OF REGENERATION AND BAPTISM, HEBREW and CHRISTIAN; With their Rites, etc.
Disquisitions.

By CHRISTOPHER ELDERFIELD Deceased, Master of Arts, and late Rector of Burton
in Sussex.

Published since his death by his Executors.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling in Thames street, over against
Baynards Castle. 1653.

To the grand Nursery of Piety and Learning, the University of OXFORD; The
happy Mother of the learned Author deceased.
YOU may justly wonder at this rude salute from an unpolished Pen: for I wonder
at my self. What, am I creeping out of the dust of Obscurity, to appear amongst
the Stars of the morning? But I come not hither without invitation; the sense
of my Duty, and brightness of your glory invite me to you. The ingenious Author
of these Disquisitions by his last will and Testament, sadly engaged me (as
Co-executor with his dearest Brother) to present with a learned Legacy, the
History of Tobit in Hebrew, Clemens Romanus, Lyra on the Psalms, with Rodolphus
Postils Manuscript. Be pleased to accept them as a testimony of his filial
Respects, whose great abilities were an Honor to you while he lived, and do
still survive in his Labors now he is dead. He was a man of a single life,
only wedded to his Book, and so had none but a Spiritual issue to keep up his
name. He was both father and mother to two elaborate Treatises. And some
conceive the pains and travel about bringing forth the younger (though more
spiritual) Man-child, might cost him his life. Since then he breathed forth his
last spirits into this Treatise; surely this infant Treatise, this posthumous
Orphan will be welcome to its Grandmother even in its swaddling clouts, to suckle
it, take it into her arms, and be a Foster-mother to it. I entreat and hope you
will not mis-interpret this pious boldness of

Your most devoted Orator, T.H.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir William Goring, Baronet.
Noble Sir,
THe Author of this Treatise lived as deep in your affections, as you lived
high in his devotions. His great study was to advance you in Spirituals, yet
he was willing to return some considerable Retributions to you, so far as he
was entrusted by you, in Secular affairs. You are now pleased to lay that
weighty employment upon me alone, in which I ever found him a prudent and
faithful Assistant. And I shall pray that your many undeserved Favors, and
the honor of so high a Trust, may be in some grateful proportion answered, by
the happy success of that duty and service which I owe to so Noble a Family,
and so great a Charge.

Sir, this Book will teach this corrupt Age the necessity of Regeneration, by
which whosoever is entered into the kingdom of Grace, has the truth of his
first Baptism by Water effectually sealed unto him, and needs no second
Water Baptism to transmit him into the Kingdom of Glory. They who are baptized
by the Spirit of Christ unto Regeneration, and by His blood to Justification,
shall by the help of the same Spirit be more and more baptized unto further
degrees of Sanctification. That You and Your dear Relations may know and feel
the power of these Mysterious Truths, (with as much sweetness and comfort as I
wish to my self and mine) is and shall be the prayer of;

Sir, The faithfullest of your Servants, T.H.

To the READER.
CHRISTIAM, Beloved and much Reverenced,
HAving not long since offered to the public and thy view, some account of
endeavors for the preservation of the Gospel of Peace in this Nation (for that
was my aim) in the received and accustomed way of sustentation of the Ministry,
service and servants thereof, by due and stated Tithes: (Which Discourse was,
and ought to have been, for the general thereof, chiefly Political) That I may
not seem to have been altogether (...), a trewant at home, and in just and
necessary redemption of my reputation, to have looked sometimes to mine own, I
have adventured on what follows more suitable both with expectation from my
calling, 1 Cor. 15.10. He that loves his brother, abides in light, and there
is none ^ffence seen in him or from him, 1 John 2.10. Do all things to the
glory of God, be without offense to any, Jew or Gentile, or the Church of God,
even as I also in all things please all men, 1 Cor. 10.32. He that loves etc.
Though all be pure, yet it is evil to him that eats his meat with offense of
another. It is good not to eat, nor drink, nor any thing, whereby a brother is
offended, Romans 14.19, 20, 21. Take heed your due power become not an offense, 1
Cor. 8.9. If my victuals offend him I will not eat while I live, to prevent his
displeasure, ver. 13. For all is not expedient, that is lawful, 1 Cor. 6. Woe to
the world, because of offense: If thy hand or foot be occasion of giving any,
rather cut it off, and cast it from thee; it is good for thee to enter lame or
maimed into life, rather then having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into
fire everlasting, which it seems must follow of offense, Mat. 18.18. and see
Mark 9.5.29. Mat. 9.47. In his example where a tribute was asked, not due, yet
rather then offend he wrought a miracle, that the collectors might not be
disappointed, Mat. 17.26. The servants of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.24.
and the course of my Profession, which is, the study of Divine matters;
whereof I am (by the grace of GOD I am what I am) an unworthy Minister. In both
equally have I endeavored to serve my God in the Gospel of his dear Son: In the
former, by setting my shoulder to uphold his House, which is like to shake as
to the visible outward sustentation thereof: in this later, by illustrating one
of the first and chief mysteries that lets into it: but with the fate of (...),
fore spoken in the Gospel, The first last, the last first; for this was
composed before that was thought on, when the things (not yet fully determined
of) were under discussion, and thou will perhaps guess no less, by the
complexion of the whole, and the aspect of sundry parts heeded. Hoped it is,
that it will displease or offend none, which is a part of my Religion, either
of those were so earnest for keeping what they had, or that have succeeded in a
partial Reformation: The one may see foam of his choice tendered to his view
perhaps in a more rational way, then he had observed before, deeper founded,
and served up to his affections by the natural way of his judgment: The other,
has his very Reformation pleaded for, (calmly enough both) to a degree of
improvement, not hitherto much mentioned, and that in the heart and inside of
an unquestioned Divine Mystery, the form that gives life to the thing. And if
Scripture be Rule, and we resolved to do only we know what, is it not like
(upon the considerations proposed, and also digested) In the Name will proceed
any further, but all must now, what some pious and learned have done long
since, come over to Baptize INTO.

I cannot be ignorant, since the first composition, what stirs and tumults have
been raised all over, from Dan to Beersheba, from one end of our Land to the
other, both by Baptists and Ana-baptists (to say nothing of Sebaptists,
Kata-baptists, No-baptists, etc). (To whose stubborn and violent oppositions,
unto the calm and prosperous receptions of former quiet times, God give a
better issue then they had in Germany, where a combined opposition of Tithes,
that should have supported a Ministry to further peace and order through all)
and Paedobaptism, the usual way of entering into the profession of the Gospel:
These at first, as in Sc. History, proved but a flattering prologue (Populo ut
placerent) to many a dire and dismal Tragedy) whose satisfaction therefore it
might be expected, I should have taken the occasion given (and as the Argument
led me) to attempt: but considering the nature of those consults, fit enough to
stand off aloof by themselves: the compass of their Controversies, wide enough
to take up the labors of the parties interessed; The multitudes that have
listed themselves already into that War, (it might savor of (...) to put my
sickle into their harvests) but above all, the small increase my dullness has
been able to make of Disputation-meeting, conference, study, or any impression
tending toward clear light, or immovable firm certainty in the business; I
have therefore thought good, to let things go as they were at first, and are
(Postscript and all, with but some small alterations) leaving it to others to
work out (if here be any thing may serve them that way, tending that way) what
their active inquires can take occasion of from hence, to the removing of all
scruple and doubtfulness, in a matter that yet seems as dark (though confidence
be bold enough to the contrary on both sides) as was the Rite it self,
delivered first among Clouds and Tempests, upon the top of Mount Horeb in the
Wilderness.

Nor may I fear of having overstaid my tide, if I have any thing might have
been seasonable, for the times are yet thirsty of truth, sensible of mistakes,
gasping for reformation (the subject of all good men's prayers and tears) and
times of peace and quiet order have been wont to be looked upon as affording
better opportunity, calmly and kindly to ripen to Perfection and Maturity, all
endeavors tending this way, then when inter arma silent leges religio
obmutescit, sana ratio exulat, vi geretur res, The strong man goes away with
all, Sovereign Power is alone Master at top, and looks, and must, and will be
obeyed, in despite of whatsoever speaks Reason, Order, Equity or Piety.

Where I have either ventured for any new Discoveries, or made bold to recede
or oppose what has been generally received, I had much encouragement from ONE
(worth ten Thousands) whose great Learning and Piety the World knows, and whose
Candor and Christian condescension, To make himself equal with those of the
lower sort, I can never sufficiently magnify, whose Grace both cherished my
conjectures as probable, and might lead to Truth, if they proved not so, and
stablished my bashful confidence, by that he himself was not now to begin to
baptize INTO. So that I stand not altogether alone: or if alone, in the way of
Truth, or nearest probability, the inconvenience of solitariness will easily
have amends in freedom from Error; As he spoke in the Orator, He had rather
be the first of his noble Family, then the last, though many had went before:
So it being more happy and safe to be one in the right, then of a Multitude,
hand joined to hand, as SOLOMON spoke, to go or do evil.

If by any thing thou here receive any benefit, Give GOD the praise, for I am a
sinner: Or, if thou dissent, remember thou was it baptized; Thou did then
promise to forsake the Devil and all his works, Envy, Wrath, Malice, and all
such rancorous and bitter passions are notoriously such, and undeniably, (the
Spawn of that infernal fiend, generated in the corrupt carnal hearts of men
(Whence Saint Paul, Be angry, but sin not, retain it not till night (to part
enemies) nor give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27.) and then I dare trust my self
with thy rudest affections, deal with me as thou will, as thou dare. Thou will not turn Apostate, forget thy vow, cancel the Oath of GOD, renounce thy
renunciation, and re-imbrace the forsaken Serpent: This granted, I am secure of
thy bitter and venomous passions.

As to the Treatise formerly mentioned, one word more I would crave, to reflect
on what is there in Chap-29. pa. 229. which has been so interpreted by many,
as if I did wish ill to the Divine Right of Tithes, contrary to my promise,
page 7. not to meddle with it, and my repeated professions and protestations.
There is no such thing: I disavow it: I disclaim it. The Words heeded have no
such matter, taken with due circumstance of Antecedents and Consequents. They
might have been plainer, by sparing four syllables more, which may be well, if
must not be necessarily understood, by insertion, thus: Equal in this too that
Levi's part is as good as the best, and if we had any better or higher (FOR
OTHER) this would no doubt come out with the highest: But we have (FOR THEM)
none; Our Tribes pretend not to a partition from heaven any of them, and
therefore Levi, etc. which is that I meant, and the words (darkly) have it, and
no more nor other. What sense had been else of bringing in after Levies part by
it self in inference, if the censure had not there been only of Joseph's,
Benjamin's, and those that were Lay, upon which prestruction, and a Divine
Right granted to be for Them none, it will then rationally follow, as it does,
And THEREFORE Levi, (not hitherto declared of) should not take it amiss, if HE
(as they) were not preferred (if it should prove so, for this necessary
dubitation to the sense is also inserted) to a right of another sort, above
other his brethren, but be content he had as good as the best. (This is the
fourth time I make uniform Protestation this way) If all will not satisfy,
(...), He that will wrong himself, his judgment, his friend, Apoc. 21.11.
the truth, nothing can hinder but he may continue to do so: Let him wrong
still.

Occasion taken by what Mr. Seldom has in his Book De Jure naturali and
Gentium, Lib. 2. Cap 3. to discourse of Christian-REGENERATION, upon that known
Text of Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again, etc.
WHere (after due parts of Preface) the things there delivered, Of the making
of Proselytes, Initiation thereby, Regeneration, etc. are borrowed and brought
home for illustration of that Text, with supervenient Amplicafitions, not
unnecessary.

And improved for farther use in five Derivation of Consequents.

1. Whereas much of Christianity had root in Jewry, the Sacrament of our holy
Communion is thought to have come from a Grace Cup, and any original of
Christian Baptism, is seldom looked into. Probably it may fetch its root from
baptizing of Proselytes in Jewry (which Rite was used in admitting them) and be
nothing else but old Hebrew Baptism, new Christened by our Savior (against or
beyond what is received, that it bottoms lowest in the new Testament, in him or
Jo. Baptist.
Which is the liker from the same name Common to both, the same general nature,
the same Rite, End, Manner of Administration (by Washing) and Persons
partakers, which among the Hebrews were even Infants, and these never excluded
by the Christian-Catholick Church.

2. The use of Godfathers taken up at first, continued all along, held on to
our times, and no one knows whence, may (not improbably) derive it self from
the Triumvirate (a Court) for admission of Hebrew Proselytes; the rather for
that they were then styled FATHERS ever after to the baptized, and ours have
carried the face of a Court with us, and been so styled.
Which improved yet farther, That the whole eldest, and to us continued way of
baptism, by Interrogation, stipulation, solemn promise and profession, etc. may
(not unlikely) be of the same derivation and pedigree; with hint for farther
search.

And yet more, that most of old Christianity is from Jewry, instanced in, Title
of public Service, Liturgy, names of distinct offices, as Patriarch, Apostle,
Bishop, Elder, Deacon, with Gospel, Church, Degrees of excommunication, etc.

3. Endeavors in a new way toward stating and resolving that great
controversy of the Schools, What was the true difference between John's Baptism
and Christ's? scil. By conjecturall assertion, that John's was only of
proselytes, Christ's of Christians: His into the old Law, this into the new. One
of water, the other of that and the holy Ghost. And if it be objected that
Christ was baptized, and other Hebrews not capable of Proselytism: This showed
capable of manifold answer.

Or, by the way; that John's might by the Text be nothing else but a solemn and
penitential washing, such as the Hebrews often used, (in which use it might
prepare our Savior for his great Office immediately entered into thereupon,
Matthew. 4.) with sundry reasons for the probability hereof, as from Josephus,
etc. especially this insisted on, That in Jewry and all abroad it was received,
that washing did sanctify and pu ifie even the inside, even the soul from sin.

4. The true Reason endeavored to be assigned of the early stirs, Acts 15.
Gal. 2. etc. of bringing in Christian Circumcision as well as Christian
Baptism, scil. that it might be to keep them together, which had wont not to be
parted in matriculating Hebrew Proselytes; for Baptism, one Rite, was admitted
by Christ's order. And so Mr. Medes endeavors set aside, who makes the doubt,
Whether Ceremony or no Ceremony? And if Ceremony, then Circumcision? This not,
for Ceremomy was already taken in in Baptism by Christ.
Conjecture also of the reason, why diverse Christian Churches do yet retain
Circu^mcision who they are that they do so: and many have done so all along:
the Reason of all, FOR that they found it with Baptism in and into that Law
they and we do yet retain.

5. Some rays of light struck forth toward illustration of sundry dark places
and things, chiefly in St. Paul's mysterious Epistles, as of Renovation, the old
and new man, born of God, Dead to the world, etc. Besides, from St. Peter and
St. John: But especially the context in this, John 3. cleared and made
coherent, etc.
With Recapitulation and Conclusion.

This agitation of thoughts breeds further inquiry (chiefly from that dark Text
of baptizing INTO Moses, 1 Corinthians. 10.2.) of the form of our Christian
Baptism, Whether it be right, In the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? and
resolved that it is not from the letter of the commission in Matthew. 28.19.
which prescribes INTO.

For illustration whereof, 1. Noted the consent of Copies for the word (...),
and for the interpretation, as said. 2. Declared the various acceptions of the
received In Nomine; or, In the Name: For 1. Invocation, 2. Auctorization. 3.
Initiation; The difference of which is showed. 3. Pitched upon, that the last
is the best: For, 1. It is plain in this Text. 2. No less evident in other
Texts. The differing reconciled. 3. Holds out fullest the nature and intent of
this Sacrament, which being for admission, this declares it to be so, by
baptizing INTO. An observation and enumeration of sundry other sects that have
baptized as well as we; and that this best parts us from them at the Door of
our entrance, by expressing admittance TO us. 4. This has, and has had much
countenance all abroad, from Greece as much as may be expected. From Latium
some, in Tertullian and St. Jerome, though the most follow the old Latin, In
nomine. The Greek Fathers cited particularly; and some (taken for) Councels,
with the sparks of light (very many) that since the Reformation have broken
forth to direct this way.



All submitted to censure, etc.

OF Regeneration.
SERMON I.
-- Except a man be born AGAIN, (or from above) (...)) he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3.
CHAP. I.
MAN was once in a state of happiness, chiefly for that he was born happy; That
Blessed condition was annexed to his Being, neither could he Be, but he must
therewith be happy, as it were by nature and Patrimoniall inheritance. But,
alas! this so happy estate lasted not long; 'twas extremely good, and such
advancements have never used to approve themselves to the world by length and
duration. Habitus corporis extreme bonus maxim periculosus, is a rule approved
by the Physicians, Exactest health speaks worst danger of Change, and from the
wisest of Politicians, the wittiest of Poets, -- Summisque negatum Stare diu.
This so happy estate therefore lasted not; and the unavoidable change, not but
as in extremes it uses to be, from one extreme to another: Out of the Heathen
so noted by the Nam ut paulo a^te, qui superiorem illam sectam amplexi sunt
contumeliosus in B. Virginem opiniones asperserunt, Sic isti in contratiam
partem declinantes, extrema^ i^ noxam and pernici^m in^id^runt, ut
Philosophorum celebre illud dictum in ipsis comprobetur, ((...)) Extremitates
Aequalitates Epiphan. l. 3. haer 79. c. 1:
Christian long since, and here it took place to the full, From the pinnacle of
a Temple to the bottom of a Pit, From the highest of perfection to the lowest
of defection, From the top of all happiness this fall was to the worst and
lowest of all kind of misery. Whereby was caught a woeful bruise: Poor Man! thou
feel and complainest of it to this very day, nor have some thousands of
years worn off all grief and anguish from thy distempered either body or soul,
And yet were not thy case wholly Miserable, if any way Amendable. But as a
cracked Bell that admits of no reparation of fracture, it must be molten, or it
remains good for nothing; Or as a Goldsmiths vessel, so bruised and battered Ac
fabri quidem aerarii, and qui ex argilla vasa fingunt; cum aliquid vetustate
obsoletum renovare cupiunt, primum illud confringunt, ac deinde iterum
conflant: Baptismus autem nos de^uo conflat; non igni sensibili sed spiritus
flamma spurcitiem omnem excutiente atque abolente. Nicet. Commentar. ad Gregor.
Nazianzen. Crat. 40. cap. 8.
by unlucky fall, that in vain is the Craftsmans assistance called in, no Art
can repair and soder it to former use, but it must to the fire and furnace, to
be wholly New-Made: So universally and irrecoverably was Man mischiefed and
spoiled in all his powers to Good, and abilities against Evil, that there needs
a total Reformation and Renovation, the frame so out of frame, that (no talk of
amendment) the Whole must be taken in hand, and Et quam ob causam, inquis, hoc
quod nobis peccata concedit, non lavacrum remissionis peccatorum dicitur, nec
lavacrum purificationis, sed lavacrum Regenerationis? Quia non nobis
simpliciter peccata concedit, nec simpliciter nos purificat malis actibus
implicatos, sed tanquam denuo Generatos efficit. Nam denuo nos condit and
conficit, etc. Chrys^st Homil. 60. ad illuminand. Tom. 1. pa. 710. Ut igitur
statuam auri metallo confectam aliquanti temporis metis fumo and pulvere and
aeruginis sordibus coinquinatam cum artificis manus acceperint, renovant
fornacis ardore, and splendidam nobis lucidamque demonstrant: ita and nostram
naturam Deus aeruginatam mole peccati, and malorum gestorum fumo violatam, and
omni pulchritudine, quam primo ei donaverat, denudatam, in illos aquarum
fontes, tanquam in conflatorium mittit: and pro flamma, spiritus gratiam
subministrat, and exinde rudes effectos etiam solis radiis elevat clarius
lucentes, veterem hominem conterens, novum autem ostendens long meliorem. id.
ib.
New-made, or else Man is lost and undone as to the state of two worlds. This
is usually known in Christian Schools by the name of a Second Birth, or
Regeneration, and has here its necessity declared and demonstrated to a great
Scholar, that yet it seems had not learned this point of necessary Learning: In
the state of lapsed, decayed nature, no good is to be expected, and Verily I
say unto thee, (says Christ to Nicodemus) unless a man be (so new formed and
made as to be) Born Again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

The words our Saviors, (the best Teacher) and spoken as they were to a Great
Name, not inferior to any of his time, Rabbi Ruler Nicodemus; Who being (as
Gualter on the place) a professing, eminent Pharisee, did, no doubt, much rely
upon that Pharisaical-natural-performance, hoping thereby to earn out a good
estate toward God; chiefly by the advantage of his Sect ( the straitest of his
Nation) by his So being and Doing even to merit eternal life. Acts 26.5.
Our Savior Catechises him better, (and that his scope, says the same Author)
assuring him that in Him, or us, that is, in our corrupt natural nature (if I
may so speak) dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
( flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor is Corruption
prepared to enter into life:) A man must be transplanted into a better stock,
before he can bring forth acceptable fruit to God, renewed, advanced, purified
to higher and holier capacities and powers, yea, Metamorphosed, and exalted to
another Heavenly nature by Grace, or else he is unfit to look him who is LIGHT
in the face: And verily (says Christ) unless (to his natural Birth) he be
again so Born, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

That is, in our first state of being we are all utterly lost, if a man remain
but what his parents left him, He is verily the child of Death. 2 Samuel 12.5.
David spoke it to his Prophet only in a Parable, but it is really true of all
the sons of Adam, They can make out themselves no better fortune, but they live
only to Die, nor may their best endeavors help them so much as one step in
the way to everlasting life. A Felon may get, but can never keep, what, under
his guilt, the Law disables him to own, and he that is not rectus in curia, is
deprived thereby of his otherwise due rights and privileges: Even so, says
Christ, Without me, ye can do nothing, John 15 5.
Be ye whatsoever ye are, or would, the tree must be made good before the
fruit, He that is born Man, must be exalted farther and higher, beyond common
humanity, by heavenly birth, or else, be what he will, or do what he can, He is
not, he acts not the Child of GOD. The sum is, Of our best works of decayed
nature in old state, there is little or no hopes to Heaven, our very
righteousness is sin, our piety guilt, our religion abomination, and Unless a
man be reformed to the height of an accessory regeneration, and more then
amended, new born Again, He cannot look to see the Kingdom of GOD, what, and
who is invisible.

A strange and spiritual Doctrine to the gross conceit of a Carnal Pharisee:
who measuring all things by lower human reason, and entertaining nothing but
according to such praeconceived notions, is startled into little less then a
frenzy of conceit; and so absurd as to vent those thoughts by Solet hoc
evenire personatis Ecclesiae pastoribus, ut si nemo illos arguat, ipsi
inscitiam suam ineptissimis quaestronibus and propositionibus public prodant.
Gual^er. Homil. 7. in Joan. 1.
words importing a second natural Birth, to make way whereto, he admits
necessarily a praesupposition that he might and must reenter his Mothers womb,
that he may be so born, All which (from so many improbabilities to be clambred
over) might well draw forth their mention in form of a doubt, Whether? and this
doubt question of the thing no less then the possibility, CAN these things be
So? CAN a man be born again? Is it possible he Should enter Again into the bed
of his former Creation, that he may thence be so new Born? ver. 4. Our Savior
meekly instructs him, and not so much chiding, as gently leading him out of his
Error, shows him both the Thing and the Manner, ver. 5. What, and how: That he
must be so born, and that birth be of water Cum enim duplex sit homo, ex anima
and corpore compositus, duplex quoque est purificatio: incorporea quidem,
incorporeo: corporea vero, corpori. Et aqua sane mundat corpus, spiritus autem
signat animam, ut abluti in corpore aqua munda, and repurgati in cord (spiritu
Dei) accedamus ad Deum. Cyril. Hierosolymit. Cateches. 3. pa. 16. Cum homo sit
compolitum quid, non simplex natura, ex duobus attemperatus, corpore nimirum
sensibili, and anima intelligente, gemino quoque opus erit ei ad regenerationem
remedio utrique quodammodo assini and amico. Spiritu namque sanctificatur
hominis spiritus, aqua vero sanctificata, corpus. Cyril. Alexandrin: Comment:
in Joan. 3. Tom 4. pa. 147. Quandoquidem homo duplici natura, hoc est animo and
corpore constabat, duplicem quoque purgationem nobis dedit, nempe and per aquam
and per spiritum: sic nimirum, ut spiritus divinae imaginis ac similitudinis
decus in nobis instauret, aqua autem per spiritus gratiam corpus peccati
deleat, etc. Jo: Damascen: Orthed: sid. lib. 4. cap. 10. And before them all.
Tertullian: The mind (says he) not the flesh, is first in fault, Spiritus enim
dominatur, Caro famulatur: and yet are they both to blame, spiritus ob
imperium, Caro ob Ministerium. Igitur medicatis quodammodo aquis per Angeli
interventum, and spiritus in aquis corporaliter diluitur, and cano in eisdem
spiritualiter mundatur li. de Baptism: cap: 4 pa: 257:
and the Holy Ghost. For, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh (alone)
ver. 6. That only is born of the Spirit, is Spirit: Marvel not therefore that
I said unto thee, A man must be born Again, for Except a Man be so born, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God.

So that two things the words then naturally give just occasion to insist on.
1. Their subject, Regeneration (as a simple Theme) Unless a man be Again Born.
2. The consequent or effect of this precedent cause, supposed and implied in
the denial of that consequent or effect upon the absence or exclusion of the
cause, Except he be so born, He cannot see what is Heavenly. Begin with the
former, (Regeneration) Except a man be born Again, etc.

And hereof, before I come to the main I aim at, two things more I crave leave
to Preface by: One of the Word, another of the Thing. Of the Word, thus.

1. Whereas our authorized English Translation has here Verily, unless a man
be born Again, with which word in the text is a marginal note of Reference, and
the Referree gives choice, or From above, Though the former is usually taken,
as best agreeing with the use most men make of it, yet the latter is the right
and truer, as agreeing not only with the Original (to us) (...), As, Every
good giving and every perfect gift is from above, ((...)) and c^meth down from
the Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17. so ^hap. 3.17. and John 19.11. Here in th s
Chapt ver. 31. O (...) that come h from above is over all: Qui superne venit,
so Beza; qui desursum, so the Vu^gar; qui e super^^s, so Erasmus. The verse
after expounds it self, He that comes from Heaven is above all.
(consideratly by the old Latin rendered, desuper) but also with the scope and
consequence of the place, (as well before as after) which make it May be thus,
and renders it so indeed that it can very hardly be meant or translated any
other way. For, Whereas the whole given is a set Dialogue between a great
Critic in the Learning of his Nation, and our Savior, of Heavenly things
(mark the subject) and He had begun by telling our Lord, that he verily thought
He came down from God (above) else He could not do the things he had been seen
perform, ver. 2. Our Lord answers by granting the thing, (How could he do
otherwise?) But withal he affirms more, Raising the particular instance to a
general case, My self? Nay, I say unto thee, No Man, Except he make derivation
from thence, (or from above, from that God) can so much as see or know any
thing toward that Kingdom. That which is born of the flesh (here) is flesh,
and can see only flesh or connatural fleshy things, That which is born of the
spirit or from above, that only discerns the things that came from whence,
or belong thereto whereof it is: Marvel not therefore that I said unto thee A
man must be born (or derive) (...), that is, from above, (for that is the word
again) For, unl^sse he can truly pretend to such extraction, and find the root
of his pedigree in Heaven, he cannot look back thither again, or see the
Kingdom of God. When this had puzzled the thoughts of the grave unlearned
Do^tor (I may well style him so, since Christ upbraids his ignorance) and his
troubled mind* little less then phrenetically carnal, had admitted the raising
of no less then a tempest of manifold doubts, What? Can these things be? Can a
man be born, and when he is old? May he return a second time to the former
womb, that he may be so born? No, says our Savior, this needs not; He needs
but be born (where he is) of water and that sacred blast or insufflation
((...)) which all know to come from superior unknown regions, and that enough:
Another of the same name, (...), and perhaps some nature common, blows where
it lists, here below, and men hear the sound thereof, but know (as little as
of this) whence it comes, or whither it goes, Such is the extraction and
designation of this Grace and its work; which wonder not that I require of
invisible production, for unless a man do so derive, or be so born, (from
whence, or to what he knows not, his hopes are little to or toward the Kingdom
of God. The sum is, A man must be born again, that is, from above; from above,
that is, from Heaven; from Heaven, that is, be inspired thence invisibly,
Divinely, or else he cannot do the works that I (or any other good man) does,
or (acceptably) look in any holy just performance to God above, that dwells
beyond the thick clouds: Marvel not therefore that I spoke in the Metaphor,
requiring such supernall extraction, to be born from on high, for unless a man
be so born, he cannot, etc. as before. This for the word, and setting together
the (disturbed) frame of the Text, now as to the Thing.

2. Although the head of sacred Re-Generation be such a subject (or article) of
Christian Faith, that many things are spoken (and written) of it (with
confidence enough,) and particularly this Chapter (and very Text) made a ground
for them, (and many other besides) as if the New Testament spoke of nothing
more plainly, intentionally, clearly, and fully, yet such is the mistake, and
things so far from being indeed so, that, not only this place (so much
confided in) has not the word Regeneration, (nor any of the same import, save
by consequence and insinuation) Nor, having enquired with some diligence, could
I find it elsewhere above once or twice in this whole Code, (very seldom
completely in this notion.) Once, it is beyond exception, in Tit. 3.5. where
Christian purification by water is styled (...), the Laver of Regeneration, and
has annexed to it fitly, the Co-assistant operation of the holy Ghost; And that
of S. Peter 1. -- 1.23. Being born-again not of corruptible semination, but
incorruptible, etc. may perhaps look that way: But for that which follows there
in the next Chapter, As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the word,
that ye may prosper by it, and our Saviors promise, Ye that have followed me
in the regeneration, and my text, Mat. 19.29.
These are so far from expressing a Regeneration, that the first and last have
not the word, nor the middlemost, in any likely interpretation, the Thing, (as
neither many other places, (the subjects of like abuse) wrested yet about to
serve ends, and pressed to confess that they meant not, nor ever knew:) For,
in 1 Pet. 2.2. the Apostle only fetches a comparison from young and tender
infants ( (...): t t modo nati infantes, Beza. sicut modo geniti infantes: so
the old Translation. As infants even now born: so the Rh^mists.
Now-born, not Newborn, as the Original word gives plain) whom he would have
desire the food of their souls, with as much sincerity, and free from guile and
hypocrisy, as those tender babes do their natural food, (Much to our Saviors
Doctrine, Matthew. 10.15. to receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, and
as he calls that pattern of humility and simplicity, and sets it before his
turbulent ambitious aspiring Disciples, Matthew. 18.2. which Br^thren be not
children in understanding; Howbeit, in malice, be ye children: but in
understanding show your selves Men. 1 Cor. 14.20.
S. Paul forgot not to take into his rule neither,) And that promise of our
Savior, Mat. 19. is only of compensation his faithful followers shall have,
(Disciples, or whosoever forsake any thing for him,) in the Regeneration says
the text, in seculo futuro, expounds it Junius, in Christ's temporal Kingdom
yet to come (and after the first resurrection) on earth, expect the Whereof see
a Learned and ingenuous Treatise, by M Maton, on Acts 1.6. Lord, will thou
again at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel?
Millenarians, but in the (...), Renas^ntia, -- instauratio. Item universalis
resurrectio. Seapul. Lexic. Novissimus hujus mundi dies, qui sic dicitur, quod
eo Deus creatu^us sit novum coelum and novam terram, hominemque electum
perfect regeneraturus, ut Mat. 1^.28 Paes^r. Lexic pa. 170. and see also
Marlorat. Enchirid. l^c. commun page 529. D^ae enim sunt Regenerationes, p^ima
animarum ex aqua and spiritu in Baptismo, secundae corporum in generali
resurrectione, quae quidem resurrectio dicitur Regeneratio vel secund^
generatio. Ludolph. de vita Christi. lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 13. In
regeneratione cum sederit filius hominis in ^ede Majestatis suae (quando and
mortui de corruptione resu^gent incorrupti) se deb^tis and vos in soliis
judicantium, etc. So S. Jerome expounds in Comment. ad Matthew. 19. Tom. 6. pa.
40. Magnas quidem and admirandas res magnoque motu ac tremore dignas mihi, O
homo, narras: Siquidem ita se habent, atque postquam fatis concesserimus, ac in
cinerem and pulverem dissoluti fuerimus Resurrectio and Re-Generatio futura
est. Prince Josaphat to his ghostly Father Barlaam in Damascens History chap. 9.
Renovation or Restitution of all things, (mentioned, Acts 3.21.) say those
that interpret most warily and probably; When the R^m. 8.21.
Creature now groaning under it, shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, In this 2 Pet. 3 13.
Heaven and Earth) (purified) there dwelling righteousness, and the Tabernacle
of God placed with men, and he shall dwell with them and be their God, and they
shall be his people, and so shall be wiped away all tears from their eyes: as
Apocalipse 21.2, 3. For, Peter had said before, Master we have left all and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore (hereafter) ver. 27.) Jesus
answers, (as lifting up their eyes to the day of Judgment presently, and that
future wonderful consideration of things and compensation) ye that have
followed me! Verily I say unto you, ye that have followed me, (in this
Generation, here) shall (hereafter, in that which is to come) receive abundant
remuneration, For in the Regeneration (for Illud vero in regeneratione, re^erri
potest vel ad praecedentia, Qui sequuti estis me in regeneratione, vel ad
sequentia, in regeneratione quum sederit filius hominis, etc. Duplex autem est
regeneratio. una animorum in praesenti vitae, administrata per Evangelii
praedicationem, etc. Altera est corporum, status futurae vita, quem Paulus
vocat Redemptionem corporis nestri, Romans 8.23. -- Hanc Petrus Acts 3.21. vocat
tempus restaurationis omnium. De hac regeneratione hic loquitur Christus, and
hoc sensu ad sequentia referendum est, in regeneratione quum sederit, etc. Nova
Gloss. ordinat. ad Matthew. 1928.
so the words are to be set together and construed, not as commonly, ye that
have followed me in the regeneration (in this world) shall receive Thus and
Thus amends hereafter in the next life, But) ye that have so followed me with
loss of all things here, shall in the Rectius ad sequens comma referuntur hae
voces. Grotius ad loc. So Beza both read himself and had observed it to be read
in five ancient Copies, conform to what hec acknowledges abroad. So Musculus,
and Marlorate, and Maldonate, and the Fathers. Chrysostom. Hom. 56. in Matthew.
Tom. 1. pa. 691. Hieron. ad Matthew. 19. Tom. 6. pa. 40. Bernard. in Declamat.
col. 1006. Augustine. lib. 20. de Civ Dei. cap. 5. and 6. lib. 2. contra Julian:
ca. 8. and lib 3. contra duas Epist. Pelag cap 3. etc. The Syriack gives, in
seculo futuro, which cannot but relate to time to come.
Regeneration or Restitution of all things, in that world when all is passed
away, and old things become new, receive large amends: And when the Son of man
shall sit on his Throne (whom now ye forsake not in his lowness or poverty)
then shall ye also (in that (...), or new mold of things) sit upon your several
glorious thrones, and (as your number fits well) judge the twelve Tribes of
your Nation of Israel. This was amends enough; likeliest to be promised, was
here promised, and so (nor the other place) making any thing for present
regeneration or change of Soul by being born of God, (though the word I confess
be exact for it;) which word (in which sense) is (I said) seldom found in
Scripture, (perhaps not above twice or thrice) nor the thing (save by
consequence and insinuation) much oftener; for certain, here is no Born Again (as
before) in this place. Yet, because the text is commonly so interpreted and
expounded, and emphatically and plainly in ours allowed so translated, which
the governing original may bear too by the help of implication not the very
remotest, I am content, rather by occasion of it, then grounding my self upon
it, to continue my thoughts on this argument: (for, ground to raise any thing
upon I would have always firm, such as none can except against, nor will fail
in time of trial:) And whereas here are two things, a Birth supernal, and the
necessity of it, shall begin and end with the former, Except a man be born
again, or from above.

CHAP. II.
AND this, you know, is a subject of common discourse, nor Pen, nor Pulpit have
been sparing of their pains, and either way they have been more then very many
things that have been exhibited to the world; the most good and pious, some
also true, and not but some (in so great variety, very like) grounded on
mistake and tending to Error; Declaring rather what the speaker or writer meant
(in the name of good) to affix and lay with reverence to so holy a subject,
then what Was, or the truth or state of things (all things considered) would
bear. I, that my Discourse may fit in with it self and be entire all of a
piece, shall first take leave (with due respect) to lay aside what has been
said hitherto by others, as things already profitably known; And secondly, that
what I intend entirely mine, may be either true or very likely, shall lay the
most upon the resolution of this (I think most pertinent, though hitherto quite
neglected) Quaere, What was known of this argument of Regeneration, in our
Saviors time? Whether any thing? In what particulars it came forth? How
tendered? How received, etc? With relation whereto no doubt our Savior spoke as
he did, to wit, according to the knowledge then on the Stage, or (as one would
say, and as most men use) in the language of the times. For as he that would
apprehend in a right notion himself, or deliver out fully to others who do not
know what the Truth is, of any of the Mysteries of our Religion (as Principio,
quod attinet ad notionem vocabuli, praemittendum est, Baptismi nomen
significare quamvis ablutionem. Itaque nonnisi usu doctorum Ecclesiasticorum
accommodatum est, ut significet proprie unum hoc sacramentum ex illis septem
novae legis, quae probavimus a Christo fuisse instituta. Gregor: de Valenc.
Tom: 4: Disput: 4: punct: 1.
Baptism, Eucharist, Church, Sacrament. Excommunication, Absolution, etc.) It
would behoove him farther then a bare and simple consideration of the import of
those words at top, to dive deeper into the nature of the Things, the
application, use and import of those words with us, and by study, observation,
or otherwise, to acquaint himself what We mean, intend, or Res auditae non ita
se habent, sicut res oculis visae and perceptae. Hac de causa non sunt ea ita
solida, quae ego per auditum de ritibus Zabiorum ex libris ipsorum scio and
addidici, sicut sunt apud illos, qui ipsimet opera illorum viderunt. M.
Maiemonid: in More Nevoch. par. 3. cap. 49.
Do by them (things to be known only from us) without which a very jejune and
empty Declaration is like to be furnished out of so great and weighty matters:
Even so, He that would to the purpose speak home on this Mystical subject our
Savior has sanctified with the mention of his lips, as He meant, and must
from him have been written down in the Scriptures, it would behoove farther
then by the help of a Concordance and Lexicon, to know what the word might
possibly hold forth in another place, or any where, to look and satisfy
himself what it meant Here, what manner of Thing it was that was clothed out
as it were in the habit of this expression, or what the people, or times, that
age did apprehend of it, which was questionless That was meant by our Savior.
A point and inquiry (no doubt) of manifold use, but withal of so unhappy
neglect, that (as far as I can inform my self) it has not at all come within
the thoughts of any Writer on my Text by Commentation, Enarration, or
otherwise, occasionally or purposely, in Tractate, Sermon, Commonplace, or
Howsoever, to bestow any considerable pains about, it yet seeming Alone that
which must afford light to satisfaction. By like, it may not be the easier to
begin first; Difficilia quae pulchra? Nay, we will invert, Pulchra quae
difficilia, the acceptablenesse of the work may perhaps grow up under our hands
with the painfulnesse of the labor, And if any thing can be found, it may be
as a new Discovery to let in more light (into this profound and obscure
mystery) and such an Addition as may lay in somewhat more to the general stock
of knowledge, heretofore laid together by other hands. On therefore, cum bono
Deo; nor may the untroddennesse of the path repel or discourage a firm resolute
purpose; God be guide, as truth our aim, and revelation of the hidden mysteries
of Scripture, (not to be looked to or toward, but with trembling reverence) our
scope and reward: Our Savior says, Except a man be born again, etc. and what
was believed, known, used about it in those times in which he lived and said so?

CHAP. III.
I Answer, Many Things. The Thing, Many of the things next following, I
confess to borrow from M. Seldens de Jure not. and gent. l. 2. c. 2. and 3.
Before, I had them; but dark, lame, scattered imperfect; plainnest and fullest
in that most learned man: Mine be only the translation and application to this
purpose.
the Effects, the Rites, the Ends; in general, Regeneration was then an effect
of Proselytism. (You must pardon the hardness of that word; obscure things
always meet not with facile expressions, and so bring in new or strange words
(I add or Things) is in this age, nor strange, nor new.) I resume therefore
Regeneration was in our Saviors time a believed effect of Proselytisme,
whereby the stranger that was by due rites initiated thither, was as it were
mortified to his former estate dead to the world, revived to a new life,
quickened to God, regenerate, renate and born again out of this, to a new state
of happiness and life with Moses and among the holy children of Israel. From
them as many as were, had their destiny praefigured in the old world, of whom,
as many as missed the relief of Noah's Ark, escaped not the mischief of being
drowned in the water, out of their Society or Church all were in state of
Perdition; As many as were taken to sanctuary with them were termed Proselytes
(of Weemse. Chr. Synag. p. 140 or of (...), as Godwin, in Antiqu. Heb. 1.3. or
of the old verb (...), as Pasor in his Lexic. N. Testam. page 313. Comelings,
as one would call them. Advenae, or Albini quasi Alibini; in Spelman. Glossar.
in vocab: Albanus. Compare Act. 2.10. -- 6.5. -- 13.43. with Matthew. 9.14. Joan.
12.21. Acts 8.29. -- quem Philo etiam (...) vocat. Grot. in Mat. 23.15.
(...), to come over) They that did come were esteemed to be renewed, renate,
Born Again plainly into a new world, capable of so much expression that it
might afford some excuse to Nicodemus, that He thought, One must enter into his
Mothers womb that he might be so born.

But it may behoove to be yet more distinct: (Generality uses to be the parent
of much confusion) and to make delibation of Hebrew Antiquities, as much as
will serve us with knowledge of the several sorts of Proselytes that were among
them, the manner of making them, the ceremonies, rites, privileges, etc. the
rather because they are to be looked upon as causes of this effect my Text
speaks of, and Those that were, by Them it was they were so Regenerate, born
anew, or (which is all one) made Proselytes.

By an usual distinction then two sorts of them there were,

1. Proselytes of the Godwin, Antiq. Heb. lib. 1. c. 3. Medes Diatrib^on Act.
17.4. pa. 83, 84, etc.
Gate, or for habitation, and no more, (Proselyti domicilii) a lower sort,
which were so far initiated that they might This was a qualification much like
as, To be a Christian in any sort, is, to live among us: for a Jew is an outlaw
by our Law: See Daniel; Histor: in Edw. 1. p. 160. Stows Chron. in 18 Edw. 1.
Fullers holy war, lib. 1. cap. 4. Especially M. Seldom de Jure not. and gent.
lib. 2: cap. 6. pa. 194, 195, etc. Formerly it appears they were under the
Kings protection by S. Edward Laws, in Lambard. Archaion: pa. 141. L. 29. Nay,
all infidels are by our Laws perpetui^ iuin^ici. Cocks Reperts 7. fol. 17.
Ca^vins case, and Iustitut. par. 4. chap. 50.
associate and converse with the Hebrews even in their own Territories, (but as
strangers,) And these had not much done unto them: Only with some few
ceremonies they were bound over to keep What they were, may be seen from the
Hebrew Doctors, in Ainsworth upon Genes. 9.4. and M. Seld^n de Jure not. etc.
1.10. But take the hest account from one of their own, a late Ruler of their
Synagogue at Amsterdam. Septem praecepta, ut traditur in Gemara Sanhedrin,
omnes gentes observare tenentur quae iccirco vocantur (...) septem praecepta
filiorum Noachi. Ex his (quemadmodum in Seder Olam: cap. 5 and apud B. Mosem in
Juda-hazaqua legimus) seria Adamo data sunt: nimirum ut abstineret ^: ab
Idololatria: 2. Maledictione Numinis Divini: 3: Caede: 4. Adulterio: 5. Furto:
6. Ut judices institueret quorum esset curare ut illa praecepta observarentur.
Super haec Noacho septimum additum fuit, ne membrum vivo animali amputatum
comederet; his verbis: Carnem cum anima and sanguine suo ne comedas; (or
against eating of blood; which whether renewed or continued in Acts 15.20. I
only propose.) Haec sunt praecepta, ob quorum violationem ut ex S. Scriptura
ibidem in Sanitedrin probatur, etiam gentes mundi a Deo punitas constat: Eum
vero qui illa observat vocarunt, (...) peregrinum in habitantem, quia in
Israele morari poterat. Manasseh Ben Israel: in Conciliator: ad Deuter: quaest:
2. pa. 221:
Noah's seven Commandments, (the reputed sum of the Law of Nature for
Divinity and Morality, out of which Moses Ten Commandments were after drawn,
or most of them) And a few other things, that they might not offend (their
Masters) the Hebrews, among whom they were permitted to live, But the fruit of
this initiation did not pretend to look to any great matter, far short of so
great a change as might entitle to a Renovation, or Born again, and therefore I
have accordingly soon done with it. But besides these of Habitation, qualified
to live and converse with Israel, there was a second sort came up farther to a
Copartnership or fraternity with them in their Religion, and the privileges
thereof called.

2. Proselytes of the Law, or Proselytes of Righteousness, (Proselyti
justitiae) which were as the Cives facti, the other as one compares, the Cives
nati, of the Commonwealth of Israel; And these as they were initiated with
more ceremony, so no doubt was made, those rites were in them effectual to
higher purposes then the former, namely, to obliterate all they had before of
corrupt Gentilisme, and to render them like men dropped out of the clouds, wholly
changed, Renewed, Regenerate, (as this morning born infant) naturalized
Citizens of the community of Israel, and so estated in a participation thereby
of their Law, Liberties, Privileges, Hopes, Religion, and all the happiness
such an holy Communion could promise the true members thereof in this or the
other world.

CHAP. IV.
The rites of making Proselytes.
THE Rites or Means (as 'twere Sacraments) in this Proselytizing or Regeneration
were three: (understand, after the giving of the Law upon M. Sinai, where one
of them, Baptism being first appointed, of necessity till then, sc. from
Abraham to Moses, the two former that were must needs serve the turn, but on
this side Sinai they were three) Circumcision, Baptism, and Oblation.

1. Ainsworth on Genes. 17.12. page 68. The first was a sign of the covenant
into which they were received: the second a sign (or means) of their
purification, (compare the 24 and 25 verses of John 3.) for all Gentiles were
held unclean: the third for aetonement with God. Purchase: Pilgrim: lib: 2. cap.
2. out of Drusius. Pet. Kicius de coelesti agricult. lib: 3 and Munster in 50.
praecepta Mosis are alleged by him for the continuance of Circumcision and
Baptism to this day, (which thing is true) and why sacrifice is omitted, see
hereafter. But remember, All three rites passed at any time only on the Men,
the Hebrew Law de^lined ever the Circumcision of the other half of mankind:
So, at first, but two rites could minister their initiation; since, but one,
Baptism. Cur autem foeminae non fuerint circumcisae, and an jus habuerint ad
bona foederis? Vid. Scharp. Symphon: prophetarum and Apost: part: 2. Epoch: 3.
Quaest. 9. Quale item jus earum ad regnum Dei, non obstante istiusmodi
circumcisionis defectu, apud Epiphan: Haeres. 3. Aebionit: Tom: 1. page: 160. --
Placeat etiam observare, Amice Lector, vel si forsan antea observasses, in
memoriam revocare, and fuisse antiquitus and jam temporis esse, qui
Circumcisionis hanc notulam utrique sexui, tam muliebri scilicet quam virili,
imprimere perhibentur; iique varii variarum cum gentium incolae, tum religionum
cultores. De Aeg ptiis (antiquioribus) Ambrosius: Quarto decimo anno
circumcidunt mares, and foeminae apud eos circumcidi feruntur, quod ab eo
videlicet anno incipiat flagrare passio virilis and foeminarum menstrua sumunt
exordia, lib. 2. de Abraham. cap. 11. Quod idem de iisdem habetur (ex Strabonis
Geographiae lib: 17.) apud doctissimum Episcop. Montacutium, in Tom. 1.
Originum Ecclesiasticarum. part. 1. sect. 52. sc. solenne ipsis fuisse (...).
Nec minus de hodiernis, quae non t^m circumciduntur quam ex^iduntur
Christianae, apud Purchase: Peregrinat: lib: 6. cap. 4. De Ismaelitis refert
euthymius Monachus Zygabenus, quod Moameth propheta eorum and legislator de
tircumcisione and marium and foeminarum legem ferens, interdixit etiam illis
vino: Et mares quidem, inquit autho^, circumcidere Ebraicum est, foeminas vero
impudentiae Mo^methicae proprium; ^cili^et ut circumcisionem in lege
praescriptam hoc modo corrigeret. In Moamethicis, apud Biblio: hec: pat: Graec:
Tom: 2. page 303. Et paulo post, docuit eos ut se circumciderent, viros parit^r
and mulieres, page 308. Ejus^em farinae est quod de Aliaticis aliis Alexan^er
ab Alexandro: In Arabia gens est, inquit, Creophagos v^cant, quibus nedum viri
sed mulieres Judaice excindi solebant; sicut de Andramite, Lydorum rege, qui
primus Eu^uchas fecit mulieres, sermo proditus est. Genial. ^ie^um, lib: 2.
cap: 25. fol: 97. Quamvis non Arabiae, sed Aethiopiae sunt is^^ Creophagi, apud
trabonem, cui nec circumcisio mulierum prorsus ignota. Geograph: lib: 16. Non
dissimile de Jacebitis (Christianis) in Mesapotamia, Palestina, Syria, etc. sub
Pat^i^rcha in orum dispersis, s^r ptum reliquit ex nostratibus Brerewoodus, in
Inquisit. cap. 21. pa. 153. De Abysseni^o five A^th^opibus sub potentissimo
Imperatore Presbytero Joanne (vulgo Prete Gianni, nostratibus Prester John)
cultum similiter Christianum amplectentibus, Idem in ^isdem, cap: 23. pa: 165.
Ant. Maginus, Geograph: Nov: fol: 188. Georg: Sandesius, peregrinat: lib: 1.
pa. 55. E. Paget. Christianograph. p. 166. imprimis autem Damian: a Goes, page:
559. De Maronitis, in Geographicis suis doctiss. D. Heylin: page 553. Necnon de
Guinensibus (paganis) Purchase. in peregrinat: lib: 6. cap. 16. Contra id quod
passim obtinet, haec omnia, fateor; sive in scri^tis hominum vulgariter vel non
vulgariter doctorum, sive in mentibus: Nec interim minus digna quae vel
observarentur vel ex criberentur vel notentur and in memoria teneantur quam
firmissima. Ex libris rerum cognitio: ex Commentariis autem gravissimorum and
authorum qui imprimis fide digni sunt, haec singula deprompta: Tute, Lector,
judica, sive quod verius sive quod verisimilius ad libitum amplecti, vel si ita
placeat repudiare permissus.
Circumcision they grounded upon the Letter of the Law, and no doubt firmly
enough, Genesis 17.12. and Exodus 12.48. where He (the stranger) that would partake
of of their Passover (as twere our Communion) must first be circumcised (as
with us baptized) or else he was unfit and must not approach, as yet not censed
among those of their Religion. And hereof is no doubt. But whereas for the
requisitenesse or expediency of their second ceremony.

2. Baptism, they allege that a little after in the story of the peoples
washing of their garments before the receiving of the Law by order from their
Governor Moses, as he from God, And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the
people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their
^loaths. From this precept the Hebrew Doctors gather their Doctrine and
practice for baptizing all whom they admit to their church, and covenant.
Ainsworth on Exodus 19.10:
Exodus 19.10. and interpret it figuratively of washing their So they interpret
other like places, as Lev. 11.25. chap. 14 47. chap. 15 10. and chap 23. etc.
Nor have they nothing before these times to countenance this rite, and that
interpretation. So long before us in Jacobs time they make out his counsel to
the stranger Siche^^ites, that they should cleanse themselves upon their coming
over from their Idolatry to his faith, Gen 35.2. for a kind of baptismal
washing. Aben Ezra gave it to the world in his Comments on that chapter; and M.
Light-foot has given it us from him, in his Elias redivivus, pa 11. In
fartherance of which interpretation M. Ainsworth grants two things. 1. That
those he there spoke to, might be many of them Captives taken before in chap.
34.^9. 2. That by cleansing is meant purifying, which outwardly was according
to the Law) by washing in water, as Levit. 15.13. Numb. 31.23.
bodies, sc. by Baptism; And farther infer from hence a necessity (as well
praeceptive as exemplariter) of the like washing of all that shall come over to
the Law, If the place be viewed, judgment will perhaps be soon given (as of A
great fault! Scripturarum esse volumus quae nostra sunt: as S. Augustine
complained.
many other wrested in, nay, turned quite round about to serve purposes) that
it was found out rather to countenance the Rite after (for what reason soever)
it was brought in and was desired to be kept, then affording any sound and
substantial Ye^ some Christian Fathers reflected on this place, as
countenancing our Baptism. Sicut in lotione vestimentorum Exodus 19.)
describitur nobis quodam^ odo purificatio per aquam. Cyril. Alexand. Glaphyr.
in Exodus lib. 3. Tom: 1. page: 319 Vid. etiam German: Archepiscop. Constantinop^
contemplat, in Bib. pat. Graec. tom. 2. pa: 131.
ground to introduce it at first, or take it up when they were at liberty. I
speak by what appears in the Text or from it, as it is come to us: That of
Guil. Paris. de Legibus, which he applies to women only, may seem fitly
appliable to All in this case, ( cap. 3.) Intrant mulieres in pactum Abrahae
per quaedam Baptismata and traditiones quae in corpore leges non inveniuntur.
They are censed with Moses people by rites not found in Moses Law. Howsoever,
whether upon ground enough from the Law, as they pretended, or otherwise,
certainly they used this ceremony, (you know what the word Baptism means;
and whether S. Paul had any allusion to such Baptism or reputed use thereof,
in his 1 Cor. 10.2. of all the Fathers being baptized into Moses, and passing
through the Sea like the molten Sea, or Baptisterium) I say no more here, but
it would be thought on) But they Sed and nunc qui ex gentibus circumcisis ut
Ismaelitis, Persis, Turcis ad Judaismum veniunt, ab ipsis baptizantur. Grotius
in Annot. ad Evang. Mat. 3.6. pa. 41. and hujus Baptismi Judaici meminit
Scholiastes ad Juvenalem, and Arrianus in Epictero. id. ib.
used, I say, this Ceremony howsoever, both to men and women, not sprinkling,
but baptizing them all over, or washing them with a care exceeding diligent if
not Superstitious that no part, so much as the bending of a joint might be left
unwashen. This was done in the presence of a When his wound was whole then
before three witnesses was he baptized, in which ceremony they covered the
whole body with water. Purchase. Pilgrim. lib. 2. cap. 2. and Ainsworth on
Genes. 17.12. Quemlibet scilicet ejusmodi proselytum, dum stetit templum,
triplici initiamentorum genere admitti solenne erat, Circumcisione, Baptismo
(public and coram tribus minime peracto) and oblatione. Seldom. de succession.
etc. cap. 26: And so it continues: If any one would be a Jew, he must first be
precisely interrogated by 3 Rabbis or men in Authority, What it is that moves
him to take this resolution, etc. In their presence he must be circumcised and
washed, etc. Ludovic. Mutineus. de gliriti Hebraici, par. 5. cap. 2. These
three were required likewise at the admission of the other lower Proselytes,
which was done without any Baptism. Id. de Jure Not. and Gent. l. 2. cap. 3.
from Gemar. Babil. tit. Aboda zora, cap. 5.
Triumvirate, or three chosen witnesses solemnly assisting as Godfathers; not
without the Silicet ipse Baptismus in seculis legis dationem sequentibus actus
habebatur forensis seu Consistorii Triumvirorum, sive public sive ex eorum
quorum intererat abitrio, pro more constitutorum. Adeoque par est ut
existimetur fuisse etiam in deserto atque intervallo quod tractamus, actus
forensis id est a praesecturis praestandus juridicis quae fuerint; etc. Seldom.
de Syned. Vet. Ebraeor. lib. 1. cap. 3. pa. 33.
nature of a Court for more solemnity, with explication of the Law over the
Baptized as he stood in the Lavatory, and that by these overseers leaning over
him, suscepturi, as they were about to take him up out of the water: Twice for
failing both those greater and lesser commandments were so repeated. Before
which the Vid. Hieron. Epist. ad Pammach. de erroribus Joan. Hierosol.
Augustine. de cura pro mortuis cap. 12. -- Confession. li. 9. cap. 6. -- lib. de
fide and operibus, cap. 6. -- de tempore Sermon. 56, 57. and 116. ( which three
last are ad competentes) Pamel. ad Cyprian. Epist. 13. number. 4. ad Tertullian.
de Bapt. cap. 1. n. 1. Duo sunt genera Catechumenorum (ut Rabanus docet) Unum
eorum qui audiunt conciones, sed nondum petierunt Baptismum, and ii dicuntur
auditores sive Audientes: Alii petunt Baptismum and dicuntur competentes.
Bellarmin. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 1. and de Poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Competens (as the word was used after in the Christian Church for him was ripe
for baptism, or stood in vestibulo pietatis, as G. Nazian. phrased it) was in
the first part of the same continued business of initiation by Post sinceram
Judaismi professionem eum circumcidebant: professionem, sc. integram and
perfectam totius Judaismi, and uniuscujusque legis Mosaicae capitis: Nam si
unicum aliquod observare renueret foedere sacro arcebatur. Gemar. Babil. cited
by M. Seldom de Jur. Not. 2.2. And in this way might be fulfilled what the
Learned Apostle writ (and perhaps meant hereof) to the Gentile Galatians, chapter
5.3. I testify to every one that is circumcised, He is a DEBTOR to do the
whole Law. Bound: Why? Why not from some such accustomed formal stipulation
and express undertaking at the ministration thereof? So M. Hooker understood
it clearly, in his Polity, lib. 5. sect. 64. pa. 338,
Circumcision, if not Praefecturae juridicae quae Baptismo praeerat
profitebatur (baptizandus) proselytus ipse majorennis (masculus qui annum 13.
foemina quae 12. superaverat) legem Mosaicam se servaturum. Minorum vero
nomine, idem ipsum profitebatur praefectura ipsa, uti in Christianismo
susceptores minorennium seu parvulorum; saltem si nec parents adessent qui id
praestare possent, Seldom: lib. 1. de Syned. Vet. Eb. cap. 3. pa. 34. Etiam
Regeneratum dixere and Renatum quemque proselytum sic factum, velut infantem
recens natum, etc. The reason, or reasonableness whereof may be derived from
the first pattern and instance, for the holy Text seems to give us some such
convention at the first institution of Legal Baptism. Moses (the Mediator) is
to carry the Articles of agreement, Exodus 19.3. The Lord called unto him out of
the Mountain, saying, Thus shall thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the
children of Israel; ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I
bare you on Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self, Now therefore if ye
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me above all people, for all the Earth is mine: And ye shall
be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. These are the words
which thou shall speak unto the children of Israel. At verse 7. Moses called
for the Elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which
the Lord commanded him: And all the people answered together and said, All that
the Lord has spoken we will do. Whereupon follows order for the Sacrament at
verse 10. If these things be thus, we have here the first bottom, (by divine
information, and proceeding from no worse then divine example, at least
approved thereby) of this part of necessary stipulation at Baptism into a Law
to be obeyed; and so may better understand 1 Cor. 10.2. Of the Fathers
baptized into the Law.
Baptism it self) to declare his sincere intention to keep the Law, and every
syllable thereof, upon which condition only he was admittable, for if he made
exception but of Any, the least, there was a stop, and no farther proceeding;
nay, the very hardest things were culled out to be proposed, say Munster and
Maimonides, that if a man were not very resolute, he might be diverted or
repelled. Serious and solemn praemonition there was also of the weightinesse of
the business in hand, the worthiness of the Law (and the received particulars
thereof) the preferment of the change by submitting to it, the dignity of those
persons into whose society there was intended Co-optation, de justorum etiam
Artic. 11. Credo perfecta fide, quod Deus omnibus opera ipsorum recompensaturus
sit; omnibus, inqua^, quotquot ma^data ejus executi fuerint: e contra vero
puniturus sit omnes, quotquot interdicta ejus transgressuri sunt, Artic. 13.
Credo perfecta fide, quod expergefactio mortuorum futura sit; tempore sc: illo
quod Deo Creatori videbitur opportunum. Cujus Dei Creatoris nomen valde
benedicatur celebreturque in secula seculorum. Amen. Two of the thirteen
Articles of the Jews Creed, as it is represented to us in Euxtorf. Synagogue,
cap. 1. p. 4. and by Genebrard about the middle of his works under this title,
Canticum sive carmen in Symbolum fidei, etc. who had it (he says) from the
101 page of the Hebrew Breviary. Another, the first of those Articles is, Credo
vera perfectaque fide, quod Deus Creator, gubernator and sustentator omnium sit
creaturarum, quod idem ipse operatus sit omnia, operetur adhuc, etc. The whole
of so great account that it is bound up with the great Hebrew Bible Printed at
Venice 1517, together with a large exposition, and this seal or censure put in
for a close, Quisguis autem fundamentum articulumve omnium vel unicum evertat
eique fidem non adhibeat, eum ad rempublic. Israeliticam non pertinere, as we
have from the same Buxtorf, page 16. Now for the Christian side, and their
derivation, (likely) or correspondence, Hear first how the Catechized were to
be admonished in Saint Augustines time. Narratione finita spes resurrectionis
intimanda est, and pro capacitate ac viribus audientis, proque ipsius temporis
modulo, adversus vanas irrisiones infidelium de corporis resurrectione
tractandum, and futuri ultimi judicii bonitate in bonos, severitate in malos,
virtute in omnes, etc. lib. de Catechizand, rudibus, cap. 7. tom. 4. pa. 297.
Alchwin has much to the same, in Epist. 7. ad Dominum regem: col. 1489. and
Gregory Nazianzene, Creed praeterea resurrectionem, Judicium, merendem ad
justum Dei lancem exigendam, to his converts approaching Baptism, in Orat. 40.
in sanct. Baptisma, cap. 51. As to the other Article of Creation, he had said
before, Creed universum mundum tam qui oculis cernitur, quam qui oculorum
obtutum fugit, a Deo ex nihilo esse creatum and Creatoris providentia
gubernari, etc. Nor is the Bridge or Passage from the old to the New Church
left so in the dark that altogether unseen, for among other Principles, these
seem to have been the very Doctrines of Baptismes in the Apostles time and
words, Heb. 6.2. the resurrection of the dead, and future judgment, things then
to be assented to; and the Apostolical Constitutions (styled) which pretend to
give the Evening of the Apostles days, have (with other things too long to be
repeated) some, of the Creation, Resurrection, etc. then to be assented unto,
and professed to be believed, in lib. 7. ca. 41.
mercede, de poena iniquorum, de futuro seculo, and such other things
(resembling a repetition of the Articles of what was then in their Belief or
Creed) All, much in the sort that afterward the first Christian Ministers took
up to set forth their Sacrament of Initiation into Christ his Church ( sc. not
without interrogation, stipulation, promise, vow, surety, confession of faith,
profession of purpose of good life, etc. of which more hereafter) and it may be
perhaps no vain or frivolous conjecture to suppose they borrowed much of this
Ab Hebraeidiscrimen hoc (between Catechizing and Preaching) ut pleraque veteris
Christianismi. Grot. ad Matthew. 28.20. pa. 521:
manner from them; not scorning to Quemadmodum aurem in magnis superbarum
aedium ruinis marmor ac aliquid simile saepe effoditur, quod nos veteris
praestant ae commonet, and insuper ad recentium struct^rarum decus atque
ornamentum facit; Aut quemadmodum ex animantium vilissimorum stercoribus s^epe
leguntur gemn^ae quae in aureorum annulorum palas immissae splendorem oculis
jucundissimum afferunt; Sic quod ex corruptae Synagogae reliquiis eruitur
Patriarcharum in corruptam religionem adhuc spirans mihi videtur and Ecclesiam
ex ornare, and ad primam suam lucem deducere. Genebrard. in Epistol. praefixa
Symbol. fidei Judaeorum, pa. 71.
adorn the holy Church of Christ with the lawful spoils of the former
Synagogue, or to set forth the administration of that Sacrament which was of
Initiation into the inherited faith of old Father Abraham, by the grave and
decent ornaments they found and could without superstition borrow and bring
along with them from the sons of Abraham; As I know not how Levies former
sacred use could profane or make any way unlawful unto followers what was in
it self morally grave and good before, or that the costly Tabernacle or
magnificent stately Temple could make it sinful to us to worship God in Temples
made with hands, fairly built, or serve him in our best, and with our best,
though as good as what Aaron or Solomon dedicated, Or that we must offend by
keeping the places of our nearest and solemn approaches to Gods most holy
presence clean and free from all noisome pollution, because of what Israel was
commanded to take care of about that place where the GLORIOUS PRESENCE promised
to discover it self in the Camp, Thou shall have a place also without the Camp,
whither thou shall go forth abroad. Et paxillus tibi esto (a paddle or
spade-staffe) praeter arma tua (besides, or upon thy weapon, so some; at thy
Girdle, so the Septuagint) Eritque eum sessurus eris for as, ut eo fodias and
ru^sus tegas excrementum tuum (turpitudin^m tuam, Septuag.) For the Lord thy
God walks in the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine
enemies before thee, Therefore shall thy Camp be holy (or clean) that he see
no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
Deuteronomy. 23.12, 13, 14. But this by the way; I return. The party so circumcised
as before, (if a man) and whether man or woman, so as but now baptized, When
he had according to the Text alleged for it, And ^e sent young men of the sons
of Israel who offered Burnt-offerings, etc.
Exodus 24.5. added the last Ceremony, which was

3. Oblation or What? Two Turtles, or Pigeons, say Weemse and Godwin in the
places alleged: But Holocaustum sive ex pecore sive Turtu e; aut Columbi. M.
Seldom pa. 142. and Ainsworth on Genesis 17.12. Since the dispersion the necessity
of either cease, till the Temple shall be reedified: So now this third is of
no expectation.
offering sacrifice, They now counted him a perfect Regenerate man, Dead to his
former estate; alive to God, formerly a stranger, now their own, not of the
Reprobates of the World, but of the Commonwealth of Israel; In a word Renate
and Born Again in the full and utmost import of that strange word, and thereby
estated in all the honor, happiness, blessing, privilege, their alliance or
religion could promise, or a Recovered, Redeemed, Sanctified, Saved man, expect
in Remuneration of the works of true Belief in this or the other world. Besides
which, some access of temporal privilege was thought to accrue, consequent
upon so solemn and ceremonial a change, as The name of an Hebrew, no small
honor, The freedom of that Nation, which might bring no small benefit, To
live under their Law, sub alis Majestatis divinae, so they were wont to
expound, To be favorably tried by that Law, in sundry cases, To be secure of
diverse shameful punishments, To borrow of a brother- Hebrew, without Usury,
etc. Yet so as the chief good expected lay on the other side of invisible and
spiritual, which Religion could bring to the soul; and this no less then to be
born to Heaven, and new-come hopes of as much Good as a Saved Soul might reap
here or hereafter.

CHAP. V.
The effects of Proselytism.
NAY yet farther and to come to the thing nearest, whereas this REGENERATION in
the full sound and sense of the word might seem to speak out a thing so
unlikely, that, to make it passable, some moderating trope had need to be cast
for and brought in, to make that which they believed, seem probable, and it be
enough for men to be as 'twere born Again, though fully they were not, This
they disclaimed as short of what they would and was, and in the proper Notion
of the word without help of a figure they took the Proselyte to be in reality
and truth indeed so Born. Wonder may be at the thing, and almost at my
assertion, but whosoever will consider these three things, they yet believed,
partly making, partly belonging to a true birth, will not think much to embrace
farther persuasion they might also believe the Birth it self (to which they did
belong, or of which they were, and which could hardly have concomitancy or
participation of any other) As,

I. A new name obtained by virtue hereof, as of one newly come into the world.

II. A new relation or kindred, at least, as of one Dead, an obliteration of
the old.

III. The man himself, (the foundation of all) changed, at least, to the Soul,
the chief and denominating part. This was Much; Yet all this I believe, they
believed.

1. The Regenerate (circumcised-baptized-offering) Proselyte was thought
worthy, (as a man newly come into the World) of a New name; (as, Philip or
Alexander was called David or Solomon; Haman or Holofernes, Moses or Benjamin,
and so of the rest; a fair Preface and omination of a real and individual
change. For Nomina are Notamina, as one says, are or should be, the revealing
discoveries of veiled Existences, or Nota rerum, as Cicero, the outsides of
Things wherein they appear to our apprehension, or Nomen quasi Novimen, so
Festus, to make known a Being. Where therefore the Name is changed is a
presumption for the thing, Why else should the Name to declare, or indeed belly,
that it is so? But hereof I am not over confident. It Is more assured,

2. He had a new relation or kindred, at least was dead to his old; So that his
Father that begat him was no longer of his alliance, nor, which is more
strange, his Mother that bare him. His Brethren, Sisters, or whatever former
Pristina prorsus omnimoda deleta cognationis ratione, consanguineos nullos
postmodum ex jure habere Sacro, sive in successionis, sive in connubiorum (quod
mirere) ratione censebatur (Proselytus) praeter posteros qui Baptismum seu
initiamenta sequerentur. Seldom. de succession. in bon. defunct. cap. 26.
Cognationem pristinam omnimodam evanuisse docent per Regenerationem, id: de
Jure not: etc. lib. 5. cap. 18. Nay, if Parent, Brother, Sister, or any of the
nearest kin came over after to the same Religion, yet could not the former
relations of nature be made to piece up and close together again, for they were
dead and gone, sealed up fast under an impossibility of Resurrection.
relations he had by affinity or consanguinity, natural or accidental all
ceased and vanished presently; what need be said more? he being so now dead to
All he was, that he had nothing now left of his former Natural-Nature.
Insomuch that if a Gentile had loved his own Sister, or one whom by Law of
Nature (things so remaining) he might not come near, He needed but by due rites
be made a Proselyte of Jerusalem, and then he might take her to himself, whom
before he could not, as now of no kin, (at least, consanguinity or nature
hindered not) for by his new birth all was new, by the effect of those rites in
Regeneration all former Relation, the closest of all, even that of
consanguinity ceasing, (Like as upon the same ground the Cum converius ad fidem
and in Ch isto regeneratus priori vitae mortuus sit, potest uxorem, cum
converti non vult, dimittere; nec cum illa habitare aut debitum reddere
tenetur. Supplem. tertiae partis. Quaest. 59. art. 4. Respondeo. The like is
added of Non-Obligation to perform promise made before entering into Religion.
Liberty of retaining is allowed by the sixth General Council of
Constantinople, which implies the contrary thought not unlawful, for I am not
at liberty, where I may not as well reject. Canon. 72. fol. 343. in Caranza.
More advisedly another Council, In Baptismo solvuntur crimina, non tamen
legitima conjugia. Council. Triburiense. cap. 39. in Binius. Tom. 3. pa. 1042.
Perfecters of Aquinas allow a man to put away his wife, if of a Pagan he
become a Christian, as being therewith Regenerate by Baptism alone, for,
Generatio unius est corruption alterius, say they, and by This that the former
Pagan is, by being converted, now made new, He is and ought to be reputed Dead
to what he was before: Not to speak of As by Monachisme; upon which change the
last binding Law of the Novels allows dissolution of the immortal bond of
Matrimony, till death us depart, by Divorce; and that whether to Man or Woman.
Quodcunque enim pacti fuerint contrahentes ex morte fieri lucrum, hoc habere
oportet eum qui dimittitur ab altero, by this change of state, sive vir sive
mulier sit; Eo quod and iste quantum ad Matrimonium videtur mori, aliud pro
alio eligens vitaeiter. Novel. 22. Tit. de Nuptiis, cap. 5. Though the canon
deny it post carnalem copulam, not otherwise, as the Gloss there has well
noted. Licentiam.
lesser changes, or As of the Servant of a Jew or Pagan, who being changed by
Baptism, was free of his Master by Justinians dispensation. Cod. de Episcopis
and Cler. L. 3. His ita. So of a Manichee or Donatist, if he came over to the
Catholic Church. Cod. de Haereticis, and Manich. sect. 8. Servos.
lesser effects of This) Stories give, when sometimes the Plague was at Athens,
it was so malignant and direly mortal, that if any fell sick, he was given over
for Dead, if he did chance to recover, his friends welcomed him as from the
Regions of Death, Neque seipsum autem novit neque propinquos, as says the
Nonnullos etiam simul ac ex morbo convaluerunt, statim omnium rerum oblivio
pariter cepit, ita ut neque seipsos, neque necessarios agnoscerent, Thucid:
Histor: be li Pelopounes. lib: 2. pa: ^31.
Historian, He was neither Himself, nor knew any of his former Friends, even so
the Renate Proselyte Hebrew was more then in danger, quite dead in this change,
He had shook off all his Relations, and lost his very blood and kindred.
Scaliger upon Festus, informs of another custom among those Athenians, that
When one of theirs had been so long absent in the War, that he was thought to
be dead, and his Friends had from their love celebrated his obsequies, if by
chance after he revived, and came to life, in their opinion, as he had been in
himself always, and were desirous to converse among them, They yet suffered him
not, prius quam per sinum laxae stolae mulier eum dimitteret, tanquam denuo
renasci videretur, (fol. 128.) and he was called (...), as one that was crept
into the world of New, and was once again born of a Woman; What was here in
fiction or supposition, was thought more Real and in effect by the rites spoken
of, sc. that the convert was truly dead to former state and had now a
resuscitation to a second true life, being born Again of Water, whereto our
Savior added in His, Baptism of Water and a new spirit or life added thereto,
sc. of Water and the holy Ghost. And hence, from belief of a true death, it
followed by the Hebrew Law, that if the natural and legitimate brother died,
leaving a rich inheritance which according to course of Law and rules of
Succession, should have devolved and come upon his brother, as of next blood,
yet could He not as the Law word is, This proved purposely and at large by Mr.
Seldom, de Succession: in bona defunctorum, especially cap: 26. Ita ex Juris
patrii fictione, ritibus sacris, subnixa, etiam ipsa quibus invicem conjunge
bantur Gentiles jura sanguinis naturalia deleri volebant. Or if no heir were
born after such translation to Judaisme, the rule was, Quicunque bona ejus
prius occupaverit ei cedunt: from Maimonides.
succeed, because he was now none of the kindred he had been of, but Dead and
out of the Family, and had lost his inheritable blood, whereunto the
inheritance would have drawn; Neither (for the same Reason) could his brother
Gentile succeed him, for that they were now of several Si Pater se dederit in
adoptionem, nec sequatur eum filius, emancipatus ab eo antea factus: quia in
alia familia sit Pater, in alia filius, bonorum possessionem contra tabulas non
potest filius ejus habere, and ita Julianus rescripsit. Dig: L. Si pater, tit:
de bonorum possess. contra tabulas.
Families, yea Nations; His going out so took all along that it left nothing
with him, not so much as sparks of Native kindred, They were not now of the
former house of their legal and earthly parents. And, by the way, some such
thing as loss of Kindred, to some purposes, even upon a Death supposed by
change of state and in religion too, both our Civil Laws have taken notice of
as possible, and made use of upon occasion, and Others of the death and
following Regeneration. For, among those six sorts of men, who, if they sue,
judgment shall be demanded, whether they ought to be heard and answered? The
Littleton, in his Tenures, Chap. of Villenage, sect. 200. fol. 1^2. whose is
the most perfect and absolute Work that ever was written in any human science,
says the Learned Coke, never any that understood him, but concurred in his
commendation, etc. We have known many of his cases drawn in question, but never
could find any judgment given against them. Preface to Instit. 1. fol. 3.
Oracle of our Common Law makes the fifth to be, lou un home est enter and
profess en Religion, where a man is entered and professed in Religion, for if
he be, and Not otherwise, as it seems: for if the habit of Probation be only
assumed, not the habit of Profession, this (in reply) but suspends the plea
till the Ordinary be written unto. Fleta, lib: 5. cap. 28. sect. 1. and lib: 6.
cap: 42.
complete by vow, etc. and then sue any action real or personal, the Tenant or
Defendant might show that such a one was entered into Religion in such a place,
into the Order (as of S. Benet, etc.) and this shall be sufficient to And this
was the Law before, in Fleta, lib: 6. cap: 42. Item competit exceptio tenenti
ex persona petentis peremptoria propter mortem civilem, ut si quis se Religioni
contulerit, and postea ad seculum reversus, agere velit, non audietur. -- Cum
quis se Religioni contulerit, renunciat omnibus quae seculi sunt. Bracton lib:
5: tract: 5. cap: 20. sect: 6.
stop the proceeding, by a modest and mannerly way of asking Whether such a one
be a fit person to be answered? The reason whereof the same with the changed
Proselyte before, because says the Sea Littletons Tenures, sect: 202. fol: 136.
The reason hereof might be from having been Devoted to God. For such were by
the Hebrew Law to be slain, or their real death redeemed by a Civil
amortization. Take some light hereabout from Cornelius a Lap: Si vero res per
Cherem Deo vota mortis proprie dictae incapax esset, morte morietur, id est,
Mori debet morte civili. Sicut Religiosi nostri quasi voto Cherem Deo dicati
civiliter mortui dicuntur, quia omni civili negotio and haereditate ac dominio
rerum temporalium sese abdicarunt, perinde ac si mortui essent. Ita olim in
lege tam Levitae quam agri, qui tanquam Cherem Domino erant devoti, civiliter
moriebantur, quia amplius ad profanus usus redire non poterunt, perinde ut jam
domus Ecclesiasticorum and Religiosorum amortizantur. Comment. ad Levit. 27.
ver. 29.
Law, Such a one is dead in Law, Quant une home entra en Religion, and est
profess, il est mort en ley, and son fits ou auter cousin maintenant lui
inheritera auxi bien si come il fuit mort en fait. His son or kinsman entered as
if he were dead: He might have made a Will, appointed Executors, and those
Nay, if he had become bound to the Abbot of such a p^ace, and professing
himself a Monk there, he after by steps came up to the highest of Abbot, He
might then have an action for that debt against his own Executors, Himself
against himself, or that debt was once his, in his life, by his death now come
to another. Cook on Littleton, fo. 133. B.
Executors (he living) should have had action for any true debt, (things
remaining thus) as if he had been dead; or if he had made none, the Ordinary
was to enter as in case of him had clearly and for ever left all here, and was
gone to another world. This dead man revived in his Cloister might there both
enter upon the actions of a New life, and manage them, sue and be sued,
purchase, possess, buy, sell, in another new created right, as Master of his
house, Respondet Dominus Julianus, quod quanquam servus ad personam suam
propriam pro mortuo habeatur, ex persona tamen Domini fui potest habere jus
stipulationis, Gloss. ad Instit. 3. tit: de stipulat. servorum, sect. servus.
Trustee for his College, etc. by that well laid and most profitable
distinction of Proprium in communi, Lording it so over Lordships, and having
nothing yet possess all things: But for any thing he had before, it was Illud
quoque decernimus, qui in Monasterium intrare voluerit, antequam Monasterium
ingrediatur, licentiam habere, suis uti, quo voluerit modo, Ingredientem namque
simul sequuntur omnino res: Licet non expressim, qui introduxerit eas, dixerit:
and non erit dominus earum ulterius ullo modo: Novel: 5. c. 5. repeated and
confirmed in the Preface of Novel. 76. Nemo aliquid proprium habeat, nullum
omnino rem, neque codicem, neque tabulas, neque graphiarium, sed nihil omnino.
One of S. Benets Rules.
lost and found, gone and come, departed from him for ever, with all title to
it, and accrewed to another: for he had been in saeculo; He was now not
secular, His very kindred took as little notice of him, as he of them, Benefit,
prejudice, loss or gain was nothing to either, not to a Cousen, Brother, or
Father; for he was now gone off clear, and only intwisted with his new
spiritual relations. There is a twofold death says the Commentator there, A
death indeed, and a civil death or death in Law, Mors civilis and Mors
naturalis, and therefore to oust all scruples, Leases for life are ever made
during the natural life, etc. Of which supposition our I mean Bracton, de
legibus Angliae, etc. l. 1. c. 10. sect. 1. l. 4. tract. 6. c. 7. l. 5.
tractat. 5. ca. 18. sect. 1. etc. 23. sect. 2. Nay in some cases that which is
equivalent to a Regeneration. Est etiam mors civilis in servo in servitute sub
potestate Domini constituto. Hujusmodi vero servitus mortalitati comparatur.
Quia fuit aliquando in manu Domini vita ac mors: (sed modo non, propter
severitatem dominorum, sed in Manu domini Regis) Sed cum tales potestatem
domini effugerint. quasi resuscitati ad vitam aliquantulum respirant, secundum
quod superius perpendi poterit, de Except. cap. 20. fol. 421. And speaking of
Outlaws, Item just utlegatus and rite non restituitur nisi tantum ad pacem,
quod ire possit and redire and pacem habere, and ad actiones restitui non
potest, nec ad alia, quia est sicut infans modo genitus, and homo quasi modo
genitus, lib: 3. de Corona, cap. 14. sect. 12. And a little after, Inlegati
vero dici poterunt quasi modo geniti infantes, and novi homines quasi de novo
creati; quia in personis eorum, post utlagariam rite factam, nulla praeterita
subsistunt, sed post inlagariam tantum praesentia and sutura succedunt, etc.
Sect. 13. fol: 133. B as beginning the world of new. An out-lawry he styles a
civil death, 5. 5. 23. 2. fo. 426. and vide Seldeni Dissertat. ad Flet. cap: 8.
sect: 3.
Papinian has enough.

This for Jus civil est quod quisque populus, vel quaeque civitas sive
proprium, divina humanaque causa constituit. Decret: par. 1. c. 8. Nam quod
quisque populus ipse sibi jus constituit id ipsius proprium civitatis est;
vocaturque Jus Civil. Dig. de Jure and Just: L. 9. Omnes. and the Common Law
of England is Jus Civil Anglorum. Seldom of Tithes: Review of Chap: 7 and
Spelman Glossar: p: 399. col. 2.
Our Civil Law; Now for that is more Jus quidem civil en unaquaque, civitate
appellatur: veluti Atheniensium, etc. sed quotiens non addimus nomen cujus sit
civitatis, nostrum Jus significamus. Instit. 1. tit. 2. sect. sed jus.
commonly so styled, Neither has been forgotten there, nor sparingly remembered
this civil death. For by such title is called, Mors civilis dicitur amissio
civitatis and etiam servitus. Gloss: Amissio: in L. 2. Dig: de poenis.
the loss of being free of the City, and Et quantum ad jus civil servus pro
mortuo habetur: Gloss: ad Institut: 3. tit: de stipulation: servorum.
Servitutem mortalitali fere comparamus. Digest. de reg. Juris. L. 209:
plain servitude, and Publicatione quoque distrahi societatem manifestum est;
scilicet, si universa bona socii publicentur. Nam cum in ejus locum alius
succedat, pro mortuo habetur. Instit. 3. de societate sect. 7.
confiscation, and Deportatos enim mortuorum loco habendos. Digest: de bonorum
possess. cont. tab: L. in contra. Sect. 8. and Gloss. ad mortem. Novel. 7. c.
5. Cum autem is qui ob a^iquod maleficium in insulam deportatus civitatem
amittit, sequitur ut qui eo modo ex numero civium Romanorum tollitur, perinde
ac si eo mortuo desinant liberi in ejus potestate esse. Institut: 1. tit. 12.
and vid. Dig. de liberis and posthum: L. Galius, sect. Et si quid, and Gloss.
Eam semper, ad librum de Pace Constantiae, in Prefat. He that with us was outed
from a place of high trust, as Abbot, Prior, etc. was by that privation so far
Capite deminutus, that proceedings in law were as if he were dead, sc. morte
civili, but not naturali, as this distinction was then laid hold of. Vide
Seldom, ad Flet: Dissert: sect. 3. pa. 529. 8.
deportation or carrying away to some desolate Island; Insomuch that it was
needful to note, that where death was mentioned without apposition, it was not
meant of As in case of Convention for somewhat to be performed after death.
Vide Gloss. Nisi morien te, ad Digest: de Verborum obligat. L. 121. sect. 2.
Civil but natural death, as possibly some might understand; whence the Divine
takes notice, with other, of one kind of Death, Mors quadruplex Naturalis,
Spiritualis, Aeterna and Civilis, Bucan. Commun. loc. 40. sect. 2.
Eorum qui capite diminuti sunt, vel de gradu honoris deciderunt. Further, a
very Regeneration, and under that title, as consequent of some change of state,
Justinian was not unacquainted with. For, Authent. collat. 3: tit. 5. cap. 11.
writing to the General of the East about the legitimation of natural children,
he wills (among other ^^^ngs) that, If a man have Such by one of Servile
condition, and after set her free and marry her, and jus eis (to her and her
children) aureorum annulorum petierit, (sc. of the Natales antiquos and jus
ingenuitatis non ordo praestare Decurionum, sed a nobis peti potuit. God de
jure aureorum annulorum, L. 1.
Emperor himself, who only could grant this honor, the utmost of the Patrons
Power was to allow the use of one made of Vid. Cujac. paratit. ad Digest. de
Jure aureorum annulorum.
Iron, in token of some lower Freedom: but if he sue to the Emperor for jus
aureorum annulorum) and REGENERATIONIS, and inter ingenuos secundum justos
reduxerit modos, etc. Then both the children to be to all purposes (as of
inheritance, etc.) legitimate, and their mother and them restored in state to
such freedom as if they never had been Servile. Which Petition the same
Emperor after willing of his Grace to release and grant of course (without
special suit) or rather to be had without granting, he uses the same Cod. l.
6. tit. 8, L. ult.
words, that the manumised should have -- Ex ipsa manumissione aureorum
annulorum and -- Nam, quasi modo sit renatus, id est, iterum natus, in
ingenuitate, ita est ingenuu^. Gloss ad loc.
regenerationis jus -- ut sint quidem liberi and ingenui, the right of the
Patrons yet saved, which expression is again of the same grant in the Novel.
78. c. 1.
Novel ((...) vocat Justinianus, says Brissonius) and after he boasts the
diffusivenesse of his goodness herein to be comparable with Antonine and
Theodosius, who granted such favors of course, formerly restrained to suit, as
he did now again, In eadem cap. 5.
aureorum annulorum and Regenerationis Jus, to the manumissed by virtue of
their manumission; Not to insist on that change of Bene-Nation in the same Cap.
2. -- ut non denuo and liberate, and been natione cadant.
Novel, and the Patron described as Pater there, a very new Father, by adding
somewhat to the first natural Birth in the Interdum and servi nati ex post
facto juris interventu Ingenui fiunt. Ut ecce si libertinus a principe
natalibus suis restitutus fuerit. Illis enim utique natalibus restituitur, in
quibus initio omnes homines fuerunt, non in quibus ipse nascitur, de natalibus
restituendis. L: 2.
Pandects. It was like to be an occasion of some wonder to meet with, in Lib.
de Baptismo, cap. 5.
Tertullian, and speaking of things out of the Church) a very Regeneration, and
that in Pagan Baptism: but there it is. And if we consider how great a The
fruits of whose pregnant wit, and ripe judgment are thought to have been many
of those Laws after collected and digested by Tribonian into the Pandects: as,
Tit. de Leg. Senatusque consult. L. Ideo, qui antiqu. tit. de acquirend: and
amittend. possess. L: si aliquam tit. de Castr. pecul. L. Miles praecipua: and
from whom that samous Senatuscon. ultum Tertyllianum ( whereof in Digest. 38.
tit. 18.) might borrow name; So Chr. Helvicus in Chronol, ad ann. Chr. 193. and
others; But without doubt erroneously.
Lawyer he was, we may cease to think it strange he should make use of a word
readiest at hand in his own art, or they to borrow a term they were best
acquainted with the use of in their own professed Civil Laws. He or they might
derive, (besides what they had as Christian) from similitude in their own
Paulus, Modestinus, Vlpian, Papinian, etc.

Thus a loss of kindred, change of state, by death, civil, and the great
remove of a Regeneration, ours and other Laws have left expressed, as in
Israel; but these were most but Tropes and Figures; In England, Rome and
Athens, the person remained still the same, or but with accidental alteration,
the expression allusive, Only at Jerusalem there was no wonder made of a Being
sent of new (antedating, in fair resemblance, the present transubstantiation of
the Church of Rome) and really, essentially, formally they held the Proselyte
to Be changed. For,

3. To come to the third sign, effect, or rather cause of Regeneration, (the
ground of the whole) the very change of the regenerate Man, They did believe
him indeed to be so essentially, and formally, and really changed, A New man
to be brought into the world, (without which that variation of kindred before
could not have been) At least for the better and chiefer part, which we know by
an usual trope to be put for the whole. For, (Credit Judaeus apella!) It is
strange that I shall tell you, yet they believed it, That the Regenerate
Convert Proselyte had by virtue of their Ceremonies miraculously working, a new
soul charmed down into Him, with abolition of the old; Corruption and
succeeding-Generation are Nothing else in Nature but induing the same Matter
with a New Form, This they believed in this case to be, to induce the very
title of most substantial change by Generation.

They went no farther; For the visible body was seen still remaining, As the
Papists allow (they Must) the outward Form, and cover of Bread and Wine in the
consecrated host, and in sensible things most men will belive their senses:
But, for the Soul, This they believed to be both gone and come; the old one
removed, no inquiry whither, a new one succeeding, they saw well from whence;
That either annihilated or sent back to its former Mansion and This immediately
procured and sent down from Heaven. Some controversy it may be their Schools
have of the procreation of those souls there, and no less uncertainty of their
Emanation and infusion into their Proselytes with us, and even ridiculous are
the fabulous brawls of the Cabalists, touching their production from I know not
what both invisible and incredible generations: But for the main they consent,
that such New Souls are Made, Sent, Transfused, Infused, and each circumcised
and by other due rites initiated Proselyte both attended by one, and from
thence readily informed. Now we know that the soul is the preeminent, leading,
chief part, by all belief; and Enimvero, quis non animae dabit summam omnem,
cujus nomine totius hominis mentio titulata est? Tert, lib. de anima cap. 13.
Denomination has been used to derive it self from it accordingly: Nay, some
have said it is not the chief, but the whole. Anima cujusque is est quisque, as
the Philosopher, it individuates the species, it is Conspicimus homines, id
est, animas ipsas; quid enim sunt homines, nisi animae corporibus alligatae?
Arneb: adversus gentes, l. 2. p. 73.
the Man; and therefore in Sed audi and istud, quia anima nomine hominis
nuncupatur, scriptum est enim in Genesi, Filii an^em. Joseph qui facti sunt ei
in Aegypto, animae novem. Omnes autem animae quae egressa sunt ex Jacob,
Septuagiuta quinque. Et multo aptius anima vel homo Latin, vel Graec^ (...)
dicitur; alterum ab humanitate, alterum ab intuendi habens vivacitate; quae
magis animae quam corpori convenire non dubium est, Ambros. lib: 6. Hexaem,
cap. 8. Tom: 1. pa. 47. Solomon corrects himself having said, he had a soul, I
was a towardly child, (says he) and had a g^od spirit. Or rather being good, I
came into a fast and incorruptible body. The person came into the flesh,
Wisdom 8.19.
Scripture Arithmetique, so many Souls, and So many Men have went for one, and
convertible terms of equal latitude both of sense and signification. In the
Ship with Paul were two hundred seventy six souls, We do not believe them
without bodies, or but Men, Act. 27.37. Joseph invited his Father, and all his
kindred into Egypt, even seventy five souls, their Tabernacles of mortality
were not sure left behind, Acts 7.14. By like numeration the same lineage of
Jacob passes together, Exodus 1.5. and in parcels, Genes. 46. The sons of Zilpah
were sixteen souls, v. 18. the sons of Leah three and thirty souls, ver. 15.
the sons of Rachel fourteen souls, ver. 22. the sons of Bilhah seven, ver. 25.
All together threescore and ten souls, at ver. 27. infallibly So many persons,
by interpretation of the same Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.22. A saying some have, that Lux
est vestimentum Dei, the light we see is the shadow and outward covering of
what (being Divine) we cannot see; Semblably have Divini Theologi Cabalistae in
Zoar dicunt hominem vocari anima^, quia corpus est vestitus hominis, and
vocatur (...) caro and sanguis. Qua^ opinionem and Plato in pluribus locis
sequutus est, dein Porphyrius, Iamblichus, Proclus, Plotinus, Cicero ac
Macrobius, and Lactantius: Avicennae quoque is Ego vocatur, id est, persona
perfecta: and Averroes affirmat constituere totam rei essentiam; ita ut anima
hominis sit totus homo, corpus non pars, sed instrumentum quo anima utitur:
Contra Aristotelem, Augustinum, ac Damascenum, qui corpus putant esse partem
essentialem hominis, quia ejus sit materia. Manasseh ben Israel, in
Conciliatore. Quaest. 19. in. Genes. pa: 27.
others thought that Corpus est vestimentum animae, the Body nothing else save
the outside or clothing of the soul, wherein it is apparelled to be
discernable by us the Errat enim quisquis hominem carne metitur. Nam
corpusculum hoc, quo induti sumus, hominis receptaculum est. Nam ipse homo
neque tangi, neque aspici, neque comprehendi potest, quia latet intra hoc, quod
videtur. Coel: Lactant: lib: de opificio Dei cap. 20. Nec mirandum est quod
Deum non videant (Idololatrae.) Cum ipsi ne hominem quidem videant, quem videre
se credunt. Hoc enim quod oculis subjectum est, non homo, sed hominis
receptaculum est, cujus qualitas and figura non ex lineamentis vasculi, quo
continetur, sed ex factis and moribus pervidetur. Id: lib: 2. de Orig. Err^ris,
cap. 3. Hence the stubborn Philosopher to one that beat him, Tundis vasculum
Anaxarchi non Anaxarchum, Thou woundest the case, t^uchest not the Man.
case or cover; and as these accessory artificial garments are to our natural
bodies, so that natural habit to preserve and cherish the soul. The
instrument, or as it were working hand thereof, to perform operations abroad,
so others: Who though they are crossed by Aristotle and his Followers, making
the Body a constituting part, yet for number are there enough in the other
scale to sway it this way, and it passes that the body is appurtenant, the soul
the essence and perfection of humanity. If then the soul be granted change as
before (so much the more eminent and denominating part) an easy and gentle
trope will soon traduce and bring along the Whole, the man is not but changed:
Nay, if that soul be it self the Whole, what need any trope at all? The man is
completely newborn by it, there needs but this infusion or transformation made
good, and by it the Man is New made completely.

In short, as a Wolf made a Sheep, a Lion, a Lamb, a Vulture a Dove, or an
Earthly man made Heavenly, so every Native Israelite looked upon the Proselyte
Gentile coming over to him, and the inspiration of a new soul might well effect
this Regeneration, which was not without the compass of their firm belief.

And thus has the lamp of the Sanctuary enlightened the things of the Sanctuary,
Jerusalem discovered its own affairs; Whence probably may we know the things of
India, but from India? Or what but a Star from the East bring certain
intelligence of the wonderful things there done and believed? The Subject
chosen and here spoken of by our Savior, had many as it were underpillars,
upon which the knowledge thereof was to be raised and is to be held forth, we
have lighted upon some in their proper Seoene, and among the people spoken to,
by which best guess may be made of what was spoken to them. As that such a New
birth was, what it was; how it was: of Proselytes, the sorts of them, the
rites of making them, the effect of those Rites, and at top of all, a
REGENERATION as the knot in which they met, the center at which they aim and
do prove the thing effectually, clearly.

All this known in the Scripture times; as the Lectures of the Schools, and
practice of the Synagogue: which may give some reason why our Savior (meek and
gentle though he were, a bruised reed, should have had from Him no further
violence) did yet lay so heavy an increpation as after at ver. 10. upon his
Rabbi Pupil Nicodemus, Art thou (says he) a Master in Israel, and yet know
not these things? Each word has its weight. An Israelite, a people of
knowledge! A teacher there, and yet not taught! A Master, as 'twere of higher
Form, and yet know not, art utterly ignorant! Of These things, which all do
or may know! Thou that teach another, Many are in high place and of renown,
but mysteries are revealed to the meek. Ecclus. 3.19: Solet hoc evenire
personatis Ecclesiae pastoribus, ut si nemo illos arguat ipsi inscitiam suam
ineptissimis quaestionibus and propositionibus public prodant, Gualt: Homil:
7. in Joan. 1.
teach thou not thy self? Thou that leadest, art thou blind? Can any thing
excuse thy Doctoural ignorance, thy graduated insufficiency? Art thou Isreal's
Teacher, and yet understandest not what is taught thee? But it is no unusual
thing for ambitious men to over-leap desert; seeking Rabbinical both titles and
preferments, without ever looking after those qualifications and sufficiencies
may deserve those titles, or striving to furnish themselves with those noble
and rich indowments of Learning, worth and goodness, can alone become their
dignities, or make the wearing of their preferments well beseem them.
Rabbi-Ruler Nicodemus is here so dark that he sees not things near at hand, a
guide so blind he cannot follow in his apprehension what is plainly taught him,
a Master scarce a Scholar, nay, not a Scholar, yet a Teacher; to make way for
desert of severe reproof, and the weight of as much indignation and shame as
could be laid on from exprobration of an undeserved title, Art Thou! a Master!
in Israel! and yet know not things commonly and vulgarly known!

And this a better way (as to me it seems) of speaking out indignation, and
bringing home reproof, sharpning it that it might bite (as very likely by his
way of expression, our Savior meant) with quickest severity, then of others
who go their several ways, and yet can hardly piece out things to any likely
consequence, or words so fitting Grammatical coherence; Especially for what
next follows, I speak what I know, (thou also might) and testify what I
have seen: (every day gives instance:) and If I have spoken unto you of these
lower earthly things at hand, and ye credit not, How would ye if I should mount
up aloft to invisible? But of these and some other hereafter. Conclude in
present, by giving due praise and honor unto our most glorious and most
gracious Lord God, by whose gracious favor it is that we have leave to meet in
these Courts of his House, to learn the mysteries of his Counsel and Will, who
bless the opportunities to us, etc.

Glory be to God on high: and on Earth Peace. AMEN.
SERMON. II.
JOHN 3.3.

REGENERATION is a subject of much inquiry and great discourse in Christian
Schools, and so not unworthy that consideration we formerly had of it from this
Text: The foundation or groundwork was then laid, and superstruction promised,
which promise we come now to perform, if the Lord permit. Those Foundations
were indeed somewhat large, (nor need we now lay them open to second review)
but they were both made and liked so, because it was judged they might serve
not only for the purposes they were then alleged for, in the opening of this
Text, but farther to be as grounds for raising sundry conjectures tending to
the resolving of diverse doubts and information of sundry other things in
Christian Religion, not hitherto so well taught or clearly and fully resolved
of (especially about the most holy Sacrament of our Christian Baptism) as
these things may (by Gods blessing) give ground for. I shall reduce the most to
sundry Quaere's touching that Sacrament: as, 1. Its Original. 2. Some
assistants used. 3. The comparison it has with John's Baptism. 4. The
Corrivalship, Circumcision did once maintain with it: And some other things
which will fall in by the way. But I shall keep chiefly to these, and in order:
He that is our God and Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ direct my way to you.

CHAP. VI.
AND as to the first; Quaere 1. Of Baptism from the Hebrews.
our Savior by all consents instituted two Sacraments, that is, Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord; By one we are brought unto Christ, by the other kept to
him (declaratorily;) By one we live, by the other we are kept alive: Now as
touching the latter probable conjectures have been already made of its Original
and how our Savior took it up, Not instituting and framing it whole a new, but
raising it out of and See Godwins Antiq. Heb. l: 3. c. 2. out of P. Fagius in
praecept. Heb. Bishop Lakes Sermon on Exodus 1^.16. And many others say the same
graffing it (as 'twere) upon the stock of another rite of his Nation in use
and practice long before; That use or custom was of a Grace cup ( Cos hillel,
or poculum laudis: Christian Synag. l: 1. c. 6. sect: 3. parag. 4. diat. 4
Poculum benedictionis they called it) usually served in after meat, which our
Savior (it appears out of the holy Story) refused not to See Purchase Pilg^im.
l. 2. cap. c. p. 121. out of Scaliger.
partake of, and out of This made, or consecrated it Into his Sacrament of the
remembrance of his Death, (whence it is called Poculum benedictionis, 1 Cor.
10.16. even after consecration, by the old secular name it had before it came
to be Religious:) Now since our Savior (very likely) did derive and compose his
confirming and strengthening Sacrament (to declare Christian Communion) out of
the bones and as it were praexistent materials of what was ( Hebrew at least,
though not Religious) in use before, What hinders but that his beginning or
initiating Sacrament (whereby we enter Christian Communion) may entitle it self
to a like Original and derivation, And, by adding to that Baptismall washing
was in use for helping to initiate Hebrew Proselytes before, the grace of the
holy Ghost, He might So make that Baptism for remission of sins, and
matriculation into his Church, which, if for its proper work and end it has
Regeneration thitherward, That (as you have heard before) was no less believed
to be the effect (as from a partial cause) of former Proselyte Baptism.

I do not say These things were so, for now I speak only conjecturally, and by
way of problem, (This speak I, not the Lord) Nor does the supposition they
were so, imply or infer Christ's newborn Baptism to be the same with that in
use before, that is, the same and no more. But, the same, And more, what
hinders but it may be? the Same heightened to a farther degree of Honor and
Power, sc. by Christ's consecration? Hebrew Baptism (in a word) Now by Christ We
may rightly term Christ his Baptism (in Jordan) Baptisma Baptismatis, the
Christening of Baptism, says Doctor Featly, in his Spiritual Bethesda, page
208.
Christened? and that with as great likelihood as a Complement may be made a
Divine mystery, a grace Cup raised to an holy Sacrament, and that Mystery, that
Sacrament advanced yet higher, and to the very highest of honor and some
veneration, sanctified and set upon our holy Communion Table. Nay, for this
reason I take it more likely, because That was before but a mere I speak this
according to what is abroad and most commonly received. R. C (or M. Rich:
Cudworth) of Cambridge, has not long since taken very commendable, and
successeful pains in a new Discovery, and to prove this Sacrament religious by
parentage; to wit, that it was founded in a Sacrificial Feast, (A conceit
altogether New, and wholly different from all before.) If his well compacted
reasons will hold water, as we use to say, and be so close wrought and well
laid that they will stand out, and endure the touch of time (as they are very
like, foundations he has fair, specious and large, and of much greater depth
then most opinions, set aside Tradition, and received) they then prove that we
feast in our Communion, from the like participation of what was sacrificed,
left, and eaten by the people of Israel, and whereby they maintained (as some
Gentiles also) a Communion both among themselves and with their God: To eat
together what was sacrificed to Him did unite and combine them as well among
themselves as with Him, and so we by Eating and drinking communicate with our
God and with one another. The opinion I leave to it self; the disquisition is
howsoever of much both sagacity, ingenuity, pleasure and use. May it promise of
the Author what was wont to be sung in the Temple every Sabbath, The righteous
shall flourish like a Palm, and spread like a Cedar: Such as he planted in Gods
house, shall flourish in his Courts, and bring forth MORE fruit in their Age,
Psa. 92. The most and generally retain those grounds I go upon.
civil business, and so needed a farther translation even of the whole kind, (a
very Metamorphosis) to make it religious, whereas Here needed no such thing; no
transire a genere ad genus, or to raise from profane to holy, because all was
sub eodem genere under the same head of Religious before: A Rite of Religion?
yea, a rite of Regeneration, yea, a Rite of Baptismal Regeneration, and in some
sense (believed) Sacramental too; to wit, as far forth as any thing among Gods
own people Then was Such, As questionless some things were, Circumcision for
instance, and this as far forth as Circumcision, being that in Sacramental work
did bear a joint half part with it.

Neither does this derogate from the honor of this Sacrament (in mine opinion)
but rather add thereto, nor detract from it but rather give esteem, Nor make
it infamous as Jewish, if the pedigree should settle and hold thence, but
rather add to its commends, as coming from the stock of Abraham, the house of
Israel: Other things boast of that extraction, the other Sacrament, for
instance, glories of an Hebrew Original, this is left Christian enough that
even this determination leaves it in the highest, safest way Christian, by If
any shall object that I seem to make the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body
and blood, a Jewish ceremony, sc. by deriving it from their Cup of blessing, I
answer, No: For as a kind of initiatory purification was used by the Jews,
etc. to make Proselytes, yet it was no more a Sacrament to them then
Circumcision was to the Turks and Saracens; Thus neither was the breaking of
the bread Sacramental to the Jew; but then it became a Sacrament, when Christ
said of it, This is my Body, etc. Godwins Heb. Antiqu: l. 3. c. 7.
Christ the Author, Neither is it any Sacrament to Us but by His Divine
appointment, HIS allowed, bestowed, instituting, constituting grace creating,
advancing, setting it where it is, and whatever it can in Religion and to Us,
That only so to do erecting and enabling it. This translates and metamorphoses
the whole kind, and to advantage of honor and preferment enough, though it
come of Jewish parents, that Jesus appointed it who was the son of Mary, and by
us believed the Son of God; whose work and authority could do it Herein agree
both Romanists and Calvinists. Siquis dixerit Sacramenta novae legis non esse
omnia a Jesu Christo Domino nostra instituta Anathema sit: Council. Tridentin.
Sess. 7. cap. 1: Authorem Sacramentorum esse solum Christum, Vid. Bellarmin. de
sacram: in genere, lib. 1. c. 23. An institutio sacramentorum sit solum a Deo,
Vid: Aquin. part. 3. Quaest 64. artic 2. Illud quoque scire nos oportet, quod
non ecclesia, sed ipso Domino instituente sacramentis utimur. Lancelot.
Institut: Jur. Canon. lib: 2. tit. 3. The Author and Institutor of all
Sacraments is not any man, but God alone. Confess. Helvet. poster. cap. 19. To
acknowledge Christ's Institution the ground of both sacraments, I suppose no
Christian man will refuse, Hook. Eccles. Polit. lib. 5: sect. 51. page 321.
They derive their value from thence. Raynolds Medit. on the Lords Supper, chap.
14. Quis est Author Sacramentorum? Solus Deus. Bucan. commun. loc. 47. sect. 3.
Quis Author sive causa instituens Baptismi? Deus Pater, Filius, and Sp.
Sanctus. Id. loc: 46. sect: 4. Sacramenta sunt Ceremoniae a Deo mandatae populo
ipsius, Piscator: loc. 23. Aphor. 1. Baptismus est ceremonia a filio Dei
instituta, etc. Vrsin. explic. Catechet. Quaest. 69. sect. 1. and see Quaest.
66. sect. 1. Ergo auctor sacramentorum quis est nisi Dominus Jesus? de coelo
ista Sacramenta venerunt. Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 4. For the whole
four, (that are or have been, or have been reputed) See their institution in so
many distinct places of Scripture. Gen: 17. Exodus 19. Matthew. 28. Mark 14. and
together, 1 Cor. 41. These (some of them) no man did or can institute but the
Lord and God himself Christ Jesus. Confess. Bohem. ca: 11. Christus igitur
Baptismi Solus est Author. P. Ram. de Relig. Christiana, l. 4. c. 5.
alone by the efficacious power of his word even regenerating Baptism, and of
an old, decayed Dead Ceremony raising and reviving it to a Sacrament of Life.
The whole ingraffed Church of Gentilisme, as now it stands, was at first set
upon or rather set into that stock whereon Iudaisme formerly flourished, Romans
11. to bring forth fruit unto God, and may not rather the less then little
branch of a Rite or Ceremony.

In which derivation of some things from ancient time, rather then framing or
creating all anew seems done somewhat like that which Vid. Bed. Hist.
Ecclesiast. Anglorum, l. 1. c 30.
Gregory the great after counseled here in England, at first Plantation of the
Gospel, Baptism with other Mysteries; Who willed the Pagan Temples not to be
destroyed, if fair, but converted, and the feasts not to be abolished but
transferred; The former, that people might be gently led along, and by their
wills, to worship where they had used, and verum Deum cognoscens and adorans, ad
loca quae consuevit familiarius concurrat, as his Order has; The other, that
by like reason men may be brought on by degrees, ascending by stairs what they
could not at once, and by retaining somewhat of that they Libet autem hoc loco
veterum patrum ad, mirari prudentiam, qui principio nascentis religionis, cum
Gentiles patrios ritus retinendi nimio plus amantes erant, ut facilius eos ab
inanibus umbris and rancida superstitione, ad novam legem veritatis and gratiae
transferrent, praeter alios ritus hunc etiam candidi Calcei retinuerunt.
Joseph. Vicecomes, de antiqu. Baptismi ritibus, l. 5. c. 18.
loved and had, they might the more easily, willingly, smoothly and peaceably,
but full as surely be brought on to what Qui sincera intention extraneos a
Christiana Religione ad fidem cupiunt rectam perducere blandimentis non
asperitatibus debent studere, Ne quorum mentem reddita ad planum Ratio poterat
revocare, pellat procul adversitas. Nam quicunque aliter agunt and eos sub hoc
velamine a consueta ritus sui volunt cultura suspendere, suas illi magis quam
Dei causas probantur attendere, Gregor. Epistol. l 11. Ep. 15. ad Episcop.
Neopolitanum. And therefore he blames the restraint there laid upon the Jews,
from keeping their Feasts. Decret. 1. Did 45. c. 3:
they had not. For, (let rigid men opine what they will, their Opinion will
never have work in order to the change of Things) Duris mentibus (and very
sure, such churlish and untractable dispositions all savage, untaught,
barbarous, whether Nations or unconverted Men have) simul omnia abscindere
impossible esse non dubium est; quia is qui summum locum ascendere nititur
gradibus vel passibus non autem saltibus elevatur, (as the Learned Historian
goes on to give the reason with the fact) and he instances in Ac similem plane
gubernationis DEI Opt. Max. modum observare licet in rebus multis in lege
nostra, quia non licet subito and momento quasi transire a contrario uno ad
alterum; and per consequens, secundum Naturam hominis fieri non potest, ut
momento relinquat id, cui longo temporis spatio est assuetus. Cum itaque misit
DEUS Mosem Doctorem nostrum p.m. ut nos faceret Regale sacerdotium, Gentem
sanctam primo in cognitione DEI Opt. Max. sicut dicitur; Ostensum est tibi ut
scires, etc. Item Scito ergo hodie, and revocato ad cor tuum, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.85.
and 39. Deinde in cultu DEI, sicut dicitur; and ad colendum cum toto cord
vestro, etc. Item, and servietis Domino DEO vestro, etc. Deuteronomy: 11.13. etc. Et
usitata tum in mundo consuetudo erat, cui omnes assueti, and cultus
universalis, in quo omnes erant educati, ut variae animalium species in Templis
illis, in quibus Imagines illae collocabantur, offerrentur, coram illis
procumberetur, and adoleretur; certi insuper quidam essent cultores sequestrati
quasi ad cultum illum destinati, qui in Templis illis in honorem Solis, Lunae,
reliquarumque stellarum extructis; exercebatur, sicuti ostendimus: ideo noluit
sapientia and providentia DEI, quae in omnibus ejus creaturis lucet, mandare,
ut cultus illi omnes derelinquantur aut aboleantur. Hujus enim rei cor humanum,
quod perpetuo ad id inclinat, cui and assuetum, naturaliter non fuisset capax;
ac propterea perinde fuisset, acsi hoc nostro tempore Propheta aliquis veniret,
qui nos ad cultum DEI vocare vesset, ac diceret; DEUS praecipit vobis, ne
oretis, ne jejunetis, ne quaeratis salutem ejus in d^^ sanguitia, sed ut cultus
vester totus consistat in cogitatione, non in opere. Propter hanc itaque causam
retinuit DEUS adhuc cultus, eosque a rebus, creatus and phantasmatis, quae
nullam veritatem habent, ad Nomen suum venerandum transtulit and praecepit
nobis, ut illas exhibeamus Ipsi. Thence Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, Incense,
Priests by the Law. Consilium autem in hac divina sapientia fuit, ut memoria
Idololatriae deleatur, and fundamentum illud magnum de Existentia and Unitate
DEI in gente nostra confirmetur, nec tamen animi Hominum propter cultuum
illorum abolitionem, quibus assueti erant, obstupescerent, vel alios cultus
scirent. Moses Maiemonid. in More Nevoch. lib. 3. cap. 32. de praeceptorum ra
ione, page 432. As the people were not brought through the Philistims country,
which was the nearer way, but through the Desert, which was the better way, as
there it follows, Vide Aquin: secunda secundae, Quaest. 10. Artic: 11. Ideoque
omnipotens and patiens creator, ( says Walaf^idus Strabo, on the same argument,
of Altars and Temples from the Heathen) factu^ae suae volens undecunque
consulere, (quia propter fragilitatem omnes con uetudines pariter tolli non
posse sciebat) permisit and jussit quaedam sibi obedienter a piis exhiberi,
quae daemonibus damnabiliter ab impiis solvebantur, as Temples and Sacrifices.
And other worshippers as forwardly and tractably borrowed mutually of them, de
rebus Ecclesiast c. cap. 2.
JEHOVA (Our great LORD GOD of Israel) who took those very rites (he says) and
sacrifices he found in Egypt, and sanctified them, being superstitious before,
for his own peoples service, in his own Land, by his own Law, to be used in
the most holy Service of Himself, and in his own city and temple of Jerusalem.
Their former profaneness held no antipathy to keep out his more powerful
sanctification, rushing in by force, nor their ill use or worse Masters could
lay any bar against his claim or possibility of acceptance of what he chose,
but that he might have, retain, use and be worshipped by that, which, before he
laid his holy hand upon it, had been profaned to the worst even Egyptian
Idolatry. The like might Christ do after in this matter of Baptism, sooner
giving form then making matter, rather taking what he found for his purpose at
his own Jerusalem, then fetching from Arabia, or elsewhere, and placing it
there, or Creating it whole anew; Nor was it so much as a Feast or a Temple, a
little farther to consecrate a religious rite, for Him was Master of all
Religion and had power so to do.

And we may be the better persuaded of this derivation (rather then Creation,
which usually passes) if we consider the similitude and resemblance is between
these we here take liberty to call the Primitive and Derivative, Original and
Abstract; or the same in one Religion, and the same in another, for the same
end; for there was the same Name common to both, the same Rite used in both,
the same End proposed of both, and the like Ministration as to the Manner, and
Persons admitted or admittable. The Name was, (and is) Baptism; the Rite,
Washing or Purification by water; the End, a New Birth, to be thereby Born
again or admitted to a new Religion, (questioned once whether Circumcision, the
old Partner should not be also retained among Christians for the same purpose?
Acts 1^.) and for the ministration both as to the Manner and the Persons,
Things may not be thought they could have been more like, then (as it is
described by them) these were, the old Baptism in days of old, and our New at
first, as it was when it was fresh and New. For, (to forbear enlarging on the
first things, as touched at before, and confine to the last) as to the Manner
of old Baptism, this we make no doubt to affirm it was it self, that is,
Baptism; the So M. Purchase in his Pilgrim. l. 2. c. 2 out of Pet. Ricius de
coelesti Agricult. l. 3. and ad praecept. 113.
whole body covered in water, and some Foemina in aquis collocabatur collo
tenus a foeminis, Seldom, p. 146.
placed in it up to the chin. Has cisternas adeo and profundas and aqua plenas
esse oportet, ut cum descenderint in eas aqua ad collum eorum pertingat. --
Quid multis? Illis circa corpus universum ne tantum quidem relinquere licet
indetectum, quantum pilus aut filum patescat. Synag. Judaic. cap. 2. pa. 98,
99. And thereof another not less learned: Matronae Judaeorum, post puerperium,
priusquam viris se conjungunt, in cisternis, fontibus and lavibus (...), ac
totas ita sese, ut ne ullam quidem partem corporis immundam aut immunem aquae
habeant, immergere consueverunt. Dan. Heinsius, in Aristarch. Sacro, pa. 743.
Buxtorftus gives us the like of another washing, for purification of women
post puerperium, which was so exact, a Ring must not be left on the finger, a
bracelet on the arm, or chain on the neck, etc. If the Lavatory had any mud at
the bottom or other filth, a fair clean stone must be chosen to tread upon,
that water might miss no part at all; tandem aliquando coguntur subtus aquas
se totas emergere, etc. And the like exactness was (as I believe, in all, so)
sure in this initiatory purification. Corpus etiam integrum abluendum (says
our Seldom, pa. 144. Yet not necessarily was the party naked, for so waters
passed through the clothes, nec inter eas and cutem corporis quid obstruens
Baptismum intercedat, it was enough. But that necessary: Id in omnigenis
Baptismis accuratius observandum volunt, ne aliter ipse Baptismi actus inde
irritus redderetur. Id de Synedriis Ebraeorum antiqu. l. 1. c. 3. pa. 26. Nay,
if but the tip of the finger remained dry, all the rest was unprofitable. The
capacity of the vessel or place wherein, was not to be so little as of 450
Gallons. Id. ib.
Author, from Maiemonides) and cavendum ne corporis particulae ulli maneret
quid quod ejusdem ablutionem impediret, Nothing must interpose to hinder the
water from any part, as scurf, scab, spittle, gore-bloud, loose skin, etc. or
if it did, all was as good as nothing. Now view the Christian side. The word
Matthew. 3.11. Chap: 28, 19. Mark 1, 9. Chap: 16.16. Luke 3.21. Chap: 7.30. Jo:
3.22, 23. Chap: 4.1, 2. and Chap: 10.40. Acts 1.5. Cha: 2.38:41. Chap: 8:12,
13. etc Chap. 9.18. Rom: 6.3. 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 3.27, etc. Dominus
N. ordinavit (Baptismum) fieri per immersionem in aquam, and non per
aspersionem, ut ex Matthew. 28. ubi verbum Baptizantes in nomen Patris, etc. in
textu Graeco idem est ac immergentes ac infundentes in aquam, Joan. Baptista
Casalius de veter. Christianorum ritibus, cap. 19. pa. 141.
used by Christ, his Apostles the Pharisees, All in the New Testament was, both
the same was used when all this was required, and of the same impor^ to BAPTIZE
and BAPTISM, signifying Neque enim de manuum vel pedum lotione, aut alterius
cujusque membri sed de totius corporis immersione, scimus (...) adhiberi,
Montacut. Apparat. 7. Sect. 25. For proof consult the Dictionaries, (...):
mergo, immergo: item, tingo: (...), immergo, abluo, baptizo, Pasor. Lexic.
vocab. Novi Testam. pa. 131. (...), mergo, immergo, tingo, intingo, madefacio,
lavo. Suidas, (...), mergo seu immergo: item submergo, seu obruo aqua, Scapul.
Lexic. But above all, Stephanus; (...), mergo, immergo, etc. item tingo, (quod
fit immergendo) inficere, imbuere. (...), tinctus, infectus, sc. color aliquo:
(...), bis tinctus, ut (...). qua utitur and Plinius li. 9. cap. 3. (...),
mergo seu immergo: (ut quae tingendi aut abluendi gratia aquae immergimus.)
Item mergo, id est, submergo, obruo aqua: and (...), id est, mergor, submergor.
Ut autem Latini aliquem aqua obrutum dicunt, significantes submersum; itidemque
vino obrutum, pro been appotum and ad aebrietatem usque, nec non obrutum
aliquem negotiis, praeterea aere alieno; sic and Graecos suo (...) metaphorice
usos esse comperio, (...) and (...): mersio, lotio, ablutio, id est, ipse
mergendi, item lavandi seu abluendi actu^. Stephanus Lexic. Tom. 1. The Native
signification of the word is to dip into water, or plunge under water, says M.
Leigh in Critic: Sac: p. 111. Or look abroad. That so much water as may
denominate ablution, is necessary for Baptism, and that the word requires it,
is proved at large by Gregor: de Valenc. Tom: 4. Disput: 4. quaest: 1. punct:
2. Mersatione autem non perfusione agi solitum hunc ritum indicat and vocis
proprietas, and loca ad eum ritum delecta, Jo: 3. Acts 3. and allusiones multae
Apostolorum (true enough) quae ad aspersionem referri non possunt, Romans 6.3, 4.
Col. 2.12. says Grotius ad Evan. Matthew. 3.6. (...) is intingor, as Apoc. 19.13.
It is taken from the Dyers Vate, and is a dying or giving a fresh color, and
not a bare washing only, whence our baptism, Leigh Critic. Sac. Plus est hoc
loco ( Mar. 7.4.) (...) quam (...): quod illud videatur de corpore universo,
istud de man^bus duntaxat intelligendum: even granted by Beza in Annot. Major.
ad Mar. 7.4. And therefore among the Hebrews, the great washers (confiding in
water) had their name from hence of Hemero-baptists. Among them were their
(...) and (...), that is for washing their hands, but These immergebant aquis,
and ita totum corpus, a vertice ad talos inundabant. Montacut Apparat. 7. sect.
78. When Peter's feet were washed (observed by the Learned Casaubon) and
mention added of his hands and his head, as distinct parts, another word was
used, of (...), Joan 13.5, 6, 8, 9, etc. but the rite of Baptism was, ut in
aquas immergerentur: Not: in Mat. 3.6.

As when holy things are laid on the table, (...). Liturg, S. Petri. pa. 14.
set forth by Lindanus: the like whereto is in St. Chrisostomes Directory (so he
styles it) in Biblioth. pat. Gr. Lat. tom. 2. pa. 60. If this were not enough
Scaliger has more. Hic fuit baptizandi ritus, ut in aquas immergerentur: quod
vel ipsa vox (...) declarat satis: quae ut non significat (...), quod est
fundum petere, ita profecto non est (...): Differunt autem haec tria, (...).
Unde intelligimus, non esse abs re quod jampridem nonnulli disputarunt, de toto
corpore immergendo in ceremonia Baptismi: Vocem enim (...) urgebant. Sed horum
sententia merito est jampridem explosa: quum non in eo posita sit mysterii
hujus vis and (...). Scaliger: not: in Mat. 3.6. The interpretations, or
insinuations of the Civil Law may be very authentic this way. There: --
Baphei, alias, Baphees, id est tinctores pannorum. (...) enim Graece, Latin
tingere. Inde Bapheus, Baphees; id est, tinctor and lavator, ut hic and infr.
gloss. ad Cod. 11. tit. 7. de murilegulis. L. 2. Baphii, Baphia, taberna est
tinctoria, (...). Vel Baphia (ait Brissonius) sunt officinae infectorum, qui
vestibus purpura and cocco tingendis operam dabant. -- Hujusmodi multa Baphia
and in orientis and occidentis partibus Imperatores habebant, quae sub
dispositione comitum sacrarum largitionum in notitia imperii Romani ponuntur.
Jo. Calvin; Lexic. Jurid. pa. 110. Item, Baptisma vel Baptismus, graece (...),
latin immersio. ibid. and paulo post, Baptisterium: Lavacrum, etc. Coeterum
bapto verbum Graecum, tingo significat. Baphia, loca ubi lanae tinguntur.
Servius appellat Dibaphum, purpura bis tincta, etc. in vocab. baptisterium.
Item: Serico baptae, serici tinctores. (...) enim significat tingo: inde baptae
apud Juvenalem dicti, quod faciem fuco illinerunt. -- Cujus (serici) tinctores
Baphii: Id. in vocab. serico baptae pa. 443. Erant in republica Romans per
provincias imperii certa loca destinata pannis tingendis, ubi Baphia erant, Id
est officinae tinctorum, and illis procuratores praepositi, veluti procurator
Baphii Tarentini, Calabriae: procurator Baphii Salonitani, Dalmatiae:
procurator Baphii Cissensis, Venetiae and Histriae, procurator Baphii
Syracusani, Siciliae, etc. In libro qui Notitia provinciarum utriusque imperii
in scribitur. P. Gregor. Tholosan. Syntagm. Juris universi: lib. 18. cap. 26.
sec. 5. (...). having on a vesture dipped in blood. Apoc. 19. Nor is all this
against that form, or but with it and for it, according to order whereof most
English Disciples have been admitted to place in that School, where now they
study, profess, and act Christians. The rubric for public baptism in the
Liturgy directed thus: The Minister shall take the child in his hands and ask
the name; and naming the child shall dip it in the water, so it be discreetly
and warily done, saying [N. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost] And only if the child be weak it shall suffice to power
water upon it saying the foresaid words. The rubric for private baptism, the
lawful Minister shall dip it in water, or power water upon it saying these
words, [N. I baptize thee, etc. after which as supposing so done, (there was a
fault of disobedience to powers if it were not so done) the question is asked
in the authorized Catechism of that book, What is the outward visible sign or
form in Baptism? It was taught to be answered; [Water, wherein the person
baptized is dipped or sprinkled with it] In the name of the father, and of the
son and of the holy ghost.


Mersion or Ablution; and this whether we regard institution, execution, order,
performance, Rule or practice, whether in Gospel or Epistle. Christ the best
instance and safest pattern, pattern, sanctified this Ordinance by is Example in
the Sciendum autem primo simpliciter in fluviis, vel fontibus baptizatos
credentes; ipse enim Dominus noster J. Chr. ut in nobis idem consecraret
lavacrum, in Jordane baptizatus est a Johanne; and sicut alibi legitur, Erat
Joannes baptizans in Aenon juxta Salim quia aqua multa erant ibi: Et Philippus
Evangelista baptizavit Eunuchum in font quem reperit in via. Walafrid: Strabo
de rebus ecclesiastic. cap. 26. Tremuit ille (Joannes) Qui mirum! quid (inquam)
mirum, si tremit homo, nec audet attingere sanctum Dei verticem, caput
adorandum angelis, reverendum potestatibus, tremendum principatibus. Bernard.
Sermon. 1. in Epiphan. -- Tanta sese benignissimus dignatione subjecit (Christus)
ut illud sacratissimum caput, tremendum potestatibus, Angelis venerandum ad
suscipiendum Baptismum servuli sui manibus inclinaret. Maxim. Taurinensis.
Homil. hyemal. 8. in fest. Epiphan. Horret Joannes, and acclive sibi esse
sacrum Christi. caput non patitur. Cyprian: de Baptismo Christi.
River of Jordan, the known greatest of all the Country; whether all the
Johannes Baptista and Apostoli conveniebant ad ripam Jordanis, volentes,
baptizare, quos faciebant descendere, and totum corpus in flumen immergere.
Joan. Bapt. Casalius. de veteribus Christianorum ritibus. pa. 141. They were
baptized, that is, plunged in water, for a sacred sign. J. Deodate in his
Annotat. on Matthew. 3.6.
people came from Jerusalem, Judea, and all the coasts round about, who were
Baptized in Jordan likewise confessing their sins. Save once in Aenon, near
unto Sabim, and that because Intellige non rivos multos, sed simpliciter aquae
copiam: tantam scilicet in qua facile corpus humanum mersaretur, quo tum more
Baptismus peragebatur. H. Grot. in annotat. ad loc.
much water there, John else did not usually Baptize any where; and, if
Expositors be not mistaken, Bethabara: John 1.28. Which is as much as domus
transitus. Videtur nomen inditum ex historia quae est Judic. 3.16, 17. ubi vox
Trajectus bis apparet. Grot. ad loc. That this was the place, and the mystery
thereof, sc. that as the waters gave way here to Jesus Nave to let him into
Canaan, so here the heavens should open into which Jesus of Nazareth and his
followers were to enter, See Dr. Jackson, in John's Answer to Christ's Question:
part. 2. memb. 2. se. 65. There remained a long time the stamp of a Divine
Character upon it: it was known by no less then this, a power to work miracles;
For Lepers thither resorted and were cured, as Baronius has from Gregory of
Towrs. In Bedes times there stood a Cross, Crux lignea usque ad collum alta,
quae aliquoties aqua transendente absconditur: and a Church hard by: where it
is believed our Savior left his clothes. Baron. Annal. in anno Chr. 31: number.
19. See the travels of the Patriarchs, page 429. of Bethabara.

Est hodie Bethsoro (Beth-zur others call it) vicus in tribu Judae, euntibus ab
Heliae Chebron in vigesimo lapide. Juxta quem fons ad radices montis ebulliens,
ab eadem in qua gignitur sorbetur humo. In hoc est Eunuchus a Philippo
baptizatus. Bed. Exposit. in Act. Apost. cap. 8. tom. 2. fol. 154.

Quae (actio baptizandi) constat immersione (mora sub aqua) and emersione
corporis ex aqua, saltem aspersione. Bucan. loc. 47. sec. 18.


near or at the very place where Israel passed before by miracle; there needed
no less to make the depth fordable. Philip and the Eunuch rode together till
they came in their way to (5) water, and there they went (6) down into the
water, and came up out of the water: which Circumstance noted and expression
used of our Savior before, Matthew 3.16. When he was baptized, he went up out
of the water. (Remember Godfathers were at first called susceptores, and some
of their office questionless in that other periphrasis of Utrum in Baptismo
requiratur aliquis qui baptizatum levet de sacro font? Aquin. part. 3. quest.
66. Art. 7. vid. etiam artic. 8. and Supplementum 3 iae partis, Quaest. 56.
Artic. 3. and Durand. Rational. Divinorum, lib. 6. cap. 82. sec. 38.
Levantes de sacro font) Whereunto Qui enim Baptizantur and aquis immerguntur
Christum mortuum and sepultum reprasentant allegorice, idque ut tropologica
similitudine significent, sicut Christus mortuus est vitae temporali, ita se
mori peccato (ait Chrysostomus) per Baptismum, quo peccata merguntur and
sepeliuntur. Cornel. a Lapide in Romans 6.4:
St Paul's speech of alusion must needs have respect in diverse places;
especially Romans 6.4. and Coloss. 2.12. We have in our ordinary Bibles an
Illumination from which there cannot be apostasy with any hopes of return, Heb.
6.4. The Fathers and those of best judgment understand there by Baptism, the
terms having bin used promiscously: Now that the Syriac gives, Atqui non
possunt illi qui semel ad Baptismum descenderunt renovari, etc. as rendered by
Tremellius, and his reason with clearness explains all, Nam immergebantur
aquis. Add hereto that first name of the Baptisterium Vid. Socrat. Histor.
Ecclesiast. lib. 7. cap. 17: and Justin Martyr. Question. and Respons. ad
Orthod. 137. Piscina Lavacrum. Suidas. St Cyprian was seriously asked, whether
any other Baptism were Catholic, which the Church would allow, then by
Mersion? He answers affirmatively; but they were the sick who might be so
privileged; and of them, aspersio, aquae instar salutaris Lavacri obtinet,
'twas as good as what was done at Church though but sprinkling. Ep. 77. par. 2.
tom. 1. p. 121.
(...), sc. locus ubi natare possumus, (as among other interpretations, Scapula
gives this one) a washing pool, and Lavacrum, God. de operibus publicis. L. 18.
pro Balneo. J. Calvin. in Lexic. Jurid. pa. 510. The word interpreted Stupha in
Gloss. ad God, de Episcopali audient: L. Judices. A nobis ita locus appellatur,
in quo quis lavari commode potest: says Spiegel. alleged there. Et
Brissonius, Lavare veteribus significat corpus aqua in balneo abluere. vid.
Heb. 10.22, 23.
Lavacrum a bath; that ancient Sciant etiam presbyteri quando sacrum Baptisma
ministrant, ut non infundant a quam. sanctam super capita infantium, sed semper
mergantur in Lavacro, sicut exemplum praebuit per semet ipsum Dei filius omni
credenti, quando esset ter mersus in undis Jordanis. Synod. apud Celicyth sub
Kenulpho: apud Spelman. Council. tom. 1. pa. 331.
Canon of our ancestor-Mercians, with the reason thereof, that Water should not
be powered on any ones head, but he be merged, because Christ had been so in
Jordan; and the practice of our first Grandfather Christians, upon whose
separation from Paganism by this rite, (which we may presume to be
understandingly, not formally ministered at first) we read still of their
attendance at Rivers: As in Yorkshire, Vir Dei Paulinus, that man of God found
employment Tantus autem fertur tunc fuisse fervor fidei ac desiderium lavacri
salutaris genti Nord-Humbrorum, ut quodam tempore Paulinus veniens cum Rege and
Regina in villam regiam, quae vocatur Adregin, triginta sex diebus ibidem cum
eis catechizandi and baptizandi officio deditus moraretur, quibus diebus
cunctis a mane usque ad vesperam nil aliud ageret, quam confluentem eo de
cunctis viculis ac locis plebem Christi verbo salutis instruere, atque in
structam in fluvio Gleni, qui proximus erat, lavacro remissionis abluere. Bed.
Ecclesiast. Histor. Gentis Anglorum. lib. 2. cap. 14.
for 36 days together from morning to evening in baptizing the Country people
that came in from all parts (after the King and his Family had led the way) in
the River of Gleni; In Bed. cap. eodem.
another Province and not far from York, To so many Mr. Fox computed them in
his Martyrolog. lib. 2. pa. 119.
ten thousand in a day in the River of Swale, some tradition whereof remains
among the neighbor inhabitants to this day, as I learned of them; In De hujus
fide provinciae narravit mihi presbyter and abbas quidam vir vera cissimus de
Monasterio Peartan vocabulo Beda, retulisse sibi quendam seniorum, baptizatum
se fuisse the media a Paulino Episcopo praesente Rege Edvino, and multam populi
turbam in fluvio Trehenta juxta civitatem quae lingua Anglorum
Tiovulfingacestir vocatur. Beda. lib. eod. cap. 16. fol. 82.
Nottingham-shire the King being present, many in the River of Trent, not far
from That, as now, to be the place called as but now, by Bid, is conjectured
by Mr. Camden in Nottinghamshire, pa. 549. Here, in token of thankfulness for
so great a favor even to the Minister, he had bestowed upon him much land;
some of it after converted to the 3 parks, which his successors kept till the
days of our late troubles, within the last septenary.
Southwell; venerable Bede who gives the Relation, had it from one he knew and
trusted much, who had it from one of the proselites that then came over.
Lastly, take in the avouched use of the Orientales toti in aquam mergebantur.
Ursim. explicat. Catechet. quaest. 69. sec. 1. Of old they were wont in hot.
Countries to dip the party to be baptized (all naked) in to the water, and so
he was washed all over. Mayer on the Church-Catechisme pa. 525. From service
performed by occasion of such Baptism of women, Phoebe. (Romans 16.1.) is
thought by many to have been styled Ministra. Especially see Hu. Grot. in
Evangel. Matthew. cap. 3. ver. 6.
Easterlings to have ministered no other way; those of Arabia to know our (to
baptize) by the word Amada (...), which imports to stand, from their standing
in the Rivers, (which the son of Azalkefat has left us in the very translation
of the Gospels;) Even That Baptism is merging, and so used by the ancients,
averred by him, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. sec. 9. As much (or as much as comes
thereto) by Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Bapt. cap. 1. tom. 3.
Calvin, and Bellarmine (the more is the wonder) in this agreeing; Besides
Aquin. Sum. part. 3. Quaest. 66. art. 7.
Aquinas his Tutius est per modum immersionis baptizare, repeated, and the
practice of the Church to be made good by the best Records, sc. that (as Part
3. Domin. 1. Advent. pa. 18.
Cunradius Dietericus grants it was, though he do not think it fit it should
have been) till the time of Constantinus Vid. Histor. Magdeburg: Centur. 8.
cap. 6. de Ceremoniis. sec. De ritibus circa Baptismum.
Copronymus about the year 740. (who from a shameful disgrace to this
Sacrament, got that name) yet, So the learned Commentator on Sir Tho. Ridleys
View of the Laws, pa. 176.
till then, men used to go into the water and there stand, Vestibus exuti,
nudi, etc. Lay I say these things together and compare, and face does not more
fully and proportionally answer face in water, nor any thing its like, then the
manner of washing proselytes and our Saviors Sacrament instituted, with the
practice in purest times, do picture, express, lead, follow, set forth,
exemplify, and in all things correspond, comply with and resemble one the
other; of which many other things might be alleged, and more then very many,
but that I am willing to borrow incautelous forbearance from the Apostles, 2 Corinthians. 11.12.
amputare occasionem eorum qui volunt occasionem: It was both and all but
Sacred Sacerdotall washing, and for the manner alike on both sides of the
Covenant.

So for the persons on whom it was to pass: which on Israel side was even to
Minor's offered by their parents or the Country; and the most The Churches
through Greece, Asia, Syria, Egypt, etc. Ruteni Muscovitae, Aethiopis, all
receive it, says judicious Cassander; and all, whose use is known to us, extra
fines Latinos, keep precisely to the 8th day. Except (perhaps) the Abissines,
who stay not the females so long, but hasten them (according to the time
prefixed for the mothers purification from a male by the Law) on the 40 day: so
crossing Levi both in male and female. Testimonia veterum scriptorum pro paedo^
baptismo. pa. 693.
general received practice of Gentile believers has been since to suffer
little children to come unto Christ, and not forbid them, as of whom is (in
right) the Kingdom of God. For, as to the former, I find, Ut gentiles Majores
ad hunc modum, ex animi sui sententia proselyti fieban, ita minores (masculi
ante annum decimum tertium, praeter unicum diem, Faeminae ante duodecimum and
diem in super expletum) ex sententia sive patris sive fori cui suberant, in
Judaismum pariter cooptati: Atque actus tam forensis quam paternus assensum
eorum tum in Circumcisione and Baptismo, tum in sacrificio offerendo, quod
sequebatur, supplebat; nempe quia in commodum ejus res cessit. Seldom, de Jure
Not. and Gent. p. 146. As much observed and allowed by him since. Non magis
Circumcisionem, quam baptismum parvulis tum debitam praestitamque volunt
(Magistri) ut ex mox dicendis de proselytis manifestum fit de Synedriis veterum
Ebraeorum, lib. 1. cap. 3. pa. 28. and he alleges sundry authorities of
remote and very dark inquiry, but best account; as from Maimonides, Misna
Babylon: Misna Hierosolymit. etc. Plain, full, home.

By their own testimony, this as common as of any other, lately observed by Mr.
Lightfoot: In the Talmud in Cetuboth perek. 1. they have these words. Rab. Hona
says, A little one they baptize by the appointment of the Consistory, (...)
Whereupon the Hebrew gloss: If he have not a father, and his mother bring him
to be proselyted, they baptize him, because there is no proselyte without
Circumcision and Baptifme. -- The Text proceeds. What do we learn hence? That
he has benefit by it, and they privilege a man even though he know it not. It
is a tradition, that they privilege a person though he know it not; but they do
not dispriviledg a person without his knowledge. (Very good!) And thus do they
answer that objection now on foot against Infants baptism, sc. that it is not
fit they should be baptized, because they have no understanding: They make it a
non-sequitur, for say they, A privilege may be put upon a person though
himself know it not: Harmony of the Evangelists, part. 2. pa. 75.


those that would be proselytes to the Synagogue (being under years of consent,
the male a day under thirteen, the female a day above twelve the parents of the
child, or the Country would offer any other, and this consent of theirs
interpreted to supply the consent of him that otherwise could not, because it
tended to the good and benefit of the receiver, quia in commodum ejus
(baptizati) res cessit, says their Law, as otherwise perhaps it should not:
Much as in Upon consideration of all our books I find this diversity, that a
Parson or Vicar, for the benefit of his Church and of his successor, is in some
cases esteemed to have a fee simple qualified: but to do any thing to the
prejudice of his successors, in many cases the Law esteems him to have in
effect but an Estate for life.] Cook on Littleton, fol. 341. and Ecclesia
fungitur vice minoris: meliorem potest facere conditionem suam, deteriorem
nequaquam. Briton. fol. 143: cited there. Bracton has it more fully, lib. 2. de
acquirendo rerum dominio: cap. 5. se. 5. fol. 12. agreeable to the opinions of
most Civilians, though some contradict. Vid. Gloss. Alimentarius: ad leg. Cum
hi, quibus. in Digest. 2. de transactionibus. sect. Eam transactionem.
our Law, a man or Corporation may be a legal actor to benefit, and the act
valid enough, as it would not have been if it had tended to prejudice; and not
only a man, but a child by Et notandum, quod cum donator minori dederit
curatorem, and curator nomine minoris fuerit in seysina, si donator postea
quacunque ratione se posuerit in seysinam, and inde obierit seysitus, nunquam
propter hoc mutabitur status minoris, quin retineat contra quoscunque. Recipere
enim poterat per tutoris authoritatem, and consentire donationi sibi factae:
consentire autem donationi ad se ( or rather, a se) faciendae, vel admittendi
iterum donatorem ad seysmam non potest, alicujus authoritate: meliorem enim
suam conditionem facere potest deteriorem nequaquam, Bracton, de acquir rerum
dom. 2.5. sec. 8. fol. 14. The substance whereof has Fleta, lib. 3. cap. 3. de
donationibus, sec. 17. In aliquibus casibus jus nostrum minoribus tantum favet,
ut ne quidem cum authoritate tutorum, judicii periculum subire eos patiatur,
sed placitum usque in plenam eorum aetatem sistat. Cowell. Institut. Jur
Anglic. lib. 1. cap. 21. sec. 5.
ours, and Minoribus enim aetas in damnis subvenire, non rebus prospere gestis
obesse consuevit. Cod. de procuratoribus. L. Non eo minus, as the gloss in
Gratian: Sententia lata contra ipsum (minorem) nulla est: si tamen lata fuerit
pro ipso, tenet. gloss. Pupillis. Cause. 15. Quest. 3. c. 3. And generally by
the Civil Law a child might act to his own benefit, but not, if (possibly) to
prejudice, without farther consent. Auctoritas tutoris in quibusdam causis
necessaria pupillis est, in quibusdam non necessaria. Ut ecce, si quid dari
sibi stipulentur, non est necessaria tutoris auctoritas, quod si aliis
promittant pupilli, necessaria est tutoris auctoritas. ( As they may take bond
alone, but not give, by Institut. 3. tit. 20. de in utilibus stipulationibus.
sec. Pupillus) Namque placuit meliorem conditionem licere eis facere, etiam
sine tutoris auctoritate: deteriorem vero non aliter quam cum tutoris
auctoritate. Institut. 1. tit. 21. de auctorit: tutorum. See the gloss on which
text: and ad Cod. lib. 5. tit. 59. de auctoritate praestand: L. Neque tutoris,
and ad Cod. lib. 8. tit. 38. de contrahend. and commutand. L. 7. Neque tutoris;
as Marcianus of old: Pupillus quantum ad acquirendum non eget tutoris
auctoritate: alienare vero nullam rem potest nisi praesente tutore auctore: and
ne quidem possessionem, etc. Digest. 41. tit. 1. L. 11. Ex diverso autem si
pupillus paciscatur, ne quod debeat a se peteretur, ratum habetur pactum
conventum. Lib. 2. tit. 14. de pactis, L. Contra juris civilis. Pupillus tantum
hoc casu naturaliter obligatur in quo factus est locupletior, gloss. ad, Dig.
de condictione indebiti. L. Quod pupillus, and vid. L. Naturaliter: in eodem
tit. and L. Cum illud aut illud: tit. Quando dies legate: and gloss. ad tit. de
Novationibus, L. Cui bonis. Item L. Ait praetor: sec. 1. tit. de negotiis
gestis. and gloss. Continentur, ad L. Si Servus, tit. de aedilicio edicto. Yet
farther, as that which is rich casts worth about it, so they that are but near
to Minors speed the better. Sed in proximis infantiae propter utilitatem eorum,
benignior juris interpretatio facta est. Institut. 3. de in utilibus
stipulationibus. sec. sed quod diximus.
other Laws may do, where it cannot suffer, and A minor of twenty, if he sell
and buy with the price thereof a thing of better value, is yet enabled both to
retain his purchase, and recover his sale, (only paying back the money) and
this in favor of his minority: says the grave author of Doct. and Student.
Dial. 1. cap. 21. ['Tis known and granted by all, that Infants may buy and
keep: but if an Infant sell his land he may enter against his own feoffment,
and if he be put out, he shall have assise of Novel Disseisin when he comes to
his full age.] Natura brevium, fol. 132. in the Writ De ingressu dum fuerit
infra aetatem.] If the husband and the wife purchase land jointly the wife
being within age, and the husband and the wife sells all the land, the
husband dies, the wife shall recover the whole by this Writ.] fol. 133.
receive and hold in hand strong enough, what yet it has not power, if it
would, to part with, by wise and very conscionable provision. So there, to
bring one to Israel and to be sub alis Majestatis divinae (as their word was)
tended to benefit and great advantage of the Receiver, and therefore that which
passed on children, or was conveyed to children, unless there followed Si vero
minor, simul ac aetatem compleverat Judaismo renunciasset, nec eam omnino
postquam major erat fuisset amplexus, Ita dein evanuit quicquid per
initiamenta, etc. -- ut in Gentilis plane conditionem rediret. Seldom, ubi
supra. Upon score of like reason whereto, and for such after trial, may have
been taken up in the Christian Church that examination, which did sift the
constancy, or rather consistency, of those had been taken in young, to their
presumed grounds: that if they wavered, they might be known and discharged; or
if they remained constant they might, by imposition of hands receive what the
commoner name of that Ceremony did import, of their faith (at least a sign of)
CONFIRMATION. Vasquez has from Erasmus (in the preface to his paraphraise on
the Gospels) a word of most wholesome, grave, and prudent advice: that those who
were baptized young, when they begin to write Man should be examined, An ratum
habeant id quod in Catechismo ipsorum nomine promissum fuit? quod si ratum non
habeant, ab ecclesiae jurisdictione liberos manner. in 3. part. Thom. disput.
154. tom. 2. cap. 1. sec. 2. If they did then stand to what their sureties had
presumed for them? if not, they should be discarded. Most necessary! and of
unimaginable benefit! such a scrutiny would shake off thousands of rotten
hypocrites, and purge the Church of many such infidel-believers (or professers)
upon whose dirty faces a little holy water was spinkled when they knew not what
it was, but they no more mind the true sanctification appertaining, then the
Turks or Saracens (who shall rise up in judgment against their washed
filthiness) or then those of whom St Peter, It is happened to them according to
the true proverb, The Dog to his vomit, and the washed Swine to wallow again in
the mire. Such discipline of awaked reason is that the world groans for! That
men would become Christians! O, that the truth of faith, and POWER of true
Christian belief might be seen in the hearts and lives of those that knowingly
put the neck in Christ's yoke!
after-revocation, was counted valid and firm enough, it could come to no less:
And even in like manner in the Christian Church, whose wisdom and charity has
been all along so free and provident as to offer to baptism, and to receive
and esteem for baptized, to all purposes and constructions, those who were so
far from Nec sentiunt, nec consentiunt. Decretal. Gregor. 3. tit. 42. cap. 3.
At this age they are levelled with mad men by our Law. Furiosus autem stipulati
non potest, nec aliquod negotinm gerere, quia nescit nec intelligit quid agit.
Eodem modo nec infans, nec qui infanti proximus est, qui multum a furioso non
distat, nisi hoc fiat ad commodum suum, and cum tutoris authoritate. Fleta lib.
2. cap. 56. de action debiti. Observable, that by the Civil Law, in that was
called ADOPTION of Infants no such particular express consent was needed: In
Adrogation, which was another way of assuming into the Family (those that were
sui juris and before the Magistrate) was required both Rogatio and mutua
Interrogatio, as Gains fully, in Digest. de adoption. and emancipat. L. 2. But
for those were only adopted, no such thing. Celsus 28. libro Digestorum. In
adoptionibus eorum duntaxat qui suae potestatis sunt voluntas exploratur ( as
were the Adrogati before; the gloss there says so; and the notes on the gloss,
Adoptio pro adrogatione) sin autem a patre dantur in adoptionem, in his
utriusque arbitrium spectandum est, vel consentiendo vel non contradicendo.
tit. eodem. L. 5. And further observable, that the word taken up by Christians
to express their conceits in this like case is Adoption all along, not
Adrogation, of those are assumed to the household of faith. Etiam infantem in
adoptionem dare possumus: So Modestinus coming home fully, tit. eod. L. 42.
consenting, that they have no present Quicquid autem tutor agit pupilli nomine
quo ejus conditio efficitur melior, pupillo prodest etiam ignoranti: applied to
this very case of Paedobaptisme, and as the ground thereof by judicious
Cassander, pa. 752.
sense at all, nor after memory of what others charity does then even power
upon them for their eternal good; for the thing here no less tends to open
benefit of the simply patient: And this, I say, has been so all along, and
from the first dawning of the fallible Church, so far off as in He lived about
1400 years of those 1600 and odd we compute from Christ's death, as may be seen
in Helvicus's Chronology, in the year 204. with whom compare St Jerome, de
viris illustribus, tom. 1. pa. 106. and Magdeburg, Centur. 3. cap. 3. and 7.
Before him was Irenaeus: Omnes venit per semetipsum salvare (Christus) Omnes
inquam, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum, infantes, and parvulos, and pueros,
and juvenes and seniores. Ideo per omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus infans
factus, sanctificans infantes, in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans hanc ipsam
habentes aetatem, etc. lib. 2. adversus haeres. cap. 39. Before both, Dionysius
Areopagita. Nihil igitur, ut reor, indignum est, si ad divinum institutum puer
adducitur, sanctum habens praeceptorem, qui illi divinarum rerum habitum
tradat, malorumque servet immunem. Tradit autem puero sancta mysteria Pontifex,
ut nutriatur in ipsis, etc. Et visum est nostris ducibus admittere infantes hoc
modo: alleged by the Centurists, Centur. 4. cap. 4. col. 236. de ritibus circa
baptismum. And yet a step higher, Clemens Romanus: Baptizate quoque puerulos
vestros, and educate eos in disciplina and praeceptis Dei. Sinite enim, inquit,
parvulos venire ad me and nolite eos prohibere: As from the Apostles
themselves, in Constitut. Apostolicarum, lib. 6. cap. 15.
Origens days, he Secundum ecclesiae observantiam etiam parvulis Baptismus
datur. Origin. Homil. 8. in Levit. tom. 1. pa. 158: and for the same so
alleged by Illiricus, in Magdeburg. Centur. 3. cap. 6. sec. de ritibus circa
baptismum. Pro hoc etiam (namely for the sins of infants which they bring into
the world) and ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit, etiam parvulis
baptismum dare. Sciebant enim illi quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt
divinorum, quia essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati. quae per aquam and
spiritum ablui deberent, propter quas etiam corpus ipsum corpus peccati
nominatur. Origin. lib. 5. in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 6. pa. 543. and so
understood by Polydor. Virgil. de inventor. rerum. lib. 4. cap. 4. and by
Spangenburg, Margarit. Theol. fol. 59. St Austin has let the same drop from his
pen many times since: and enough others may be seen in Gregory de Valencia,
Tom. 4. disputat 4. quest. 3. punct, 1. Postremo. But best together has G.
Cassander represented the tendries of antiquity in this point; in his,
Testimonia veterum scriptorum qui intra trecentos circiter annos a temporibus
Apostolorum floruerunt, etc. for this opinion: pa. 668 of his works printed at
Paris, 1616. The inforcement of which collection in inference very remarkable
is this; Cum hi omnes, quorum testimonia produximus, continuata ab Apostolis
serie, diversis temporibus and locis ecclesiarum Christi rectores and doctores
fuerunt, non dubium est hanc sententiam, a singulis tanquam uno ore
pronunciatam, communem esse doctrinam totius ecclesiae, quam ecclesia ab
Apostolis acceptam ad posteros transmisit: pa. 691. In farther probability
whereof he shows the prevalence of this opinion and use to extend it self to
remotest Nations, both from us and themselves, as the Churches through Greece,
Asia, Syria, Egypt, Aethiopia, India, Muscovia (what is far and wide if this be
not?) who were not all like to join in a corruption of what first delivered: or
to receive with such one consent what had any other first delivery. Who trusts
not the faith of the world! much more the Christian world! such a one were
worthy to be banished out of both worlds.
acknowledged and embraced it for a Tradition Apostolical then, allow it but
any reasonable time to grow up to desert of that reputation, and we shall soon
pinch hard upon St John in his banishment, yea upon St Peter and St Paul in
their travels; Truth is, generally I believe it has been received through
Christendom in its largest diffusions whether to time or place, though the most
general rules are forced to admit of some derogatory exceptions.

Thus have we Paedobaptisme upon both sides of the double testament. Doubt may
be, and upon the matter, has, of the bridge or means of conveyance from one to
the other: Whether by virtue of any command of our As Mat. 28.19. to Baptize
all Nations, of which children are a part. Matthew. 19 14. and Mark. 10.13, etc.
Suffer little children to come unto me without any restraint So Clements Romans
expounded but now.
Lord himself in scriptis directly given? or by equity of example found after
in the As in baptizing whole households, Act. 16.15. 1 Corinthians. 1.15. and Act.
16, 33.
practice of his servant Apostles? or by derivation and necessary consequence
from other truths laid down upon other occasions? (as, the parents being within
the Covenant, their childrens (thereby) at least parentall holiness Both
Circumcision was necessary to sanctify into the Law, says Mr. Seldom, and also
baptism; that is, to them who were admitted, to all; but not, as Circumcision,
Baptism to their children after them, quos universos (...) in sanctitate, ob
parentum scilicet sanctitatem, natos docere solent, De synedriis veter. Heb.
lib. 1. cap. 3. pa. 23.
faederal sanctification, native title to the seal, as the circumcised had the
eight day Genes. 17. ver. 12. Or, the grace of God being universal, to all
sorts; Or, Christ shed his blood for all, young as well as old; Or, all have
original sin, calling for this necessary purgation (as but now Origin.) Or, no
other plain ordinary way to salvation, by that bar Christ has laid a cross,
except a man be born of water, and of the holy ghost, he may not enter the
Kingdom of God, John 3.3. Or, lastly, God would have all men to be saved, and
come to the participation of holiness and happiness; which was pitched on in
the conference between Archbishop Lawd, and Mr. Fisher, sec. 15.
under the Law, etc.) which three have been the opinions of those that become
the Doctrine even of this Circumstance of a Rite (for it is no more) in the
sacred Text, and would have none bottomed elsewhere: Or, whether (no warrant
supposed any way written) as to such an appendant or but appurtenant of a Rite
(the Right it self having first passed by clear command) that which so belongs
thereto, and is but of the manner, may not be conveyed safe and sure enough
from hand to hand by successive and continued practice, and the Church be
entrusted to give along with security so small a thing, scarce a thing, to
avoid multiplying commands; which has been used to be called Ecclesiastical
Consuetud o matris ecclesiae in Baptizandis parvulis nequaquam spernenda; nec
omnino credenda nisi esset Apostolica traditio. Augustine. de Genes ad lit. 10.
cap. 23. and see lib. 4. de Bapt. contra Donatistas, cap. 24. so Baronius, ad
an. Chr. 53. number. 20. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 8. and Lindanus, in
Liturg. D. Petri. cap. 1. pa. 60. with sundry other that go his way.
Tradition, and is laid hold on by diverse, and some Melancthon. in loc. commun.
tit. de baptism. puerorum, and a treatise of Paedobaptisme Printed last year,
1645. licensed by Chapter Herle, President of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, p. 7. and many other.
Protestants in the business? But of this controversy, which I cannot be
ignorant to have been on foot a long time, and yet to be, prosecuted with zeal
enough, and too much bitterness, by those have interessed themselves, I leave
the abettors to their several opinions and disputations; let them sit and vote
as they please, for the bridge or manner of conveyance, I interpose no farther
then I have cause for the both sides: that there it was, and here it is, it had
being before the Gospel, and has had ever since the Gospel (though they that
rely on simple tradition may perchance hope to gain hereby not a little
advantage on their side; for if it were so indeed that infants were, upon what
grounds or maxims soever, baptized into the Law, and this so usual that
nothing more, this known, rendered it the less The patterns from whence most, if
not all, the Customs in the Church were taken, was, the Custom of Israel in the
old Testament. And this may be one special reason, why the providence of God
did not take so much care for the writing of every custom and ordinance for the
Government of the Church in the new Testament, because the precedent from
whence they were taken being at hand, if any alteration did creep in, it might
easily be amended by reducing it to the pattern. The same Treatise, pa. 8.
baptizing whole households instanced in, for one thing p. 9.
needful to give or require express order for every days practice, or to waft
over by cumbersome strength of precept what the force of custom would fairly
and gently but surely enough carry on along with it, especially for a
circumstance, when the main was secured by Command, And withal there might be
Rules and received Orders then on foot, to carry on the business with light,
strength, security and evidence enough, since lost Grant I say, the thing done,
a glance, or but intimation, or but covert supposition might give as much
evidence as might reasonably be expected in such a business from so small a
Volumn as the new Testament is, where we have but a very short draught of all
the sure Theology in the world: As here in England what a small account have
we of infant baptism for about 500 years ago as to doctrine or practice, which
yet questionless was, and how much less will be a thousand years hereafter,
when time shall have eat out the prints that are now legible in many things,
that sets her teeth into every thing? Things unusual claim their notice,
strange come upon the Record, dark, doubtful, uncertain, of hard belief, use
to take up room of vindication into clear and open light, else books must
multiply in infinitum; and as to our particular of what passed under Christ, we
more then guess that all was not written of him, by that supposition we know
who used, that if (...), all that was, should, the world could not contain the
books that should be written. Jo. 21.25.) But of these I say, I interpose no
further then I have cause, the fact on both sides, and the similitude of their
and our initiating rite thereby; even those that could not consent were
admitted, before, since, under our Savior, to the Synagogue, and the use of
Christians has been (we know in part) from the beginning, to take into the Ark
Noah and all his Family, not the youngest left out to perish in the water, but
saved by the water, as is St Peter's saying, and mine in his sense: 1 Pet. 3.21.

So the parallel stands fair, and our baptism comes from Israel, because in
so many regards like theirs; as primitive and derivative, original and
extract, as was said before, type and antitype, the same and the same: that
Jerusalem from the East which giving us one, had the other, being the likest to
afford both mother and daughter.

Which admitted, as I see not but it may, there is neither impossibility,
improbality, nor (of weight) inconveniency, Thereon would follow two other
things to be yet super-induced by way of Corollary, sc. 1. That it is not so
credible as commonly believed, nor gold so good as Current through
Christendom, that our Messiah, or his anteambulo John Baptist, at the soonest,
was the very first that ever introduced this rite of Religious Baptism into
the Church or into the world; There was no such thing before, These Master
builders not only raised it up to that hight (of value it justly has, and use
it serves for) but laid the first corner stone thereof, as is with confidence
enough delivered, by Johannes Baptista. sic dictus quod Deus per ipsius
ministerium Sacramentum Baptismi instituerit, primusque baptizaverit. Exposit.
Cathol. in Matthew. 3.1.
Marlorate, Tom. 1. de sacramentis, cap. 4. pa. 100.
Maldonate, Centur. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4. de baptismo. and lib. 6. sect. de
ritibus baptismi.
Illiricus, Homil. 25. in Luc. de baptism.
Brencius, De rerum inventoribus, cap. 4. de primo baptismatis usu, etc. and
Gloss. ordinar. nov. in Matthew. 3.1.
Polyd. Virgil, and diverse others both Historians, Treatisers, Commonplacers,
Schoolmen, and both Fathers and their children of every generation, who drive
on with one consent (the more is the pity) the same mistaken way: But is it so?
No; it is not so: There was a rite, of Baptism, in Religion, for regeneration,
I step one foot farther, and for renovation, institution, initiation into new
faith and profession, before Matthew. 2 1. Luc 2.4.
Jesus (the son of a Virgin) was born in Bethlehem in the land of Judea in the
days of Herod the King, or his elder servant and next Herald practiced (to make
way for his Master, to come) John 4.23.
in Aenon, or any where else: and for this there is proof enough, full, home,
pregnant, plentiful, though not Scripture Proof (and yet such as Scripture
contradicts not neither) as good as the world uses to afford in like case. Far
be it, I should be overlavish to grant the adjective of Christian regeneration,
Christian Baptism; That, such and Ours (by which alone we hope, so far as
Sacraments may, admission into the new Jerusalem) began I believe with the New
Testament, and has the form authoritatively ordered from him that could alone,
and did, our highest Prophet, and Savior* and Redeemer, Matthew. 28.19. Thus, or
to this, baptize not till now, or then. But for Baptism (or religious washing,
at large, for the words are the same) a Rite, Seal, Means, Ordinance (believed)
of ingraffing to a new Faith or Religion, not without regeneration intercedent
(though not ours) This was both in the Certe ludis Apollinariis and Eleusiniis
tinguntur, idque se in regenerationem and impunitatem perjuriorum suorum agere
praesumunt. Tertullian. lib. de baptismo. c. 5.
world before and in the Church, Our Savior did but transfer not bring up,
dispose not create, order, appoint, metamorphose and sanctify Verum quidem
est, Christum and Apostolos expressim, quaedam alia docuisse ac imperasse in
quibus fundamentatotius religionis Christianae collocantur, horumque nonnulla
(verbi gratia, baptismi sacramentum) ex anterioribus Judaismi moribus sumta ac
in ipsis retenta sic Christianismi suum formasse ac novasse, ut novatum inde
Institutum divinum plane accessisse inde sit dicendum. Sed ejusmodi, etc.
Seldom, de Synedriis vet. Heb. lib. 1. cap. 13. pa. 492.
a new, not raise to being, that which both had been and had been holy before,
making it to us Tit. 3. ver. 5.
the Laver of regeneration and gate of spiritual (a degree of eternal) life;
as breaking of bread was before it became a pledge of Christian Communion, and
as the To conceive there was no Rainbow before the Flood, because God chose out
this as a token of the Covenant, is, to conclude the existence of things from
their signalities -- with equal reason we may infer, there was no water before
the institution of baptism, nor bread and wine before the Eucharist. So the
most exquisitly learned and judious Dr. Brown, in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica,
book 7. chap. 4. The argument whereof is to prove, That the Bow was before the
flood.
rainbow had a being in nature, before God appointed it to be significative to
the world, by judgment of good vid. Scharp. Symphon. Epoch. 2. Quest. 9. pa.
66. and Bellarmin, de Sacramentis, lib. 1. cap. 17.
Philosophers-Divines, Genes. 9. and thereby a kind of Ne diluvium alterum
formidaret (Noachus) intueri Iridem, atque huic fidere Sacramento jussus fuit,
Pet. Cunaeus, de repub. Heb. lib 3. c. 2. and vid. Luther. de captivitate
Babylon. cap. de bapt. and Calvin. Institut. lib 4. c. 14. sec. 18.
Sacrament to give sensible pledge and assurance of what it is there set for.
In short, Baptism See more hereof in Grotius upon Matt. 3.6.
was before, our Master brought in ours, it had a being, He made it our
Sacrament, washing was in use, he new washed and sanctified it, and made
Baptism (taking in his own name) to be Christianing, which God grant it may be
to all the welcome and willing partakers thereof wheresoever; the gate of
heavenly life here, and of heaven it self in the Heaven of heavens hereafter.
Amen, Amen.

Secondly, Hence may be made a discovery of the gates of new and old Sion of
equal wideness, the door of the Synagogue as broad as the Churches, and either
wide enough to let in (Sacramentally) both sexes; I mean by a solution of the
great doubt, hitherto so much tossed, but to or toward satisfaction so little
determined of rationally and resolved, sc. How Hac ratione Judaeorum liberi per
faederis circumcisionis observationem Judaei fiunt: (sc. the males) Quod si
Judaea filiolam pepererit, nativitas ejus tam parvi aestimatur, ut in libris
eorum de ea nihil fere scriptum invenire mihi licuerit: (except this little)
Quod puellulae quaedam juvenculae, quando filiola nata sex hebdomadarum est,
circum cunas, in quibus, linteolis pulcherrimis cincturisque argenteis ornatis,
ea posita cubat, se collocent, eamque cum cunis aliquoties elevent in altum,
eique tum demum nomen imponant; and quod ea quae ad caput infantis a stat,
susceptrix ejus sit: quae, rebus istis peractis, cum puellis aliis convivium
paratum agitans, and edat and bibat, and ita tempus aliquod hilaris laetaque
cum eisdem transmittat. Ridiculous! yet this is all; from Buxtorfius, in
Synagog. Jud. cap 2. de nativitate and circumcisione Judaeorum, pa. 96.
women were taken into the old of Moses, or Jehovah's Covenant? Macherae
petrinae eundem heic fuisse usum quem and in maribus praeputandis, die scilicet
octavo, juxta praeceptum Abrahae datum, Nemo sanus puto affirmabit; imprimis de
Israeliticis foemellis, DEI popularibus, JEHOVAE peculio, quarum vel
circumcisionem, vel excisionem, vel concisionem nullibi commemorat sacra For
the instances we read of, were Abraham, Isaac, Ishmael, Hamor, Sichem, Gershom,
Jesus Nazareus, John Baptist, Paul, Timothy, etc. all Males. The Law, Every
Manchild among you shall be circumcised, Genes. 17.10. Act. 7.8. He that is 8
days old among you shall be circumcised, every male in your generations. ver.
12 of Genesis 17. The uncircumcised male shall be cut off from his people, ver.
14. according to which Rule, In this will we consent, if ye will be as we,
every male circumcised. chap. 34.15. proposed again, ver. 22. Nor is memorial
of any order or instance to the contrary or different, in those we embrace for
sacred oracles.
pagina, vel in lege vel exemplo; si res ipsa forsan For the Rule was of males
only, who had by nature the foreskin of the flesh to be cut off, the females
wanting it were not to keep this rite, though they were as well as men within
the Covenant of Grace in Christ, says Mr. Ainsworth on Genesis 17.12. Epiphanius
proposed the question, if circumcision were needful to salvation, How were
Rebecca, Leah, Rachel, etc. saved, (...), who were not capable of what passed
on Abraham? in Haeres. 30. cap. 30. pa. 160. Though yet call to mind what had
plentiful attestation of the women of many Nations, as to more then capacity
hereof, before, in the margent of chap. 3.
possibilis: That they were admitted, yea circumcised, as some have been apt to
think, in their Moreover, the woman is comprehended under the man, as her head,
so styled, 1. Cor. 11.3. Mr. Ainsworth in the same place. In majoribus
censebantur, ex circumcisis enim parentibus nascebantur: circumcisis etiam
maritis nuptae fuerunt. Scharp, Symphon. Prophet. and Apost. Epoch. 3. Quaest.
9. pa. 91.
males, of not much less absurdity; considering they were one half of whole
mankind: That they were admitted without ceremony, as strange: or that they
were not admitted at all. It remains therefore, if neither by their own
circumcision, nor in their males, nor but by some rite, nor by any other, by
BAPTISM which passed on men, which might pass on Call to mind, to increase
probability hereof, the plain testimony of William of Paris alleged before:
Intrant (mulieres) in pactum Abrahae per quaedam Baptismata and traditiones
quae in corpore legis non inveniuntur. Women are entered into the Covenant with
Abraham by WASHING and other unwritten traditions: Remembering, that the Texts
before would scarce make good any baptism of Proselytes, for the order by the
words was only for washing of Garments in Sinai, which they interpreted of
washing the person. Mr. Seldom who gave us the testimony, had said before,
Proselytae autem Baptismo duntaxat and oblatione initiabantur: though men were
circumcised, no more passed on women but baptism, and necessity of offering.
de jure not. and gentium. lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 142. And H. Grotius, since: Sed
and foeminas extraneas Judaeis nubentes aiunt (Hebraei) ablutas, idque olim
factum Sarae and Rebeccae. annot. ad Matthew. 36. pa. 41. Marrying, that is, as
they were initiated into the Hebrew Religion, without which a stranger might
not conceive from the Holy seed. Washing not so much a rite of Matrimony, as of
conversion accompanying.
women, which was fit to pass on them, which nothing hinders the likelihood it
might pass on all, and most likely on women, who had many such special
consecrations appointed by the Law, nothing is this way inconvenient, nothing
absurd, nothing improbable; Modesty is taken care of, all fitted in to
wonderful consent of Things: and above all, the Church succeeds the Church,
the New Testament the Old, and while with us both So ruled by the text. When
the Samaritans had faith in Philip declaring the things of the Kingdom of God,
etc. they were baptized both men and women, Act. 8.12.
men and women continue to be baptized, of which it is certain men's succeed
what was under the Law, it will remain a strong visible, real, lasting
argument of weight, that both came together, and that our baptism of women (of
which we have no special command) comes from the Hebrews, and theirs went
before ours. Greedy endeavors had been before to compose things to similitude
and likeness; whence (at hand) the Lords Supper was made to piece out the
Passover, to us; and our Baptism, Circumcision, (which yet could be put in
part, since one half was never circumcised) I leave all to think how much fitter
it will be, to compare not only Baptism with Baptism, but that which does now
pass on both sexes with that which both heretofore might, and the likelyer did
for what since follows: and upon terms of how much disadvantage should we be
willing to take up but a likelihood that the women of Israel were entered by
water, which is after followed by such another known piece of the same, as (the
first admitted) will put all believers in a livery, men, women, of now, and
heretofore, all into the same ceremonious dress of Sacrament like themselves,
the sons and daughters of faithful Abraham.

I acknowledge the whole, as to any succession, whether of women's baptism or
men's, to be altogether new, and utterly different from all or the most that
have written or spoken on the Argument before me, whether fathers or their
posterity, whose opinions and confident determinations have still went on upon
this supposition with concession as undoubted, that our Baptism for admission
does succeed among the Hebrews, what? not a Baptism (which has not been
thought of) but their first and great commanded ceremony of entering into
Abraham's Family and the visible Church by Circumcision; and that this is the
gate to let into Christian Communion, as that did (and in succession to it)
into the Jewish Synagogue, for which I could Pro Baptismo Judaei circumcisione
utebantur. Isidor. Pelusiot. libr. 1. Epist. 125. pa. 39. Baptismus est
vicarius circumcisionis Durand. rational. divin. lib. 6. cap. 8. sect. 13. And
see St. Augustine in Epist. 108. tom. 2. Bernard Epist. 77. ad Hugonem de
sancto Victore. Aquin. par. 3. quaest. 70. Decret. de consecrat. did. 4. ca.
Quod autem. Decretal. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 42. cap. 3. Lancelot; Institut.
juris Canon. lib. 2. tit. 3. Feu-ardent. in Iren. lib. 4. cap. 30. Cornel. a
Lap. in Genes. 17.10. Ursin Catechism. part. 2. quaest. 4. Bishop Hall, Epist.
4. Decad. 5. And yet Decades more might be added.
cite of books, and in them dictates, enough: But I refer my self to Caeterum
scimus quosdam quod semel imbiberunt, nolle deponere, nec propositum fuum
facile mutare, sed salvo inter collegas pacis and concordiae vinculo, quaedam
propria, quae apud se semel sunt usurpata, retinere: Qua in re nee nos vim
cuique facimus aut legem damus, cum habeat in ecclesiae administratione
voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum unusquisque praepositus, rationem actus sui
Domino redditurus, Cyprian. Epist. 72.
indifferent judgment, whether this be not a more probable origination and
succession, it self to it self, rather then to circumcision, another thing,
Ceremonia haec neque nova plane fuit ( When John began, Matthew. 3.) and
vocatione gentium praelusit: sc. in the Hebrews washing of their proselytes,
Grotius, ad Mat. 3.6.
Baptism to Baptism for the same end of regeneration believed by both, then
Baptism to what is merely heterogeneous and of another nature (especially since
this was always fit to have passed on women to let them in with the other Sex,
as still it is known with us it does, the other nor did, nor well could) and I
am persuaded as it is to me clear, so it will be to others, at least very
probable, after they shall with a new and free judgment have digested these
considerations. The rather for that it is observable the grouth of the Church to
have been all along, both at beginning and ever since, most successful among
the gentiles, and they, it is like (in love of their own, would rather choose to
take up or continue that, for what end soever, which could fairly derive it
self by inheritance from their own, and which had wont to pass on their
Ancestor-proselytes, then what must graff it self, were it but for succession,
upon what had passed upon their envious, and it is well if not envied
adversaries: As, how Cum legislator a Deo institutus fuisset (Moses) ac legem
accurate servare deberet, ipse primum hanc violabat: filios videlicet cum
praeputio in Aegiptum secum ducens, illudque mandatum abolens, quo solo Hebraei
a Barbaris dirimebantur. Isidor, Pelusiot, lib. 1. Epist. 125. pa. 38.
Jewish circumcision has been counted all along and in all expositions, is
well enough known; in so much that the Nation seems properly enough described
by it, and deciphered, Galat. 2.7. and Ephesians. 2.11. even by In his Commentaries
on the places, and see Act. 10.45. cap. 11.2. Tit. 1.10. Coloss. 4.11.
Calvin's interpretation of those places.

In his Moses and Aaron. Book 3. cap. 2. And as much observed by Mr. Lightfoot
in his Elias Redivivus, who has it from Aben Ezra in Genes. 35.2. that the
washing of the Sichemits then and there, was their introduction into Jacobs
Religion, pa. 11. and from Rambam, the same of the thousand foreign laborers
that came in to assist the building of the Temple: and from Solomon Jarchi on
Exodus 24. That Baptism was a rite of induction, etc.
Dr. Godwin went so far to acknowledge a kind of initiatory purification by
water used by the Jews of old, without which no proselyte was admitted to the
Church: (though he disclaim it to be sacramental) and that my premises:
Polydore Lib. 4. cap. 4.
Virgil (who had been likest to have lighted upon it in prevention, writing
purposely de rerum inventoribus, or how things took their beginning) taking it
in hand, derives it from Moses and the Synagogue, which was my conclusion, Ego
vero dixerim, says he, Mosen primitus rationem baptizandi ostendisse, quippe
qui baptizavit sed in aqua solum, id est, in nube and mari: Quod, test
Gregorio Nazianz: and baptismi Johannis and Christi exemplar fuisse constat,
quando ista omnia a Deo proficiscebantur. Of which sort the Prophetavit quidem
lex in Exodo baptismatis gratiam per nubem and mare. Ambros. in Luc. cap. 7.
Tertium quoque testimonium est, sicut te Apostolus docuit, Quoniam patres
nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt, and omnes mare transierunt and omnes in Moyse
baptizati sunt in nube and in mari, etc. 1 Corinthians. 10.2. and Exodus 15.10.
Advertis quod in illo Hebraeorum transitu jam tunc sacri baptismatis figura
praecesserit, in quo Aegiptius periit and Hebraeus evasit, Id. in lib. de
initiandis. cap. 3. The like has Cyprian, in Epist. 76. ad Magnum, pa. 122.
observing farther from 1 Corinthians. 10.6. That these were examples to us, (...),
is the word (and again ver. 11.) types and figures. See more in Ambrose, de
sacramentis, lib. 1. cap. 6. lib. 2. cap. 1. and 3. in Psalm. 38. tom. 2. pa.
350. Cyprian, ad versus Judaeos, lib. 1. cap. 12. Cyril. Alexand. de adorat. in
spiritu. lib. 9. tom. 1. pa. 112. and contra Julian. lib. 7. tom. 6. pa. 249.
Gregor. Nyssen. de Baptismo Christi. tom. 3. pa. 373, 374, etc. Augustine. in
Psalm. 77. and in tractar. in 3. Johan. tom. 11. Symbolum baptismi erat labrum
in tabernaculo, Cyrill. Hierosol. Catech. 3. Let Tertullian give the close:
Quot Igitur patrocinia naturae, quot privilegia gratiae, quot solemnia
disciplinae, figurae, praestructiones, precationes, religionem aquae
ordinaverunt? Primo quidem quum populos de Aegipto expeditus, etc. and so he
goes on to the waters of Mara, those out of the rock, etc. lib. de Baptismo,
cap. 11.
Fathers have much, and Baptism was prefigured in the red Sea and in Jordan.
Walafrid. Strabo. de rebus ecclesiast. cap. 26. In the sprinkling before the
entrance into the Temple. Alphons. Salmeron. com. 2. tract. 17. In the
purifying of Aaron and his sons, Exodus 29. and many other both places and
things of the Old Testament, P. G. Tholosan. Syntagm. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect.
sect. from the Rabbines, In 3. things the Deluge, the red Sea, and Jordan.
Durand. Rational. divin. lib. 6. cap. 83. sect. 1. approved by Jo. Calvin, in
his Lexicon in the word Baptisma, pa. 110. Sacramenta Christiana primum in lege
Naturae adumbrata, and praenunciata: -- Particularly Baptism, Bellarmin, lib.
3. de poenit. cap. 3. And see hereof Alchwin. de divinis officiis, cap. 18. Dr.
Mayer on the hard places of Scripture. tom. 2. pa. 215: from Oecumenius, in 1 Corinthians. 10. and Pet. Ramus, de religione Christiana, lib. 4. cap. 6, etc.

Though after all, I acknowledge, that when these things were observed and
digested, I found Mr. Seldom conjecturing with me and deriving, in his
excellent Commentaries on Eutychius, lately by him set forth: Atque sicut
Baptismus Christianorum Ebraicum Baptismum, quo tum parents ipsorum turn
proselyti Iudaismo initiabantur, haud parum imitabatur, etc. unde nec novus
visus est hic ritus, cum fide Christiana imbutis adhibebatur; and as the Lords
Supper drew from the Passeovers, so the Ordination of Presbyters he there
speaks of; whence our Ordination, Number. 10. pa. 24.


others: But premises and conclusion neither of them, I think, laid together,
or scarce any other; I modestly propose, let the learned judge.

And this the first probable discovery, upon former grounds, of the original
of our Baptism, with what would follow thereon: the second follows.

CHAP. VII.
QUAERE 2. Of the Original of Godfathers in Baptism.
TOuching certain Assistants that have been usually required at the
administration of this Sacrament among Christians for like believed
Regeneration; the expectation of the World, and continuance of Ages, has not
improperly styled them (for so they were thought to be) GODFATHERS. About whom
much has been said (besides what has been seen done) by many, and not the
least doubt of them is of their Mult^ ignoramus, quae non late rent si veterum
lectio esse^ familiaris Macrob. in Saturnal. 6. In omnibus rebus animadverto,
id perfectum ess^ quod ex omnibus partibus suis constat. and certe cujusque rei
p^tissima pars principium est. Digest. de Origin Iuris. L. Facturus.
Original, which if well searched into, might, as in other things, let in much
light toward ending many controversies, hanging now in miserably perplexed,
both obscurity and uncertainty. That they have been in the largest diffusion of
C^rcumstance, both to time and place, in all AGES, and of all CHURCHES, appears
by the Records left; the As Justin. Martyr. Quaest. 5^. ad Orthodox. Dionys.
Areopagit. de coelesti Hierarch. cap. 2, 3, 7. as I find him alleged by
Bellarmin, Vasquez, Aquinas and Maldonare. The Writer of Epiphanius his life,
in cap. 8. Nicetas de saraceni Anathema^ismo, apud Bibliothec. Pat. Graec. tom.
2. pa. 283. Disputationes Gregentii cum Herban^ Iudaeo, tom. 1. page 271.
Severus Patriarch. Alexandr. lib. de ritibus Baptism, apud Biblioth. veterum
patrum. tom 7. pa. 732.
(...) in the Greek Church; Tertullian, lib. de Co ona milit cap 3. and lib de
^aptismo, cap. 18. Augustine. in Sermon. 116. Sermon 163. Sermon. 181 and in
prae^at. ad sermon. 215 Lib de peccatorum meritis se remiss^ cap. 19. and cap. 34
De Nuptiis and concupisc. lib. 1. cap. 20. Contra Donatist. lib. 4 124. and
Epistol. 23 ad Bonifacium, Gregor. Magn Dialog lib. 4 cap. 32. By P lydore
Virgils authority they were required by Higynus Bishop of Rome about the year
1^0. lib 4 de rerum Inventor cap. 4. By Genebrard, sooner: Thel^sphoru --
p^oparentes Baptismi -- constituit, aut potius constitutos and in usu habitos
imperavit. ( He lived about the year 110) Genebrard. Chronolog ad an Mundi,
4.27. By the Latins I find they were styled Patres, Patrini, Patroni, Divini
patres, Offerentes, Sponsores. Vades, Fide-jussores, Fidei doctores,
Fidei-ductores, Poedagogi, Levantes de font sacro, etc. which may enlighten
among them to their use.
Susceptores and compatres, in the Latin, and among our Be godfaederes
othatthate godsunes ^lyht; De eaede susceptoris ad sacrum fo^tem, aut suscepti,
vid. Spelman. Council. Britan. tom. 1. pa. 186. in Leg. Ecclesiast. Inae regis,
11. Necnon Lambard, Archaionom. pa. 14. Quid ut su^ceptoris officium, vid.
c^ncil. Calcuth. can. 2. apud. Spelman, pa. 293. He must be able to give
account of the Creed and Lords Prayer. Canon. Edgari regis, 22. pa. 450. and
Lambard. Archaion. pa. 67. None to contract Marriage within degrees forbidden,
or with his godribbe (since contracted) cum consponsali sua, Leg. Presbyterorum
Northumbrens. 52. pa. 501. in Spelman. God-sib is as much as kin together
through God. Verstegans Antiqu. cap. 7. pa. 223. More may be seen in Concilio
Aeuhamensi Pananglico, cap. 8. pa. 516. and King Knouts ecclesiast. laws, ca.
7. pa. 544.
Saxon Ancestors at their first illumination by Christ's saving truth,
godfaeder and godsun besides Council. Nicen. c. 21, and 23. apud Council.
Antisiodor. can. 25. in Caranz. fol. 266. Council gener. 6. Constantinopol in
Trullo. can. 53. fol. 338. Synod Mogunt. can. 47. fol. 386. Synod. Anglican sub
Oswaldo, Northanymbrorum Rege, Anno 787. apud Magdeburg. Centuriatores, Centur.
8. cap. 9. Col. 316. Ne Monachi compatres, vel Monachae commatres fiant Synod.
Anglican. sub. H^nric. 1. in Eadm. Historia Novorum, pa. 68. Council. Trident.
Session. 24. de reformat. Matrimonii can. ^. Ne proprium filium de Baptismo
quis suscipiat, Synod. Mogunt. can. 55.
Councels, Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. Distinct. 6. de responsione Patrinorum,
and distinct. 42. Qui sunt filii spirituales, Aquin. Sum. Theolog part. 3.
Quaest. 67. Utrum in Baptismo requiratur aliquis qui baptizatum Ievet de font
sacro? Artic. 7. Utrum qui, etc. teneatur ad ejus instructionem? Artic. 8 and
vid. Supplem. tertiae partis quaest. 56. Art. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Nec non Augustine
Hunnaeum, de Sac^am. Bapt. axiom. 8. and de matrimon. axiom. 8 Vasquez in 3
partem Thomae. Disput. 148. tom. 2. pa. 346. etc. Gregor. de Valenc. tom. 4.
Disput. 4. Quaest. 2. punct. 3.
Schoolmen, Joan. Patriarcha. Hierosolym. in vita Johannis Damasceni, pa. 12.
set before his Works, Centur. Magdeburgens. Cent. 3. cap. 6 de ritibus
baptismi, Centur. 5. Cent. 7. Cent 8. Cent. 9. Cent 10. in the sixth chapter of
each of those tomes, under the head, De ritibus Baptismi, Buchannan; Histor.
rerum scoticarum, lib. 18. Os^ald King of Northumberland was Godfather to
Kynigilsus King of the West Saxons: this in the morning of our Christian light,
when the bright beams of the Gospel from heaven to great joy and comfort first
dispeld here the darkness of H^athenisme, Bed Histor. Ecclesiastic. gentis
Anglorum lib. 3. cap. 7. Edilwalch King of Chichester had for his Father at
Baptism King Vulphere ( of West Saxons) who gave him the Isle of Wight, and
the Means about old Winchester in Hampshire) as a pledge of his love and
adoption. lib. 4. cap. 13. compared with Mr. Camden in Hampshire, pa. 2^8. Such
another lega^y K. Alfred gave to Guthrun ( or Gurmund) the Danish King adopted
by him at Winchester, with eighteen, some say thirty of his Chiefs,: sc. the
Provinces of the East Angles and Northumberland, Spelman, Council. Britan. tom.
1 pa 378, 379. and pa. 395. Lambard Archaion pa 37. Fox Martyrolog. in the
life of K. Alfred, and Jo. Pike, avouched by Mr. Camden in Icenis pa. 510.

Not unseasonably may here be remembered, that it was usual in those days, and
continued since, to bestow gifts upon those were owned for such children in God
(or Religon) as a token of a kind of adoption or assumption into the Family,
with those were natural. For, Adoptio est imago Naturae, and civilis ratio
quaerendorum liberorum, qui in nostra potestate sunt perinde atque liberi
procreati ex justis nuptiis Cui ac: in paratit. ad Codic. lib. 8. tit. 48. de
adoptionibus; or it is, fictio inducta ad similitudinem naturae. Nam est
adoptio legalis actio, per quam quis fit velut filius qui non est, pene naturam
imitans. Gloss. Imagine. ad Digest. de liberis and postum. L. 23. Filio, quem.
Or, as Aquinas, Adoptio est extraneae personae in filium vel filiam vel nepotem
legitima assumptio, Supplem. tertiae partis. Quaest. 57. art. 1. Such Adoption
seemed here, and the care and bounty of life continued to death in remembering
with some kind of Legacy, in the next classis after natural, those that were
so adopted. Which abused, and as it were Simoniacally depraved, to suck out of
what was Holy and Religious, corrupt worldly gain, (as, for instance, that Jew
did, so often baptized in Socrates his Ecclesiast. story, lib. 7. cap. 17.)
occasioned (for ex malis moribus bonae leges) those wholesome Laws in after
times, sc. 1. Against giving any thing: So far a Synod at Millain proceeded. --
Ne cuiquam, quod aliquando commissum est, iterandi hoc sacramentum
(confirmationis) occasio praebeatur: Quod and in Baptismo diligenter
observandum: Alleged by Durant, de ritib. lib. 1. cap. 20. sect. 18. 2.
Against unnecessary multiplying those relations at first. As our commanding
canons had restrained to three. Quod enim amplius est a malo est. Lindwood
Constitur. provincial. lib. 3. tit. de Baptismo. Other places allow not so
many. The Council of Trent, but two at most. De reformat. Matrimonii, Session.
24. ca. 2. The Canon law, one man and one woman, Gratian. in Decret. par. 3.
did. 4. c. 101. and Lancelot, Institut. Juris Canon. lib. 2. tit. 13. At
Lunenburg in Germany (says my Author) they have but one.


Historians, Cod. de nuptiis. L. Siquis alumnam The Gloss takes this to be a
Greek Law, though wanting in Theodosius his Code, and refers both to Harm nop.
lib. 4. tit. 6. and another body, de nuptiis prohibitis, where they are
mentioned,
Civilians, Decret. par. 2. Cause. 2. Quaest. 1, 2, 3, 4. part. 3. Distinct. 4.
c. 100, 104, etc. Lancelot Institut. Juris Canon. lib. 2. tit. 13. Gregor.
Tholosan. Syntagm. lib. 9, cap. 9. sect. 10. lib. 15. cap. 13. sect. 15 and
lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 10, 11.
Canonists, Walafrid. Strabo, de rebus Ecclesiast. cap. 26. Alcwin. de devinis
offic. cap. 19. col. 1062, and 1064. cap. 21. col. 1064. de ceremoniis
Baptismi, Epist. col. 1153, and 1158. Durand. Rationale Divin. lib. 6. cap. 83.
sect. 34, 35. Joan Beleth. Divinorum offic. explic. cap. 90. and cap. 110.
Durant. de ritibus Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 19. sect. 16, 17. Joseph. Vicecomes, de
ritibus Baptismi, lib. 1. cap. 30. de susceptorum nominibus, origene, usu, ande.
Ritualists, Estne sponsorum, quos susceptores vocant, etc. usus necessarius?
Respond. Nec necessarius. -- nec simpliciter rejiciendus. But 8 Reasons
alleged for their convenience, by Will. Ducan. a Lutheran, and professor at
Lozanna, the next University to Geneva. Commun. loc. 48. quaest. 47. Join to
him for neighbourhoods sake and consonancy in opinion, the eloquent professor
at Ulme, Dr. Theordorike ( or Cunrad. Dietericus,) in praefat. ad tom. 2. An.
Dominical. and some gratulatory verses before the last edition of 1644. tom. 1.
were directed to him by Cunrade Backman (his successor in the Chair) Ad
reverendum, etc. Cunradum Dieterio, etc. amicum and compatrem suum. In like
manner Dr. Chapter Matthias professor at Sora gratified Dr. Brockman professor at
Coppenhagen in Denmark: Ad reverendum, etc. Erasmum Brockmannum -- fratrem in
Christo and compatrem long dilectissimum, in the verses before his Works
printed 1639. And the professor himself both remembers them, approves their
use, and has four reasons for continuance of them in his Danish Protestant
Church. Systhem. Theolog. artic. 34. sect. 5. de Baptismi ceremon. pa. 2018.
tom. 3.
Catechists, Bellarmin. de sacram Baptismi, lib. 1. cap. 26. Polydor. Virgil.
de rerum inventor. lib 4 cap. 4. Herman Archbishop of Coleyne, in his
consultation for a reformation of Religion in his Province: These he would have
retained in his chap. of Baptism, and of Demands before Baptism.
Adversaries, Friends, As far abroad as Prester John's hot regions, Ordo
Baptismi secundum usum Aethiopum both mentions and expects them Vades, sureties
and pledges for the infant, says Jos. Vicecom. lib. 1. cap. 30. Cassander
inlarges, extant apud nos typis excusi ritus Baptismi Ruthenorum, Armenorum and
Ethiopum, etc. -- qui omnes infantes haud secus atque adultos apud ipsos
baptizari testantur, nisi quod infantium nomine susceptores respondeant.
Testimonia veterum scriptorum, etc. in his Works, pa. 693. The Russes are a
part of the Greek Church, at their profession of Abrenunciation the Godfathers
spit on the ground in defyance of the Devil, Paget. Christianogr. pa. 132.

The Low Countries own them by Tremellius his notes on Isa. 8.2. and the same I
had from credible testimony of a neighbor, who long exercised his Ministry
among them. Learned Zanchy both mentions and approves them in Commentat. ad
Ephesians. pa. 580. Chamiet, that great light of France, magnifies them; Praeclarum
inventum, etc. especially for infants in the place hereafter alleged. But
above all Geneva has not discarded them. Mr. Hooker assures it, in his
Ecclesiast. Polity. lib. 4. sect. 10. pa. 146. and Bellarmine, (who makes some
advantage of it) lib 1. de Bapt. cap. 1. Nor do they that Town any wrong. For
to one that asked the question and doubted of the lawfulness, Calvin did not
forbid the thing, but to be surety at Popish Baptism, in Epist. 258. To Mr.
Farell, desiring his advice in some things about the Church of Berne (where it
seems he was then resident, and in which Epistle he mentions Levantes puerum,
in Epist. 147.) He is very copious. Stipulamur ab iis qui offerunt (says he)
ut adultos erudiunt in ea fide in qua baptizantur: si nemo fide jubeat
profanari baptismum certum est. -- and for what they should be, Caeterum minime
dubitamus, non alios esse idoneos sponsores, nisi penes quos sit praestandi
facultas, hoc est qui infantem habituri sunt in sua potestate, vel qui patris
aut matris rogatu fidem suam ecclesiae obligent, Epist. 149 pa. 256. To Gaspar
Olevian showing upon request their discipline, and for his imitation, Patres
(nisi quid negotii impediat) jubentur adesse ut stipulationi respondeant unam
cum fide jussoribus (says he) Nemo tamen ad fide jubendum admittitur, nisi qui
ejusdem nobiscum est professionis; arcentur and excommunicati ab hoc honor,
Epist. 302. pa. 491. This communion of faith he again holds requisite in Epist.
381. pa. 661. as did Gregory de Valencia his way. sc. Jure divino and naturali
certum est haereticos vel maxim ab ejusmodi munere prohiberi, tom. 4. Disput.
4. Quaest. 2. Punct. 3. And those are under penance, the Council of Paris
would have forborne: Quoniam quos and lex divina a castris militaribus, ne
ruina sint populi, and authoritas Canonica ab ecclesiarum sequestrant
limitibus, multo magis a memoratis peragendis, etc. Council. paris. c. 54. Dr.
Brockman is earnest against both, sc. that both the scandalous and heterodoxe
should be kept away. Systhem. Theolog. artic. de Bapt. Cas. conscient. 9.


abroad, Even T. C. or Tho. Cartwright liked to have them retained here because
all Chutches have received them. Hooker Polit. Eccles. lib. 5. sect. 65. pa.
341. Dr. Godwin had somewhat of them in Moses and Aaron, lib. 6. cap. 1. and Dr.
Mayer on the Church-Catechisme, pa. 4. I forbear any more at home, because at
home: de quibus saltem pauca posuissem, nisi otiosum esset docere quae nota
sunt, in the words of St Jerome Comment. in Jerem cap. 32. tom. 4. pa 303. They
have been with us always. This sure. Witness what before, of the first days: and
add those directions to the Presbytery of Northumberland, that the sponsores
should make good their title, and perform their undertaking, teaching the
child to forsake the Devil and all his works, to learn the Greed and Lords
Supper, etc. Or else to answer the neglect to God Almighty, Magdeburgens.
Centur. 8. cap. 9. de Synodis col. 316. The thoughts of Vicecomes may be a fit
close, which his pen has left expressed in these words: Si plura veterum
testimonia quis desideret, facile erit rerum divinarum scriptores, qui, etc.
adjicere. Quorum plerique cum non longo intervallo, ab Apostolis disjuncti
sint, necessaria consequutione colligimus Susceptorum usum ab ipsis Apostolis
incepisse, Joseph. Vicecom de antiquis Bapt. ritibus, lib. 1. cap 30. By
Caranza's credit St. Mark was so adopted by St. Peter. Hic scripsit duas
Epistolas quae catholicae and canonice nominantur, and Evangelium Marci, qui
Marchus auditor ejus fuit, and filius a Baptismo. sum. Conciliorum, fol. 12.
in vita Petri.

True indeed, St. Mark was his son: He styles him so, and that we embrace for
Holy Writ gives it us. In 1. Epist. 5.13. The Church which is at Babylon
saluteth thee, and Marchus my son. So, his son he was, and not natural: no one
has said this. Ergo.


at home, and generally all sorts of Writers, which may be thought to have had
occasion to mention them, who have not forgotten them. Now may not a more
probable origination of them then hitherto (indeed scarce thought on before) be
made out, by deriving them from the like assistants, at the same rite, by the
same ceremony, for the very same end of regenerating men to new Religion,
though the Jewish way? (as first Christianity throughout was nothing else but
Judaismus reformatus, as the learned style it, or the corruptions of Moses and
the Prophets reformed by Jesus of Nazareth and his Discsples) and they be
thought to be taken up in succession of the Look back to what was said of them
before, pa. 16. and compare therewith what is said of Ordination: In Pandectis.
Hebraeorum ordinatio presbyterorum per impositionem manuum tribus fieri debet
praesentibus, Seldom. commentar. in Eutych. Number. 10. pa. 20.
Triumvirate before spoken of, to be that Triumvirate continued, without whose
presence or assistance necessary, none were ever regenerate unto the Church of
Israel?

As, by the way, our making the business clearly For the Church of Christ is so
gentle and reasonable a Mother, that she would have none forced to yield to her
Jurisdiction, or constrained without due self-conviction to yield subjection to
her sovereign and commanding Power. Whence way to Baptism has been usually
made not without explicit satisfaction given in two things. 1. Whether the
competens or desirer thereof were willing to come over to her? 2. Whether he
would frame his life accordingly, and not be a disgrace to that School, a
blemish to that society which is the Household of God, 1 Timoth. 3.15. Ephesians.
2.19. Galat 6.10. whose conversation Philip. 3.2. is already in heaven?

So was it in the Synagogue of Israel. Nolentem non cogebant in se suscipere
legem and prophetas, says Maiemonides, He that would not, should not be theirs:
they forced none to their Law, (understand, the Law of Moses and to complete
proselytes; for the lower sort were as 'twere constrained, or not suffered else
to live with Israel, because Israel might not associate with them:) and
Munster, When any desire to be a Proselyte, they propose to him the hardest
things of the Law -- with some pennances -- and they would seem by these means
to be willing to drive men from their Religion. in Evangel. Mat. Hebr. cap. 22.
A special part of that enquiry was, whether by love and choice, etc? Diligenter
an ob simplicem Judaismi amorem in illum transire desideraret, explorantes, as
Mr. Seldom, de Jure not. pa. 143. ( in exact parallel to what in St Augustine,
Utrum propter vitae praesentis aliquod commodum, an propter requiem quae port
hane vitam speratur? de Catechizand. rudibus, cap. 16. and cap. 26. tom. 4. pa.
301.) And this might give reason why in the prosperous days of Solomon and his
father, so few were admitted, perhaps none, but the Courts down, least Fear of
power, or Hope of reward, or any thing but Love and Choice might seem to
enforce or permit them to Israel.

So at this day, Si alcune volesse farsi Hebraeo, primo sono tenuti tree
Rabbini, o person di autorita interrogaclo sottelmente, che cosa lo move a far
questa rissolutione, e intender been se fosse a qualch fine mondana, che devono
licentiarlo, e poi protestarle con notificarle che la leg Mosaica e
strettissima, e che gl'Hebraei al present sono abietti e vili and esotarlo che
meglio sarebbe ch'egli se ne stasso nel stato che si trova. Which by the help
of a Spectacle, I thus read: If any one would be a Jew, he must first be
precisely questioned by 3 Rabbines or persons of authority, What is that moves
him to take this resolution, and understand well that if it be for a worldly
end, they ought to leave him, and then to let him know and protest that the Law
of Moses is very strict, and that the Hebrews are at present abject and vile,
and exhort him that it is better for him to continue in his present condition.
But if he give a fast answer: then he is to be circumcised, etc. from Ludovic.
Mutinens. de gli riti Hebraici. part. 5. cap. 2.

Now for the Christian side, beside St Augustine before, hear St Chrysostom.
Sicut nos servos ementes, ipsos qui venduntur prius interrogamus, an nobis
servire velint? Ita facit and Christus quando futurus est in servitutem te
caper^. Prius interrogat, an velis illum crudelem tyrannum dimittere, and a te
faedera suscipit; (...), non enim coactum est ejus imperium. Homil. 21. ad
popul. Antioch. tom. 1. pa. 244. As we, when we hire servants, enquire of their
will to serve us, So Christ, willing to own no one against his will. And thence
he reckons that Baptism unavailable which is in sickness, etc. when a man
seems driven in by the tempest of pain, and has not command of his whole self:
in Homil. ad Illuminandos, pa. 707. The incongruity of which time for which
reason Basil left observed, Quid expectas beneficio febris baptizati, etc. in
Exhortat. ad Bapt. Homil. 13. tom. 1. pa. 415. And the Canon Law which would
not admit such into Orders, Did. 57. cap. 1. As nor the Council of
Neocaesarea, siquis in aegritudine fuerit baptizatus ad honorem presbyterii non
poterit pervenire, quod non ex proposito fides ejus sed ex necessitate
descendit. can. 12. nor Cornelius Bishop of Rome, whose restraint of the
Clinici, or those were baptized in their beds may be seen in Binius, in Epist.
ad Fab. Antioch. pa. 163. tom. 1. Dionysius the Areopagit (to take the highest)
has left, Imprimis interrogandum esse baptizandum, antequam Ecclesiam
ingrediatur, number velit ejus esse professionis, as Gregor. Tholosau. in Syntagn.
2.4.10. Will thou be baptized into this Faith? Walafrid. Strabo. Notandum, quod
primis temporibus, illis solummodo Baptismi gratiam dari solitam, qui and
corporis and mentis integritate jam ad hoc pervenerant ut scire atque
intelligere possent, Quid emolumenti in Baptismo consequendum, quid conficendum
atque credendum, quid postremo renatis in Christo esset faciendum, de rebus
Ecclesiast. cap. 26. Nicetas has it often, how free the access was in his time:
Heus tu, qui a Saracenis ad Christianorum fidem accedis (said the Minister) non
ex violentia quadam aut necessitate, neque dolo aut hypocrisi, sed ex tota
anima and cord puro atque sincero quibus Christum and ejus fidem diligis?
What! willingly, and in sincerity of heart to seek Christ alone! He answers,
Renuncio omni Saracenorum religioni,and anathematizo Maomedum, etc. And soon
after, Ego qui a Saracenis hodie ad Christianorum fidem accedo, non ex
violentia quadam aut necessitate, neque dolo aut hypocrisi, sed ex tota anima
and cord puro atque sincero, quibus Christum and ejus fidem diligo: I
seriously renounce Mahomed, and seek my Savior with all my heart. Nicet.
Saracenica, apud Biblioth. Patrum Graec. tom. 1. pa. 282, 283. And another
Nicettas (Serronius) Solo voluntatis pretio Baptismus emitur. Nothing but a
good will can deserve to this Seal. In Commentar ad Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 40.
cap. 26. Tertullian, Sed nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae sponte
suscipi debet. lib. ad Scapul. cap. 2. St Bernard, Fides nequaquam vi
extorquetur, sed exemplis atque ratione suadetur, de modo been vivendi, cap. 1.
And a Spanish Council gravely and discreetly, De Judaeis praecepit sancta
synodus nemini deinceps ad credendum vim inferri, Cui enim vult Deus,
miseretur: and quem vult indurat. Non enim in viti tales salvandi sunt, sed
volentes, ut integra sit forma justitiae. Sicut enim homo proprii arbitrii
voluntate, serpenti obediens periit, sic. etc. Council. Tolet. 4. can. 55. taken
after into the Decree, in Distin. 45. cap. 5. Where the Canon is determining,
that the Minister of Religion ought to be mild, not soon angry, no striker,
(from 1 Timoth. 3.3.) Pastores etenim facti sumus, non percussores, says
Gregory, Et egregius praedicator dicit; Argue, obsecra, impera in omni
patientia and doctrina. Nova vero atque in audita est ista praedicatio, quae
verberibus exigit fidem. cap. 1. out of Gregory the great. Ad fidem enim nemo
cogendus est, as the Gloss has it there. Yet more, the same Canon Law grants
them dischargeable from obligation to observe Laws Christian, who in no sort
consented, but in spite of express contradiction had this Sacrament forced on
them. Lancelot. Institut. Jur Canon. lib. 2. tit. 3. As Erasmus would have them
released of the Churches Jurisdiction, who dissent at years of consent, in
praefat. in Matthew. (But note that refusal must be then more then not agreeing,
an actual resisting; for plus est express contradicere quam non consentire, as
in the Decretals.) And in the Decree, Prius ipse Jesus caeci nati oculos luto
superlinivit, and sic ad aquas Siloe misit, quia prius debet baptizandus fide
incarnationis Christi instrui, and sic ad Baptismum jam credulus admitti, ut
sciat cujus gratiae est in eo particeps, and cui jam debtor fiat deinceps. de
consec. distinct. 4. ca. 54. Hence Catechizing was wont to go before Baptizing,
and in practice as well as rule, in act as well as equity: Non enim adulti sunt
cogendi ad profitendum fidem, vel ad suscipiendum sacramenta fidei, sed
inducendi instructione and admonitione ut dictum fuit, etc. in the Schools,
Durand. in Sentent. lib. 4. Did. 6. Quaest. 3. Utrum Catechismus debeat
praecedere Baptismum? By the greatest reason in the world. And though Princes
may compel their subjects to return to their vow, if they apostatize, or all
other not to blaspheme; etc. yet it is the common sentence of the Schools,
says Gregory de Valencia, that to force their consciences that are at liberty
to come to Baptism, this they may not: tom. 3. disput. 1. Quaest. 10. de in
fidelitate, punct. 6. So was done here in this our Land: When the Bible,
unheard of, was brought and offered, and the King by the Grace of God had his
heart opened to belief of the Truth, yet he constrained none of his subjects to
follow him, but left it to their choice, and to bring the free will offering of
their hearts in their hands, by consecration of mind and good will, else he
knew the sprinkling of a little water was but an unprofitable Ceremony. Quorum
fidei and conversioni (says Bid of those that came in after him) ita tamen
congratulatus esse rex perhibetur, ut nullum tamen cogeret ad Christianismum,
sed tantummodo credentes arctiori dilectione quasi concives sibi regni
coelestis amplecteretur. Didicerat enim ab auctoribus doctoribusque suae
salutis servitium Christi VOLUNTARIUM non coactitiumesse debere. Histor.
Ecclesiast. gentis Anglorum, lib. 1. cap. 26. So is it as this day abroad. If
any Jew, Moor, or other Gentile be disposed to receive the Faith of Christ, it
is believed written in the Apostles books (says Zaga Zabo, an Ethiopian,
Bishop, of his Country, to omit other) that he is not forthwith to be
admitted: But they will that he first come unto the gate of the Church, and
there to hear Sermons and the words of our Savior Christ that before he be
(wrought over and) brought (as it were by stealth or force) unto the, faith, he
may know the yoke of the Law. Damian. a Goes. pa. 563. whereto we may believe
practice answerable. Aquinas proposes the Question, of Jews children, Whether
they are to be baptized without consent of their parents? He answers, No: nor
ever had or should: quod and justitiae naturali repugnaret, and inde fides in
periculum venire posset: It was both against common Justice, and destructive of
the nature of Faith: So of other infidels, secunda secundae, Quest. 10. artic.
10. Lastly, our very learned neighbor dislikes all fighting to propagate
religion (in his book of War, and for religion) particularly the enforcing of
ours, by Scripture Fathers, and other amplificatio^s. Lex nova non se vindicat
ultore gladio, out of Tertullian, Force is the worst Minister of Faith, and
most unreasonable to persuade averse men to Heaven by the Rhetoric of the
Sword H. Grot. de jure Belli and pacis, lib. 2. cap. 20. This whole in
accordance to the first and best patterns: As many as receive the word (...)
with delight (and pleasure, which is more then libenter with a permissive or
active good will, as in the old translation( were baptized: and so there were
added to the Church that day multitudes of souls, Act. 2.41.


voluntary, in all forms, or according to all Directories of Christian
Baptism, that I have met with by repeated Questions or Used all along, and
from the first: Philips questioning the Eunuch, Act. 8.37. may give some
countenance of holy Writ. For continuance, see Tertullian: de corona mil. cap.
3. Cyprian. Epistol. 70. ad Januar. Epist. 77. ad magn. Epistol. Firmiliani ad
Cyprianum, pa. 116. Acta sanctorum Martyrum, first published from the
Manuscript by Baron, ad an. 259. n. 11. Hieronym. adversus Luciferian, cap. 5.
tom. 2. pa. 167. Ambros. in lib. de initiandis. cap. 2, and 3. tom. 4. pa. 163.
de sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 171. de spiritu sancto. lib. 2. cap. 11. pa.
151. Augustine. de Catechizand. rudibus cap. 16. tom. 4. pa. 301. and cap. 26.
pa. 307. de Baptismo contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 20. tom. 7. pa. 63. Homil. 2.
de Bapt. in append. tom. 10. pa. 846. Nay what Interrogatories to a man's self.
Sermon. 116. de Temp. tom. 10. pa. 303. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. distinct. 6.
Herman. Archbishop of Coleyne in his Treatise of Reformation, chap. [of
Baptisme] Calvin. Epist. 302. pa. 491. Are they able to show that ever the
Church of Christ had any public form of Baptism without Interrogatories?
Hooker, in his Eccles. Polity. lib. 5. sect. 64. pa. 336.
Interrogations proposed to the Baptized, and exacting full answer, Scrutinium
nihil aliud est quam fidei and religionis Christianae inquisitio. -- and
dicitur a scrutando, id est, inquirendo, quia fidei and religionis inquisitio
sit. Durand. Rational. Divin. lib. 6. cap. 56. sect. 2. Certe: Nemo improbare
queat seriam in tam sanctis rebus non prophanandis diligentiam: Ne, quantum
fieri poterit, lateant Simones. Chamier. Panstrat. Cathol. par. 4. lib. 5. cap.
15. sect. 13.
Scrutinia the ancients called them, or Perpulchrum vero nobis videtur, ut ad
incontaminatum accurrentes Baptisma non temete suscipiantur. Authentic. collat.
9. tit. 25. cap. 2.
sifting them for their consents (for Religion should be of all other most free
and at liberty, to force men profess what they do not believe, what is it but
to fill the world with Atheists and hypocrites? in a business so near us of
Salvation, every one should be allowed to choose for himself and not according
to another Interesse: Faith is the gift of the holy Ghost, I can believe but
what I know, nor should I be forced to seem to believe any more then I list,
because I can believe no more or otherwise then my forestalled judgment shall
lead my faith and persuasion) with mutual Consider whether that (...) 1 Pet.
3.21. or Stipulatio bonae Conscientiae, as Beza has translated, may not be
fitly thought to allude to some such thing? Many have thence spoken of a
stipulation: and very many. Brentius: Petrus in priori sua Epistola, Baptismus
(inquit) est (...), hoc est, stipulatio bonae conscientiae erga Deum. Quibus
verbis Baptismi ratio valde significanter explicater. Etenim quod inter homines
in civilibus stipulationibus fieri solet, hoe idem sit in Baptismo inter Deum
and hominem. In civili autem stipulatione,(quae est, ut Jurisconsultus definit,
conceptio verborum, quibus is, qui interrogatur, daturum facturumve se id, quod
interrogatus est, respendet, videlicet: Spondes? spondeo: promittis? promitto:
dabis? dabo: facies? faciam) primum est interrogans, quem vocant stipulatorem,
deinde respondens, qui est promissor, postremo res ipsa de qua fit stipulatio;
and in legitima stipulatione promissor stipulatori ita firmiter obligatur, ut
quasi vinculo quodam solvendae promissae rei astringatur; sic in Baptismo, etc.
Homil. 23. ad Luc. 3. fol. 46. which is indeed the nature of that compact, by
our Bracton: Stipulatio est quaedam verborum conceptio, quae consistit ex
interrogatione and responsione, ut si dicatur, Promittis? Promitto: Dabis? do.
etc. lib. 3. tract. 1. ca. 2. sect. 2. and Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 56. sec. 9.
which they might have both from the Imperials: Instit. 3. de verborum obligat.
sect. in hac re. Bellarmine alleges Lyranus, Gagnaeus, and Johan. a. Lovan:
for this interpretation; de Sacram: lib. 1. cap. 17. Chamier ads many other,
Nicetas Hesselius, etc. tom. 4. lib. 2. cap. sect. 5, and 11. Pamellius on
Tertullian goes the same way, lib. de Bapt. cap. 6. number. 45. and Joseph
Vicecomes. de ritibus Bapt. lib. 2. cap. 23. and Estius in his coments on the
place: and Dr. Brockman, Systhem. Theol. art. 34. sect. 3. and Hooker in his
Eccles. Polit. 5. sect. 63. (...) signifies a stipulation or promise conceived
in words, whereby he that is baptized covenanteth to believe and do as he is in
baptism required. Mr. Legh, Critica sacra, pa. 213. Non enim sufficit
baptizando habere bonam conscientiam, nisi ad interrogationem ecclesiae suam
fidem ostendat, says the Canon from 1. Pet. 3.21. de Consecrat. did. 4. cap.
Verus Baptismus. Thus after mine own thoughts had led me to this conjecture,
plenty of confirmation came in from abroad. Beza's attestation to all will not
be despised. Sed omnino praestat ut hoc referamus ad interrogationes
Catechistarum quibus Catechumeni interiorem Baptismum testificabantur exteriore
sanciendum, ut Act. 8.37. Quo spectat Apostolicum totum symbolum, and illud, ab
adultorum Baptismo ad insantium baptismum, magno errore, si ipsos infantes
spectes, translatum, Credis? Credo. Abrenuncias? Abrenuncio. Unde illud
Tertulliani (lib. de resurrect.) Anima non lavatione sed responsione sancitur.
Annotat. mayor. ad 1 Pet. 3.21.
stipulation between him and Ubi promiseris considera vel quibus promiseris.
Levitam vidisti, sed Minister. est Christi. Ambros. de sacram. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Gods Minister, the result whereof is by St Chrysostom and others styled
(...). Chrysostom. Homil. 21. ad popul. Antioch. tom. 1. pa. 244. When a man lies
sick upon his bed and like a block, how can he consent to those words, (...),
whereby he is to contract a league with the God of all? Id. in Homil. 51. ad
Illuminand. tom. eod pa. 707. -- sequentis vitae ac purioris vivendi rationis
PACTUM cum DEO in itum. Gregor. Nazianzen. Orat. 40. tom. 1. pa. 641. vid.
etiam Joan. Damascen. de Barlaam and Josaphat, cap. 8. and B^^l. exhort. ad
Bapt. Homil. 13. tom. 1. pa. 415. Baptism implies a Covenant betwixt G d and
man, says Mr. Hooker, wherein as God does bestow presently remission of sins
and the holy Ghost, binding also himself to add in process of time what grace
soever shall be farther necessary for the atainment of everlasting life, so
every baptized soul receiving the same grace at the hand of God, tyeth it self
for ever to the observation of his Law, Ecclesiast. Polit. 5. sect. 64. pa. 337.

And from advantage of this preconfederation and firmness of the COMPACT we may
suppose it to be, that those who deliberate of plain Apostasy, or falling from
God to his Enemy, as Witches (having been baptized) can, as is said of them,
do nothing in this accursed hellish business of new league till they have
abjured their Baptism and trampled under foot their former Contract,
Renouncing their past Christian Renunciation, and tearing in pieces the
Articles of that blessed agreement, whereby they were so (thus) made over to
God in Christ, that they could not be another, nor enter into new
covenant-service till they were discharged of their former Master; As a woman
can superinduce no new relation conjugall till she have sued out divorce from
whose she was; Feodum talliatum, not pass to a stranger before the tallie be
taken in, and the Indenture of past appropriation revoked; A State can do
nothing contrary to a Public Act unrepealed; nor a private person go against
his own hand. All which if, and these things be so; What a great advantage must
it be to Satan's Kingdom to have left out what was so contrary to him? What a
loss to Christ, by his servants not being hindered from his enemy? What must
follow hereon, but a Gate set ready open for Hell and Death? and (by
forbearance to lay across that rub and impediment was wont to hinder) the
levelling and making plain a ready smooth way to the D? But I forbear Position
here: The suppositum lies far off in a dark Region of knowledge wherein I thank
God I have little acquaintance. Darkness should not make way to light. These
foundation-Premises are slippery or weak, and so no confident boldness should
be taken up in superstruction or conclusion.


Confaederatio cum Deo, or entering solemn league and Covenant with the God of
Heaven: Our Blessing from him, or Benedicere alicui, pro, orare pro eo, and
been illi precati positum est. Nam prius dixerat Matthaeus, ut manus eis
imponeret and oraret, Marlorat. in Matthew. 19.15.
praying for him, which the Hebrews called to Bless, (and they are not far
asunder, Benedictio est sanctitatis traditio. Gratian. in Decret. Qui benedicit
mediator est ad impetrandum influxum sive gratiam ejusmodi: estque illa ratio
impositionis manuum: solent enim qui benedicunt, imponere manus super eos,
quibus benedicunt, ut eos disponant ad recipiendam gratiam, aut bonum ejusmodi.
Quum autem justus aut pius benedicit, ipse est canalis per quem gratia divina
profluit. Joseph. de Voisin. lib. 1. Theolog. Judeaorum, cap. 5. pa. 76. de
cultu Angelorum. from the Rabbines.
Blessing being in a sort the calling down or giving of God, and prayer chiefly
to invoke and procure his presence, assistance or blessing) Our enjoining him
moreover Abrenunciationem seculi, in Martyr Cprian. Epistol. 7, pa. 14. Epist
8. pa. 15. ( so understood by Augustine de Bapt. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 2.)
lib. de discip. and habitu. virg. pa. 132. lib. de lapsis. pa. 141. lib. de
orat. Domin. pa. 157. and lib. de mortalitate, pa. 177. The word betokens so
smart and irrevocable rejection as was used by Monks at entrance upon their
Poverty, postquam abrenuncian conversatus fuerit inter Monachos. Novel. 5. cap.
5. abrenuncians hanc (substantiam) reliquit. cap 7. as upon other occasions,
Novel. 17. cap. 8. and Novel. 18. cap. 9. Cum saeculo abrenunciaverit. gloss.
Dedicare. ad Novel. 76. in praefat.
Cyprians phrase and and Abrenuncio Sathanae and operibus ejus, pompis, cultui,
Angelis and machinationibus ejus, and omnibus quae sub ipso sunt: I defy them
all. Clem. Roman. Constit. Apostol. lib. 7. cap. 41. vid. etiam lib-3 cap. 18.
Clement. Alexandrin paedagog. lib. 1. cap. 6. Cyrill. Alexandrin. contra
Julian. lib. 7. tom. 6. pa. 248. Cyrill. Hierosol. Cateches. Mystagog. 1.
Chrysostom. Homil. 21. ad pop. Antioch. tom. 1. pa 239, 244, 245. Homil. 47. in
Julian. pa. 544. and Homil. 6. in Coloss. 2 tom. 6. pa. 200, and 201. Nichol.
Cabasil. Liturg. expos. apud Biblioth. pat. Gr. tom. 1. pa. 203. Nicet Saracen.
tom. 2. pa. 283, 285. Sever. patriarch. Alexand. lib. de ritibus Bapt. apud
Biblioth. pat. Lat. tom. 7. pa. 530. Basil exhort. ad Bapt. Homil. 13. tom. 1.
pa. 115. lib. de Sp. sancto. cap. 27. Eli. Cretens. in Orat. 4. Gregor.
Nazianzeni. cap. 24. and in Orat. 19. cap. 13. Nicet. Serron. commentar. ad
ejusdem Gregor. Orat. 40. cap. 51. whence Gregory himself might say of
Baptism, it was, (...), a declaration for God against his adversaries, in
Orat. 32. sect. 56. tom. 1. pa. 520. so expounded by Elias Cretensis, col. 929.

For the Latins (besides Cyprian above) see Tertullian, lib. de spectac. cap.
4, 24. lib. de Idololat. cap. 6. lib. ad Martyr. cap. 2. lib. de corona. mil.
cap. 3. and cap. 13. de cultu faeminarum. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. Anima. cap.
Ambros Hexaem. lib. cap. 4. tom. 1. pa. 3. Comment, in Luc. 20. tom. 3. pa. 95.
Comment. in Coloss. 2. pa. 255. lib. de initiandis. ca. 2. tom, 4. pa. 163. and
lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 2. pa. 167. Hieron. Comment. in Amos. 6 tom. 5. pa.
115. Comment. in Matthew. 5. tom. 6. pa. 6. Comment. in 1. Timoth. 6. tom. 8. pa.
270. and de vera Circumcisione. tom. 9. pa. 77. Augustine. Epist. 23. ad
Bonifac. tom. 2. pa. 35. Epist. 89. contra Pelag. pa. 155. Concio. ad Catechum.
contra Judaeos. cap. 3, 4. tom. 6. pa. 23, 24. de Bapt. contra Donat. lib. 5.
cap. 15, and cap. 28. tom. 7. pa. 61, 65. sermon. 116. de Tempore. tom. 10. pa.
304. Homil. 2. de Bapt. in append. tom. 10. pa. 846. and de Symbolo ad Catech.
lib 4. cap. 1. Alchwin. Epist. ad Imperat. Carol. de Ceremon. Bapt. col. 1156.
de divinis officiis, c. 19. col. 1061, 1063. and Epist. 70. col. 1592. Salvian.
de gubernat. DEI. lib. 6. Bernard. Sermon. de duplici Bapt. Lombard. Sentent.
lib. 4. did. 6. Joan. Beleth. divinorum offic. explic. cap. 90. Council.
Calchuth. ca. 3. in Spelman. Council tom. 1. pa. 293. Synod Anglican. sub. anno,
786. apud Magdeburg. Centur. 8. cap. 9. de Synodis, and Centur. 9. cap. 6.
ritus circa Baptismum, Gratian. de Consecrat. did. 4. cap. 95. So all abroad
this has been received, and heretofore. Of later times, The Russes were
remembered before spitting upon the ground in defyance of the Devil, credo ut
hac ratione perpetuum illi dissidium indicent, says Joseph. Vicecom. de ritibus
Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 19. The Habassines or Ethiopians are no less earnest in
Pagets Christianogr. par. 1. pa. 165. The Cophri or Egiptians thus: I such a
one N. that am baptized, I do renounce the Devil and all his works, and all his
Angels, and all his pride, and all his worldly error, and every one that does
consent unto him, pa. 158. The nearer Danish Protestants continue it, by
Brochman. in Systhem. Theol. artic. 34. sect. 5. tom. 2. pa. 2017. Others I
forbear as near enough home, and well enough known. Vehementissima
frequentissimaque apud veteres patres hujus partis and commemoratio est and
commendatio; prorsus necessaria atque essentialis huic sacramento, quo
initiamur Deo and Christo: quod prorsus fieri nequit quin dermamus esse
Diaboli. So Ghamier. Panstrat. Cathol. par. 4. lib. 5. cap. 15. sect. 15.

Nor may it be impertinent to compare herewith the protestation of the Essenes
at their admission into their Order, wh^ e seems to have been a purification by
water, and more then ordinary. After a years Probationership without their
College, and two within, before they be received into fellowship, (says
Josephus, that knew them) They protest with great and solemn Oaths, To worship
God, observe Justice and Faith toward all men, not willingly to hurt any
(though commanded) but to hate the Evil and love the Good, especially to keep
faith to Governors, If ever exalted to any command to use power with sobriety
and moderation, to hate pomp and all worldly ostentation, to love the Truth and
strive to confute liars, to keep their hands from picking and stealing, the
soul pure from spotted with unjust gain to conceal Mysteries, hold fast
received Doctrins, etc. and with these oaths or adjurations they try, arm and
prepare those that enter into their Order. De Bello Judaico, lib. 2. cap 7. And
the rather view this protestation well, because it seems much Christian; the
whole Character of them there given agrees with Christ his Doctrine, and the
ancient Christians were either reputed Essenes, or were, or descended of them
(which consent might be the reason why our Savior, reproving the Scribes and
Pharisees often, yet never meddles with them; nay they are not mentioned in
Scripture at all) Whether the denying of the Faith, the Lord Redeemer, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, so often laid to the charge of some unhappie Apostates in
the later Scriptures of the New Testament (after the Messiah had been embraced
by them a while) may not have reference to after-Revocation of some such
precedent formal stipulation with God and pre-confederation against his enemy?
may deserve to be farther thought on. It Is said of the Nicholaitans and
Simonians, by Simon Peter, that they did deny the Lord that bought them, 2
Pet. 2.1. and by Jude the brother of James soon after, that They (the same it is
like) denied the only God and the Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 4. The Deceiver,
Antichrist, St John tells us, shall deny high points, both that Jesus is the
Christ, and the Father, and the Son, 1 Epist. 2.22. and Gamaliels Scholar to
his Disciple Timothy, If we deny ('it is not said How, Whom, or What) Christ will
deny us: (yet after seemingly expounded) If we return to infidelity ((...))
become plain Apostates, yet he cannot deny himself, 1 Timothy 2.12, 13, 14. Some
more formal abnegation may have been meant, (as agreeing meetly well with the
insinuation of these texts, and the Majesty of Scripture, whose state uses to
couch much in little) yea abjuration, and of weightier import then simple
dereliction, joined thereto negation; life that (...) of the great Apostle,
Matthew. 26.34, 35, 75. Mar. 14.30, 31, 72. Luc. 22.34. Jo. 13.39. compared with
Matthew. 26.74. and Mar. 14.71. As those vertual and interpretative denyals of
those that in a sort, held the Truth, but in unrighteousness; professing to
know God (they had not cast off that cloak) but in deeds denying him (their
lives were an interpretative, substantial, real abjuration) Tit. 1.16. may
not inconveniently be thought to cast a glance this way; with 1 Timothy 5.8. and 2 Timothy 3.5. Even the words and syllables of Divine Oracles are considerable, the
intimation of weight, the glances not to be neglected. Blessed is he that
reads and can understand. All illustrates the seriousness of Defying Satan,
his pride, Pomps, Vanities, Lusts, and ALL other HIS WORKS.


others, both fathers and their children, no age or almost another having left
it out, Admitting the baptized to be One of Us only upon holy condition of
public engagement from that day for ever: for Manens enim in pristino statu,
and mores suos and consuetudinem non relinquens, nequaquam rite ad Baptismum
venit. Origin. Homil. 22. in Luc. Hence that transmentation or change of mind,
from dead works to serve the living and true God, and to look for his son from
heaven, required among the past lower things of those on whom Baptism had
passed, Heb. 6.1. Laying by that foundation, (...), etc.) He that undertakes
not to reform all amiss, as well as believe in Christ aright, is to be barred
this Rite by St Augustins strict Order, lib. de fide and operibus, cap. ^1, 12.
Propterea, and prius dixi, and nunc dico, and dicere non disistam, siquis morum
vitia non correxit, nec sibi facilem paravit virtutem, ne baptizetur: Chrysostom.
Homil. 21. tom. 1. pa. 239. Non ideo abluimur ut delinquere desinamus, sed quia
desiimus: quoniam jam cord loti sumus. Tertullian. lib. de poenit: After much
dispute, Aquinas his conclusion settles on this, Manens in proposito peccati
non debet baptizari. part. 3. Quest. 68. art. 4. And Gregory de Valencia proves
it at large, in tom. 4. disput. 4. Quaest. 3. punct. 3. Nay abroad, apud gentes
etiam profanas usurpatum antiquitus fuit, ut qui initiari vellent prius toto
corpore abluerentur, haud dubie eo ipso testantes propositum innocentiae. Nam
ejus propositi sponsionem ab iis mystagogi exigebant, ut Libanius docet and
Lampridius, H. Grot. ad Matthew. 28.19. pa. 515. Both washing, and in implication
of innocence, among Heathens.
reformation and amendment of life, whatever he has been before, that now
henceforth he seriously promise and This solemn devout managing the work, makes
it the more deserve that obliging title, whereby the Latins (how properly I
enquire not) have thought good to render the originals by the name of a
SACRAMENT. Sacramentum dicitur quod jurisjurandi sacratione interposita
geritur, said Paulus in verb. significat: and Sacramento dicitur quod sacratur
fide interposita. Scaliger ad Festum. Thus is it more then a civil, a devout
and Religious giving our selves over to God and Christ.
sacredly vow to Manet aurem societas eousque donec in eodem consensu
perseveraverint (socii) at cum aliquis renunciaverit societati solvitur
societas, Justinian. Instit. 3. tit. 26. sect. 4.
forsake the Devil and all his works, (branded crimes and heinous offenses,
nay) the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world, Pompa est Diaboli, in
theatris spectacula, in Hippodromo cursus equorum, and venationes, and reliqua
omnis ejuscemodi vanitas, a qua postulans liberati sanctus ille Dei, Averte
inquit, oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem. Non ergo sis curiosus frequentia
spectaculorum, etc. Cyrill. Hierosolym. Cateches. Mystag. 1. vocis illius
recorderis, quam dum sacris initiareris, emisisti, Abrenuncio tibi Sathana, and
pompae tuae, and cultuti tuo. Circa margaritarum enim curam in sania est pompa
Sathanica. Aurum enim cepisti, non ut corpus vincias sed ut pauperes solvas and
enutrias. Dic igitur continuo, Abrenuncio tibi, Sathana: Nihil hac voce tutius,
si ipsam per opera exhibeamus. Chrysostom. Homil. 21. pa. 244. tom. 1. Pompa vero
sathanica sunt (...), page sequ. Of the same esteemed detestation and professed
abjuration are all lewd rimes, wanton songs, obscaene dances, etc. Thou did
renounce them all, devoting thy self to Christ's service, says he, Remember thy
word and that promise, and do not by the present or too morrows sports and
revels, renounce that renunciation, Id. in Homil. 47. in Julian. pa. 544. Quid
enim in circo faciebat, (says Satan) atque ibi furias, lites, insanas voces,
manesque victorias, (Cum jam a se alienus sibimet videbatur) videbat? Quid in
theatro faciebat renunciator turpium voluptatum? Quid in amphitheatro -- etc?
Haec omnia mea post renunciationem invasit: Meus esse voluit, and Mea
concupivit. Goncio ad Catechum. cap. 4. tom. 6. pa. 24. vid. etiam lib. de
Symbolo ad Catechumen, lib. 4. cap. 1. Quae est enim in Baptismo salutari
Christianorum prima confessio? Quae, sc. nisi ut renunciare se diabolo ac
pompis ejus, atque spectaculis and operibus protestentur? Ergo spectacula, and
pompae etiam juxta nostram professionem sunt opera Diaboli. Quomodo, o
Christian, spectacula post Baptismum sequeris, quae opus esse Diaboli
confiteris? Renunciasti semel Diabolo and spectaculis ejus, ac per hoc necesse
est, prudens and sciens dum ad spectacula remeas, ad Diabolum te redire
cognoscas. Salvian. Massil. de gubernat. Dei, lib. 6. The gallants of our age
would account this precise Doctrine: that gaming, racing, staging, hunting,
dancing, etc. should be a breach of Articles of their Christendom, and a
violation of the Covenant of their God! If they have been Christened (they know
how) let them think again, and own this preciseness of severe life for no less
then sacred and sworn duty, or they are as they are. Theatralibus ludis qui dat
operam, venationibus, equorum cursibus ac certaminibus, vel desistat vel
rejiciatur. So the Apostles Canons; let them leave their vanity or their
profession, lib. 8. cap. 38. Scaenicus (sive vir, sive mulier) auriga,
gladiator, Cursor stadii, Olympius, Choraules, Citharaedus, Lyrista, no less,
ib. O, for the power of our Religion! that we were but as we are BOUND to be!
and the conditions of our Faith seen in our works! Then should not infidelity
stand before us, but GOD be glorified in all his Saints.
Gaming, racing, Stageplays, light and wanton songs, pranking with Jewels, etc.
so far the fathers extended the meaning of this Article of agreement) and all
the sinful lusts of the flesh: Renunciasti Diabolo and operibus ejus, mundo ut
luxuriae ejus, ac voluptatibus, as grave lib. de initiand. cap. 2
St Ambrose made bold after to remember the baptized and hold him to his
Bargain: Lastly, to Remember what before of the present mention and premonition
of those things were as in the Articles of the present Hebrew Creed, De
justorum mercede, de poena iniquorum, etc. And compare the Christians ancient
and usual repetition of his Creed, by way of answer to such Interrogation, Do
thou believe in God the Father Almighty? etc. Of the Apostles times thus much
is laid together by the Centurists: Ante Baptismatis impertitionem, quod quidem
ad adultos attinet etc. Before any thing was done, they taught what Baptism
was, and why used, what the Doctrine of the Gospel and true faith in Christ. For
John is said to have preached a Baptism of repentance, Act. 3.24. The Apostles
first taught of Christ, of repentance and Baptism, and then, those that
received the word by repenting and believing, they Baptized, Act. 2.38, 41. Nor
would Philip admit the Samaritans, till they heard and received the Gospel,
Act. 8.12. The Eunuch being well instructed of the Gospel and Faith in Christ,
out of the Prophet, Esai 53. desires to be baptized. Philip conditions, if thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may. He answers, I believe that Jesus
Christ is the son of God, ver. 35, etc. Unde haud obscure intelligitur
baptizandos oportuisse fidei suae confessionem ante Baptismum edere. Whence is
plain, that profession of faith went before admission to profession of it.
Magdeburg. Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 6. Col. 382. Among those constitutions are
said to have been St Peter's, we have both instruction into the faith to be
baptized into, God increate, Jesus the only begotten son of God, the Holy
Ghost, Divine Providence, etc. to the last of Resurrection of the body and life
everlasting, and personal assent testified by word, if not signed by the hand,
Aggregor and credo and baptizor in unum and ingenitum meum verum Deum
omnipotentem, patrem Christi, Creatorem and opificem omnium, ex quo Omnia: and
in Dominum Jesum unigenitum filium ejus, primogenitum omnis creaturae, etc.
Crucifixum sub Pontio Pilato, etc. Constitut, Apostol. lib. 7. cap. 39, and 41.
The continuance whereof is attested by the Greek and Latin Fathers.

Gregor. Nazianzen. Orat. 40. cap. 51. tom. 1. pa. 671. Chrysostom. Homil. 40.
in 1 Cor. 15. tom. 5. in N. Testam. pa. 451. Cyrill. Hierosolym. Catech.
Mystagog. 1. pa. 230. Atque tunc unusquisque interrogabatur, An crederet in
Nomen Patris, and filii, and sp. Sancti? and confessi estis confessionem
salutarem. Cateches. Mystag. 2. pa. 232. sever. patriarch. Alexander: in
Biblioth. pat. Latin. tom. 7. pa. 530. Joan. Damascen: Historia de Barlaam,
etc. cap. 19. pa. 867. Basil. in exhortat. ad Bapt. Homil. 13. tom. 1. 415.
Nicet. de ordine qui observatur cum quis a Saracenismo, etc. Biblioth. pat. Gr.
tom. 2. pa. 288. Looking up toward heaven, and with hands stretched out
thither, the Minister bids, Christo assentire, omnibusque sacris verbis, quae a
Deo tradita sunt. Dionys. in Hierarch. Eccles.

Tertullian. lib. de bapt. cap. 6. lib. de pudicitia, cap. 9. Cyprian. Epist.
70. pa. 101. Epist. 75. pa. 116. and Epist. 77. Baron. ad ann. 259. number. 23.
tom. 2. col. 675. Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 7. tom. 4. de spir.
Sancto. lib. 2 cap. 11. Augustine. Confession. lib. 8. cap. 2. Concio ad
Catechumen. contra Judaeos. cap. 1, 5, 6, etc. Homil. 3. ad Neophyt. lib. de
fide and operibus, cap. 11. sermon. 2. de Bapt. in append. tom. 10. Hieron.
contra Lucifer. cap. 5. tom. 2. pa. 167. in proverb. 2 tom. 8. pa. 75. Symbol.
Ruffini. tom. 9. pa. 63. Council. Laodicen. ca. 46. de redditione fidei
baptizandorum, Council. Brac. 2. cap. 1. apud. Caranz. fol. 289. Salvian.
Massil. lib. de gubernat. Dei 6. Alchwin. de divinis officiis cap. 14. col.
1061, 1063. and cap. 21. col. 1069. Epistol. ad imperat. Carol. de ceremoniis
Bapt. col. 1155. and Epist ad Dominum regem. col. 1489. Jo. Beleth. divinorum
officiorum explicatio. c. 110. Gratian. de Consecrat. did. 4. c. 37, and 59.
Lombard. sentent. lib. 4. did. 6. Porro, cuncti ad Baptismum venientes fidem
suam profiteri debent, and exponere ad quid petendum venerint ad ecclesiam,
Calvin. Instit. 4. cap. 15. sect. 19. and H. Grot. in Evangel. Matthew. 28.19.
pa. 518. From which declaration of faith so often mentioned, so usually
required, so commonly made, and in an orderly way never to be left out, the
seal thereon was called (...), a rite of obsignation into the faith, by St.
Basil. and in Tertullian, obsignatio Baptismi. lib. de Bapt. cap. 13.

Nor may all this want foundation of Divine likely authority (if we take
probable guesses and likely interpretations) much may be derived from the
equity of Act. 8.37. (but an example, yet imitable) Do thou believe? If thou
do, thou may; so he did and was. I thought thus, when (besides from the
Centurists before) I had a stipulation from Beza, in his larger annotations on
the place, G. Cassander, in one of his Treatises about the middle of his Works,
pa. 752. Joseph. Vicecom. de ritibus Bapt. lib. 2. cap. 23. and he that so
lately wrote from Rome, Joan. Bapt. Casalius, de veteribus Christianorum
ritibus, cap. 5. pa. 35. No other might be that confession of hope, Heb. 10.22.
made, it seems, when the body was washed in pure water. Cornel a Lapide,
Estius, and Beza so understand, and the consequence of text favors and
furthers; the very word of illightening or Baptism (so expressed by the
Syriack) follows soon after, In chap. 3.1. Christ is the Highpriest of our
confession, him we then confessed, or the subject of the work, in chap. 6.1, 2.
the Apostle eggs on himself with the loytering Synagogue, to leave speech of
the beginning of Christ and make on, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, faith in God, (Do thou believe in God, the
Father, etc.) the Doctrine of Baptismes, imposition of hands, Resurrection of
the dead, and eternal judgment ( which two last were the two last articles of
the present Hebrews Creed, before pa. 18. whereon St Augustine, Haec omnia
pertinere ad initia Neophytorum satis aperteque testatur scriptura, lib. de
fide and operibus, cap. 11. And, what speech was this of the beginning of
Christ? Sermonem inchoationis, vocat doctrinam quae tradi solet iis qui Christo
initiantur: quae superius appellavit (cap. 5.12.) elementa exordii sermonum
Christi: says Estius on the place. And both Beza and Cornelius a Lap. make the
five following particulars so many heads of Christian Catechism, whereof
account was given and required before the Mystery: Respicit ad professionem
symboli, quam faciebant baptizandi, so Estius again. Or, the Doctrine of
Baptismes, may be a head to all the rest, which were so many branches of
Doctrine, then delivered; the rather for that parenthesis with which those words
in Luthers Edition of the Original, are enclosed. Heed well the construction
of the Greek. And (from Rabanus) the consequence and order of Matthew. 28.19. Go,
Teach and Baptize: and Matthew. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized.

To all not unsuitable may be added remembrance, that the Apostles Creed was
wont to be called Symbolum, as the common watchword wherein all believers in
Christ were to agree. Quod signum in nostr. lingua vertitur vel Cognitio.
Quando enim dividebantur Apostoli per totuma orbem praedicationis causa,
dederunt illud praedicatori, ut siquis talia confiteretur qualia ibi dicuntur,
cognitionem daret se a Christi Apostolis sive a successoribus eorum didicisse.
Alchwin. in Epist ad Imperat. Carolum. col. 1153. which Ruffinus had more at
large before: inter opera Hieron. tom. 9. Epist. 19. pa. 63. If so, this might
be the larger form of words into which Baptism was made; dilating upon that of
Scripture more contracted, Matthew. 28.19. Of great use for continuance, to
maintain consent of Doctrine.


believe in God and to serve him (accordingly) which the Catechumene was after
taught to have accomplishment in [to Remember here again what before of the
Proselytes sincere undertaking to fulfill the whole Law of Moses, pa. 18. or
else no Matriculation into the S^nagogue; especially from Saint Paul, Every one
Circumcised is bound to keep it entire, Gal. 5.3. and add thereto both what out
of Oecumenius hereafter of the intimation (by being baptized into Moses, 1 Cor.
10.2.) of a Covenant to observe that Law, and what Mr. Seldom has upon another
occasion, -- nec cooptatum quempiam, qui futuram legis Mosaicae observationem
in se non reciperet: de Jure Not. etc. lib. 7. cap. 12. And compare therewith
that obligation to obey Laws Christian, and engagement to all moral and holy
strictness preimposed and conditioned, as well as after required and expected
of all those came over to Jesus of Nazareth from the wilderness of this world
by water and the Holy Ghost, In Heb. 6.1. Repentance from dead works is among
the lower foundations, above which is required much exaltation, as before. The
same Apostle having remembered, a Layer of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, soon infers, those that have so believed in God, should (by a faithful
saying and worthy special remembrance) be careful to maintain good works, and
inforces it again, for necessary uses, and that they be not unfruitful, Tit.
3.5, 8, 13. Our Saviors Canon is most considerable, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go, make
Disciples Baptizing, etc, And teach them to observe all that I have commanded,
in sincere performance, and an absolute integrity of all obedience, that no
trifle be left out. Whereupon, to light it this way, thus Jo. Ferus, Nequis
satis esse putet semel tinctum esse ac professum Evangelicam fidem, RURSUS
DOCENDI SUNT quibus modis progredi possint ad perfectionem Evangelicae
pietatis, Quasi dicat; A me nihil omissum est quod pertineat ad parandum
salutem aeternam; Vestrum erit, nedum fidem docere, sed etiam vitam and mores
informare. Nulla enim fides est quae opus Dei non habet, and adeo non prodest
Baptismus, ut si non servemus quod notat Baptismus, id est, mortificationem
carnis and innovationem vitae, vehementer etiam obsit. Comment. in Matthew. lib.
4, pa. 302. and St Hierom, according to his wont, judiciously and gravely: The
order is here much to be regarded, Jussit Apostolis ut primum docerent
universas gentes, deinde fidei intingerent sacramento, and post fidem ac
Baptisma, quae essent observanda praeciperent. Ac ne putemus levia esse quae
jussa sunt and pauca, addidit: Omnia quecunque mandari vobis. Ut quicunque
crediderint, qui in Trinitate fuerint baptizati, omnia faciant quae praecepta
sunt, Comment in Matthew. 28. tom. 6. pa. 60. Plini gives account to Trajan the
Emperor of the Christians then so early meetings, Eos sc. se sacramento solenni
obstringere solere, ne surta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne
fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent, Epist. lib. 10. Epist. 97.
and from him, Tertullian: in Apologet. cap. 2. Dionysius, about those times.
Tum ei exponit rationem perfectam, qua ad Deum accedendum est, explanataque
eidem divina vita, and, ut ita dicam, conversatione, ex eo praeterea quaerit.
Number ita instituat vivere? Cum promisit, manum ejus capiti admovet, etc. Dionys.
Areop. ca. 2. Justine Martyr was not long after. Quo vero modo nos Deo
dicaverimus, exponemus, says he, -- Quicunque persuasi fuerint and crediderint
vera esse quae a nobis traduntur and dicuntur ac vivere se ita posse
receperint, orare jejunantes and petere a Deo priorum peccatorum remissionem
docentur, nobis cum illis and orantibus and jejunantibus; and so they are
Baptized. St Augustine doubts not the Eunuch was thus articled with, Act. 8. in
lib. de fide and operibus, cap. 9. The Fathers have their works full of what
fasting, prayer, and all the parts and works of holy penitence (see Act. 2.38.)
were required to cleanse and prepare that vessel was to hold the holy water of
Divine Baptism, (the Renunciation before was a part of that purification) which
yet was not to be powered in neither, but with all possible obligation to keep
it so, sc. to obey God in all his written Laws, and to follow the Lamb
whith^rsoever he goes. See more in Clem. Roman. Constitution. lib. 3. cap 18.
and lib. 8. cap. 40. Tertullian lib. de Baptismo, cap. 20. Baron* o^ an. 259.
number. 11. basil. de sancto Bapt. lib. 1. t^m. 1. pa 558 Cyrill Hierosolym.
Catech. 3. Gregor. Nazianzen, Orat. 40. cap. 38, and 51. Augustine. lib. de fide
and operibus, from cap. 6. to cap. 13. and de tempore sermon. 116. tom 10. pa.
305. Damascen. Histor. Barlaam. cap. 19 pa. 867. Council. Carthag. 4. can. 85.
taken into the Decree, de Consec. Did. 4. c. 60. (...). Marc. Eremita de
Baptismo, in Biblioth. pat. Gr. tom. 1. pa 918. And Gregory Nazianzene, (...);
the turning over a new leaf. Carm. Iambic. 15. tom. 2. pa. 202. Of later times;
Hominem, qui baptizatur, obligare seipsum ad juge Dei sacrificium, testis est
D. Paulus, Epist. ad Romans 6. ver. 1, 2, 3. Shall we continue in sin, that grace
may abound? God forbid! How shall we that are dead unto sin, live any longer
therein? Are ye ignorant that they who are Baptized into Christ, are Baptized
into his death? Being buried with him by Baptism unto sin, to be raised unto
newness of life? Brockman, Artic. 34. sect. 3. So Israel undertook
sanctification and vow of obedience in order to their Law; Israel according to
the Spirit, the same; and either at admission: Into Mr. Hookers mind it came
to bring them both together. Every baptized soul receiving grace at the hands
of God, tieth likewise it self for ever after, to the observation of his Law,
no less then the Jews by Circumcision bound themselves ( Gal. 5.3.) to the Law
of Moses. Eccles. Polity. lib. 5. pa. 338. and Mr. Seldom no less,
Praefecturae juridicae quae baptismo praeerat profitebatur proselytus ipse
majorennis (masculus qui annum decimum tertium, foemina quae duodecimum
superaverat) legem Mosaicam se servaturum. Minorum vero nomine, idem ipsum
profitebatur praefectura ipsa, uti in Christianismo susceptores minorennium seu
parvulorum, de Synedriis vet. Ebraeor. lib. 1. cap. 3. pa. 34. The traduction
sought for, made out plain. How Heathen initiation did promise innocence,
enough was said before.
keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and to serve him truly all the days of
his life,] without which no Baptism, or whereinto this did lead, and publicly
and solemnly engage,

These, and more, and the whole grave and ancient dress of this most holy
Ceremony had Sacrament, as it was apparelled and set forth in elder days by
those ancient and holy Ne transgrediaris terminos antiquos quos posuerunt
patres tui, Proverb. 22.28. sc. ne transgrediaris terminos fidei, quos
Catholici ab initio statuere doctores. Hieron. in loc. tom. 8. pa. 104.
Fathers (in their ministration) and martyrs, who lived and died in and for the
truth of Jesus Christ, confessedly before the growth of superstition, I believe
it would be no impossible thing to render it the fruit of labor, encouraged
with Et si quid tecum dissentiat priscae veritatis indagator, dum Apostolicas
voces, dumque rejectis fabulis, veteris ecclesiae commentationes, Reique
publicae (cujus post Deum sumus) consectetur vestigia, impunitatem meretur.
This at least. Ab. Wheloc. fol. 4. Epist. ad lect.
impunity, and assisted by due means of furnishing out so important and
needful a search, to prove, That they derive themselves (probably) from a fair
parity and resemblance of the like doings, proceedings, undertakings,
performances annexed to a kind of Sacramental Baptismall initiation into the
truth on the other side of the Covenant. And as it is most certain they have
been in all Hi ritus omnes (Catechesis, scrutinium, Abrenunciatio, fidei
professio) ab ipsa Baptismi institutione habue^unt originem. Chamier. Panstrat.
Cathol. 4.5.15.19. That mighty Champion of Truth, and incomparable confounder
of all Popery; whom not all the Jesuits in Christendom shall ever be able to
confute in this world, or the world to come: says Mr. Bolton of him, in his
Instruct. for comforting of Consc. pa. 386. And before: Eorum (rituum) ordines
duos explico: Unum legitimorum, alienorum alterum: Priorem qui oritur ex ipsa
sacramenti natura atque ejus institutione; as these: Though he would have all
discretion used (which no good man but wishes) in the application; To whom,
where, when, etc.
ages (much, for that has been said before) and states of the Church, and to
have come from the beginning, so that they were before likewise, even before
our Saviors incarnation, in that other Hemesphere of the true believing
Synagogue, which was enlightened by the face of God from Moses and the
Prophets. Which if, how likely they must not but have been to come through his
and his Apostles hands? And if this, of what rare use and consequence it would
be (being well proved) is left to judge, though for the weightiness is hard, in
few words to determine, or many.

Certainly for Quo peraeque adversus universas haereses jam hinc prae^udicatum
sit, Id esse verum quodcunque primum, Id esse adulterum quodcunque posterius.
Tertullian. adversus Prax. cap. 2. Ne innitaris prudentiae tuae. Proverb. 3.5.
Prudentiae autem suae innititur, qui ea, quae sibi agenda, vel dicenda
videntur, patrum decretis ante ponit. Hieron, in Proverb. 3.
1200. or 1400. years such Interrogations, Responsions, Vow, Promise,
Profession, Confession, etc. with sureties, and the interposition of diverse
other such requisits and performances, of solemnity and use enough, have been
continued (beside the bare and simple act of Baptizing) by order: And if nearer
the fountain and up to the very well head (as far as books and lights of
information help us to see) and also beyond; if on this side of the Cross and
the other, and on both sides nearest, how unlike is it but the best interceding
times of our Savior and his Apostles might have them likewise, and both take
and give them? take them with one hand from the times before, and convey them
(with Baptism again) to the times following? They being in themselves such
things as are not Ritus tamen illos servandos judicamus, qui sine peccato
servari possunt and ad ordinem bonum prosunt. Confess. Augustan. art. 15. vid.
etiam Cassand. Consultation. cap. de Ceremon. Baptismi pa. 84.
evil, but grave and good, of no evident or probable iniquity in use or
consequence, and so far from superstition (unless men's opinion make them so, as
by enhancing their necessity, or ascribing to their effects, etc.) that they
tend openly to edifycation, and the better, Omnia Decenter and ordine fiant. 1. Corinthians. 14.40. Ergo, ersi alia desint quae ad decorem Sacramenti instituta
sunt, non ideo minus est verum, sacramentum est sanctum, siverbum sit ibi and
Elementum. Nam and in hoc Sacramento (Baptismi) and in aliis, quaedam solent
fieri ad decorem and honestatem sacramenti, quaedam ad substantiam and causam
sacramenti pertinentia: De substantia hujus sacramenti sunt verbum and
elementum, Caetera ad solennitatem ejus pertinent. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4.
did. 3. -- Ceremonias, quae sacramenti hujus dignitatem and vim commendent,
tanquam verba quaedam visibilia, etc. Cassander, ubi supra.
handsomer, fuller, if not faster inocculation or graffing wild men into that
holy stock which is Christ's mystical body, the Elect company of most holy
Believers, his beloved Church. For how handsome is it, if those few who have
the hap or rather happiness to be brought into the fold with Christ's little
flock, Renunciantes stetisse recto corpore, ad solemn occidentem spectasse,
manus protendisse, in coelum erexisse, complicasse, invicem collisisse,
spiritum impulisse, atque etiam in terram spuere; and singulorum ratio
demonstrata, apud Joseph. Vicecom. de antiquis rit. Bapt. lib. 2. cap. 19.
disclaim his enemy (the roaring Lion) upon their entrance, and have with them
sureties ( fide-jussores is St Augustines common title, Sponsores and
promissores in others) that they do and will ever after defy and Renounce that
Satan, those malign, opposite, adverse powers, that are most contrary to him?
as by all concessions and confessions, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh are
most notoriously such and undeniably. Of what great obligation must it needs be
to hold men fast and close in, ever after to the Christian Law, when, (and at
the very admission) the admitted shall enter upon no other terms but express
and avowed undertaking, condition and promise, that he will ever after keep
thereto? How complete must it needs make the present action cannot but speak it
self out of being Baptized into the Faith of Christ, if the heads or articles
of that faith be then and there distinctly As in the Baptism of Prince
Josaphat, in Jo. Damasc. History, chap. 19. St. Augustine has an excellent
treatise, of the Explication of Christian Religion, by giving the sum and heads
of the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, before Baptism: de Catechizandis
rudibus, tom. 4. pa. 295, etc. The like is in Gregory Nazianzene, in Orat. 40.
in Sanctum Bapt. cap. 51. See also Augustine, Sermon. 130. ad Competentes.
repeated and rehearsed as the particular covenants of that Indenture or
Agreement, Decret. 1. distinct. 23. cap. 6.
solet enim plus timere quod singulariter pollicetur, quam quod generalis
sponsione concluditur) to which the Olim in Baptismo fidem Christianam
professuri public in coelum suspiciebant, ac manus dextras in altum erigebant,
adhibito juramento coram testibus: ac Jusjurandum manu baptizati subscriptum,
ejusque annulo obsignatum in tabulas referebatur, uti ex patribus, etc. Cornel.
a Lap. in 1 Pet. 3.21. As 'twere in accomplishment of what the Prophet Esai
foretold, upon the pouring forth of these mystical waters: One shall say, I am
the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with the hand unto the Lord: and surname himself by the name of
Israel, Isa. 44.4. Scribet in manu, DEI SUM, ut novo tyrocinio servitutis
Christi se militem glorietur. Hieron. in loc. tom. 4 pa. 145. Intuentemque in
coelum and manus tendentem jubet (Hierarcha) Christo assentire, omnibusque
sacris verbis quae a Deo tradita sunt. Dionys. Hierarch. Postquam autem
renunciarunt, convertit eos ad orientem, and ait tribus vicibus: -- Consentio
tibi Christ Deus Ego N. qui baptizor, and omni doctrinae quae revelata est a
te divinitus per prophetas and Apostolos and Sanctos Patres. Confiteor quoque
and credo and baptizor in te and in patre tuo, and in sancto spiritu tuo, etc.
Severus patriarch. Alexand. lib. de ritibus Bapt. in Biblioth. pat. tom. 7. pa.
530. which is yet retained in those Countries among the Cophti, ( or Egophti,
Egiptians) to this day. Paget. Christianog. lib. 1. pa. 158. (...). Nichol.
Cabasil. Liturg. exposit. cap. 1. and vid. Nicet. de ordine qui observatur, cum
quis a Saracenismo, etc. loco supra citat. (...). Cyrill. Hieros. Catech.
Mystag. 1. Taking all together: Fidem professuros in coelum suspexisse, ac
manus dextras in altum erexisse; professionem public and alta voce fieri
solitam; testes in ea adhibitos; jusjurandum additum; eam quoque in tabulas
relatam, and profitentis vel alterius manu subscriptam; ac demum annulo
obsignatam; eorum omnium rations allatas, vid. apud Joseph. Vicecom. de
antiqu. ritibus, lib. 2. cap. 27. All this belongs to the manner, the grave
and circumstantical, studied serious way of acting in this ministration.
hand and seal of public and deliberate consent, are then and there to be
affixed? As accordingly, how frequent and wonderfull-powerful use, the (4)
Fathers (that well understood these things, See Tertullian. de Coron. cap. 13.
Chrysostom. Homil. 21. ad pop. Antioch. and Homil. 47. in Sanctum Julianum.
Augustine. Sermon. 116. ad competent. and Conc. ad Catechumen: adversus Judaeos.
tom. 6. Cyrill. Hieros. Catechis. Mystag. 1. Nicet: Commentar. in Gregor.
Nazianzen. Orat. 40. The sum of Baptism, is a compact with God, ac proinde vel
maximo in metu omnes esse, atque omni custodia animas nostras servare debemus,
ne hoc pactum violasse comperiamur. Nam cum ad mutua hominum pacta firmanda
Deus medius adhibeti solcat, quantum quaeso periculum est, ne foedera cum Deo
ipso contracta pertregisse reperiamur? ac praeter alia peccata ipsius etiam
mendacii apud veritatis tribunal rei peragamur? Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 40. cap.
8. May it not be said of all here, as our learned Countreyman (but not taking
in all his particulars) upon like occasion? Videris quam fideliter,
rationabiliter and prudenter haec omnia tradita sunt nobis observanda: Nemo
Catholicus contra ecclesiae authoritatem, Nemo sobrius contra rationalem
consu^tudinem, Nemo fidelis contra pietatis intelligentiam certare audeat.
Alchwin. Epistol* ^0.
before time and negligence had frozen them into dull and useless forms) made
of them in their holy and divine tractates and Sermons, ad populum Christianum,
is known to all those very well that have read their Works.

I said, some few appendants of Baptism: But might I not as well, more and the
most of old Christianity to have been in the several particulars as so many
branches slipped off from the elder Synagogue, and transplanted to the ornament
of new Sion, Christ's Catholic Church? the rather for that S^ Augustine
doubted not HER Truth to be coaevall with the world, and clothed only with a
new name of late, for substance, to have been since the beginning. For,
speaking of that the immortal soul has to trust to to convey it hence to God,
In lib. de vera religione, cap. 10. tom. 1. pa. 303.
Ea est nostris temporibus Christiana religio, says he, quam cognoscere ac
sequi, securissima and certissima salus est; That can do this alone which we
now call Christian Religion, the surest guide to know and follow. Which later
date (now he Retractat. lib. 1. cap. 13. tom. 1. pa. 10.
after expounds to be meant only of the Name, not Thing, Secundum hoc Nomen,
non secundum rem cujus est nomen, Nam res ipsa quae nunc Christiana Religio
nuncupatur, erat and apud antiquos, nec defuit ab initio generis humani, quo
usque ipse Christus veniret in carne, Undo vera religio quae jam erat, caepit
appellari Christiana. Cum enim post resurrectionem ascensionemque in coelum
coepissent Apostoli praedicate, and plurimi crederent, primum apud Antiochiam,
sicut scriptum est, appellati sunt discipuli Christiani, Act. 11.26. Propterea
dixi, Haec est nostris temporibus Christiana religio; non quia prioribus
temporibus non fuit, sed quia posterioribus hoc nomen accepit. For that we call
Christian Religion (his meaning is) was of old, never but among mankind since
the beginning, till Christ, of whom it was NAMED Christian, For when after his
death and resurrection, his Apostles preached him and were believed; Then were
men called Christians first at Antioch: And therefore said I, the Christianity
of our times, not because it was not sooner, but of later times was begun to be
so called. So indeed: Truth is from the beginning; coaevall with the world:
Gospel truth the light and glory of all ages, from the same point of duration
with the Sun of the Firmament: But not of equal brightness; for it has shined
sometimes dimmer, sometimes clearer, as the same Father again, sometimes under
vail, sometimes revealed, as Type or Reality, Shadow or Substance. Nor is that
but worthy of all acceptance, as rooted in truth, and grounded on much
observation all abroad, of the singularly judicious H. Grotius, fit here to be
called up to be heard speak again, Pleraque veteris Christianismi a Judaeis,
most of Christian is borrowed from Judah and Jerusalem. It had been to be
wished (as he was most able) that he had, while he lived, set himself on work
about traduction and to imbody the particulars: No inquiry could be more
useful then what might have produced satisfaction, in our darkest times
(because remote from the first spreading of light) about what is pregnantly
insinuated in Romans 11.17. the graffing in of that Olive Tree which is wild by
nature, the Gentiles, upon the stock, or instead of the broken branches of
decayed Israel, that once most fertile and truebred natural Olive Tree; wherein
it yet stands and florishes by faith of that truth, the unbelief whereof in that
wretched infidel, both brake him off at first, and makes him yet continue a
dead and sapless stick fit for the fire. Which till, and from better abilities,
answering the difficulty, shall please God to set some fitter hand on work, to
go through with it, let the needfulness and usefulness excuse this essay.

Where (omitting, though not but remembering, what we have under our hands, of
the Hebrew parentage of our two great Sacraments (Let But know* Reader, that as
I had observed and digested these considerations, there came to my hands a very
useful treatise this way, called THEOLOGIA JVDAEORVM, Sive Opus (vere aureum)
in quo res ipsa quae nunc Christiana Religio nuncupatur, etiam apud antiquos
fuisse, priusquam Christus veniret in carne, ex Hebraeorum libris ostenditur;
The Author Joseph de Voisin a Frenchman, and of Bordeaux, Printed the last year
at Paris, 1647. His scope the same with mine; and for so far as he has gone,
and those speculations he has taken in hand (for of that nature his enquiries
are, but speculations; nor has he more then begun, as of Gods Unity; Essence,
Attributes of Eternity, immensity, incorruptibility, etc. according to the
Schools; so far) he keeps to his text very close, and makes good his title with
much faelicity of success. Good luck may he have with his honor, and a
prosperous journey in this his progress for new discovery, to spin out his
thread to full length and satisfaction of all lookers on as he has begun. That
I borrowed not of him, an inspection of the things will be my best and real
justification; Whether he may of me, Time will show. Let Knowledge prosper by
all means, and Truth shine out every day clearer and clearer by whomsoever. I
cannot but love the name of CHRIST, and what I find of HIM wheresoever:
especially what lays deepest, and toward the bottom of time, giving opposition
to his open professed enemies. That sweet name is my hope, be my Comfort in
life and death, and after death, even for ever and ever.
first be called to mind what I somewhere read in the exchange of Letters
between Dr. Hammond and Dr. Cheynell, sc. that Confession of sins, Prayer,
Lection. Benediction, and the whole ordered form of Divine public service, is
said there to have come into the Church from the Synagogue, for which is
alleged the famous Morney du Plessy, lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 3. Then, to fit
the body with a head not unanswerable, add that the title of (...) (which in it
self betokens Romans 13.6. Exodus 24.13. and Pasors Lexicon on the new Testament,
page 296.
public employment or service, and by first Christian Governors was laid hold
of to denote their public sacred service) is from the old by the new Testament
conveyed to our later days; yea is in the new both of the new and old, and from
both, through the current of ages, conveyed down to ours. (Nor offers this any
cross to whatever is or seems established now: for a new Directory is nothing
else but an Established Order for Public Sacred Service or Liturgy, and the
old Liturgy was nothing but a public agreed on Direction for sacred Service or
Worship; both to further unity and consent in the things of HIM is ONE, and
long since used as expository one of the other.)

For, as to the Old first, in that translation the learned observe our Savior
and his Apostles to have been more conversant then in their own native
original, because therewith their allegations are found better to agree, then
(as it is come to us) their Hebrew edition, the public service of the Temple
there (most what Sacerdotall as well as Leviticall, and spiritual in offering
Prayer, Praise and Sacrifice, as well as corporal in works of outward
servility) is delivered out unto us by the title of (...), as these places do
evince: Number. 8.22, 25, 26. and chap. 18. ver. 7.21, 23, 31. 1 Chronicles. 6.32. cap.
24. ver. 3, and 19. and cap. 28. last, 2 Chronicles. 8.14. cap. 31.2, 4. and cap. 3,
10, 16. Sapient. solom. 18.21. Sapient. Sirack 50.21. 2 Maccab. 4.14. To do
either work is worded to us (...), Exodus 28.35, and 43. cap. 29.30. cap. 30.20.
cap. 35.19. and cap. 38. last, Number. 8.6, and 31. cap. 4.3, and 26. cap. 16.9.
cap. 18.7, 21. and 23. Deuteron. 10.8. and cap. 18.5, and 7. 1 Chronicles. 6.32.
cap. 23.13, and 27. 2 Chronicles. 5.14. cap. 13.10. cap. 23.6. cap. 29.11. cap.
31.2. and cap. 35.3. Nehem 10.35. Ezekiel. 40.46. cap. 42.14. cap. 43.19. cap. 44.
ver. 15, 16, 17, 19, and 27. and cap. 45.4. Daniel 7.10. Joel, 1.9, 14. and
cap. 2.17. Besides the Wisdom of Sirach. cap. 4.15. cap. 45.19. and cap. 50.15.
and 1 Maccab. 10.42. Even as Philo tells us the Priests had in the Temple, Bread
(unleavened) and Salt (unmixed) thereby different from others, and it was
(...), a reward of their Ministry or public service they performed there. And
Joachim the high priest, and all they that waited before the LORD, (...),
offered the daily sacrifice and prayers and voluntary donations of the people
with their loins in sackcloth, Judeth 4.15. But above all, in 1 Chronicles. 16.4.
where the following verses give upon record the manner how the Priests did
perform this work of (...), or public Ministry: to wit, by Confessing with a
loud voice and praising the LORD, the God of Israel, and saying, O confess unto
Jehovah and call upon his Name, make known his works unto the People, etc. as
it follows, (and is a composition of the fifteen first verss of the 105.
Psalm, joining thereto the whole 96, and the last of the fourth paragraph or
book of the Psames, according to the Hebrew division, which is with us the 106.
Blessed be Jehovah the God of Jsrael for ever and ever, and let all the people
say, Amen) whereon is recorded soon after, ver: 37. They thus praised Jehovah
and left there before the Ark Asaph and his brethren, (...), to Minister thus
over against the Ark of JEHOVAH from day to day: Nor is any doubt but they
continued so doing from age to age, for so long after as Simon the son of Onias
his time (whose Vid. Joseph. Antiqu. lib. 12. ca. 4.
story is within 200 years before Christ) the wise son of Sirah has left
described the then service of the Temple much according, sc. by Psalmody,
Prayer, Prostration; and all the parts of worship till the honor of the Lord
was given complete, (...), and they had finished all his service. cap. 50.20,
21, etc. Further, by another conjugate the Agent in all this work (as by and by
in the New Testament) is styled (...), Ezra 7.24. Nehem. 10. ult. and Esa.
61.6. (a plain prophecy of Evangelicall times, Vos autem Sacerdotes DEI
vocabimini, (...)) and with application both to Priests and Levites, (...),
Jerem. 33.21. as in the Egiptian Philo, (...), their Ministers of sacred things
quenched their thirst with water, being forbidden wine: and a little before,
(...), None might minister but who was spotless, lib. de victimis. pa. ^53,
654. yea (...) were the Vessels, works, and appurtenances of that service, Number.
4.12, 26, 32. cap. 7.5. 2 Chronicles. 24.14. and (...), wherein they were performed,
Exodus 29.30. cap. 31.9. cap. 35.19. cap. 39.1, 4.1. and Ezech. 42.14.

In the New, referring to the Old, are three places, Luc. 1.21. the days of
Ministration of Zachary the father of John Baptist were (...), Every Priest
stood daily ministering and sacrificing till St. Paul's time, (...). Heb. 10.11.
and all the Vessels of Ministry were sprinkled with blood, (...), cap. 9.21.
Besides what a most judicious Traveller brought us home word of, that the
Hebrews retain at Rome their Liturgies to this day. S. Edwin Sands, Relat. fol.
10. pa. 1, 2.

In the New Testament, of the New, St Paul continues and boasts and writes the
more confidently to the Gentile Romans, because he was to them (...), such a
Minister of Jesus Christ, presently expounded, (...), employed in the sacred
work of the Gospel, chap. 15.16. The Antiochian Prophets and Doctors being met
together, and [serving the Lord and fasting] (Beza expounds, Teaching;
Chrysostom, Preaching; the Syriake, Praying; (...), is the Original) the Holy
Ghost called for a separation and Ordination* Act. 13.2, 3. Gamaliels Scholar
if he should spend his blood, was ready to rejoice in that Sacrifice, joined
thereto the public Ministration of the Philippians faith, (...), cap. 2.17.
for so St. Chrysostom read the place, tom. 6. N. Test. pa. 81. to omit, that
Christ disdained not the import of that title, Heb. 8.2. (...), a Minister of
sacred things; whence his (...), ver. 6. Behither and on this side the
Scripture, things are well enough known.

A whole heap of borrowed titles is together in Mr. Seldens notes on Eutychius,
number. 10. pa. 16. who is speaking of imposition of hands for ordination to
public Office, which as we have, so he there makes good we borrow from the
alleged storehouse, with other: Animadvertendum autem est (says he) quem
admodum nomina officiorum sacrorum, ut Patriarcha, Presbyter, Apostolus,
Diaconus, Primas and Episcopus in Christianismum ex Judaismi veteris usu (...),
jam dictis satis respondentium, manarunt (unde and sacerdotum, (...), Levitarum
etiam nomina nostris aptarunt majores) Ita and ritum sive presbyterorum sive
aliorum (ut Patriarchae heic, which he is speaking of) creandorum hunc, ab
Ebraico font, uti alia non pauca, tum ex institutione, tum ex imitatione*
manasse. Both Patriarch, Elder, Apostle, Deacon, Primate and Bishop, all their
titles of Office from Jewry, Look we upon some of the particulars.

The Hebrews were not without their Patriarch, for he is mentioned often.
Eliezer the son of Zichri was such over the tribe of Ruben, Saphatias the son
of Maacah over the tribe of Simeon, Hashakiah the son of Kemuel of the Levites,
and so every other tribe had his one in David's Polity, 1 Chronicles. 27. (...), all
Patriarchs of their said tribes, ver. 22. In that liber censualis (like our
Domus-Dei book) which the Kings of Israel and Juda kept by them, cap. 9.1. were
many more; some of their names after remembered, Salom, and Jemnaa, and Elo,
etc. so many in all that verse 9. they are nine hundred fifty and six, all
Patriarchs of their families or circuits, as in the Spanish edition of the
Septuagint, (to which Septuagint, remember, I refer all along, as where the
title is found without Traduction) others are in cap. 24.31. 2 Chronicles. 19.8.
cap. 23.20. and cap. 26.12. and were continued even among them to Christian
times by the fair mention is of them, in Epiphanius, Haeres. 30. number. 4, 11.
God, Theodos. tit. de Judaeis. L. 14. and Consideremus Patriarchas Judaeorum,
etc. in Hieron. Commentar. ad Es. 3. tom. 4 pa. 13. But when left off among the
Hebrews, taken up by the Christians, much about the year 430, if Mr. Blundle be
not mistaken, in the preface of his late Apology against the Biships, pa. 18. I
should think much sooner.

The title of (...) was among them much more often. I do not say for a person
that had Ecclesiastical praeeminence, but for that which the word does import,
a Governor, an (...). Suidas. Primu namque ab Episcopo, quid sui nominis
dignitas teneat, inquiratur. Quoniam cum Episcopus Graecam nomen sit speculator
interpretatur. Cyprian. de 12. abusibus sect. cap. 10. Super inspector. Ambros.
lib. de dignitate sacerdot. cap 6. The same with the Carthaginian Sufes (or
chief Magistrate) from (...) speculator in the Hebrew, Scaliger. ad Fest. pa.
185. See also Augustine. de Civit. Dei. lib. 1. c. 9. and lib. 19. c. 19.
Constitut. Othonis tit. de offic. Archiepiscop. Polyd. Virgil de rerum invent.
lib. 4. cap. 6. Gratian. Decret. 1. distinct. 21. c. 1 and Leonard. Coquae. in
commentar. ad Augustine. de C. D. 19. 19.
Overlooker, a Superintendent (in which sense the verb (...) is so frequent,
as none more) as the (...) were among the Lacedaemonians, to oversee that
absolute Power did not corrupt into Tyranny, and as Cicero had it commended
unto him by Pompey: Ego negotio praesum non turbulento. Vult enim me Pompeius
esse, quem tota haec Campania and maritima ora habeat (...), ad quem delectus
and negotii summa referatur, lib. 7. ad Atticum. Epist, 11. And some like
inferior Offices in the Civil Law, Episcopi qui praesunt pani and caeteris
vaenalibus rebus quae civitatium populis ad cottidianum victum usui sunt.
Digest. de muneribus and honoribus. L. 18. Sect. Irenarchae: like Clerks of the
Market to look to provision. As, for instance, in Number. 61.14. Jud. 9, 28, 4
Reg. 11.18. 2 Chronicles. 34.12, 17. Nehem. 11.9, 22. Job. 20. ult. and in the
language of those times to foreshew what was to come, Et dabo principes tuos in
pace, (...), Esai, 60.17. Sure a prophecy of Evangelicall times, fulfilled in
those had this title undeniably, in all the later Scriptures of the New
Testament: Yea (...), etc. Number. 4.16. who was before (...), princeps super
principes Levitarum, in the distribution of their Offices, cap. 3.32. and whose
Office is there (...), superintendentia totius tabernaculi, as Nobilius
translates, the oversight of all the affairs of the travailing Temple, the
Tabernacle. Ad the Original (for these have bin hitherto but the Septuagints
translations of 1 Maccab. 1.53. and the office of (...) in the prognostication
of Psalm. 108.7. So alleged thence in that very word in the fulfilling thereof,
Act. 1.20. about a subtitute for Judas: So translated (advisedly) by Th. Beza,
Et Episcopatum ejus accipiat alius (for although the title were originally
Doegs in the Psalm whence 'twas alleged, and as Forester or chief shepherd,
in so good a place and thence to be removed; no more: yet 'twas fitly enough
relative (says he) to and of an Apostle, Solent enim pastorum, ovium, and
gregis vocabula saepissime ad ecclesiasticam administrationem transferri, for
which the Apostle that makes the allegation gives a fit instance in one of his
Epistles, Ye were all as stray sheep, but now are returned, (...), to the same
person, Shepherd and Bishop of souls, 1 Pet. 2.25.) And lastly, so understood
by F. Feu-ardentius in his notes on Irenaeus, lib 4. cap. 44. who speaking
there of that text before (and alleged by his author, Dabo principes tuos in
pace, and Episcopos tuos in justitia, Esa. 60.17.) Atque hinc (says he)
manifestum est antiquissimam esse vocis Episcopi mentionem: ut etiam ex Psalm.
108.8. and ex prophetis per Apostolos traducta sit ad Ecclesiae praefectos and
principes, Annotat. 7. pa. 383. His author (remember) both read and understood
the word in that import; St Jerome commented on it in a sense according, lib.
17. in Es. tom. 4. pa. 203. and before them both Clemens Romans A multis enim
temporibus de Episcopis and Diaconis scriptum est, sic enim alicubi ait
scriptura: Eorum Episcopos in justitia constituam and Diaconos in fide, as I
find him alleged: And it is a rule with me, to prefer often a seeming fair
interpretation of the ancients, though not irrefragably true, before that
commends it self by more probability of later date, because I know they not
only loved truth as well as we, but had one help to see what it was, which we
have not (irrecoverable from the jaws of time) from advantage of the height of
station upon which they stood. Nay, God grant they loved it not better, who did
so much for it; We can hardly let alone what they at much cost of care and
pains and wealth, procured to leave as it was. Nor have the later Hebrews
decryed this title, or forgotten it, even in this our land; for I find Mr.
Seldom alleging it from the rolls in the Tower, (those Records cannot deceive,
or be suborned) sc. Sacerdotium communitatis Judaeorum Angliae ab Henrico
tertio Eliae, Episcopo dicto, conceditur; uti ab Edwardo primo Hagino filio
Deulares: in his notes on Eutychius, number. 10. pa. 34.

But here all along I say nothing (mark this well) of that great question now
on foot, and disputed eagerly at push of pike, and wherein indeed is the only
question, Vtrum Episcopus sit major presbytero jure Divino? This is another
thing, the praeminence or difference; that if a Constable be, he shall be
presently allowed to be greater then a Justice of Peace or a Chairman above the
whole Committee: But the existence or being, that such a title, degree, order,
and trust, has been and ought to be in all times and places of the New
Testament; This I believe no one will deny, but he that is ready to offer
violence to the sacred text, to raze the Tables of Sions Eternal Covenant, and
to deface and mutilate that fair body of truth, that (in beauty and majesty,
derived from above) shines for our light and conduct from the glorious leaves
of the New Testament of the Son of God. For there we have it, (...), expressly,
in all the elements of letter and syllable: Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timoth.
3.2. Tit. 1.7. 1 Timothy 3.1. Act. 1.20. Whatever the Jurisdiction prove, this is
the Title: the Life is in the Power, the doubt only Praeeminence, and of this I
say nothing.

(...) are yet more obvious then both: it may seem toward superfluous to
collect or suggest; their evidence and frequency is such in either Testament. I
believe they came first from Egypt; for there we have them before in Israel.
Genesis 50.7. With Joseph went to solemnize his fathers funeral, the Servants of
Pharaoh and the Elders of his house and the Elders of the Land: Not (adding
consideration what after followed, Moses the Lawgiver his Marryage with
Jethro's daughter the Priest of Midian, the familiarity that after grew between
father and son in law thereby, the advice that was asked and given and taken
about the whole frame of State, Exodus 19. and in a word, the influence the
Politics of Egypt are observed by the learned to have had on the constitutions
of infant Israel) may this conjecture or derivation seem altogether absurd or
unreasonable. But among Jacobs posterity we have sure the Elders of Israel, and
the Elders of the People, and the Elders of the Congregation ((...), as 'twere
Church-Elders with us:) as Levit. 4.15. The Elders of the Synagogue shall lay
their hands upon the head of the Bullock: the like is Jude 21.16. (...): And
Solomon as 'twere, called the Elders of Israel to Church to the dedication of
the Temple ((...)) 3: Reg. 8.1. 2. Paralip. 5.2. which phrase is again, 2
Maccab. 12.35. more and in official signification may be seen in Exodus 17.5.
cap. 18.12. cap. 19.7. cap. 24.1, 9, 14. Number. 11.16, 24, 25. cap. 16.25.
Deuteron. 31.28. ((...) -- (...)) Josh. 7.6. cap. 8.10. cap. 24.1. Jud. 8.14.
Ruth. 4.2, 3, 9, 11. 1 Reg. 16.4. 2 Reg. 17.15. 3 Reg. 20.8, 11. 4 Reg. 6.32.
cap. 10.1, 5. cap. 23.1. cap. 19.2. (...). (as Esai. 37.2) 1 Paralip. 11.3.
cap. 15.25. cap. 21.16. 2 Paralip, 5.3. cap. 34.29. Ezra 3.12. cap. 10.8.
Whosoever did not come according to the counsel of the Governors and
Presbyters, his Estate to be sequestered, (...), and himself excommunicate from
the Church of the Captivity. Continued yet farther in 1 Maccab. 12.35. and cap.
14.20. The collection of these made up a (...) or Eldership, Exodus 3.16, 18.
cap. 4.29. cap. 12.21. Levit. 9.1, 3. Number. 22.4. (even in Midian, whence Jethro
was, of whom before, and Moab) Deuter. 5.23. (official still) cap. 19.12. cap.
21.2, 3, 4, 6, 19. cap. 22.15, 16, 17, 18. cap. 25.7, 8, 9. Judith 4.7. cap.
11.11. cap. 15.9. 1 Maccab. 12.6. 2 Maccab. 1.10. cap. 4.44. and cap. 11.27.
continued to after both resurrection and ascension of the son of God; for in
the persecution raised against the Apostles, Counsel is taken with the SENATE
as it is fitly translated, or Eldership, (...), Acts 5.21. Nor, if we believe
two of the likelyest witnesses, Philo and Josephus, was the Nation in other
Countries without them, as far as Galilee and Alexandria. Ita (...) Judaeorum
Alexandriae habitantium mentio est apud Philonem. Ipse Josephus simili
Senatorum numero (sc. 72) (...) in Galilaea constituit, cum in ibi bello
praefectus esset, says H. Grotius, ad Matthew. 5.21. pa. 83. And as to the
persons they remained no less, for we have them Matthew. 15.2. cap. 16.21. Mar.
8.3. cap. 14.43. cap. 15. 1. Act. 23.14. cap. 25.15 (as Judaicall still) A
collection of them gave Authority to persecute Paul for his conscience. Acts
22.5. A presbytery (...), banded and bandyed against our Redeemer: Luc. 22.66.
made out in description to be Chief Priests and Scribes, And might be so styled
( of the People or ruder sort in opposition to (...), that more civilized
collection in Towns, Ad Mat. 16.20 pa. 295.
as Grotius thinks, (as 'twere a Rural Deanery) And lastly, since the
infallible times, amongst those deprived by one Joseph their Hebrew Apostle,
Epiphanius (who had been of the Circumcision) reckons up Rulers, Priests, and
Presbyters; which, he says, he had information of from that very Apostle
himself, in haeres. 30. cap. 11. pa. 135.

(...), our Deacon was among them no less. I say not always in a sacred sense,
as of (...) before, (remember, nor were they clearly in Church orders at first
by Acts 6.) but for, at large, Ministers: And yet this succession may as well
pass (and of (...) too) as that of Presbytery, Sacerdotes (or by what name
soever we call those are above Deacons with us) to follow upon those who were
but among the Jews Presbyters or Elders, no more; who were not (strictly) of
the Priesthood, the sons of Aaron, but mere Lay, of a different both extraction
and ministration, and so needed a farther consecration (as the Priests had not)
by imposition of holy hands; as well as to design the party, to limit and
guide the hoped fruit of present Invocation for somewhat to be poured out from
above to enable to a new and extraordinary work, which the sons of Aaron were
supposed not to want from the inherited purity of their blood. And thence also
we ordain by imposition of hands those we take from amongst men, not as the
Priests were, Exodus 29, by anoiting and sacrificing, but as the secular Elders
commonly were) according to our pattern, Acts 13.3. 1 Timoth. 4.14. 2 Timoth.
1.6. and their pattern of preceding Elders. Though this be not commonly heeded,
but our holy orders thought fit to be graffed only upon a stock of the same, no
heterogeneous root will serve the turn, but only the sacred Priesthood of the
Law to settle our holy ministration upon; as is with confident and public
solemnity enough delivered us in the Decree: But it is not so, witness the
name; and what could be more? continued form of ordination; which gives
Presbyters to succeed Presbyters, Elders Elders, not Priests or Levits; and as
in these, why not in Deacons likewise? That word of Office, attendance, or
ministration is in three places, Esther 1.10. cap 2.2. and cap. 6.3. The Office
it self in 1 Maccab. 11.58. young Antiochus gave to Jonathan (...), golden
vessels and a service, which might be the sacred function in the former verse.
granted, here actually given, the military power being reserved for his brother
Simon in the verse following. For continuance to after times, among other
Ecclesiastical officers and Ministers deprived by the severity of Joseph their
Apostle, some mentioned by Epiphanius were Azanitae; which he has not only
interpreted to our hand, (...), Deacons or Ministers, but the word it self
seems to be an easy and gentle inflexion of that title was given to like
officers, for they had their (...) who had care of collection and their
treasury which was the first original office of Deacons. Annotat. in Luc.
4.20. pa. 664^
The very knowing and judicious H. Grotius says the (...) were all one, as in
Epiphanius his indifferent interpretation, and that they were both the just
translation of Chazanim: This if, we have them plain in the Hebrew form of our
Saviors time; for he delivered the book to one (having read his text) who was
there pro more according to the custom, (...), Luc. 4.20. a minister: and
Barnabas and Saul had such a John attendant, Acts 13.5. Jgnatius presses the
Deacons of his time, to be pleasing in all things, for as much as they are
(...), in Epist. ad Trallian pa. 66. Philo speaks of the attendance of the
Essenes, the forefathers of the Christian sect, (...), as free they do servile
offices: lib. de vita contemp. pa. 696. and a little after, (...), etc. after
the waiters are set ready for attendance, there is wonderful silence, etc.

An Apostle has been of much note in our Church: there might be allusion
thereto in Ahijahs answer to Jeroboams wife, I am a sad messenger, or Apostle
to thee, (...), etc. 3 Reg. 14.6. and in that contrary mission of Evil Angels,
or by evil angels, Psalm. 78.49. (...). The brethren, the glory of Christ, are
styled, the Apostles of the Churches, 2 Corinthians. 8.23. and Epaphroditus was
such, (...), an Apostle and Minister, as 'twere with relation to such known
office of Hebrew stamp and power. That certainly they had such, we are
beholding (out of Scripture) to Epiphanius, a learned one of their own, born
and bred both with and of them, who has left us a full description. He tells us
they were a kind of Co-assessors with their Patriarch, to assist at all times
with counsel, and to be sent abroad if need were upon weighty affairs: as to
collect tenths, gather first fruits, administer discipline, etc. a kind of
Visitors and Receivers. Joseph of Tiberias he there speaks of, and was well
acquainted with, was one, who used his trust and power with much severity, to
the displacing of many scandalous Priests, Elders and Deacons under his
jurisdiction, in Haeres. Aebionit. n. 4. and n. 11. tom. 1. pa. 128. and 135.
The credit of an imperial law will seldom deceive us; Honorius and Arcadius
make express mention of them -- Archisynagogi five presbyteri Judaeorum vel
quos ipsi Apostolos vocant (sc. (...)) qui ad exigendum aurum atque argentum a
Patriarcha certo tempore diriguntur, etc. (much to what was in Epiphan.) in
C^d. Theodos. lib. 10. tit. 8. L. 14. alleged by Mr Seldom on Eutychius, pa.
16. Grotius gives them the reddition of the same word, and their office of the
same nature, from the most proper repository of the Talmud: Proprie autem
vocabantur in Talmudicis libris (...) qui decimas atque alia percipiebant,
atque ad Levitas deferebant. Of their (...) (which word we have in Scripture,
Acts 1.25. Romans 1.5. 1 Corinthians. 9.2. Galat. 2.8.) and other things of them he
has enough from Philo of Alexandria, Ignatius of Antioch, Julian the Emperor
and others, to whom their persons and Offices might be as well known as a
Bishop or Archdeacons is amongst us; in his notes on Matthew. 10.1. whereto I
remit.

As to the number,, it is like they were twelve, (while the State stood in
power.) We read, (That being the number of their Tribes) often of the Heads of
their Tribes, as Number. 7.2. cap. 25.14. Deuteron. 5.32. cap. 33.5. Josh. 14.1.
cap. 19.51. yea both (...), Deuteron. 31.28. and (...), Deuteron. 29.10. and
Josh. 21.1. (whose power was next to Regal, in Dr Hammonds Power of the Keys,
cap. 5. sect. 13.) which, allowing a due Symmetry and proportion, and that
every body has one head and no more, will give that product exactly: as indeed
they are by number, tale and name in the first of Numbers, from ver. 4. cap.
7.4. cap. 13. from ver. 3. to 17. and in Joseph's Hebrew Antiquities, twelve are
chosen and sent to view Canaan, one of every tribe, lib. 3. cap. 13. The very
same number, to one, which Christ sent after to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, the twelve tribes of his Nation, Matthew. 10.5, 6. Over whom he promised
they should one day sit, as so many Judges on their so many thrones, Matthew.
19.28. Luc. 22.30. In imitation and commensuration whereto his Jerusalem
Apostle directs to the twelve tribes scattered abroad, Jam. 1.1. So was it, for
a while, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into a City of the Samaritans
enter not, Matthew. 10.5. But after enlarged to All Nations, Matthew. 28.19.
ratified and allowed, Acts 13.46, 47.

The great Court of Sanhedrim is famous; raised by Moses, (to take off a great
part of the Monarchical burden from himself in the beginning of their State,
as appears Number. 11.24, 25, etc.) continued by his successors, renewed after the
Captivity, and never but carried along through all the variations of their
State, and course of their affairs to the end of their Commonwealth, to have as
it were Parliamentary influence upon all persons, estates, affairs and things:
It consisted of 70 chosen men, as usually, though more truly of 72, to teach
in six Twelves, or six out of every Tribe (like as Ptolomyes translators were
of the same number for the same reason by best Josep. Antiq. Hebr, lib. 12.
cap, 11. Epiphanius, lib. de ponderibus and mensuris; and Aristaeus, an
Aegiptian present and imploy^d in the work by King Ptolomy, in Bibliothec. part
Graecoru^. tom. 2, pa. 859
authority, though commonly propter rotunditatem numeri, and more ready
conformity to common use of speech in an article Number, they are called the
SEVENTY:) And as it were in extraction from that Sanhedrim, Jesus of Nazareth
chose ^o, say some, 72, give other both Greek and Latin texts of Luc. 10.1. and
ver. 17. (the Eastern and Western agreeing to dissent in the same point both
fathers and their children; a new probable reason of which diversity the
premises may perhaps afford a better light toward. then hitherto or any
before) that they might be his Sanhedrim, or a kind of Collegiate and
Congregationall assistants, by whose furthering advise and help, or seeming
countenance and authority, he might the better carry on his great work of
building a Kingdom of God in the holy Nation, wherein he lived under the like
representative; a part of whose work is cut out and left there in open view
upon plain Record, that they might go before his face by two and two to make
way in every place and City whereunto himself was also to come. And the phrase
of the text may there the better bear this interpretation (of a meant
Sanhedrim) if we shall observe, that though some translations add boldly the
word Disciples, to distinguish from the Apostles before, others continue the
word of Apostles, (corrupting by a kind of Sacrilegious addition, at pleasure
equally and on both hands) yet if we view the best Originals of Greek and
Syriak, taking in the most authentic old Latin, with the chief of Fathers, as
Ambrose, Hierom, Bid, etc. in their translations or commentations, We shall in
them have no such limitation by any appropriation to what subject soever, but a
bare septenary or seventy two without any more, as well in verse 17 as verse 1.
leaving at loose as to the substantive; and an indifferent unforestalled
judgment will as soon take an offer of so many Elders for a Sanhedrim, as any
sort or thing else. The rather for that the Fathers of the Council of
Neocaesaraea, having occasion in their 13 Canon to compare with them the
Chorepiscopi of the ancient Church, as Zonaras and Balsamon understand, the old
translator thought good and made bold to add the word Seniores, as there meant:
Chorepiscopi vero sunt (...), ad exemplum septuaginta seniorum: (whether he
meant and referred to the seventy our Savior chose as the other side of his
comparison, or the elder bench of Moses Sanhedrim? is left to judgment: Zonaras
and Balsamon understand as I say:) And Annal. Eccl. tom. 1. ad an. Christi. 58.
n. 10:
Baronius proving that Seniores and Presbyteri were all one in the first
Churches, doubts not to averr, both that either of these titles were those
Seventys; That it could not well be otherwise; All the Fathers were of that
opinion; Nay and reason (he goes on) must give they were upon that stayre of
eminence and distinction. For, All the believers were called Disciples, (the
general title in Acts 6.1, 2, 7. chap. 9. ver. 10.19, 25, 26, 36. especially
chap. 11. 26, etc.) This was the lowest style) Deacons, the first preferment
were made out of them: Acts 6.) So that unless we will allow those were SENT,
with special Commission, to be Laborers in making way for the best Teacher,
having Power mixed with Threat, (He that hears you hears me, He that
refuses you, me also) and this so effectual that it quelled, in execution, the
very devils, To be of the common lowest style, and flat level with the meanest
of the people, We must at the least grant them this step of exaltation above
Disciples (for Deacons were not yet in being) and (joining in the number) a
very great likelihood of a Seigniory or Sanhedrim, which methinks the whole
frame and complexion of the place to every one that looks upon it not
prepossessed cannot but give. In farther confirmation both whereof, and of the
former branch of succeeding Apostleship: comes in very fitly the strength and
concurrence of the learned and most learned H. Grotius, Synedrium (says he)
quod a Mose-constitutum est, ad cujus exemplum hos Christus elegit, quomodo
Apostolos ad exemplum phylarcharum, fuisse capitum 72, Judaei nonnulli
prodiderunt, etc. in Annot. ad Luc. 10.1. pa. 711. and of Mr Calvin upon the
same place: (double strength even of assistance, conduces much to immovable
firmness) Tenendum est memoria quod de Apostolis duodecim diximus: Quot
florente populi statu fuerant tribus, totidem delectos fuisse Apostolos quasi
Patriarchas, qui membra laceri corporis in unum colligerent, ut inde prodiret
integra ecclesiae restitutio. Non absimilis in Septuaginta ratio fuit. Scimus
Mosen, quum oneri non sufficeret, septuaginta sibi ascivisse judices, qui
populum una cum ipso regerent, Numer. 11. This ( Synedrium or Sanhedrim) the
captivity of Babylon ruined, the return thence raised, Herod's tyranny had now
dissolved, and as the return from Babylon, was only a type of a better
redemption, videtur nunc septuaginta adventus sui praecones eligere Dominus, ut
instaurationem collapsi status promittat. Comment. in Harmon. Evangeliorum, pa.
42. Yet more, the title of the New Testament (from the contents) (...), with
the conjugates of (...), etc. are in the septuagints of 2 Reg. 18.26, 27, 28. 4
Reg. 7.9. Psalm. 63. 12. and 39.10. Joel 2. ult. That signal appellation
thereof, Romans 10.15. is borrowed by the learned Apostle from Esaias 52.7. Our
Saviors of Luc. 4.18. from the syllables of Es. 61.1. The title of the
collection of believers of the N. Testament (...), our Savior and his Apostles
(with their followers) might with far more likelihood take up where they found
it in their own Bibles (of daily use) in the septuagint, then from those
trivial, vain shallow, frivolous grounds of grammatical signification and
derivation, (as of (...), to call from others, as Gods people were: which yet
may have been of consideration at first) As, that there it was, for a
congregation, of Gods people, sometime met to serve him, we have from Deuteron.
28.1, 2, 3 8. and cap. 31.30. Judic. 20.1, 2. 1 Reg. 17.47. 3 Reg. 8.14, 22,
55, 66. 1 Chronicles. 13.2, 4. Ezra. 10.1, 8. Nehem. 13.1. Psalm, 21.23, 26. and
25.12. and 67.28. and 88.6. and 149. 1 Joel 2.16. Sapient. Sirac. 24.2. cap.
25.15. and cap. 50.15. besides (...), to call an Assembly, or the congregation
to Church, Levit. 8.3. as David called his worthies under that phrase, 1 Chronicles.
28.1. and (...), call the people to me, as 'twere to Church, that they may hear
my words, on that which was (...), a Congregation or Church-day, Deuteron.
4.10. The title, thing, degrees, use of excommunication or separation from the
Church, by 1 Exclusion 2. Anathematization 3. utter devotion or final
distermination, which among the Hebrews was raised by the degrees of Niddui,
Cherem, Schammatha, but by the septuagint was styled, (...), (or (...)) and
(...), This graduation might by the Scripture from thence be traduced and
brought down along to our Consistories. In John 1^: verse 2. we have exclusion
from the Synagogue foretold, (which was before in cap. 9.^2. and cap. 12.44. as
Hebrew) In Romans 9.3. Gal. 1.8. 1 Corinthians. 12.3. and cap. 16.22. it is worse,
plainly accursed. In 1 Corinthians. 5.5. and 1 Timoth. 1.20. the highest devotion,
or giving up to the Devil. The progress of the Greek Church was by one step
more, (...), as in the Fathers and Counsels at large; of the Roman by one less,
Excommunicatio major, and minor, as in the Decree. Cause. 3. Quest. 4. c.
Engel-trudam. All, no doubt from the Leviticall Anathemata and
Anathematizations, with which we cannot be unacquainted from Deuteronomy. 7.26. cap.
13.15. and cap. 20.17. Josh. 6.20. Jude 1.17. cap. 21.11. 1 Reg. 15.3. Ezra
10.8. and other places: though with some difference. Of which succession and
comparison, that I may not seem to walk by mine own light, enough may be seen
in those that have carried the Torch before me. Polyd. Virgil. de rerum
inventor. lib. 4. cap 12. Bez. annot. Major. in Roman 9.3. Godwin. Antiq. Hebr.
lib 5. cap. 2. Seldom, de Jure not. and gentium, lib. 4. cap. 7, 8, 9. Hug.
Grot. annot. ad Luc* 6.22. and a late learned and useful tract of the Power of
the Keys, cap. 4. sect. 5^, 53, etc.

A learned Italian had the last age intended to write a treatise of this
argument (besides what was done this way, or let fall by the way, by Petrus
Galatinus) He takes occasion by the ceremony of a Christians change of garment,
upon renouncing his old state in Baptism, a toga ad pallium, as the word was
in Tertullian. This Pallium was borrowed, says he, from Jewry, as appears by
the frequent mention, in Deuteronomy. ^2. 1 Esd. 9. Ester 8. Canticles 5. Esaias 28.
Zach. 13. Hence, facile adducor, ut credam, Apostolos, cum in inculto solo
magnam sementem Christianae religionis facerent, hujus indumenti genus,
Christianis tradidisse; pro certo habens, ea omnia, quae fidei non repugnabant,
a nostris hominibus in ecclesiae exordio retenta esse, (very reasonable) ut
suave Christi jugum dura daemonis servitute oppressis facilius imponeretur.
Sicut de more festumac solennem sabbati diem laete agitandi, aliisque
Hebraeorum ritibus in Diario nostro Ecclesiastico demonstrabimus. Joseph.
Vicecomes, de ritibus Bapt. lib. 2. cap. 22. pa. 149. Whether he wrote that
book, I know not; I could find none by enquiry: He was well persuaded
howsoever of this derivation, and very reasonably. For why should more changes
be made, then needs? or heretofore should have been? There was work enough to
separate the dross and fan the chaff: why should any of the coursest corn be
thrown away? or good metal, though not the finest, as gold purified seven
times in the fire?

To conclude: The President of the Divines assembled at Westminster has
licensed since the beginning of this Parliament, and is by the Author thought
worthy of special observation, that, The pattern from whence most, if not all
the Customs in the Churches were taken, was, the Custom of Israel in the Old
Testament: And this may be one special reason (he thinks) why the providence of
God thought not fit to commend them to writing, -- because the pattern was at
hand to reform, if, etc. as before, pa. And he instances, in 1, A seventh day
for Gods service. 2, Places deputed thereto. 3, Directions for Church-censure,
of which but now. 4, Woman's having leave to partake of a second Sacrament, from
the Passover. 5. Baptizing all, Infants, because whole houses, etc. Treatise
of Poedobaptisme, pa. 9. It were not hard to drive on the conjecture yet much
farther: Materials offer themselves, with plenty, probability and pliability
enough on both sides of the parallel, to stretch forth the lines to exceeding
much length on both sides of the parrallel: for Salvation is from the Jews,
says he is Savior both of Jew and Gentile: John 4.22. Many things happened to
them, (...), says the profound learned Apostle, ^ Corinth, 10.11. and the Law
had a shadow of things to come, Hebr. 10.1. What could be more expedient then
to find out the (...), that must exemplify those types? (as St Peter says our
Baptism does in some things, 1 Epist. 3.21.) and the body whereto the things
thereof were shadows? The Law (future) was to proceed from Sion, Esa. 2.3. and
Jerusalem is the Mother of us all, Galat. 4.26. (Questionless the first,
highest, and fittest ruling Metropolis, to us Christians, (it should be so of
all the world, as one of the Fathers sometimes styled her:) I believe we have
more of either then we commonly imagine or understand, and that as well
belonging to Politye as Religion, to war as peace, both of stabiliment and
ornament, in Church and State. Mr Seldom has much in his late learned De
Synedriis veterum Hebraeorum. lib. 1 cap. 8. pa. 225.
book dispersed all over, reducible to that of the eight chapter, Nec
disciplina illa (Christianae) apud eos (Christianos) alia, quam Judaismus vere
reformatus, seu cum fide in Messiam seu Christum rite conjunctus. New
Christianity was nothing but old Judaisme, reformed and purified: and Annotat.
ad Luc. 6.22. pa. 678.
H. Grotius most excellently (with whom I began) Christiani veteres (qui, ut
saepe notavimus, omnia proba Judaeorum instituta libenter sequebantur) hos
((...)) vocabant (...), etc. They followed the most that was good, and this:
(He is speaking of the degrees of Excommunication.) And summing together much
that I have said, in one of his last pieces, In appen. ad comment. de
Antichristo. pa. 54. col. 1.
Nimirum, Christiani (says he) omnes mores probabiles, quos apud Judaeos
receperant, sequebantur, coalituri, scilicet cum Judaeis si ipsi Evangelium non
respuissent. Inde nomen (...), inde (...) iidem qui (...) and episcopus qui:
(...) inde excommunicationes, absolutiones, impositiones Manuum, panis and vini
communicatio, baptismus. The Christians took in what they could of their Hebrew
forefathers: thence the name of Elders, Deacons, the head of the congregation
or the Bishop: thence Excommunication, Absolution, laying on of hands,
Communion by bread and wine, and Baptism.

And the rites of Baptism too, as was said before, the way of Baptism,
besides the thing it self: particularly a succession to their Trium-virat in a
sort of like Assistants retained at first and continued ever since through the
Christian world. To whom at last to return (after much digression, it is hoped,
without any transgression) that they do so succeed as was proposed, two things
make it yet more likely. 1. Their continued name, even to us. 2. Their
remaining use.

1 As to name, that had been with the Hebrews, and remains to us Sub quo jam
puer sit quasi sub divino Patre. Dionys. Hierarch. Post absolutum Evangelium
ingressus est Episcopus in Baptisterium, and jussit Epiphanium in gredi and
ejus sororem, and cum ipsis Lucianum, (...), qui etiam pater eorum fuit in
Baptismate. In his life written by one of his Disciples, chap. 8. pa. 324. tomi
secundi. He was born and bred a Jew, this and thus was his conversion; at least
thus sealed. Et ideo non solum exemplis, sed etiam verbis eos ad omne opus
bonum, admonere debetis: praecipue tamen qui filios aut filias excipere
religioso amore desiderant, etc. and soon after, Et ideo tam illi qui
accipiunt, quam qui accipiuntur, id est, tam patres quam filii, pactum, quod
cum Christo in Baptismi Sacramento conscribunt, custodire co^^endant. Augustine
de Temp. Sermon. 116. tom. 10. pa. 304. Filios quos in Baptismo ex^^tis, scitote
vos fide jussores pro ipsis apud Deum extitisse. Id. Sermon. 215. pa. 36.6.
Spirituales patres. Durand. rational. Divin. lib. 6. cap. 83. sect. 38. Our
Parents in God. Hooker, Polity, pa. 323. In the phrase of some kind of men
they use to be called Witnesses, as if they came but to see and testify what
is done: It savoureth more of Piety to give them their old and accustomed name
of Fathers and Mothers in God, whereby they are well put in mind what
affections they ought to bear, toward those innocents for whose Religious
Education the Church accepts them as pledges. Id. lib 5. sect. 64. pa. 339..
vid. Durant. de ritibus ecclesiae, lib. 1. cap 19. sect. 17, 18 and Aquin. Sum.
par. 3. quaest. 67. art. 7, 8. and Supplem. tertiae part. Quaest. 56. art. 5.
GODFATHERS; with other or less respect, They nor mentioned nor We, it has
passed through Jewry and Christendom, a strong argument of their mutual
parallelisme, when the distinguishing name shall continue without change to
hold us to the same expectation. For us, the case clear, and proved in
assertion: For Jewry, I have it from Mr Lightfoot of Staffordshire, He from the
Gloss on the Talmud, which alleging, as before, for the Baptism of Chrildren
in the Court of Three, Those Three (says the gloss, and Harmony of the Gospels.
part. 2. pa. 75.
He from it) become a FATHER to the Baptized, and he is a Proselyte by their
hands. And Mr. Seldom much to the same, fetching his Merchandise (like Proverb.
31.14.
King Lemuels Lady) from far, I mean, every where adorning his pages with the
rich spoils of Babylon and Jerusalem, De Synedriis veterum, Hebr. lib. 1. cap.
3. pa. 39.
Baptizare solent, quia non fit proselytus sine circumcisione and Baptismo; ex
sententia domus Judicii. Sci licet Triumviri Baptismo ejus praesunt, secundum
jus ad Baptismum illorum attinens, cui necessarii habiti sunt Triumviri, (...),
and ita fiunt ei PATER. Atque is per eos fit proselytus, etc. They become a
Father to him, and he is a Proselyte by their means. By words we know things:
they are the habit wherein they are dressed and served out to our
understanding, necessary for conveyance at any distance of time or place: as
the Pictures of our minds or apprehensions of what is real, and thus made
transmittable, the (...), which we can draw to send over what necessarily
corrupts or passes, to the view of distance, or memmory of Posterity. Of what
REAL and inward conformity to the things from which they are drawn, I enquire
not. It is a hard question, perhaps too hard for our dull intellects. (When any
such serious and very quick proposals are made, as dull of apprehension as our
bodily eyes are to lay hold of a passing and vanishing Angel; something we
guess at, but cannot reach it) An voces habeant a natura REALEM aliquam
congruentiam cum rebus? Whether Words are not so extracts, and as it were
Emanations by way of Radiation from things, that they partake and still retain
some what of from whence they came? a kind of species being first reflected
from them on our minds, thence on our speeches or books, which are our Words?
The question is proposed by Abraham: Vander-Mylius in his Lingua Belgica, cap.
15. pa. 59. and there may be some such thing as he after speaks of, Naturali
quadam vi sua congruunt Nomina NATVRAE rerum, quas significatu suo and forma
EFFIGIANT: Words are the proper and commensurate SHADES of things, more then
denoting, decyphering, describing, and delineating the proportions of their
Natures and Beings: according as Marsilius Ficinus has left there remembered
from the wise Plato, Sunt quaedam IMAGINES Nom^^ Rerum, per quas RES IPSAE
agnoscantur: they are a kind of Pictures or Casements through which things are
discerned; not only emergent and deduced from them, but resembling and
con-natural with them. As if they be, then are they not of mere voluntary
imposition, as commonly passes, that White might have been as well styled
Black, or Light, Darkness, for their REAL, correspondence hinders, and would
keep things that are like, together. But this enquiry I pursue not. Of
whatsoever relation or consent, The NAME I find was here the same continued:
and if, Why, but to the end all grant all names serve for, sc. to wrap up and
to convey, if not to signify and delineate the same thing to us? As, a man
does import always a man, a Father, not a Son or a Daughter, and Light, it self
and not Darkness.

2. As to their use and power, they who do mention, do so make mention of them
as if they had the nature of a Court, to give legal and more solemn admission
to Jewish hopes; Such They must be Rabbie's or Persons of Authority and place:
in the Testimony before alleged from Rabbi, Ludovicus Mutinensis. Triumviri
nempe qui huic negotio sic praeerant Fori genus erant, sive authoritate
publica, sive velut ex compromisso, seu auspiciis eorum quorum intererat, uti
and in rebus aliis fieri assolebat, selectum. Seldom, de Jure not. and Gent.
lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 143. What Court I find not expressed or intimated. I
should guess, or almost not doubt, the Court of Three, dispersed in lesser
Villages or Towns, where the whole collection of Families did not amount to
twice threescore. There was, 1. At Jerusalem the great Sanhedrim (some say
distinct from the Ecclesiastical, and two other) as the supreme Parliament:
Summa curia seu supremus Senatus Judaeorum, quemadmodum apud nos in Germania
est Curia spirensis, apud Gallos Curia Parisiensis, apud Britannos Curia
Londinensis, quam alii voce Gallica vocant Parliamentum, Pasor, Lexicon Gr.
Lat. pa. 246. Ab his (senatoribus) non erat provocatio. Cun. de republ. Hebr.
lib. 1. cap: 12. 2. In every City of 120. Families three and twenty Benchers,
to judge of Civil and Criminal matter, even to life and limb. Joseph brings it
much to the same, Seven Governors, and to every Governor two Levits assistant,
Antiqu. lib. 4. cap. 8. and compare 2 Chronicles. 19.4, 5. 3. In every less City or
least collection of Families a Triumvirate, to judge of smaller matters, ordain
Elders, etc. I should parallel, this with our hundred Court, the former with
the Sheriffs turn or County Court, the first with as before. More may be
learned from Godwin, Hebr. Antiqu. lib. 5. cap. 4. Mr Thornedike of religious
Assemblies, cap. 3. Pet. Cun. de republ. Hebr. lib. 1. cap. 13. and Weemse Chr.
Synagogue, lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 8. parag 3. And it is observeable, The Hebrews
being much delighted with the number of seven, that seven Triumvirats (the
less) make up the next middle-Court, (the two over might be the Judges) And
thrice as many sevens again the great Court, near seventy.
a Court they were, styled, acknowledged, used, owned; And therefore Baptism
could not be regularly and legally administered on the Beside what is in their
Laws, In festivitatibus suis Judaei corporalia munia non obeunt: addit
nomocanon, neque quicquam faciunt: neque propter publicam privatamve causam in
jus vocantur, aut ipsi Christianos in jus vocant. Cod. de Judaeis and coelic.
L. 2. and vid. L. 13. Die Sabbati.
Sabbath or other Feasts, because they were a kind of Non-le days, as we had
some in the Universities, and are at There are dies Juridici (which Britton
calls Temps Covenables) and dies non juridici. The former (save in Assizes)
only in term; wherein also are some dies non juridici. As in all the four
Terms the Sabbath, for that it ought to be consecrate to divine service. Cook,
Institut. 1. fol. 135. Answerable to the old respect was wont to be given to
holy times, or reputed holy, even before the Conquest. No proceeding in suits
to be on the Lords day. Leg. Ecclesiast Aethelstan. cap. 9. so Leg. Presbyt.
Northumb. cap. 49. in Spelman Council. pa. 500. Council. Aenham. K. 15. and de
diebus juridicis, K 18. pa 518. and ca. 29. pa. 523.. L. Eccles. Canuti cap.
14. De temporibus Justitii. ca. 17. pa. 546. The Con^n joined in. Decret. 2.
cause. 15. Quaest. 5. cap. 1, 2, 3. and Decretal. Gregor. lib. 1. tit. de
Feriis, cap. Omnes dies and cap. Conquestus est.
Westminster, wherein Courts might not sit (Though if the things were done, the
received rule took place, Facta tenent multa quae fieri prohibentur. Cook,
Instit. 4. cap. 1. pa. 38. Multa enim contra jus dantur, nec tamen ideo vel
nulla vel non data dicuntur. Augustine. de baptismo cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap.
15. tom. 7. pa. 61.
Multa quae non fieri debent at facta valent, as if a Priest of the Roman
Church marry without license in forbidden times, the Act is valid, though the
thing should not have been done; the knot is fast though there were a fault in
tying; or if Cook Institut. 1. pa. 136.
himself had been married, (being secular) his issue was legitimate and should
have inherited with us, though it were a fault in him to contract, his faulty
contract wa^ not void, but voidable) Now in some Christian Writers, and those
not of meanest account, our Susceptores were so set out as might render them
very well capable of this comparison, the Schools telling us that they stood
and offered for the whole Respondeo. Dicendum, quod sicut in generatione
carnali aliquis nascitur ex matre and patre, ita in generatione spirituali
aliquis renascitur filius Dei, sicut patris and ecclesiae, sicut matris: sicut
autem ille qui Sacramentum confert gerit personam Dei, cujus instrumentum and
Minister est, ita ille qui baptizatum suscipit de sacro font -- gerit personam
ecclesiae. Supplement. Aquin. par. 3. Quaest. 56. art. 3.
Church, as a Court represents, in few, a Community; one of their ancient
names, retained by St Augustine, is Offerentes, a kind of Public Presenters,
expounded by himself, that they did offer for the Offeruntur quippe parvuli ad
percipiendam spiritualem gratiam, non tam ab iis quorum gestantur manibus,
quamvis and ab ipsis, si ipsi boni and fideles sint quam ab universa societate
sanctorum atque fidelium. Ab omnibus namque offerri recte intelliguntur, quibus
placet quod offeruntur, and quorum sancta atque individua charitate ad
communicationem sancti spiritus ad juvantur. Tota ergo hoc matter ecclesia quae
in sanctis est, facit: quia tota omnes, tota singulos parit. Epist. 23. ad Boni
sac. tom. 2. pa. 35. and vid. Decret. 3. de Consec. did. 4 sect. 229.
Church, Hers their act; and lastly ours by all accounted very profound and
judicious Mr Hooker describing them, as if they stood forth instead of the body
of the Congregation to further and approve what Gods Steward and Vicegerent
does in admitting or taking in a new member into Christ's holy congregation Some
make them to have been only a kind of Witnesses (and style them so) to come
and see, as De rerum inventor: lib. 4. cap. 4. Testes, sc. accessus ad
Christum. Tremel. ad Esai. 8.2. In the way of Durand, Aquinas, etc. in the
places alleged.
Polydore Virgil who ascribes their institution to about Anno 150 after Christ,
to prevent that which the As appears by the frequent votes of Synods, the
multiplied determinations of private men, and indeed the general loud voice of
the Christian World. The sovereign power of the Civil Law left it under strict
prohibition, Cod. 1. tit. 6. Ne sanctum baptisma iteretur. Especially in L. Si
qui rebaptizare. And the Canon as severely. Rebaptizare haereticum hominem, qui
haec sanctitatis signa perceperit, quae Christiana tradidit disciplina, omnino
peccatum est. Rebaptizare autem Catholicum immanissimum scelus est. de Consec.
distinct. 4. c. Rebaptizare.
Church has all along so carefully declined, and Id auferentes quod
geminabant, (Donatistae, Novationi etc.) as in Cod. Theodos. L. 5. de haeret.
interpreted ill done if it has more then once been attempted to be done well,
that is (in times of persecution) Rebaptization; whom many follow, or lead, or
have lighted of themselves upon the same or very near the same way: But it
seems somewhat unlikely that the times of peace and quietness should go on to
continue so long to call for, even in times of peace, what had been needful,
and therefore had been needful because the times had been of trouble, as if a
winter garment no summer beams should prevail to have laid aside, nor ever,
that which had been once required: Reason would there should have been somewhat
more at first to raise and with power carry along (which also might as a cause
accompany) that which has with so much constancy gone on and been conveyed
through times and ages, continuing to call for them and bear them out with
their continuance; which whether consisting with these conjectures laid down,
is left (with whatsoever else I said) to judge some had stumbled so far before
in this dark No doubt, to see to their Christian Education; that as their
natural parents take care to bring them up in the world, so their conscience
should with equal diligence think it self obliged for their nurture in
religion. Qua propter eos observare, quam fieri potest diligentissim e debent,
ne unquam fide and justitia excidant, utpote responsuri in die judicii de
omn^bus illis, quae isti enormiter per petraverint. Joan. Beleth. divin. offic.
explic. ca. 110. Sciant se fidejussores ipsorum esse ad Dominum pro ipsa
sponsione, ut dum ad perfectionem aetatis pervenerint doceant eos praedictam
Orationem Dominicam and Symbolum; quia nisi fecerint; districte ab iis
exigetur, quod pro non loquentibus Deo promittitur. Council. Calcuthens. can. 2.
apud. D. Spelman. Council. tom. 1. pa 293.
way of search and traduction that they had lighted (very near) upon a kind of
assistants at Circumcision (mistaken to have led the way to Baptism, as
before) who had resemblance and Vid. Tremel. ad Esai. 8.2. Puelli circumcidendi
sive sponsor sive susceptor accedit. Buxtori. Synag Judaic. cap. 2. He was
called Baal-Berith, or the Master of the Covenant, and held the child in his
arms. Dr Godwin in Moses and Aaron, lib. 6. cap. 1. out of Elias Thisbites.
Otherwise Saudak, that is, susceptor pueri. Also Mecabbalim, Promissores, of
undertaking for the child, Weemse, Chr. Synag. lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 3. parag
3. Tremellium sequuntur professores Leidenses in Synopsi Theolog. pa. 659.
These. 54. inquit Brochman, in cap. de Baptism. sect. 5. de caeremoniis Bapt.
nec Baptismo solum verum etiam circumcisioni proselyti Triumviros ad esse
debuisse volunt aliqui, Seldom, de Iur. not. 2.2.
in whose succession they thought these Offerers followed; taking occasion by
an unlikely text (as to me it seems) of Esai 8.2, 3. Where is mention made of
faithful witnesses required and assisting at the naming) not circumcising,
though they often went together) of the Prophets son Maher-shalal-hash-bash,
and two Priests, they are supposed to stand forth as Godfathers, Vriah and
Zachariah: But I refer my self to indifferent judgment, whether this be not a
more probable origination from like assistants at the same rite of very
Baptism, rather then circumcision, a thing heterogeneous (if we were agreed of
derivation from the synagogue) and of another nature; and if there be any
difficulties as to the number, or our taking in the other Faeminae quoque
adoptate non possunt: quia nec naturales liberos in sua potestate habent.
Justinian, Instit. 1. de adopt. sect. 10. Though in some cases, it follows,
they might: Also by the Emperors leave, Digest. de in offic. testam. L. 29.
sect. Quoniam faeminae.
sex, etc. these are either of no weight, or they will soon dispell or vanish.
As to the number, Time having possibly wrought that The first restraint I find
was in Leo's time (incorporated after by Gratian into the Canon) Non plures ad
suscipiendum de Baptismo infantem accedant quam unus sive vir sive mulier: de
Consecrat. distinct. 4. c. 101. And yet about then a plurality is supposed, and
in the same body, Cause. 30. Quaest. 4. cap. ult. The Gloss says there, The
limitation had not been so soon dispersed to be under knowledge at Rome; and
that is Urbans excuse for contradicting Leo: the very reason of the alteration
and restraint may have been this, sc. A superinducement of that opinion (then
generally received) of a kind of alliance contracted hereby, forbidding
marriage: Hence, (ne carnalis copula per spiritualem conjunctionem impediretur,
as Io. Beleth contracts in cap. 116. de divinis offic.) least too many should
be hindered their choice, 'twas thought good the occasioning restraint might
have scope to touch the fewer, least otherwise the prevalence might offer seeds
of much mischief, by hindering from that nearest amity most known friends. And
the Council of Trent seems to preface to the same purpose in session, 23. de
reformat. Matrimon. ca. 2.
change; diverse times and diverse Laws producing like diversity in their
limitations or permissions, (though with us the number held for three, by our
ruling Constitution, of which hereafter. And for women offerers and
undertakers. 1. There may have been none at first: I do not remember to have
found mention of them very early: and De mulieribus, An susceptrices esse
queant, nonnulli dubitarunt. Durant: de ritibus. lib. 1. cap. 19. sect. 18. De
faeminis, an possint esse susceptores, aliquis dubitet, nam in antiqua ecclesia
non legimus solitas fuisse suscipere; tamen ex sermon quodam D. Augustini de
Pascha cognoscimus etiam faeminas fuisse susceptrices, quia admonet viros and
faeminas, qui aliquem in Baptismo susceperunt, ut instituant been eos quos
susceperant. Maldonat. tom. 1. de Sacrament. cap. 3. pa. 93.
great enquirers yield it doubted, Whether or no they ought to be? 2. I read of
some women that went into the water with women at their initiatory washing into
the Law (besides the Triumviri standing and looking aside) And in the Christian
Church at first were some of the same sex, commonly thought to have assisted at
the Baptism of women; as Elige quoque Diaconissam fidelem and sanctam ad
mulierum ministeria: for often the Deacon himself may not visit them, one of
their own sex may. Nam ad multos usus muliere Diaconissa indigemus: ac primum
cum illuminantur mulieres, Diaconus ungit frontem ipsarum oleo sancto, deinde
Diaconissa eas abstergit. Non est enim necesse mulieres aspici a viris, etc.
Clement. Constit Apost. lib. 3. cap. 15. Diaconissa non benedicit, sed nec
aliquid ex iis, quae faciunt presbyteri vel Diaconi exercet ipsa, sed tantum
portas custodit and ministrat presbyteris, quando baptizantur mulieres, propter
honestatem. lib. 8. cap. 38. Quanquam vero Diaconissarum in ecclesia ordo sit,
non tamen ad sacerdotii functionem, aut ullam ejusmodi administrationem
institutus est, sed ut muliebris sexus modesty consulatur, aut tempore
Baptismi, aut visitationis propter infermitatem, aut laboris, aut cum nudandum
est mulieris corpus, ne a viris ministran tibus aspiciatur, sed a sola
Diaconissa, etc. Epiphan. Her. 79. cap 3. Diaconislae ad hunc unum usum
adhibeutur, ut mulierum decoris and honestatis causa sint administrae, si id
forte necesse fuerit, sive dum Baptismo initiandae sunt, sive dum earum corpora
perscrutanda. Id. in exposit. fidei Cathol. cap. 21. In the Civil Law care was
to be taken of their choice as those that did adorandis ministrare
baptismatibus, and aliis adesse secretis quae invenerabilibus ministeriis per
eas rite aguntur, Novel. 6. cap. 6. The fourth Council of Carthage gives their
part to be, To instruct Country women how to answer their interrogatories and
order their lives afterward. cap. 12. Only the Constitutions above mentioned
come home to our purpose: Sacram super ipsos dicens ac nominans invocationem
patris and filii and spiritus sancti, baptizabis eos in aqua: ac virum
suscipiat Diaconus, mulierem Diaconissa. lib. 3. cap. 16. See also Cornel. a
Lapide in 1 Timothy 5.9. Tertium, and Chamier: Panstrat. Cathol. par. 4. lib. 5.
cap. 2. sec. 6.
Saint Paul's Hooker, Eccles. polit. lib. 5. sect. 78. pa. 423.
widows, 1 Timothy 5. and Phoebe, styled Vid. Comment. ad loc. inter opera Hieron.
tom. 8. pa. 190. and Spelman, Glossar. in vocab. Diaconus.
Ministra, (Romans 16.1.) from some such ministration. But this last I should
guess to be no more nor other then some devout zealous convert, whose good
affection to the cause of Christ moved her (by all the credit the Written to
the Romans from Corinth by Thaebe ((...)) servant of the Church of Cenchrea.
Plainer by the Syriak translated by Tremellius, Finitur Epistola -- quae --
etc. and missa fuit per manus Phoebae, ministrae fidelis.
postscript can give) to do the good office for St Paul to carry this Letter to
Rome for him; and he in lieu could not but afford her name a friendly and Vide
quantum illam honorat; nam illam and ante reliquos omnes commemorat, and
sororem vocat. Non est autem, modici momenti, Pauli sororem vocari, (...).
Chrysostom.in loc. tom. 4. pa. 382.
honorable remembrance with other his friends and assistants; and as in the
first place (which she deserved) so by the merited title of (...) (that is the
word in the text) which might be fully enough rendered Compare Marc. 1.13. Romans
13.4. Luc. 8.3. Matthew. 23.11. Act. 6.2. Hebr. 1.14. 2 Cor. 9.11. Luc. 10.40.
and cap. 12.37.
Ministra in any kind; It Is not said, Sacred, and it is used for Diaconi nomen
ad alias quam ad Ecclesiasticas personas referri potest, propter generalem
significationem verbi, quod ad diversa ministeria refertur. (...), unde (...),
ministro and famulor significat. Ut D. Paulus vocat Magistratus (...), ad Romans
13. sic and Julius Pollux, etc. Ea ratione Diaconi sacri and seculares. Pet.
Gregor. Tholos. lib. 15. cap. 20. sect. 1, 2. Verbum (...) scriptores nostri
usurpant saepe de iis ministeriis quae ad hujus vitae necessitates pertinent,
ut videre est Matthew. 8.15. cap. 25.44, etc. Grot. ad Luc. 10.40. pa. 718. The
conjugates thereof are used both of that ministry is sacred, (...), of the
word, ver. 4. and of that is opposed thereto; we must not leave the word of God
to serve tables, (...). ver. 2. of Act. 6. of the Essenes Philo remembers,
(...), In their feasts they are not served by slavish underlings, but by
Freemen freely; lib. de vit. contemplat. pa. 696 And so again soon after.
profane or any servant or service elsewhere. She was latrix hujus Epistolae,
observed by Corn. a Lap. on the place. 3. At the naming of a woman child about
the end of 40 days (which was as her circumcision the eight day, when the name
on males was imposed, peradventure her purification by water accompanying, sure
'twas the time of her mothers purification) there was one called Susceptrix
under this very title, in Buxtorfs Synagogue, Jud. chap. 2 page 96. But enough
hereof.

I was going on to drive on the conjecture farther, That forasmuch as Christ
came to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. John we may presume a Priest not
irregular or incanonicall, and such things usually were required, even to the
particulars mentioned, that therefore there passed on him what on others, and
he had at least what all: But --

In that which is, I crave I be not mistaken, as if I went about to disturb
things howsoever settled, or reduce and bring back what POWERS have or shall
think meet to cast away: Private hands are too daring that would meddle with
Churches and men too bold that shake States. Nay I acknowledge these things
according to present grounds and rules of proceeding can have no force that
way, where a regulation of all is held forth simply by Scripture, which here is
not Harum and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules scripturarum,
nullam invenies. Traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix,
and fides observatrix. Tertullian: de Corona, cap. 4.
pretended (that from Esai. 8.2. being but a forsaken conjecture; and of Christ
in Jordan owning it self but as a modest proposition; The As of Ludolphus de
saxon: who found them in the Example of Andrew offering his brother Simon to
Christ, Io. 1.42. Ex hoc accepit ecclesia quod in Sacramento Baptismi and
confirmationis utitur Adducentibus qui praesentent suscipientes sacramentum,
qui Patrini solent vocari. de vita Christi, par. 1. cap. 24. sect. 12. Weakly:
For what similitude? yet the same taken up after by Joseph: Vicec^mes, de
ritibus Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 30. and after both by Baptista Casalius, de veter.
Christianorum ritibus, cap. 5. pa. 23. So ready are learned men to follow one
another: sometimes in mistakes: sometimes in unlikelyhoods. We know in part.
When that which is perfect comes, that which is in part shall be done away.
Come Lord Jesus!
incongruities of others wholly rejected) But, It delights some to look back
the way they have traveled or has been traveled, when themselves have
forsaken that way, There may be use of the Paulatim autem antiquae leges
vetustate atque in curia obsoleverunt: quarum etsi nullus jam usus est, notitia
tamen necessaria videtur. Decret. part. 1. did. 7. c. 2. Licet leges abrogatus
non teneamus, tamen notitia earum est necessaria. gloss. Membranas ad Distinct.
19. c. 1. Legimus aliqua ne negligantur: legimus, ne ignoremus: legimus, non ut
teneamus sed ut repudiemus. Amb. in proaem com. ad luc. Lex etiam ipsa
abrogata, nedum mutata aut novata, abrogandique, mutandi, novandi ratio
diligentius perpensa (neque enim sine hujusmodi concursu praevio been decernit
Iurisconsultus) autoritatem plane praestat amplissimam Iuri novissimo atque in
repraesenti capiendo. Seldom. Dissert. ad Flet. cap. 1. sect. 3. Non est novum
ut priores leges ad posteriores trahantur. Digest. lib. 1. tit. 3. L. 26.
knowledge of some things left, It may please to recount upon what grounds (and
But upon what grounds) things have passed reaching to our selves, or all may
pass if but for the reason alleged in the license of Mr. Tombs his late book,
The strength being here imbattelled and the better Discunt autem non ut
sequantur sed ut judicent atque convincant. Quomodo si quispiam adversus
Mathematicos velit scribere ignarus (...), risui pateat; and adversum
Philosophos disputans, si ignoret dogmata Philosophorum. Hieron. in Daniel,
cap. 1. tom. 4. pa. 496. D.
known for opposition. Whatever it be, I submit it to the censure of every
body, yea if need be, Audivimus etiam illud ab eo (Origin) frequenter intexi,
quod hodie ne quidem isti imperitissimi omnium obtrectatores ejus dicere non
dedignantur; ut siquis melius de his locis qua ille disseruit, dixerit vel
exposuerit, illi potius qui rectius diceret, quam sibi auscultandum. Apolog.
pro Origin. inter opera Hieron^: tom. 9. In hoc autem tractatu non solum pium
lectorem, sed etiam liberum correctorem desidero: maxim ubi profunda versatur
veritatis quaestio, quae utinam tot haberet inventores, quot habet
contradictores. Lombard. in Prolog. ad sentent.
Correction; or, farther, Rejection; Though I had rather find And from a
Christian I hope to be dealt with as a Christian. Not flattering, or snarling;
but approving, or convincing: in meekness and sobriety, admonishing or
instructing. Let all your works be done in love, is blessed St Paul's (1 Cor.
16.14.) In doctrine showing integrity, gravity, sincerity, sound speech that
cannot be reproved ( Tit. 2.9.) with meekness reclaiming the discenter, (2 Timothy
2.25.) and with much sedulousness of industry and utmost endeavor, studying to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4.3.
Conviction, or Approbation. It is far enough from the precious foundation, and
so, if it should prove hay, stubble, or other rotten and corruptible stuff, ex
qua non struitur firmum aedificium, as Beza, unserviceable for the proposed end
of meant edification, yet the Worker should be himself safe and free enough by
the past vote of a leading and infallible Christian Casuist, the Work proving
unprofitable. For, Other foundation can no man lay, says he, then Jesus Christ
and him crucified: And if any (keeping to that) shall trouble himself
fruitlesly to build hay, stubble, wood (things So the best expositors. Calvin,
Beza, Marlorate, etc.
unprofitable merely, not otherwise noxious, for the speech is of mistaken
informers, not malignant depravers) the Examinationem judicii igni voluit
comparate juxta consuetudinem scripturarum. Commentar: inter opera Hieron. tom.
8. pa. 195. Quia metaphorice loquutus erat Paulus de doctrina, ipsum quoque
doctrinae examen nunc metaphorice Ignem appellat, ut membra comparationis
opposita inter se cohaereant. Ignis ergo hic est spiritus Domini, qui suo
examine probat, quae doctrina sit instar auri, and quae instar stipulae. Quo
propius ad hunc ignem admota fuerit Dei doctrina, eo magis clarescet: contra,
quae in hominum capite nata fuerit, protinus evanescet, sicut stipula igne
devoratur. Io. Calvin: Comment. in 1 Corinthians. 3.13.
fire of severe censure shall try what it is: if it had been of proof, able to
hold out trial, there is Cum enim nihil in illo sordis inventum fuerit pravae
doctrinae (ut in bono auro) it^ erit ut tr^^fratres in camino ignis, mercedem
vitam aeternam cum gloria accepurtus: quia sicut aurum and argentum and lapides
quos ignis non corrumpit, ita and bonorum magister incorruptibilis perman^bit.
Ambros. in loc. tom. 3. pa. 167.
reward in justice for the Worker: Else he may suffer loss, (of his Siquis
negligenter docuerit aut verbo aut exemplo, perdet laborem suum. Hieron. ubi
supra. (...), id est, jacturam hanc faciet, operis nimirum istius and laboris:
ut siquis architectus non recte struxerit parietem, non modo non persolvitur ei
merces operis, sed etiam opus diruitur. Beza, in annotat. major.
perishing work) (...), but Paulum de iis loqui constat, qui retento semper
fundamento faenum auro, stipulam argento, lignum lapidibus pretiosis admiscent,
nempe qui in Christo aedificant, sed propter carnis imbecillitatem patiuntur
aliquid humanum -- (as the Fathers) tales dicit Paulus salvos fieri posse, sed
hac lege, si Dominus eorum ignorantiam absterferit, etc. Vult ergo innuere se
illis non adimere spem salutis, modo libenter faciant jacturam operis, etc.
Calvin. in loc. Servabitur, id est, opere quidem ut mercede sperata, non tamen,
vita mulctabitur. (This written in the heat of late troubles, when prisons were
full and houses empty; when a man was made an offender for a word, as Esai
29.21. and soft Religion, that hardly permits to defend our selves, both taught
and instigated to bloodshed and for Religion.) Every Table was made a snare: To
think did border upon a Crime: the least discovery of warping to any side had
some Armed Power at hand to Judge and Revenge: but to ascend the Pulpit-stayers
(How much more yet to coin thoughts into doubtful words, and make them
legible! Litera scripta manet!) This brought on usually a Dilemma of highest
danger, Sequestration, or Treason. O tempora! O mores! Neque enim eos ut
pseudo-apostolos reprehendit Paulus, quique a Fundamento desciscant, sed ut
curiosa quaedam ac humana potius quam divina consectantes, etc. Beza in annot.
majore in ver. 15.
himself shall be safe, though not without Porro, tametsi purgat interdum Deus
suos afflictionibus, Hic tamen Ignis nomine Spiritus examen intelligo: -- Scio
quidem multos ad crucem refer, verum meam interpretationem sanis omnibus
judiciis placituram confido. Calvin. in loc.
fire or searching trial, which shall pass farther even upon all, in the great
critical day, when Judgment shall be given of all the world. Whence in the
texts of sundry Editions it is, Dies Domini declarabit, not some time or other,
but The day of the Lord shall make declaration of all things secure till when,
I go on in my way.

CHAP. VIII.
QUAERE 3. Of the difference between John's and Christ's Baptism.
WHereas long Dignus hic vindice nodus (let me usurp the words and liberty of
Pet. Cunaeus) and opiniones quidem aliorum non percensebimus. Positae enim in
magna varietate sunt. Et praeterea, nemo dixit quod penitus placeret. de Repub.
Hebr. lib. 1 ca. 9. Dr. Jackson, a man of deep searching thoughts complained of
it as ill stated to his time, in his treatise of Christ's answer to John's
question. sect. 40. and that not without cause. I promise no more then that of
St Augustine. Quam quaestionem tam solicit tractabimus, ut quaeramus cum
quaerentibus. Utrum autem aliquid in veniamus, nihil nobis temere
affirmantibus, lectori been attendenti satis indicabit ipsa tractatio. L. de
mendatio. c. 3. tom. 4. p. 3
controversy has been between the wrangling regiments of Polemick Writers and
a question so eagerly disputed between Calvin and Bellarmine, and their
followers of the Protestant and Pontifician part, What was the difference
between the Baptismes of John and Christ? (as differ Discrimen interea
agnoscimus, 1. in quibusdam externis ceremoniis. 2. gradu and efficacia in
donis spiritualibus. 3. donis Sp. suncti visibilibus extraordinariis: quae
discrepantia tamen accidentalis non substantialis est. Atque sic distinguendus
uterque Baptismus, non disjungendus. Conrad. Dieteric. Domi: 4. advent. par. 1.
After he had confirmed them the same for substance. And Brentius, They differ,
1. Baptismi materia. 2. Modo. 3. Donorum varietate, etc. and a little after,
Johannes Minister, Jesus Magister spiritus: Johannes servus, Jesus dominus:
Johannes cooperarius salutis, Jesus author salutis: Johannes famulus Christi,
Jesus, ipse Christus. in Act. 1. Homil. 2. fol. 2. And Dr Brockman, having
gathered things together for a substantial unity, allows yet a threefold
difference; in Systhem. Theol. artic. 34. Variety is of these varieties: scarce
any man has said, what has been thought fit to be followed by another. Reason
loves truth, and the mind nauseates at what is offered not sound; Again, and
Again, and Again.
they did certainly, and more then a little; They that say least, grant yet a
circumstantial difference) May not a more likely way be found out to satisfy
all difficulties and end this controversy, then hitherto has been, if for
ground we presume what was said before, of the initiating of Hebrew Proselytes
by Baptism for regeneration, and then add,

That the holy Priest John's Baptism even of our Savior himself (besides many
other, which might give him the name of BAPTIST) was nothing else but the
ordinary exercise of that sacred Power, which in the Priestly execution and
according to the first intent thereof, was given to consecrate proselytes in to
the profession of the Law, whereas Christ came after and Praepa^^bat viam
Domino Johannes lavando exterius corpora, ut praecederet exterius lavacrum
sequuturum Baptisma, in quo conferretur animarum ablutio and peccatorum
remissio. Praecessit quod erat ex part ut consummatio sequeretur. Cyprian. de
Bapt. Christi: pa. 267.
added thereto the Holy Ghost, (look in Jo. 1.33. Act. 1.5. and chap. 11.16.)
and so made up our new Christian Sacrament, by raising it so much higher then
it was before, (Baptism by water) as Baptism by water is lower then ours has
been ever since, Baptism by that and the Holy Ghost? (heed well to which
purpose that large discourse is in Act. 18. from ver. 24. to chap. 19. ver. 7.
Certain, they which had the height of John's Baptism never yet heard of Holy
Ghost; this, if nothing else, certain.) So they baptized both, one as a legal
Minister, the other as an Evangelicall: one to the Synagogue, the other to the
Church: one into the name of GOD, JEHOVAH, ONE; the other into the same ONE,
and THREE: the first, into the LAW In Mosen: so Beza read in his Translation,
and Pet. Ramus in his Commentaries, de religione Christiana. lib. 4. cap. 6.
and a hundred more besides. They were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud: So
the authorized Church Bible of the Queens time, expounding in the Margent, into
the doctrine of Moses, though Augustine understand it otherwise. How Augustine did
understand, is undertook to be showed by Scharp: in Symphon: par. 2. Epock. 2.
loc. 206. who there adds, vel in Mosen significat in doctrinam vel in legem
Mosis, ut Act. 19. Ephesii illi baptisati in Baptismo Iohannis, id est, in ejus
doctrina. pa. 434. Augustine himself may be seen in his Comment. on Psalm. 77.
tom. 8. pa. 347. and his eleventh Tractate upon John 3. tom. 9. pa. 41. Dr.
Brown (our living Aristotle, if any) read it advisedly, All were baptized unto
Moses, in his late Pseudodox: Epidem. lib. 6. cap. 9.
((...), a form remembered by St Paul, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. and would be warily
heeded, as containing more then is under common observation) the other, into
the GOSPEL ((...), as Galat. 3.27. or (...), as Romans 6.3. (...), Acts 19.5. (in
the primitive Church it was, Into the death of Christ) or (...), etc. Mat.
28.19. not IN, but INTO that capital doctrine or head Article of all the
Christians Faith, the name of FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST. In brief, the common
effect of eithers Baptism might be, A regeneration intended (and believed no
less to proceed from the old Baptism, sc. partially) but the specifying
difference of those common regenerations, that whereto either did tend; The one
to let into the Temple, the other into the Church, the one to captivate to
Mount Sinai, the other to make free of M. Sion, the one to matriculate into
Moses and Aaron, the other into Christ and all Privileges, Rights, Happiness
Christian; And the reason of those different issues the Power given, that Power
exercised, and the way and means whereby either proceeded, which (besides other
places before) is plainly and clearly set down under John's own hand of
acknowledgement, Mar. 1.7. I indeed baptize with water, but when he comes who
is mightier then I, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost: ('it is added
elsewhere, and with fire:) View also to which purpose and compare Mat. 3.11.
Luc. 3.16. John 1.26. Act. 19 4.

That last Vid. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de sacram. Bapt. cap 20. secundo.
place seems indeed to contradict; as if John baptized no less into Christ (in
his baptism of repentance) telling the people they should believe in him that
was to come after himself: but the Original well heeded and texture of speech
gives no such thing, but the evident or probable contrary. For, the Ephesians
had not yet heard of the Holy Ghost (that gift to be powered out in the later
days) No! says the Apostle: Whereunto then were ye baptized? They say, Unto
John's Baptism: (yet, it seems, nothing of that inspiration) ye might indeed,
replys St Paul, ver. 4. for John did baptize (a kind of baptism, sc. of
repentance, or some change of mind; (...), a transmentation, such a
regeneration) but this not effectual to the end now spoken of: which being, of
the Holy Ghost, that, (or light so much as that it was) he nor had nor gave:
And therefore he went farther (to strike the matter home) saying unto the
people, They should believe on him that should come after (that is, on Jesus
Christ) And when they heard this they were baptized INTO the name of the Lord
Jesu, (ver. 5.) and so obtained their desire. This although it be not the
usual, is, I doubt not, the true and natural meaning of the place, giving the
right sense, grounded upon a genuine, unforced, free offer of the words; and
withal affords a new and better ground to raise answer to the Vid. Cassand.
Consultat. cap. de discrimine Baptismi Iohannis etc. p. 87 88.
Anabaptists, (who hence (not altogether irrationally) derive color of
Rebaptization after Christian baptism complete (if John's Baptism of Christ
were such) or at least after Which all must grant: but they distinguish. Nec
iteratum est in his Baptisma, sed innovatum. Lombard. ^ent. l. 4. did. 2.
neque ibi fuit baptismi iteratio, sed very Baptismi prius non habiti collatio.
Clictov. in Comment. ad Damascen. de fide orthod. lib. 4. cap. 10. The corrupt
form John had used, was mended, say the Centurists. lib. 2. Centur. 1. cap. 6.
de ritibus circa Bapt. Dominus Jesus Christus tali Baptismo mundat ecclesiam,
quo accepto nullum alterum requiratur: Johannes autem tali Baptismo
praetingebat, quo accepto esset etiam Dominicum Baptisma necessarium, non ut
illud repetatur, sed ut iis qui Baptismum Iohannis acceperant, etiam Christi
Baptismus, cui viam praeparabat ille, traderetur. Augustine. de Bapt. contra
Donat. lib. 5. cap. 9 tom. 7. pa. 60. (so had he determined before, in the
beginning of that chapter) And he lays it down for observable, that the first
Baptism of these Ephesians was but John's, not Christ's. and so no occasion of
repetition of the same. lib. de unico Bapt. cap. 7. tom. Eod. pa. 84. For this
reason he prefers the Baptism of Judas before the Baptism of John ( and need
not be renewed, as John's was) Quos enim baptizavit Johannes, baptizavit
Johannes: Quos autem baptizavit Judas, Christus baptizavit. Tract. 5. in Johan.
tom. 9. pa. 20. taken after into the Decree, de Consecrat. did. 4. cap. Aliud.
( and see also, Cause. 1. Quest. 1. cap. Dedit:) Summa est, quod Paulus
discipulos illos erudiverit de doctrina Christiana, atque ita eis ut iterum
baptizentur praeceperit, quum non fuissent recte baptizati. Piscator. in Act.
19 1. These things pass; and are the more likely, because the teacher of the
Ephesians ( the mighty Apollos) was, as to the way of the Lord, yet no more
then Catechized, (...), cap. 18. ver. 25. hough fervent in Spirit.
some kind of holy Baptism precedent which Protestants, that say John's
Baptism and Christ's were all one, I do not see how can deny to be complete)
then other, or former, various, dark, uncertain interpretations, diversions,
distortions possibly could. And moreover, other (I believe, all) places of
Scripture treating on this argument might be better brought in to correspond
then those senses others various, incoherent, and sometimes contradictory
interpretations have been forced to put upon them. Part. 3. Quest. 38. per tot.
Aquinas was put to use of his best wits, and had much ado to make things
cohere, or in any tolerable sort piece together; and let him take heed of but
as nimble, strong, rational, Logical opposition: Those that led or follow of
either side, are troubled no less to bring things about, or comply with their
own: Veritas simplex, (...). Clem. Alexand. Strom. 1. pa. 298. (...). Chrysostom.
Homil. 3. in Epistol. ad Roman. Truth is nothing so much as ONE.
error multiplex, and it is not much like they are all of the right who agree
chiefly to cross one another.

Ob. I confess some difficulties do spring out of this new way, but withal not
no likelyhoods to countervail; Diverse things flatter to a more then
probability, but some sour oppositions would again cross and overturn all. The
chief I foresee is this. That our Savior was an Hebrew (Hebraeus ex Hebraea,
by one side at least, though not Hebraeus ex Hebraeis, as Philip. 3 5. Whereof
see ^n Moses and Aaron: pa. 9. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Paul, which was the most noble) and so not capable of proselytisme, who yet
was baptized, Mat. 3. and Mar. 1. The There w^nt to Him, Jerusalem and all
Iudaea and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in
Jordan, confessing their sins. Matt. 3.5, 6. All the people and the Publicans,
Luc. 7 30.
whole people no less, dwelling about Jordan, who came and were received,
Matthew. 3.5. and Luc. 7.29. and those other of Act. 19.4. yea the very Scribes
and Pharisees, the inside of that Nation, (as many understand Matthew. 3. though
a very Observed by the late Bishop Montague (in Origin. Eccles. tom. 1. part.
2. sect. 62 pa. 392.) that, although all the people and the publicans justified
God and were Baptized with John's Baptism, yet the Pharisees and the Lawyers
rejected this way of God, and were not baptized. Luc. 7.30, 31. But these might
be different times. In Matthew. 3.5. they might come and speed, but here reject
themselves. Conjectured by H. Grotius, that John was now in prison; as very
like from Matthew. 11.2. John in Bonds heard the same of Jesus which bred the
message of this chapter. And Calvin in his Harmony of the Gospels, places these
Baptismes far enough asunder: pa. 79, 80. compared with pa. 244, 245. approved
by Marlorate on Luc. 7.29.
learned man stand on the contrary part, from Luc. 7.30, 31.) Nay and Part. 1.
cap. 17. sect. 5. So Dr. Brochman: Baptismus Iohannaeus non nisi solis Iudaeis
administrabatur. Systhem. Theolog. art. 34. sect. 4.
Ludolph. de Saxonia, appropriates John's work of Ministry to the Hebrews only.

Answ. But these difficulties I take to be easier soluble by leisure, wit and
industry, then diverse other in weightier matters (even about Baptism, and this
very part of Baptism) or if not, I do now but propose and not determine. As if
we should say.

1. That Baptism commonly taken to have been in-itiatory only of the Gentiles,
may, not impossibly nor very improbably have been taken in with Circumcision to
enter or Matriculate into the Law. The Scripture says nothing to the contrary;
and the Scripture does say, The sense of the place seems best mad^ ^ut thus:
All the Fathers ( the congregation of Israel, Exodus 19) were under the cloud
(upon the Mount, that covered the Hill) and all passed through the Sea (that
Baptism there mentioned, of which before) and were all baptized into Moses
(that Law, in legem M^saicam, ut viri docti heic, quod apprime consonum est
notioni Ebraeorum, qua in receptionem legis Baptismum illum adhibitum
tradidere, says Mr. Seldom) in the cloud and in the sea, or, (as others) in
that cloud and that sea. The only difficulty seems in making the sea, Baptism.
But 1. Observe, it is not said, the red Sea, which commonly runs away with all
the sense. 2. Consider, the word (...) to be often rendered Waters, or a large
comprehension of waters, as Psalm. 69. 2. Ezekiel. 26.12. ( through which they
passed in Hebrew Baptism, they were not sprinkled; as here, (...) they passed
through) and is it self the reddition of (...), Mare, which is not far from
(...) the proper word for Waters, and often used for it. 3. Call to remembrance
the molten sea, for the use of washing the Priests, or baptizing them, (...), 2
Chronic. 4.6. It was made by Solomon. 1 Kings 7.23. 2 Chronicles. 4.2. Unsettled by
Achaz: 2 Kings 16.17. Quite taken away by Nebuchadnezzar, chap. 25. and in all
those places, and verse 24, 25, 39. of 1 Kings ver. 10, 15. of 2 Chronicles. styled
a Sea, and yet in the third verse of the same expounded a bathing Vessel (ten
cubits compassed (...)) Indeed it was a very Baptis^^rium, or Font, so used and
yet so called; as here Israel passed through the like sea. The rest is made out
by Mr. Seldom, de Synedriis vet. Ebrae. lib. 1. pa. 42, 43. etc.
All the Fathers were baptized, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. and in what form, from him was
likelyest to know, the learned Apostle in the same place, who says 'twas So all
the Greek Fathers read: How could they well otherwise without corrupting the
Text? See Basil Moral. Regul. 11. cap. 5. Chrysostom. Homil. 23. in 1 Corinthians.
tom. 5. etc. Israel olim in Mosem in nube and mari baptizatus est, tibi nimirum
figurans, and quandam in sequentium temporum monstratae veritatis formam
ostendeus: Tu autem baptismum fugis, etc. Non in Mosem Conservum fed in
Christum creatorem institutum. Basil. exhort. ad Bapt. tom. 1. pa. 119. Though
the Latins commonly run another course; for in Mose, or as St. Augustine, per
Mosem. Of later times: Sunt qui sic exponant. in Moysen -- id est, cultui ac
legi per Moysen sibi tradendae specie quidem baptismatis initiati; quomodo nos
in Christum baptizari dicimur, id est, Christo and religioni Christianae per
baptismum initiari. Qui quidem sensus non modo percommode ex significato graeca
praepositionis habetur verum etiam contextui quam optime quadrat -- Exodus 14,
etc. ita ut credibile sit eos etiam gutris tum ex aquis maris (hinc inde qua
transibant in altum erectis) tum ex nube supra ipsos expansa, fuisse non nihil
aspersos: quo Baptismi sacramentum evidentius significaretur. Estius in loc.
Nota secundo pro, in Mose, graece est, (...), in Mosen, sc. Legislatorem, id
est, in legem Mosaicam. Specie quidem baptismatis transeundo mare, initiati
sunt Hebraei, ut nos in Christum baptizamur, id est, Christo and Christianismo
per baptismum initiamur and incorporamur. Unde Exodus 14.31. subditur (post
transitum maris rubri) crediderunt Domino and Mosi servo (id est legisl^tori)
ejus. Cornel. a Lap. in loc. Est autem baptizari in aliquem vel in ejus nomen,
se ei auctorare and devorere, atque de ejus nomine appellari velle. Paulus, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. (...) etc. respicic^ illud Exodus 14 31. Crediderunt in Deum and
Mosem servum ejus, id est Mosi tanquam Dei Ministro cum bona fiducia regendos
se commisere. H. Grot. in Matthew. 28.19. Nearer home: Baptized into Moses, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. that is, to be observers of the Doctrine and Laws delivered by
Moses, as we by Baptism are bound to the doctrine of the Gospel. Barnard.
Thesaur. Biblic. in the word Baptized. In that Paul says, We are baptized into
Moses, he insinuates a Covenant of observing the Law of Moses; to which they
were hereby bound, as we are by baptism to observe the Ordinances of the
Gospel. Dr Mayre on the place, from Oecumenius. And R. C. (Mr. Cudworth before
mentioned) wonders why it should be so Magisterially imposed upon us by some,
That the Jews had but two Sacraments, sc. Circumcision and the Passover. -- He
assures us they had many more, instancing (though by way of (...), that he will
not instance, which is the strongest way of assevering, cum simulamus aliquid
praeterire, vel non scire, aut nolle dicere, quod tum maxim dicimus) in this
of our Apostle, that the Fathers were all baptized unto Moses (so he
translates, making advantage, no more then just occasion is given, of the
Original) in the cloud and in the sea; Like (says he) our Christian Baptism,
chap. 2. pa. 17. I stumbled not on these things first: Some faint conjectures
we see what other, and how many have made. Questionless it was thus, he that
said it, knew how: the Fathers were (sacramentally) baptized into Moses, or the
Law.
(...), INTO Moses, the very form (mutatis mutandis) after used by Christ, and
is or ought to be continued by us to this day. Add that in the Old Testament
the Text alleged for the Gentile, may seem at least, as authoritative for
Abraham's Seed, if not more, for the Persons there washed were Israelites, and
if, in-itiated: And in the New, our Savior desires Baptism, even of John the
Baptist, to fulfill all Matthew. 3.15. Iustitia in scripturis pro impletione
legis and caeremoniarum saepe accipitur: Quare and baptizari (quum ita dominus
instituisset) portio aliqua justitiae fuit, quam Christus (tametsi illi non
necessariam) implere voluit, and in hoc patri obedientiam praestitit, Gloss.
ordin. Nov. in loc. Dicit igitur, Sic decet nos implere omnem Justitiam, id
est, quicquid praecepit pater, cui oportet me obedire. Ibid. Christ had kept
the whole Law hitherto, as much as came in his way, says Chrysostom, Here he
comes to Baptism, quasi cumulum ((...)) illud cunctis observationibus legis
imponens. Homil. 10. in Matthew. and a little after, Iustitiam vero hic
complementum cunctorum nominat mandatorum. Vid. etiam Homil. 12. tom. eod. and
Homil. 24. tom. 1. opusc. pa. 281. Sic enim decet nos implere omnem justitiam,
id est, omnia quidem vera sunt quae memoras, sed mei adventus est ratio, ut
quia sub lege factus sum, ordo legitimus suppleatur: veni enim non ut mihi
viverem, cu^^ vita aeterna cum patre est, sed ut conditionem vestrae mortis
auferam. Et hoc est justissimum, ut quia totum suscepi hominem, per omnia
hominis transeam Sacramenta. Maxim. Taurin. Homil. 6. in Epiphan. pa. 203. and
in the next but one, Redemptionis nostra author -- ita quod Deus erat
exinanivit in semetipso, ut per omnia legalium sanctionum sacramenta transiret:
ac Circumcision, Oblation and Baptism, Homil. 8. pa. 204. Maldonate grants,
many went this way, (though he be in the dark) Sunt qui legis justitiam
interpretantur, quae in variis (ut loquitur D. Paulus) baptismatibus and
ceremoniis externis consistebat, quam Christus implere voluerit, sicut
circumcidi voluit, quia non venit solvere legem sed adimplere (Matthew. 5.37.) ut
Hieronymus and Euthymius: quibus necesse est dicere, Baptismum Johannis veteris
legis Sacramentum fuisse, quod multi de Schola Theologi, Magistrum sequuti
suum, docuerunt: But he otherwise; Comment. in Matthew. 3.15 col. 81. Baptismus
Johannis fuit sacramentum, Lombard. Sent. lib. 4. did. 2. and see Durand. upon
that Distinct. quaest. 3. Gratian, de Consecrat did. 4. ca. 14. Epiphan.
Exposit. fidei Cathol. cap. 15. and Brent. Homil. 31. in Luc. 3. fo. 63. Nearer
home: All these reasons (says Dr Mayer) are good. -- But there was one yielded
by the Lord himself which was the true reason indeed, when he says to John,
Let it be now, for Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. It was a
part of that humiliation whereby he was to humble himself, in yiedling
obedience to all the ordinances of his Father: for to fulfill all righteousness
is, to do all things by the Lord required, in his reconciliation of hard
places. But yesterday from Geneva: It becomes us to fulfill all: that is,
says Mr. Deodate, Obedience to God in all things ought to be observed by me
and all mine by my example, and particularly the observance of Ecclesiastical
Orders, and religious actions. annot. on Matthew. 3.15. It cannot be so many to
have stragled. Righteousness was, somewhat to be observed by the Law (the rule
of righteousness:) This of received and accustomed legal Baptism as well as
any thing else: though folded in silence and almost clouded in everlasting
darkness to us. And this might be that council (or will) of God some Scribes
and Pharisees did reject against themselves, Luc. 7.30. which the simpler
people believing (and doing accordingly) justified God. ver. 29
righteousness: How to fulfill what was never expected or required? (Near
whereto Epist. 73. pa. 107.
St Cyprian had observed somewhat, for giving the reason why the form was
changed in that of the Hebrews by St Peter's Council, Acts 2.38. Repent and be
baptized in the name of Jesus: he says it was, quia jam legis and Moysi
antiquissimum Baptisma fuerunt adepti, they had been as it were baptized into
the name of God, or the Father before: Whereupon Pamelius making his Number. 59.
pa. 110.
Comment says, there is allusion to that of Moses remembered, 1 Corinthians. 10.2.

Or if it be answered, This cannot be, for circumcision was always administered
in infancy, sc. the Genes. 17.12. cap. 21.4. Levit. 12.3. Luc. 1.59. cap. 2.21.
Act. 7.8. Philip. 3.5. John 7.21. -- quando (sc. octiduo exacto) par aetas
illis doloribus est. Manasseh Bon Israel: Quaest. 1. in Exodus pa. 95. Quia ante
illum (octavum diem) infans nimis tener est, and incertum an fit vitalis
futurus. Galen.: alleged by Cornel. a Lapide in Genes. 17.10. For then a
child is reckoned inter videntes aerem hujus mundi, as we would say, able to
look upon the light. Maiemon. in More Nevochim. par. 3. cap. 49. de causis
praeceptorum. More may be gleaned from Cyprian. Epist. 59. ad Fidum. Ambros. de
Abraham, lib. 2. cap. 11. Augustine. de Civ. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 26. Chrysostom.
Homil. 39. in Genes. Aquin. Sum. prima secundae, quaest. 102. art. 5. and
part. 3. quaest. 70. artic. 3. Mendocha. in 1. Reg. cap. 1. ver. 20. pa. 258.
Montacut. Origin. part. 1. sect. 71, 72, etc. Cael. Rhodigin. lib. 22. cap. 12.
Polyd. Virgil. de rerum invent. lib. 4. cap. 4. Scaliger in Fest. in Vocab.
Lustricus. Scharp. Symphon. Epoch. 3. quaest. 8. pa. 9. Godwins Antiqu. Heb.
lib. 6. cap. 1. pa. 238. Willet, Hexapla in Genes. 17. quaest. 8. pa. 162.
Tremell. comment. in Genes. 12.17. and in Levit. 12.3, etc. By like equity it
may have been appointed, that a beast, whether for presentation to God, Exodus
22.30. or immolation in his service, Levit. 22.27. must expect the maturation
of the eighth days Sun: as observed by Mr. Ainsworth on Exodus 12.5. and Cornel.
a Lapide on those texts. Then had there passed sure one Sabbath over it. R.
Menachem, on Genes. 17. and what Mysteries, nay what virtues the Hebrews always
believed (it may be, were) in the Septenary, all know.
eight day by letter of the text in rule and practice, whereas the people were
of full age, coming from Jerusalem, Judea, and the Country about Jordan,
Matthew. 3. Luc. 7. our Savior also of 30 years, by all consents ( Luc. 3.23.)
They needed not, well could not therefore be or be thought to have been
baptized: May it not hereto be replied.

2. That though this additional did or might belong to circumcision of old, to
bear a part with it in its believed work, yet delay of it might creep in in
after times, As of imposition of hands for confirmation in the Christian
Church, As (...), or Imposition of hands went at first with, or indeed was the
outward ceremony of Conferring Divine Sacred inspiration (in the phrase since
taken up we call it, The Gifts of the Holy Ghost) to those were thereby
appointed and initiated assessors of the Sanhedrim. Of the first ordination of
Ioshuah, etc. Number. 11.17, 25. it is said, Qua solennitate peracta statim
delapsus aetheriis sedibus spiritus pectora eorum implevit. Et hi porro in hunc
modum initiata cum essent, alios eadem lege auctoraverunt. Pet. Cunaeus. de
rep. Heb. lib. 1. cap. 12. and see hereof, Grot. annot. in Matthew. 19.13. and
Joseph. de Voisin. Theol. Iudaeor. lib. 1. cap. 5. pa. 76. in the margent.
which though by one of the best texts alleged for it ( Acts 19) it went This
proved at large by Joseph. Vicecom. de antiqu. rit. Baptismi. lib. 5. cap. 28,
29. Etiam infantes statim post Baptismum confirmatos esse; ac consuetudinem
ipsam confirmationis baptismo subdendae ab Apostolis profectam. cap. 30. So
Polydor* Virgil. de rerum invent. lib. 5. cap. 3. Joan. Bapt. Casalius. de
veteribus Christianorum rit. cap. 5. p. 55. and B. Rhenanus, si Episcopus
adest, statim confirmari oportet. annot. in Tertullian: de Corona. tom. 2. pa.
857. Bellarmine labors to prove it a distinct Sacrament. Against whom D.
Chamier opposes and proves, it was but an Appendix of Baptism at first.
Panstrat. Cathol. tom. 4. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 14, 16, etc. True enough: it
was so: Proof offers it self in plenty. In the East and South, sc. in Ethiopia
and Greece they continue still joined together. Joseph. Vicecom. lib. 5. cap.
32.
with Baptism at first, and Act. 8.16, 17.
both did but Or, God by them, or with them, or in, by, or with the use of
them. Faciles esse debemus in verborum usu, cum de re constat. Keckerman.
Logic. Every good giving and every perfect gift, both the thing and the
dispensation, Is from above, Jam. 1.17.
give so much grace of the Holy Ghost, as might The ancient Custom of the
Church was, after they had baptized to add imposition of hands, with effectual
prayer for the illumination of Gods most holy spirit, to confirm and perfect
that which the grace of the same spirit had already begun in Baptism. Hookers
Polit. lib. 5. sect. 66. ut pleni Christiani inveniantur. de Consecrat. did.
5. cap. Omnes fideles.
complete Christians (I speak after the manner of men) yet in after times that
was De tempore quoque confirmationis video bonis viris utriusque partis non
displicere, si ejus usus ad aetatem paulo adultiorem differatur: Quod quamvis
praeter ecclesiae autiquae consuetudinem sit (in qua ad Baptismum statim, si
fieri poterat, confirmatio sacri Chrismatis accedebat:) tamen exemplo non
prorsus caret. Nam and corporis and sanguinis Dominici communio haud secus
utrique Baptismi and Confirmationis Sacramento adjungebatur, -- ad quam tamen
Dominici corporis and sanguinis confirmationem nunc communi ecclesiae consensu,
in ecclesiis potissimum Latinis, non nisi adultiore aetate pueros admitti
videmus. G. Cassand. Consultat. in artic. 9. pa. 85..
delayed both in rule and practice, and men might have, nay had hands laid on
them after 30 or 40; why not in Baptism in like manner? Time has produced
many strange alterations, in Sacraments, of Sacraments, (that is more then
timing them) and in this very Sacrament of Baptism: And as for delay of time
for ministration, The Breerwoods Enquiries, cap. 17
Circassians defer it till the eighth year, the Anabaptists (or rather
Antipaedobaptists, who sure have somewhat to say for themselves) would have
none come so soon, St. The life of St Ambrose, by Baronius, before his Works,
page 4.
Ambrose delayed till he was chosen Bishop, many As Constantin the GREAT till
near his death: in Eusebius. de vita Constantin. lib. 4. cap. 62. Theodorit lib.
1. cap. 32. till the year of his age 65. says Socrates, Histor. Eccles. lib. 1.
cap. 26. Gregory Nazianzene, long Montacut. Origin. par. 1. sect. 106. pa. 105.
and so St Augustine, Confession, lib. 1. cap. 11. The learned know how much of
the primitive Fathers eloquence was spent in urging backward men not to delay
Baptism: The beginning of St. Chrysostom 59 Homily ad Illuminandos, tends
that way, tom. 1. pa. 706. and see Socrates his Ecclesiast. History. lib 1.
cap. 6.
others til ripe or old age, and (that which is more considerable to our
purpose then all the rest, and I believe very considerable) Those For instance,
the Ethiopian believers, of whom we read in Damianus a Goes, pa. 559. Nay
more: Omnes nationes extra fines Latinos, statum baptismi diem, nisi mortis
periculo intercedente, hoc est, a partu octuagesimum expectant. Aethiopes -- in
faeminis -- quadragesimum, qua de re extat constitutio Leonis Imperatoris. G.
Cassandri testimonia veterum pro paedobapt. In his Works printed at Paris, pa.
691.
Christian Nations which, as it is like from their going together at the first
(as shall be said more hereafter) join circumcision and Baptism for
matriculating into the Christian profession to this day, yet put off the later
for a time. Circumcision passes the 8th day as in the Law, and as they have
tradition for practice, from those who delivered them over both the rite and
the Law: But Baptism is delayed about a quarter of a year; to the eightieth
day in females, to the fortieth in males, (just the limitation of time for the
mothers purification by the Law, Levit. 12. to which there was annexed her
Baptism or Vid. Buxtorf. Synagog. Iud. cap. 2.
exact washing;) To omit that is By Mr. Purchase in his Pilgrim. lib. 2 cap. 2.
alleged from Pet. Ricius and others, that the Hebrews themselves do not add
Baptism to Circumcision the same day, as should seem, but stay till the child
is Baptismus antem non adhibebatur antequam circumcisionis vulnusculum integre
resanaretur. Seldom, de Iur. Not. etc. pa. 145. If he (the examined gentile)
remain unshaken by his examination and protest, let him be circumcised, and
when he is well, let him be washed in water, in the presence of Three, etc. This
is the late manner of Ministration, from a Venetian Rabbine, Ludovicus
Mutinensis, alleged there, pa. 152.
whole. Circumcision it self, notwithstanding the plainest Letter of the Law
for the 8th day precisely, was yet omitted once for forty years together in the
Wilderness, as may be seen in Josh. 5.5, etc. And may not then much rather an
alteration creep in of timing that, which never was restrained under any
certain bound and limit of time, nor it self was more then darkly commanded?

But grant, Neither of these. Regularly or practically none of Abraham's seed
were ever baptized, nor should have been, (though Gamaliels Scholar himself an
Hebrew, and writing as St Hierom was wont to say, Hebraeus Hebraeis Hebraice,
in that Epistle mentions Baptisms in the plural, as well known among them,
chap. 6.2.) but grant, nor sooner nor later the holy seed ever needed or had
this purification, yet

3. Might not so famous and noted a holy Prophet as John the BAPTIST ( then
whom among those born of women there arose not a greater, Matthew. 11.11.) and in
a business of BAPTISM, begin? making the best use he could devise of that rite
he was so eminently entrusted a Minister of before, toward that regeneration
even of Videtur igitur Johannes ( says H. Grotius, speaking of this
Ministration, and that it was for amendment) hac sacra ceremonia indicare
voluisse, Judaeos, quantumvis Dei veteres foederatos, in tantum jam a vera
pierate descivisse, ut Idolorum cultoribus accensendi essent, planeque eorum
exemplo totum vitae genus mutare deberent, si vellent esse salvi. annotat. in
Matthew. 3.6.
them he saw was needful to enter them in to the new and approaching Kingdom
of God? The work it self (of entrance) he might not be able absolutely and
perfectly to perform, as needed and full out, but howsoever he might do what he
could, let them to the door by his Water Baptism, leaving the rest to be
supplied and perfected by him that could, even let them quite in; by giving to
water the gifts of the Holy Ghost. So being the Accepit autem hoc Johannes
certae dispensationis gratia, non diu mansurum, sed quantum satis esset ad
parandam viam Domino, cujus eum esse praecursorem agnoscebat. Augustine. de
Baptismo cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 9. tom. 7. pa. 59.
forerunner of Christ, Luc. 3.4. the Angel of his face And Malach. 3.1. Matthew.
11.10. Luc. 1.76. and chap. 7.27.
Mar. 1.2. and to prepare the way of the Lord, Matthew. 3.3. (who meant to make
more of this outward rite, even a sanctifying Sacrament, the Key of Heaven door
complete on Earth, to let into the congregation of Sion) He might begin, by See
Luc. 7.30.
Gods appointment and Christ's approbation, to sanctify that Rite anew and
farther, whereof he had been long an entrusted Minister, by letting it have
operation upon the holy seed, and so give it some small advance, a partial
consecration toward what it should be after complete, by conferring what he
could make it, upon the holy circumcision: To which purpose he administered it
even most solemnly, and with famous care; though with this reserve and still
mentioned reference farther, When HE comes, of whom I so often speak, and of
whose shoo-strings I am not worthy to ty or unty, HE shall do more, But I have
done what I could.

4. This may be: but I find my self a little in the dark: Too far with
confidence would not do well; and yet the holy text methinks heeded and not
prejudged, sounds all along much this way. When behold light shines in the
darkness, and I am led by the hand to behold clear truth or fairest
probability. It Is by him I dare trust, who assures from the Rabbines that no
less Israel was baptized then Edom, both had their initiation by circumcision
and Baptism both, yea all Nations by all three, and with omission of none they
came over and were engaged to the Law. Tria adhibebantur initiamenta
Doctissimus, clarissimus, consultissimus, and citra controversiam in re
literaria versatissimus omnigena I.S. in lib. de Jure not. and gent. etc. 2.
pa. 141.
says he (no fewer) sine quibus nec ipsi Israelitae, foedus illud, juxta
receptam ipsorum sententiam, primo inierant, Nimirum Circumcisione, Baptismo
and oblatione. And a little after, Tribus initiamentis inierant Israelitae
foedus, which were as before: and Commentar. in Eutych. number 10. pa. 24.
elsewhere, (as to this) -- quo (Baptismo) tum parents ipsorum, ut volunt
ipsi, tum proselyti Judaismo initiabantur, Besides what At the giving of the
Law in Sinai, Baptism initiatory thereinto was added; id est, ut universus
populus adeoque sexus uterque tum Originariorum tum Proselytorum justitiae ante
admissorum se sanctificaret atque aqua seu Baptismo mundaret. lib. 1. de Syned.
pa. 22.
since and by By three things did Israel enter into the Covenant: by
Circumcision and Baptism and Sacrifice. Circumcision was in Egypt, Exodus
12.48, etc. And so in all ages, when an Ethnike is willing to enter into the
Covenant, and gather himself under the wings of the Majesty of God, He must do
likewise, as is written Numb. 15.15, 16. As ye are, so shall the stranger be
before the Lord: One Law and one manner shall be for you and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you. How are ye? By Circumcision, Baptism and bringing of
Sacrifice, So likewise the stranger throughout all generations, etc. Maiemon.
in Misn. tom. 2. alleged by Mr. Ainsworth in Genes. 17.12. St Cyprian
insinuates, the reason of the form diversifyed from the usual, Act. 2.38. in
Peter's directing his Countrymen to be baptized in the name of Christ only, to
be, because (or as if) they had been before baptized in the name of the Father;
Now therefore none was needed or fit to be added but only the Son. And soon
after: Alia fuit Judaeorum sub Apostolis ratio, alia est gentilium conditio.
Illi, quia jam legis and Moysi antiquissimum Baptisma fuerant adepti, in nomine
quoque Jesu Christi erant baptizandi, secundum quod Apostolus Petrus ad eos
loquitur, Paenitemini and baptizetur unusquisque vestrum in Nomine Domini Jesu
Christi in remissionem peccatorum, etc Acts 2.38. Jesu Christi mentionem facit
Petrus, non quasi Pater omitteretur, sed ut Patri quoque Filius adjungeretur.
Epist. 73. ad Juhaian. pa. 107. And yet I confess very few glimpses of such
light could I ever find shining from the Christian Fathers. The doctrine was
unknown to most of them, and they usually proceeded upon other grounds. Ad
Iudaeos dictum purat Cyprianus (illud. Act. 2) eo quod and ipsi Baptismum etiam
haberent, etc. Vasquez. in 3. partem Thom. Disput. 143. cap 3. sect. 19.
others. So that now the objection vanishes, all clears up; the Hebrew seed
might be baptized as well as any other, for they were: Christ and the people;
All about Jordan; the very Scribes and Pharisees not left out; and this by a
work of John's ordinary Ministry. By Text, Tradition, Custom, or howsoever it
was thought to be enjoined and accordingly observed, It was so.

Ob. I may not but take notice of what is of late published for granted, which
would imply a cross hereto, sc. That that whole nation was baptized once for
all in Sinai, no Ex parentum Baptismo rite peracto posteri universi pro
initiatis, quantum ad Baptismum solum, satis habebantur; nec Baptismus ut.
Circumcissio erat in p^steris reperendus. Seldom. de Syned. vet. Hebr. lib. 1.
pa. 23.
repetition was of this rite to them or any other; Circumcision was indeed
hereditary and to be renewed in Posterity, but Baptism was such a personal act,
as passing on any man, the virtue thereof was continued to his whole line, nor
needed ever after be repeated in Gentile or Israelite. But,

Ans. 1. This is only said. 2. No authority produced for this variation, nor
perhaps can be. Indeed the Law says, Every male child shall be circumcised the
eight day in your generations, Genes. 17. Not, you and your posterity wash your
garments, in Exodus 19. But then withal the Gospel says but, Baptize all
Nations, Matthew. 28.19. and yet this carries for a succession: Why not that of
Horeb? 3. There was equal necessity, (necessitate rei) for both, and equal
authority, of Jus Divinum: Why should it be, Circumcise a man and his seed, and
Baptize, but not again? 4. The several intentions of these rites are in granted
view; One, Ut Sacramentum initiationi^ faderi Abrahae^ Circumcisio erat, ita
intelligunt Magistri Sacramentum initiationis (...) receptioni legis sacrae in
Sinai pariter fuisse Baptismum. Id pa. eadem.
to let into the Covenant with Abraham, The other, to the Law of Moses: Was not
Israel still to be let into both? as sure to Moses's Covenant, as to Abraham's?
and the seal as necessary? and to be repeated? 5. Take the best, Real Comment:
Those Judaizing Christians (Ebonites and Cerinthians heretofore; Habassines,
and Egiptians, etc. of late) who retain circumcision and Baptism both, with the
rites; whence should they have the repetition of them, but from whom they had
the rites? Sure, they yet baptize the baptized, as well as circumcise the
circumcised. 6. Is any text or order to be produced for our varying from what
was always used? We see what is done: the rite it self of washing is known to
come from Jewry: the succession from what was Apostolical: No reason of change
can be assigned: or time. Therefore what we do, as has been done always, and
no change can be assigned, (at the first chiefly, when change was to be made,)
Very likely we take and continue as it had been before and always; else show
the variation: or would the Catholic Church have been so presumptuous as to
alter and continue what no reason appears, or authority for, or that ever it
should have been altered! Wherefore, (Pace tanti viri dixerim) I oppose not,
but propose, May it not have been thus? May not the posterity of the baptized
have been ever as now (and as equal strength of reason always would they
should) baptized, as well as the sons of the circumcised, circumcised? Was not
an admission to Moses as fit and necessary and successively, as unto Abraham?
and the seal of that admission? Might not Jewry pattern out, To baptize of the
baptized, to Aebion and Cerinthus, Egypt, Ethiopia, etc. as well as To
circumcise of the circumcised, which we see done? Or, if not, I am mistaken:
(which is not much: nor unlikely: and I ask pardon:) But if, then might Israel
be baptized; into their Law; Scribes, Pharisees* and all, even our Savior not
excepted; for usually of that Nation men were: And so, the objection above
vanishes, of the unlikelyhood of that Nations Baptism; and the difference may
have been newly aright stated between John's Hebrew, and Christ's Christian
Sacrament.

Ob. If it be said, This may yet seem strange, that born, professed, natural
Israelites should need, or be capable of, any new translation, as into the Law,
etc.

Answ. 1. As to the plea of Nature, remember they must be also circumcised, or
else they were not within the Covenant.

2. As to their possible translation, remember what before of Christians
deferring the undoubted Ordinances of God, as Baptism: which might be here put
off.

3. Or John might here a little Johannis vero Baptisma Judaico multo sublimius
fuit, humilius vero nostro: velut pons quidam utriusqu^ hujus Baptismatis, ab
illo ad istud quasi manuducens Chrysostom. Homil. 23. de Baptismo Chr. tom. 1.
pa. 279.
vary. He might be an ordinary Minister of Proselyte-Baptisme, and called
therefore, the BAPTIST, and as such baptize multitudes, all that came: But to
his own Nation he might think good to alter; And change toward the Kingdom of
God, that rite which ere long was thitherward to be wholly varied and changed.

And this might both reasonably startle the high court of Ex legatione hac
Concilii Hierosolymitani ad Johannem, ut interrogarent eum, quisnam ipse esset?
Pontificii sanctam scilicet suam haereticae pravitatis inquisitionem probare
and commendare annituntur: How, wherein, and yet how incongruously either, see
in. Conrad. Dieterick, tom. 1. pa. 51, etc. Homil. 4. Advent.
Inquisition at Jerusalem, and give the occasion why their doubt by their
messenger) should come forth in that form we see it does, in that reply of
theirs to his former answers, Jo. 1.25. Why baptizest thou then (say they) If
thou be neither Messiah, nor Elias, nor a Prophet. They could not, 1, Question
him for baptizing, that is, in any sort, (the rather being of the Priests line,
the Son of Zacharias, Luc. 1.) Washings and for purification being with them
and their Nation so usual as nothing more. (Remember of them what but now
enough; and add what ordered for Exodus 29.6.
Priests and Levit. 8.6. Number. 8.7.
Levites; by diverse places of the Epistle to the So many understand, chap. 6.2.
which seems yet to look another way. More to be relied on seems chap. 9.10.
Hebrews, continued to Evangelical times.) Nor could they, 2. Trouble him about
Baptizing Proselytes, for the same reason, and from what they saw every Priest
do every day. 3. Some have thought, it was from The Question formal) put by Dr
Jackson; Whether the Priests and Levits or the Pharisees had their praenotions
or belief in general, That the Messiah his first manifestation to the world
should be solemnized by Baptism, from written traditions of the ancients only?
or, whether it were grounded upon the express testimony of Scripture or the
written word of God? His answer gives for the later way: and many texts pitched
upon, as Esai 35.40, 41, etc. in Christ's answer to John's question. part. 2.
memb. 2. branch. 2. Baptismum aliquem universalem circa tempora Messiae
expectabant ex zachariae 13. locisque aliis. H. Grot. annotat. in Joan. 1.25.
pa. 860.
Scripture, by Hence the persons sent to entangle John Baptist, were Pharisees,
best skilled in traditions: observed by Maldonate in Joan. 1.24. sect. 192. and
vide ejusdem commentar. in Matthew. 3.10. col 78.
tradition or otherwise (howsoever) received, that Persuasum habebant Iudaei
fore, ut Christus cum veniret, baptizaret. id. in Mat. 3.11. At least he or his
Disciples. Dr. Iackson, in his Treatise upon Christ's answer to John's Question.
sect. 35. resumed, in sect. 41. pa. 82. Sunt and qui scribunt temporibus
Messiae tantam fore turbam conversorum, ut per lavacrum, non per circumcisionem
sint admittendi. Grot. annot. ad Matthew. 3.6. pa. 41. Heed to this purpose as
well the rise as consequence of that part of John's answer to his disciples
interpellation, which is in John 3.28. Ye are witnesses, I said, I am not the
Christ, but sent before him, when news was brought of one baptizing, and many
coming to him. And before, This is he of whom I said, He that comes after me
is preferred before me: And I knew him not, but that he should be made known
unto Israel, THEREFORE am I come baptizing with water, chap. 1.30, 31.
Baptism should precede, or in some way or other belong to the Kingdom of the
Messiah, and therefore they desire to know, how he, having denied himself to be
such (in the reply before) could then take upon him such a Ministration as did
not belong unto him. But these heed not, 1. The names of Elias and (...) ( any
prophet, in the text) whose degree might have born out the business as well. 2.
What but now of Baptismes, various, of sundry sorts, for sundry ends, open,
visible, every day. It remains therefore that neither Baptism, nor of
Proselytes, nor as belonging to the Messiah could any way trouble or give
ground of reasonable doubt (which have been the things thought) But the new way
(likely) Why Abraham's seed? Why thus? distorting the old ceremony to a new
frame or end, or making to or toward something it had not (having no Nulla,
quisquis es, in te est authoritas, nihil magni aut admirabilis, Quid quaeso
Baptizas? Quid, cum nihil ipse sis, rem tantam moliris? Cyril. Alexand. in
Joan. 1. tom. 4. pa. 110.
authority or power extraordinary to bear out so bold or perilous Neque enim
res levis momenti erat, quicquam in ecclesia Dei novare: praesertim novum
profiteri initiationis genus, quod perfectius esset lege Dei. Calvin. Harmon.
Evang. pa: 90.
innovation!) These, say they, thou have disclaimed already, tell us how then
thou can, justify thy new way, So, thus, in this manner Baptizing, whereas
thou art neither Messiah, Elias, nor (eminently) a Prophet. This seems to make
the doubt reasonable, gives the bottom of the business fit to trouble an high
Inquisition, and withal involves or permits answer to (or thitherward) the
cross objection, that Christ's forerunner the Baptist was not a baptizer of
Proselytes (to the Law) because he baptized his own Nation; yes he might be
both, he might do both; And here (which might well trouble the Inquisitors for
heretical pravity) be changing the one into the other, that formerly used into
now-introductory to the Kingdom of God. By the way: And this opinion and
determination might light toward better answer to that rational objection made
against John's Baptism in the Martyr Iustins time, by some who wondered how he
could minister and the people receive baptism under the Law, they being under
the Law, for which they had no Law, and yet not be thereby transgressors of the
Law. Si Baptismus Iohannis (say they) non secundum legem fuit, ut certe non
fuit (they took this for granted, and to them the doubt thereby hardly soluble)
quomodo ergo praeter legem non fuit? and quomodo ab his qui sub lege vivebant
receptus fuit? (they might well say so, considering how that Nation was bound
to their Law) Quomodo autem non violatores leges fuere ((...)) qui legi subditi
cum essent, praeter legem Baptismum susceperunt. Sin sub lege Baptismus gratiae
obtinuit (for that I doubt not is the sense, though Langius translates
otherwise) qui neque secundum legem, neque supra legem, neque praeter legem
dictus, (...) secundum quid extitisse reperietur? Quaestion. ad Orthod. 38. pa.
413. The answer there given is, 'Twas praevious to the Gospel, therefore above
the Law, for it assoyled not legal transgressors, etc. Nor does this assoil
the doubt; nor them very well from being (...), besides the Law, living under
it. The fairer, clearer, fuller answer might be: All this was (taking in
expressions and limitations before) according to the Law, and then what
inconvenience could follow, or difficulties remain?


Ob. If it be farther said (in objection to the main at first) Those Baptismes
were equal, one reaching as far as another; for John's was for remission of sin,
what needed or could Christ's or any other do after any more?

Ans. St Augustine De Baptismo contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 10.
answered long since, Spe dimissa fuisse peccata Baptismo Johannis, Christi
Baptismo reipsa dimitti: John's gave hope of forgiveness, Christ's reality; Or I
send farther to that Father and others, with whom that doubt found long since
both mention and satisfaction.

Ob. Or if it be urged lastly, they were not in Scripture, show thence such
things as these.

Answ. I proposed them not as such. Not as found in Scripture, or borrowed of
Scripture, but agreeing with Scripture, furthering, I hope the interpretation
of Scripture, as well bottomed there too, as many current opinions, even about
Baptism, and in the Originals, But if offering any contradiction to Scripture,
I am ready not only invertere stylum to raze out all presently, but to be the
first shall cast off the remainder whither it deserves.

There can only remain a seeming to cross our own, or possible thwarting
Protestant determinations in these. Whereof yet can be neither doubt nor fear.
For, 1. As to In publicis Protestantium ecclesiarum confessionibus nihil adhuc
mihi lectum hujusce furfuris, ( that John's Baptism and Christ's were all one)
in ecclesiae Anglicanae (...) nihil extat, huc vel detorquendum: quum potius
contra. Montacut: Origin. par. 2. sect. 60. pa. 390.
Protestant Churches, they have not, as far as I know, made any determination
at all, I mean in their Articles, Orders, Acts, Convocations, or whatever is of
public account* Particularly, I assure my self, not the Church of our Nation;
And for private men, they may vary, Why not? with like liberty, in things not
publicly determined, on all sides? Though I seek no such refuge, I need not,
for, 2. I aver nothing. I bind not on other men's shoulders the weight of one
line, or burden their faith with one assertion. All I do, is, in humility, and
as a lover and seeker of truth, to propose with -- Quae cum exponit (Origines)
frequenter addere solet and profiteri, se non haec quasi diffinitiva
pronunciare sententia, nec statuto dogmate terminare, sed inquirere pro viribus
and sensum discutere scripturarum, nec tamen profiteri quod integre perfecteque
comprehenderit: suspicari magis se de quamplurimis dicens, nec tamen certum
esse quia in omnibus quod perfectum est and integrum assecutus sit. Apolog.
Eusebii Caesar: pro origin, inter opera Hieron. tom. 9. pa. 114.
modesty, the fruit of mine own conceptions to view and judgment, and which
mine own thoughts have suggested and whisphered at least for probable truth: (
dissero non assero, as he said) If to any they seem otherwise, the looker on
has his leave and choice, whether to take or leave; but no reason to blame me
who meant but to lend him my hand to lead (nor force) him to that I apprehended
the righter way. Potest mihi aliud videri, alteri aliud: sed neque ego quod
dixero praescribo alteri ad meliorem intellectum, nec ille mihi, an utrumque
accipiendum sit, si utrumque cum fide concordat. Augustine: Enarrat. in Psalm.
36. conc. 1. tom. 8. pa. 112. Thus, All may prophecy one and one, that all may
learn and all receive comfort: for the spirits of the prophets ((...), their
gifts, revelations, Inspirations, Insufflations) are subject to the Prophets.
1. Corinthians. 14.31, 32.
Another may with the same leave and love embrace that fancy or opinion which
is the (...). Clemen. Alexand. Strom. 1.
child of his own teeming brain, and so by the collision of differing or
opposed judgments that truth chance to be struck out to light, which otherwise
might have lain hid in perpetual darkness. Times of reformation have been
reasonably looked upon as affording liberty of disquisition; in order to the
work in hand etc.

I confess I had been once like to give entertainment to another opinion of
John's Baptism, not touched at before, as far I know, by any, much favored by
the glances of the text throughout, and meetly well agreeing with the beliefs,
usages and customs both of Jewry* and abroad (which was the reason why I liked
it:) Although it be not true, it may have of truth in it, and therefore I shall
not think much to set it down; Let the probability of things all along be my
excuse; it is this.

That John's Baptism might be nothing else but a very solemn and This manner of
Baptizing (sc. as in making Proselytes) they used likewise in reconciling and
receiving penitents, which had given scandal by any notorious offenses, in
token of repentance and newness of life, having first before this washing
testified their humiliation by fasting and prayer. Purchase. Pilgrim. lib. 2.
cap. 2. of the Hebrew Law. Among the Pagans, impuritatis labes qualiscunque
dilui ac satis purgari plerunque credebatur ex corporis in aqua viva ablutione.
Seldom. de Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 10. pa. 399. ( Heed well that epithete, aqua
VIVA; as in the Hebrews Law it was, (...), Levit. 14. ver. 5.50, 51, 52. as it
were Quick, and of Life to work out and thereby purify, as Levit. 15.13.
Cantic. 4.15. zachar. 14.8. Joan. 4.10. and cap^ 7.38. ALL LIVING Waters,) and
in the Poet -- Donec me flumine vivo Abluero, Atque id. de Tertullianis,
Arnobius, Lactantius, ejusmodi alii Paganis hoc exprobrant, quasi ex ablutione
ejusmodi se ante flagitiis in qui natissimos satis mundatos existimarent. pa.
400. In sum, Receptissima erat in sacrorum disciplina persuasio illa de
impuritatis omnimodo purgatione per Ablutiones and sui and vestium, quibus
anteacti sceleris redargutio, increpatio and liberatio adeoque Poenitentia
ejusque effectus etiam significabatur, uti ex Artemidori itidem and Achmete
edisci potest. ibid. Vid. etiam Th. Aquin. par. 3. quest. 38. artic. 1.
Respondeo.
penitential washing, such as the Their brazen Laver made and consecrated under
(their moving Temple) the Tabernacle, Exodus 30. their many other under (their
fixed tabernacle) the Temple, 2. Chron. 4. especially their MOLTEN SEA (so big)
carefully provided and stately framed by Solomon. 1 King. 7. 2 Chronicles. 4. what
speak these but the frequency of this rite, (to them both national and
religious) and such as did call for and had a good part of their traditionary
or additional Law, in rules hereabout? For whereas there were of the Talmud six
parts, of those six one is spent chiefly in Purification: and the sixth book of
that sixth part entitled (containing 10. chapters) Tractatus collectionum
aquarum, in quibus agitur de font atque aquis, in quibus baptizabantur homines
utriusque sexus, ut ab immunditiis spiritualibus purificarentur, says Pet.
Galatin. de arcanis Catholicae veritatis, lib. 1. cap. 5. Israel Iudaeus
quotidie lavatur, quia quotidie inquinatur, so Tertullian, de Baptismo. cap.
15. Quisquis enim immunditiem contraxerat undis abluebatur, vestesque etiam
ips^s lavabat, atque ita demum aditus ei ad castra patebat, so he who might
know better then another, Ioannes Damascenus, lib. 4. de fide orthod. cap. 10.
Nothing was among them more usual. That Combustion in John 3.25. was about
their religion, for Saepe and in omni vita Iudaei baptizabant, qui and
baptizando leviora crimina (nor reaching the public or the life of a man)
tolli putabant. ut and varios baptismos sive ablutiones haberent. Dan. Heins.
Aristarch. sac. ad Joan. 4.25. Sicut and apud Hebraeos aquae lotio ad
emundationem pollutionis saepe usurpata est, ut Levit. 16. and cap. 25. Exodus
30. Deuter. 23. 4 Reg. 5. cum similibus. Greg. Tholosan. syntagm. lib. 31. 8.
6. In fact, The seventy Translators of the Bible washed and so purified
themselves every morning, and to fit them for their work, before they went to
their studies: Joseph. Antiqu. 12. cap. 2. The Essaeans washed every day, and
in cold water, id. de bell. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 7. Those Mungrels, the
Samaritans, often: as, when they returned home from Merchandise trade,
traffic, etc. Mountag. Acts and Monum. chap. 7. sect. 145. Remember, and all
these had a different aim from, to Initiate.
Jews (after much fasting and prayer) used for purification from their (...).
Damascen. de fide, 4. 10. Alii etiam fuere in Hebraeorum ritibus baptismi
(besides for admission into the Synagogue) qui non solum (...) seu sordium
purgationes, sed and ut peccatorum ablutiones habebantur; de quibus Isai. 1.16.
Eulog. contra Novatianos, lib. 2. -- and Rab. Elias de Wides in Reschith
Chochma, seu Initio sapientiae, c. 4. and 5. -- De poenitentia verba faciens
ille, -- oportet (inquit) paenitentem purgare se lavacro, and postmodum
sanctificare se jejuniis, etc. Et Petrus Blessensis contra perfidiam Iudaeorum,
cap. 26. Crediderunt Iudaei and adhuc credunt, per aquam frigidam peccata
dimitti. unde and ipsi solent multis baptismatibus exerceri. Ejusmodi etiam
ablutionem Herbanus Iudaeus in disputatione cum Gregentio Archiepiscopo
Tephrensi memorat, ubi peccatorem poenitentem (...), ablutum (in versione Nic.
Gulonii pro eo (absolutum) male legitur) ut anima expiatum and ad bonam mentem
reversum, in templum, ex jure Hebraico, admittendum ad sacra antiquitus fuisse
ait. Seldom. de succession. in bon. defunct. cap. 26. But such Baptism was only
in vitae atque morum, not in Natalium Novationem seu regenerationem, as he
there notes. In aquas se submergunt, and in iisdem peccata tam plene a se
abluunt ut purissimi fiant. Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. cap. 20.
sins, Washing of the body shadowing and signifying, if not furthering and
operating the inward purity and cleanness of mind and soul, (as many have been
apt to think, and those very, very many) or a kind of atonement with Heaven
(for which there was time and rite, and very For being drawn so easily to be
baptized ( so many, from Jerusalem, Judea, and all about Jordan) it may be
said, That washings that they might be cleansed from the sins they had
committed, were in use amongst them by the Law: And therefore this being a
thing they were of old grounded in, it is no marvel that they now off^r
themselves. etc. Mayer. tom. 1. pa. 69. Of washings by the Law we have, Levit.
13.54, 58. chap. 15.10, 11, 16, 18. chap. 17.15, 16. Number. 10.19, 20. chap.
31.19, 20. Deuter. 23.11. Washing of garments, in Levit. 11.25. and chap.
14.47. was interpreted of themselves, before. And from both and their
multitude, It is the use of the Scripture (says Dr Raynolds) to describe
spiritual duties by expressions drawn from Ceremonies and usages under the Law,
as repentance is called washing, Es. 1. Sermon. on Hos. 4.2. Other such allusions
are in Ierem. 4.14. Psalm. 51.2, 7. Revel. 1.5.

Four sorts of unlcean persons, to be cleansed must be baptized and also bring
sacrifice. 1. The Leper. 2. the Woman puerpura, that had lain in 3. the Man. 4.
the Woman, that had an issue ((...), the Septuagint gives, Levit. 15.) and this
according to the Law. Ainsworth, on Levit. 12.6. pa. 63. Josephus confirms,
that the cleansing of that infirmity requires both sacrifice and bathing in
cold water, lib. 3. cap. 10. and till this were done women (post copulam) were
held unclean, as having a part of their souls defiled by that act, lib. 2.
contra. Apion. Which was after taken into the Christian Law. For Gregory of
Rome in answer of some doubts to Augustine (first) Archbishop of Cant. gives
this order: Vir autem cum propria conjuge dormiens, nisi lotus aqua Ecclesiam
intrare non debet, sed neque lotus, statim. fetching it from the purifying Law
of old Israel, Levit. 15. and adding: that, though other Nations might teach
otherwise, Romanorum tamen semper ab antiquioribus usus fuit, post admixtionem
propriae conjugis, and Lavacri purificationem quaerere, and ab ecclesiae
ingressu Paululum reverenter abstinere; with (a little after) the same lavatory
preparation directed for receiving the pledge of Christians holy Communication
one with another, in Bedes Histor. Ecclesiast. 1. cap. 27. Taken into the
Decree so late as by Gratian, in Cause. 33. Quaest. 4. ca. 7. which shows it had
some influence then where the Bible went. Neque ab uxore ad sacra licitum esse
illotis adire sanxerunt (Aegyptii) remembers Clemens of Alexand. in Stromat. 1.
pa. 306. and in the Alcoran, as if Religions did conspire in this case to make
somewhat conscientious as of natural piety: Non ebrii, sed sobrii oratum ibant
(Mahometani:) and post coitum, and egestionem, non prius orabant, quam aqua aut
pulvere mundae terrae abluti essent. Azoara. 9. Alleged by the Centurists of
Maydenburg, in Centur. 7. cap. 15. de religionibus externis. col. 354.


Ablution appointed by the Law) or reconciliation with God and his Church: In a
word, the rite of a very set and solemn Penance (if we may borrow a word from
beyond sea). And for all this are more then flattering glances of the text if
the words and coherence be heeded and judged of without prejudice. As, John the
person, ministering, his Matthew. 3.1, 4. chap. 11.8, 18. Mar. 1.3, 4, 6. Luc.
7.33.
austerity of life like a Hoc illius etiam Rabitus ipse ostendir, qui utique
compunctioni and paenitentiae congruebat. Chrysostom. Homil. 10. in Matthew. 10.
penitentiary; the Matthew. 3.5, 6 Mar. 1.5 Luc. 3.7, 10, 12. and cap. 7.29
peoples coming to him, as about such a business; their Matthew. 3.6. Mar. 1.5.
confession of sins; for Mar. 1.4. Luc. 3 3.
remission of sins; and to Mat. 3.7. Luc. 3.7.
avoid future wrath; the Matthew. 3.7.
Pharisees coming with the rest, a Ib. and cap. 12.3. and cap. 23.33.
venomous and viperous generation that had most need (though not all of them;
Some let the simple people go before them in accepting this Luc. 7.29, 30.
council of God for their justification) And the righteous son of God should
have been Matthew. 3.14. John forbade him, saying, I have need to be baptized of
thee, and come thou to me.
repelled, as in whose spotless perfection, a Lavare eum in quo non erat
peccatum existimabat (Johannes) superfluum. Cyprian. de Cardinal.
Christioperibus. pa. 267. Venit ad Iohannis Baptisma (Christus) sed Iohannis
Baptisma habebat paenitentiam delictorum. Et ideo prohibet eum Johannes ducens,
Ego a te debeo baptizari and tu Venis ad me! Cur venis ad me qui peccatum non
habes? ille enim baptizandus est a me qui peccatum habet. Qui autem peccatum
non fecit, lavacrum poenitentiae cur requirat? Ambros. in Luc. 3. Ego utique a
te debeo baptizari, qui mihi est ex paterna praevaricatione corruption, and tibi
in Majestate paterna communio: -- Ego terrenum animal tu agnus Dei. Ego peccati
lege mortalis, tu autem adversus peccata veniens nescis subjacere peccato.
Maxim. Taurinens. Homil. 6. in Epiphan. De Baptismo Christi. Baptizari vis
Domine Jesus! Utquid enim, aut quid opus est tibi Baptismate? Nunquid sano opus
est medicina? aut mundatione mundo? Unde tibi peccatum ubi Baptisma sit
necessarium? -- Quam maculam habere potest agnus sine macula? Bernard. Sermon. 1.
de Epiphan. Johannes intuens eum, and spiritu per divinam revelationem
cognoscens eum esse verum Deum and hominem nullum peccatum habentem, and ob hoc
lavacro non indigentem, timuit and expavit, Et -- ex reverentia eum prohibens,
Ego (dixit) Domine (terrenus) a te (Coelesti, qui non eges) baptizari debeo:
and tu, etc. Ludolph. de Saxonia, part. 1. cap. 21. sect. 7, 8. Vid. etiam
Cyrill. Hierosolymit. Cateches. 3. pa. 20.
business of that nature could take no place. But above all, the constant and
repeated word of Baptism of Repentance, Baptism for Repentance, He preached
saying, Repent, and (what more fitly consequent and attendant to all these,
then what he also used and pressed? saying) Live not now as ye list any longer,
but bring forth fruits worthy Repentance and AMENDMENT of life. With which the
poor people were so taken and terrifyed, as it were thunder-striken with fear
and amazement, that neither pleasure nor fear of their past sins can offer any
rub, but in they com, thick and threefold; paleness is in their cheeks, and the
word of terror on their lips (even of those that were compuncti corae suo, Acts
2.38. Wounded at the heart,) Men and Brethren! Alas! Men and Brethren! Now:
what shall we do? A confused multitude comes in and cries out first, What shall
we do? The cheating Publicani (ut est genus hominum avarum, rapax and crudele)
saepe iniquis vexationibus plebem vexabant: vitia, quibus ut plurimum laborabat
ordo ille, taxat Baptista, prohibens, ne in exigendis tributis modum excedant,
id. pa. 89.
Publicans (toll-gatherers, tribute-mongers, purveyers, excisemen, Customers,
etc.) and what shall we do? (They had not wont to make such conscience of their
ways, or doubt of gain; Luc. 3.10, 11, etc.
Lucri bonus odor qualibet ex re, as he said; but now they will be bounded by
rule, and that rule the strictest, of Religion: Hanc solicitudinem gignit verus
recipiscendi affectus, ut cupide inquirat peccator, quidnam velit Deus ac
praecipiat? Responsio autem Johannis breviter definit fructus poenitentia
dignos. Calvin. Harmon. Evangel. pa. 88.
What! Now: Any thing!) The ravenous, rapacious, greedy, plundering Soldiers
with iron sides and harder hearts, whose swords had wont to be their rule, and
their power their Law, have now a case of conscience to propose to a Prophet;
Vivitur ex rapto is laid aside, and Rara fides pietasque viris qui bella
sequuntur, become to them as bad as heresy; their spirits are mollified and
hearts softened, their consciences ductile, to follow or take any impression.
And What, say they, shall we do? To which they receive such answers severally,
as may teach others (to whose guilty souls the Johannes quid facto opus esset a
turbis interrogatus, periti medici more, singulis opportuna praesidia
salutariaque pharmaca praefinit. Et quidem turbis, ut mutua benevolentia se
invicem complectantur, injungit: Publicanis vero ad telonium sedentibus, ad
immoderatam avaritiam insaciabilemque illam habendi sitim, viam obstruit:
militibus autem, ne quem temere concutiant, non absque singulari providentia
Praecepit. Deus namque nullum omnino, modo just riteque vitam instituat,
rejicit. Tit. Bostrensis ad Luc. 3. in Biblioth. Pat. Gr. pa. 781.
salve of like wholesome and saving counsel might come fitly applicable) the
proof of repentance to this very day. To the closehanded parcimonious people;
Be not so saving and distrustfully, fearfully covetous, but Tobit: 4.7.
Give alms of that is yours, and never turn the face from any in want, and
then the face of the Lord shall not be turned from you. To the Officers of the
Customs, receivers, deceivers; Leave off those hooks from between your
fingers, Wash off that birdlime wrongs all you touch with your hands, It Is an
injurious Chimistry that meddles not with any thing of another, but it
extracts and purloyns somewhat for it self, Do not plunder instead of take, and
make public power a stalking horse to creep to private unjust gain, but take
that belongs to you and be therewith contented. To the rude and Masterless
Soldiers, Remember that ye also have a Master in heaven, Do not tyrannize
instead of Rule, and spoil instead of Protect; grating, exacting, worrying,
fliecing, that the poor afflicted people may look upon you as so many wolves
sent to guard the sheep, As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked
Ruler over the poor people. Proverb. 28.15
or bears and lions to oversee the quiet fold; your profession is honorable, do
not disgrace it by unsuitable actions, staining the beauty of your Nobility by
unlawful deeds, and casting dirt upon the face of your own glory: Trouble or
misinform against none, but get your pay and be contented. These were the
parts, works, fruits, effects of John's Baptism, and do they not all look much
like or toward a business of Repentance?

The rather yet for 4. things more. Because, 1. Most practical Divines have
looked upon John, as a severe Prophet, a legal teacher, a Minister of the Law,
a terrifyer of consciences, the needle going before the thread Mat. 3.10. Luc.
3.9.
one that carried the axe, etc. 2. For what Joseph the son of Matthias has
left of his whole dispensation; himself an Historian, a Jew and This he owns of
himself, in his Preface to his History, Of the Wars of the Jews.
a Priest; it so fell out, of the same tribe and line; and not only so but of
some nearer alliance, as being of the highest Compare, for proof hereof, what
is in Luc. 1. ver. 5, 8. with what this Author has left us of himself, in the
beginning of the Relation of his own life.
course of 24 with Zacharias the Baptists Father, living in (or near) For John
came out of the Wilderness but in the 15. year of Tiberius: Luc. 3.1. and
Joseph was born in the first of Caius Coesar. as himself writes there.
the time of his tragedy, (not above ten years difference) and one that had
tried the same After I had heard that a certain man called Banus lived in the
desert, clothing himself with that which the trees brought forth, and feeding
on no other kind of meat but that which they willingly yielded him ( compare
herewith John's Locust and wild honey) washing himself oftentimes by day and
night in cold water to keep himself chaste: I began to imitate his course of
life, and after I had lived with him the space of 3 years, and satisfied my
desires, at last I returned into the City. ib.
severe course of institution by Eremiticall life which John did in the
Wilderness, even to a Baptism of himself in a penitential way, who gives this
account. Diverse were of opinion (says Antiqu. Heb: lib. 18. cap. 7.
he) that Herod's Army miscarried for the execution of John, sir named Baptist:
For he had done this man to death, who was replenished with all virtue, and who
exhorted the Jews to addict themselves thereto, and to execute justice toward
men, and piety toward God. Exhorting them to be baptized, and telling them
that that Baptism should at that time be well pleasing to God, if they should
renounce not only their sins, but if to the purity of their bodies they should
annex the cleanness of their souls, re-purified by Justice. 3. I have somewhere
read a Question, to which I never saw, or could frame to my self an answer
clearly satisfactory in the affirmative, Whether it can be proved by holy
Scripture that John ever baptized in or into the name of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost? Which I piece out a little farther, Or into Moses? or Christ? or for
initiation any way? No question of his Baptism; the text is clear for that:
but whether to this end? keeping to Scripture: or where may it be found? It
has been otherwise generally Received: But this was Delivered: and all know
how low the credit of bare Tradition is now grown in most Parts of Christendom.
Diverse opinions may have been no better then pious presumptions; Religious
mistakes, which having had the hap to meet with able defenders, (Divinity
Readers or Writers) at first, have by degrees prospered into Axioms, and almost
Articles of Doctrine; having yet little of credibility, very little of Truth,
Nothing of solid Scripture at bottom, but a strong faith, helped by inclination
to tread in the steps of the Wise and Learned, has carried them current along
and made them (like Jerusalem) Ezekiel. 16. prosper into a Kingdom: May it not
have been so here? 4. Take in the large reign of that opinion, that water (
quick and living water, as before) had power in it self in Nature to purify
the conscience from dead works: I do not say, it was so, or St John thought so,
but thought it was so, all abroad, both within and without the pale of Jewry,
which might bring multitudes to Jordan, though upon erroneous account, and John
took occasion thereby to exhort them to serious and real repentance; nor was he
himself altogether free from error, as appears by repelling One it was just
should come, Matthew. 3.15. and as to our Savior he might conform to custom, in
what he absolutely needed not, as John told him; or take the best of what had
some mixture of error or superstition. Sure this Gracious enlivening quality,
was all over the East believed to be in water to sanctify and make clean the
spotted soul.

The Quam rationem (baptizandi) observabant and Esseni, a Pythagoraeis, ipsorum
Patriarchis mutuatam: sic enim illi statuebant, Puritatem consequendam per
purgationes, lavacra, and irrigationes. Montacut. Apparat. 7 sect. 77. pa. 278.
Pythagoreans thought purity to be attainable hereby, and so did the Pharisees
among the Jews, in Ad Luc. 12. pa. 140. And hereto belongs what is in Mar* 7.2,
3, 4, 5. what was unwashen, was there common; as 'twere, opposed to sanctified
and clean. Lavandi istam consuetudinem, a Lustrationibus Paganorum mutuari
credi possunt Pharisaei, Aegiptiis praecipuae, and Persis. (...) enim and (...)
frequenter apud illos usurpabantur: unde se expiandos and mundandos credebant.
Appar. Eod. sect. 26. pa. 253.
Titus Bostrensis. The Egiptians and Persians had their frequent Bathings
whence they thought themselves to be freed from guilt and cleansed: So did the
Samaritans; who were, (that it might seem no less then very usual) like the
Ebionites in Et aquis se identidem tam hyeme quam aestate (...) nimirum
sanctitatis sibi conciliandae gratia. in Anacephal. tom. 2. pa. 140. Of whom
see before, adversus haeres. 30. sect. 21, and 32. in tom. 1. pa. 145. and 158.
Epiphanius, who reverenced some Deity in the waters, Washing themselves as
well winter as summer, to sanctify themselves thereby. The like thought may
have born sway with Habes homo in primis aetatem venerari aquarum, quod antiqua
substantia; dehinc dignationem, quod divini spiritus seeds, gratior scilicet
caeteris tunc elementis, alluding to the spirit of God upon the face of the
waters. Genes. 1.2. lib. de Baptismo. cap. 3. Sanctum autem utique super
sanctum ferebatur, aut ab eo quod superferebatur, id quod ferebat sanctitatem
mutuabatur. cap. 4.
Tertullian, when he commended the liquid Element as in nature, and from the
beginning, the habitation of some divine spirit, and dignum Deo vectaculum, a
fit convoy for a Deity: and with Siquidem jam inde ab orbis initio spiritus Dei
super aquas ferebatur: ac lustrandi facultate jam olim praeditam aquam esse
Scriptura testis est. Quippe tempore Noe Deus mundi peccatum per aquam Eluit.
Orthod. fid. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Io. Damascene (another of ours) that from the beginning the spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters, whence it had a cleansing power seen in
washing away the sins of the old world. Add, and with those superstitious
Christians, who (sticking too much upon the letter of 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that
Men pray every where, lifting up PURE hands, and Jam 4.8. Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, as well as purify your hearts ye double minded) made it conscientious
to wash their hands always before their heavenly address, that so they might be
morally clean and fit to lift to heaven, as Chrysostom tells us, in Homil. 72
in Joan. tom. 2 in Novum testam. pa: 466. Tertullian, in lib. de Oratione, cap.
11. and Cornel. a Lapide, in 1 Timothy 2.8. The Mahomedans were wont to say,
Orationis clavis est Mundities, Cleanlyness was the Key of the work of
Devotion: and, Non accepit Deus preces absque mundatione, sen lotione, God
accepts not the prayers of the unclean, as, from Algazal, is remembered by Mr.
Pocock, in his late notes on the Arabian History, pa. 302. For the Gentiles
washing their hands before sacrifice, and from them the Christians, may be seen
Polydore Virgil, de rerum inventor. lib. 3. cap. 5. and lib. 5. cap. 11.
Cicero giving the reason why the old Law (continued to As appears by Institut.
lib. 4. tit. 18. de publicis judiciis. sect. 6. Digest. de lege Pomp. de
Parricid. L. paena parricidii. and Cod. 9. tit. 16. de his qui parents.
Justinians time) was, that he that had killed his father should be sewed up in
a sack, with a dog, an ape and a viper, etc. and so cast into a river or the
sea, alleges; The sack was to preserve the cleansing waters, Ne, cum delati
essent in mare (parricidae) ipsum polluerent, quo caetera quae violata sunt,
expiari putantur, as Lect. antiqu. lib. 11. cap. 21, 22. This particular is
remembered in Paulus Merula, in dissertat. de maribus cap 1. Who from other
discourse had inferred a little before, Non igitur obscurum, quam ob causam
marinas (Aquis omnibus tribuunt purgandi vim alii scriptores) undas usurparit
Antiquitas in Purgationibus, ut videre est apud Catul^um de aversis incestisque
Gellii Veneribus, Senecam in Hippolyto, Apuleium, etc. Et hinc cum apud alios
tum Julium Obsequentem de Prodigiis leguntur Hermaphroditi Aruspicum praecepto
in Mare deportari quondam soliti; quod nullis nisi aequoris undis ejusmodi
portentum lavari and expiari posse arbitrarentur.
Coelius Rhodiginus: which he farther clears by that the Scholiast on
Aristophanes expounds some verses of that author, about ones coming to the sea
and washing there, by Mos erat antiquis illic expiare pollutos, the antiens
were wont so to purify the unclean: as Plato in his journey to Egypt, taking
with him Euripides who fell sick by the way, He was cured by the Priests
washing; whence Plato was wont to say, The sea washes off all Inconveniences.
in Diogenes Laert. lib. 3. in vita Platonis. The So the late Bishop Montague in
his Acts and Monum. chap. 2. sect. 59.
Druides had their expiations, lustrations, sanctifications, often washings and
cleansings, without which nothing was well, orderly or truly done or performed
in their services: As Sybilla Cumana sect. 60.
rinsed her self in pure running water before she addressed her self to her
prophesies. The ancient Greg. Syntag. juris universi. lib. 36. ca. 31. de
expiatione homicidii.
use (says Sophocles) was, those that had stained their hands by murder, to
wash them clean in water, (...), for what less, then to take off the stain of
guilt? the Existimabant antiqui eandem esse animi quam eriam corporis
purgationem, ut cum quis in flumine manus aut corpus abluisset post caedem,
ille pu^us statim efficeretur: quare ita scribit Anticlides libro 74. redituum.
(...): It was and is the use after manslaughter or any other to wash the hands
in running water to fetch off the stain. Natalis Comitis Mythol^g. lib. 1. cap.
10. pa. 27.
cleansing of body and mind, of hand and soul they thought went together. And
In vocab. (...).
Suidas expounding that (...), says, so were believed to have expiation those
were guilty of bloodshed: acknowledged by Item penes veteres quisquis se
homicidio infecerat, purgatrice aqua se expiabat. lib de Baptismo. cap. 5. as
likewise for expiation of perjury. ibid, Quae verba satis indicant quantam vim
ad animos ab omni scelere expiandos in aquis positam esse gentiles
existimarint. Joseph. Vicecom. de antiqu. ritibus Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Tertullian, and so understood by Joseph. Vicecomes. But especially and above
all the rest were the Hemerobaptists. We may expect somewhat more then ordinary
of them, when Daily washing had soked into their name; as such there were and
so they used. They Dicebant, neminem aeternae vitae compotem esse posse, nisi
quotidie lavarer. Respons. ad Epist. Acacii. tom, 1. and Anacephal. tom. 2. pa.
134.
thought else no one could attain eternal life, says Epiphanius; and Baronius,
Rati nimirum hominem non posse vivere nisi quis singulis diebus in aqua
mergeretur, atque ita ablueretur, and proinde sanctificaretur. in Apparat. 14.
No living without washing and rinsing, and thereby cleansing, yea
sanctification. This they did every day, both morning and evening, winter as
well as summer, says Tam vere autumnoque quam aestate atque hyeme quotidie
lavant, unde and (...) appellationem adepti sunt. Ita enim statuebant, vivere
aliter hominem non posse, quam si quotidie se aquis elueret, atque ab omni
crimine purgaret. adversus haeres. 17. tom. 1. pa 37.
Epiphanius again, upbraiding, that their practice did confute their hope, and
their doing their believing: for since they washed and did it daily, the
repetition bespake the insufficiency, and the renewing it the day after
declared really the imperfection of what was done the day before. Nor may we
withdraw all respect from the giddy-witted Poets? Some truth they let fall by
the way in pursuit of their vainest fictions, their materials were commonly
sound where their plot was but a figment, a golden web, when the piece but a
toy or a fancy; for what brainsick Rhapsodist would ever have supposed
speeches that could not have been spoken (truly?) or things that could not have
been done? or words empty of all sense? or that to be, which neither was not
could, nor was ever heard of? Virgil Aeneid. 2. And Dido ordering a preparation
for sacrifice: Dic corpus properet fluviali spargere lympha in Aeneid. 4. And
after: Occupat Aeneas aditum corpusque recenti spargit aqua in Aeneid. 6. And
again, -- aliis sub gurgite vasto Infestum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
thus brings in his Aeneas bespeaking his aged parent: Tu, genitor, cape sacra
manu patriosque penates:
Me bello e tanto digressum and coede recenti
Attrectare nefas, donec me flumine vivo
Abluero.
His bloody hands might not meddle with what was religious, till clean and
cleansed by living water. (for I purposely retain that epithete.) Would another
fall out with less then a shadow? O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua!
said Omne nefas, omnemque mali purgamine causam, Credebant nostri tollere
posse senes. Graecia principium moris fuit illa nocentes, Impia lustratos
tollere facta putat. Actoridem Peleus, ipsum quoque Pelea Phoci, Caede per
Hemonias solvit Acastus aquas. Whereto the Poet upbraids as here, O nimium
faciles, etc. in 4. Fastorum.
Ovid: sure some were then persuaded that it was so; that the deepest dye of
worst offense might be washed off in the neighboring brook. And In Hercul.
furent.
Seneca gravely: Quis Tanais, aut quis Nilus, aut quis Persica
Violentus unda Tigris, aut Rhenus ferox,
Tagusve Ibera turbidus gaza fluens
Abluere dextram poterit!
Can Tanais, Nile, Rhysni, Tigris or the golden sanded Taio make clean a
guilty hand; they cannot. To omit Quid facit is, patruum qui non sinit esse
maritum?
Ecquid scis quantum suscipiat sceleris?
Suscipit, o Gelli, quantum non ultima Tethis,
Nec genitor nympharum abluit Oceanus.
And Persius,
Haec sancte ut poscas Tiberino in gurgite mergis
Mane caput bis terque, and noctem flumine* purgas. in Satyr. 2.

Catullus. The more Eastern Ganges was left out in Seneca's enumeration, but
his virtue is supplied by the belief and present recourse of ours, or the last
age. For thither do people resort, if we may credit I. Huighen van Linschoten.
Book 1. chap. 16.
him that brought it us from the banks side, in multitudes, with assured hope
that as many as wash and bath themselves in that River, be they never so great
sinners, have all their sins forgiven them, and that they are thenceforth pure
and clean from a^l sin, as if they were new come into the world as shall be said
anon. And indeed it is believed all over the East, says Accepimus enim duobus
illis elementis aqua and igni, creditum apud omnes fere gentes expiari posse
delicta and purificari: as from Virgil., before. Ingredientes and egredientes
domo, ubi mortuus erat, aqua se aspergebant Graeci, ut se purgarent, etc. P.
Gregor. Tholosan. Syntag. Juris. lib 31. cap. 8. sect. 7. Sed and apud
Ethnichos expiationes and veluti purgationes per aquam fiebant, etc. Id. lib.
2. cap. 4. sect 7.
another, Whence the Graecians kept always a pot of water at the door, where a
dead man lay unburied, to sprinkle and cleanse, as well at going in as coming
out, the like they had at their temple door, for the same use, ((...) they
called it) and by their Alcoran it is no less appointed to be used by the
Mahumetanes. Lastly, (as if there were still a natural persuasion inhaerent in
the mind of Man, of some such natural force and power inhaerent in Water, to
hold forth means of purification reaching to the soul) it is observable, that
not only the Heathen washed at their Temple-doore as Ad Annum 57. number. 108.
Baronius has from Herodotus, Cicero, Persius, etc. (and from the relics of
that opinion finding consent in the mind of man may have grown up the
sprinkling with Holy Water among the Papists as they enter the Church:) but
also their Temples obtained both place and name from vicinity of Healing
springs. Notandum quod Pagani sive Gentiles circa fontes templa sua facere
solebant, vel saltem ibi aquam habebant, per cujus aspersionem purificari
credebant, and inde Delubra vocantur, quasi Purificantia, says Rational.
Divinor. lib. 6. cap. 83. sect. 1.
Durand: (Which when I read it comes into my mind, to compare, the situation
of our English Churches, most of them upon Some congruity with what is ours in
both these, the instances of holy scripture seem to hold out to us for safe
imitation. 1. The Hillock: for (not to enlarge on the known things of
Jerusalems Temple and its high situation, Her foundations are upon the holy
hills: the Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob,
as Psalm. 85.1. or the averred place of old Shiloh upon a Mount in Ephraim) in
an Oratory of Mount Olivet our Savior spent his whole night, the next before
the mission of his Apostles (a fit preparation, (and the place most fit) for so
holy a work) Luc. 6.12. (...). And a like preparation upon a place of like
ascent again, the night before his treacherous delivery, chap. 22.39. for there
is a departure from an Oratory, (...), to remove to his drowsy disciples, at
ver. 45. 2 The Brook: for to another Oratory, near the gate of Philippi the
Metropolis of Macedonia, which was by a Brook side, went St. Paul to preach to
the devout women, Act. 16.13. Where, it so fell out, there was a seasonable and
present use of the waters for initiating diverse converted by him at that
meeting, ver. 15. And, that Gethseman, the particular place of M. Olivet, where
(before) our Savior prayed, and rose from his Oratory, is, in St John's consent
of Story, about the Brook of Cedron. Our text goes thus far, When Jesus had
spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over the brook Cedron,
where was a garden into which he entered, etc. Jo. 18.1. but the Syriack is
punctual and restraining, he went (...) ad vadum, or ad transitum pedis Kedrun:
to the ford of Kedrun: thither and no farther. As we would say, From London to
a place named of Windsor forest: Gethseman is as much as, Vallis pinguedinis,
the valley of fatness, or the valley of Olives, whose Mount of that name was at
hand) Of like nature and use whereto were the pleasing retirements of this
place (but nearer situation to the Metropolis) made and resorted to by David
and Solomon. The chief stress of this whole conjecture lays upon an unwonted
but rational interpretation of the word (...), which, in the places alleged,
is commonly rendered to give the Act of Praying, I take it for (...), a place
designed and devoted thereto, as Synonymon with what from Esai 56.11. is in
Matthew. 21.13. and Mar. 11.13. My House shall be called (...), A House of prayer
to all Nations: and as in Maccab. 7.37. where thus the Priest: Thou Lord did
choose this House to have thy name called over it. that it might be a HOUSE OF
PRAYER and supplication for thy people. For 1. The word will in all those
places (and moreover in Act. 16.16. It came to pass as we went (...), to an
Oratory: the Syriack is plain, (...), to a House of prayer: and in
Ecclesiasticus, 39. ver. 6. and ver. 8. and chap, 50.21.) very well bear that
sense, if not in some require it rather: for how odd were it to say, Christ
continued all night in the prayer of God, (...), with an article? or S Paul
traveled with his company to prayer? and not rather, the one went, the other
spent time in, that which all allow Churches for, an HOUSE of GOD for Prayer?
2. Mr. Pasor warrants this possible and likely signification, in his Lexicon:
p. 326. in vocab. (...) 3. The Syriack (the best Comment, and indeed better
then any Comment) gives its vote clear. Etegressi sumus die sabbati extra
portam urbis, juxta ripam fluminis, quia ibi conspiciebatur DOMUS ORATIONIS;
(...), again, as before, an HOUSE OF PRAYER. Act. 16.13. as we would say they
went on Sunday to Church. Not to speak of the smiling glance of the English
this way, We went out of the City, by a Rivers side, where prayer was wont to
be made. 4. Epiphanius helps us a little farther, a Jew born, but Proselyte to
us, Learned, even among the Fathers: Who speaking of the Messalians, who had
their Places of Prayer abroad, as had the Jews and Samaritans; Of them, says
he, it is so proved from the instance of Act. 16. Where the woman seller of
purple met St Paul, (...), for there seemed to be a place of prayer^ Haeres.
80. cap. 1. tom. 1. pa. ^68. exa^t^^ ^greeing with what Mr. Mede (in his
excellent Diatribae, pa. 284. who both gave me, and there a^serts this
interpretation) says the Arabic must import, LOCUS ORATIONIS. 5. No^ was this
sense unheard of abroad. The Roman Poet brings in his drunken Gallant thus
v^pouring and quarreling with the man he met, (the Picture, as the whole is
there together, of what our age shows daily exemplified, in glistering colors;
To shame and sin, the dregs of corruptest Gentilisme being not yet purged out
of our Christian Congregations, nor any Reformation prevailing that the most
sacred pledges of our even heavenly Communion be not still prostitute and
profaned to a sort of lewd and ungodly varlets, the scum of the world, the
shame of men, unworthy of civil society, Pagan Rome scorned them, her Poets
made sport with them: Usque quo, Domine! LORD, When will Sion be it self!) His
words are, Ede, ubi consistas; in qua te quaero proseucha? Say, wretch, where
live thou? in what Church Porch may I find thy habitation? Proseucha est
locus ubi mendici stipem perunt. Erant autem illo tempore Judaeorum fana ita
dicta, says Lubine on the place: of Juvenal. Sat. 3.
tolts or hillocks, near springs or waterbrooks; no doubt the sanctified
successors of Pagan places of worship, there before used; and it was easier to
consecrate then to erect, indeed Natural to continue Religious what had in any
sort been devoted to God) which, with little variation, his successor Jo.
Divin. officiorum explicat. cap. 110
Beleth took up from him: and Servius, In Virgil. Aeneid. 2. remembered by
Rosinus, in Antiqu. Romans lib. 2. cap. 2. pa. 109.
Delubrum a diluendo, locus ante templum ubi aqua currit: The word Delubrum is
not properly a temple, but a place by, of running water.

Thus in much diffusion all abroad it has prevayled that Water sanctifies,
Jordan was holy, and Ganges or any other brook, They are Pure and have
operation effectual upon the soul to Purity. Not yet that the thing is so, or
Truth will bear it out, or the profound and only heavenly Maxims of the most
holy Christian faith, whose tender eyes are rather for the contrary, though he
use Water most religiously. For, St 1 Pet. 3.21.
Peter (in whose time such opinion might be stirring, and his full intent to
give thereto just and even opposition) tells us that a washing, Baptism, our
Baptism (the true (...) to the Deluge, not to the Ark, as commonly construed,
the Neuter article will not bear that, (...), the figure to which water now
says, but of what sort? not the putting away or rincing off the filth of the
flesh, which is that natural ablution may, but somewhat internal, and which the
element cannot reach, the inward stipulation, or purgation, the answer or
satisfactory declaration in a good man's behalf of a good conscience by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Of the type perhaps it had been otherwise
presumed, and that the old world was morally cleansed by the flood. Ac primum
quidem Diluvii baptisma excindendi peccati causa contigit, as in Jo. Damascene,
de fid. orthod. lib. 4. cap. 10. Of the eight sorts of Baptism this was the
first, and so operative: Vnde illud celebre, apud Graecos, (has Grotius on
Matthew. 3.6.) (...), as but now from Plato in Diogenes Laertius. But is it so?
no, it is not so: The Element cannot do it in present Christian belief, but
somewhat internal and spiritual reaching farther, not Washing but Baptism, to
be regenerate, and renewed or born again of water and the holy Ghost. And
accordingly they are made distinct by the author to the Cap. 10.22, 23. Et aqua
sane mundat corpus, spiritus autem signat animam, ut abluti in corpore aqua
munda, and repurgati in cord accedamus Deum. Qui itaque in aquam de scensurus
es (He speaks to the proselyte, and the use was then to go down into the Brook
for Baptism) non aquae simplici mentem adhibe, sed Sp. Sancti virtute salutem
accipe: nam sine utrisque ad pe^fectionem deduci non poteris. Cyrill. Hieros.
Cateches. 3. pa. 16.
Hebrews, Cleansed as to the heart internally from an evil conscience, as well
as washed externally to the Body in cleansing or pure water: and the like
partition is in St ca. 4. v. 8.
James, Wash your hands, O sinners ((...), purify them) but that not enough,
Cleanse also your hearts, ye double minded: and the Heb. 9 9, 10.
former again, That service which was performed by the worshippers under the
first Tabernacle, could by no means perfect, as to the conscience, those that
brought, though it were both gifts and sacrifices, for it did consist only in
meats and drinks and diverse outward washings and carnal ordinances,
Justifications of the flesh, which must expect a time of review or following
reformation; these were but shells and shadows. Nor any other but this, might
that pure and heavenly, spiritual doctrine, in His meaning, be, our Savior took
up, to contradict the gross and carnal traditionaries of the Pharisees; They
cried out, Wash all, and so purify; Hands, Cups, Tables, Platters, else
nothing but unclean: He, Obey the Commandments, Honor Parents, look all be
sound within, for nothing that goes in, or is applied to, or is conversant
about defiles the person, or sanctifies, but what issues out FROM WITHIN (Evil
thoughts, Adultery, Murder, Rapine, Covetousness, etc.) these carry the stroke
in profanation or sanctification, as is express in Mar. 7. When he was invited
to dinner by one of them, who wondered so great a Prophet went not His washing
way, according to the orders of the ancients, HE sits him down to dinner and
without any preparatory ablution (of which he had no regard at all as to piety
or impiety) excuses by return of sharp reproof, Ye Pharisees think to make all
whole thus, but ye go a wrong way to work, as 'twere washing a cup or platter
without, when the inside remains corrupt and naught (the pot is clean, but the
meat is poisoned: Or, ye wash YOUR outsides, your bodies, as far as water can
reach, when your insides, your hearts, are full of mischief and naughtiness)
Begin within, study righteousness, DO GOOD, Give of what you have in charity,
and then all shall be clean to you, whether supposed sanctifying water has
been used, or no: Luc. 11.38, etc. Matthew. 15.1, etc. And elsewhere, and still
blame laying upon the same branch of the distinction (...), ye outside
hypocrites, Woe be to you, ye bestow care enough about that grosser part your
Ceremonies can reach, ('it is your Religion) thinking withal they reach piety
and work it; but for that wherein is the life, (...), This is left as foul, as
to which to due means of sanctification has been applied. Ye blind guides,
first regard to cleanse (...), the inside or heart by real and sincere
inclinations to holy virtue and goodness, and then for (...), be there
Lustration, or not (ye put so much, and enough, and all holiness in) This will
come in the rear of things less regardable and considerable, Matthew. 23, 25,
etc. Otherwise ye do but paint a wall, or white a Sepulcher, wash over with a
few empty and superstitious Rites that slabbered outside, whose heart or inside
(whither such outward linitives cannot reach) remains nastie, and full of --
and -- not fit to be named. The sum, we disagree in this: ye say, water is
Holy, wash and be clean; I say, Sanctify your selves, BE YE Clean; for bodily
exercise profits little. So, of those times the gravest Necessum est igitur
adituros templum sacrorum gratia, and corpore nitidos esse, and multo magis
anima. Haec enim Domina est Reginaque modis omnibus illo praestantior, ut
divinioris naturae particeps. Lib. de Victimas offerent pa. 657.
Philo, who having required as by their Law, exactness of Lustration beyond
ordinary (as not of water alone, with which other worshippers were content,
but) by ashes admixed, and which does help farther, yet concludes for internal
beauty and purity of mind as that is more lovely and amiable in the eyes of
him that sees all. And of the same clime the not unadvised Dictum est a
Mohammede, Fundata est religio in Munditie: and again, Mundities est dimidium
fidei: quae ipsius dicta ut intelligantur quatuor statuit Algazalius munditiei
gradus. Quorum primus est mundatio exterioris corporis ab inquinamento.
Secundus, mundatio membrorum corporis a sceleribus and rebus illicitis
patrandis. Tertius, Mundatio cordis a moribus vituperio and vitiis odio dignis.
Quartus, Mundatio secreti ab omni re praeter Deum. A multis quorum caligant
oculi curari exteriorem illam corporis quae est caeteris instar corticis extimi
ad nucleum qui appetitur, cum sit maximi momenti res, recessuum cordis
expurgatio. Multum ergo de iis queritur Algazalius qui de exterioris corporis
munditie ad superstitionem usque soliciti sint, adeo ut illos qui hac ex part
minus superstitiosi sint, pro immundis habeant, and eorum contactum fugiant;
cum interim sit apud ipsos quod intus est, desolatum and oppletum vitiis
superbiae, fastus, ignorantiae, dissimulationis and hypocrisis; rerum ordine
penitus in verso. E. Pocock: in notis ad Histor. Arabicam Abulfurajii. pa. 302.
Mahomed, of whose Divinity one half was cleanness, he laid the foundation of
all in purity: But when this comes to be expounded, his followers distinguish
of 4 sorts, Corporal, Mental, and some other reduced to them, of which the
chiefest is the inwardest: Washing the shel, Soul-purity the Kernel. And sad
complaint is made of those are superstitiously careful (it is no better) of
the Body to be washen, shunning to draw near who is in that regard profane:
whereas quod intus est, desolatum est and oppletum vitiis, that which is within
is overrun with vices, fraud, hypocrisy, disdain, pride, ignorance, etc. all
being inverted, the first last, the last first. Among Christians Epiphanius (of
that Country still; and they are like to have learned and taught best those
things came out from them) strikes home against the Hemerobaptists before
spoken of, telling us Neque enim Oceanus, neque mania omnia, neque perennes
fluviorum aquae vel fontium, neque quicquid uspiam pluviarum est, (...) si unum
in locum conveniant, eluere pecca^^ hominum possunt in Haeres. 17.
It is not sea and river, fountains and great depths, nor the whole congregate
force of the mighty Limbick of Nature could afford to Wash and cleanse a
spotted soul: and to the Aebionites, others under the same influences, Who used
frequent Bathing themselves, ((...), and thought to have benefit of being
cleansed by them) But objected them to the disgrace of Peter and the rest of
the Apostles, He raises direct and full confutation from our Saviors Dialogue
in the thirteenth of John, He whose feet are washen is whole clean, (...), and
so needs no further, required, used, superstitious ablutions: Id. in Haeres. 30
s^ct. 21. pa, 145.
not to insist on Quod lex externam immunditiem and impuritatem to^lat post
purificationem cordis. The argument of cap. 33. in More Nevochim. part. 3.
Maiemonides, who rangeth outward purification much behind inward and sincere
purity. And hence it was that Tertullian call those without the Church very
appositely Sed enim nationes extraneae ab omni intellectu spiritalium
potestatum eadem efficacia idolis suis subministrant. Sed viduis aquis sibi
mentiuntur. Nam and sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur, Isidis alicujus
aut Mithrae. Lib. de Baptismo. cap. 5. pa: 257.
viduas aquas, the Pagans yet both used and relied on: that is, destitute of
Angel and holy Ghost, as Viduis scilicet Angelo ac spiritu sancto ideoque
sterilibus. At nostris aquis supervenit spiritus de coelis, sanctificans eas de
semeripso, and ita sanctificatae vim sanctificandi concipiunt, quare and
pariunt. Nempe Christianos vitae homines aeternae. Observat. ad Tertullian. pa.
70.
Rigaltius on the place; whereas by our Holy use Paulinus, in Epist. ad Severum
12.
Sanctus in hunc coelo descendit spiritus amnem,
Caelestique sacras font maritat aquas.
And some sage Cum multum animus corpori praestet, observeturque ut casto
corpore adeatur (ad Divos) multo est inanimis id servandum magis. Nam illud vel
aspersione aquae vel dierum numero tollitur: animi labes nec diuturnitate
evanescere, nec amnibus elui potest, Cicero, lib. 2. de Legibus.
Philosophers have confessed as much as comes to this emptiness or viduity. He
is pure only that knows no ill of himself, said Menander in Stromat. 5. pa. 714.
Clemens Alexandrinus, with rejection of all insufficient elementary
Lustrations. And the Tragaedian, What Is any ones bane but his Conscience? that
himself has knowledge he has done amiss? for, indeed, There is no true purity
but innocence. And Epicharmus excellently, Be thy mind clear within, little
needs thy body the purification of water. Much more of which nature may be seen
in the same Clemens Alexand. Strom. 4. pa. 531. Clemens Roman. Epist. 4. ad
Jul. and Julianum: in Ceterum quae ratio est manibus quidem ablutis; spiritu
vero sordente orationem obire? quando and ipsis manibus spiritales munditiae
sint necessariae, ut a falso, a coede, a saevitia, a veneficiis, ab
idololatria, caeterisque maculis quae spiritu conceptae manuum opera
transiguntur, purae alleventur, Hae sunt verae munditiae, non quas plerique
superstitiose curant, ad omnem orationem etiam cum lavacro totius corporis
aquam sumentes. De Oratione, cap. 11.
Tertullian, Deorum templa cum adire disponitis, ab omni vos labe puros,
lautos, castissimoque praestatis? Adversus gentes: lib. 7. pa. 212.
Arnobius, and his Scholar Flagitii^ omnibus inquinati veniunt ad precandum,
and se pie sacrificasse opinantur, si cutem laverint, tanquam libidines intra
pectus inclusas ulli amnes abluant, aut ulla maria purificent. Quanto satius
est mentem potius eluere, quae malis cupiditaribus sordidatur, and uno virtutis
ac fidei lavacro universa vitia depellere? Lib. 5. de Justitia. cap. 20 in fin.
Lactantius: in Cyril. Hierosol. Cateches. 5. pa. 239. Chrysostom. in Timoth. ^.
tom. 6. pa. 453. Gregor. Nyssen: de Baptismo Christi, tom. 3. pa. 363. Basil.
lib. de Sp. Sancto, cap. 5 tom. 2. pa. 323. Ambros. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 1.
Titus Bostrensis in Luc. 12. Gratian. de consecrat. distinct. 4. Ca. Verus
baptismus. and lastly, in the Eastern Sure, it must have been some truth of no
ordinary mark or note in Christi^n value and apprehension, that has left (to
continue so long) so much memory of defense and vindication; and the contrary
error of great disorder and very perilous consequence that stirred up so many
Champions in arms, who would least Andabatarum more pugnare, struggle with the
air, or fight it out with a fancy. Why all mention either of opposition or
satisfaction hereabout has been so long laid still, as 'twere asleep within
the vail of secrecy and silence, may proceed from nothing else but the clear
and final victory that Truth has been long in aged possession of, in the gates
of its adversary. So let it rest and dwell. But if any should disturb, of these
things would then appear the use. -- Think chiefly, that herein might be the
very point of contest between our Holy Savior, and the washing Scribes and
Pharisees, They calling for the Ceremony, He for the Substance, They resting in
the opus opera um, traditions observed, He not contented without real, true,
and inward sanctifi^ation: To screw up to beyond which their Sacramental piety
is that of Matthew. 5.20. Ex^ept your righteousness (that hearken to me) shall go
beyond those Scribes and Pharisee^, ye shall no way enter into my Kingdom of H
aven.
Cyril, who is, (...): Water, it is true, may wash the body, but somewhat
quicker, inward, spiritual must reach the soul. in Cateches. 3.

Thus the world has been divided, and though the Many be on the contrary,
Truth, as received by Christians, and some other the gravest, especially such
as hearken to Scriptures, seems to be on this part, That not Nature but Grace,
the power of the holy Ghost not any outward Element can purge the Conscience
from dead works, to be acceptable and clear in the sight of God. Howsoever, the
other prevailing, over the world, even the East, might bring in store to John's
Baptism, that dwelt about Jordan and were willing to have their sins forgiven;
which made them ready to try, what they thought could do them no harm, with
more pliable forwardness then the Syrian Naaman, 2 King. 5 12.
General before in the same River, with forced neglect of his own Abanah and
Pharphar. Sin in the burden of the soul, that hangs on and presses down, and
sticks close, and wounds deep: Industrious care would do much to be rid of
fear, to draw on hope that it shall dread no grief, from suffering pain (as
well as bearing loss) which having begun knows no other bound but to Be
Eternal: Upon which account many might be willing to try what would but color
for toward redemption to Free and Safe; and from that Baptism, which in nature
cleansing, was thought to reach a little farther, to within, and did here own
the sure name of, for Repentance or change of mind ((...), by divine
imposition) from that they now had, which they knew to be bad enough. So that
John's Baptism, these probabilities favor, might be, not of initiation to
Religion, but cleansing and purification in Religion: So meant and so used; not
for the Water sake, but for the Ordinance of God's sake, which in the Law had
appointed such purification for sin by (or with, or not without) Water.

Which admitted, (as why may it not? the frame of other Truths is hereby well
enough sorted in with, as well of sacred Oracles as abroad; nor is confirmation
wanting form them, as well as compliableness) in the Holy story, this would
seem yet farther capable of one improvement more, as to HIM our eyes are most
upon, our blessed Savior; To whom such Lustration might not unfitly serve as
preparative to his Entry into Holy Orders; The time whereof was now at hand,
and St Matthew has so related, as if presently he were so actually admitted.
This sure: We find him soon after preaching, Matthew. 4.17. Luc. 4:17, etc. and
choosing his Disciples ( Andrew, Peter, James and John) Matthew. 4, 18, 19. (as if
till now he had no power) Immediately he betook himself to the Wilderness,
Matthew- 4.1. Luc. 4.1. from the solitariness whereof John returned next, before
his stepping forth to the Work of Preaching and Baptizing: Matthew. 3.1. Luc.
3.1. Such public Ministers of sacred things were wont not but to be washed,
in fulfilling the letter of the Law, Exodus 29.4. with water. And, HE was now of
fit age, sc. about thirty, Luc. 3.23. the ripe season for public employment
and by the Law again, Number. 4. ver. 3, and 37. 1 Chronicles. 23.3. besides St Hieroms
preface to Ezekiel: tom. 4. pa. 330. So that it should seem, if not for
Initiation as before, but for Purification as even now, in one advanced more
for INAVGVRATION to most sacred Office (sc. to be supreme Priest, Prophet and
Pastor of his Church) might, as to Christ, the work of John's Baptism serve and
be intended; With less solemnity men not having been, nor needing to be let out
from Private to Public in the Church, then they were at first admitted and let
into it; each being assumption into a new State, (not but always ceremonious
and with much formality, as 'twere in a Regeneration) and whereto once the
ceremony of WASHING was requisite, and that, Jure Divino.

Although I resume and adhere fastest to my first, Not Of Repentance, but of
Repentance and More, not only of Purification, much less Inauguration, but for
Initiation into the Law, (as Christ did into the Gospel) was John a Minister of
SUCH holy Baptism; Legal, as Christ was of Evangelical.

CHAP. IX.
QUAERE 4. Why Circumcision should have been brought into the Primitive
Churches, and is yet retained in many.
Whereas Circumcision as well as Baptism had been long used for initiating or
regenerating Proselytes to the Jewish Religion, and it is like our Savior took
in his Sacrament of admission from one of them, as before: And, Whereas ye know
more, there was so long and tedious a vexing controversy in the Primitive
Church, which troubled even the Apostles themselves, by occasion of some devout
Pharisees, zealous of the traditions of their fathers, and other false brethren
crept in privily to spy out the new gained liberty in Christ, Whether Disciples
of this sect were not, as others formerly, to be circumcised after the Law of
Moses? May not the reason of the doubt be more fairly then hitherto deduced
from what before, and Be; Because our Savior had already taken in one rite of
Baptism to matriculate the advenae into his Religion, the other was now as
needful for the same purpose? and as Circumcision and Baptism had went hand
in hand Both to one thing, (not One, but Both) to perfect Hebrew Proselytes, so
'twas as needful they should now continue to join for completing the
admission of Christians? the rather because the new Religion did seem to
promise as much as the old (which ought to be performed) in matters of
substance, and therefore it should do very ill to scant it in Circumstance or
Ceremony.

Nothing is more certain then the devout and zealous managing of strong
attempts to bring in that second rite: the holy Galat. 2. ver. 3, 14, 16. cap.
5.2, 3, 4, 6 chap. 6.12, 13.13, 15. 1 Cor. 7.18, 19 Colos. 3.11. Timothy,
though a half-Gentile, circumcised by Paul to comply with the Jews, even after
the Church-sentence. Act. 16.3.
Story lays it down at large in several places obliquely or by the way,
directly and as of full intent in one whole chapter of Acts 15. where poor
Christendom contributed all the force it had to establish a firm Decree, and in
that first general (and only Apostolical) Council that ever met (as far as we
know) the Fathers consulted not chiefly, but only about this business: Nor do I
remember to have met with a more likely and sitting state of the doubt
occasioning the meeting then this, sc. to determine Whether Circumcision were
not now as necessary to welcome advenae into Christian Religion, as it had
been, joining in with Baptism? or Whether old friends might part here, and
(which the Council thought fit) Baptism be enough, without Circumcision?

A way of stating the doubt that has not been altogether without mention
before: for, though I have not observed many to look so deep, yet Mr. Joseph
Mede, late of Cambridg: in his Diatrib^, pa. 97, 98, etc.
One (and in our own language too,) has lately proposed the Question directly
(a very learned man, whose Sermons are Sermons) and He assigns the reason of
the Councels meeting, somewhat otherwise, yet somewhat toward this, thus:

There were (says he) two sorts of Proselytes, Some of a lower degree,
Proselytes of the gate Proseliti domicilii, admitted without any ceremony; and
there were other made perfect Hebrews, Proselytes of Justice, and by consequent
circumcised: Now the doubt was, of these two, to whom or whether, Christians
should conform? Whether to the lower, to be made without any ceremony at all?
or to the other, of the Covenant; who being circumcised, if Christians were to
conform to them, they must needs be circumcised also? And he interprets the
Council met to determine for the former sc. that Christians needed no more
initiation then those of the lower sort, who were entered without any Ceremony
at all: Not of the higher, who were only circumcised, and therefore Christians
needed not, because to them they were not to hold conformity.

But I crave leave to And excuse in the borrowed words of Pet. Cunaeus: Nam and
ille, qua fuit animi aequitate, dedisset ingenuo candori nostro veniam. Etenim
in corruptam libertatem professi, sine a more, sine odio, quid rectissime
dicatur ^xquirimus. de repub: Hebraeorum. lib. 3. cap. 5.
dissent from so learned a man who (it seems to me) mistakes a little: for this
could not be the doubt, to which sort Christians should conform? to those made
with, or without Ceremony? For this the Master of Religion had more then in
part determined before, by his admission and command of Baptism, whereof they
could not be ignorant: But if to the perfecter (as he had already employed order
in ordering Baptism) then, how far forth to them? whether that taken in
already would be enough, to Wash and be clean? or whether there needed as
aforetime, to wash and circumcise? and so to make complete Christians by the
complete use of both those ceremonies that had formerly went to the completing
those came over the highest Proselytes to the Hebrew Law? This, if it might
have been had, would have pleased the Jews well, especially the more learned
Pharisees, zealous of the traditions of their Fathers; had been of fair pretext
to keep old friends together, whose parting employed and was a change in
Religion; and many other things might have been thought of, and no doubt were:
But against them all the Court determins, for a non-necessity of the Questioned
rite: Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. For, I testify again to every one that is circumcised,
that he is a debtor to do the whole Law Galat 5.2, 3.
Circumcision would have been the earnest of all Moses, the Harbinger of the
Law, the first link of that chain would have brought in all Leviticus.
Therefore what Christ had ordered and appointed was to be rested in as
sufficient; the observance of his Law, duty and burden enough, and his
followers madeover unto him and consigned fast and sure enough by the single
use of his own appointed Baptism.

This I take to be the state of the case and ground of that doubt takes up so
much place, and finds so often repetition in the story and doctrine of the later
times of the New Testament, which if I have so determined as none before me, it
might be for want of the same grounds; and what light has guided me to where I
am, I humbly think, may guide in some measure others also.

And farther yet, into the reason of one thing more, still upon the Stage (the
Quod sit whereof has exercised the pens of many, but for the Cur sit, I have
not found so much as an Enquiry attempted) sc. Why so many of old, of late, and
now, both do, and did retain Circumcision with Baptism for consigning over
believers into the profession of the faith of Jesus Christ? They were and are
abroad many, and it is like will be to all times to come, who did and do so:
Whence this conjunction? Whence, but from that they did go together at first?
they were found together, and so taken, and kept; even in flat contradiction of
an Apostles Jerusalem Council General, many would and will do as their
ancestors have done before them. They find, Circumcise, in the plain letter of
the Law of faithful Abraham, as well as Wash after into Moses Law, and
therefore they will retain both, Circumcise and Wash after, which is natural,
rather then Wash only, having had no occasion by Circumcision.

For who they were, as to times past. Mr. On the 27 Article of the Church of
England, propos. 1.
Rogers applies it to commendation of Believers in England, that, in matter of
Baptism, We do not defile the Ordinance of Christ by any unnecessary
supervenient additions, but profess adversaries to the Qui ita Christum
recipiunt^nt observationem legis veteris non amittant. Hierom. in Esai 8. tom.
4. pa. 32. Hoc igitur uno tam a Christianis quam a Judaeis differunt: ab illis
quidem quod in Christum credant; a Christianis vero quod Judaicis adhuc vitibus
implicentur, velut circumcision^, Sabbato, etc. Epiphan. haeres. 29. sect. 7.
Nazarenes who with the Jews were Circumcised and with the Christians baptized,
referring to St Jerome s Epistle unto St Augustine, de haeresibus. No such
Epistle do I find in St Jerome, but an Epistle he has, wherein he makes Epist.
89 cap. 5. tom. 2. pa. 265. -- qui dum Christum filium Dei confiteantur, Omnia
tamen veteris legis custodiunt: So Gratian gives account of them. Decret par.
2. cause, 24. quaest. 3. cap. 39.
mention of these Nazarenes, writing unto St Augustine, not as Christians, but
as Erant. illi (Nazaraei) genere quidem Judaei, atque ad legem and
circumcisionem adhaeserant. Epiphan. haeres 29. sect. 5.
Jews (it may be they were such, or in greater part) and of some other we
acknowledge for Christians branded with the same error as Sufficit discipulo si
sit sicut Magister ejus, Matthew. 10. Quid igitur inquiunt (Cerinthian?)
Circumcisus est Jesus; tu igitur circumcidere. Epiphan. haeres. 28. sect. 3.
Quod ad Paulum pertinet, hunc penitus explodunt propterea quod circumcisionem
abdicarit: imo and rejiciunt propter dictum illud, (Gal. 5.) Quicunque in lege
justificamini a gratia excidistis. Et si circumcidamini, Christus nihil vobis
proderit. Ibid.
Cerinthus and those Poor Ones (for so their names gives them) the Ebionoei,
hoc est, mentis and intelligentiae in opes quippe qui de Christo and ejus
doctrina tenuiter and abjecte statuerent opinarenturque. Eum namque simplicem,
vulgarem, and solum hominem censuerunt, etc. Porro, legis Mosaicae observatione
omnino ipsis opus esse, etc. Eusebius. Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 3, cap. 21. (...)
is as much as Egenus, Indigens.
Ebionites. St Lib. de haeresibus, ad Quod vult deum: haer. 8, 9.10. tom. 6. pa
7. Qui se Christianos Nazarenos vocant, and more Judaico carnalia praeputia
circumcidunt. id: de Baptismo contra Donat. lib. 7. cap. 1. tom. 7. pa. 75.
Augustine himself has them all three together: to the former Cerinthus and his
Cerinthians, adding Merinthus and his Merinthians, (if at least these be not
the same; Epiphanius doubts, in Here Is. 25. sect. 8.) and to the later the
Sampseans and Elceseans, as near of kin, out of Epiphanius. Who has them
indeed, in haeres. 28, and 29. tom. 1. pa. 110, etc. and St Augustine Lib. 1.
contra Crescon: Grammaticum, cap. 31. tom. 7. pa. 168. and lib. 19. contra
Faustum Manich. cap: 4. tom: 6. pa: 143. They might derive from the famous
Symmachus, translator of the Bible, of whom St Jerome made so much mention and
use.
elsewhere remembers with the Nazarenes, the Symmachians.

Nearer home of later times, diverse both Eastern and Southern Christians, upon
their grounds, go on in that tract, to this day: And, by the way, we are not
lightly to esteem the judgment or practice of those present Sufferers for our
common Savior: Though I doubt we do undervalue them and their sufferings, who
love their Christ as well as we, do many things for his sake, obey his will to
the light of their knowledge, and suffer willingly many o^ those losses and
inconveniences, which we, if the case were ours, would free our selves from,
upon terms worse agreeing with our common foundation then they do: For they
maintain a life in the midst of persecution, hold it out in flames, forsake
not if they be undone and ruined as to this world, part with the fruit of their
bodies in hope of the salvation of their souls, and bear cheerfully along the
discouraging burdens of infamy, pain, loss, disgrace, etc. all which they might
be freed from if they would turn with him whose name is Peter, and renounce
their Dear, Beloved, most honored Savior; Living as well as we, (if they
would) who make too little use of our peace and plenty but to grow fat and
wanton, and being got on the warmer and quieter side of the hedge, having little
else to do, fall first a sporting and playing, and then a quarrelling and
fighting with one another. They do not so, but meekly and gently take up
Christ's cross and follow him, 1 Pet. 4.1.
arming themselves with the like mind as, he who suffering in the flesh ceased
from sin, and Heb. 12.2.
enduring the cross despised the shame, and is now sat down at the right hand
of God; giving the greatest evidence of their love to their Master, that they
do for Him, and bear for Him, and forbear for His sake, Suffering, any thing,
or the lost of any thing, and Phil. 3.8.
count all dross and dung that they may win Christ, and be found in Him. They
follow step by step, that Heb. 2.10.
Captain of their Salvation, not made perfect but by SVFFERING; and yet they
retain still For, in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. Gal. 6.15. Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. 1 Cor.
7.19.
a harmless rite they think they may hold from Abraham and Solomon.

The Jacobites a numberless number of Christian professors, dispersed over
Syria, Cyprus, Palestine, Mesopotamia, etc: (God grant they be so many indeed,
and that reports fill not our working fancies with dreams of more happiness in
the communion of Saints then is real, by their forged multitudes; I hope the
best) Britenbachius says they are dispersed (thicker or thinner) over forty
Kingdoms, yet they circumcise, says Salign. Itinerar. tom. 8. cap. 1.
another, both Sexes has a Vitriac. Histor. orient. cap. 76.
third alleged by a Mr. Brerewood, in his learned Enquiries, chap. 21. pa. 153.
fourth, and Dr Heylin In his Geography, pa. 553 in Syria.
confirms, who wrote since them all.

The Copti, Cophti, Aegophti, or Christians of that Land Egypt, do the like;
(there are that fetch their appellation from (...), Scindo, relating hither, to
cut off) or did, if they have not lately left it by persuasion of the Popes
Legate, about Anno 1583. as Mr In the same Enquiries, chap. 22. pa. 156. Done in
a Synod at Cairo. says Mr. Pagit in his Christianography, par. 1. pa. 156.
Brerewood thinks they have; but In his Pilgrimage, lib. 6. cap. 4.
Mr Purchase who wrote since gives the continuance, and that they do, as their
ancestors were, wont, (...), in the words of Strabo: lib. 17 de Aegiptiis.
which I may not English.

The Abassines, or mid-land Ethiopians inhabiting a large continent, holding
proportion, some say, with all Europe, though others contract to a less
scantlet of Spain, France, Germany and Italy (as if, it is not yet to be
despised; The rather because Truth is there under profession, not (as in other
places) under persecution, the Scepter declaring for the Cross, the public
Power uniting all one way, and so God having succor and favor from the things
of this world. But, here again I pray, Intelligence flatter not, interposing an
Optic Glass which multiplies the species, and creates us but deceit, by show
of more happiness then is, in our best Religious communion; such dealing were
injurious, a friendly unkindness a courteous wrong; and Pia Fraus her self is
but a gaudy strumpet in her best Holy day robe; Christ and HIS cause nor have,
nor need, nor would, nor any thing but abhor and detest her, with all her
devices and imaginations) The holy Gospel is there both professed and
protected, Baptizing in the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, says Geograph.
Nova. fol. 188. in Ethiop. interiori.
Maginus, yet they circumcise too, say Paulus Veridicus. chap. 1. pa. 15. and
chap. 2. pa. 24. Dr. Heylins Geograph. pa. 733. and Brerewoods Enquiries, chap.
23.
others, And Zaga Zabo, a Native of that Country: who having managed office of
good credit at home, and sent in Embassage to the King of Portugal, made this
report to Damianus a Goes, a Counselor of that Kingdom; who published both it
and sandry other things, most richly worth the knowing, of that remote sunburnt
Region.
one that was very like to know gives, They believe their Ancestors had it and
kept it from Solomon: for when their Queen went to Jerusalem to be acquainted
with his wisdom, (and perhaps rites) she brought back this as one of the chief
flowers of the Nation, which her Posterity retain: though our Aethiop^s aut^m
ips^s, (refert. A^^^p^^us) tametsi hosts, tam propenso tamen in Moysum animo
fuisse, ut ipsius quoque Circumcisionis ritum ab eo acciperent. Eusebius. Pamphil,
Praeparationis Evangel. lib. 9. cap. 27. pa. 433.
Eusebius, go a little higher and fetch it from Moses. Who (as he learned from
Artapanus) going to manage a War in Ethiopia in behalf of his foster-father
Cenephra, while he lived in Egypt, so wan by his discretion and the attraction
of his person, He was so fair and amiable, that there was not any one, how
austere and inhuman soever, who in beholding him would not be astonished It was
so that many who met him in the streets born in his Nurses arms, would turn
themselves about to behold him, intermitting their other affairs only to look
upon him: for the admirable beauty of the infant did ravish all that beheld
him. Joseph of the Antiquities of the Jews. lib. 2. cap. 5. Tharbis the King of
Ethiopia's daughter was in love with the sight of him, and sent to offer him
Marriage, though a spoiling Enemy; as there it follows.
for beauty incomparable, upon that Nation, that they were content both Priest
and People to retain the rite of his Religion ever since. More I believe I have
Meminit item Lutherus suo tempore fuisse in Austria ac Moravia Judaizantes, qui
tam circumcisionem quam Sabbatum urserint. Conrad. Dieteric. tom. 1. pa. 119.
in festo circumcisionis. Whether Innocent the third meant some in his time or
since is uncertain. Absit enim ut in illam damnatam haeresim incidamus, quae
perperam affirmabat legem cum Evangelio, and circumcisionem cum Baptismo
conferendam. Decretal. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 42. c. 3.
read of though I cannot upon the sudden turn to chap. and pa. believing in
Christ and deriving (they meant) all from him, not abhorring that rite, himself
not disallowed but accepted.

Mr Brerewood endeavors to render it in some of these, a Custom rather
National then Religious: As of the last Habassines, that they are descended of
the ancient Ethiopians, who (as Herodotus) did circumcise; or of the Arabians,
who came of Ishmael, Abraham's son by Keturah; and so of the rest: and their own
Priest before cited (who, one would think, should best know their own) that
they observed it, for a reason in And so one of our own Nation; The Ethiopians
or Indians, who are also called Abyssenes, (but this Geography I understand
not) grounding themselves upon this example (Acts 16.3.) retain the Custom of
Circumcising still, as well as Baptizing. And herein they are excused by
Caietan (part. 3 Quaest. 37. art. 1.) For that they use it in imitation of
Christ: who therefore adds also, that he shall do well that uses Circumcision,
not as a legal ceremony, or a remedy against sin, but only for conformity to
Christ. Dr. Mayer, on the hard places of Scripture: on Act. 16.3. This was the
Cerinthians reason before.
Religion indeed, but in love, honor, and remembrance, professing imitation of
our Savior: Luc. 2.21. But

They have taken in Baptism from Jerusalem, (say the same of the Nazarenes and
all before) Jerusalem had wont to circumcise as well as Baptize: Even the
Apostles times were troubled then about a conjunction thought expedient; they
would not have been troubled about trifles: Might not the reasons for their
union to continue inseparable, praeponderate and bear sway in the scales of
their Judgments who sat at stern, as Causae quidem and authors ejusmodi
discrepantiae (says the Historian, speaking of the manifold diversities of
usage in several Churches, in Feasts, Fasts, Rites, etc. (fuerunt Episcopi, qui
variis temporibus Ecclesiae praeerant. Qui autem istos ritus recipient, eos
tanquam legem ad posteros transmittunt. Socrates, in Hist-Ecclesiast. lib. 5.
cap. 21.
Church-Governors then, and by tradition or traduction, long continued
derivation be brought down through other times to us? Notwithstanding the
decree of Acts 15. for we know how usual it has been (I do not say, should be)
for whole Nations, whole Churches to reject (or retain) what other whole
Nations or Churches in Canons and Councels, yea Epistles or Gospels have
thought as fit with like liberty and Religion to determine of otherwise:
witness the Church of Rome compared with ours, and other instances enough: And,
as to that book and that chapter, and that Council and very decree, it is known
we make no conscience of eating of blood, though under the same prohibition
there with circumcision (so we find it, and distinguish who can) Harlotry and
Idol-sacrifices, placed also in the same range of, One as 'tother rejected or
allowed.

So for Mahomet: we have it from our own Machometh volens placere utriusque
testamenti cultoribus, quaedam quae legem, quaedam quae evangelium contingunt,
praedicavit: de veteri testamento Circumcisionem, de novo Baptismum. Marth.
Parisiens. Histor. Angl. in Henric. 3. pa. 412.
story (written when was much intercourse hence with Jerusalem) that he uses
both circumcision and baptism; we have it from Purc. Pilgrim. lib. 3. cap. 3.
pa. 244* Juverunt eum duo haeretici; Sergius Nestorianus, and Johannes
Antiochenus Arianus, and quidam Judaei. Magdeburg. Centur. 7. cap. 15. sect. de
Mahometanismo. col. 331.
other, that he had conversation as well with Abdalla the Jew, as Sergius the
Nestorian Monk, and borrowed of both: Might it not be like, if he loved
baptism the better to sit the Christian and serve his own turn therewith, that
he took up the pair where he had them together in the Hebrew Law, rather then
any thing hitherto said by others? Wherein he agreed also with many Christians?
and so the same storehouse furnish each shop, Jerusalem the Holy City, or CITY
of RELIGION, be the Mother of all? Most Masters of Religion have loved and used
to coin as little as they might; or if they must, their high judgments have led
them to new stamp, only that metal had wont to go under other signature for
tried and current before* as in planting of gardens, desire is to borrow slips
from the neighboring plots of like soil, or in making a posy the flowers are
commonly gathered from diverse beds and walks, owing little to the maker but the
disposal or composition: For it is easier to dispose then provide, to compose
then to give being, to borrow then to raise and create; and in any thing shall
please the people (never but jealous of change) a safe rule and of great use,
To innovate as little as may be, especially in the dearest and closest interest
of them All, about matters of Religion.

To conclude this point: we have found this conjunction of Rites for initiation
both in Scripture (as interpreted) and since, dispersed over Egypt, Ethiopia,
Arabia, Syria, etc. of late and before, both in Christendom and without and
beyond; May they not have come both together wheresoever we find them (from
where it is confessed they Both were, and whence most other things of the same
kind amongst us, are allowed and confessed to have come? and They, We, All,
(who would have joined circumcision and Baptism, or have, or do) fetch all
from Jerusalem, the Grandmother of Religion? and particularly from
Proselyte-admission? whereabout was my fourth Quaere, and in my fourth
inference or promised derivation.

CHAP. X.
Sundry other dark Texts enlightened, alluding to a Regeneration.
I Add a fifth; more then I promised. And hence also a true, natural, genuine
unforced interpretation of sundry dark allusions (yet remaining dark) and
seeming hard expressions of diverse places of the later Scriptures, especially
in St Paul's In which are some things of profound conceit, (...), hard to be
understood, is St Peter's censure of them, 2 Epist. 3.16. or (...), deep and of
difficult interpretation, as Epiphanius, in haeres. 30 cap. 25. If it be not
rather to be heeded which Beza and Estius have observed in their Comments, that
the Relative is not (...), as referring to Epistles, but (...), among which
things, of the last judgment, often treated of by St Paul, and likewise thereby
St Peter, Among them are diverse things hard, etc. This seems probable, and
would set a new face both upon the sense of the text, and controversies managed
by interpretation or distortion thereof.
mysterious Epistles, hardly if at all possibly intelligible but from these
prestructions. That great Whereto I was appointed a Preacher and an Apostle, a
Master or Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity, 1 Timothy 2.7.
Master of Christian Religion was we know also a learned Hebrew, an acute
Pharisee, a Doctor of the Law, of Gamaliels College, and being expert in all
the Customs and Questions of the Jews, (which height he was after glad to meet
in his learned Judge Agrippa) spoke, no doubt, and wrote according to that
knowledge in himself, which in the tendry thereof did still presuppose a
Regeneration. How shall we understand what he spoke, without having first
learned those grounds upon which he spoke? How shall we possibly attain to the
proper and genuine Scire legis non hoc est, verba earum tenere, sed vim ac
potestatem. Digest. de legibus, senatusque. L. 17.
meaning of those words (he has left his sense wrapped up in) without a
foreknowledge of those things, from which he derived the use of those words?
and without a presupposition both of which knowledge in him, and foreknowledg
of them in us, we can neither imagine how he should have spoken as he did, nor
can we possibly apprehend him? As, the frequent reflections of his pen upon
generation spiritual, parents not natural, born to God, and a blessed A man in
Christ a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. and see Galat. 6.15. Ephesians. 4, 22, 23. 1 Corinthians. 5.7. 2 Corinthians. 4.16. Titus 3.5.
New creature: The Hereof in Colos. 2.9. Ephesians. 4.22.
Old man also he tells us is Roman. 6.3, 4, etc. Colos 2.11, 12, 20, etc.
dead and buried even by Baptism alone (Circumcision, for some obligations
attending, or other inconveniences, was it seems then left out) and a Colos.
3.1, 9, 10. Ephesians 4.2^. siquidem Regeneratio, quod ipsum etiam nomen, declarat,
alterius vitae initium est. Basil. lib. de spiritu sanct. cap. 15. Renovatur
quod finitum est, protelatur quod adhuc durat Digest. de damno infecto. L. Dies.
new man raised up instead thereof: nay such a prevailing and universal change,
that (as the Hebrew of his Renate Proselytes 2 Cor. 15.17.
Old things were passed away, and all things become new New kindred (in God)
new (heavenly) relations, a new name, Saul called Paul) new faith, new hopes* a
new mind, a renewed For our conversation is in heaven, whence we look for the
Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.20.
conversation: I say THEREFORE and testify in the Lord that ye henceforth walk
not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having the
understanding darkened, aliens from the life of God, etc. But be ye renewed in
the spirit of your minds, and put on the new man framed to a similitude of God
in righteousness and the holiness of truth. Lie not one to another: He that
stole, give it over: Lay all bitterness aside and wrath and malice, and Be ye
followers of God as his dear children, etc. Ephesians. 4.17, 18, etc. A new FORM;
what could be more? and that is in Romans 12.2. (not a transfiguration but a
Transformation) I beseech you, Brethren, by Gods mercies, that in reasonable
service you offer your selves to God a sacrifice, and be not conformed to this
world, but be ye TRANSFORMED by the renewing of your minds (...), which is
somewhat light, and of the outside, (...), a very Metamorphosis. As the
Corinthians are said to be so translated to Gods Image, 1 Corinthians. 3.18. (a
thing done) and My little children, of whom I travel till this FORM of Christ
be brought forth in you. Galat. 4.19. In regard whereof the foreknown of God
are said to be predestinate to a Con-Formity to the image of Gods Son* Romans
8.29. who was before (as is elsewhere said) the first Draught as it were of the
invisible God, They, (the elect Romans) but (in their New making) Conform and
like to HIM, and so He being before, and they after, and but after him, He has
in all things the priority or preeminence, as Colos. 1.18. or, as here, is
hereby made the first born of many brethren. From which TRANSFORMATION, by the
way, (in various expression so often pointed to, and must therefore have had
much Reality both in it self and common belief and from the truths depending
thereon, (but those consequences overstrained, as the manner is) Might those
perverse disputers, men of corrupt minds, that lived in those morning days,
draw color of their claimed Liberty, indeed open and boundless wild
Licentiousness, who questioned (as appears by the Apostles often questioning
them) the dissolving of all bonds, natural, moral, political, oeconomical and
of all worldly obligations, by coming over to their new and regenerate freed
condition. If we look into 1 Corinthians. chap. 7. Ephesians. 5. Coloss. 3.1. Timoth.
6. Ephesians. 5. and 1 Pet. chap. 2. We shall there find servants ready to forsake
their Masters, women to divorce their husbands, children rising up against
their parents, subjects against their liege Lords, All champing irefully upon
the bit, and ready to take up the words of the Psalm, Let us break their bonds,
and cast away their yokes from us, All whatsoever that have held the world in
quiet and kept us in duty and subjection, Whence but from that change sounding
in their ears, and treasured up in their hearts, They were not now what they
had been? They were Dead to the world, Alive to God, a chosen generation, a
peculiar people, Born again, the SONS of the most High, and must they yet be
held in by their old rotten bonds of corrupt carnal relations? Which made the
caution needful (and hence we have its just place and use) taken up in the
Epistle to the Galathians, (to keep all in order and due bounds) ye have been
called unto Liberty, grant that; but not such a liberty as may give occasion to
the flesh, or fleshly men to follow the swinge of their exorbitant desires, to
what they list, and unbounded appetite may crave, but in love still to serve
one another; and by another Apostle to the same sense, As free (so ye are)
says St Peter, only use not your new liberty (justly claimed and freely
granted) for a cloak of maliciousness, or licentiousness to any thing, 1 Pet.
2.16.
but as becomes the servants of God, those would not shame a heavenly relation,
honoring all men, loving your own fraternity, fearing God, obeying your King,
and submitting to all humane orders for Gods sake, etc.

1. Use not your due liberty as a cloak, (...): in a metaphor taken from sordid
men; who though their cloths be underneath torn and vile, yet if they get a
handsome cloak to cast over, they walk the streets in appearance neat; the
vileness is covered but the sordidness remains: So, many are apt to abuse
Holy Religion and just Liberty, to be a cloak and cover of their licentious,
wild, unbridled passions and corrupt affections; envy, malice, pride,
covetousness, ambition, revenge, and the whole heap of troublesome and cursed
sins sedition, insurrection, sacriledg, disobedience to POWERS, which is, as
the sin of witchcraft) those reigning spirits, their dominiering lusts within
are subtle and active enough to tempt them to; they have not their Christian
liberty unless they may withhold their Tithes, pull own Churches, destroy
societies, discompose States, subvert Government, obey whom they list, do what
they list, think, speak, act as they list: But do not ye do thus says the
Apostle, Ye have not so learned Christ or the freedom of his Gospel, if ye have
heard of him or been taught of him as the truth is in Jesus, to put off that
old man corrupt according to such erroneous lusts, and put on the New, created
in righteousness, that gives every one his own, and True holiness: O be not so
impious to profane a shrine to cover a strumpet, to wrap up an Idol in Aarons
holy robes, to make Religion a stalking horse to come (unsuspected) at corrupt,
carnal, seditious, sacrilegious ends, Let it be abomination and as the sin of
witchraft, to make sanctity a cover of iniquity, fair liberty, for any thing
that is foul (...), as a cloak.

2. And, as a cloak of Maliciousness; not Malice, a particular passion, as
usually translated, and commonly understood, but (...), of Hujus virtutis
contraria est vitiositas: sic enim malo, quam Malitiam appellare eam, quam
Graeci (...) appellant, nam MALITIA certi cujusdam vi^ii nomen est, VITIOSITAS
omnium. Cicero, Tusculan: Quaest. lib. 4. Quas enim Graeci (...) appellant,
Vitia malo, quam Malitias nominare Id. lib 3: definibus.
Naughtiness in general, an ill disposition, or Habit of wickedness: so
observed and suggested by learned In his excellent and judicious Sermon on that
text: pa. 21.
Dr Sanders, so translated by him there and by others from the As in Genesis 6.5.
Wickedness was great on the earth, (...) in Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not be with
the many in ill, (...). So deuteron. 31.18 Jud 9.56, 57. cap. 20.3, 12, 13. 1
Reg 12 19, 17, 20. cap. 17.28. cap. 24.12. and in many other pl^^e ^esides the
Original of Eccles. 33 32. Idleness teaches much ill, and chap. 15.21. All
wickedness small to the wickedness of a woman: twice together: and in the New
Testament, Acts 8.22. 1 Corinthians. 5.8. chap. 14.20. Ephesians. 4.31. Jam. 1.31. and
in the beginning of this very chapter, Lay aside all ILL: In all which places,
and many more, (...) (the word here) may be well, and can be well nothing else
but the head or comprehension of all Naughtiness.
Septuagint in diverse places and that which is only rendered by that unusual
abstract in the Metum accipiendum Labeo, dicit, non quemlibet timorem, sed
majoris malitatis. Digest. Quod metus causa. lib. 4. tit. 2. LL. 5.
Civil Law from Malus, Malitas, the head or comprehension of all evil; and as
in the Vulgar of Matthew. 6 34. Sufficit diei Malitia sua, sufficient for the day
is the mischief thereof, any ill or inconvenience; do not abuse your privilege
to such design, your granted liberty by real change to an occasion or color
of ANY Evil As elsewhere, when it was questioned, May a newborn Christian 1
Cor. 7.10, 11.
put away his old wife? No: nor a woman her husband, but if the infidel will
depart, let him, or her, depart: Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Let every soul continue subject to the higher powers: Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20.
Children obey your parents, still: Ephesians. 5.22. Colos. 3 18.
Wives your Husbands, Servants your Masters And 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
if any have believing Masters, let them not despise them because they are now
brethren, but do them service because they are faithful and beloved partakers
of the same benefit, as a man had rather serve a friend upon the same stair of
common goodness, then an adversary, or an enemy; The sum, 1 Pet. 5.5.
Be ye clothed in humility, Romans 12.10.
in honor preferring one another, not scandalizing the Gospel, 1 Cor. 7.17,
20, 24.
remaining in the same state ye were called with God, Ephesians. 5.21.
submitting to each other in his fear, and under all old carnal relations
remaining still ready Galat. 5.13. A divine sentence not fit to be written but
in l^tt^rs of gold. N^thing is m^re Christianly religious: Give it obedi-ence,
and from it alone we should s^e a new fa^e of ^hristendom.
in love to serve one another. This was the needful doctrine, upon all changes
allowed, which the Apostles preached; which changes (to go on) we have not in
St Paul alone. For,

In 1 Pet. 1.^3.^5.
St Peter we have births proceeding from a double semination: One corruptible,
as of the flesh, but this (natural) lasts not, another supernatural, as from
immortal generation; (...), whereby somewhat is quickened which abides for
ever. In St John is a second and beyond-and-after-natural 1 John 2.29.
Generatio (...), out of the RIGHTEOUS one, as 'twere from God above; The
consequent whereof is there is consequence of discourse continued in the next
chapter, To be the Children of God in present now, to those were the complete
sons of men before, and whatever they shall be hereafter (which is unknown,
chap 3 ver. 2.) And the seed of that Divine birth is said after to remain, John
1.12, 13.
as an antidote against ill, or inward receipt at the heart to hold antipathy
and keep out the working of temptations that they may not close in and generate
unto sins, ver. 9. All this, even out of GOD, chap. 1. ver. 1, and 18. Besides
the like intimation and expression, even to words and syllables in the Gospel
of the same Apostle: As many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the sons of God: who were born (to this estate) not of blood, nor of the lust
of flesh or men, but of God.

These are in Peter, Paul, John, abroad: nearer home I chiefly insist on the
10. ver. of this present chapter; the coherence whereof seems not so well made,
the sense given, nor deduction of consequences followed, as these things (in my
understanding) may give ground for. The usual interpretation is this: That
Nicodemus, (a great Master in Israel knew not, (as well how could he?) the
great mystery of Regeneration, (revealed only by whisper from heaven, which he
had not) Hence he, (destitute of that revelation, which was not in his power)
makes an answer childish and grosely carnal, (which yet no one can Homo hominis
nisi ipso indicante non intelligit cogitatum: Quanto minus Divinum quis poterit
investigare consilium, nisi cui ipse voluerit revelare. Bern. in Epistol. 77.
suppose how he should have mended) talking of entering into his mothers womb,
(to which his invincible ignorance as inevitably led him) and being thence born
again: whence our Savior reproves him sharply, Art thou a Teacher of Other, a
Master in Israel and yet thus ignorant? But how do these things hang together?
That our Savior (meek and gentle) should dispose to blame him (who would do
nothing without reason) for ignorance of that, he nor did know, nor could know,
nor any other could well tell how he should! in a mystery of Religion to be
revealed, dropped only from heaven, which instillation, inspiration it is
granted he had not! Might he not well have answered for himself, Ye call me
Rabbi and Master, and ye say well. for so I am, but how can I speak, in that I
was never taught, or know these things unless some one (from above) show me?
Such revelation I have not, why am I blamed for that I never could have? can I
take what was never sent, or receive what was never given? If this must come
from God, and he gave it not me, how am I (though I have it not) blamed, or but
excused! Whereas in the other way, blame comes home, inexcusable, unanswerable,
unavoidable; sc. That he was blind where he might see, an ignorant professor of
what he might know, destitute of the knowledge of his school, the tendries of
his associates, the light then upon the stage, the learning of his place: from
whence he might have had instruction of the whole business, but he a trewant or
a drone neglected even the usual tendries of his own Religion, offering him
what as a Doctor he refused, the doctrine of a Regeneration. And thus our
Saviors increpation comes home indeed, the blow lights hard and smarts as he
intended it: Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things, thou
should, might, ought know! thy Liturgy, thy Breviary, thy Catechism,
thy profession! the badg whereof in thy professing ignorance does but blazon
thy folly, and in thy long robe (that lying outside) thy ridiculously
incongruous simplicity and duncery! So the Scholar might have known, otherwise
our Savior would not have blamed him for want: and that without impossible
Revelations, which were never accounted in man's power, and so should be out of
reach of blame: for the learning of his own Schools might have been in this his
sufficient instruction, the doctrine extant (to have been furnished therewith) a
shield of strength to keep off this increpation. And so this place, not (as By
St Chrysostom, in Homil. 23. in. Johan. tom. 2. pa. 153. and many more.
usually alleged) affording instance of what is after, in 1 Cor. 2.16. The
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolisness unto him; neither can he skill, for they are spiritually discerned.
for by the ordinary acquirable knowledge of his own School he might have come to
notice of them by study and industy, as a Schoolman to the opinion of Scotus
and Thomas, and a Priest to his rites by his own rituals.

The co-herence moreover would thus be well made out and carried along with
clearness of sense to some verses following. Do not thou a Master know these
things? 11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak what we know, thou
might, and testify what we have seen, it is every days object, and yet,
seems it strange to you? ye receive not our testimony. 12. If I have spoken
unto you earthly things, within reach of every days sense, and ye apprehend not
or believe not as out of reach, How would ye believe if I should strain higher,
to speak of those things, from whence I am and whereto I could ascend, heavenly
things? 13. Whereunto it is hard for any other to climb in apprehension; for No
man has ascended or can ascend up to heaven to understand things there (
ascendere in coelum dicitur, qui arcana coeli penetrat, says Grotius on the
place) save he that came down from heaven, from the bosom of the Father, even
the son of man that is now in his contemplation and omniscience in heaven. 14.
And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness heretofore on high, so must
the Son of Man be thither from whence he is lifted up again, that whosoever
believes on him may not perish, but have everlasting life. Thus are the words
chained together fast and close, in a handsome coherence of sense as well as
Grammar: Thus they enlighten one another, still supposing a Regeneration known
upon earth and visible (as was said at ver 11. We testify what we have seen)
So is offered to us all of a piece, light and clear, (not to speak of others
miserable distortions, and incongruous, inextricable perplexities) and in a
word, This makes the text together look like it self, the word of God and sense
A diligent inquiry would I believe find out many other (consider of Jam. 1.18.
and 2 Cor. 3.8, etc.) which interpreters have hitherto tormented themselves in
vain to give any tolerable interpretation of, and after all have scarce left
handsome Allegories of those the holy Ghost meant for notable Elegancies; The
places are rich in deep sense and profoundness of matter, but the well has
been hitherto stopped, there have wanted to draw the riches forth. What I have
now laid before you, I commend unto the blessing of that GOD to continue, who
has I hope hitherto guided both my heart and tongue: if all or any may conduce
to the guiding if it be but of one benighted soul, or inlightening of any
obscure and clouded text of Scripture, I have then of my pains and search
abundant recompense. Ye also some, of your tempted patience, which if not
accustomed to such length or thornie difficulties, you may the rather bear for
once with that is not usual: Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

And thus, with my sands run, I am at last arrived at the end of my way, whence
it is usual to stand still and look back: Remember therefore, etc.

All which yet I desire to have taken as offered, and accepted as intended, non
tam asserendo quam disquirendo, in the words of my great Canones, sed tamen
mobiles, sive axiomata inchoata, quae nobis inquirentibus non pronunciantibus
se offerunt, praescribimus and constituimus. Utiles enim sunt si non prorsus
very Illustrissimus Baconius, in prolegomen: ad histor. Ventorum.
author, that I meant to propose only to attention and judgment, not so much
with the confidence of a peremptory resolver as the Si cui, vero in
disceptatione profundum aliquid occurrerit, de hoc quidem dicendum: ( said
Origin.) sed non cum omni affirmatione. Hoc enim aut temerarii hominis est,
ejus qui sensum humanae infirmitatis perdiderit, oblitusque sui sit: aut certe
perfectorum virorum, and eorum qui confidenter se sciant ab ipso Domino Jesu
didicisse, id est, a verbo veritatis and ab ipsa sapientia, per quam omnia
facta sunt, agnovisse, vel eorum qui divina responsa ingressi, turbinem and
caliginem ubi ipse Deus est, caelitus acceperunt: in quod vix ille Moses
ingressus, vel intelligere talia potuit, vel proferre. Nos vero pro eo solo
quod mediocriter licet, credimus tamen Domino Jesu, and ejus gloriamur esse
discipuli: Nec tamen audemus dicere, quod facie ad faciem ab ipso traditam
susceperimus intelligentiam eorum, quae divinis libris referuntur, quae quidem
certus sum quod ne ipse quidem mundus pro virtute ac majestate sensuum capere
potest. Propter quod, pronunciare quidem de his quae dicimus, sicut Apostoli
potuerunt, non audemus. In eo autem gratias agimus, quod cum multi imperitiam
suam nesciant, and morus suos incompositos and inordinatos, interdum etiam and
ineptos at fabulosos, cum omni intention, sicut sibi videtur, quasi verissima
assertione annuntient, nos de rebus magnis and his quae supra nos sunt,
ignorantiam nostri non ignoramus. Apolog. Eusebii Caesar: pro Origin, inter
opera Hieronymi, tom. 9. pa. 114.
modest haesitancy of a seeker and yet learner; and as One that had rather
doubt of many things he thinks he knows, then over rashly determine, or
impudently pronounce and contest for those things he thinks there is the least
cause to doubt. The way was untrodden, where as it was not impossible to err at
first, (nor improbable) so should it not be unpardonable, there to have stepped
awry, where scarce any had set a foot before. It had been, easier to take on in
the beaten road, as the fashion is, to skim the top, and by laying together by
helf of a Concordance those places of sacred writ where Born and Again are
mentioned, to have heaped together such Materials, and hammered out such a form
of doctrine as those places, severally and jointly, would have afforded: But the
Levium metallorum fructus in summo est: illa opulentissima sunt quorum in alto
latet vena. Seneca, in Epist. 23.
vein of precious metal lies lightly deeper, the surface of the ground there is
often dry and barren, and to lay a sure foundation of true interpretation, it
may be needful sometimes to dig deeper then the very text in its originals,
The Scriptures are, I confess, light of themselves, and have from heaven to
guide our souls into the ways of peace, but if they chance to burn dim (as in
many hard places they must be confessed to (do or have their light eclipsed by
any interpositions, (worst of the rubbish contracted by time) the light of a
candle there may not be despised for help, to light us at least up to their
sense, nor the snuffers of the Sanctuary (made though they were of Scire
prophana quidem sanctis non credo prophanum,

Si non illo^^ mente prophana legant. Joan. Buxtorf. in Grammat. Heb.


profane gold from Ophir) to trim the light, to quicken its brightness, to
make it shine clearer, direct farther, guide surer then otherwise of it self,
it would or could: And for this the things delivered have, I hope, here some
use. I say again, it had been easier to have bin the following Chariot, to have
traced others, to have kept the beaten path, when not only the comfort of
society might happily have lightened some burden of the way, but the directing
feet of passenger before have preserved from error, and guided surer and safer
those that were to follow after: But this liked not me. This had been but to
repeat others toughts, I esteem it more to add of mine own; as counting it more
answerable to the desire and expectations of good men, and greater advantage to
truth, to be the author of one new thought, then the continuer or repeater of
twenty: which is more then to trade with the old stock, to lay in by addition
somewhat of new store, to make a beneficial and fruitful increase of what is
already come in, and to set up a new mark or stand as it were, to direct yet
farther into the terra in cognita of divine mysteries, then past discoveries or
intelligences have, or could have brought us acquainted with. But a grain of
truth is precious, yet more, of Christian truth, most of all, in the
profoundest, obscurest, richest, divinest mysteries thereof; toward discovery
whereof these things I hope may afford some light: and so leaving all to your
consideration, meditation, application, conclude, as I use, by giving due
praise and honor to our most glorious and most gracious Lord God, by whose
gracious favor it is, that we have thus leave to meet in his house, to enquire
and learn the things of his council and will; who bless the opportunities to
his own allowed ends, that we may proceed from knowledge to knowledge, from
virtue to virtue, from faith to faith, til we be perfect in Christ Jesus our
Savior: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be honor and praise
everlasting. Amen.

Cyprian: de baptizand. Novat. Epist. 77. Rescripsi, fili charissime, quantum
mediocritas, nostra valuit, and ostendi, quid nos, quantum in nobis est,
sentiamus; nemini praescribentes, quo minus statuat quod putat unusquisque
praepositus, actus sui rationem Domino redditurus: secundum quod beatus
Apostolus Paulus in Epistola sua ad Romanos scribit and dicit, Unusquisque
nostrum pro se rationem dabit. Non ergo nos invicem judicemus.

Opto te, fili charissime, semper been valere.

Of the Form of Baptism.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations (or, as ye go, or going, make Disciples
of all Nations) baptizing them (...), INTO the Name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost. Matthew. 28.19.
IT is agreed on by all that this is the very Commission-text or Letters of
Orders, enabling all the deputed Ministers of Jesus Christ to Baptize; All men,
say some, Others, the Gentiles only, there was order for the Hebrews before;
but this if it be, clearly appears not (at least, to this way of Baptizing) and
therefore say I, This is Christ's Catholic ordination of Baptism Universal;
Of all persons, of all Nations, not the peculiar Hebrew excepted (though he
stood much upon his high privilege, and would sparingly be allowed any need of
change) but, take in him says Christ, and every other, and all universally;
for, I am at top, All power is now given unto me both in heaven and earth, Go
therefore, and as ye go, take in all, baptizing them (my way of Matriculation)
Into the Name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

In which verse are usually made two parts, and those clearly distinct, and
that distinction, with the order thereon argumentative, for satisfaction in a
very weighty business. For troubling the Church, object some, and raising
needless controversy; Nay, for stablishing the Church, says the Anabaptist,
and putting end to one great controversy, sc. for the total and final
exclusion of all Infants from this Holy Sacrament, by laying bar in the way of
necessary knowledge, to them impossible; for our Saviors words are more plain
then that they may be evaded, and he knew his own mind best who chose in these
words to interpret it, GO, TEACH AND BAPTIZE.

The first of which is preparative, the last the main; That introductory, to
bring unto this; yet so as both are necessary, and in this order, First,
instruct, and then, initiate.

1. For it might seem unreasonable to admit men they know not whither, or enter
them to they know not what. (...), in the words of Festus, Acts 25.27. very
incongruous to privilege whole multitudes to the greatest height by droves: and
though it be in the way to heaven, it might be expedient a man carry a light in
his hand, as well for his other comforts, as to be sure he hit the right way:
Catechizing of Nations is therefore to go before Baptizing them, Illumination
before they be admitted to profess the Light, To try the Scholars aptness and
fitness, before he be preferred to a higher form, for fear he may prove dull or
scandalous: And do so here; examine, approve, and then Baptize.

2. But admit afterward: For the complaint ran high in the Prophet, A day of
trouble, rebuke and blasphemy that Children came to the birth and there was not
strength to bring them forth: Esai. 37.3. When good desires shall be denied
their errand, earnest suitors driven from heaven gate, They that would may not
enter, but be beaten from Noah's ark, the desires of their souls still hovering
about the windows. This is a sad case. Of a good School it is the commendation
to have many good Scholars, Heaven loves to be furnished with guests, and the
felicity of the righteous receives much increase by their number and
multitudes: Of those therefore that would enter let none be kept back, of those
that would be admitted let none be excluded: My Father keeps open house, why
should any of his servants be churlish or illiberal, straightning either the
hand of his bounty, or the grateful performance of good offices from
themselves? Who is prepared let him be received, and Baptize all that are
taught.

Thus the Ana-baptist (or rather Antipoedobaptist, for there is a great deal of
difference, and they that would have no children Christened, do yet as much
disclaim to Ana-baptize; for that which was administered in infancy, they say,
was no Baptism, and in their seeming repetition, they do therefore at ripe
years, but begin, not renew) and having laid such a foundation, much is the
following use his importunate perverseness makes of it. For when we require
Nations to be baptized, it is the plain word of command, Christ willed so: Good,
says he, But he first willed them to be taught. When we reply, Federal
holiness, Children within the Covenant, The sons and daughters of Abraham, a
faithful Generation, a holy Seed: Be it, says he, But every thing in its own
order, Christ's Sheep hear his voice; and that is here, Teach and Baptize. When
we think to strike all dead by instance of Circumcision the eigth day,
administered to as very infants as ours can be; what made or supposed them fit,
may by a parity of reason as well supply all imaginable deficiencies of ours of
the same Covenant: Well, says he, for Jehovah once said so, to the Sons of the
Old Testament this was Gospel; but Christ has been since, and he has said, A
new Commandment give I unto you: So that now, though not necessitate rei, for
the need of Instruction's sake, yet necessitate praecepti, for obedience to
this Commandement's sake, that is necessary, which might before be at liberty:
Nor may our duty be taken out a syllable shorter then the length of Christ's
precept, which here forbids the profanation of what is holy in our ignorant
service, or that we stumble at a wrong administration in the door of entrance
to Religion (by pressing on like bruits unbred and untaught) but we are first
to know what is to be done (or is supposed or employed) and then obey or receive
accordingly; Believe, and then receive the Seal of Sacrament; first be Taught,
and then Baptized.

Thus is this the grand refuge of the great disturber, his gladius (...) that
wounds both ways, or rather his Sword and Buckler whereby he both defends
himself, and gives out offense to his adversaries: for when we urge the right
of all Nations in terminis so set down, federal holiness, or children in their
parents, Circumcision the eighth day, etc. he keeps off all with, Teach before
any thing: When we require reason for disturbance of Christ his Church of 1500
years possession, Teach, says he again, This is required distinct and
preparatory: So that this one word, is his ready and chief both guard and
weapon, let us see how fast he holds it.

Not so fast but it may easily be wrested out of his hand, for the weight of
his whole argumentation is settled upon two slippery or false Foundations. 1.
That in this verse are two, and those distinct precepts or commands; two
propositions, two bidding verbes, two duties laid down by them, and their order
argumentative, whereas here is no such duplicity, but One plain, simple,
general rule of Christ, how, the Earth being given to him, he would have the
Nations taken into his confederacy, and it stands thus: All power is given unto
me, as was said before, both in heaven and in earth, and I enlarge your Optime
cohaeret cum superioribus: quando id jus mihi datum est, vos estote ejus juris
administri atque legati. H. Grot. annot. in Evangel. Matthew. pa. 514.
Commission accordingly, ( As the Father has sent me, so send I you, that the
Syriack Copy has put into the text) Going therefore Post resurrectionem ex
mortuis, ad impleta jam in ipso prophetia Davidis, ex persona Dei ac Patris
dicentis, Filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te: Pete a me and dabo tibi Gentes
haereditatem tuam, and possessionem tuam terminos terrae (quod and factum est
and jam omnium oculis expositum) discipulis suis deinceps, quasi aliud mandatum
priori opponens, quo in vias gentium abire prohibuerat, praecepit dicens
Profecti, docete omnes gentes, etc. Basil. lib. 1. de spir. sanct. tom. 1- pa.
560.
confine not now as formerly to Judea, Matthew. 10.5, 6. but take in, or make
Proselytes of all Nations, and do it thus, Baptizing, etc. as I have said. Let
your work equal your power, that is extended by your Commission, that not
stinted but by my authority, and this governs over All: You see your bounds, do
and so: As ye go, Teach, Baptizing all. And how? this is the second slippery
ground; first by Teaching, then Baptizing! No, here is no such thing, here is
no Teach: It Is (...), which is not necessarily of that import, and may as well
signify somewhat else; nay it does, and better, and the true and proper import
of that word is, to make Disciples, or to enter into a School, Sort, or Sect.
The sound of Teach has indeed gone out into all lands, and the noise thereof
into the ends of the world, for ever since the old Latin has prevailed, which
has been at least long enough, this word has gone for Gospel; but look to
either the Original of this text, or the Hebrew, in which many say St Matthew
wrote (as the Finis Evangelii sancti praedicationis Mattas, quod praedicavit
Hebraice in regione Palestinae. In the end of St Matthew, in Junius's Bible. De
novo nunc loquor testamento, quod Graecum esse non dubium est, excepto Apostolo
Matthaeo, qui primus in Judaea Evangelium Christi Hebraicis literis edidit.
Hieron in praefat. in quatuor Evangelia.
close of the Syriack Gospel witnesses he did) which has (...) or the Syriack
it self, or the Arabic translations (for which two last I interpose the credit
of a very learned professor of those Languages) in all those ancient Eastern
draughts of the mind of the holy Ghost, we have to import nothing but
Discipulate or Discipulos facite, Enter into my School, or bring to me, make
Proselytes, no Teach.

In the Grammatical possible signification I grant it may be otherwise, and the
Hebrew word import first, to make to learn, and then, to Teach; or by
derivation, in the Greek, make Disciples, which being not without documents
instilled, so secondarily Teaching comes in: But consider we the next sense of
either that which will first follow of (...), (which sure signifies in
Scripture but For so in the New Testament: See Matthew. 5.1. cap. 8.21. chap. 9,
10. chap. 10.1. chap. 11.1. Mark 2.18. chap. 10.23, 24. Luke 6.40. chap. 14.26,
and 27. John 1.35, 37. chap. 2.2. chap. 3.22, 25. chap. 9.27, 28. Acts 1.15.
chap. 6.1. chap. 9.1, 10. chap. 20.1, 7. but especially verse 30: of that
chapter. And no farther then this chapter no fewer then four times, sc. verse
7, 8, 13, 16. beside that full and pertinent exposition of (...) by (...), at
the very act of Baptizing, in John 4.1. The Pharisees heard that Jesus makes
more Disciples and baptizeth them then John.
a Disciple) how gladly that noune would come along with and be lodged in the
As it seems to do, Matthew. 13.52. but more plainly, chap. 27.57.
verb, what Volkelius acknowledges, that according to Castellio, Erasmus, and
Beza, it is either discipulum facere, actively, or neutrally, discipulum esse:
The first it cannot be here, Ergo. lib. 6. cap. 14. Of Beza it is true. Quidam
subtilius interpretantur (...), discipulos facite, quasi in conjugatione Hiphil
dicas, Discipulate. Nec etiam alio quam discipulorum nomine initio fuerunt,
vocati, etc. And G. Pasor, (...), etc. Docete omnes gentes, hoc est, colligite
mihi discipulos ex omnibus gentibus: in Lexic. Gr. Lat. pa. 457. Teach, or word
for word from the Greek, Go, make them Disciples, as the word is expounded John
4.1. E. Legh. Critica sac. pa. 355. Discipulate, liceat sic mihi loqui gratia
docendi, sive, facite mihi discipulos. Bullinger: ibid.
others have pertinently and judiciously observed of it before, and above all
how fit in this place and this sense alone it makes the words and whole series
of things stand fair and handsomely together, This will soon discard the former,
and retain only this, That Christ's purpose was by his word, no other but to
have Disciples gathered unto him, or entered unto HIS, and not to have any
Taught first, that they might be entered. Add, that the word properly betokening
so much finds place immediately after, sc. (...), Teaching the baptized to
observe all that I have Commanded; and might have been here, if Christ had this
intended: (which variety is also in the Syriack and Arabic translations, by
the authority before:) That the same (...) was received the most common yet
proper word for such import through the whole Bible. as in the Deuteron. 4.10,
14. chap. 11.19. chap. 31.19, 22 2 Chronicles. 17.7.9. Job. 21.21. Psalm. 24.4, 5.
and 33.12 and 119.66.
Septuagints translation (to which Jewry was used in the holy times) in the
Romans 12.7. 1 Corinthians. 4.17. chap. 11.14. Galat. 1.12. Ephesians. 4.21. Colos.
1.28. chap. 2.7. 2 These. 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Jo. 2.27 and Heb. 5.12. where
speech is of the principles of Faith to be taught, which is supposed here.
Epistles, in the Marc. 2.13: chap. 4.12. chap. 6.30. chap. 8.3. Luc. 4.15.
chap. 5.3, 17. chap. 11.1 chap. 12.12. chap. 13.10, 22 chap. 21.37. chap. 23.5.
John 6.59. chap. 7.14. chap. 8.2 chap. 9.34. chap. 14.26. chap. 18.20.
Gospels, in this Chap. 4 23. chap. 5.2, 19. chap. 7.29. chap. 11.1. chap.
13.54. chap. 15.9. chap: 26.5.
Gospel, in this Verse 5. and 20.
chapter, where with incredible frequencie it has been let fall: also, that
besides it there is In Acts 22.3. chap. 7.22. Ephesians. 6.4. Romans 2.20: 2 Timothy
2.25. chap. 3.16. Tit. 2.12. Heb. 12.9.
(...), which properly betokens to instruct youth, or filial instruction, from
the primitive whence it comes: and As, where the Jew boasts himself to be
catechized out of the Law: No doubt he was so: Romans 2.18. Catechizing is so
ancient. And, Let the Catechized communicate with his Catechist, the taught
with his teacher, in All: (...); (a large measure to cut out Ecclesiastical
allowances by: yet is that extent Jure divino) Galat. 6.6. And Apollos was so
Catechized ((...)) before Baptism. Acts 18.25. Observe how our Ecclesiastical
words have footing in Scripture, and add for this, Luc. 1.4. and 1 Cor. 14.19.
(...), the very same from which we use and name to this day Catechizing, and
imports teaching Proprie est Viva voce instituere ac docere. Erasm. in 1 Cor.
14.19. Proprie, Resono, item instituo viva and s^nanti voce, (...). Pasor in
Lexic. Graec. Lat. pa. 352.
by word of mouth, as a Master to his Scholar, or (...) to sound or resound as
by an Echo, to answer like the s^und of an Ec^o: Mr Leigh in ^rit. sac. pa.
309. Scilicet, sicut in Echo una vox bis auditur, ita quoque Catechistae vox
bis audiri debet, tam ex catechumeno, quam ex ipso Catechista. Pasor ubi supra.
It signifies in its common and large sense to Resound, to instruct others viva
voce, by speech sounding in their ears, Acts 18.25, etc. in special, to teach
the rudiments and elements of any doctrine whatsoever, and more peculiarly to
teach the first elements of Christian Religion; unde dicti Catechumeni quibus
fidei mysteria vocis ministerio credebantur. Mr Leigh, where before.
Echoing in his ears repeated instructions, which the Learner resounds or
Echoes back to him; or as (...) Homil. 21. ad popul. Antioch. tom 1. pa. 235.
St Chrysostom, so to ring in ones ears that the noise be not forgotten. Lay,
I say, these together, and that from a view of them all, which our Savior no
doubt had, he yet chose none (when to fit his purpose, he yet singled out one
of them in the next line, when he meant the thing) and it will be very unlikely
he meant that thing; passing by these words and laying hold of an obscure,
dark, remote Metaphor, as 'twere to lead us into Error, or leave us in Error,
in a thing so clear, and touching Salvation, so near concerning us.

But above all, take the From ver. 18. (...). As much as, Jesus coming said to
them, All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Going therefore make
Disciples of all Nations, Or the Heathen, Baptizing them into the name of
Father, son and holy Ghost, teaching them (Teach comes after) to keep whatever
I have commanded you, and behold, I and you together to the end of the world.
Amen.

Is here any thing for Catechism before the Font? what that looks like it?
It Is hard to find where 'twas occasioned; if read with a free and clear eye.


text and context in their entire originals. There Is commonly more life and
quickness in those first draughts of any ones mind, that grows pale and wan in
best translations, nor do pieces of a Writing but furnish us with a parcel
understanding. The whole uses to illustrate the whole, and as Wine, so rich
sense most times loses, grownes flat and dull by being drawn from Vessel to
Vessel. Take then the whole, without parcelling, the Original without
derivation, and in that face no sign appears of requisite instruction. I do not
say, not at all; but, not here; in this word; and inevitable order; before the
element applied, which is that alone will please the Antipaedobaptist. How or
when, is another consideration, I only vindicate this text: one of the
strongest holds he has, that quarrels our Charity for suffering little children
to be brought unto Christ by Baptism: And sure, for him here is no TEACH AND
BAPTIZE.

I retort his chosen weapon: and what if here be much for Childrens Baptism?
for being taught only after the Sacrament, if this text and the sure order
thereof be argumentative? and more, that Infants may come in with the throng
(of Nations) whether they be taught or no? Both these, I aver, are here. For
first, (setting aside the amphibologie of the first Teach, as but now) in the
20 verse following we have sure Teach; and sure after, and neither Translation
nor Order can be evaded: where is the Petrobrusian now? Will he be ruled by
this Text? will he have the Order regarded? shall Baptize AND Teach, in this
series of words and things unavoidable, be as authoritative to him, as Even now
was Teach AND Baptize, if he could have made it good. Let Christ's words
together (by his own reading) end the quarrel, who says thus: All power is
given to me in Heaven and in earth: Go therefore, Initiate all Nations,
Baptizing them, etc. then TEACHING them to observe all that I have commanded,
Will now Tho. Munzer say, Teaching them first?

Secondly, besides, Infants may be Baptized: I argue from hence; for they are a
part of All Nations, and All Nations ought by Christ's words: Let the answerer
choose which to deny. If Madagascar or some Indian Prince should send word, He
and his Nation would be Baptized, why should I think he excepted any, except
his exception did express it self in some, as in tender babes? Or if our
Governors should authorize me to convert and initiate the Nations next New
England (or in all America) and I should take my Commission (with my
associates) in very Gospel words, from them directed, (...), and so as it
follows, As ye go take in all the Nations, or all the people, or all the
countries, what reason had I think any sort meant to be excluded the Ark, or
shut from admission to society under them, since they willed ALL by me to be
admitted. Some one might cast doubts, The children are unfit, they cannot take
the Oath of Allegiance or enter into necessary Engagements: But I speak of
their Commission and my duty, what I find written in the one, and I ought to
extract and see not left undone in the other; They bid me take in (...), as
Christ did, and I am to obey them in rational construction: If therefore I
shall be busy or froward to thrust back clildren, or any that offer or are
offered, how shall I excuse, being questioned, who was to take in the
comprehension of Nations, much less if All the Nations? though there be
peradventure yet more in their parents or other Offerers, then I can promise my
self in Their ingenuity, or indiscoverable future dispositions, for their
present gracious reception. It is sure enough children are no sure part of
Families, and it satisfies when it is alleged, that Lydia and her household
were baptized, Acts 16.15. the Jailer, He and all his, ver. 33. the household of
Stephanus, 1 Corinthians. 1.16. that possibly here might be no children, for we
read of none, and some Families always have been without: But that any Nation
should be without children, or any thing to have its force upon Nations, that
has nothing to do with chrildren, was not heard since the beginning of the
world, much less All Nations. The Amazones lived without Men for a time, and
some sullen Men perhaps as much without women, but that All Nations should be
with ut children, or not include children, is very hard to be believed, and
unreasonable to understand: The quintessence is in this, A Nation is
comprehensive of all, (Men, Women, Children, Servants, Bond, Free,) But all
Nations are here to be Baptized: Therefore --

Thus the order of this text lays no rub in the way of childrens Baptism: the
order, if any thing, requires that that which is alleged for a rub before
(TEACHING) should come after Baptism: and Christ appointing Nations to be
Proselyted, takes in them for a part, and so seems here to imply and call for
their Baptism. Which was more then I meant, for my aim is at another thing and
yet not more then needed, considering times and things; and that much of it may
not have come under observation before. Next after Making Disciples, and of all
Nations, is How, or by what rite Jure divino: which is a point wherein Christ
has not left himself to us without witness, the witness of his own immediate
words, for he has prescribed this manner, Baptizing them INTO the name of
Father, Son and holy Ghost.

1. Which is first the Dixit and factum est, the solemn and authoritative To
acknowledge Christ's institutution, the ground of both Sacraments, I suppose no
Christian man will refuse: for it gives them their very nature, it appoints
the matter whereof they ^^nsist, the form of their administration it teaches,
and it blesses them with that grace whereby to Us they are both pledges and
instruments of life. Mr Hooker, Eccles. Polity. lib. 5. Sect. 61. pa. 321.
erection or elevation of this Act of Natural washing into a holy and religious
rite or Sacrament to Us. For the Jews had their Baptisms of many sorts, their
Even Baptisms of Proselytes into their Religion, by opinion of the most learned
among them, And the Gentiles their Washings, Lustrations, Februations, etc.
much of the same general nature: But here was that divine and powerful word of
Creation to Us, that made this rite used, (perhaps profaned) before, a
Christian and holy Sacrament of life, and without which our Religion had been
superstition Do this in remembrance of me, was said before, and by verture
thereof we yet Do that which is well pleasing in his sight, our natural piety
is by obedience to his command sanctified into Religious: So, Do this, says
Christ, Congregate unto me by the Ceremony of Washing; now it is holy what else
were superstitious, though it passed from us as Religious; Have not I commanded
you, Go, take in, Baptize.

2. Here is also the person to whose care and work the ministration of this
rite pertains, Take in All Nations, but Baptize YE. That is, the Apostles and
their Successors, Men deputed for this holy work, called of God as was Aaron;
for to them belongs the application of this rite, to whom is made application
of the words from the 16. ver. They went there to Galilee, according to
command; Them Christ there met according to his promise; To them he directs his
full speech and commission; The same he inaugurates and intrusts with that
power no man can exercise but from heaven: You, and in naming You, I name no
others, in naming but You I exclude all others, Go, take in, Baptize You.

3. The manner or sort is no less evident and perspicuous, Do, and do it thus.
Depart not from my form, Vary not from my prescription, Obey my Order, Do as I
would, or as good do nothing at all: Lo I have commanded you, Do thus, or do
not this: Baptizing into the name of Father; Son and holy Ghost.

Where is also, 1. The form or substance of faith Baptized into, sc. That is,
to be dedicated and consecrated unto the name of, The Father, as his Sons, The
Son, as his redeemed ones, The Holy Ghost as his Sanctified ones. Bernards
Thesaurus Bib. in the word Baptized.
Father, Son and holy Ghost. 2. The form or manner of admission or entrance
into that faith, in Nomine is most usual, but in Nomen is the right, which
makes initiation or admission, entrance INTO the faith of Father, Son and holy
Ghost, or what To baptize to any one, or the name of any one, is to devote and
consecrate unto him, to be called of him; Christiani igitur tres sui dogmatis
auctores agnoscere jubebantur, P. F. and Sp S. nihilque ut necessarium
admittere quod non a Patre ortum, a Filio proditum, a Spiritu vero esset partim
explicatum apertius, partim obsignatum. Grotius ad Matthew. 28.19. pa. 516.
proceeds from them. 3. The expression of the person in Ministration left at
liberty; so the form be kept, that is not limited, but may vary. The As in
Aquinas, part. 3. Quaest. 66. artic. 5. Vasquez, in 3. part: Thom. disput. 142.
c. 1. Sexto Cornel. a Lapid. in 1 Corinthians. 1.13. Bellarmine lib. 1. de Bapt.
cap. 3. de forma baptismi. Alphons. de Castro, lib. 3. adversus haeres. cap. 2.
Paget: Christianogr. par. 2. pa. 120. Mr Gregory, in his notes, chap. 39. pa.
107. from the Euchologue.
Greek Church administers in the third person, Baptizetur N. servus Christi in
Nomine Patris, filii and Sp. S. and so does the Paget. Christianogr. par. 1 pa.
118. and Severus, Patriarch of Alexand. in lib. de ritibus Baptismi: in
Bibliothec. Pat. Latin. tom. 7. pa. 732.
Egiptian, Such a one N. is Baptized in the name of the Father, Amen, of the
Son, Amen, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Which In 4. Sentent. did. 3. Quaest,
3. sect de secundo.
Scotus allows for good, if the Pope would allow it; and In decreto fidei
quodest in Concilio Florentin. post ultimam sessionem. Ita Vasquesius in 3.
part. Thom. disput. 142. cap. 2. sect. 10.
Eugenius the fourth has allowed it in the Council of Florence, because the
Validity of the Sacrament arises not from this, but the Trinity invoked: But
now the Western Church generally takes in the first person, with applycation
from him that Ministers to the receiver, I Baptize thee: I should be loath to
say either is faulty while both hold fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
or that type of Doctrine, Romans 6.17. which was here left by our Savior. Who has
not restrained any more then to substance, the Circumstance left at large, to
one or other: Baptize, that is the rite; the persons, Ye, the faith, of the
Trinity; the manner, INTO; and that all is needful.

I have chosen the last (for which also I chose the text) and almost the least
(for it is but one syllable in the Original, two in translation, (...), into)
to insist upon: sc. how it is Christ's will this should lead to the mention and
use of the Trinity. Neither of the other parts but are miserably distorted, and
more then seem to need some diligent hand, and the industrious employment
thereof to set them to rights: the Arrians, Eunomians, Cataphrygians,
Valentinians, etc. having so woefully perverted their clear and evident sense,
that some wonder it is how such havoc should be made of precious truth, a
corruption of so much in so little a compass, or so many errors creep into so
narrow and small a room: But that I would enquire into only, is, that I have
said.

But little ground, I confess, a small compass of pedistal to set foot upon;
the greater care, if not more skill, would be required to build sure, if of any
bulk or height, upon so narrow a foundation. Even the Neque enim vel syllaba
vel apiculus est in sacris literis in cujus profundo non sit grandis quispiam
thesaurus. Chrysostom. Orat. 21. in Genes. Equidem collando in moribus tuis
discendi studium atque industriam, supraque modum delector, ista instantia
vigilantiaque mentis tuae, qui putas nullam vocem ex his quae per universam
scripturam de Deo praedicantur oportere in discussam relinquere, o -- frater
Amphilochi, etc. Basil. de Sp. Sancto. cap. 1. tom. 2. pa. 291. Nam haud
oscitanter audire sermonem de rebus divinis disserentem, sed conari (...) non
est eorum qui segnes sunt ad pietatem, sed qui intelligunt scopum nostrae
vocationis, etc. -- Proinde syllabas excutere non est aberrare a scopo, etc.
ibid.
least things are worth consideration in Religion, chiefly those are so near
the heart and pith; About this I have The first spark that lighted me to
various construction, I observed from Bellarmin, lib. 1. de Conciliis. cap. 12.
speaking of the power left by Christ to call Councels, in Nomine meo. sc. by my
Authority. A difference formally made, but lightly turned off. I after found in
Gerards Common places, between, In Nomine, and In Nomen. An exact discussion I
promised my self in Gab. Vasquez, who has, one would think, all the Questions
and quirks imaginable in disput. 143. in 3. part. Thom. but in vain. Therefore
said I, Hearken even to me, I will show mine opinion; in the words of Elihu,
Job 32.10.
hardly met with any purposed and formal disquisition before, where yet the
mistake would be perilous and dangerous enough.

The first consideration would offer it self about the I make no formal
division, but the steps I would be heeded to proceed by should be these. 1.
What the word is and does import. 2. What it has been taken to import here,
sc. In the name, or Trinity invoked, In the name, or by the power, and In or
Into the name or faith. 3. Which last is right, from first the nature of the
work; secondly the authority of context: thirdly the tradition of the Church,
in elder and later times.
word, both what it is in the text, and what it imports in the world, the
corner stone upon which all that follows is to be laid, and had need therefore
to be well looked into, lest we plunge into all the inconveniences following
upon error in principio.

And in the Text, note, it is constantly, universally the same, (...). Other
words are commonly perplexed with variety of Readings, Meus codex habet, sic
Anglicus sic alii aliter, etc. the seeds of everlasting uncertainty; for who
can tell what should be meant, when the book is not agreed with it self of the
word? But here no such thing, fate or providence has still preserved, in the
variation or distortion of the sense, the means of rectifying all in the
undoubted word fast and safe retained: Luther, Beza Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis,
St Hierome, or whosoever has had, a hand in reforming the Text, having left no
hint of variety or mark of uncertainty upon any Letter of this word: Add the
like constant, univocal transcription and allegation wheresoever, and this
promises well for a beginning, we have fast hold at least of a word to trust to.

For import and signification of that word, no less is the concord and
agreement: sc. that it is motive or terminative, casting the signification into
the accusative case, and making way to INTO. So all Authors have rendered it:
Proofs are numberless: No word is more common in any known sense: It may be
superfluous to prove that Pater is a Father, Filius a Son, Veritas Truth, or
Homo a Man: Of, like both certainty and evidence is the import of this
particle, and unless we will allow of such Enallages and substitutions whereby
any thing may be made of any thing or any one word put for any one other, I see
not but it must stand in sense as it does in Lexicon, that (...) is not (...),
nor the signification thereof IN, or any thing else but INTO.

The word secured, and the translation: next for the sense that has been made
of it, or the sense that should be made of it here, and indeed how it leads,
(for so it does) the sense of all that follows, ( Father, Son and holy Ghost
being led, and looking to various imports for several purposes as this shall go
before and direct) Thus the most interpretations I have met with are Mr Deodate
has briefly couched all these three senses together in his late Commentaries
on the Bible; though to a preferment of which in his judgment led that the
words should lead him, is easy to guess by his words. Baptizing in the name,
that is, says he, to consecrate unto the only true God (revealed in 3 persons
of the holy Trinity, 1 Jo. 5.7.) by the baptism administered by their power and
authority, which are also called upon to ratify the external ceremony thereof,
each one by the special property of his operation, annot. on Matthew. 28.19.
Good: and all true; but how much of it is here in the text? It is easy to
guess what he found in the place, and what was buzzing in his ears from the
noise of the world. The Word is the rule; and that ought rule us.
reducible to three heads: that In the name should import either. 1. Invocation
of the name. 2. His Authority whose is the name. Or 3. Consecration, Devotion,
dedication, institution into him whose the name is: Who being here three and
one, makes the consecration to be into that Name or Faith, of that Trinity,
that is, either to believe it, or what come from it, either from the Father,
through the Son, by the holy Ghost, or from the Father, and the Son, and the
holy Ghost, or simply that they BE (belief of their revelations will come
after) sc. that there is Father, Son and holy Ghost.

The first of these is Calvin's, Beza's, Bellarmin's, Aquinas's, Luther's
Ambros's, Augustin's, and indeed whose not? Most others. Maldonate expounds it
and contends for it by many reasons. The Latin Fathers (not to instance in
particulars) went the same way generally; the Schoolmen and Canonists followed;
as Gratian, Lombard, Scotus, Vasquez, etc. with Liturgies, the most that I
could inform my self from, and Ministers, no doubt, accordingly in their
ministration: not to speak of Treatisers, Lecturers, Expositors,
Common-placers, Systematists, Catechists, etc. which let them all make good if
they can, either from the Not this; for all say and use Baptism as initiatory,
the Door of the Church, as shall be hereafter said more fully: Now with this
what has invocation to do? I mean, as to the act, though it may be a
convenient appurtenant.
nature of the business in hand, or likely Nor this: for how many tropes would
be needful to translate and lift off a plain and simple order of Baptizing in
the name, if it were so, of Father, Son and holy Ghost, to a capacity of such a
sense as should give order for Baptizing, that is, Invoking (or baptizing by
invoking) that glorious name? Must there not be an entire and full piecing in
of this whole uninteressed word of Invocation? and by such an immense license
of figure as might bear out any thing to made of any, thing? or any thing to be
said or put for any thing? or meant by any thing.
interpretation of these words (the ground) or possible Nor lastly this: for
how can the words whose plain and open sense lead to initiation and nothing
else, be applied to such a work as declares and spends it self in an act of
another nature, which is invocation?
application of these words to this business in this sense. They mean, I doubt
not, In-vocation, or Ad-vocation of the most holy name of God, One and Three,
over the baptized, according to that of St Augustine, O Baptizati, audito me,
etc. obsecro vos per nomen quod super vos invocatum est, that this does the
work, so far as water and words (the outward ministration) can reach; or simple
So also Josephus Vicecomes, -- ita ut in nomine idem fuerit ac nominando. And a
little after, In quo verbo (in nomine) Catholica Eccl^sia Divinitus edocta
optime intellexit non virtutim aut fidem indicati -- sed tres personas
sanctissimae Triados nominandas esse. de ritibus antiquis Baptismi. lib. 4.
cap. 5. pa. 272. vid. etiam pa. 274.
APPELLATION or NOMINATION, say some; Invocato aut appellato nomine Patris,
filii and Sp. Sancti is Maldonates, whence the Canon Law (and Schools too,
agreeable herein with most of the Latin Fathers) they that have been Baptized
even by Heretics, if there have been Invocation, or as some Confession, for
there is still variety in Error, of the Trinity over the baptized, they are not
to be washed again, otherwise they are.

That which gave occasion of this way of interpretation might possibly lay in
two things. 1. As to the word, the long prevalence of the old Latin
Translation, which we know has domineered over Europe from above a thousand
years since, and is lately Statuit and decrevit (sancta synodus) ut haec ipsa
vetus and vulgata editio, quae longo tot faeculorum usu in ecclesia ipsa
probata est, in publicis lectionibus disputationibus, praedicationibus aut
expositionibus pro authentica habeatur, and quod eam nemo rejicere quovis
praetextu audeat vel praesumat. Session. 3 Can. 2.
Canonized in the Council of Trent, for uncontrolable: Where, in Nomine being
first found, and all along continued, to make out sense of that they under tood
not (nor sought further for, whether it were right? taking that for granted)
hence they were forced to hammer out such a meaning as they could make some
tolerable interpretation of to the people, suitable a little with the argument,
and hence Invocation danced all over, when Men were to be Baptized unto the
Trinity, the Trinity was invoked or named over them, and this (but how
incongruously let the world judge) did the business. 2. As, to the thing, the
use of an They had in ancient allowed Directions for administering the other
holy Sacrament a preparatory prayer (no doubt from the purpose and contents
thereof) called (...), wherein they seemed and meant to Invoke down something
upon the work, persons or thing in hand, whereof is mention made in St Basils
Liturgy, pa. 10. in St Gregory's Liturgy, pa. 34. and in St Cyrils, pa. 53.
of the same volumn, translated out of the Arabic, and Printed 1604. That title
I find expounded in that use, and it is like it was the same here, to be (...),
an Invocation of the holy Ghost, and that they prayed therein for the (...), or
(...), the descent of the holy Spirit upon the things under hand; somewhere by
Dr Hammond, and in St Peter's Liturgy, (as said to be) (...), very often; and
so in St James's and St Chrys^stomes in Biblioth. pat. Gre c. tom. 2. pa. 4,
and 6. pa. 77, and 78, etc.

The Pagans used the like over their Sacrifices, St Cyril tells us so; co^paring
and averring, that, As those things which are offered upon Altars being pure,
(...), are defiled by Idol-Invocations, so on the contrary pure water receiving
virtue of the holy Ghost and Christ, (...), at Invocation, is made partaker of
holiness, in Cateches. 3. pa. 16.

The juggling Marcosians had their initiations not without somewhat of like
nature, (...): others of them lead their seduced Proselytes to the water,
(...), etc. and baptizing, they say over them, into the name of the
incomprehensible Father of all things, etc. (where observe by the way, the
intent of their mysteries was, To lead and convey over UNTO, (...).) Others of
them frighted with hard and uncoth names, (...), BASEMA, CHAMOSSE, BAAEANORA,
MISTADIA, RHVADA, CVSTA, BABOPHOR, KALACHTHEI: which are not interpreted
without (...), etc. and yet others went (to the same sense) a little
otherways: In Epiphanius, haeres. 34. de Marcosiis. cap. 20. pa. 255. out of
Irenaeus. And before, there was an used (...), apprehended effective of strange
things, cap. 1. pa. 233. of which or another of the same sort is repetition in
the next page.

There was a form of BENEDICTION in Aarons Directory, Numb. 6.24, etc.
according to which he and his sons were wont (as is conceived, for such was
their Office Deuteronomy. 21.5. 1 Chronicles. 21.13.) at dismission to bless the Assembly,
(...), which I interpret actively or datively to give them Blessing; for
Benedictio est sanctitatis traditio, in the Canon Law) and this was so
successful that the fruit or consequent thereof is said to be, He did thereby
put the NAME, or Jehovahs Name upon the sons of Israel, and Jehovah himself
followed him, (...), verse 27. And I the Lord will so bless them. Nor was this
so effectual Bene-Diction without long continuance, for so long after as in
Simeon the High Priests time mentioned in Ecclesiasticus, 50. at the end of the
most solemn service, He went down and lift up his hands over the whole
congregation of the children of Israel, to GIVE THE BLESSING OF THE LORD with
his lips, and to rejoice in his NAME: And they bowed themselves to worship the
second time, that they might RECEIVE a BLESSING FROM THE MOST HIGH, verse 20,
21. of our English Translation, which is agreeable enough with Junius's
Edition, ut daret benedictionem Domini labiis suis, and that of Complutum, or
Alcala de Henares in Spain, (...), in the genitive, though Sixtus 5. corrected
it in his Edition, (...), to give blessing or praise to the Lord.

In much conformity to which of old, the Ministers of Jesus Christ (serving, as
the sons of Aaron did heretofore, in the Assemblies of his Saints) have been
wont with much strength of endeavor to attempt to GIVE the PEACE OF GOD, or
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost (from the conclusion of the second Epistle to the Corinthians) to be
with their people and continue with them to comfort them till their next
meeting in Gods presence. It seems more then a simple intimation, or plain
comfortable declaration, or earnest petition and obsecration, a powerful
imprecation, yea a solemn and successful authoritative dispensation or
distribution of those favors from heaven are then more then wished for,
presently invoked, called down and given out by Gods faithful servant to his
expecting and worshipping people For more effectual doing whereof and
Authoritative, if many were present that had Commission, and one in power above
the rest, it was ordered that he whose authority was thought greatest, should
stand up for this part, to Give this Blessing. All these seem to meet in
somewhat of one general nature, or, as we say, to hang upon one string: When
we understand them we may perhaps have found out therewith a new and better way
then used of saying or GIVING the Peace of God; (to which the ceremony of
Elevation or lifting up the hands, as in weighty matters, once appointed by God
himself, or used by his approved Ministers, Levit. 9.22. Eccles. 50.20. yea by
our blessed Savior, Luc. 24.50. might not be I think an unfruitful
appurtenant.) Illumina quae sumus Domine Deus tenebras nostras.


(...) (which word yet to all purposes, and every corner of the meaning
thereof, I confess I clearly understand not, and for some reasons hope I never
shall) applied to Baptism too some times, and importing to INVOKE, as the name
of GOD, or GOOD, or EVIL upon a party, place, people, etc. In many derivatives
thereof we meet with it often in the As, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 11, 21. chap. 14.23 4.
chap. 16.2, 6, 11. chap. 26.2. chap. 28.10. 2 Reg. 6.2. 3 Reg. 8.43. chap.
17.20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 6:20, 33. chap. 7.14. Esai. 63. ult. Jer. 7, 10, 11, 12,
14.30. chap. 14.9. chap. 15.16. chap. 32.34. chap. 34.15. Dan. 9.18, 19. Amos
9.12. and 1 Reg. 13.2, 4. which compare with 2 Reg. 23.16. These places are
most of them translated (and in our last and best English) by, called by
Jehovahs name, as in Jam. 2.7. Do they not blaspheme that good Name by which ye
are called, or by Calling as by way of prayer, upon that name: But the
unavoidable evidence of the Originals was such as made it need to be added by
way of supplement in the Margent of the most, for, that Name being CALLED UPON,
the party, place, people, etc. As for instance in 3 Reg. 8.43. that they may
know that this house is called by thy name; but the Margent has: Heb. thy name
is called upon this house. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people which are called by my
name shall humble themselves, etc. that is, according to the Hebrew, upon whom
my name is called; in the Margent again: And the like annotation is in 2 Chronicles.
6.33. Esai. 63.19. Jer. 7.10. chap. 14 9. chap. 15.16. chap. 34.15. Dan. 9.18,
19. Amos. 9.12. The most exquisite Tremellius has in text or margent always
super quos, or super quae invocatur nomen tuum: Sixtus 5. in his Roman Edition
never otherwise; I mean in his Latin translation: and the Doway gives it very
often, particularly in 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Esai. 63.19. Jer. 14.9. chap. 15.16. chap
34.15. Dan. 9.18, 19. and Amos. 9.12. Somewhat there was in it that made all
these wary translators retain so hard and to us almost unintelligible phrase of
speech: they meant to give plain English or Latin again, as before, Illumina
quae sumus Domine Deus tenebras nostras, and calliginem ignorantia qua in hac
vita laboramus obsiti, dispelle propitius, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

That SVPER-NOMINATION of Exodus 20.24. belongs hereto, (...), wheresoever I
shall place my name there; which might be and was in div^rs other places: and
Thither will I come, in the following words: as in Deuteronomy. 12.5. and 2 Chronicles.
12.13. both Super-nomination and In-vocation have the same text (...). Observed
by Nobilius in his Notes on the Septuagint there, that St Augustine should say,
(...) was exactly rendered by Supernomination or Adnomination; rather then by
Cognomination or simple Nomination: and it is true St Augustine has this
critical and very useful observation: Quod Graecus habet (...),
supernominavero aut adnominavero expressius dicitur, quod usitatius
cognominavero nonnulli interpretati sunt: sed non habet necessariam
significationem cognominavero, propinquius autem dicitur cognominavero quam
nominavero; nam and hoc aliqui interpretes dixerunt. Locution. de Exodus lib. 2.
tom. 3, pa. 49. and he is there examining the propriety of speech of that book.


Seaventies translation of the Old Testament, and the Acts 2.21. chap. 22.16.
Jam. 2.7. Acts 9.14, 21. chap. 15.17. Romans 10.14.
text it self of the New, besides the Sea 1 Maccab. 7.37. 2 Maccab. 8.15. and I
prayed and understanding was given me, (...), I used In-vocation and there came
a spirit of Wisdom unto me. Sapient. Solomon. 7.7.
Apochrypha of the former the meaning whereof is so little understood, that it
has, Scarce been handsomely questioned, What it is? and the doubt so far from
being fully satisfied, that the inquiry has before been scarce fairly and
pertinently raised. There might be intended by it some in-vocation of the great
NAME of GOD, JEHOVAH, under the Old Testament, of which our Schools or Books
make little mention, and this operative and effective of the DIVINE PRESENCE in
such a way as we little dream of; And the rather for that Jer. 7. ver. 10, 11,
12, 14.29.
where this in-vocation is most mentioned, as an effect or consequent God says
his name See the English translation of Deuteronomy. 12.5, 11, 21. chap. 14, 23, 24.
chap. 16.2, 6, 11. chap. 26.11. 2 Chronicles. 6.20. Jer. 7.12.
there Was, He placed it, he had Wherefore, go to my place in Selo, where I
had placed my name formerly, (...), settled or lodged it, Jer. 9.12. (the word
used in Nehem. 11.9. wherewith compare 1 Chronicles. 23.25.) And both Jerusalem is
called, A place of the Lords name, Esai. 18.7. and his name both was to be
there, and Was there, and to continue: 1 Reg. 8.16, 29, 44. chap. 11.3.6. chap.
14.21. 2 Reg. 21.4. chap. 23.27. 2 Chronicles. 12.13. yea, for ever, 2 Reg. 21.7. 2 Chronicles. 7.16. and chap. 33.4, 7.

Where mark still and from the Text, the words of placing, settling, dwelling, a
House for that purpose, and, by virtue of that enjoined Bene-diction (remember
before) of Number. 6.24, 25. The Priests shall put my name upon the Sons of
Israel; God himself coming as 'twere along with it. We may compare things not
all out the same: The Marcosians, mentioned by Irenaeus, acknowledged some such
thing, After their imprecations before spoken of, and the NAME invoked by
Priest and Proselyte, (...), and so they proceeded to a noyling him, etc. they
pronounce that are present, Peace be to all upon whom this name (of Jao)
rests. Adversus haeres. lib. 1. ca. 18. p. 108. and from Epiphanius in the
place alleged. And it was the adjuration by the Sanhedrim to the High Priest
of Israel on Expiation Eve, that he would change none of the service for that
day, Noste jurare jubemus per eum, cujus nomen in hac aede habitat, as rendered
by Pet. Cunaeus, We adjure thee by him, whose name dwells in this house; de
repub. Heb. lib. 2. cap. 6. out of Maiemonides.


inshrined it once in Shiloh. Under the New Testament likewise there might be
some such in-vocation St Isidore proves the Deity of the holy Ghost, by that it
is completive of the holy Trinity, (...), and in this Epiclesis or In-vocation
of the holy Baptism, with the Father and the Son, it was judged purgative of
sin. Isid. Pelusiot. lib. 1. Epist. 109. pa: 34.
annexed to our Baptism by the pregnant insinuations of The voice from heaven
to Saul, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, Calling upon the name
of the Lord. Whereupon is Vasquez's observation: Quoniam haec verba denotare
videantur invitationem ex part Pauli (Arise thou, wash thou, etc.) yet that
this performance is to be a third persons, sc. the Ministers, appears by that;
his is to be the in-vocation, whose the accompanying ablution, But (No man
washes himself, Sebaptists are scarce heard of, Be thou baptized, here) this
was to be the Ministers, Ergo, in 3. partem Thom. Disput. 143. cap. 2. sect.
17. So the sense this, Be thou baptized, sc. by some fitting Minister, and let
that Baptism be by (or not without) Calling upon Gods name, the Epiclesis
mentioned.
Act. 2.16. and Do they not revile that good name, (...), that is called over
you? And add what of this import we meet with often in those who trod next
after the steps of the Apostles: As in those styled The Constitutions of the
Apostles, in many places, especially lib. 7. cap. 43. in Justine Martyrs.
second Apology, pa. 94, etc. and many other places.
Iam. 2.7. But grant it were, and to continue to us, I see not how this Text
has any thing to do with it, or it with this Text, the words whereof if duly
considered, not superficially flubbered over, lead clean another way: Grant
In-vocation, and of the holy Trinity needful, yet what ground have we for it
here? and how must not the phrase of speech but be more then miserably wracked
and tormented to force a look of the words toward any such business? Follow as
they lead, hear as they speak out their own mind, and they gently, but fully,
confess an intent toward Christ, a will to Christ, an admission into Christ:
But any In-vocation of Him, or Trinity, Any calling upon Any thing, This was
not left here and we idly seek, in vain we hope to find it.

Indeed, the occasion of much error may have been, (perhaps even here) Truth:
yea the derivation of truth from truth, the grounding of one truth upon
another; the settling, I mean, of opinions warrantable enough in themselves,
upon other as warrantable as they, but so incongruously and without coherence
of any necessary concatenation, that of things that should flow and follow,
there is no dependence, nor, being compared, any establishment they can afford
mutually one to the other. He that says, little children should be assumed to
Christ by his own Ordinance of matriculation into Church Fellowship and the
Communion of Saints on earth, (as well as no doubt they are into the society of
the first born in heaven) says well: and it is more certain, that the Savior
of us all declared Mat. 19.13, etc. Mar. 10.13, etc. Luc. 18.15, etc.
his good will toward them in special manner (and to those Of such is the
Kingdom of God: ve. 14. Christ does not say, of them. As before, in the
exclusive, Verily I say unto you, unless ye turn back and become as little
children, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Whosoever
therefore shall humble himself low as a child, he shall be exalted greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 19.1. Significanter dixit Talium, non Istorum, ut
ostenderet non aetatem regnare, sed mores, and his qui similem habent
innocentiam and simplicitatem praemium repromitti. Apostolo quoque in eandem
sententiam congruente, 1 Corinthians. 14.20. Fratres, nolite effici pueri sensibus,
(...) but in malice be ye such, etc. Hieron. Matthew. 19. tom. 6: pa. 40.
Humilitatis ergo signum Rex noster in statura pueritiae probasti, cum aisti,
Talium est regnum caelorum, etc. Augustine. Confession. lib. 1. cap. 19.
like them, whose is the Kingdom of God, by the Text) for he took them up in
his arms, he laid his hands upon them and blessed them: But he that shall upon
all these ground their invitation or due acceptance to our Lords holy
Baptism, does but, as to me it seems, build a Castle in the air, link the
slippery sands, or settle a firm Spanish Fort upon the Pike of a Tenariffe;
piece together I mean inconsequences, and raise the weight of firm and sacred
truth upon the foundation of an immovable rock, but such and at so remote
distance, that it can no way come near to contribute any furtherance of
establishment to that truth, whereof it was intended the sufficient supporter:
Even so, grant the In-vocation of the Trinity need, full over the baptized, (as
it may be, or may not be) yet how impertinently do men urge this Text for it,
since here is no rest for the sole of its foot? no pedistal to settle on? no
words may bear this sense, or occasion that consequence? Thus to prove, is to
add truth unto truth, heap truth upon truth, by no means farrly and gentile to
collect and derive truth, one from another: for, search and look, for certain
no such thing can hence be made to follow. A Baptism, and into the Christian
faith, this is really offered, and we may as surely take up, but any such thing
as falling upon, or what can be easily wrested thitherward, even by the fairest
help of Enallagie or any licentious trope, in vain do we seek for; it is not,
and we cannot hope to find it.

Thus In-vocation is discharged, and that how usual soever, though rooted in
custom and spread abroad far and wide over the face of the Earth.

Next for Hoc enim dicimur facere Nomine alterius quod illius jussu and
authoritate facimus. Jo. Maldonate: tom. 1. de Sacramentis, ca. 1. de Bapt. pa.
5.1. To Baptize in the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost does signify to do
it by their warrant and Commission. Bishop Lake, Sermon on Matthew. 28.19. pa.
232. Significat autem in Nomine, 1. Jussu and authoritate communi horum trium
(sc. patris, filii, etc.) institutum esse Baptismum, atque has tres personas
mandare, ut qui velint esse membra ecclesiae illi sic baptizentur. Ursin
Catechet. par. 2. Quaest. 71. Oportet quod in forma Baptismi exprimatur causa
Baptismi. Est autem ejus causa duplex, Una quidem principalis aqua virtutem
habet, and haec est sancta Trinitas: Alia autem instrumentalis, sc. Minister,
qui tradit exterius Sacramentum: and ideo oportet in forma Baptismi de utraque
fieri mentionem. Minister autem tangitur cum dicitur, Ego te baptizo: Causa
autem principalis, cum dicitur, In nomine patris, filii, etc. Aquin. par. 3.
Quaest. 66. artic. 5. Quod autem Apostoli dicuntur baptismum administrasse in
nomine Christi, -- istis verbis hoc tantum docetur administrasse eos jussu,
authoritate, mandato and ex praescripto Christi. Caspar: Brockman: Systhem:
Theol. artic. 34. sect: 3. Sic etiam Schrapius, in Cursu Theol. col. 1367. de
forma Bapt. Emanuel Sa. in annot. in Bib. magn. ad Matthew. 28.19. Jacob. Tirin.
in eandem locum. Gregor. de Valentia tom. 4. disput. 4. quaest. 1. punct. 3.
Gab. Vasquez. in 3. part. Thom. disput. 142. cap. 1. sect. 9. and cap. 2. sect.
19. Alexand. item Alensis, and Sotus, and Canus, and recentiores plerique:
atque in hujus expositionis confirmationem plura scripturae testimonia
afferunt, in quibus idem est, in nomine alicujus, facere, quod authoritate and
virtuti ipsius operari inquit, Vasquez. disput. 143. cap. 2. sect. 9. And this
way, though he corrupt the sacred inviolable Text, even in its first original,
goes the late Patriarch of Constantinople Cyrillus Lucaris in the confession of
his faith, set forth in the name of the whole Eastern Church lately, cap. 16.
In so much, says he, that, whosoever is washed in the name of Father, Son and
Holy Ghost ((...)) is regenerate, purified and justified. See whither dullness
and drousiness are in time apt to corrupt the best forms. So dealt Mr. Petly
with the Greek Translation of our Liturgy; as shall be said hereafter.
Power and Authorization, this indeed has more color as well from the words
and syllables in some reading of the Text, as from the granted and necessary
sense of the same phrase in many other places even among our heavenly oracles:
for In Scripturis illud In Nomine ubique fere accipitur pro eo quod est ex
auctoritate. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 12. But then it is to be
understood, that that in nomine is rightly given out of the Original, sc. by
the preposition and case: But not so here, Ergo. Among Vasquez 's Criticismes
this distinction had place. Qua phrasi ((...)) Christus est usus, Matthew. 28.
cum formam Baptismi tradidit in illis verbis, In nomine, etc. Cum autem dicitur
Marci ult. In Nomine meo daemonia ejicient; hoc est, virtute and authoritate
mea non dicitur (...) sed. (...). disput. 143. in tertiam part. Thom. cap. 2.
sect. 16.
in the name (if it were so rightly translated) does both there and abroad
betoken POWER. Abroad, to do any thing in ones Name, is to do it in his power,
by virtue of his authority or name, as an Officer commanded such a thing in his
Majesty's Name which imprinted a public power in a private precept: The
Prophets came and acknowledged they came (of themselves they had no power) See
Jer. 14.14, 15. chap. 20.9, 16, 20. chap. 29.9. chap 44.16. Dan. 9.6. Zach.
13.3. Also 2 Samuel 6.18. 1 Chr. 16.2. 1 Samuel 17.45. 2 Chr. 14.11. And 1 Samuel
25.5. 1. King. 21.8 Esth. 3.12. and chap. 8.8.

() Data utrinque fide dicat Sacerdos: Ego tanquam Dei Minister, vos in
Matrimonium conjungo, In nomine Patris, and filii and Sp. Sancti. Modus
administrandi sacramenta, etc. ex Pastorali Mechliniens. Colon. 1618.


In the NAME of the LORD: and amongst us the Ministers of the invisible GOD, in
his form of solemnizing Marriage the Liturgy way (it so fell out, in this form
of words, and very sense too) stood forth, and when all ceremonies of agreement
had evidenced the contract finished, as 'twere by a voice from heaven (sure by
a vicarious power assumed at least from thence) declared; that for as much as
N. and N. had consented in holy wedlock and were now joined, etc. they were Man
and Wife, which I pronounce, says he, In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In which form in the Adjuro te, immunde spiritus,
in Nomine Patris, Filii and Sp. Sancti, ut exeas and discedas ab hoc famulo
Dei. Dr. Brockman, artic. 34. sect. 5. pa. 2015.
Danish Church they continue still to exorcise. In promised Scripture, no
otherwise: (though observably How yet it may be even in this sense here
reasonably and needfully used, sc. to authorize and solemnize this great work
of making a Christian, may be seen by comparison from Nicetas, De ordine qui
observatur cum quis a Saracenismo, etc. In Nomine tuo, Domini Deus veritatis,
and unigeniti filii tui, and sancti tui spiritus impono manum, etc. in
Bibliothec. pat. Graec. tom. 2. pa. 284.
In the Name, to that purpose, is another phrase in the original, and of
different construction) (...)) I instance in 2. These. 3.6. We command you
brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye separate your selves
from inordinate livers, that is, by his In nomine, id est, per Nomen Jesu
Christi, id est, per ipsum Jesum Christum: Nomen enim ponitur metonymice pro re
nomine significata. -- Praecipit ergo per Christum, id est, Christi nomine,
vice, potestate and authoritate, qua fungebatur quasi Legatus, Vicarius and
Apostolus Christi: Cornel. a Lap. in loc. Quidam obtestationem esse putant,
quasi dicat, Per Nomen Domini, etc. at multo rectius est ut authoritatis sit
allegatio, quomodo haec phrasis (In nomine) frequenter accipitur in Scripturis;
ac nominatim 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. ubi in negotio simili verba haec interponit,
ostendens, etc. sensus ergo est, Praecipimus vobis nomine and authoritate
Christi Domini, cujus sumus vicarii, idque potestate ab eo accepta. Haec fere
omnium expositio est. Estius, in commentar. ad loc. Non nos haec dicimus, sed
Christus: Hoc enim est in Nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi, (...). Per
Christum (inquit) annunciamus. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in 2 These. tom. 6. pa. 393.
power, as from him, so the words will bear and seem to require. In Mar. 16.17.
Nomen enim potestatem and authoritatem significat in scriptura, ut Marci
ultimo, In nomine meo daemonia ejicient, and Joan. 5. Ego veni in Nomini
Patris, etc. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Bapt. ca. 3. Saepe in sacris literis Nomen
significat virtutem seu potentiam ut Marci ult. In nomine meo, etc. and Psalm.
53. Deus, in Nomine tuo salvum me fac: sequitur enim quasi expositio, and in
virtute tua judica me. Estius in Mat. 28.19. And according hereto in following
use, Epiphanius speaks to the Emperors Nephew, who was to be raised from
death, Surge puer ((...)) in nomine Jesu Christi crucifixi: when yet he had
conditioned before, that upon his revocation to life his mother should be
baptized (...), Into the name of him that was crucified. In vita Epiphanii.
sect. 50. tom. 2. pa. 3. 62.
These signs shall follow them that believe, In my name shall they cast out
devils and do many wonderful works; as if, I will enable them, give them
strength and power so to do. John brings word to Christ, chap 9.38. Master, we
saw one casting out devils in thy name, and forbad him because he is not of our
company: Jesus answers; forbid him not: No one that d^es any thing, exercises
any power in my name can lightly speak evil of me. Elsewhere, I have come in
the name of my Domine Patris Dei veniunt, qui ab illo mittuntur, and commissa
sibi Dei negotia fide bona agunt. Suo autem nomine veniunt qui affectu pravo
excitati sua sponte currunt, and privatis modo commodis serviunt: Gualter. in
Homil. 44. in Johan. Nominatim dicit (Matthew. 21.9.) Qui venit in nomine Domini:
Quod Messiah venturus esset quasi Missus, and qui se non ingereret sed mandatum
haberet a patre. Nam venire dicitur in nomine Domini, qui se non ingerit, sed
Dei jussu and mandato suscipit regnum. Marlorat. Exposit. Ecclesiast. in Matthew.
21.9.
Father and ye receive me not, another shall come in his own name, and him ye
will receive, though he come of himself and urge no farther authority. All this
is explained and both by Question and Answer, this way, in Act. 4. The Council,
met to examine Peter and John of their Doctrine, ask, By what power or what
name, qua authoritate, so Beza, ((...)) they did what they did, preaching the
resurrection? Be it known unto you, they answer, Non nostra virtute, non nostra
justitia; been enim nobis conscii sumus nostrae imbecilitatis and in justitiae;
-- Nec potentia aliqua Magica, quippe qui nullis nec carminibus, nec
characteribus, nec exorcismis (quibus rebus Magi uti solent) hominem
excitavimus, sed sola virtute, potentia and Nomine Jesu Christi Nazareni, quem
vos crucifixistis, etc. Brent. Homil. 17. in Act. Apost.
In the name or by the name (for so it must be to answer directly their
question) of Jesus Christ of Nazareth does this man stand here before you
whole. But plainest of all is that about that dreadful act of excommunication,
1 Cor. 5.4. where 'twas needful indeed to produce POWER to open or shut the
gates of another world. In the In Nomine Christi, id est, auctoritate ac vice
Christi, qua fungor dum impero and judico: Cornel. a Lap. in loc.
NAME of our Lord JESUS CHRIST (you being met and my spirit assisting) with the
Vna cum potestate Domini, hoc est, non ex vestra auctoritate, neque ut privati
homines, sed imperio ejus communiti cujus Nomine convenistis. Erasmus, apud
Bez. in loc. This expounds the phrase notable clearly.
POWER of (the same) our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to deliver such a one to Satan for
the destruction of the flesh, etc. Could any thing be more awful? worthy the
NAME OF THE LORD, (what else could have given answerable POWER to it, leaving
an impression of terror yet, to make him tremble now, that considering reads
what was then done?) I forbear to transcribe other places, Matthew 7.22 Mar.
9.38. Luc. 10.17. Acts 9.27, 28. Jam 5.10.14. Acts 16.18, etc in all which, In
the Name, is, By the power and authority of him whose is the name: and in the
this sense our Text runs thus, I baptize in the name, that is, by the power and
authority of Father, Son, and holy Ghost: I do nothing of my self, but my
Commisssion gives me leave; That Power gave me Commission, I would do as I
should, this shows I do as I ought, behold here it is, I hold it forth to act
by it, to the honor of whose is the power, Baptizing IN THE NAME of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. And in this sense to baptize is as to preach. 2 Cor. 5.20.
Hoc ad fidem legationi astruendam non parum valet, imo penitus necessarium est.
Quis enim hominis testimonio acquiescat de aeterna sua salute? Major res est,
quam ut hominis pollicitatione possimus esse contenti, nisi conster a Deo esse
ordinatos, Deumque per ipsos loqui. Calvin. in Commentar. ad loc. vid. etiam
Chrysostom. Homil. 11. in 2 Corinthians. tom. 5. pa. 613.
in Christ's name or steed: We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did entreat
by us; we beseech in Christ's steed, be ye reconciled to God. The like Vicarious
power or exercise of authority delegate does this form import in the second
Monosyllable sense, I baptize IN the Name

But now the dissyllable (whereto I adhere) imports more: Not the name IN
which, but the name To which, not the power from whence, but the end Whereto,
not the Authority by virtue whereof but the Faith and Religion where-Into this
was meant to import and declare admission and institution: sc. to Per Baptismum
enim adscribitur quis primo caetui fidelium. Durand. in Sentent. lib. 4.
distinct. 3. quaest. 2. sect. 6. Hence Baptism and Making Disciples go
together Joh. 4.1. As expository one of the other. And, the fruit or consequent
of both, Apposition to the Church: Acts 2.41. As many as received the word were
baptized, (...), and there was an addition that day (to former collections) of
about 3000 souls. Ubi videmus Baptizari nihil aliud esse quam in ecclesiam
intrare. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Baptism. cap. 8.
enter, adopt, convey, translate, carry over a man Ipse vos tinguet, pro eo
quod est, per ipsum tinguemini, vel in ipsum. Tertullian: de Bapt. cap. 11. pa.
260. Cum locutio haec (Matthew 28.19. -- (...)) varias habeat ex Hebraismo
significationes, eam ex his praeferendam arbitror, quae Baptismo maxim propria
est. Est autem Baptizari in aliquem vel in ejus Nomen, se ei auctorare atque
devovere and de ejus Nomine appellari velle. Paulus (i Cor. 10.2.) (...),
respiciens illud Exodus 14.31. Crediderunt in Deum and Mosem servum ejus, id est
Mosi tanquam Dei Ministro cum bona fiducia regendos se commisere. Sic Paulus
neg^t quenquam baptizatum in suum Nomen, 1 Cor. 1.13, 15. hoc est, sibi velut
novi dogmatis auctori mancipatum. Maimonides de bello capta, (...) baptizet eam
in nomen proselytarum, id est in eam religionem quam profitentur proselytae. H.
Grotius, annot. ad Matthew. 28.19. And Estius saw as much, though fettered with
the forms of his own way. Probabilis expositio est In Nomine id est in virtute:
Nam saepe in sacris literis Nomen significat virtutem seu potentiam, etc. Verum
quia in Graeco est (...), videri posset hic sensus, Baptizantes eos in nomen
patris, id est, Baptizando eos incorporantes and asscribentes numero fidelium
eorum qui fidem S. S. Trinitatis profitentur, vide Jansenium; and nostra in 4.
did. 3. Estius ubi supra. And so Bishop Lake brings about his In the name,
though how to fit that sense with those words let himself see. In Nomine
Trinitatis, is to baptize unto their service, and to dedicate to them, says he
in the place before: The original has (...). And therefore the Ministration of
Baptism is accompanied with Abrenunciation, Those that are baptized renounce
the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of the world, etc. They
devote themselves unto God, to believe the Articles of the creed, and obey the
ten Commandments.

Quibus scilicet verbis, Patris, and fillii, and spiritus sancti confessionem
edocemur. Jo, Damascen. de fide orthod. lib. 4. cap. 10. Jubet ut in universum
terrarum orbem effundantur (Apostoli) compendiariam quae per Baptisma fieret
doctrinam indigitans. Chrysostom. tom. 1. in N. Testam. pa. 928. upon this
pastoral commission.

Est enim Baptismus sacramentum initiationis, quo in ecclesiae visibilis
cooptamur societatem, ut inter filios Dei, ab illis censeamur, etc. Piscator.
Aphor. loc. 24. sect. 4. from Calvin: Institut. lib. 4. cap. 15. sect. 1. And
so the later Helvetian. Confession, chap. 20.

A part nostra sacramentum est spiritualis militiae, quo perpetuum illi
(Christo) pollicemur obsequium. Calvin. in 1 Cor. 1.13. Damus enim ei Nomen in
cujus Nomen baptizamur. ib. To be baptized in the name of Christ is to be
enrolled, entered, and received into the Covenant and family, and so into the
inheritance of the Sons of God. Confess. Helvet. poster. cap. eod. we are
billed Soldiers for the holy warfare, that all our lives long we should fight,
etc. ib. see Romans 7.23, 24. Ephesians. 6.10, 1i, etc. We are received by Baptism
into the number of those Soldiers, who by the good guiding of Christ do
through all their life exercise a warfare against the world, Satan and the
flesh. Declarat. of the former Helvetian confession, and to that sense Pet.
Ram. de religione Christian. lib. 4. cap. 3. (...). Cyrill. Hieros. Cateches.
3. pa. 16. to those were to be baptized.


INTO the faith, belief, confession, profession of the holy Trinity, and all
revelations and declarations of the will of heaven proceeding thencefrom; as a
student is entered into such a society, a stranger into such a College, a man
into such a fraternity and corporation; or as a Soldier is listed, enrolled,
entered into such a troop, or a Towns-MAN before, matriculated to a new
University: And even as it is after explained and declared in the manifesto or
public profession following by the order of the Liturgy, where the Minister of
Baptism declared the event consequent, saying, We receive this Child (as he was
baptized, or should have been) INTO the Congregation of Christ's flock. (...)
hic notat sinem, the preposition here declares the scope of the work, observed
by In his Lexicon, in the word, (...) pa. 511.
G. Pasor, a good grammarian. And to be baptized into any ones name is to be
devoted to his service, that a man may be named from him as his Lord, and
addict himself wholly unto him, as we may learn from the words of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 1.12. and In the word (...). pa. 266.
before, in nomen, that is, in cultum, baptizing unto the service of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; very well agreeing with the Gloss. ordinaria Nov.
in Mat. 28.19.
gloss upon that Text, and the learned Scottish Ita ut haec praepositio in
istis loquendi formulis (1 Cor. 10.2. Act. 19.3. 1 Cor. 1.13. To. 6.3. 1 Cor.
12.13.) causam finalem significet, Symphon. prophetarum and Apost. par. 2.
Epoch. loc. 30. p. 378. And see in his Cursus Theolog. col. 1370. de forma
Baptismi.
Dr. Scharpe upon other occasion. If we regard modern interpretations, more may
be called in for the same, who discoursing at liberty at last drove things
hither. Beza: (...), id est, invocato Patre, Filio, and Sp. Sancto: vel, In
Nomen; nam Baptismo consecramur Deo, quoniam ibi nostra adoptio Christo per
spiritum sanctum sancitur, either by invocation, or Devotion To God, in annot.
major. in Matthew. 28.19. and in many In carnem suam, Gal. 6.8. Ego puto (...)
respondere (...) Hebraeorum, tertio casui praeposito, and finem seu scopum
declarare. To that sense upon chap. 3. ver. 23. and Ephesians. 2. ver. 21, 22.
Baptizari in ejus nomen dicimur, cui nos per Baptismum dicamus ac consecramus.
id. ad Act. 19.3.
other places. The late Commentators on the Bible, 1645. In the Name, Gr. Into
the name; by that rite initiating into the service of one God in three persons,
and of depending for salvation upon Christ alone. Mr. Barnard of Sommerset
shire a little before, Baptized into the Name, Matthew. 28.19. that is, To be
dedicated or consecrated unto it, in his Thesaurus Biblicus, printed 1644.
Baptizari in ejus nomen (utpote Patris, Filii and Sp. Sancti, Matthew. 28.19.)
dicimur, cui nos per baptismum dicamus and consecramus. We are baptized into
his name, to whom we devote our selves; so Marlorate, in Enchirid. loc. com.
pa. 60. Docete, etc. baptizantes in nomen patris, etc. Sic vertendum, non in
Nomine. The truer version is INTO the Name; so Piscator, in comment. ad Matt.
28.19. for which compare 1 Cor. 1.13. And a little after, Baptizari in nomen
alicujus est illi consecrari in cultum, To be baptized into any ones name is to
be devoted to his service: And hither was even Josephus Lib. 4. de ritibus
Baptismi. cap. 5. de Baptismi forma.
Vicecomes driven at last after he had ranged far after the old Latin (his
Canon, and that by the Trent Canons) and came home to dive into the sure
Originals. Doctor Hammond gives liberty, in the additionals to his practical
Catechism; But lay aside prejudice, and remove prepossession, come home to the
bottom of that Text he alleadges, the granted preposition, the nature of the
business, and scope or purpose, A coincidence of so many inductives will soon
persuade which way a free judgment is to take, and where to settle; nor can a
tractable mind but by help of that light is allowed, see it self led from truth
to truth, from presumption of one truth, to assurance of another, by degrees to
the place where we would be. This is full, clear and home, the other seems
jejune and empty: This declares wherefore the thing is done, which is most
considerable in every action, speaks the end, and thereby makes the Rite it
self, a Sacrament of IN-ITIATION (which all presume and use it for) I Baptize,
says the Minister, that is, by authority from above: So: but may it not be
pertinently replied, Whereunto? This satisfies: Into the name, faith, belief of
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Nor is this very preposition and phrase, (of like final import still) less
abused, in another place of this very Gospel, chap. 18.20. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. In my name,
that is, by authority and power from me, or, with invocation of my name, say
hundreds and thousands, (from the same bottom of the old Latin trusted to)
making use of the very words and syllables for direction of prayers, regulating
of assemblies, calling, ordering, ruling, overruling, Synods, Councels, all
Christian Congregations; as if here were nothing plainer then a Commission or
authorization, and that could not but end well that had so happy beginning, as
in Christ's name: But here is no such thing, no Commission, no invocation, but
(...), For my name, or honor, or glory. Upon which occasion strange it were if
Christ should not assist, or but be ready to back his Ministers, and further
the work of his own service. So he promises he will, and where his people meet,
not refuse to give them a meeting, If but two or three are gathered for ME,
there am I in the midst present. So not here neither any delegation,
deputation, surrogation or substitution, but as far as purpose from power, and
beginning from end, where many or few are for my name ('s sake) there will I
not fail to give a meeting: but this by the way.

To return. Plain I think it is now what we mean: as plain that the thing is
the same here meant: the word, sense, work, nature of the action lead all, not
to invocation, or commission, but (which have been the three interpretations)
Admission or Initiotiation. In which sense, to look abroad, and this alone,
this form would afford a necessary discriminating difference between this
Baptism and that, or those of other Add, quum doctrinae prior datur locus,
inter hoc mysterium and adulterinos gentium ritus, Quibus se in SUA sacra
initiant, verum statui discrimen. Calvin. Harmon. evangel. pa. 683. Non enim is
est qui donat legitimum Baptisma, qui simpliciter ait, Domine, sed qui nomen
exprimit and rectam fidem habet. Ideoque salvator non quovismodo baptizandum
praecepit sed primum dixit Docete: ac deinde Baptizate (...) in Nomen Patris,
Filii and Sp. Sancti, ut ex doctrina recta fides oriretur, and cum fide
perfectio Baptismatis adderetur. For others wash also as well as we, etc. as
hereafter Athanasius contra Arrian. Orat. 3. tom. 1. pa. 414.
Religions. Many have used this rite, it behoved they should have difference,
where could that difference better arise then in the form of administration?
This form, and this alone holds out that difference, and in the present work in
hand, perspicuously, clearly, needfully, fully. I Baptize, says the
Circumciduntur enim Saraceni and se in aquis currentibus abluunt in partibus
sc. corporis inferioribus, ut sic quasi quodam Baptismi Lavacro purificentur.
Matthew. parisiens. in Histor. Angl. pa. 412. in Henr. 3. For farther similitude
it may be noted, that, as Christ our Messiah by Jo. Baptist a Priest of the Law
preceding, so Mahomet was baptized by Sergius a Christian Monk, in Polydor.
Virgil. de rerum inventoribus: lib. 7. cap. 8. Purchase. Pilgrim. lib. 3. cap.
3. Johan. Boem. lib. 2. cap. 11. and G. Sands's travels, lib. 1. pa. Though I
take it to be no better then a current mistake, as well in tradition, as the
later of those Authors, in Nicholas de Nicholai (in his Oriental
peregrenations) lib. 4. cap. 16. and many others, that Mahomet in favor of
Christ and his Doctrine appointed, no Jew to be taken into his sect unless
first baptized, that is, Christianed, nor into his Moschite but by the only way
previous and preparatory, Our Catholic Church: (Even as heretofore none went
into the Temple of Honor but by the Temple of virtue in Pagan Rome, or into the
Sanctuary of Holy Jerusalem but by Solomon's Porch, those leading into these.)
To have them baptized indeed he requires; I grant: But this no more to
Christianing, then washing the hands is necessary to prepare for supper, or the
known threefold vow, to make a Dominican or a Franciscan, which may as well
speak to a Carthusian or a Benedictine, they all by this door of threefold hard
obligation entering into their several Cloisters or Orders. Baptism indeed is
Epicence and introductory to many, the manner or form alone can specify and
bring home to any particulars, to Other or Us: Which way I believe Mahomed nor
any of his followers ever required or liked in any coming over toward them:
the rite it self might presume as well for introductory to Persee or Bannian as
Hebrew, Mahumetane or Christian. Though it be yet true enough, that the infidel
desires even Christian Baptism for worldly ends, sc. propter corporalem
medicinam, as to obtain some bodily cure, whereof see the collections of Pet.
Greg. Tholosan. Syntagm. juris. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 14.
Mahumetane, (to begin at the hither end of time) and so does the We have it
from the excellent observations of Mr. Herbert, in the published account of his
late Travels, lib. 1. pa. 44, 45.
Bannian, and so does the In the same Author, pa 52, 53. The manner is. As soon
as the child is born, the Daroo (or Priest) is sent for. He hastens, and having
calculated the Nativity, invents the name which the mother is after to impose.
This d^ne, they hasten to the Eggaree or Temple, where the Priest puts a little
pure water into the barque of a holy tree (Holme they call it) thence poures it
upon the infant, and prays (therewith) it may be cleansed from all impurity. At
7 years age it is confirmed by the Daroo, etc.
Persee, and I believe so did John Baptist, as well as the Christian: But,
whereunto? may it be well questioned, and that would essentiate the difference.
I Baptize in the name of Machomet, would the former say? though this I do; No:
but to difference mine from the Christian, and all other sects, into the faith
of Machomet. And I Baptize, says the Persians Daroo: what, in the name of
Perhaps a corruption of the old name Zoroaster, a great Master, and known so to
have been of Religion in those parts. Of him mention has been made enough in
books formerly extant, as Ammian. Marcellinus, lib. 23. Psellus, Patricius,
Delrio, etc.
Zertoost, our Lawgiver? I believe in him indeed, but I baptize into the
Zundevastaw, his Law given. And, I Baptize too, says the other Bramin (or
Priest) to his beloved Bannian: But into the Shaster, our Law or Religion,
which has more Emphasis of specification of the work, then In the name of our
most holy and reverend Bremaw that taught us our Religion: (As the Son of Aaron
might perhaps say, I Baptize into the Law of Moses, whereto is reference, 1
Cor. 10.2. or (...) into the Most HOLY NAME. But now, I Baptize too (at last to
come home to our selves) I do the same act, says the Minister of Jesus Christ:
What, in the name of my Prophet, or God? That I do, I could not do otherwise,
but more; Into his name: sc. into his holy doctrine, faith, religion,
profession: Hear me, heed me, I devote to HIM, Baptizing, as he taught, to lead
into the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Which none of them will do, nor
will I as they: which they abominate, I can as ill like of theirs: into which
faith they would not be entered, nor I into what they believe: and as they would
not have this NAME called Or UPON HIM, I allude to the exactness of the
Jerusalem Apostles speech, in Ja. 2.7. by which it should seem there was a kind
of Invocation or calling of the name of Christ over or (down) upon the
baptized, or dismissed: Though if so, this Text of Matthew. 28. has nothing to
do with it, whose words and meaning are much different. Do they not blaspheme,
says St. James, or traduce, or malign, or revile that glorious or excellent
NAME that is called upon over you? ('It Is not said in Baptism, and may have
been at dismission or other solemn occasions.) Quod in-vocatum est super vos,
so Calvin and Beza, and the old Latin, which goes far, agreeable to the Greek
and the Syriack; and in English, which is invocated upon you, so the Rhemists,
affecting exactness, where it may be had: the very word that is used in the advice to Saul, Act. 22.16. Arise and be baptized, (...), having called upon
the name of the Lord. A hard phrase, mistranslations make it easy: full of
darkness, mistakes clear it up to show of light. There seems more in it and of
a different nature from that appellation of Acts 11.26. Christians from Christ,
or is understood in Gen- 48.16. of Israelites from Israel, or in Esa. 4.1. as
H. Grotius has it upon the place, sicut filii de parentum, faeminae de
maritorum dicuntur nominibus, as children are named after their parents, women
after their husbands. Compare with the Originals of Deuteronomy. 28.10. 2 Samuel 6.2. 1
King. 17.20, 21 Esa. 63. last. Jer. 7.10, 11, 12, 14, 30. chap. 14.9. chap.
15.16. chap. 25.29. Dan. 9.18, 19. Amos 9 12. and mark well the Seventies
translations of those places. In the new Testament light may be had from Act.
2.21. chap. 9.14, 21. chap. 15.17. Romans 10.13. In them all seems an invocation,
advocation, or calling the most holy or sacred name of GOD, JEHOVAH, or CHRIST
upon or over the party, place, people, etc. What that Invocation.
over their baptized (to use a dark and doubtful phrase) so nor would I
theirs, nor that which they do. Agreed on therefore it is The Church is
discerned from other Gentiles by certain Rites and Ceremonies instituted of
God, usually called Sacraments, etc. Confession of Saxony, artic. 12. Baptism
is a badge, for it serves for our confession, for by this we do plainly
confess in the Church that we, together with our children and all our Family do
profess the Christian Religion. Artic. 21. of the former Helvetian Confession.
As, Sacraments (in general, art. 25.) so, Baptism ( in particular, artic. 27.
of the Church of England) is not only a sign of profession, or mark of
difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from other that be not
Christianed, But it is also, etc. as there it follows. And therefore making
Disciples and baptizing them, are conjoined so fitly in Scripture, One is
indicative of the other: John 4.1. The Pharisees heard that Christ made
Disciples and baptized them for his, more then John.
between us, that as Baptism or Sacramental ablution (so used and so esteemed
by us all) is to us ALL the Primum omnium Sacramentorum locum tenet Baptismus,
quod vitae spiritualis janua est: per ipsum enim membra Christi ac de corpore
efficimur ecclesiae, etc. Council. Florentin. apud Barth. Caranz. fol. 457. Quod
coeleste regnum initiatis aperit, said Isidor: of Pelusium in Epist. 37. lib.
2. and at home, Ingredientibus hoc mare magnum naufragiis plenum prima tabula
nos ad portum salutis adducens Baptismus esse dignoscitur, quem omnium
Sacramentorum esse januam Salvator instituit, and eum sequentium sanctorum
patrum testatur auctoritas. Constitution: Octoboni. tit. de Baptismo.
Sacramentorum quaedam deserviunt ad ingressum in Ecclesiam, quaedam ad
progressum in Ecclesia, quaedam ad egressum ab Ecclesia: Baptism is of the
first. Lancelot. Instit. juris Canon. lib. 2. tit. 2. whence Aquinas, Utrum
effectus Baptismi sit apertio januae regni coelestis? and affirmed by him in
part. 3. quaest. 67. art. 7. And from hence the places of Baptism have been
accustomed to be near the Church door, in mystical signification of what was
there and thereby intended to be done. The Abassines (or Ethiopians) baptize to
Christ there yet, sc. in the Church Porch says Mr. Paget in his
Christianography, par. 1. pa. 165. and so do the Northern Russians, pa. 132.
and the ancient Western Christians were so wont, as appears by many things
alleged by Stephanus Durantes, out of their books, lib. de ritibus Ecclesiae,
cap. 19. sect. 4. agreeable to what Josephus Vicecomes had collected, non in
ecclesia sed prope ipsam in porticu. de ritibus Baptismi. 1 cap. 6. Durant has
more, what significantly Dionysius (de ecclesiast. Hierarch.) ascribed hereto,
sc. to be (...), as 'twere the womb of our heavenly adoption. sect. 10. and --
Regenerationis Sacrarium, which is St. Ambrose his Epithete, in lib. de
initiandis, cap. 2. Deinde quum Baptismus velut ingressus sit in Ecclesiam ac
Symbolum nostrae in Christum initiationis, etc. acknowledged by Calvin in Tit.
3.5. tom. 5. And lastly, hence before Baptism there can be regularly no
ordination, as of one without the Church, in gloss. Baptizari. ad Decret. 1.
Distinct. 77. cap. 3. or if there have been, all must be, as upon such mistake,
begun anew. Cause. 1. Quaest. 1. cap. si presbyter.
door or entrance into our several sorts, sects, kinds, Churches or
Congregations, a holy mark of several regiments of believers, and their
Symbolum or declaratory sign of initiation Ejus amplectimur fidem in cujus
nomen baptizamur. Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 13. sect. 16. In unius Christi
doctrinam initiamur per Baptismum. Id. in 1 Cor. 10.2. Whosoever is now
baptized must also of necessity enter into the profession of Christianity.
Willet on Genes. 17. quaest. 10.
into several ways, so the form or manner of administration alter, vary, and be
so ordered that it express and hold forth that difference; You washing in water
one way, we another; You admitting your several religious Congregations in your
form, we Christ's Accensemur sancto rationalique Christi gregi, etc. Cyril.
Cateches. 1.
flock, no otherwise then he has ordered; You baptizing into this or that,
Machomet, Zertoost, Bremaw, etc. we (by the same act) into that God, Name,
faith none of you will allow, HIM that is One and Three, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. This makes the rite speak out it self clear, specifying the action
notably by declaring the end: This makes a rite of By Baptism does God separate
us from all other Religions of people, and does consecrate us a peculiar people
unto himself. Confess. Helv. poster. cap. 20. We are received into the Church
of God, and separated from all other Nations, and all kind of strange
religions, being consecrated unto him alone, whose badge and cognizance we
wear. Confess. Belgic.
Separation or Admission as was intended, to enter and let into one new from
all other persuasions: and in one word, this distinctly, clearly, briefly, but
fully makes sense of what is done. How better, or what could do it more, then a
mark in the bowels? a close conveyed note into the heart, or form of
administration? I confess the barren and scant way of delivery of these things
informs us not fully of any of these forms from the Authors: as neither of the
contrary or different; the intelligence was as bad as written in sho^t-hand
through all the ranges of my Enquiry, and so not reaching full home to instruct
in all particulars. So that I am fain to conjecture rather then pronounce, and
argue rather then declare, and give in or from history, Methinks it should be
thus: from reason, from the nature of the work, from the end of its design,
what was fit to have been done and said; All which seem to call for a
declaration of doing rather then of power, since the intent was here, as all say
again, that thing which we call from the word A nonnullis ideo signum initiale
populi D^i Baptismus appellatur. Ramus de relig. Christiana lib. 4. cap. 5.
Perpulchrum vero nobis videtur ut ad incontaminatum venientes Baptisma non
temere suscipiantur sed cum quadam observatione and instructione quae,
initiationis tempore fieri solet. Novel. 144. cap. 2. (...), we are made over
to God. Nichol. Cabasil. Liturg. exposit in Biblioth. pat. Gr. tom. 2. pa. 211.
IN-ITIATION: Of in-ire, to enter, actively taken; which one word gives us both
the beginning of its derivation, and end of its work, much in the sense that a
radical simple verb varied to the conjugation Hiphil in the Hebrew, increases
its signification to, To cause; so here, to cause IN-ITION.

But to look beyond our own time, these were of yesterday Here take in (as
between both) what a great Traveller has left written ('it is not impertinent)
of the River of Ganges: It belongs to what before as being of our times, it
relates aptly to what follows, as showing a Pagan-Eastern-belief and use of
this rite, it both illustrates and confirms what was said in the former
Treatise of the Power believed, even naturally inherent in water for Mental
purification, and it may be some wonder to hear of born again at the banks of
Ganges, to find a Purification from sin, and by water, believed there, in order
to Aeternall life! The words showing that belief, expectation, use, and faith
are these.

But returning to Bengala and the river of Ganges, you must understand that
this River is holden and accounted of all the Indians to be a holy and blessed
Water, and they do certainly believe that such as wash and bathe themselves
therein, be they never so great sinners, all their Sins are clean forgiven
them, and that from thenceforth they are so clear and pure from sin, as if they
were new born again, and also that he that washes not himself therein cannot
be Saved: For the which cause there is a most great and incredible resort unto
the same from all parts of India and the East-Countries in great Troops, where
they use diverse strange Ceremonies and superstitions, most horrible to hear;
for they do most steadfastly believe that they shall thereby merit Eternal
Life.

Huighen van Linschoten, in his Eastern Voyages, lib. 1. cap. 16. page 27. The
River is thus reputed venerable by Bremaw (their great Prophet's) frequent
resort thither: Washing in it often, they suppose themselves purified from sin;
Mr Herbert's Travels, page 45.


But it is not of yesterday, or our days alone, that Baptism has been known
out of Christendom: Rome and Greece have heard of its fame (perhaps from
Jerusalem, the famous treasury of Truth: whence (...) is often repeated by As
observed, and to this purpose, by Dr Hammond in his Power of the Keys, c. 6.
sect. 6. p. 133.
Clemens of Alexandria, most Foraigners stole thence their Jewels) Its name and
use was great long ago, and so long ago, and so far, and in that state,
before they were by a true faith sanctified; All this handed over to us by
credit of most credible intelligence. Jewry had their Baptismes, by the Epistle
to the Hebrews, and so had Egypt, and so had Italy, and so had Greece, Persia,
and what Religion or Nation not? which we have light of, as well from the
Christian Fathers, as others; Them it may be proper enough my search lay
together, relying for the other upon references and citations.

And first, I have In a Manuscript I had by me of a nameles Author, but well
learned.
read that St Augustine should say, That (as the Turks and other Mahumetans use
Circumcision for initiating men into their superstitions at this day, so)
Anciently (said the Book) did the Pagans make use of Water for introducing men
to them, and for this referred to the 25 Chapter of St Augustines third Book
against Cresconius. No such thing do I find there, but in the second Book
against Cresconius, chap. 25. do I find that which had this occasion. In his
Lib. 1. contra literas Petiliani, c. 9. tom. 7. p. 90.
Books against Petilian he had mentioned some that were baptized in Temples of
Idols, as it were, a mortuis, by those that were Dead: This Cresconius took
offense at, among other things, or perverted. He In the same Volume, p. 175.
contra Cresc: Grammaticum.
vindicates himself that his meaning was not, a mortuis; that is, by Dead men,
but by their Gods in state of Death, as neither in Heaven nor Earth, forasmuch
as that Temple-Idoll, Baptism, had its force, not from the Priests, which were
but Ministers thereof, but from the Gods in whose name it was given: as, upon
the credit of In his annotations, upon the Evangelists, p. 515. on Mat. 28.19.
H. Grotius, in his Books against the Donatists, In multis Idolorum sacrilegiis
sacris baptizari homines perhibentur, In many of their no less sacrilegious
then Idolatrous sacrifices men are said to pass through Baptism. But look
abroad, and we shall have more, and more certainty, as well of before as after;
begin at Highest. The Martyr Porro, lavationem hanc cum audissent doemones per
Prophetam promulgatam, ut and ingressuri in delubra eorum and accessuri ad
illos, atque libationibus and adipis nidoribus offerendis operaturi seipsos
aquae aspersione lustrarent, effecerunt, Apologet. 2. page 92. A part of that
foundation whereupon Jos: Vicecomes raised this conjecture: Meum judicium
semper fuit multa in Religionem nostram derivasse, quae ipsi Idolorum cultores
antea observabant. Cum enim vaferrimus humani generis hostis audisset Dei
immortalis interpretes atque internuncios coelestia nobis arcana aperuisse,
atque ad Ecclesia ritus and caeremonias salutaribus disciplinis and futurorum
predicatione informasse, prae insito fallendi studio, suis cultoribus ut eadem
praestarent facili momento persuafit; De antiq. ritibus Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Justine having spoken of a kind of Christian Baptism, In the Name of the
Parent of all things, and of Jesus Christ who suffered under Pontius Pilate,
and the Holy Ghost who spoke by the Prophets, (but with Invocation I confess
and supernomination of those A strange use he confesses of one of which, in
the beginning of his first Apology, p. 45. Per NOMEN Jesu Christi sub Pontio
Pilato crucifixi adjurantes sanarunt, etc. I wonder when I use to meet with
such passages, and yet they are not to be denied to be in the Ancients; Many:
All the operations of my soul can drive it, no farther then, such Wonder!
Names, no more) This washing when the Devil heard proclaimed by the Prophet
(understand Esa. 1.16. Lavamini, mundi estote, etc. alleged before) they then
brought it to pass (says he) that as many as entered their sacred mysteries,
and came over to them, or were to offer Incense, etc. should purify themselves
by sprinkling of Water. To which initiation of the Church he is likewise
thought to allude in his mention of the other ceremonies about two leaves
after: and in those Initia Histrionatu pari nescio quis Mithra prophanavit
Evangelicae fidei nostrae sacra. Non aliter enim Christiani suo Christo nomen
dabant, quam suo Mithrae Milites initiabantur, hoc est se dedicabant seu
consecrabantur, etc. Pamell. in adnotat. ad Tertullian, de Praescript. cap. 40.
number. 242.
Mithrae, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, pa. 296. (from the Prophet Esaias
his Aqua -- fidelis, cap. 33.) And yet again, in page 304. Tertullian is next
and very pl^in: The Tingit and ipse (Diabolus) quosdam utique credentes, et
fideles suos expositionem ( or depositionem) delictorum de lavacro repromittit.
Et, si adhuc memini ( or, as some read, and sic adhuc initia^) Mithra signat
Illic in frontibus milites suos. De praescription. haeret. cap. 40.
Devil dips also his believers and proselytes, promising them thus remission
of sin: and, If I well remember, Mithrae cultus Sacramenta Christianae
religionis imitabatur, tingendo, signando in frontibus, panis oblationem
celebrando, resurrectionis imaginem inducendo, denique coronando suos sub
gladio. Atque sic initiati Mithrae milites dicebantur, B. Rhenanus, in annot.
ad lib. 1. Tertul. advers. Marcion.
Mithra signs Disciples in their foreheads. And treating purposely of Baptism
(our Baptism) afterward; Nam and sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur
(nationes extraneae) Isidis alicujus aut Mithrae, Lib. de Baptismo, cap. 5.
page 257. Certe ludis Apollinaribus and Eleusiniis (or Pelusiis) tinguntur;
idque se in regenerationem and impunitatem perjuriorum suorum agere praesumunt.
-- Quo agnito hic quoque studium Diaboli cognoscimus, res DEI aemulantis cum
and ipse Baptismum in suis exercet, id. in sequent.
For by some sacred lustrations, as of Isis or Mithra are Foraigners admitted
or initiated: And soon after, In Apollo's games, and some other, men dip, and
they presume it to be for Regeneration and remission of sins. Strange Doctrine!
to be found out of Christendom! And yet soon after; Whereby, we learn the
Devils sedulity, who imitates the works of God, and leaves not Baptism
unpractised: Which way also many other passages are considerable in his first
Book against Marcion, especially Chap. 23. The Devil, says one, is Gods ape,
and he apishly imitateth the things of God; his works, wonders, orders,
institutions; and transfers them to the service of Idols, that so he may seem
to be the friend and familiar of God, or rather indeed to be God, to whom such
service is due and appertains, to take in by the way that not impertinent
observation of a great Bp. Montague, in his Acts and Monuments, chap. 3. s^c.
59. pa. 203.
Scholar, and he gives hereof there instances enough, in Sacrifices, Oblations,
Tithes, First fruits, Sanctifications, Excommunications, Expiations,
Lustrations, etc. To which many more may be added out of Walafridus Strabo, in
his book de rebus Ecclesiasticis, the second Chapter.

Proceed in our way to grave and profound Athanasius, who discoursing against
the Arrians of our Baptism, that both shows our faith, and initiates
there-INTO (for that is his words import, so to Enter) ranging abroad, he comes
to tell, that Certe aliae etiam haereses, eaeque numero non exiguae, n^mine
tenus ritum istum pronunciant, sed non recte sentientes, ut dictum est, neque
sanam fidem retinentes, inutilem possident aquam, quam impertiunt; nimirum
numine and religione destitutam: adeo ut qui ab illis adspergantur, sordescant
potius prava religione, quam redimantur. Oration: 3 contra Arrianos. tom. 1.
pa. 413.
other sects, and those not few, make use of the same rite in Name, but with
their Ut superstitio omnia Dei opera praepostere aemulatur, stulti homines
varia Sacramenta fabricant pro suo arbitrio: sed quia non subest verbum,
tanquam anima, inanes sunt ac lusoriae umbrae. Calvin. Harmon. Evangel. pa. 683.
erroneous opinions they have no more but simple water, and that in stead of
washing, defiles them. Saint Ambrose next, ^here are many kinds of Baptismes
indeed Lib. 2. de Sacramentis. cap. 1. tom. 4. p. 169.
says he, and yet the Apostle avers there is but one Baptism: Therefore the
Heathon have Baptismes which are upon the matter no Baptismes. Lavacra sunt,
baptismata esse non possunt. Caro lavatur, non culpa diluitur, imo in illo
lavacro contrahitur. The Body is washed, the offense not washed off, but rather
contracted and drawn on. His good son St. Augustine we had before, whose
coaevall St. Jerome leaves us not altogether without witness. In his Multaque
sunt lavacra quae ethnici in suis mysteriis and haeretici p^llicentur, led non
lavant in salutem. Propterea additum est: and in aqua non es lotus in salutem.
Commentar. lib. 4. in Ezechiel. 16. tom. 4. pa. 369. C.
Commentaries on Ezekiel, speaking of our Baptismall water, from that There
Jerusalem was not washed. There are many washings, says he, like ours typified
there, which Heathen and Heretics make much promise of, but they wash not unto
cleanness, as that does. Of the meaning whereof I the less fear mistaking,
because the Lombard: sentent: lib. 4. distinct. 4.
Master of the Sentences has since made use of it to prove, that a man may
receive Sacramentum, and yet not rem Sacramenti; the Element, but not the
Sacrament, which he there avouches St. Jerome to have allowed Pagans, without
any grace of sanctification; which must be granted they had not. And yet not
so, say I. True: they had no sanctification, but they had no Sacrament, for
they had only water and their forms, which can never make a Sacrament; and so
no argument that a true Sacrament may go without the grace of the Sacrament.
Epiphanius may be taken in for his In haeres. 34. Marcosior. cap. 20. page vid.
etiam Irenaeum adversus haereses, lib. 1. cap. 18.
Marcosians; for they were scarce Christians: yet they used somewhat near of kin
to ours; for water and washing, for initiation, this is certain they had, and
so made believers theirs, by redeeming them from the world. Lastly, and the
great Critic Tho. Demster touches at a (...), or previous lustration among the
mysteries of Bacchus, in his enlargement of Rosinus's Antiquities, lib. 2. cap.
11.

As to those that allege others, and without the pale of Christian, the
learned In his Annotations on Mat. 28.19. page 515. Supra ostendimus apud
Judaeos moris fuisse, ut baptizarentur qui se a falsorum Deorum cultu ad cultum
unius DEI convertel an^. Sed apud gentes etiam profanas usurparum antiquitus
fuit, ut qui initiari vellent, prius toto corpore abluerentur, haud dubie eo
ipso testan^es propositum innocentiae. Nam ejus propositi sponsionem ab iis
mystagogi exigebant, ut Libanius docet and Lampridius.
Grotius produces many, Libanius, Lampridius, Homer, etc. Besides Clemens of
Alexandria: our most learned Mr. Seldom, sundry other, Hesychius, Apuleius,
Nonnus, etc. Besides our Tertullian (the words are worthy reading in either)
and they that are thoroughly acquainted with Athens, and Rome Pagane, the
Washing, Lustrations, Februations, etc. of them and other Gentiles abroad; or
have leisure, opportunity, means, books, to search, may I believe yet add many
more; as out of Alexander ab Alexandro, Carolus Sigonius, Caelius Rodiginus,
etc. chiefly from Gyraldus his Syntagma de Diis gentium, about the 17 chapter.

But these may be enough to make good what I undertook, that as well in ours,
as elder times, baptizing has been known and used without and beyond
Christendom, may do now, and many Religions have heretofore thus entered into
their several vvays, some of which were possibly on foot in our Saviors
time, from all which it behoved his Baptism should differ, and in this way it
is expressed to differ, and difference from them all and singular. Some glance
or offer whitherward the other in interpretation may chance hold forth, for
none of them will or would invoke our Trinity, or act from it, but they come
not home to fasten the difference full and clear where it ought, in the nature
of the thing, which is to be a sacrament of innovation or admission to whom
or whatsoever, nor in the way of administration to express a purposed and
present entry INTO this or that, which is the thing in hand. As if it were
said, what ever others do or mean, this admits and enters into Christ's Church:
Into what College or Society soever sacra sacrilega would them lead; this
brings unto the Congregation of Believers, the Church of the firstborn, a
fellowship with all Christian souls: of what profession soever of truth they
stand at the door to let in, this gives admission TO the Name (faith, religion,
profession) of that which none of them will allow, or not defy, Father, Son,
and holy Ghost. Strange words! which they would abhor, as we defy the
Devil and all his works: In the nature of a charm, which they might not come
near, or as abominable as an Idol; but we reverence and cast our souls upon
what we derive from them; to Us there is bound up in them all our comfort and
hopes for this and the next life, and we are solemnly entering into the Porch
of those rich possessions, by them, will bring us further to eternal life.

Some one may perhaps say, These are things distant from us both in time and
place, and yet farther from where we would be in the heart of religion, show
us if you can, them or the like from the Scripture; that book of God we will
believe, the rest of the world is large and vvide, contract thither and we
will hearken to you.

Good: Who has appealed unto Caesar, unto Caesar let him go. Let this holy
Scripture, which Christ has bid us Search, be the Umpire and Rule, the sole
and supreme Judge and Oracle from whose last and definitive sentence in this
case shall lie no appeal.

There is first our present Nemo certe insiciari poterit baptizari debere jux^a
Christi institutum in Nomen Patris, Filii, etc. Cass^nder in append. de Spir.
Sancto invocando, pa. 298. Nec enim disputamus quomodo haec verba intelligi
possunt; sed quomodo debeant. Debent autem eo intelligi sensu quo a Christo
dicta sunt, non quem sibi animo quisque finxerit. Maldonat. in loc. And so far
resolute, well: Though he warp to In Nomine, which Chr: nor meant, nor said.
Text to be heeded, which for the thing in question (let be heeded also)
speaks full, home, clear and indubitable: And this one worth many, if there
were many other texts or reasons, to contradict; because it is the first
original scaled Patent and Commission in this case for the Officers of the
most High to do as they may ever after justify. Other examples in practice, or
other places in transcription, or conjectures by derivation, might perhaps give
show of other things, But against them all this one would hold up the Buckler,
and make good the ground (how many soever) for baptize INTO.

I am not ignorant, I should have noted, but have in part intimated before, how
commonly Translators have both used and rendered this Text otherwise, even those
of fairest note and greatest reverence, the whole body of the Ambr. lib. 1. de
fide, cap. 1, 2. lib. 1. de Sp. Sancto, cap. 14. and lib. 2 cap. 10. lib. de
institut. Virginis, c. 10. etc. I was going on to have mustered the rest, but
the places are so obvious and numberless, that as he that runs may read, so he
that begins can hardly tell where to find an end. I confess enough, the whole
stream to run this way.
Latin Fathers at least, besides others, as Cyprian, Ierom, Ambrose,
Augustine, Leo, Fulgentius, Hilary, Lombard, Aquinas, Calvin, Bellarmine: and
who not? But against them all our affirmative of that question in the Schools,
An soli Ut enim veterum librorum fides de Hebraeis voluminibus examinanda est,
ita novorum, Graeci sermonis normam desiderat, Hieron. Epist. 28. ad Lucinium,
taken after into the Decree. Distinct. 9. c. 6. Et est hic argumentum quod
quantumcumque authenticum sit aliquod instrumentum, si tamen de ipsa aliquid in
dubium revocetur, semper exhibendum sit illud a quo originem ducit, ut
distinct. 76. cap. Jejunium, and other places. Gloss. Graeci, ad distinct. 9.
c. 6.
fontes Scripturarum sint authentici? is armor of proof to repel and keep off
what ever in Translation, or Logical probability can be brought in opposition
or contradiction. Besides the counterpoise of tradition of the As Justin
Martyr, in exp sit. fidei, de recta invocat. pa. 376. Antiochus Monach-H^mil.
1. de fide in Biblioth. pat. tom. 1. pa. 1028. and infinite others, as well in
their casual allegations of the Text, as (how it could be otherwise without
manifest corruption of) the Text it self.
Greek Fathers, and some Councels as univocally standing forth on the contrary
part: And as to Translation it is only INTO can give the original, truth,
emphasis, and business. And lastly, so also (beside other formerly touched upon
by occasion) diverse As Calvin in institut. lib. 1. cap. 13. sect. 16. and, In
Patris, Filii and Sp. Sancti Nomen baptizamur, in Comment. ad 1 Cor. 1.13. And
Brentius, Hoc autem nihil aliud est (speaking on this Text) quam baptizare
Ordinatione, mandato and vice Patris, Filii est Sp. Sancti, ac per Baptismum IN
NOMEN Domini, hoc est in haereditatem and proprietatem omnium divinorum
bonorum, quae per Christum parta sunt, inaugurare, Homil. 23. in Luc. 3. And a
little after, Jussit Apostolos baptizare in Nomine, sive IN NOMEN Pat: Fill: and
Sp: Sanct: Nimirum significans, quod qui baptizatur sanctificetur per Baptismum
ad communionem omnium bonorum DEI and recipiatur IN NOMEN, hoc est, in gratiam,
misericordiam potentiam and Majestatem DEI Patris. etc. But, it must be
confessed, these (and other) wavered and were inconstant. That truth which
dashed in their faces, stayed not, to make any fair and kindly impression in
their souls. The glimpses of light soon gave place to prevailing darkness, and
(without offense be it spoken) Error.
Latins have translated.

But look abroad; This was the foundation and undeniably thus, Consider we what
was after builded in following Scripture belief or practice. Saint Luke has a
parenthesis delivering clearly the form of Baptism as to this part, by this
occasion, that the Samaritans had not by it received the holy Ghost, only
(says he) they had been baptized Translated by Beza IN NOMEN Jesu, in
Tremellius 's Bible, and so by Calvin, as alleged by Marlorate on the place,
Acts 8.16
(...), into the Name of the Lord, that God they believed) for other, likely,
then baptized unto their Gods which were but Idols, but the Samaritans had been
cleansed into the LORDS Name. After, when there was doubt of the Acts 19.3, 4,
etc.
Ephesians, who, it seems, having yet been baptized too, had not received the
holy Ghost, question is made, Qua igitur doctrina imb^ti and initiati estis?
Beza ad loc.
(...)? Whereunto, or whereinto then were ye baptized? They answer, Baptizari
in Johannis Baptisma significa^ profiteri doctrinam quam praedicabat and
sigillo Baptismi obsignabat, and baptismo adhibito eam amplecti. Scharp.
Symphon. par. 2. Epoch. 2. loc. 30 page 378. Quum igitur hoc ignoretis (sc.
concerning the holy Ghost there mentioned) quaero, In Quid sitis baptizati, id
est, in quam doctrinam sive Religionem? in cujus doctrinae Religionisve
obsignationem? Piscator Schol. in Acts 19.1.
Into John's Baptism, the same preposition and case again) when it proved that
was not enough, let more be done, and it was, the text says for the form) they
were baptized. In Nomen Domini Jesu, Beza. In Nomen Domini nostri Jeshua
Christi, Tremellius, from the Syriack.
in To the Name of the LORD JESU, (...), etc. Some other places are commonly
interpreted as tropical or allusive, and there may be some trope folded up in
them, or moral or doctrinall signification made way for in their historical
declarations or argumentations. But the texts themselves are for the main such,
that is, plainly historical, or simply declarative in commemoration or
admonition of what was, o^ was to be done. As in Romans 6.3. Quicunque in
Christum Jesum tincti sumus, in mortem ejus tincti sumus, Tertullian de
resurrectione carnis, cap. 47. qu. d. Paulus. Per baptismum estis inserti in
Christum, quasi rami in novam arborem, and sacti estis de corpore ejus, Cornel.
a Lap. ad loc. Baptismus igitur datur (...) in mortem. Jesu, Clem: Constitu^.
^ib. 3. cap. 16. As alleged by Chamier: in his Fanstrat. Cathol. 4.4, 11, 25.
Know ye not that as many as were baptized INTO Jesus Christ, were baptized
INTO his death (in reference whereto there is as well in the Apostles Canons as
in other accounts of eldest times such a form upon record as used, some did
baptize into Christ's death. And Gal. 3.7. As many as were baptized INTO Christ,
(...), have put on Christ. In both which we have the same case, composition,
construction, translation, (either is or should be) and all of final import
what the business of that word tended TO: sc. plain intimation, or open
expression what was meant the work of that work, an incision, or inoculation
into Christ's We are baptized into one body of the Church, that we might well
agree with all the Members, etc. Confess. Helvet. poster. cap. 20. Scimus enim
Deum testari nobis adoptionis suae gratiam hoc signo, quia non inserit in
corpus Filii sui, ut nos in grege suo censeat, Calvin. Harmon. Evangel. page
683. -- Nos in suam ecclesiam cooptans, and inferens in corpus Filii sui, Id.
in Commentar. ad Tit. 3.5. Whence in the Thanksgiving after dipping or
sprinkling, We yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has
pleased thee to regenerate this Infant by thy ho y Spirit, -- and to
incorporate him into thy holy Congregation. Ad hoc Baptismus valet ut baptizati
Christo incorporentur, and membra ejus habeantur, De Consecrat: did. 4. c. Ad
hoc. Out of St Augustine.
mystical Body; which very word of Corporation and Baptism leading thereto, we
have together in one place elsewhere, For by one Spirit were we all baptized
INTO one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, 1 Cor. 12.13. If we look
back into the beginning of that 1 Cor. 1.9, 10, 11.
Book, we shall there find this body both at unity in it self, as it should,
and after miserably broken into many fractions by faction, what so like to do
it as Baptism, and this way of Baptism into several ways, that one spoke to
one thing, another to another, one led this Way, another that? God is
faithful, says the Apostle, beginning his argument, by whom ye were called
and molded by degrees into one holy Communion or Church fellowship; which I
would might be continued. But it is declared unto me there have been
partitions. How? What was that could formalize the difference? or divide you
that you might continue divided? Had you several Baptismes? This might do the
thing: for nothing more effectually or irreconcileably divides, then to be
entered and engaged hereby several ways. But this not. For though ye say, One
of Paul another of Apollo, another of Peter, another of Christ; Christ was not
so divided, nor Paul crucified; nor any baptized An in Nomen Pauli bapt zati
estis? sc. Nos Christiani denominandi sumus non a Doctoribus seu Ministris, sed
a solo Christo capite and Domino nostro, in cujus Nomen, hoc est, cultum
baptizati sumus. Qui ab Ecclesiae doctoribus, quantumvis excellentissimis se
denominant, eos tanquam Idola sacrilege venerantur, and pro Idololatris sunt
habendi, Pasor. Lexicon. Gr. Lat. pa. 133. in vocab. (...). Non dixit, nunquid
Paulus vos baptizavit? (baptizavit enim multos; for some the Text is clear) sed
haec non erat question, a quonam baptizati essent? (...), sed in cujus. Nomen
baptizati essent? Nam quoniam haec erat causa schismatis, quod vocarentur ab
iis qui baptizarant hoc quoque corrigit, dicens, (...), nunquid in Nomen Pauli
baptizati estis? Ne dixeris enim, inquit, Quis baptizavit? (...), sed in cujus
Nomen? Non enim baptizans, sed invocatus ad baptisma quaeritur, Chrysostom.
Homil. 3. in 1 ad Corinth. tom. 5. pa: 22. Alii sic exponunt, number per baptismum
asscripti estis in Nomen meum, ut Pauliani diceremini, tanquam accepto Pauli
baptismo? -- Hic sensus est in Graecorum commentariis, and Graeco textui and
iis quae sequuntur accommodatius est. Estius in Comment. ad loc.
INTO the name of Paul, or any other. As to me, I thank God, I baptized none of
you at all (save Crispus and Gaius) to give the least occasion that any might
say I had made over any by that parting rite Graece est, (...), in Nomen meum
baptizavi: sc. ne quis calumnietur and dicat, quod vos baptizando
transcripserim in Nomen meum, and de me Paulianos (as there was after
Paulianistae, for another reason) tanquam meo baptismo sanctificatos, Joan.
Menochius, in annotat. in Bib. magn. ad hunc loc. That is, he had not caused
them in their Baptism to devote or addict themselves to him as their Master.
Mr Tombes's Examen, etc. against Poedobaptisme, par. 3. sect. 1. Baptizari in
Nomine alicujus significat, Nos ei per Baptismum dicare in cujus Nomen
baptizati sumus. Ideo recte Paulus, 1 Corinthians. 1. negat se in Nomen suam
quenquam baptizasse, Scharp. in Symphon. ubi supra. Multi quidem sic exponunt,
Nequis vestram in Baptismo sanctificationem asscribat virtuti ac merito meo;
quasi pro merito baptizantis, etc. Ita fere Latini. Aliter and graecae lectioni
congruentius -- Nequis me calumnietur and dicat, quod vos baptizando
transscripserim in Nomen meum, ac de me Paulianos vocari voluerim, tanquam meo
nomini sanctificatos, Estius in Comment. ad loc. Baptizari in ejus Nomen
(utpote Patris, Filii, etc. Matthew. 28.19.) dicimur, cui nos per baptismum
dicamus and consecramus. Quamobrem recte negat Apostolus, 1 Corinthians. 1:13, 15.
quenquam Corinthiorum in Nomen suum baptizatum fuisse, Marlorat. Enchirid. in
vocab. Baptisma. -- Was either Luther or Calvin crucified for you? or were ye
baptized into the Name either of Luther or Calvin, or any other man? That any
of you should say, etc. So Dr Saunderson Comments on this Text, in his Sermon
on 1. Pet. 2.16. pa. 18.
INTO mine own Name still. For I was sent about somewhat else, scil. to preach,
etc. This is the sum of that discourse, and in two places the same
Praeposition, Case and Construction that was before, scil. That the work of
this rite is to lead INTO. Into one Body* as before, or as here, Into one
Communion or fellowship (so long as there was (...), as Ephesians. 4.5.) But when
this was parted there followed division into this or that. I thank God! gave
not the occasion by frequent Baptismes, lest any should say, I baptized into
mine own name. Where Beza is exact again. In Nomen Pauli, verse. 13. which he
says was borrowed from the like in Matthew. 28.19. and In nomen meum, verse 15.
Of the convenience whereof Tremellius it seems convinced, was fain to put it
into his margent with words of the same purport, In nomen meum, that is, to
draw Disciples after me. And Calvin who both reads and comments upon the place
accordingly, frequently using this phrase; as likewise he does writing upon 1
Cor. 10.2. And Symphon. Prophet. and Apostolorum, pa^. 2. Epoch. 2. loc. 206.
pa. 345
Scharpius whose use is the same of both places. And lastly, Cornelius a
Lapide; to whom though the old Latin lay in his way to divert him and others
of his persuasion from a true text; yet at last he Nota. Baptizari in Christi
nomine, idem est, quod in invocatione professione, virtute, merito and baptismo
Christi baptizari; ac consequenter in nomen Christi transscribi (but that
consequence let himself look to) ut a Christo dicamur Christiani, non Pauliani
vel Apolliniani; Ita Graeci Commentat. in 1 Cor. 1.13. pa 202.
comes about to end in a Translation INTO Christ, intended by the work, which
is that and all we contend for. And is of moment worthy contention: for even a
quiet man will strive for a Pearl or a Diamond, though he pass over trifles and
greater toys; and the very filings of gold are precious, more then which are of
value the syllables of Scriptures. From which truer construction heeded, and
the sense thus restored, Note we may 2 things, 1. The very text redeemed from
those absurd, various and darkning expositions (for they have been no other or
better) wherewith the Latin Fathers and others had rendered it perplexed; who
generally urge it so as the most Emphaticall words lose all their strength and
vigor, becoming only dark and idle impertinencies, instead of adding intended
elegancy; scarce of sense, sure of no use. I have observed many; thou (Reader)
may have more, perhaps some hundreds at least in all, where this most
significant and pithy phrase is near wholly lost; thus redeemed from barreness
and unusefulness, to much signification and sense, and former want of matter
recompensed with apparent life and Emphasis. 2. Hereby falls to the ground that
which the Grecian Churches made and continue a weak and needless reason of
their separation from the Latin in matter of this form of Baptism, suffering
none of theirs to declare in the first person, as we, Graeci dicunt, baptizetur
iste servus Christi. Scot. Reportationes in Sent. 4. did. 3 quaest. 2. Vide
etiam Jacob. Tirin. in annotationibus ad 1 Timoth. 1.16. Scot. in sentent. lib
4. distinct. 3. quaest. 2. De secund. Th. Aquin. part 3 quaest. 66 artic. 5.
ad. 1. and Vasqu. in par. 3. Thom. disput. 142. c. 2. n. 15.
I baptize, etc. but in the third person leaving things at large, N. such a one
is baptized thus or thus; because in several names, I. such a one, and I. such
a one, did here in the Corinthians sow the seeds of division, and mutually
wasting Separation. But hereto, 1. Vasquez has well Cap eod. number. 23, 24.
observed, Those Factions did not arise here from any (by the text) likely
power or authority supposed to be in those Baptizers to administer in their own
names that the Factions thence emergent should give the Grecians warning to
take heed of the like in their like cause. 2. Truly to speak, here was no such
thing, no acting In any ones name, but INTO this or that (if the words used by
the holy Ghost may be thought to give us his mind, or ought to frame ours)
which was the right way to formalize and diversify into lasting factions: Not
the difference of Ministers, but their different ministrations; Not the
beginning of an action, but the end (first aimed at) giving it specification;
not the person from whom, in whose name (of which here was none) but INTO Whom,
or What, being that which was apt to make Sects, and did it here. But this by
the way: and not far from, wherein we were going. If Scripture may be Judge, I
hope now we see what we are to trust to in the case under contention: If that
may overruled, or reason bear sway, the scope of the business rule the action,
or due manner of administration give law to the words, these All conspire and
meet to make the enjoined form of administration speak out the Sacrament to be
it self, and a rite of Regeneration Into new state or life, whereby due
partakers are We assured y believe, that by Baptism we are ingraffed into
Christ Jesus, Confess. of Scotland, of 1581.

It was given to us to testify our adoption, because that therein we are
ingraffed into Christ's body, Artic. 25. of the French confession.


graffed into the Church, as is the expression of the 27 Article of the Church
of England, and the Minister does not, ought not so much invoke any Name, or
profess to act in any Name, as declare the end of the Action (most
considerable in every action) by standing forth and saying, Now I make a
Christian, Now I take a perishing soul into the Ark, Now I reach in a
wandering sheep to safety and privilege of Christ's fold: This party I devote
from all the world to HIM, as I express meaning, and baptizing him INTO the
Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

And this declaration of intention enough: what needs any more? It might be
superfluous to allege authority, or multiply words of Power upon every
occasion. Hic in terris (to use the words of Bella^m. de Sacramen^o Poenit.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
one thought himself very Learned) cum famulus aliquid agit quod non potest
nisi jussu Domini (and non est stultus) omnes intelligunt eum habere mandatum,
etiamsi is non dicit se habere mandatum: Ut si lictores capiant aliquem magnum
virum in medio foro, aut si viatores indicant Senatoribus tali die habendum
Senatum, etc. When a servant does that he cannot do without his Masters order,
he is supposed to have it even when he does not allege it, (if he be Master of
his own reason) as in arrests, citations, etc. As with us a Steward may admit a
Tenant, or do an act in Court, and yet not say I do it by virtue of my Patent
from A. B. the Lord; it is sufficient he has his Patent by him to produce upon
occasion; or a Justice of Peace imprison, discharge, bail, retain, or do any
act within the compass of his Assignavimus, binding, and yet not allege that
authority for every thing he could not do without it, or indict himself a
Justice at every word In his Majesty's Name, for what he still does, and could
not do But in that Name. Quod subintelligitur non deest: in many things it
behooveth there be a suppression of what is, but is understood, else
expressions must multiply to infinite, and there had need be almost Words
without end.

Twice yet, to confess all at once, there seems in Scripture variation: Once,
where Act. 2.38. Upon which place Bucan. Quod Apostoli leguntur baptizasse in
Nomine vel in Nom^n Domini and Christi, vel in synechdochice dicitur, ut vult
Ambrosius: vel in Nomine, hoc est ex Nomine vel ex jussu Christi, id est, ut
ille praeceperat, ut Nomen saepe pro Mandato accipitur: vel terminus ad quem,
id est, finis and scopus vel effectum baptismi, non autem forma Baptismi
significatur: ut sit sensus, baptizasse eos in Nomen and professionem seu etiam
mortem Christi, and incorporasse Christo per Baptismum; and huic tanquam
mediatori Christianos consecravisse and obsignavisse sub formula baptismi
consueta, Catech. l. 47. sect. 20. In this last Beza accords, translating the
Text by In Nomen, observing well and truly; Deest tamen hoc membrum apud Syrum
interpretem: which is true, as may appear by examining. St Chrysostom made so
bold as to alter the Text, with like liberty as others have used about the
Commission. Poenitentiam agite and baptizetur unusquisque vestrum (...), in
Homil. 21. ad populum Antioch. tom. 1. page 239.
St Peter counsels his troubled Disciples to appease their raging minds by
being baptized, (...), in (by or with) the name of the Lord Jesu. And where he
gives order the believing Family of Cornelius should be baptized (...), Acts
10.48. In the name of the Lord. But, in answer.

1. G And Mr. Marshal grants that the preposition (...) in 1 Cor. 7.14. (on
which he is discoursing) usually translated By, may as fitly be rendered In or
To, giving other places fairly capable of that exposition, as Galat. 1.16. 2
Pet. 1.5. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 7.15. In his Sermon of Infant Baptism, p. 24.
which is not disliked by Mr. Tombs in his Examen, or reply to that Sermon.
Pasor a good Grammarian, interprets (...), that is, (...), in the later, (and
why not as well as the contrary inversion, (...), for (...), ordinary enough?)
for he says there is heterosis Hebraica a change by Hebraisme, and in the
former (...), is but the signification of (...) in the Hebrew, and to be
translated, In nomen Jesu Christi, scil. in cultum Jesu Christi, into the name
or service of Jesus Christ. For (...) hic indicat causam finalem, as in the
construction before often repeated. Or,

2. St. Peter might in either place give order for Baptism in Christ's Name,
that is, In Lexic. p. 511. in vocab. (...).
by authority and order from him, but that not touch the Qua utique locutione
(Acts 2.38. and 10.48.) non forma verborum inter baptizandum adhibita,
significata est, ut quibusdam visum fuit, sed potius auctoritas, virtus ac
meritum ejus cujus in nomine Baptizari dicuntur. Estius in Commentar. ad 1. Corinthians. 1.13.
form of Baptism, which he is not there meddling with, but giving wholesome
direction about other expedients, of which this was one, scil. that as of every
thing else, so of Baptism, What ye do in word or deed, All in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God and the Father by him, as Col. 3.17. This
might be for true and good, but not (as to the form) for true and full: (no one
has said, this was given for exact form) declaring that which was to be, but
not setting forth the full of that which was to be: 1 Cor. 7.38.
As another Apostle spoke, He that gives forth in marriage does well, but he
that otherwise does better. I should be loath to say, He that baptizeth in the
name of the Trinity, does ill, scil. in that faith, or by that power. But he
that INTO does better, because he strikes farther, and reaches in more, indeed
the needful Whole; with the authority, that which is also the end of the
action, most considerable, to consecrate into the Christian faith, according to
Christ's Order. Though

3. If there be any difference in the Texts, it seems far more reasonable, that
the fewer should yield to the more, then the more come in to the fewer: where
the disproportion is so manifest, and the prevailing part for number has one
for weight sways as much as the original Commission. Which way also best lets
into the nature of the business. Nor let any put in to even the scales, the
confessed use and practice of the Church, which has been as it has: for it
rests agreed on by Protestants, that this is but the dust of the balance, of
little weight, (though some when it lays clear on any part.) But Tradition how
aged soever, must yield and give way to prevailing Scripture.

Nor is most of this but this way neither, be it of what power it will:
Scripture, I take it, is secured, besides Reason; Nor shall industrious search
be able to find there any line, or sentence, of a probable different
interpretation, or not fairly capable of this. Nor have the ANCIENTS said any
other; many rely much on them: for they loved not their lives to the death:
they ventured their souls on the Bible-truth, they gave over to us our truths:
Nor need we doubt of their Charity or Justice, (whose zeal and piety was so
eminent) that they would have us deceived in any thing so good, so loved, they
left all to be able to leave unto us: upon which presumption it cannot be less
then very expedient to hear what they have said in any Christian business. Tell
the Church, bids our Savior, beyond which for reso^ution is no appeal in this
world: and the past deserves as the present may. Petimusque damusque vicissim.
Here we use to be meted as we measure; And so much is like to be returned to us
in those ages when our power and passions are past, as we now in love,
reverence and due regard of what kind soever mete out to them were in their
Watch-towers under Christ before us. But remember where we are; now a story
lower then what is high divine. That commands, this persuades; that forces our
faith, this invites, not without encouragement and some violence yet of force:
it would hear very ill in the world not to reverence the gray hair, to despise
the aged, to kick off our Ancestors as those our advanced judgments have
learned to contemn below us; and men give it a worse title then uncivil, to be
undutifull to FATHERS.

Now for them, I had cast abroad to learn, as they offer themselves to
consideration under these four heads.

1. Directing (no doubt but by the assistance of the holy Ghost, who will not
fail his Church to the end of the world) in those rules agreed on by public
consent, the no less public administration of the things of Religion, by those
excellent compositions we may call Directories, but are commonly called The
Lyturgies of the Church.

2. Determining in their public meetings, for ending controversies, composing
strifes, restraining heresies, etc. (in succession to what is left in pattern
from the Apostles, Acts 15.) what seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to them
for so good an end (for we are not to presume of error, where two or three are
met together for Christ his name; nor are only private bosoms capable of
inspiration: He that should so think, I should much doubt, whether he be guided
by the holy Ghost: or indeed take his persuasion but for a fancy,) which
meetings have in the World born name of Synods and Councels.

Other Writing upon other occasion, whether Polemically or Didactically; of
which sort, the number is worthy farther partition into.

Three Greek Fathers. Four Latin Fathers.
And as to the first, I could wish the public orders for Administration of
Divine Christian Offices had been better laid together (that yet I believe have
been) then by any inquiry I could yet learn they have. Cassander is said to
have done something this way, as to a part, but the Book I could not fetch
within compass of my eye; nor Cassians Collations, which perhaps might have
relieved in the case; by reason whereof, my inquiry, as shrunk in the sinews,
is like to go lame in this first and principal limb.

Nor like to be much stronger in the second, for a like reason: (The Latin
Councels, I cast into the Latin Fathers following;) and for the Greek have not
much, nor that which is as to the bottom, whereupon it stands of much firmness.
In the Apostles Canons, by that time they were wrote (which was sure not very
long after the Apostles days, at least for the first fifty; though the Bench of
Antiquaries deny the rest to be ancient, and these to be truly Apostolical) so
soon some departing from the form of Divine Institution, and received usuage of
thrice dipping, to conform their words to their faith and practice, had taken
up to baptize (...) into the death of the Lord Christ, (peradventure borrowed
from St. Paul, Romans 6.3.) against whom a Canon there (the 49 in Caranza, the 50
in other) thus: Si quis, Episcopus aut Presbyter non trinam mersionem unius
mysterii celebret, sed semel mergat in Baptismate, quod dari videtur In mortem
Domini. So Gentianus, Hervetus thought good to translate, though Dionysius
Exiguus, and the most have, In morte. G. Holoander. has as Hervetus, and
Tertullian: Diem Baptismo solenniorem Pascha praestat, cum and passio Domini,
in quam tinguimur, adimpleta est, lib. de Bapt. cap. 19.
(...) in mortem Domini, damnetur: Non enim dixit nobis Dominus, In morte mea
Baptizrate, (...), in Mortem meam, in Greg. Holoanders Translation. sed Euntes,
Docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine Patris, etc. but the Greek has
again, (...), etc. Where with what sense could these Perverters, or any other
mortal men be, with show of reason, imagined to have entained purpose of such a
change as this, In the Name, sc. By the Authority, if they had so understood,
of Father, Son, etc. into In the Death, or Into the Death -- that is -- of
what? Or were ever the unequal sides of a meant opposition (which should be
always (...)) so unevenly or almost ridiculously, as well as incongruously set
together, as we received not order for baptizing into Christ's death, but were
bid baptize In the name, power, authority of Father, Son and Holy Ghost: No:
opposita are ad idem, and so reasonably must these, both referring to the end
of Baptism: not Christ's Death or Faith thereof, which yet is true, and we
believe, but Into the Name, says, belief of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which
was the form left, whereto not only the thing, but the evident construction
and signification of the words leads us also. Remember that the same final
Preposition, with its case, is here all along ((...) indicat causam finalem
before) And take in that Expository inference which was added in Franc.
Turrians Edition, which cannot, but make all clear, (...), etc. vos igitur O
Episcopi, Baptizate terna mersione in unam Patrem and Filium, and Sp. Sanct. as
the same is lately translated by the Learned L. Primate of Ireland, with no
mention of name, or any thing may seem to countenance intent of Authority, but
only the Non tantum te dimittis, quantum Christus, CUI baptizaris, hodierno
die, (...), said Gregory Nazianzene to a proud Master, that scorned to be
baptized with his servant, Orat. 40. cap. 26. page. 656.
end of the action set forth, and whereinto the Baptism is intended, sc. Into
the Trinity: which very Praeposition and Form for substance is mentioned to
have been retained tenaciously afterward, in opposition to a like Haeretical
distortion corruptly foisted in Non in Trinitatem sed in Christi mortem
baptizant. Socrat. Histor. Ecclessiast. li. 5. cap. 23. Sozomen. Hist. lib. 6.
cap. 26. and Scharp. Curs. Theolog. col. 1390. yet of this form the Apostolic
Constitutions make often mention without offense. Cognitum autem sit vobis,
Charissimi, quod Baptizati In mortem Domini Jesu, amplius peccare non debent.
Nam. etc. lib. 2. cap. 7. Datur igitur baptismus in morttm Jesu, aqua pro
sepultura, etc. lib. 3. cap. 17. Eodem modo contenti sint uno solo baptismo qui
in domini mortem, traditur, lib. 6. cap. 15. Dominus in suam passionem non est
baptizatus, neque in mortem, neque in resurrectionem, nihil enim horum adhuc
venerat, etc. Qui vero in ejus mortem initiatur, primum jejunare debet, and
postea baptizari, lib. 7. cap. 23. Nullus qui n^n sit initiatus, ex iis
mysteriis comedat, sed tantum qui sunt baptizati in mortem domini, cap. 26. The
praeposition motive and terminative all along, INTO. So in Ignatius, (...), in
Epistola ad Philippenses. So in Tertullian, Diem. Baptismo solenniorem Pascha
praestat; quum and passio Domini, in quam tinguimur adimpleta est. Lib. de
Baptismo cap. 19.
by Theophronius Eutychius, Eunomius, and others, a sort of Arrians, in the
days ^f Valentinian and Valens the Emperors; who having it seems no very good
opinion of the Trinity, devised to shuffle up the matter in this general of
Into the death of Christ, and this should comprehend all he taught, whether
Trinity or not: but the Orthodox would not suffer it so to pass, for among all
the changes and chances of this world, Providence has shown it self still awake
to keep this Anchor of the Faith firm and stable, this fundamenmental truth
One, and amongst all to baptize into the Trinity and Revelations thereof, as
the bond and cement of the much distracted Christian world, as I hope it shall
be always, whatever prove our other differences; that if the sides of
disagreement should remove to never so wide distance, yet all meeting in this
general, it may be a means to compose and lay together again their remotest
distractions. Nor was that above, all the Apostles Canons afforded: that next
before, guided the same way, and the words are so plain and articulate, they
are able to speak for themselves: If any Bishop or Presbyter shall baptize not
according to our Lords Appointment, (...), (...), Into Father, and Son, and
Holy Ghost but into three Eternals, and three Sons, and three Comforters, let
him be deposed: where the Latin Translation has again as usual in morte,
though whither Reason would have led, is easy enough to be guessed, both as to
affirmative and negative, Into, or Not into, This or That; nor did Gr.
Holoanders wariness miss here the right again in his Translation, both that
annexed to the Canon Law, and that set forth by Rufin: Toranus among St.
Clement's Works, Siquis Episcopus aut Presbyter secundum ordinationem Domine
non baptizaverit in patrem, and filium, and Sp. Sanctum, sed in tres principio
carentes, aut tres Filios, aut tres paracletos, deponitor. If any shall baptize
not according to our Lords Order, INTO Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but into
three Eternals, etc. let him suffer; nor it should seem was the jealousy
without cause: Balsomon, who was very like to know, lets us understand, some
had actually brought in this innovation, whom to reduce, the Canon revokes to
primitive Institution, (...): And these Commentaries make the next Canon of the
same import, Statuit enim, per tres immersiones peragi oportere mysterium sacri
baptismatis, (...) etc. For he appoints the Celebration of this mystery, INTO
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Be next the Constitutions of Clement himself, (thought worthy of the mention
of St. Paul's own pen in his Epistle to the P ilippians, chap. 4.3. and by many
of the Fathers, that he was Author of that to the Hebrews) or those which he
collected and imbodyed: in the sixth Book whereof is historically laid down, as
'twere by recognition what the Twelve do acknowledge to have Done and Taught
(as in the Acts of the Apostles) and among other Orders this comes in (in chap.
15.) for one: Eodem modo contenti sint uno solo Baptismo, qui in mortem domini
traditur, non ministerio abominandorum Haereticorum, sed probatorum sacerdotum,
(...). As before, let them acknowledge God one, Parents to be honored, Disorder
to be shunned, so, let them be content with one Baptism INTO Christ's death,
administered not by profane Haereticks, but allowed Priests, INTO the Name of
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Bovius has translated there, as his old Latin, In
Nomine; but Zonaras kept to the Text in his edition of the Greek: and so in
lib. 7. cap. 40. Our Lord commanded, saying, first, Teach all Nations, and then
Baptize them (...), etc. Into that Name, etc. And so after, in the end of Chap.
43. and so before, in the beginning of Chap. 23. of that seventh Book.
Confession is thus made (in the same account at Chap. 41.) he that has
renounced the Devil, and revoked kimself to the banner of Christ, professes
(...), etc. I am listed to Christ's Regiment: and I do believe, and am baptized
INTO one only true God, uncreated, Omnipotent, etc. and into his only
begotten Son the Lord Jesss, the first begotten of every creature, by whom all
things were made in heaven and earth, who in these last days came down from
heaven, and was incarnate, born, lived, dyed, rose, ascended, and shall come
again at the lact day in glory, to judge both quick and dead, of whose Kingdom
shall be no end: And I am baptized Et in dominum Jesum unigenitum filium ejus,
primogenitum omnis creaturae, genitum beneplacito Patris ante saecula, per quem
omnia facta sunt, quae sunt in coelis and in terra, visi bilia, qui in
novissimis diebus descendit de coelis, and carnem assumpsit, and ex sanctu
virgin Maria natus est, and conversatus sancte secundum leg^s dei, and Patris
ipsius Crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, mortuus pro nobis: Resurrexit mortuis
tertia die post quam passus cit. Ascendit in coelos, sedet ad dexteram Patris
iterum venturus est in consummatione saeculi, cum gloria, judicare vivos and
mortuos: cujus regni non erit finis. Baptizor and in spiritum sanctum, hoc est
Paracletum, qui operatus est in omnibus sanctis, qui fuerunt a saeculo: postea
missus est Apostolis a Patre, secundum promissionem salvatoris nostri, and
Domini Jesu Christi: and post Apostolos omnibus credentibus in sancta Ecclesia
catholica. Carnis resurrectionem, peccatorum remissionem, regnum coelorum,
vitam venturi saeculi. This large Confession the party made him or her self:
And it were to be wished, where Paedo-baptism is continued, that a personal
ratification were thus made of what had been undertaken for them, by the
parties themselves, come to full age: or else they might not be looked upon as
wholly admitted, at least kept from the visible pledges of mystical Communion.
Faith is personal, Every tree is known by his OWN fruit, Luke 6.44. Why should
any be judged Believers that are not? or to be so, that having opportunity and
ability, yea some kind of necessity, refuse to profess it?
INTO the Holy Ghost; who is the Comforter, which wrought in all Saints from
the beginning, after in the Apostles, and in Believers to the end of the world.
The Resurrection of the flesh, or into a faith and belief of the resurrection
of the flesh, the forgiveness of sins, a kingdom of heaven, the life of the
world to come. See the whole face of this Confession together, and that it
looks TO Jerusalem, to devote, consecrate, enter and profess admission INTO
Christ and the Articles of faith, or heads of Doctrine embraced from him? The
baptized did in his own person profess as much: he did not look at the
Ministers Authority, or the Invocation used (though that was used, but it was
not the thing here) only he looked and declared whither he was going, what the
Ceremony did intend, how he understood it, motive, alterative. and terminative,
to bring him from the world to God and Christ, or God in Christ: and therefore
was he baptized; and thus, says he, I express mine own meaning, I am listed,
matriculated, baptized INTO. Not much to insist on what is elsewhere. Nam
baptizati in nomen domini, atque in ejus resurrectionem, veluti infantes nuper
nati nullum peccatisensum, actionemque habere debetis, lib. 5. c. 17.
They that being lately converted from Idols to God, Have been baptized INTO
the name of the Lord, and INTO his Resurrection, have now no more sense of
inconvenience, nor power to work sin, then the child that smiles in his
mothers face, being yesterday born.

As to the Fathers, they divide themselves by their language, and stand as much
distant in their opinions, about the thing under our hands: yet so as there is
some commixture. Those of the Italian having some of the Graecians among them,
and the Greeks interspersed with some Romans.

Generally they of Greece are for the (...), Into the Name, as well in their
allegations of this Text of Matthew. 28.19. and other of the same import and
words, as they have occasion; as in their form of speech upon other occasion,
commonly intwined with such matter, or grounded upon such matter as would not
suffer them to speak otherwise. As where they baptize into Christ; into the
death of Christ (or faith thereof) Into the Trinity, or Into Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, without any Name. Also, where diverse of wrong persuasion are
mentioned to have baptized Into somewhat else, whose error could not have been
so justly and evenly opposed by the Orthodox, (nor had they so fully opposed
them) unless there had been on both sides Into, or not Into, This or That.

And these wise men of the East, I take by the way, to be in this case most to
be trusted to, for that they were of the East, whence most of our light came,
and so they drew near the fountain. And moreover, they both did read and write
in the Gospels own language, and so had not one occasion of error, all
Translators and Traslations, and what ever depends on them, are inevitably
tempted with, scil. by traduction out of one Language into another. He that
goes out of one room into another, may possibly stumble by the way, though he
take it to be very plain, and so he that depends on any derivation: As he that
does not so (as for instance, He that writes the things of England to us in
English) is likelier to hit and keep the truth first written in that language;
because he misses the great danger of one slip (might have been hurtful to
him) in the passage, by continuing still in the same room in which things were
first delivered.

But to particulars; and one of the first highest note is In Epist. ad
Philippenses.
Ignatius, who descanting on the unsearchable mystery of our Religion, Trinity
yet Unity, Three Persons yet One God, (not therefore three Fathers, or three
Gods, but one Father, three Persons, yet one God.) Since this is so, says he,
Our Lord sending his Disciples to catechize all nations, willed them to baptize
(...), etc. INTO the Name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost. And in process of
speech, (...), Not into One with three Names, nor into Three incarnate with
man, but INTO still Three of the same honor and equality. I know the Latin
Translators retain usually the Latin form in the first, praecepit eis
baptizare IN Nomine, etc. and that to the last and best of 1642. But the force
of the same construction carried them on to, Non in unum quendam Trinominem,
neque in tres incarnatos, sed in tres ejusdem honoris, in the later; why it
should not have had the same force and operation before, is hard to divine;
chiefly the words remaining the same, and (which should least have been
perverted) the words of the Oracles of God. A little before he had, There is
one Father, and one Son, and one holy Ghost, and one Baptism into the death of
Christ, (...), or faith thereof, and One Church, therefore there ought to be
but one faith, as in Ephesians. 4. I quarrel not here again the authority of the
Epistle, let it be but ascribed to Ignatius: It is thereby very ancient, and
the point in question has thereby as much credit as such a testimony can give:
it is sure the form of speech agrees best with the ancientest.

As appears by comparing with the next. Advers. haeres. lib. 1. c. 18.
Irenaeus, who both gives, and Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 10.
Eusebius, and In haeres. 34 cap. 20. Et sane interpres Latinus Epiphanii per
casum accusandi loco citato, and haeres. 73. transtulit: says Vasquez, in 3.
part. Thom. disp. 142 cap. 1. Although Petavius, a later Translator, has
indeed mended, that is, quite marred it.
Epiphanius, have the same of one Marcus the Patriarch of the Marcosians, who
agreed with Cerdo and Valentinus, all to corrupt the simple form of Baptism,
left by our supreme Prophet, and needs they must add Crotchets of their own,
(...), INTO the name of the unknown Father of all things, INTO Truth the mother
of them, INTO him that descended into Jesus, etc. where note, the form not
found fault with, is still Into, as remembered by several Authors; nor could it
be faulted, for it was that (so far) left by Christ and his Apostles. But the
matter, they would add, and affix conceits of their own, in countenance of
their opinions, restraining what was left at large without any father of all
things, Mother Truth, etc. to enter into their opinions, and plot a
co-incorporation of their fancies into the heart of Religion, by first
baptizing into them. As did another Eunomius, a follower of Aetius, of the Sect
called Anomaeans (though remarkably he kept this form of speech and
construction.) Rebaptizat autem (says Epiphanius) in nomen Dei increati, and
in nomen filii creati; and in nomen spiritus sanctificantis, and a creato filio
procreati, Haeres. 76. cap. 4. tom. 1. p. 992. Still, good made the occasion of
ill, and uniting Baptism in its nature, intent, and declared work. Of Sects not
only the occasion, but the seal and very effectual furtherer. This the
Fathers found fault with, justly they might, 'twas new amiss: but for the form
this was right enough; else, when the hand was in, it had not been hard to have
noted the error, nor but unusual to take purposed heed of one fault, and let
pass another; but they could not. This was according to the Orthodox, received,
and Scripture appointment. Here again must be craved, as reasonable there be no
reputed infallibility of translation, nor a necessary tie to any: To all we
cannot, for they vary: To some we ought not; for they are, in contrariety to
the true, erroneous: if choice be allowed, that would take the draught of the
original. The old Translator, Fronto-Ducaeus, Feu-Ardentius, Christophorson,
Fillius, Petavius, these all have in a row, In Nomine, as the way was led by
Ruffinus in Eusebius: But it is well noted by one of them, that Cornarius and
Gallasius thought as fit to give it otherwise, scil. In nomen ignoti, etc.
though himself were not so well advised to follow it. And another adds, that
the originals of Eusebius, Epiphanius, Haeretic. sabularum. lib. 1. cap. de
Marco.
Theodoret, and the very precedent chap. 12. here did instruct him the same
way, though he choose to follow Ruffinus's Latin error, a very bad copy to
write after, compared with that lay in his way. It seems both their judgments
were convinced (as they mu^) what they ought, but the rode kept them in, that
is, out, Hence In nomine.

That great Champion of his days, and valiant confuter of Heresies, steps forth
next, Athanasius; nor was Alexander himself more successfully stout and
courageous in the field, then used to be at the Desk this noble Alexandrian;
who keeps himself, as it were with religion, to the words and syllables of his
Master, as In Epist. ad Serapion, tom. 1. p. 179. and p. 186. Epist. ad
Orthodoxos, tom. eod. p. 944. Et Epist. ad Serapion, tom. 2. p. 14
occasion is to use them, and when he inlarges of his own, he departs not from
either word or meaning. The Arrians are in danger of losing the integrity of
this mystery, says he, for while perfect initiation is made, (...), etc. Into
the name of Father and Son. But they express not the true Father, by denying
there is any consubstantiality with him, and deny the true Son as a Creature.
How do they not evacuate this whole Sacrament? For the Arrians do not
administer Into the Father and Son, but Into Creator and Creature, Maker and
the thing made. As then the Creature is different from the true Son, so is
their Baptism from Truth, though they seemingly retain the Scripture words: for
the word is not enough without the faith contained under it. And therefore our
Savior left order for first instruction, Teach aright, and then baptize into
the name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost. How can there be a Baptism but into
something? Or, how into what is not, or not aright understood? This was in his
third Oration against the Arrians, tom. 1. p. 413. And in the next Oration but
one, Our Baptism, which is as the point wherein all the Articles of our faith
concenter, is not administered, (...), into the word, which had been wrong, but
(...), INTO the Father, Son and holy Ghost. Orat 5. contr. Arian, p. 535. I
rely here nothing upon Translators again, who commonly plod on according to the
Latin presumption; but the Translators Rule, and that gives as I say.

More then, Noble St Basil begins thus his 17. Homily, (A King even of Divines,
with allusion to his name; (...), as Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Theodoret spoke of him, that great light that gave shine, not only to the
East, but to the world.) (...) Basil. hom. 17. tom. 1. p. 437
(...), etc. He that is baptized into the Trinity, he is baptized, into Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: not into Principality, not into Powers, or any creature.
In his Sermon on the 40 Tom. eod. p. 358.
Martyrs he is speaking of one of the Apostles falling back from our Savior.
Another (Matthias) stepping up in his room, Paul turninng about from persecutor
to professor; and in like manner the executioner there, when one of the forty
fell off, stepped up to recruit the number, (...), and believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and was baptized into him by his own ministry, not in water, but by
his own blood. I foresee an objection. This was but a strain of Rhetoric, no
real Baptism. Good: But it gives the form of Baptism, the phrase of Baptism,
the nature of Baptism, and the Orators conceit of the reality of it; else his
strain had been not so much Eloquence as Delusion; and this enough to my
purpose. To the same his constancy ties him in many other Lib. 1. de Baptismo.
tom. page 560. lib. 3. contra Eunomium tom. eod. p. 752. Moral. regul. 12. cap.
3. tom. 2. p 423.
places; as in alleging the Commission of Mat. 28. where sometimes the
Translator gives his original; but with our point in hand, that in his Tom. 2.
p. 316.
Book of the Holy Ghost, Chap. 12. notably shows the connection between Faith
and Baptism; which is born out by the Joan. 1.12. And in conjunction with the
like signification and application to Baptism, Acts 19.4, 5. John (says Paul)
in his speech referred further, (...); Which when they heard, those there were
baptized, (...): Into the name of the Lord Jesu.
phrase of the holy Text; and opens also that Article of declaration of our
Creed, wherein we profess in a distinct and somewhat unusual form of speech to
believe, (...), In God and his Son Jesus Christ; the words are these, Faith and
Baptism are two means of our salvation, connaturall, inseparable: for faith is
perfected by baptism, and baptism leans on faith; and both depend on the same
words: for as we believe one Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (or our faith relies
on them) so we baptize into Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Thus faith goes before
and leads the way to salvation, Baptism follows after and perfects the work.

Two other lights of magnitude not much inferior, give shine the same way: they
were so faithful and diligent Watchmen over Christ's flock, that Providence
has wrapped up Diligence and watchfulness into their names, the two Gregory's.
He of Nyssa in Caria, elder brother to St. Basil, finds Orat. 11. contra Eunom.
tom. 2. p. 706.
fault with the Baptism of Eunomius (whereof before from Epiphanius) that it
was not (...), etc. Not into Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as he gave order that
gave the mystery to us but into Maker and Creator, etc. In this pla^e though
Grotser there translate In nomine, yet Siphanius was after more wary in
alleging the same Commission, Quae sunt verba Dominici praecepti, baptizantes
eos in Nomen, etc. Sermon. in Bapt. Christi. tom. 3. p. 372.
And so he appeals to the form in Matthew. 28.19. Again, when the hand was in,
finding no fault with the preposition, or termination; which preocupates reply,
if any should say, The ground was here an error, and so unstable to raise any
thing of observation or argumentation: for the error was here in the matter,
not in the form, which was left untouched, as I am confident, to note so much
once for all, that sense can hardly be made of the matter accompanying this and
many other, both posititions and oppositions of the Writers of this Language,
if the name of the Trinity be interpreted to import either authority vouched,
or any thing invoked, or but this intention of active initiation declared; and
to make it more then likely so here, The Name, whose mis-interpretation gave
occasion of all the mistake; is very observably not mentioned, but simple
Baptism into the Trinity only. And as our confession of Faith might be whole
and sound, though not so clear and sweet, if we did declare to believe in the
Son of God, or the holy Trinity, though we take not in so much as in the name
of the Son of God, or the name of the Trinity, which does but add emphasis,
and grace the expression: so but that it is not safe to meddle with those are
given to change, Prove. 24.21. might be our The learned Vossius declares for
this liberty: Baptizare in alicujus Nomen est ei per ablutionem initiari and
consecrari in religionem and cultum. ut illius arbitrio vivamus. To baptize is
to devote. Atqui hoc fit seu dicas, In Nomen Dei, seu Trinitatis, seu Patris,
Filii, and Spir. Sancti, seu Jesu Christi, seu simile quid (...), etc. These. 5.
de Bapt. Disp. 2. p. 307. Quoniam and aggregor Christo, and Credo, and Baptizor
in unum ingenitum meum verum Deum omnipotentem, patrem Christi, etc. Et in
Dominum Jesum filium unigenitum ejus, primogenitum omnis creaturae, etc. and in
Spiritum Sanctum, hoc est paracletum, etc. Carnis resurrectionem, peccatorum
remissionem, regnum coelorum, vitam venturi saeculi. Constitut. Apost. l. 7. c.
41.
Baptism, and the declared Administrations thereof: for, As we Believe, so we
Baptize: But now from St. Basil.

The other Watchman of those days, Gregory of Naziansus in Cappadocia, makes
Oration 40. cap. 51. tom. 1. p. 671.
known before hand to his Expectant, how he meant to enter them into their new
Law. Who would lend him the tables of his heart, he would be a Moses to him;
nay he would borrow the finger of God, to inscribe a new Decalogue: and (...),
etc. When I take thee in, I will baptize thee into the name of Father, Son and
Holy Ghost.

Whereupon Nicetas in his Commentaries, Primum in Sanctam atque individuam
Trinitatem te Baptizabo, cujus nomen commune Divinitas est. First I will
baptize thee into the Holy Trinity, etc. And they both give the heads of faith
into which Batism was to be administered, Believe that the world which we see,
and which we not see, is Gods Creation, etc. A little Cap. 48. p. 669.
before, the Father, If I should please men, I were not the servant of Christ,
as says the Apostle: If I should worship any Creature, or be baptized into any
Creature, (...), I should not have the benefit of a divine Change: And the same
Preposition and Case kept a little after; upon which place the same Tom. 2.
Col. 1083.
Nicetas likewise commenteth, Si filium ut creaturam adorarem, aut in filium ut
creaturam baptizarer, nunquam Deus futuru; essem.

Epiphanius Haeres. 7. cap. 11. This he after more fully expounds this way, in
the recapitulation of his greater work, tom. 2. p. 137. and yet again in the
very end of that recapitulation, p. 157.
proves the Deity of the Holy Ghost from conjunction with the persons in
Baptism to make a Trinity: for so, says he, the Scripture order d, As ye go,
Teach, Baptizing, (...), etc. (Remember what before from another place in him,
and of the forms of Heretical Baptism, right in this) and when he was to raise
the Emperors sisters Son to life: In vita S. Epiphanii per Johannem, unum ex
discipuli^ ipsius, cap. 51. p. 36^.
which if I shall, will ye then believe, (...), and be baptized into that
contemned, but powerful Name of him that was crucified? Whereto they answer,
they would: He did, and they performed the conditions. Elsewhere differencing
the Jewish from the Christian Rites: Ad versus Haeres. lib. 1. Haer: 8. sect:
6. tom. 1 p. 19.
They had, says he, a carnal Circumcision, till the great Circumcision should
come of Baptism, and this both cleansing us of sin, (...), and sealing up to
the name of God.

Voluminous Chrysostom is next, out of whose many Tomes, I only note how
constantly he keeps to the Sermon. in Mat. 28. tom. 1. p. Sermon. de Sancta
Trinitate tom. 6. p 191. and sermon. de Cananaea. tom. eod, p. 202.
form, this form, (...); and upon Acts 19. Paul Homil. 40. in Act. tom. 3. in
Nov. Testament. p. 351.
spoke of John's Baptism as he did, to persuade Apollos further, (...), to be
baptized into the name of Jesus. From Vid. commentar. in Esa. lib. 5. tom. 2.
p. 859. etc.
Cyril of Alexandria but the same; with some addition, that his Translator has
been more careful. If Father, Son and Holy Ghost did denote all the same, and
one included in the other, Comment. in Joan. 2. tom. 4. p. 17.
Quid porro necesse est in Trinitatem potius quam in unitatem baptizari? and to
the same sense (...), etc. in Dialogo, Quod unus sit Christus. tom. 5. p. 773.
(...). Lid de recta fide. tom. 5. par. 2. p. 108. Vid. etiam Oration. de recta
fide sect. 52. p. 173.
elsewhere.

The words of Mark the Hermit are very remarkable, Fides est ut non solum in
Christum baptizemur, Lib. interrogat. and respons. Marci. Eremitae de Baptism.
in Biblioth. par. Graec. om. 1. p. 918.
sed etiam ejus mandata opere compleamus: Our faith requires not only to be
baptized into Christ, but to fulfill his Commandments. Mr. In his notes and
observations (excellent Criticisms) lately published, ch last. p. 170.
Gregory, late of Christ Church in Oxford, cites the Euchologue for the form of
Baptism to be this, The servant of God N. such a one is baptized (...). And
lastly, John of Damasco, (besides what in Jo Damasceni Histor. cap 7, 8, 11.
and 28.
his History of Barlaam and Josephat) the whole tenth Chapter of his fourth
book De fide Oxthodoxa, is worth reading to this purpose, Quocirca qui in
Patrem, and Filium, and Sp. Sanctum baptizati sunt, etc. -- and, Qui in Sanctam
Trinitatem baptizati sunt, etc. are his phrases translated: and, We are
baptized into Christ and his death, we are baptized into the holy Trinity: all
these together, and much more; and I believe in other Authors more then very
much more to this purpose. A hasty view has espied this which is here, enough
(if there were yet no more) to justify this interpretation of INTO, etc. and
to give it countenance expedient from the whole body of those that wrote o^ the
New Testament Sacrament in the New Testament language.

Sparingly, I know, there is As in the Martyr-Iustines second Apology. p. 94.
Athanas. Epistol. ad Serapion. tom. 1. p. 204. Chrysostom. de serpente Mosis. tom.
6. p. 63. Basil. lib. 1. de Baptismo, and some other.
variation: very sparingly: but one Swallow makes not summer. There has been
seldom universal agreement in any thing, and those that do dissent, we have
their consent upon other occasion: The constant, loud, prevailing, general
voice carries it for this way clear, shrill and home, both in words, and such
matter precedent and subsequent, as must bring on those words: and all joining
in with this leading Commission Text, often cited, scarce ever but to this
purpose; sci. To make the visible word of this Rite intentionally and
declaratively introductory into the Religion of Christ then assumed, and to be
ever after named and reputed from, or the chief head point thereof, the Holy
Trinity, Go, make Disciples of all, thus, baptizing INTO Father, Son and Holy
Ghost.

The Fathers are not to answer for the transgressions of their children, nor
could they foresee or prevent by any humane providence, that these should not
either deceive or be deceived; who being the most of them of younger days, have
rendered things according to fore-received notions and conceits, giving out the
liquor strongly tasting of the vessel that held it, and that first possessed
and thoroughly seasoned with In nomine: But the original is still the same, and
gives out the same to us howsoever. Some Interpreters also have hit the right,
and a small measure of reason will serve; now the doubt is started, to
determine with much of assurance how all should. If much consent of Greece may
bear us witness, we shall not doubt of testimony enough from her, and truth,
and Scripture beside: the East is still the noble treasury of light, and thence
universally the beams shine clear and home for Adopt INTO.

But we have staid long amongst our friends: cross next the Adriatique for
Rome, and see what her translation of the knowledge of things thither has
thence afforded the world: Her Natives remember all, or as many as borrow
language of her in the Provinces, are but so many Interpreters, and so to be
looked upon by us, and consequently not with the same eye of respect as unto
those that had one help of truth more, and one occasion of error less, then
those that read and wrote without derivation. The fountain's clearest; these
were but the streams, which by many accidents may run troubled and disturbed;
and the transcript, both in Reason and Law is never best, but to be corrected
by the original.

And these all, as with one mouth, deliver error from one another: Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Leo, Chrysologus, etc. When an opinion is once started, if
it be but a mistake, the busy world keeps it going, and it is hard to still the
cry, as has been here; consent even of the learned, and for ages has went for
In nomine.

I except (of the Fathers) scarce any but Tertullian; a man of an uncouth
style, and ragged language at first, drawing near to the harshness of
Barbarism, but after acquaintance none more pleasing, sweet, fluent and
familiar: His wit was very sharp, his judgment very deep, his disquisitions of
much liberty and likelihood, but learning universal; whence he not only stuck
at many things swallowed by others, and doubted where they seemed to know; but
on the other part, his enquiries made out far beyond their reach (some say too
far; which made him hear ill) and indeed his blame may have been in many
things, not that he reached not truth, but that he went beyond it. From the
strength of his parts, and depth of his knowledge: as his apprehensions were
very exact, so his speech was exceeding wary, and (to our purpose) he was one
of the first that ever taught the four Gospels to speak Latin, sanctifying the
Dialect of Remus and Romulus to sound abroad to the world, what was holy of
Sion and Jerusalem; and so had no preceding errors to lead him in Translation,
drawing himself first from the original; and so is yet the more to be relied on
by us, not only for his great parts, but likely purity and soundness of
language, not mixed with those errors are used, to be drunk down the more
pleasingly, and without suspicion from mistaken friends. He speaking of some
that thought it enough to partake of the faith of Abraham: But now, says he,
more is prescribed: Obsignatio Baptismi, vestimentum fidei, quae retro erat
nuda, etc. Lex enim tinguendi imposita est, and forma praescripta. Ite, in
quit, docete nationes, tinguentes eas in nomen Patris, Filii, and Sp. Sancti:
To have faith sealed by Baptism, clothed with ceremony: for a new Law is now
enacted, and the manner prescribed, Go Teach, Baptizing Nations into the name
of, etc. The Interpreter, or rather Perverter, soon corrupts into, in nomine:
but yet he is fain to grant it is ad verbum ex Graeco, (...), and why could not
he then retain truth from truth, agreeable with truth, rather then change to
worse, or not leave his tract for better, when he saw it before him? elsewhere
the same Father, When one fell off, he sent the other eleaven, and commanded
them to go, Ite and docete Nationes, intinguendas in Patrem, and in Filium, and
in Sp. Sanct. to instruct nations to be dipped into the Father, and into the
Son and into, etc. where the setter forth grants he had the repetition of the
preposition in, from several Manuscripts, and the first print; very observably,
The name being left out in all, whereof use may be made. And after to Praxeas,
The Father and Son are not the same, for Christ (among other things) undertook
to send the promise of the Father after the Resurrection, and commanded, ut
tinguerent in Patrem and Filium and Sp. Sanctum: (mark again, without any
Nomen) Nam nec semel, sed ter, ad singula nomina in personas singulas
tinguimur, to the same sense as before, dipping into the persons, and each
several person: And in the same construction is mention enough of the same
person afterward. A fair testimony for one man: We soon grant most of the rest
(except S. Hierome, who has somewhat this way) though knowing with that grant
where the original rests, and thinking how expedient it is all after-draughts
should conform to the first copy. This should rule and overruled if any thing
in process be drawn amiss, or slipped awry; how much more, when (as here) so many
Master-workmen in their own language, have so used the rule to draw or keep
things to Rite: which primitive vote of Greek Writers, counterpoiseth the
derived Latin: and, I believe, the most will say, have it no less then their
due to overpoise them.

The next ages were dark: Our Writers generally account them so; and it were
lost labor to seek light from darkness. So long as the old Latin was Canon,
look for no amendment: The Rule was crooked, but the Reformation was as the
dawning of the morn. See next what sparks of light brake forth here to clear
our way.

Before much has been dispersed looking hitherward: and not from few, nor
Authors much to be despised: Add to them more from Calvine, Bucane, Marlorate,
etc. Commun. loc. 47. S. 24.
Question and Answer are first from Bucane as follows:

Quest. Quid est Baptizari in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Sp. Sancti?

Resp. Hac phrasi significatur, invocato patre, filio and sp. sancto, eum qui
baptizatur, remissis peceatis, in gratiam accipi a Deo, qui est pater, etc. Et
adoptari, obsignari, initiari, in augurari, recipi and consecrari, in peculium,
familiam, jus, potestatem, cultum, faedus, gratiam, religionem, fidem and
communionem patris, filii and sp. s: (id est, very Dei, natura unius,
proprietatibus trini, etc. Ideo non in nomina sed in nomen dicit, ne sc.
occasio ex hoc loco detur tres Deos statuendi. In quem sensum hanc phrasin
accipiendam esse percipitur ex Pauli verbis. 1 Corinthians. 1.13. ubi negat se in
nomen suum quenquam baptizasse. Baptismo igitur consecramur Deo Patri, etc.


What is it to be baptized in the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost?

Hereby is signified that Father, Son and H. Gh. being invoked, he which is
baptized is received into favor with God, by remission of sins, who is Father,
Son, etc. And is adopted, initiated, sealed, installed, received and consecrate
into the proper possession, family, right, dominion, service, covenant, grace,
religion, faith and communion of Father, Son, etc. (that is, the true God, one
in nature, and three in person, etc.) Therefore it is not said, into many
names, but into the Name, least hereby occasion should be of making three Gods.
In which sense that this phrase is to be taken, we learn from 1 Corinthians. 1.13.
where Paul denies he baptized any into his own name. By Baptism we are
therefore devoted to God the Father, Son, etc.

This is full, clear, home and sound. Master Calvine proving the Deity of the
Holy Ghost in the first of his Institutions. Chap. 13. sect. 16. consents
thus:

If we be entered by Baptism into the faith and Religion of one God, we must
needs think him to be God into whose name we are baptized. Ergo si in unius Dei
fidem ac religionem initiamur per baptismum, nobis necesse est verum censere
Deum in cujus nomen baptizamur. Nec vero dubium est quin hac solenni
nuncupatione perfectam fidei lucem jam esse exhibitam testari voluerit Christus
quum diceret, baptizate eos in nomen Patris, Filii and Sp. Sancti. Siquidem hoc
perinde valet arque baptizari in unius Dei nomen, qui solida claritate apparuit
in Patre, Filio and Spiritu.
Nor is doubt but by this solemn Dedication, Christ would have it testified,
that the full light of faith now shines out, when he ordered, Baptize into the
Name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Since this is as much as to be baptized
into the Name of one God, who fully appeared in Father, Son and Spirit.

Marlorate, in his Collection of Protestant Expositions of the Gospel, has
these words upon this Text of Matthew. 28.19.

Therefore to baptize in the Name (or into the Name of F. S. and H. G. Ergo
baptizare in Nomine (sive in nomen) Patris, Filii and Sp. S. est initiare and
consecrare eos qui baptizantur in unius Dei fidem and religionem, ut credant
Patrem, Fill. and S.S. esse unum Deum, in quem unum spectare illos oportet, and
in eum unum se confer, in eo uno haerere, ut fixum in se habeant, unum esse
solum Deum, etc. Observemus igitur Baptismo nos obligari, initiari and
consecrari in unius Dei Religionem and cultum, ut illius arbitrio vivamus.
is to enter and devote those that are baptized into the Faith and Religion of
one God, that they may believe Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be one God, on
whom they are to bestow themselves, etc. Heed we therefore, that by Baptism we
are initiate and consecrate into the Religion and Worship of one God, to live
according to his will.

Hulderic. Zuinglius, in lib. de vera and falsa Religione, cap. de Baptismo: as
he alleged by Vossius, These. 5. de Bap disput. 2.

Multo vividius est, quod Graeci, Mat: 28. habent, baptizantes eos in Nomen
Patris, Filii and Sp. Sancti, quam in nomine, quemadmodum Latini habent.

Not to insist upon what Isaac L. Feguernek. has collected from Marlorates
Thesaurus, in his Enchiridion locorum communium. p. 233. Quarto (fides) capitur
pro obligatione illa, facta in baptismo, ad profitendam veram Religionem, and
ad credendum in hunc Deum, in cujus Nomen baptizamur, 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. in
vocab. Fides. Nor on what Mr. Bernard has left this way, in his Thesaurus,
alleged before. Nor the confidence of Cassander, Nemo certe inficiari poterit,
baptizari debere juxta Christi institutum in Nomen Patris, and Filii, and Sp.
S. It cannot be denied by any, but that Christ's institution leads to baptize
INTO the name of Father, Son and H. G. Lib. de Spiritu Sancto invocando. page
298.


It has more life a great deal as the Greek is in Matthew. 28. Baptizing them
Into the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; then In the Name, as the Latins.

Of more public attestation take in the Confession of Saxony: We do often
expound the sum of the Doctrine, etc. I baptize thee into the Name, that is,
invocation of the true God, whom thou shall acknowledge and invocate, and
distinguish from all other fained Gods, etc. Artic. 13. In hujus very Dei nomen
(having mentioned the Holy Trinity) id est, invocationem, te baptizo, quem
agnoscas, etc. as in the Apology for the Ausburg Confession, offered to the
Council of Trent, p. 147. Of Helvetia the later, Baptism is called of some a
sign of initiation of Gods people, as that whereby the Elect of God are
consecrated unto God, Chap. 20. Of Ireland, baptism is not only a sign of our
profession, but a Sacrament of our admission into the Church, Artic. 89. Of
England, We are by Baptism graffed into the Church. Artic. 27. Lastly, of
Government and order of the Church of Scotland. chapter 3. p: 19
Scotland to the same sense, Thirdly, he that presents the child, makes
confession of the faith into which the child is to be baptized, and promises
to bring up the child in that faith, and the fear of God. Fourthly, being
informed of the name, He (the Minister) baptizeth into the name of Father, Son,
and holy Ghost. Grotius was not to learn how, and he proposes his question
very warily, Votum pro pace ecclesiae, ad artic. 9.
An Christus ab Joanne baptizatus fuerit in nomen Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus sancti: Whether Christ were baptized by John INTO the Trinity?
Familiarly using the same construction in his Commentaries on Matthew. 3. and
Matthew. 28.19. And lastly, Brentius is cited by Lib. 1. de baptismo, cap 3 from
Brentius his Catechism, cap. de Baptismo.
Bellarmine and In 3. partem. Thomae disput. 142. cap. 1.
Vasquez, to take so much liberty this way, that giving first the nature, and
regarding the end of Baptism, he thought enough, if after the owning of the
Creed by the Catechumene, the Minister stood forth, and received him thus,
Audivi jam ex te confessionem fidei, quod credas in Deum Patrem, and filium,
and Spiritum Sanctum: In hanc igitur confessionem intingo te in aquam, ut hoc
signaculo certus sis te esse insertum in Christo, though he advise the usual
form to be kept. Much of which liberty has not elsewhere dislike from Horum
locorum collatio docere nos potest cum veteres regulam fidei aut baptismi
immutabilem dicunt, non ad certam and receptam ubique verborum formulam eos
respicere, sed ad vim atque sententiam interrogationum quam breviter, ut solet,
Lucas ita comp^ectitur, Acts 8 12. When they believed Philip preaching the
things of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized.
H. Grot. annotat. in Matthew. 28.19. p. 518.
others, or Quod idem cernimus in baptismo, neque enim certus sonus aut numerus
syllabarum in Scripturis determinatur, quo forma baptismi pronunciari debet,
sed solum sententia ejus formae ex Evangelio colligi potest. Quare quemadmodum
ex eo quod Dominus ait Matthew. 28. Docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eas, etc.
Colligit Ecclesiae formam illam, Ego te baptizo, etc. Nec tamen cenferentur non
vere baptizare, qui dicerent, Ego te abluo, seu tingo, sive aspergo, etc. Sic
etiam, etc. Bellarm lib. 3. de poenitentia, cap. 16.
himself.

These by their words appear to have been the thoughts of men and Churches
abroad, and of Vide Ursin. Explicat. Catechet. par. 2. quaest. 71. p. 467.
Baptizati in nomen alicujus dupliciter sumitur; Improprie, and ita Judaei
dicuntur baptizare in Mosem: Proprie vero dicitur baptizari tantum in nomen
Patris, Filii, and Sp. sancti; quia babtismus non potest proprie fieri in nomen
creaturae. Nam baptizari in nomen alicujus est ejus mandato and authoritate in
ejus cultum, fidem and obedientiam baptizari, quod nulli creaturae convenire
potest. Scharp. Symphonia. part. 2. Epoch. 2. loc. 206. In the reconciliation
of 1 Corinthians. 10.2. in Mosen baptizari, and chap. 1.13. In nomen Pauli.
some more. The force whereof prevailing nearer home with our T. C. (a man
known to have been very much conversant in the writings of the Scripture, and
precisely careful to conform all to the pattern in the Mount) may be thought to
have enduced him to make bold with a change long since; and to add this so much
contended for syllable unto his I mean that said to be Tho. Cartwrights, which
came forth about November 1643. His, the more likely, because the same syllable
is retained in the Allegation from T. C. made by Mr. Hooker, in his
Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 5. sect. 62. p. 328. in the Margent, And it holds
conformity with the Church of Scotland, with the tendryes whereof he was known
to keep much correspondence.
Directory, printed or reprinted very lately, and to order Baptism Into the
name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost Which I take to be the sense likewise,
though not the very letter of that interrogatory is very near preparatory to
the act of Initiation: and immediately after confession of Faith by recitation
of the Apostles Creed in our Lyturgy; Will thou be baptized, says the Minister,
in this faith? whereto answer is given, It is my desire. In this faith! What?
in the Ministers faith? or the offerers, or any others belief of the Articles
then repeated? Or rather INTO this faith, that is, that which (by the self or
by thy Sureties) thou have now repeated, and yielded thy self a proselyte of by
ratification of firm consent? Say: Nothing shall be done without thy pledge of
good will: Strike up the bargain; and as thou have said, All this I firmly
believe; Printed 1571. by Reynold Wolf, at London.
Will thou now be baptized into this faith? So it was expressed in the old
Latin translation, when the sense of the Composers was fresh abroad. Minister.
Credis in Deum patrem omnipotentem? etc. Respons. Omnia haec firmiter credo.
Minister. Cupisne in hanc fidem baptizari? Resp. Cupio. And so in the Greek of
Mr. Petile within this ten years; (...). I wonder he continued not his care to
what follows, to render to it self that which was first written in this
language, ruling Scripture, the immediate and underived word of Oracle given by
the holy Ghost. For thus he proceeds to give the form. (Strange!) misgiving
both together, preposition and case. N. (...). And a little before, Christ out
of his most precious side did power both water and blood, and gave commandment
to his Disciples to go teach and baptize, (...), etc. No: it was not so; Each
is a depravation both of Text and Work: Christ gave commandment for (...),
etc. view his words; Search the Scripture: the syllables whereof give that and
nothing else, and he perverts that besides this way leads any other. But his
excuse may be, he followed the Rode and his present Text. One error very
gently, but powerfully, leads on another. How this went a good while since, we
may have from St. Cyrill of Jerusalem: Postea deducebamini ad sancti divini
baptismatis lavacrum, etc. Atque tunc unusquisque interrogabatur, an crederet
in Nomen, (...), Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti: and confessi estis
confessionem salutarem, Catech. Mystagog. 2. But to return here at home, the
interrogation propounded in the sense given, would make fit way, as it does, to
baptism then at hand; an act of adoption, admission, consecration, regeneration
Learned and pious Dr. Hammond, (remember here) in the late Additions to his
Practical Catechism, of the two possible interpretations of that Text, giving
the fo^m of Baptism, Matthew. 28.19. na es this one: INTO the Names of Father,
Son, etc. Mr. Hooker, He which baptizeth, baptizeth into Christ. He which
converteth, converteth into Christ. Eccles. Polit. lib. 8. p. 202. Mr. Dell, if
he be the Author of the late Tract, Against Water Baptism, professing to lay
aside all to hearken only to the Divine Oracles, he makes use enough of this
Criticisme his way. Nor could many of his arguments hold if it were any other
then INTO the Name, power, faith, and assistance of the Trinity, etc. pa. 15.
into a new state faith, religion, profession (the proper end of the work)
Which past, there follows soon after the induction or legal investiture of the
proselyte into his new heavenly profession, and the believed possessions of
grace; We receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's flock: with
yielding most hearty Benedictus Deus and pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui
pro ingenti misericordia sua regeneravit te in spem vivam, in haereditatem
incorruptibilem and incontaminatam and immarcessibilem, etc. Upon the Baptism
of Prince Josaphat in Jo. Damamascenes History, pa. 19.
thanks unto the Father of Heaven, that he has been pleased to regenerate that
child, sure unto somewhat, some new state, to receive him for his by adoption,
and to Neither do we think that this custom is only an idle ceremony, but that
the infants are then indeed received and sanctified of God, because that they
are then ingraffed into the Church. Confession of Saxony, Artic. 13.
incorporate him into his holy Congregation: and prayer that being dead unto
sin and living unto righteousness, he may lead the rest of his life according
to that beginning.

I know not what to other, but to me nothing under any cloud of darkness or
doubt seems ever to have been better recovered to clearness, certainty and
light; agreeable with the words of Scripture, the sense of the business, the
sound judgment of believers, orthodox and pious, of elder times and later; and
above all, to the scope and nature of the work, to make this holy
divinely-instituted Rite speak out it self to be a Sacrament of renovation,
consecration, admission into a new religion, faith and belief; or (which one
word is both proper and significant enough) a very CHRISTIANING, or admitting
INTO CHRIST, as the old word was once, even at the Constitut Provincial. li 3.
de effectu baptismi circa Sacramentum.
Font, I Christian the in the Name of the Feder, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Or as it was in Lyndewoods time (because some love the moldy best) I
Crystyn the in the name of the Fader, and of the Sone, and of the holy Ghost.

Insomuch that (all things fit in so well) I cannot but incline to wish (now
that all is sub incude, under the revise of strict Scripture-examination, with
which these things agree meetly well) that (among other) this may find place of
consideration, and (if any thing be found really amiss by those are fit to
judge) be (by those that have power also) reformed and amended. The business is
of weight and moment touching our Freehold, as men use to say, the quick of our
Religion (one of our inmost mysteries or Sacraments) and the highest of that
which can be done amongst men (by Christ's appointment too) for Quem Baptismum
omnium Sacramentorum esse januam Salvator noster instituit, etc Cum igitur
circa ingressum januae error maxim periculosus existat, praedictus legatus,
etc. Constitut Octoboni. tit. De Baptismo.
admitting into the visible Church and estating in heavenly hopes; as giving of
the Quae verba, scholae vocant formam Baptismi nos formulam verborum dicere
malumus. Bucan. loc. commun 47. sect. 20.
form and essence of that Rite, whereby we are (sacramentally made (or
declared) Christians, as some love to say, the form of that form: And whereof
we may say contrary to those who have written de fossilibus, who after much
turning find little metal, and so have parvum in multo: but here is multum in
parvo, very much in very little, the worth of a Talent in the weight of a
Scruple. What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own
soul? How further the salvation of his soul, but by being in Christ, Neque enim
parva re^ haereticis and modica conceditur, quando a nobis baptisma eorum in
acceptum refertur; Cum inde incipiat omnis fidei origo, and ad spem vitae
aeternae salutaris progressio. Cypr. Epist. 73.
inserted into him! How this but by Baptism? And about This, yea This of This,
do these things direct, and this gate on earth of Life Everlasting, do they
concern most nearly. I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should
teach wisdom. But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
instructing him: Therefore said I, Hearken unto me, I also will show mine
opinion. Job 32.

Nor let any say, Much of it might have been spared. Ut quid perditio haec? as
he in the Gospel: Why so much pains to so little purpose? Curiosity is it self
another fault (in nature, in morality, in religion, even in reformation) Apices
juris non sunt jura: We are to walk by line, not by letter, and lex non curat
de minimis: Why should we? Whereto I answer, This may serve Providence for
preserving this part of the new Law in the accurateness of Matthew. 5.18. Verily
I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle of this shall
not be unfulfilled. It is not without the reach of every ones knowledge, that
great care and contention has been wont to be about small things in matters of
Religon: words and Neque enim vel^ syllaba vel apiculus est in sacris literis,
in cujus profundo non sit grandis quispium Thesaurus. Chrysostom. Hom. 21. in ca.
4. Genesis tom. 2. p. 200. And a little after, Nam si in scriptis quae de
soecularibus negotiis ab hominibus conficiuntur, saepeque tempore corrumpuntur,
vel unam prooemii syllaba^ deesse, multu^ momenti habet: multo magis hoc in
scripturis divinis a Spiritu sancto compositis invenitur, modo sobrii simus and
non temere progrediamur, sed intenta mente diligenter omnia consideremus, and
non negligentiores fimus aliis, qui hoc studio in prophanis utuntur.
syllables have taken, and been used to take up the deliberate consultations of
the gravest and wisest. (How was the Empire divided about a Diphthong, (...))
Nor about any ( -- I speak absolutely) has the exactest search and scrutiny
bin thought to have so little toward supererrogation, as about these; the votes
of many private Doctors, yea of public Schools, and sometimes Cum sacramentu^
baptismi omnium sacramentorum sit principium and fundamentum, and ideo propter
summam necessitatem, forma ejusdem a Christo n ^titutore tred^a, a nullo
fidelium maxim del eat ignorari, ipsam formam quae infra scriptis verbis
continetur recensemus: Petre, vel Maria, Ego baptize te in nomine Patris,
Filii, and Spiritus sancti sub ^rina aspersione vel immersione, nihil
interposito vel detracto. Quam siquidem formam Canones sacros imitantes,
m^andamus and praecipimus de caetero ab omnibus baptizantibus irrefragabiliter
observari. Council. Ravenna te 2. rub. 11 apud Sever. Binium, tom 3. pa. 1514.
As but now from the Provincials of England: in Lyndewoods Constitut. lib. 3.
tit. de Baptismo and ejus effectu.
solemnest determinations, (as of whole Councels and learned Assemblies) having
contributed to keep all to rights here; not without some dan erous influence
suspected to whole Christianity upon creeping in of not the greatest mistake.
This was that which therefore not but needfully both awaked my jealousy, and
prompted my industry with some fervor of zeal, and strength of endeavor
amplified Judes Epist. verse. 3.
to contend earnestly for this part of the faith, delivered unto the Saints, by
their Savior: But the ramenta or filings of gold are precious, each sparkle of
a Diamond has value, and a Mite not without regard in the greatest judgment of
him shall judge all; wherein yet methink I could almost condescend to wish
toward owning of some mistake my self, rather then so many others should as
both have, and (I doubt) must. The door of the Church should be kept fair and
open, the porch clear and safe, the entrance not but free from all obstruction.
And though of Error in principio, the present deviation be not great, yet the
consequence may be so signal, that here a little in mistake may prove worse
then a great deal. There have been who have went about to unchristian a good
part of Christendom, by farfetcht supposition, That he who after proves to be a
Bishop, may not have been, by the due administration of this Sacrament, rightly
admitted at first himself: he proceeding to Ordination, seems to let in other
(beyond a Being, to a degree of power and authority in the Church) which yet he
does not, being without himself: They go on to open the door for several
others; but to as little purpose, having the key either not delivered, or not
rightly delivered unto them. Of which last some also may prove Baptizers or
Ordainers, etc. to propagate mistake, and a succession of dead Ordinances; (in
effectual operations even of the mysteries of life,) from generation to
generation. So numerous is the brood of multiplying error. E parva origin, ad
tantae magnitudinis instar, as the Historian speaks, from so small a spark so
great a flame may be kindled; In consequences unseen errors, not great of
themselves, spreading far and wide, like slips or strings that shoot out from
the root under ground. Or, Mat. 13.22
The grain of mustard seed, whereof our Savior spoke, which being the least of
all other, grows great among Herbs, and becomes a tree, the birds of Heaven
come and lodge in the branches of it. Even of the Sacramental words, F. G. In
tertiam partem Thomae. tom. 3. Disput. 129. de materia and forma sacramenti,
cap. 7. Est igitur Catholica sententia, Sacramenta constare praescriptis ac
determinatis verbis and rebus, cap. 5. praeced. and tam in Sacramento Baptismi,
quam Eucharistiae, certa and definita verba dicit (Lutherus) esse necessaria.
Ibid.
Vasquez has these two considerable Rules, 1. Mutatio sive per additionem,
sive per ablationem, sive alio modo fiant, quae non corrumpit verum sensum
formae, non tollit valorem Sacramenti: That change, by addition, substraction,
or howsoever, which corrupts not the sense of the form, leaves the Sacrament of
full force and virtue. But so as, 2. Mutatio quovismodo facta corrumpens verum
sensum formae semper destruit valorem Sacramenti: Any alteration made to the
corruption of the sense, IN WHAT WAY SOEVER, takes away the life and operation.
How many ways it may be done, Joannes de In libro, De Sacramentis in genere.
Disput 2. sect. 6
Lugo (a late Spaniard) has taken great pains to show by exact view and
pensitation of the words; as in Hoc est corpus meum, so here examining
distinctly EGO, TE, BAPTIZO, etc. And determining where he takes to be the
perilous mistake: Nor in any of those noted by him, does corruption seem to
proceed to worse disturbance and depravation of the sense, then here. So that,
as of a dangerous error, distempering the very heart of Religion, this would
not, but ought to have been taken notice of for consultation, cure, and remedy.

To conclude, what ever be mine opinion, or any others, it cannot but be safe
and requisite for thee, O Christian, to hearken to the WORD OF GOD; those
draughts of Heavens mind, sacred inspirations from above, divine Oracles, which
will neither deceive, nor suffer any to be deceived. John 5.39.
Search those Scriptures, says our Savior, for in them is life: but (...), do
it with prying, quickest, sifting diligence. There since is found Baptizing Romans
6.3.
into Christ, into his death, Acts 8.16.
into his name; and they that Gal. 3.27.
put him on, were so baptized into: Since the 1 Cor. 12.13
Corinthians were matriculated into his Corporation, the Acts 19.5:
Ephesians into his Name, or Faith; Paul 1 Cor. 1.13. and verse. 15.
had not so formalized Sects, scil. by baptizing into this or that (the only
way to do it) and all according to Commission here, (...), from which is seldom
variation. In consequence hereupon, I suppose there will remain little cause of
doubt or deliberation with any, what is reasonably fit to be done or amended
here by all those who submit to the Scepter of the Lord Jesus our believed
Savior. Kiss that Son, lest the Father be angry: To whom with the holy Ghost
(for as we believe, so ought we be baptized, before from St. Basil: and into
whom believing, we are baptized, Unto him to give glory) be all honor, praise
and glory. from his whole Creation, for Ever Ever and Ever.

AMEN.
POSTSCRIPT. In one word more, good Christian.
WHat thou have here beheld in open light, was at first as 'twere opened in
darkness, what is now preached on the house top, having been delivered, scarce
published in the whispers of a very private Country Congregation. Partial
estimation (such as friendly always uses to be) made the thoughts seem not
unworthy thinking over again; Thence their review; Thence this bulk: and it is
left to thy discretion to sever what was first spoken from what was likeliest
to have been since written. It was held convenient thus to co^mumunicate All;
if for no other reason, Because 1 Cor. 5.10.
the day is coming when we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
to render account of what we have done in our bodies, and as well what we have
Inter pressuras atque angustias praesentis temporis and nostrae officia
servitutis, cogimur dilectissimi non tacere, quum potius expediat flere, magis
quam aliquid dicere. Veruntamen nequid minus lucri Arcae Domini accedens,
dicatur nobis, Serve nequam and piger, tu erogares pecuniam meam:, and ego
veniens cum vsuris exigerem eam. Peto charitatem vestram, ut quae ipse
paterfamilias per nos vobis ministravit, libenter accipere dignemini. Augustine.
Concio ad Catechumen. contra Judaeos, cap. 1. tom. 6. pa. 23.
not done, as what we have (for our omissions are not without fault.) And as to
this, the season added special opportunity, all being now under revise, both
for Agenda and Credenda, for Doctrine and Discipline; seeming to call in those
words of the Masters of the Assemblies, after the reading of the Law and the
Prophets, Acts 13.15. Ye men and brethren, as many of you as have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on.

If any thing here shall run the Nullam enim existimo Scripturam adeo
^oeliciter procedere cui ^ul^us omnino contradicat C^emen. Alexand Strom. 1. It
is a common frailty of our Nature, which may be watched, but cannot be
remedied, bewailed not helped: possibility of Erring, a misery from which his
Holiness is not exempted when he sits in his Apostolic Chair. Besides, as of
bodies, so there may be differing complexions of judgment: One man's meat is
another man's poison; and one man's thanks another aversation; yet of the thing
yet the same. Pro captu lectoris, etc. It has been so, and will: Do our
REASONS differ!
face of all other (for nothing could yet be found to have pleased every body)
thy courtesy, or rather thy Christianity is bespoken and entreated.

1. Cavil not at words: the last refuge they will yet make to, that are
resolved to continue Cavillers. It was matter was heeded, not Sane quisquis
legis, nihil reprehendas, nisi cum totum perlegeris, atque ita fo^^e minus
repr^hendes. Eloquium noli quaerere. Multum enim de rebus laboravi^^us, etc.
Unde hactenus ac prope nulla fuit nobis cura verborum, Augustine. lib. de
Mendacio, cap. 1. tom. 4. page 3.
Them: so that please, the rest may be spared. Or thou may even herein be
satisfied; for, so the substance be kept, it is left to thee to alter the dress
of outward expressions to thine own judgment or fancy; or if thou will, think
the thing already done.

2. Take me not in pieces; but either the whole, or a whole part: And that
after thou shall have perused and considered the whole. Partition belongs to
choice: That, in taking some, leaves the rest: and therewith an interpretative
concession, that what was left was judged hard, and scarce malleable, therefore
in prudence let alone. The world will judge s^: deal therefore entirely; and,
heed all along the scope: for that also I heeded.

3. Contract not thy brow too severely, that I make use of Non me latent ea
etiam quae ab aliquibus imperite omnia metuentibus jactantur, qui dicunt
oportere in iis versari quae sunt maxim necessaria, and quae fidem continent:
externa autem and quae sunt super vacanea transilire, quae nos frustra
continent ac detinent in iis quae nihil ad finem conferunt. Alii autem
Philosophiam etiam cum maximo malo and ad perniciem hominum venisse in vitam
existimant, ut quae profecta sit a maligno aliquo inventore. Ego autem quod
vitium quidem habeat malam naturam, neque alicujus unquam boni causa esse
possit, in his Totis Ostendam, libris, qui (...) dicuntur, tacit significans,
aliqua ratione divinae opus providentiae esse Philosophiam. Clement. Alexand.
Strom. lib. 1. p. 278.
some parts of remote, obscure, profane, disdained pieces of knowledge, thou
(so much a Scripturist) judge altogether unprofitable. I was long since
taught by Dr In his published Sermons on Psalm 110. v. 4. p. 480. Neque
verebuntur commenta^i nostri, uti iis quae sunt pulcherrima ex Philosophia and
iis quae praecedunt disciplinis. Non enim solum propter Hebraeos and eos qui
sunt sub lege, par est fieri Judaeum, sed etiam propter Graecos Graecum, ut
omnes lucrifaciamus, Clem. Alexand. Strom. 1. p. 277
Reynolds, whom I believed, That there is no part of Learning in the whole
Circle thereof, which is not helpful, and may not contribute to the
understanding of holy Scriptures, and some part or other of a Divines
employment. I particularize his general into Jews and Gentiles, Councels and
Fathers, Schoolmen and Historians, Decretals and Imperials, and hope one day to
be better acquainted with the Alcoran and the Sybils, the Talmud and the
Sanhedrim. For how else should we understand out sundry things of the Bible
(our Religion) depending on these? or how make toward the requisite perfection
of that Scribe in the Gospel, thoroughly furnished to the Kingdom of God; who is
like an House-holder well stored, who contents not himself with neighbor
provision, some single Commentary, or broken patched systeme, but has ready by
him for all supplies, and as the occasions of the Family call for it, both New
and Old: With an evil eye these Moldy remnants are looked upon by many, who
could peradventure readily enough wish the whole heaps of them thrown away at
once, and all of Jewry or Samaria dealt with, as those Magic books were, upon
conversion to sound knowledge, Acts 19.19. I am perhaps too far on the contrary
part; as, wishing our Libraries may be the safest part of our Land, so that
these jewels may be treasured up in the safest Archives of our Libraries,
hoping for more light yet to shine out of the east by them, and if ever the
Bible be made plain and legible to the vulgar, or Learned, those Divine Oracles
unsealed to sure and certain sense, and the Book of our Redemption it self
redeemed from that cloud of darkness, and mist of obscurity, the delusion of
false Glosses, corrupting emendations, interest of States, and Tyranny of
times, and manifold such impositions have cumbred it withal, that from the
rising Sun alone we must expect the sovereign healing beams to proceed, whose
fresh and morning influence has POWER to produce that dispersion; being not
without temptation to some kind of Idolatry, in worshipping with a face
settled toward the East, and thence really expecting another Homines enim
Hebraei, agregia eruditione, sagacique ingenio, cum sacri codicis sensa patrio
Sermon evoluta nobis darent, multa faeliciter repererunt, quae aliorum nunquam
assecuta esset industria. Pet. Cunaei lib. 3. de repub. Hebraeorum. cap. 5. p.
422.
Star (as full of Corporeity (soon it may be) as was the last) to guide all
those shall be accounted amongst us Worthy, Watchful and Wise, to the yet
unknown things of Jesus the Son of a Virgin, born in Bethlehem. For that was
the Land where the affairs of our Religion were done, whence else should we
expect an illustration and elucidation of them? That was the scaene of
wonderful things, to raise expectation of a wonderful knowledge: There was
Power shown likely to breed an amazing Light: Nor may the full sense of Isa.
2.3. The Law from Zion, and the Word from Jerusalem, be so wholly already drawn
out, but that our Merchants may bring us some rich Remainders (God bless our
Merchants of Knowledge) and their neglected, despised, moth-eaten Rolls and
Records help us to see our own light, or to make a right use of it, and enrich
us thereby beyond Caesar and Craesus and Crassus.

4. (Here I would be accounted earnest) Christian, if thou be, deal with me as
thou art and would, remembering thy Saviors Rule, and mine, Both our Masters
Meekness, not only as his Quality, but our Qualification, and our Duty in his
Example, Learn of me, Matthew. 11.29. for I am so: we never read, His voice was
heard in the streets, Matthew. 12.19. We no where hear him loud in venomous and
and boisterous reproaches: we find him not at any time raging for truth,
passionately. Religious, truly Seditious, bitterly Zealous: but if the
weightiness of the occasion had need to draw from him powerful reproof, Luke
4.32 They were amazed at his teaching, for his word was with power. Mat. 7.29.
he taught as having Authority, not as the Scribes, Mark 1 22. Percellebantur
super doctrina ejus. The soberest moderation may be most effectual in power.
his Word was with power, but his Severity with some Lenity, his strongest
Physic ministered in an inoffensive dose, and nothing dropped from him ever,
but what bespake declared, and left assured a most soft and gentle Genius. Oh!
this is that for which Christendom has cause to mourn and lie down in
sackcloath and ashes, that Truth comes often a woing, apparelled like a Hag or
a Fury, the Orators of Heaven mix wilde-fire with their zeal, perswasives
labor their end rather with teeth to bite, then arguments to convince; The
tongue that should lick whole mistakes in an erring Brother, ministers venom
to wrankle, rather then salve to heal up, Vinegar is not sharp enough, but Aqua
fortis must be taken in, and that ink is blackest is fittest, not to write the
cause, or convince the Arguments, but besmear the reputation of a tractable
recoverable adversary (As David observed in his time, and complained: Psalm.
64.3. And I lie even among the children of men, that are set on fire: whose
teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, Psalm. 57.5.
They shoot out their arrows, even bitter words, in speaking with their mouth,
Psalm. 59.7.
Swords are in their lips, for who does hear? nay, their poisons have reached
to my very soul) This, this is that, but for the permission whereof,
Christendom has much to answer, by men of sober and Gospel Spirits not to be
remembered, without tears of blood, and which, God grant it turn not the grave
and prudent advice of an admonishing Apostle, into the misfortune of a
Prophetic curse (so calculated and composed as 'twere of purpose for the
Religion, Meridian, Clime and Age under which we live.) Gal. 5.15.
If ye will needs go on to bite and tear one another, take heed ye be not
devoured one of another.

As it has been seen often enough before. Where malice has fretted it self
quite away on both sides, two obstinate Champions have left neither alive; both
have ceased to be, because one would have had victory. May it never be so with
us, where CHRIST'S name is reverenced, and at top of all (as the prize of all
our concertations) that strife should ruin what it fights to preserve, and
that word and Gospel which is now the rule of Princes, Psa. 103.^6.
The Place that has known it, shall know it no more.

5. Think not thou have to deal with an untractable adversary, but one would be
glad to turn the ear to reproof, as being not yet past the Learners form
((...), that is the utmost) a very Seeker (of Truth and Verity) which
Tertullian so much commended and pursued: and that loves that of the Psalm, Let
the righteous smite, Psalm. 141.5, 6.
it shall be a favor, but let not the precious balms of flatterers break mine
head, I will yet pray seven times more against all such wickedness. There was
peradventure too much of the Stoic even in Socrates himself, of whom St.
Augustine somewhere, Hoc tantum scio, quod nihil scio: he presumed no farther
knowledge then only of his ignorance: But as much as following times have too
little, where presumption of knowledge attained already, bars forwardest
resolutions of seeking any more; Prejudice and Pride will admit no increase of
former riches, the active inquiries of the soul are stopped, and our wings
clipped, that would soar to any new discoveries: Therefore we know not, because
we think we do: sitting still in little more then a dull and contented
ignorance, scorning to learn what we think we have already attained. I thank
God, I know many things I do not know: I thank God, I see, many have cause to
doubt of what they think they know: I thank God, I have assurance, that what I
think sure, yet I may have more abundant confirmation of: And what I nor know,
nor opine, I am willing to learn. I pray my darkness may be enlightened, my
ignorance instructed, my errors reformed, my true persuasions strengthened: but
above all, that Truth may conquer and be glorious: As Christ is TRUTH, John
14.6. To whom be due praise for ever.

His te volebam. Now judge, and be charitable. My last thoughts may not unfitly
come out in the concluding words of whosoever was the not over-confident Author
of the second History of the Maccabees; And here shall be an end, if well I
have said, (...), and hit the mark, 'twas that I aimed at: if otherwise, that I
could: And so (with offer of mine) wishing and hoping to meet a return of the
courteous embraces of thy love, I bid thee Christian, heartily.

FAREWELL. March 29. 1647.
Immortali DEO Immortales gratias.
FINIS.

