THE CIVIL RIGHT OF TITHES:

WHEREIN, Setting aside the Higher Plea of Jus Divinum from the Equity of the
Leviticall Law, or that of Nature for Sacred Services, And the Certain
apportioning of Enough by the Undoubted Canon of the New Testament,

The Laborers of the Lords Vineyard of the Church of England are estated in
their Quota pars of the TENTH or TITHE per Legem terrae, By Civil Sanction or
THE LAW of the LAND:

Which being the foundation of All Civil Right Here, must needs render their
Spoliation Wrong, the Taking or withholding as Injurious as of Any other MAN'S
DVE.

Humbly represented to the Judicious and Pious Consideration of all Sober and
advised Christians, who fearing God and hating Covetousness, have learned
Christ fo far, as, To give every one His Own; and would do no Wrong for
Conscience sake.

By C. E. Mr of Arts.

Quicquid enim jure possidetur, injuria aufertur.

Quintil. Decimae autem EX DEBITO requiruntur; and qui eas dare noluerit RES
ALIENAS invasit.

Augustine. Sermon. 219: de Tempore. Render Therefore to All THEIR DUES.

Romans 13. 7. Licensed and Allowed.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for JOHN HOLDEN, at the Anchor in the
New-Exchange. 1650.

REVERENDISSIMO. DOCTISSIMOQUE JACOBO. USSERIO ARCHI-PRAESULI. ARMACHANO,
PIETATE, ERUDITIONE, CAETERISQUE. ANIMI. VIRTUTIBUS MAXIM. CONSPICUO,
DIATRIBAS. HASCE. SUAS. DE. DECIMARUM. APUD. ANGLOS. JURE. NATIONALI. ET.
POLITICO, SUMMA. OBSERVANTIA D. D.

The CONTENTS.
AN Introduction declaring the occasion, scope, and limits of the Whole, with
way Made to Sundry Propositions of CIVIL RIGHT in general. pa. 1. Chap. 1.
Propos. 1. That by the Law of Nature all was left at first in Community; And
this according to the Canon, Civil, and Our Common Laws, not opposing the Law
of God. p. 9. Chap. 2. Propos. 2. That yet Enclosures may be, the Scripture
approving and furthering. p. 27 Chap. 3. Propos. 3. That the Fence making out
those Enclosures is Everywhere, THE LAW. p. 31 Chap. 4. Prop. 4. Which being
manifold, That in the world The Maker of Severals is, The Law of Nature, or
Nations. p. 37 Chap. 5. Prop. 5. In any Particular place, The Law of That
Nation. p. 39 Chap. 6. Prop. 6. Individually with Us, OUR LAW. p. 41 Chap. 7.
Here with us Three distinct titles made out for Tithes: 1. Of Donation,
strengthened by Confirmation. 2. Possession, advantaged by Being Possessed for
God. 3. Praescription, lengthned for through the space of many
Praescription-Times; with what Donation (the first of them) is.
p. 56 Chap. 8. The Donation in Kent of K. Ethelbert and his people, and that
it is genuine. p. 62 Chap. 9. The Donation of K. Aelfwald in Northumberland,
and of K. Offa in Mercen-land. p. 68 Chap. 10. The Donation of K. Aethelwlph of
All who was over All. p. 70 Chap. 11. Henceforth needed but Confirmation, and
Memorials speak accordingly, of not Giving but Paying: what That is, and
Tradition superseded as of a Right. p. 80 Chap. 12. The particular
confirmations of K. Alfred, K. Aethelstane, and K. Edmond. p. 82 Chap. 13. Of
K. Edgar with sundry Ecclesiastical Constitutions. p. 84 Chap. 14. Of the
Parliaments of Aenham and Habam. p. 85 Chap. 15. Of the Danish Knoght in K.
Edgars Law repeated. p. 87 Chap. 16. Lastly, of Edward the Confessor in his
composition of the Common Law. That work done by Him: Whence he had his
Materials, with Recapitulation and Inforcement of all thus far to the Conquest.
p. 89 Chap. 17. Behither, a partition of the strengths into four sorts: 1. The
allowance of K. Edwards Laws. 2. Church-Constitutions. 3. Impressions of the
Secular State. 4. Particular men's Votes.


William 1. Will. 2. Hen. 1. Stephen of Bloys, and K. John passed to make over
these Laws into the Charters; and that They were K. Edwards. p. 99

Chap. 18. 1. That Tithes were under the Conqueror. 2. Confirmed by Hen. the
1. 3. Owned in a Parliament at Westminster in 3. of the same.
Being come in, The Patent of the Court-Christian represented, with taking
Tithes into that Jurisdiction likely by virtue thereof. p. 110 Chap. 19. Laws
or Canons made by the Church. One under Will. 1. Another under Will. 2. Another
at Windsore. Another at London. Two at Westminster. Three Decretalls sent
hither, and to whom. What force They had here, and vertually the like of Then
have yet. More from R. Hoveden, with Parochial Right settled by Authority from
the Laterane Council. Two other Decretals sent in K. John's time, also of force:
But the chief strength is in the Provincials collected by W. Lindwood, in
Quoniam propter: Quoniam audivimus: Sancta Ecclesia: Quia quidam; etc. p. 120
Chap. 20. The Canon of Sylva Coedua. Strength of Church Power to create Right
where not restrained, insinuated by the Statute of 45 Edw. 3. 3. against the
Excess of that Power. The Proceedings in the Court-Christian to Recover these
Rights. What was intended by the Stat. of 25 Hen. 8. 19. about Reforming the
Canons. What was done: The Canons to this purpose Given. Till these be
authorized, All Former in force, as by the Proviso of that Statute. p. 137
Chap. 21. Among Seculars, the firm Rooting Tithes have in the Great Charter.
The solemn Ratification and due Great esteem thereof: with address by
Apostrophe to those are against them, that they keep but fast here, and This
will settle Tithes. Their Redargution else from their own Principles, and a
Christian admonition to Constant, Equal and Just dealing. p. 148 Chap. 22. The
Statutes of Regia Prohibitio under Hen. 3. Of Circumspecte agatis, and
Consultations under Edw. 1. Articuli Cleri under Edw. 2. Four more under Edw.
3. Diverse under R. 2. and Hen. 4. All but the Exempted now paid, and Who were
Exempted. p. 162 Chap. 23. Under Hen. S. Wary and just proceedings as to this
matter. The preservation of Tithes, when what next was Cast away. The Need of
Temporals for Divine Service. Two Statutes by Consequent establishing them, sc.
24 Hen. 8. chap. 12. and 25 Hen. 8. chap. 19. and Two more purposely, sc. 27
Hen. 8. chap. 20. and 32 Hen. 8. chap. 7. p. 177 Chap. 24. The last and most
vigorous under Edw. 6. p. 192 Chap. 25. An Examination of the Lo. Cooks
assertion occasioned by his Comments thereon, That Tithes were taken into
Church-Cognizance by some old Statutes, as about Edw. 1. time. And that Not,
from nine alleged probabilities. p. 198 Chap. 26. By occasion of the mention
of them in that Statute, The More ancient dueness of Personal Tithes laid
forth: With the Laws in force for them before the Statute. p. 205 Chap. 27. The
grant of the Petition of Right a Concession of All. That None are Burdensome,
because laid on by Law. Application to those that Plead this Petition, that if
they understand it It Cannot be Against but Must be For them, because they were
at the time of that grant A Right. p. 211 Chap. 28. What particular and Ruling
as well as Judging Lawyers have said. The Lo. Cook: M. Saint German, Fleta,
Bracton, etc. And an insinuation of their allowance from the proceedings in
Temporal Courts inferred from the form of Prohibitions in the Book of Entries,
Natura Brevium, etc. p. 219 Chap. 29. Collection and Re-inforcement of all
Hither. p. 227 Chap. 30. Of Possession (the second ground of Right:) The great
force it has abroad, as that 1. It gives Right. 2. Was the first Right. 3. Is a
very Right. 4. Against All but One presently. 5. Against him at last. 6.
Against an equal Right at any time. 7. Against All till eviction. 8. Helps to
Keep what it could not Get.
The Application of this force Hither, with answer to Doubt, How the Churches
Person or Man Possesses what the Owner has: sc. As a Right: Which may be
Invisible, though the things be Corporal. pa. 230 Chap. 31. This Strengthened
by being possessed for God. What would follow thereon. That such a Thing May be
from Scripture. What Laws say It is so Among Us. Their Ordination to Heaven.
Hence they Could be styled CHRISTS-SHARE, were tried in the Court of Religion,
And Their Surreption Can be Sacrilege. The Application hereof, and Inference
of Necessary Wariness, lest (if it Be not) it Should be Thus. p. 248 Chap. 32.
Praescription, (the third ground:) What it is: The Power of it, Chiefly here in
England. Its several Measures of Limitation, by the Civil, Feodall, Canon,
Common, and our Statute Laws. Its Equity, Necessity, and Conditions. The
Application Hither, with Time made good for Many Praescription-spaces chiefly
from M. Seldom. p. 263 Chap. 33. A Recollection and inforcement of All. Appeal
to the Lawyers, That they have So understood (these things,) and Judged.
Particularly to Sir Henry Spelman and M. Seldom. p. 283 Chap. 34. Also to
Practice and what has been Seen Done. Way made Thus to enforce Payment ( not
Giving but Just Payment) with us in the very words of Scripture. Even Our Law
Sacred: Every Minister thereof a Priest. This Supposed, That Mediately, but
Certainly Tithes are Then with us Due in this new way Jure Divino: For God is
at the top of all Just Humane Ordinances. This strengthens the other: At least
we have a Dueness by Civil Right, Id quod erat demonstrandum. p. 298 Chap. 35.
Exhortation then to the discharge of Moral Duty in Just Payment; by Arguments
chiefly from Scripture: As, from Moses Precepts in the Old Law, Christ's in the
New; Our Righteousness must exceed the Pharisees, (yet They went Thus far,)
Do as we would be Done unto, the Fear of^ God, Examples of Just and Unjust men,
Do Justice, Love Mercy, Hate Cruelty, Give every one his own, etc. which are
the Great good Works of the Christians Law. Close to All and Some, to let every
One have That: The Magistrate declined all along, Here only saluted; The whole
meant to Private Persons; With the Conclusion. 307 And a Prayer. 335 And a
Postscript. 337
These the CONTENS:

THE INTRODUCTION:
Deo, Ecclesiae, Patriae, Tibi.
JUstice and Righteousness are among the great things of the Christians Law.
They mistake Religion, who understand it to direct only in heavenly things; one
part whereof is to make Honest Men, and while the Decalogue is within the
compass of our Creed, and we believe both Tables of Gods law to contain our
Moral duty, the scope of one must be (rightly understood) ever to guide our
outward, moral, civil conversation. It is an age now much treating of
Religion, and hard to suppose that any of those who are most forward would
(willingly and knowingly) leave out one half; leading men to God with neglect
of Men, and trampling down all Civil righteousness, in order to Heavenly: This
makes it the more needfully considerable what that Righteousness is, that we
may not seem to love God with neglect of our Neighbor, or in zeal of Religion
to permit our selves unjust: but so to make our pilgrimage through this world,
that we leave the reputation of Honest men behind us, and so to pass through
things temporal, that finally we lose not the things eternal. Particularly,
in that great and so much vexed case and controversy of the remainder of the
Churches Patrimony in TITHES: which many look upon as of no more Right or
Wrong, to continue or withdraw the payment of, then in relieving a Beggar with
an Alms at the door: They may, or may not (what any advantages shall give
opportunity to) with equal liberty, and no wrong to a just Conscience, parting
or not parting with as they can contrive or shift, and so take to themselves
that boundless license the Apostle has given in another case; 1 Cor. 7. 36.
let a Man (in this) do what he will, he sins not: As if to venture upon the
spoils of the Church, were no more then to divide what men have taken in
hunting; to defraud Religion, not so bad as to disturb Humane Right, (and yet
that is bad enough, and yet this is worse). And to remove the pillar (worldly)
of Gods service, of no greater guilt, or doubt, or fear then to seiz upon that
a man finds in his way, or to fetch Timber for building a new house, or
repairing his old, from his own Le^anon. A great mistake! whereof the Enemy of
all goodness makes much advantage; being like to reduce the Lords Ministers
hereby to great streights, and to get the daily allowance of oil withdrawn:
which, though ordinary in it self, was wont to be consecrate to keep light in
the Temple: by subtracting Levi's portion, I mean, to disable Levi himself from
attending the service of his God; As (...). Arist. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
how can worldly men live in this world and follow worldly business, (as to the
outward part to be studied and acted by Man, even Gods service is) without
worldly maintenance?

Such consideration as these awaked my thoughts to that I took to be a very
needful enquiry; scil. Whether Tithes had indeed any of that we call^ Right or
good title among Men demonstrable, to hinder the subtraction by any that are
conscientious? A Right in equity for maintenance of Gods service? Luke 10. 7.
Sure, this is very likely. A right in Justice by Divine law, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
which apportioneth (in the New Testament) to Mat. 10. 10.
every labourer his reward. ^, Cor. 9. 11.
to him that preaches the Gospel, to live of the Gospel; and this no less
probable. Nay, for the very Tenth in kind and proportion, a worldly, civil,
positive, humane Right; Such as might infer the detaining, Wrong, and make it
civilly injurious not to part with what is not now courteously given, but
justly paid; I resolved, it might be so: I assured my self it was so: And
thought I had read and observed so much, that reduced to heads, and presented
to view, might persuade others also: and because it was a truth I thought not
known to all, and I perceived very many very much to love the truth* for their
sakes therefore I set my self to represent what I could in haste lay together,
to every ones friendly And shall be heartily glad, if it shall please that God
who out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings does sometimes perfect is prais,
to magnify his own power so much the more, as to make Me the successful,
though weak means of undeceiving any; for, Non quaerimus vestras opes, sed
vestram justitiam, as St. Augustine somwhere said: It was not so much
preservation of any ones Right, as all men's innocence, that set me on work. Or
as Pet. Cluniacensis spoke, Nec tam ad scribendum coegerut lu^ra decimar^m,
quam damna anim^^^; not hope of worldly gain, but fear of loss of Souls. And
this twofold; both of theirs who shall do the wrong in withholding, and
theirs who shall miscarry for want of instruction, occasioned by withholding of
this worldly sustentation from him should have hold out the light. Other means
may be talked of* But --
consideration. No other the candor of mine own bosom did assure me I should
either doubt to find, or (...). Chrysostom. Him 14. in cap 4. ad Phil. t^m. 6.
in N. Test. p 132.
need to fear: for the Public had passed nothing against, but many things As
in the Ordinance of Novem. 4. 1644. yet in force (beside many other) for
recovery of them: The repelling of the Kentish, and many other Petitions
against them The ac^^all segregation of them from other parts of Delinquents
Estates, to piece out a more comfortable Subsistence for Preachers out of them:
And, above all, the late exemption of them from sale among other Cathedral
Endowments, with express Declaration, that they shall make every Parish, where
they arise, afford 100 per an. to an able Guide of Souls. Vid Act of Ian. 8.
1649. and what can, if this do not, assure their purpose? at least a
Declaration of such Intentions, which is that we are to walk by.
for these dues, (which secured me on that part) besides the old established
laws of the land; and for mine own private, the scales hung almost even: Not
much to me whether they stood or fell, went up or down, as having not much to
get or lose, to hope or fear. But for Sions sake I resolved I would not, I
might not hold my peace: For Gods sake (I know mine own bosom) I was willing to
be at the cost of following pains, for the Gospel of Jesus Christ's sake, and
endeavor to preserve (if God should so bless weak endeavors) that support had
been hitherto the visible and worldly maintenance of Christ's Kingdom in ours,
I resolved to dig down as deep as I could, to try and represent to view what
foundation and strength that pillar had, which chiefly (as worldly still) has
held it out to the view of the world amongst us; being glad to find:

1. That it is of that firmness and also age, that we have occasion to bless
God for his Rex aut^m barbarus (circa an. ab Incarnatione Domini 63.) eum sua
gente tam nova audiens and in^onsueta, omnino praedicationi eorum consenti^e
renuebat, nec paterna^ Traditiones commutare volebat. Quia tamen de long
venorant, vitaque ^or^m exigabat m^d^stia, ad petitionem eorum quandam insulam
sylvis, rub^, atque paludibus circundatam ab Incolu Ynsuvitrim nuncupatam (
Glastenbury) in lateribus suae Regionis ad habitandum concessit. Postea and
alii dic^ Reges, licet Pagani, comperta eorum vit^ sanctimonia ( Joseph of
Arimathea, and his 12. Fellow Apostles) unicuiq^e eorum unam portionem terr^
successive concesserunt, ac ad petitionem eorum secundum morem Gentilium dictas
12. Hidas e^sdem confirma^ runt; unde 12. Hid^ per eos adhuc, ut creditur,
nomen sortiuntur. Guilielm. Malmes. apud Spelm. Council. page 5 de Exordio
Christianae Religionis in Britannia.
early mercy to this Land: That almost as soon as any where; he that once said,
Matthew. 8. 20. Luc. 9. 58.
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests, but the Son of man not
where to lay his head; had here (in his Ministers, which Matthew 10. 40. John 13
20.
whosoever receives, receives him) entertaiment and home.

2. That prudence mixed with piety, and true love of God of equal sincerity,
and all dimensions with that to their nearest selves, prompted our long since
dead and blessed Ancestors, to do for him as for themselves, building the
honor of his house with the same (if not better) materials then their own; and
contriving to perpetuate (as they meant) true Christian Worship, by allowing it
the best (they thought so) of this world, no weaker nor other support then went
to the strongest of their own buildings.

3. That it has not been yet within the power of malice, envy, pride,
tyranny, fraud, wretched covetousness, or any other inimicall passions or
powers, to scatter or divert, disturb or destroy: but by the blessing of God,
and under the safety, power, and protection of the Laws, Levi has had his own,
and yet has his own, to live on and serve his God, as well as other men. The
foundation of Gods House (his Church) stands fast and firm upon the same bottom
with theirs (besides what it has from Heaven,) and beside what may be said for
a Divine Right; the Ministers of Jesus Christ have as much of humane as any
other men can plead for, that is truly and justly theirs: And this to continue,
and this for their works sake, and thus the Gospel made here without It has
been warily and truly observed by some, that a Christians exercise of his
Religion here in England, for the years of some Ages past, has not usually
cost him above his 2d. per an. and that in his voluntary Easter oblation. The
rest was but the disbursing or delivering forth what others gave long since,
and it had been injust c^^ not to pay, as given and appointed by another
Bounty. As for Christening and Marriage Duties they were extraordinary.
charge, which 1 Cor. 9. 19^
St. Paul sometimes desired so solicitously: It being left to our Autumn of the
world, only to reap the harvest of their rich piety, who lived and made very
costly seed-times before us, and serve God cheap enough at their cost and
charges: They having given so much from themselves, and all the world; that we
need only issue out their bounty, and in what we contribute or give forth to
Christian Worship, are not so much liberal as righteous; nor do we give, but
pay. This is so, I know it to be so, I was glad to find it so: Others gifts
have made it, and great is the advantage that comes hereby to Religion and us,
from those are now at rest from their Labors, and their works follow them. I
confess, I could not but all along wish so great a work better done; and
sensibly complain of infirmities all along: that impar congressus between
undertaking and performance was still in my eye; and another discouragement of
another Poet: Sumite materiam vestris qui scribitis aequam
Viribus. --
Beside that I often wished I had been able but to bring in what my self saw
the Argument did afford, and in part also where it was. But when withal I
considered Goats hair and Badgers skins to find acceptance, (for the
tabernacle of those had not gold and silver: when I remembered the Widows mite
commended, who gave of her penury; and not cold water to loose its reward,
least (says a Father) excuse should be any from want of fuel to warm. These
things again refreshed and encouraged me to the tendry of small things,
especially when I called to mind the Great Apostles straights, who was fain to
take up with a part-bountie, when he had not wherewith to pay the whole: for
Silver and Gold (says he) have I none, (to a Beggar that wanted a Drachme) but
such as I have give I thee, Act. 3. 6. A ripe Judgment will soon discern wants
enough, and so do I; and that I hope is the chiefest fault: To have been better
furnished with books, arts, languages, records, means, company, might both have
strengthened many a weak nerve, and supplied many an empty vacuity. But yet if
but one half hereof be strong, of what I hope none is weak; if a moity true, of
what I hope none is false; there may be so much of it as it is, that he that
runs may read, and he that reads and understands will not (I hope) herafter
dare give leave to his Conscience to consent to that, which if he have the
honesty of a Moor or Saracene, he must step back and pause, and decline; I
mean, by reaching out his hand to withdraw that, which if he were one of the
Sons of Pamphilio, he would let alone, or rather give; or, in plain terms, not
dare to withold his Tithes, unless he be resolved to more then covet his
neighbors Goods.

This is a point of Religion very low in an age of Religion, and for Religion
pretending to soar so very high; But he that has but this, cannot upon these
grounds, do this evil, and sin against his God: If there be Civil Right, there
must be undoubtedly Civil wrong, (for they are Correlatives) fraud, injustice,
spoil, rapine, coveting, thieving; some of these, if not all: and God grant
there be not also upon the grounds, and in the reputation of the Common Law,
Sacriledg also, to meddle with, and in this case to pervert what That Law
accounts Sacred.

But to come to the Point: ( Det Deus his studiis vela secunda meis: Or rather
from more Divine extraction: Now God himself, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Holy Ghost direct my way; 1 These. 3. 11.
(...) that it may go right in a righteous business:) That which I then
propose to my self to assert, is, The Civil Right of Tithes: and mark those
three words, they are so many limitations.

1. Of Tithes: and so I meddle not with any other Ecclesiastical possessions
or claims.

2. Of the Right of Tithes: and so I meddle not with the story, which has
already been both very successefully done, and also examined.

3. Of the Civil Right of Tithes: in evident and express contradistinction
from the Sacred.

Which be it what it will, (there be enough that have engaged themselves pro
and contra;) The light and brightness of the Sun remains clear in the
Firmament after a demonstration: There is fire on Earth, and so are all their
Arguments of force for a Divine Right, who claim by it; notwithstanding I
shall have showed there is enough in lower Secular Law amongst us to give right
amongst men, by which alone we enjoy all other things; These do not interfere,
but mutually assist and strengthen each other; and the sticking to the one,
must not needs be a present and sudden relinquishing, much less opposing of
the other. To this Text therefore I keep my self, not intermedling to weaken
or strengthen, or any ways to interrupt or disturb their course who move in
another higher Sphere; let us both keep to our own, and that is a point of
Prudence at least, if not of Justice and Necessity. Neither do I them, or their
higher pretensions, any wrong, direct, or consequentiall: For a man may say,
the silver Drachme was good and current Coin, and yet not disparage Solomon's
Gold of Ophir: This Candleburning by me, has light and brightness enough to
guide my pen, and yet it permits and leaves the Sun a more noble and glorious
Planet. The access of a lesser strength does not infirm a greater; nor a prop
of wood a pillar of Brass or Marble; nor yet a favorable seconding Law made
here, That the God of Heaven shall be Worshipped, disparage the Bible, or
Tables of the bosom, where the ^ame was before engraven. We have many things
in our Councels and Common Laws, which are in the Scriptures, if no more but
this, Do as thou would be done unto; which Ex hoc ^nico Praecepto satis
liquet, unicus^^e ex aequo jus esse reddendum; neque enim alio quocunqu^
j^diciali libro ^^us fuerit. Hac solu^ meminerit qui sedet in alios ju^ex,
nolle se aliam de aliis proferre sententiam, quam de se ipse latam iri
voluerit. Praefat. in Aluredi Leg. apud Lombard. Archaion. pa. 2^
has been thought Law enough for a Judge; neither does the sticking to them
There, say they are not Here, or infer a light regard of them. Who by a Lawyers
pleading, a man has broken our Law by Perjury, and is thereby guilty of high
offense, can thereby think the prohibitions of the Decalogue despised? or
because a Judge lays hold of our Country Law to punish Theft or Murder by,
can say, He vilifies the sixth or eight Commands by which a man is at Church
and in conscience forbid to steal? There may be a Subordination, and is,
between Laws and Rights, and Crimes and Things; and the laying hold upon any
of those of a lower range or series, were very ill interpreted a
discountenance, much worse an opposition of the highest. Not disparaging
therefore the higher Right, much less renouncing it, (and it was needful to
make such express protestation) relinquishing it only pro hic and nunc, by no
means disclaiming, yet least of all opposing it; I lay hold of that my Text,
The Title of Civil Right, directs and holds me to, by no means undervaluing
or giving just occasion, it may be thought I do undervalue the Golden Noble by
this, that I think I have Silver enough current Coin to pay this Debt, and our
Secular Laws will here with Us make out a Duenesse of Tithes by title
sufficient, without troubling or borrowing any thing from the higher sphere of
Divine, Natural, or Ecclesiastical.

Being thus then confined to mine own Circle, wherein I mean to keep my self
religiously without trangressing; and like there to behold little but of Right,
and Civil Right, and the Dueness of this maintenance of Religion intended. Thus
to be asserted thereby, It may not be amiss, it cannot but be very expedient
to premise sundry things of Right or Rights in general, the nature, ground,
rise, strength, and original first growth of Them all, with this intent and
purpose: That if we can find the reason of All, we may the better judge of
These: If we do find these to have the same strength and bottom to rest on,
that all others have (to wit, humane paction and the powerful word of the
severing all-giving Law, which alone incloses all from the common) in the same
with others, we may conclude, either these have enough, or none have any; for
the same Cause produces the same effect always wheresoever; and if here be the
same ground of right, there must be the same right also, why should it not? Now
to the top of that I thus propose to my self to aim at, I shall ascend as by
so many steps; by these six following Propositions, beginning at the bottom,
where all was left at first as in a wilderness of Community, and say as
follows.

OF Civil Right.
CHAP. I.
Proposition I.
BY the Law of Nature all things are Nec h^^ quidem secundum Naturam ( says S
Ambrose, speaking of the Philosophers opinion of the form of Justice, (sc.) to
use what is common as common; private as private:) Natura enim omnia omnibus in
commune profudit: Sic enim Deus generari jussit omnia, ut pastus omnibus
communis esset, and terra foret omnium quaedam comm^^is possessie. Natura
igitur jus commune generavit, usurpatio jus fecit privatum. de Offic. lib. 1.
cap. 28. tom 4. page ^1.

And, upon this ground, it seems Aquinas thought it not unlawful to re-enter
the enclosure in case of a a poor man's extreme necessity, there having been a
kind of tacit condition at the beginning, that the fences should hold but
till there were a necessity of (in part) removing them. So by that occasion All
things return again to All men. 22* Quaest. 66 Art. 7. Vtrum liceat furari
propter necessitatem? And much to the same purpose the more solid Hug^ Grot.
de jure Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 6.

And Bellarmine: Quo adusum necessarium sunt omnia communia positive, ita ut
per nullum aliud jus possit quicunque homo prohib^ri, quo minus viva^ de rebus
a Deo creatu. Atque hinc est quod in articulo necessitatis non dicitur, neque
est fur, qui ex quocunque loco accipit unde vivat. de Bonis Operibus in part.
lib. 3. cap. 11. Respons. ult.


common. No propriety ascertained or cut out to any, but all left as made in a
common heap for the common use of all men: As beasts come to the water and
drink, but ask no leave; or as Vno in loco non diu commorantur, rati gravem
esse infelici^atem diu in eodem loco haerere. Ortel. Geog. Tab 47. and vide
Magir. Geogr. p. 223. and Heylin. Microcosm p. 659.
the Hoords of Tartary which depasture and stay here and there so long as their
safety or entertainment like them; or, lastly, as some simple Indians, who not
knowing the craft of appropriations, think themselves rich enough, in that
every man has every thing: So man, in puris naturalibus (looking Natura dedit
^nicuique jus in omnia, h. c. in statu mere naturali, sive anteq^am homines
ullu pactis sese invicem obstrinxissent, unicuique licebat facere quaecunque,
and in quosc^nque licebat, and possidere, uti, frui omnibus q^ae volebat and
poterat. T. Hobb de Cive, c 1. Sect 10
beyond coalition into societies, and notwithstanding any divine law, which
approves indeed ( a posteriori) partitions made out, and strengthens them) at
first, and as God and Nature left him, is Master of Nothing; but was to take
what he had need of, and leave the rest, (a very Coenobite) and Another had as
much right as He, and He no more right then Another, but He with them, and they
with Him, were together to enjoy the Blessings of God in Common. Non Domus ulla
fores habuit, non fixus in agris
Qui regeret certis finibus arva lapis,
as the Tib. El. 1. 3.
Poet spoke, with opennesse and community enough, Ne signare quidem aut partiri
limite campum
Fas erat, in medium quaerebant, etc.
so Virg. Georg. 2 which yet Lactantius interprets only of an open Bounty;
having no more of strict import then that of another. Flumina jam lact^s, jam
flumina nect^ris ibant. l. 5. de Iustitia cap 5. page ^72
another: and the grave In Octar. Act 2.
Seneca, -- Pervium cunctis iter,
Communis usus omnium rerum fuit.
And again, and still smiling upon the Free and Erant in Saturn^ avo omnia
communia and indivisa omnibus, veluti unum cunctu patrimonium ^stet. Justin 43.
unde in Saturnalibus Bonorum communie.
Golden Age, -- Nullus in Campo sacer
Divisit agros arbiter populis lapis.
Ovid Met. lib. 1.
But by after acts came in Mine and Thine, Communemque prius, ceu lumina Solis
and Aurae,
Cautus humum longo signavit limite Mensor:
as the Sunt autem privata nulla Natura; sed aut ve^^^i ^c^upatione, ut qui
nondum in vacua v^n^rum; aut victoria, ut qui bello potiti sunt; aut l^g^,
condition^, paction^, sort; ex que sit ut ag^r Arpinas Arpinatum, Tusculanus
Tuscullanorum: similisque est privatarum possessionum descriptio* Cicero de
Offic. lib. 1.
Orator tells us accordingly, That nothing is by Nature enclosed to such or
such a one in several, but either by first seizure, as those that entered upon
what was no ones; or by Conquest, as what the Soldier got; or by Law,
Agreement, Com-promise, Lot, etc. and so is such a Field such a Man's, or such a
Farailies. Apologet. Sect. 39. page 35.
Tertullian observed of his time, Omnia apud nos indiscreta sunt praeter
uxeres, Every one had his wife to himself, but nothing else: (It were well if
our charity or goodness would enable or permit us approach to so great
happiness;) and of the new fresh inspired Christians it is written, No one
said, that Any of the things he possessed was his own, but they had all things
Common, Acts 4. 34. and (yet wanted no one any thing, for) as many as had Lands
or Possessions, sold and brought to the Apostles in bank, and distribution was
made to each (in charity or equity) as he needed.

No more then this do God or Nature entitle any to by name and singularly: Let
great Possessors look to themselves, and make much of after inducements (which
alone have lifted up their Lordships above the level;) and preserv them, and
endevor to keep them whole, and as well the whole as any part: For if the Bank
be cut anywhere, the Flood may find way thereby to run over all; if there be
but a beginning to remove the bounds and lay open the fences that have severed
Dominions anywhere, what is begun may proceed unluckily; and what has been done
by any Men, may hap to be revoked as concerning themselves, and then poor
Codrus is as rich as Craesus, and A. B. as great as any of the greatest.

But to proceed: Say I these things as a man only? (...), private and fallible?
Says not the Law the same also? Ask either of the three sister Queens; the
Canon, Civil, and our Common Laws have shared in Government, some way or other
of most part of the Christian world; and do not they speak home or homeward
this way?

The Canon first, a See Sir Th^mas Ridleys view of the Laws, par. 1. cap. 5.
Sect. 1. pa. 73.
wise piece, and a competent knowledge whereof does with us half create a
Doctorship: And set aside where it superstitiously directs about things not
needful, or lightly takes in the Errors of dark times, or politikely advances
the Pope to an Vid. Cause. 9. qu. 3. Ca. 117. Totius enim orbis Papa tenet
principatum. Gloss. partibus ad Decret. lib. 3 tit 16. Nec est qui audeat
dicere, D^mine, ^ur ita facis? gloss. continetur, ad Extrav Io. tit. 4. cap. 2.
universal indirect Vid. Extravag. de major. and obed. cap. 2. in fin. and
gloss. porro subesse. ibid.
perhaps direct) Dominion, or blasphemously tantum non, advances him to an
immense sovereignty; Dominus Deus noster Papa, is said to be in the
extravagants: In other serious and sober pieces of much gravity and great use,
and thought by many to serve very commendably toward the end it pretends to aim
at; the well regulating and ordering diverse emergent cases that may arise and
become doubtful in the Catholic Church. See then there not far from the
beginning, where we have, that Differt autem Ius natural a ^nsuetudine and
Constitutione: Nam Iure naturali, Omnia sunt communia omnibus; quod non solum
inter eos servatum creditur de quibus legitur, multitudinis autem Credentium
erat cor unum and anima una, etc. verum etiam praecedente tempore a Philosophu
traditu^ invenitur. Vnde apud Platonem illa civitas iustissime ordinata
traditur, in qua quisque proprios nes it affectus: Iure vero consuetudinis vel
constitutionis, hoc meum est, illud alterius. Vnde Aug. Tract 6. in Joan. Quo
jure defendis villas Ecclesiae? and Dec. 1. did. 8. The place is in Aug. tom.
9. p. 25.
The Law natural differs from Custom and (super-induced) constitution; for
by nature All things are common to All, which was not only observed of those
Act. 4. but formerly among the Philosophers: Whence Plato counts that City best
governed where none covets property to himself: But by the Law of usage or
agreement, This is mine, That another. And Gratian proves it by a place of
Augustine, Jure Divino, omnia sunt communia omnibus, (Jure constitutionis, Hoc
meum, illud alterius, is the title of that proof,) who speaking to those that
thought themselves wronged by deprivation for Heresy, He asks: By what right
they had their livings? of God, or Man? The one is in Scripture, the other in
royal Laws: Now whence, says he, are (your) Possessions, but by the last?
for by the Ex hoc videtur quod tantum j ure humane aliqua possideantur, ^r non
divine. With answer to an objection. Vid. Gloss. number Iure Divino. 16.
first, ( The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof:) He made rich and
poor alike, and preserves them alike: But by man's Law we say, This is my
Farm, this is my House, this is my Manebat antequam vinum inveniretur, omnibus
inconcussa libertas: Nemo sciebat a consorte natura suae obsequia servituris
exigere. Non esset hodie servitus, si ebrietas non fuisset. As if a drunken
mischance were the parent of this lasting inconvenience. Did. 35. Sect. 14. c.
Sexto die. Sect. Manebat.
Servant. And why are humane Laws the Emperors? Because by them God
distributes their own to the people. Where the gloss is full, That Possessions
are only founded in humane Laws. And the Text again, Take away Imperial
Constitutions, and who can say, This is my House, this is my Slave, this is my
Living, etc: and to the Emperors Laws forbidding Possession to
Non-conformists, some answering, what have we to do with Emperors? Nay, and
what have you to do with Possessions? Replies that Father, Quickly; for
Possessions are by These: whom if ye renounce, your possessions are therein
involved. This is full; somewhat dark is that before of Did. 1. c. Ius
natural.
Communis omnium possessio: And before that, the Gloss. Al. ad c. 1. ^maes
Leges.
gloss makes a doubt upon the speech of invading another, Nonne Jure naturali
omnia sunt Communia? How this? Is any thing another? And answers, True: as
things are Now. Whereupon the note on the gloss; Omnia sunt And though
Dominion be by Nature, at large, that all is man's: yet the distinction or
partition of Dominions, that such or such things should belong to such or such
a man, is from use or introduced civil compacts. Gloss. p^rro sub^sse. Extrav.
1. de Mayor. and Obed. c. 1. in fin.
communia Jure Naturali: as plain as can be.

This may be enough for one piece, pretending it self to be a necessary
supplementall additament to the Law Christian, or drawing out the general rules
thereof in particular expedients (as several cases require) for governing the
Christian world: Next what says Justinian? He chiefly insists on one branch,
indeed the matter of superinduced servitude, yet so as the length of his reason
duly extended, will serve also well enough to hem in all other Dominion. In
each part of his Compositions he has somewhat tending this way. In his
Institutions first, where servitude (he Lib. 1. tit. 3. sect. 2. vide etiam
Arist. Polit lib 1. cp. 3.
says) is a Constitution of the Law of Nations, whereby, against nature, men
are subject to the commands of others: (the very Syllables of F. de statu
hominum. L. libertas. And, Quod attinet ad jus civil, servi pro nullis
habentur: non tamen and jure naturali: quia quod ad ju^ natural attinet omnes
homines aequales sunt. De diversis reg. Iur. aut l. 32
Florentinus in the Pandects before) contra Naturam, id est, contra Jus
natural, cum eo jure omnes homines liberi sunt, says the Glosser there: (for
by Nature all are free) from diverse Autorities. Nor are they impertinent: for
in the next Quae res (manumissio) a jure gentium originem sumpsit: utpote cum
jure naturali omnes homines liberi nascerentur: nec esset nota manumissio, cum
servitus esset incognita: sed postquam jure gentium servitus invasit, secutum
est beneficium Manumissionis. Et cum uno communi nomine omnes homines
appellarentur, jure gentium tria hominum genera esse coeperunt; Liberi, and his
contrarium, Servi, and tertium genus, Libertini, qui desierunt esse Servi.
Instit lib. eodem tit 5.
title but one, speaking of Manumissing, This freeing from power (says he)
derived it self (only) from the Law of Nations, or agreement: for by the Law
of Nature all men were born free, neither was releasing known, since there was
no such thing as Bondage. But after that by the Law of Nations this Bondage was
brought in, then came there also along therewith possibility of Freeing. So now
of one sort of men at first. there were thus made three; Servants, Born, and
made freemen: (the very Syllables F. de Iustitia and Iur^. L Manumissiones.
of Vlpian in the Pandects again.) And tit. 8. de his qui sui vel alieni juris
sunt: Servants are in the power of their Masters, which Instit. 1. tit. 8.
Sect. 1.
power is of the Law of Nations: And Instit eod. tit. ^. Sect. 3. and vid. F.
de condict. indeb. L. Si id quod.
before, Captivity and Slavery are contrary to the Law of Nature; for by this
Law all were free from the beginning: And this continued also to the Novels:
For in that supplementall addition to all former provisions of Code, Pandects,
and Institutions, The Law of Legitimation there tells us, that Natura servum
and liberum non discrevit, sed liberam hominis fecit prolem: and a little
after; Neque enim a principio, quando natura sola fanciebat, hominis (antequam
scriptae provenirent leges) fuit quaedam differentia naturalis, atque legitimi,
sed antiquis parentibus antiqui filii mox ut procedebant, fiebant legitimi. Et
sicut in liberis natura quidem liberos fecit omnes, Bella vero servitutem
adinvenerunt: sic etiam hinc natura quidem legitimas produxit soboles, attamen
ad concupiscentiam diversio naturalis e^s im miscuit, Novell. 74. cap. 1.
Nature made all children free at first, it was war brought in Bondage: Even so
by Birth a^l were sons, and one as another at first, after-provisions made
distinctions. And endeavoring soon after to collect and bind together all
former resolutions on this great subject to be represented in our view, he both
Natura siquid^ ab initio dum fi^^orum procreationes sanciret, scripsis nondum
positis legibus, omnes similiter quidem liberos, similiter autem produxit
ingenuos. Primo namque parentibus primi filii, similiter autem legitimi a
natura ^iebant: bella vero and lites atque libidines and con cupiscentiae
causam deposuerunt ad aliud schema; serve tutem namque invenit bellum, Naturales
autem castitatis casus, etc. Novell. 89. cap. 1.
repeats this Assertion lb. cap. 9. and before. Liceat igitur (sicut
praediximus) patri si legitimam non habeat sobolem, filios restituere naturae,
and antiquae ingenuitati. Novel. 74. cap 1. and, offerre Imperatori precem, hoc
ipsum dicentem, quia vult Naturales suos filios restituere naturae and antiquae
ingenuitati, and legitimorum juri. cap. 2.
, and Phrases, to Liberty, to be a restoring to Nature. Now that what is thus
dispersed of freedom and servitude only, may be enlarged by like reason to all
Community and restraint, we are beholding to the Gloss on Bella, captivitates,
servi^utes, postliminia, manumissiones, ut sacrosancti fint hostium legati,
Regna, Dominia, Obligationes, Acceptilationes, Constitutiones, sunt juris
Gentium. Gloss. 13. Bella.
Instit. 1. tit. 2. which stretches out one place, as all other may, thus. Wars
and servitude are contrary to the Law of Nature, said the text; and what is
meant by Wars? Manumission, Restitution, Rule, Dominion, and such other things,
says Cujacius on the place: And upon the other of tit. 3.. 2. Slavery is by
the Law of Nations Gloss. Constitutio juris Gentium, a.
, therefore (he inferrs) Domination is from the same; and therefore, say I
again, not from Nature. Wherein the text also seems to bear him out (and me;)
for thus Ex hoc jure gentium introducta Bella, discretae Gentes, Regna condita,
Dominia distincta, agris termini positi, aedificia collata, commercium,
emptiones, venditiones* locationes, conductiones, obligationes institut^:
exceptis quibusdam quae a jure civili introductae sunt. F. de Iustitia and
Iure, L. 5 Nam Dominia rerum sunt de Iure Gentium, and that Text alleged for
it. Glos. generali Iuri* ad Cod. 1. tit. 22. l. Omnes cujuscu^que.
Hermogenian in the Pandects. By this Law of Nations (whereby Manumissions were
possible, as before) were Wars brought in also, Provinces distinguished,
Kingdoms erected, Dominions settled, Fields enclosed, and many such
superinducements, which Nature in her Dictates never acquainted with: the good
wisdom of Man having found them out for quiet of societies, and the great
goodness of God and religion approving these humane inventions.

Yet farther, and from the same Volumns it is observable, that of that first
universal freedom, some footsteps are by the same Emperor allowed to remain
yet not clean wiped out, and of that natural liberty of things, never yet
brought within the bondage of any accessory restraint, some evident both signs
and instances: For, Instit. 2 de rerum divisione in Princ. and F. de divisione
rerum. l. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Quaedam naturali jure sunt communia omnium, (yet in despite of any offered
enclosure) quaedam publica (id est,) popiclica, sc. omnium populorum, as the
gloss) quadam universitatis, quaedam nullius, quaedam singulorum, so and no
more. And he gives instance in Air, water, Sea, Shore: who has endeavored to
Understand, in the Empire: for some kind of appropriations of some of them has
been with us made to the King, as shall be said.
enclose and appropriate these, or not given to every man to make use of their
bounty, as his occasions should bring him to need them? The River to row, the
Haven to entertain, the Bank to Land, Theaters, Temples etc. He might have
added also Highways, which have never yet cast off their opennesse of former
freedom, or come within the bonds of my private restraints; but in all Grants
been still reserved and retain to themselves yet what they were at first, and
are, and ought to be, viae publicae, without any allowed restaint, and for
every man's use that can use them Crafty appropriations have or can no more
hedge in these and some other gifts of God and Nature, (or God by nature) then
the rich can impale to their own use the Sunbeames, or cause the same light not
to shine to their poor Neighbors comfort, as well as their own, or the
enriching rain to fall upon Their own Land, and leave the poor man's barren.

Thus the current of Justinians works: That wise Law that kept the World in
awe, durst never, never did declare against all Community. Plainly it speaks
things left at first Common, Servitude is by after-inducement; Property as
Servitude, and no such universal restraint yet; but some things remain as
free as the Wood for the Bird to come and sing on what branch she pleases, or
as the Sunbeams for which the poor man pays no rent, or dreads no quarter
day; or like the Fountain to the wearyed Passenger, he may drink what he
will, and leave the rest, and no one questions, interupts or molests him.

Come we now nearer home; and what said here our Doctor Bracton? he was a great
Civilian; and some say not only so, but such, a Doctor of the Civil Law, to
bring home (as he has) and mix many of the Effata of that more Civil Rule
with our barbarous Customs. It Is true, he makes often use of the Code and
Pandects; and that which is more, many of his Rules are borrowed verbatim from
them, and so does his Follower, and in most transcriber Fleta also; though I
will not enter much dispute of their Doctorships. They are to us a kind of
Scriptores hujusmodi apud nos, ( as these, Thornton, Britton, etc.) inter eos
quorum doctrina pro ornamentis tantum orationis, in disputationibus juris
nostri forensibus scholasticisque esse* possiut, nec authoritatem in se ferant,
vulgo censeri solent; idque non sine authoribus magnis. Quod mea sententia
(tantorum virorum pace dictum fit) non citra errorem ex incogitantia ingentem
ortum propagatumque. Tametsi enim ob vetustatem ac intervenientes quae
insequutae sunt juris mutationes admodum multiplices; authoritatem in
quamplurimis jam non praestent ejusmodi quae decisionibus, Iudiciis
Consultationibusve per se solum sufficiat, innumera nihilominus continent, quae
aut etiamnum manent integra nec omnino abrogata, (ut in materie maxim feudali,
criminali, etc) aut quae mores majorum legesque avitas mutationibus ejusmodi
priores copiofius ostendunt. Atque ita certetam authoritatem e qua Iuris
interpretatio pendeat eos habere manifesto in disputationibus forensibus
scholasticisque est agnoscendum quam Ornamento esse. Seldom. Dissect. ad Flet*
cap 1. Sect. 3. p. 454.
Oracles, and borrowing their Inspirations from where before (wherein they were
at least well studied, if not graduated,) we are not to wonder if they wrote
much the hand of that Copy according to which we see they did practice to
write. The former first in very perfect imitation, instances chiefly, as
Justinian did, in superinduced servitude, which De Rerum divisione. lib. 1.
cap. 6. Sect. 3.
he says, is by the Law of Nations, whereby against Nature, one man is subject
to another: And the like assertion he lets fall (by the way) not long Lib. eod
cap. 9. sect. 3.
after ( potestas Dominorum in servos a Jure gentium est:) with the same
enlargement to all restraints as the Civilian taught: Lib. eod. cap. 12* Sect.
4, and 5. Add whereto what a little before: Manumissiones anima juris gentium
sunt; Est autem Manumissio datio libertatis, i e, detectio secundum quosdam*
quia libertas quae est de jure naturali per jus gentium auferri non potuit,
licet per jus gentium fuerit obsuscata Iura enim naturalia sunt immutabilia. --
Item ex hoc jure introducta sunt Bella, cum ad tuitionem patriae inducuntur a
principe, uel propulsantur violentiae. Ex hoc etiam jure gentium discretae, i
e. separatae vel divisae sunt gentes, Regna condita, and dominia distincta. Et
non sunt dominia de novo inventa de jure gentium, sed ab antiquo, quia in
veteri Testamento, aliquid erat meum and aliquid tuum, and unde tunc erat
prohibitum ne furtum fieret, and etiam tunc praeceptum suit, ne quis mercenarii
sui retineret mercedem. Ex hoc etiam Iure gentium agris sunt termini positi,
aedificia sunt coliata and vicinata. -- Et generaliter jus gentium se habet
adomnes contractus, and ad alia plura, 16 cap. 5. sect. ult. Much to the mind
and words of what was before from Rome.
Some things are common, some public, some Corporations, some no ones, and
some every ones: And as by Right remaining yet Common, and according to Nature,
he instances in Water, Air, Sea, and Shore: which retain their primitive
universal freedom, and were never yet in bonds to any.

Fleta treads for the most part his steps, and it may not be pleasing to lead
the same dance over and over, or to represent as a new Show, that which has in
it nothing of variety and novelty; wherefore I only Vid. lib. 1. cap. 3. Sect.
1. and ca. 5. Sect 3. 6.
refer to him. And so for Dr Cowell late of Cambride, who professing to mould
our Laws according to the pattern of the Imperial ( Institutiones Juris
Anglicani ad methodum and seriem Institutionum imperialium compositae and
digestae, is the Title of his Book:) In the second, third, and fifth Titles of
his first Book, and first of the second, has the same parallel things, and near
words; showing indeed, that the Laws were parallels; and, which was his Plot,
in these things both alike. I may not have omitted the Student to his Doctor;
the Author is both Grave and serious, and were he in transmittatable Language,
might gain with time, and more Authority after some Centuries then he has in
present: Besides other places, He delivers himself in his Dial. 2. cap. 3.
fol. 64.
Book thus: It is to be known, for satisfying the doubt how the property of a
man's goods may be altered (as in an Out-lawry) without his consent; that, The
property of Goods (he might have said, of Lands, the reason is the same; I
believe he meant both,) be not given to the Owner by the Law of Reason, nor by
the Law of God, but by the Law of man, and is suffered by the Law of Reason,
and the Law of God so to be. For at the beginning All goods were in Common; but
after they were brought by the Law of man into certain Property, so that every
man may know his own, then were conditions assigned; and so he proceeds to
resolve his doubt, by that one condition (here) was then, that if a man were
Outlawed, he had nothing as a man not to be trusted, or an enemy etc.

Many other such plain Assertions are partly in This, and These, and partly in
other our next to Oracle-Lawyers, which joined to what before; give, if not
assurance, much probability that the truth is, and the nature of things was at
first, as I say, or else there would not have been such conspiring testimony.
Agreeing Witnesses is among the strongest of proofs, and a likely evidence
that they all speak the truth, who all speak the same; and as in neighbor
Buildings their help and assistance is mutual, and ones strength strengthens
another; so here. The grave Rules these have been, and prevailing Mistresses,
if I may so say, whose words have been obeyed to sway a good part of the past
and present Christian World: and they should not have been empty Rattles, ( Vox
and praterea nihil, as he said of the Nightingale,) mear speeches or noise that
went for nothing: The Canon for the Church, the Civil for the Empire, and our
Civil for our Monarchy; what can we look for more, or more Authorative, after
so great and honorable attestations?

Neither has the Realty of things been otherwise in existence sometimes, then
according to the matter held forth in these Rules: There have been and Are,
that have lived and Do live accordingly: persons so composing themselves that
they remain happy without enclosure or guard, home or own, and they never saw
yet reason (which they obeyed) to remove them from the benefis, (esteemed such,
with all inconveniences) that they found and had in this they still thought
their most expedient Community; some simple Indians retain it to this day;
they will not exchange their Liberty for our Wealth, nor their native, as we
count it barbarous freedom; for whatsoever we esteem better, richer, surer,
and nearer, coming unto us under the name of our magnified Civility. They have
not our advantages, so neither our inconveniences, our enriching Property, so
neither our emergent vices and troubles. Take away this, there would be no
place left for many of those we call Crimes that trouble the World, nor
temptations to others, which it might be our happiness to be free from, and
such as would perhaps go much toward the balancing of the benefit of our
Riches.

Besides, the Primitive Christians lived Thus too: We Vid. Act. 4. 34 and
compare Eus. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 16 pa. 27.
know they did; and many principles of that Religion dispose thitherward. (Mark
the just extent of my word and meaning; I do not say, Thither; but,
Thitherward, That way.) They began our religious pattern in a Glorifying God
for your professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and what follows?
(...): for the simplicity of your Communion to the Macedonions and All, 2 Cor.
9. 13.
Community, and did not build so evident certainty any where for awhile, as in
a flat Level. Give us their simple Charity, we should do the better without our
quieting boundaries, or enriching property; make us so meek, humble, gracious,
and disposed to be helpful to one another, Malebant tenui contenti vivere
cultu; as Cicero of his Aratus: quod est proprium nostrae religionis. Lactant.
de Iustitia. lib. 5. cap. 5. vid. Luc. 3. 14. Phil. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 6. 8. Heb.
13. 5.
contented with any thing, charitable to All, as they were, we should the less
miss, or perhaps not complain of any miss at all of our troublesome wealth,
nor the scale swaying to any sensible incommodity by that loss, taking in the
amends of our then from many vices and troubles most certainly freeing
Community. For, Nondum vesanos rabies nudaverat enses: Nec consanguineis fuerat
discordia nota: This at first: but after, Tum Belli rabies, and amor suc^ss^t
habendi, upon enclosures, and in Jupiters days, when Saturn was gone: Ille
malum virus serpentibus addidit attis, Praedarique Iupos jussit etc. id est,
odium and invidiam and delum insevit hominibus, Id ibid.
Covetousness would be a name, theft not in nature, wrangling Suites vanish,
fraud remove, guile be a stranger, no injuries known or possible. Those many
sprigs that shoot out of that accursed root, Amor sceleratus habendi, would not
only be lopped off, but the root it self, the disorderly affection taken away,
even to an impossibility; and with no riches, much innocence, great content,
strange quiet, a banishment of many vices, and plenty and enough to every one,
with our first primitive simplicity.

Though I confess, this was either not general, or lasted not long with those
Primitive Christians neither, for by Act. 11. 29. we have private abilities
fruitful in beneficence; and Collections for the poor, which many ways
supposes propriety, 1 Cor. 16. and 2 Cor. 8. and relief even amongst brethren
Iam enim cessarat illa communio and distributio donorum de qua dixi. Creverat
enim numerus Christianorum ad plurima millia inter quae impossibilis erat hac
communio. Cornel, a Lap. in Epist. Jacob. 1. ver. 27 pa 72.
Jam. 2. 15. 16. 1 John 3. 17.

But the meek Essenes continued so; whose precepts (many of them) hold much
correspondency with the ancient Christians, and if they were not such, or their
forefathers immediate, many have been deceived So St Ierom. expressly Catal.
Illust. virorum in Philone. pa. 102. romans 1. Eusebius. Hister. Eccles. lib. 2*
cap. 15. 16. Huic libro Philonis (de Essaeis*) Suidas titulum tribuit* de vita
Christianorum. Christophorson* annot. lb.
who thought them so. Now these trod in the steps of Justinian (...) and from
all servility at first, which they hated as unnatural and unhumane, they went
on to place in the same cause All dominion or domination. Two sorts of them
there were; The Students, and the Practiques: (I compare them in some things,
with the Secular and regular Priests; some are for Conversation, other should
be more for Meditation and Contemplation;) but both of them went together in
This same way: Take account of them of those are likelyest to enform us. Philo
an Alexandrian Natione Alexandrinus, de genere Sacerdotum. Hieron. Catalog. V^i
paulo supeperius. So in the Preface to Philo's works. p 1.
Jew, and I think Priest, tells of the In lib. de vita contemplatpa. 696.
former: That they are not served by Servants, which they account quite besides
natures intention, who made all Free: It was the greedy iniquity of some Very
pathetically described by Lactan. Fi^m Non tantum enim non part cipabant aliis
^i quibus aliq^id affluebat, sed aliena quoque rapiebant, in privatum lucrum
trahentes omnia: and quae antea in ufus hominum etiam finguli laborabant, in
paucorum domus conferebantur. Vt enim serv^tio caeteros subjugarent, inprimis
necessaria vitae subducere, and colligere caeperunt, eaque ^irmiter conclusa
servare ut beneficia caelestia facerent sua, non prop er humanitatem quae nulla
in ipsis erat, sed ut omnia cupiditatis and avaritiae instrumenta co^raderent.
Leges sibi et^am justitiae nomine munitas, iniquissimas, in justissimasque
sanxerunt, quibus rapinas and avaritiam suam contra vim multitudinis tuerentur.
Tanttum igitur authoritate, quantum viribus aut opibus, aut malitia
praevalebant. Et quoniam nullum in his justitiae vestigium fuit, cujus officia
sunt humanitas, aequitas, misericordia, jam fuperba and tumida iaenqualitate
gaudebant, altioresque se caeteris hominibus satellitum comitatu, and ferro,
and insigni vest faciebant. Hinc honores sibi, and purpuras, and fasces
invenerunt, ut securium, gladiorumque terrore subnixi, quasi jure dominorum
perculsis nec paventibus imperarent. lib. eod. cap. 6.
domineering Tyrants, who having gotten power into their hands (perhaps
entrusted) changed their rods into Swords, and turned their own Canon given for
defense against their own Subjects, and having gotten their fellows down, kept
them (by strength only of their cruel clutches) and of no more right then
force, continued the Usurpation over their subdued fellows. With them, no such
thing; for no servant, but all free; any farther then they did in love serve
one another: So the service was performed (mark, their servants then were in
lower condition then ours; slaves or worse, which made the condition seem to
soft and merciful men so unreasonable and hard) but by no Tyrannical
constraint: the younger served the elder, they took care of the younger, each
in love; and no fear, scarce awe: But every one made necessary Offices his
voluntary duty, and thus service with no commandment. This is the substance; I
stick not exactly to the words: And for the other sort, the same Author in
another Book; Servants among them (says In lib Quod omnis probus liber, p 678.
he) they have none but they do as Gal. 5. 13.
in love (as the other) serve one another. They hate dominion both as unjust
and impious, as clean contrary to Natures law, who made all men equal, not
only in name, but in reality. Joseph the son of Matthias gives the same Antiq.
I^d. lib. 18. cap. 2.
account; and Montagues Acts and Mon. cap. 7. sect. 73. etc.
others: and for the enlarging this restraint from service to any Dominion else
unlawful, as Cuiacius did, very pleasing is that the last named Hebrew Priest
lib 2. cap. 7.
recounts of them in his History of the wars of the Jews: They contemn (says
he) riches, and all things with them are common, neither is any among them
richer then other. They have a law among themselves, that whosoever will follow
their Sect (compare that of Christ with it, Luke 14. 33. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whosoever forsakes not all that he has cannot be my Disciple;) must
make his goods common to them all; for so neither any among them shall seem
abject for Poverty, nor any great for Riches; but they have fitting equal
Patrimonies as brethren. They hate Curiosity, etc. They have among them
Procurators to oversee, (the very picture of the after-Coenobite, and according
to the import of that word) and use all things among them for their common
benefit, and every one seeks the good of all (compare Phil. 2. 4. Mind not
every one his own things, but every man also the things of others:) and those
(Procurators) are chosen from among themselves by common consent. They have many
Cities, and if any of their Sect come unto them from another Patent eorum
sodalitia ^ominibus etiam advenis idem institutum servantibus. Omnibus unum est
promptua ium, unde vestitus and mensa communis sumitur, etc. Philo lib. eod.
page 679.
place, they give him any thing they have, as if he himself were owner thereof.
(Let the Catechumene communicate with his Catechist so, (...), in all things.
Gal. 6. 6.) And, in brief, they go in boldly to those whom they never saw
before, as if they were familiarly acquainted with them: And therefore when
they take a journey, they only arm themselves against thieves, carrying nothing
else for their journey. (Compare again that part of our Saviors directions to
his Commissioned and Itinerary Sanhedrin, Luke 10. 4. Carry neither purse, nor
scrip, nor shoos, and salute none: and into what house ye enter, first say,
Peace, etc. and in the same house continue eating and drinking what they bring,
etc. but more plainly to his Twelve, (heads of the Tribes, and each a
resemblance of the Hebrews Policy,) Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor
Brass in your purses, nor Scrip for your journey, nor two Coats, nor Shoos, nor
Staves, Matthew. 10. 10.) In every city one is appointed to take care of such
guests, and see they want not clothes or other necessaries, which they never
change till altogether unusefull: (yet fear no want, for they have a Wardrobe
everywhere whither they come:) Amongst themselves they nor buy nor sell, but he
that has what may pleasure another, imparts it, and so takes without leave of
him whatsover he needs. Their labor is great to maintain this expense: their
fare the same, eaten in public, and with much reverence and devout
thanksgiving: and though in all other things they are chiefly tied in obedience
to their Governors, yet in giving they may may be as open handed as they
please, save to their kindred, where they must have leave of their Supervisors.

Is not this a strange happy life! beyond rich! obscuring the glory of Caesar
and Crassus! if not what ever else is here among mortals! and like to last too,
by their perpetually supplying industry. Are they not more admirable for this,
says Philo, then for any wealth and abundance? I confess I was fain to
stretch my patience much to go on so far reciting, being like to stop many
times by the way, my affections indeed scarce suffering my intellectuals to
make their orderly paces forward; for I never saw, me think, in all my life any
thing more admirable, or so much toward the best on earth, and beyond Royal and
Imperial. And all this with little, with nothing: as the Apostle speaks, 2 C^r.
^. 10.
Having nothing, yet possessing all things. Give us, I say again, but gracious
hearts, contented and humble minds, lowly affections, and true Christian
qualifications, fearing God and hating Covetousness, and we might be soon thus
rich all, beyond the wealthy; All the poor in the world as their Lords, (and
yet they never the worse) for, (no one greedily griping any thing) every one
would shortly be Lord of all things. And to show that this may last, (if we had
but truly loving and not self-seeking hearts, such pliable and humane minds,
as men may have) the same Joseph tells us, that the same Essenes kept it from
all Antiquity, being herein, faith Godw. Antiq. Heb. lib 1. cap. 12. page 57.
another, like the Pythagoreans, who held it also in their way, and yet wanted
some good principles tending this way, that were both in the Essenes, and are
in our Religion.

Behold here this speculation reduced to act, that what I said may then be,
because it has been, and is: both heretofore and now the stage of this world
represents examples in being to every ones veiw and consideration. Neither does
this contradict the Scripture: we showed before thence some glimpses of light
rather to countenance it, but there is nothing sure that forbids Community, or
commands that Separation which breeds propriety in either page of the Old or
New Testament. For the Old first; where the Story of the Creation tells us
indeed, Genesis 1. 28, 29. Deus humano generi generaliter contulit jus in res
hujus inferioris naturae statim a mundo condito, atque iterum mundo post
diluvium reparato. Hinc factum ut statim quisque hominum ad s^o^ usus arripere
possit quod vellet, and quae consumi poterant consum^re. Gr^t. de Iure Bell.
lib. 2. cap 2 sect. 2. page 127.
The earth was made, stablished, and adorned, and the Parent of the Donation
(all that was) that God blessed Man, and bade him Multiply, and have Dominion
over the Fish of the sea, the Fowls of the air, and every thing that moves
upon the earth, with Herb bearing seed for food, and Tree bearing fruit for
meat; and Adam particularly put into Paradise: But what parted place any one
should have, or the fruit or royalty of so much ground with exclusion of
others; or that a partition should be made, One to have This, Another That,
this we read nowhere. After when things were (as it appears after) separate,
(for* Cain and Abel had their severals, Genesis 4.) and after that again
confounded by the Flood, the following restitution to former state, if we view
the renewed Gen 9. 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you,
even as the green her^ have I given you all things etc. So far from giving any
h^nt of Appropriations, that from things, so as they are here cast down in a
heap, some fetch argument for a Community: as in Bellarmine de Bonis oper. in
partic. lib. 3. c. 11. E^ certe non obscura rerum plane communionis vestigia
occurrunt in donatione illa Numinis, Genesis 9. 2. says Mr Seldom Mare Claus.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
patent of the supreme Lord, had not much more then the former, but spoke much
in the free and general language of the first donation: And if Noah's Posterity
had after any Severals, (as we know they had) they were left to divide by
humane discretion, and each to have no more then what by the Providence of God
their own wisdom could mutually asscribe to one another. Which was done, Genesis
10. (Hitherto we find no Jus Divinum what every one should have:) for the
Islands were divided, and it is showed by whom, ver. 5. and in Pelegs time the
land (which I take to be the terra firma) ver. 25. (and ver. 32.) whence he had
his name of Peleg, that is, Division. After what was in the promise to Abraham,
or Levitical Law, or execution in the Book of Joshuah, all know; but nothing to
our purpose. Come we then to the New Testament: Is there required any such
thing as this distribution, or bounds set, or appointed they should be set,
what should be whose? If it be, it is very obscure, and the lines so dim that
mark it out, that they and it are by any ordinary eye very hardly discernable.
Our Savior bids, give to the Poor, and to Caesar, and to every one his own,
and many such things, supposing Propriety, but then the Propriety was before;
He nowhere raised fence, but intimated and insinuated it should be kept. They
would once have John 6. 15.
made him a King, whereby he might have grasped dominion into his own hands in
gross, which he might have afterward given out by retaile: But this he
peremptorily (if not scornfully) refused, because John 18. 36.
his Kingdom was not of this world. The manner and course of his life we all
know, and that we must make the best of it, to advance it above Indigency. He
often complains he had not a house to put his head in, and was fain to Matthew
17. 27. Observe: And this he did that he might be able to satisfy an unjust
order: for the children were free, of whom he was: So far from countenancing
the establishing of any new Power he might seem to set up, that merely because
his quietness should not give offense ((...)) he readily submitted to the
unjust power that was. Sure his Kingdom is least of this world and worldly
Dominion As sure, his Religion rightly taught, or Power duly used, will have
no operation to hurt any Powers, if just, be they what they will: Be subject to
humane Ordinances as ye find them, is the pith of the whole; Be contented and
quiet, much of the duty of a Christian, as to the public.
create as it were a doller to pay his tribute: so little he meddled with wealth
or worldly Possessions. There was some of this very work brought unto him, an
Man, who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you, Luke 12 14. To decline what in
the same express syllables, (as it is in the Septuagint) was objected to
Moses, Exodus 2. 14. Contentus dare Praecepta generalia, quae ad res quasv^
accomodari a vole^tibus facillime possunt, singulorum negotiis me non
immiscebo. Grot. ad loc.
Inheritance in gross, which he was requested to be so charitable as to divide,
to part strife between brethren; but he would not intermeddle for that reason
which also constantly swayed with with him in his whole course, he would be no
medler, no divider of Inheritances. He did not find any fault with the thing
done, forbidding it should be put in practice by others, but rather approves of
what he found, by the just measure of his Acts and Words heeded: for, (argue
from his silence) he laid not the block of any prohibition in the way, having
just occasion; permitting there by, no doubt, other persosn, Corporations,
States, or Laws to do what they should think good, (which is enough against all
Levellers) and he approves and ratifies what they shall do for their
convenience, by the same reason for which he would not divide, for neither way
would he meddle: Nor should the Court-Christian interpose in secular Affairs,
or Religion disturb the quiet world, but leave things as they are found, and
let worldly men dispose as they will their worldly Inheritances. Considering
(in our depraved estate) the Corruption of our Nature, it can hardly be
conceived how we should do well, or frame to quiet (so many as therebe of us,
and of manifold minds and tempers) without partition, which might render it
necessary he should ( a posteriori) approve those by Laws the Community of men
shall make for quietness and stinting the Common, which he does in submitting,
and commanding to submit to the Powers that were: But that he should take the
matter into his own hands to formalize properties, or erect or give order for
any set Courts to order or dispose of them: This I believe will never be made
good from any thing He or his Apostles did, or it is said, that they either
effected, or intended, or gave any necessary command for any such thing, or so
much as that Partitions or Proprieties must be, from any leaf or line of the
Old and New Testament. They may be, as shall be said next, and these do not
contradict but confirm; but that they should and ought, this is not showed.

We see then, as to the first Propsiotion, that Propriety is not necessary,
nor was it natural: The Canon, Civil, and Common Laws found all left in a
Community: some simple Nations continue so still: the first Christians began in
a level: The Essenes held it up long with great applause, nor is any thing in
Scripture found in prohibition of continuance, if we had but gracious humility,
and true love to make us capable of so great a happiness. But yet then we are
in a wilderness: And what must we needs stay there? Nature indeed made not,
commanded not partitions, nor God (the revelation of whose will is wholly spent
at utmost in toleration.) But may not the wisdom of man proceed further by
Gods permission? though not ex vi praecepti, by force and impulsion of any
strict command, yet by taking the leave, seems given, in that it is not denied:
Questionless, yes, Humane Ratio nihil aliud est, quam in corpus humanum pars
divini Spiritus mersa. Sen. ep. 66.
Prudence is a ray from God, shining dimly in the bottom of man's earthly heart,
and has not hitherto directed all men amiss that by the light thereof have
found out any Good; their own, or that they had an own, or that an own was, or
might be. God loves man so well, that he loves every Good of man: the Good of
Society, the Good of Order, the Good of Peace, the Good of Benefit, even to
that outward Bestial part, whereof yet the divine Soul is a blessing and
sanctifying inmate. All which Goods being so nearly concerned and highly
advanced by, This is Mine, we cannot look upon our good God as carelessly
neglecting, or enviously nilling that man should reap any fruit or benefit of
that wisdom (which is also his gift) whereby he is enabled to find out any of
these Goods so much for his glory; whence, with much likelihood, arises this
second Proposition, That although God and Nature left things at large, yet

CHAP. II.
Propos. 2.
THere may be impaling Though to necessity all is still l^ose positive, yet for
Dominion, only negative, sc. that they are not actually divided, sed tamen
permissum est ut dividerentur, si id ipsi generi humano videretu expediens.
Quemadmodum cum paterfamilias moritur, and f^^ios in commune relinquit
haeredes. haereditas quidem est eis ex testamento Communis, sed negative, non
positive: Et ideo nihil prohibet, quo minus eam inter se dividant and una pars
unius, altera alterius efficiatur propria. Bellarm. de b^n. oper. in partic.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
propriety; for else much of the Good even of Good things would be lost; the
strong ('it is like) would tyrannize over the weak, the lazy partake as much
fruit of his vice, as the industrious of his dilgence; at Harvest, he that
labored should reap no more then he that loytered; and supposing the most
evidently seen corruption of our nature, that Minime autem utile hominibus
fuit quod hujusmodi habuerint in Omnia jus Commune. Nam effectus ejus juris
idem paene est, ac si nullum omnino jus extiterit. Quanquam enim quis de ^e
omni poterat dicere, Hoc meum est, Frui tamen ea non poterat propter vicinum.
qui aequali jure and aequali vi praetendebat idem esse suum. Th Hobbius de
Cive, cap. 1. Sect. 11. and vide cap. 2. Sect. 3.
which should be Every ones, (to take care of and enjoy) would be No ones: Nor
could confusion but be the fruitful mother, bringing forth many daughters
worthy her self. Besides, argue as Christians: The Law would be superfluous,
the Commandment evacuated, Thou shall not steal, Nothing; for there would be
nothing to steal, or have. No poverty, no riches, no purloyning, no restoring,
no fraud, no injury, no wrong, no right, which are all founded in Meum and
Tuum, and would be taken away even beyond the very roots, to an impossibility,
if these be taken away. No charity to Neighbors, no hospitality to Strangers,
no bounty to Friends, no more then most magnificent Christian bounty in
relieving Enemies, if etc. Yea, the exercise of all Christian and moral
virtues, that act about giving and receiving, were not only suspended, but
presently deprived of their very being. No making bags which wax not old, which
our Savior counseled: Luke 12. 33.
no collection for the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem, 1 Cor. 16.
which the Corinthians used: no laying of a good foundation for the time to
come by rich distribution, which Paul counseled; 1 Timothy 6. 17.
and he was himself superfluously careful of paying that of debt Onesimus to
Philemon; Philem. v. 18, 19.
he neither did, nor, as things were, could pay, because he, nor any body else,
had any thing to pay. A hard word for Creditors, there could be no paying of
debts: An impoverishing word for States, farewell all Tributes: The rich man's
gold Ring and costly Apparel had been nothing else but a crime, or a gracing
encroachment upon others Rights, which yet St James blames not, Iam. 2. 2.
but preferment in Religion hereby: And, the poor man an impossibility, and
empty name, a Nothing, forasmuch as poverty is by comparisons, ( felix nemo
nisi comparatus, nor yet miserable:) and this must be with the Rich, which yet
is not, nor indeed One nor Other, not Any one that has Any thing. In a word,
all Sentences, Admonitions, Exhortations, Rules, Decisions, suppositions of
Scripture everywhere could nowhere take place, unless the Community left by
God and Nature, might be ascertained and severed by the following prudent
constitutions of men, and after-Lawes; and a good part of the Book of God would
be but an empty Letter, without sentence or sense, if all those words stood
void of meaning, which do not require, but suppose appropriations. Take
together what Mr Rogers has, plain but substantial upon the 38 Article of the
Church: The Article it self, is in direct affirmation of what we say, That the
riches and goods of Christians are not common, as to the right title and
possession of them, as the Anabaptists vainly talk, though every man be bound
to distribute largely: (agreeing herein with the 65 Article of the Church of
Ireland:) upon the first position, whereof thus he: Against Community of Goods
and Riches be all those places (which are infinite) of holy Scripture that
either condemn the unlawful getting, keeping or desiring of Riches, which by If
any that is called a brothrr be a fornicator, or covetous, etc. with such eat
not, 1 Cor 5 11. Covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes
Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. Beware of Covetousness, Luke 12. 15. which is Idolatry, Col
3. 5. the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Let your Conversation be without it,
Heb. 13. 5.
Covetousnes, Let none of you suffer as a Th^ef, 1 Pet 4. 15. Servants, no
purloyners, Tit 2 10.
Theevery, With a brother extortioner eat not, Cor. 5. 11. Nor thieves, nor
covetous nor extortione^s shall inheri^e Gods Kingdom, 1 Cor 6. 12.
extortion, and the like wicked means many do attain: or do commend Blessed to
give, rather then to receive, Acts 20. 35. yea and that thing ye do to all the
Brethren throughout Macedonia, 1 These. 4. 10. If a Brother or a Sister be naked
and destitute of daily food etc. and ye give them not th^se things are
needful for the body, what profits? James 2. 15, 16. and Vide 1 Corinthians. 9*
6.
liberality, If there be any that provide not for his own, and namely those of
his own household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.
8.
f^ugality, From him that would borrow of thee turn not away, Matthew. 5. 42.
Lend, looking for nothing again, Luke 6. 35.
free and friendly lending, Let him that stole steal no more, but rather labor
that he may have to give, Ephesians. 4 28. We warned you, that if any would not
work, he should not eat, 2 These. 3. 8.
honest labor, and lawful vocations to live and These hands have ministered to
my necessities, and those that were with me, Acts 20 34. We labored day and
night, that we might not be chargeable unto any of you, 1 These 2. 9.
thrive by: All which do show that Christians are to have goods of their own.
Thus far Mr Rogers according to his Text, of which thing there was so much
regard that a little before the composition of those Articles, it was intended
to have been marked for an Heresy to be of a contrary opinion: sc. in the
intended Canon Law by virtue of some Statutes in Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. time:
where if the 32. had proceeded, as in part they did, and their conceptions
received life, and quickening power by setting to the Seal of due and lawful
Authority, it had been then Excludatur etiam ab eisdem Anabaptistis inducta
bonor^m and possessionum commun^^as, quam tanto^ere urgent, ut nemini quicquam
relinquant proprium and suum: In quo mirabiliter loquuntur, cum furta prohibere
divina s^riptura cernant, etc. Reform. Legum Eccles tit. de Haeresibu^, cap. 14
page 14.
the 14th of the heresies there to be condemned, to maintain Community. But
those Canons were only cast, not mounted, not ever yet of power to do any
Execution in this Church or State: But others have plainly, fully, and actually
In his Sermon called, The righteous Mammon, not far from the Beginning.
spoke it out both heterodox and heretical. Bishop Hall long since preached
with applause enough upon 1 Timothy 6. 17. that certain Heretics, called the Vide
Epiphan. haeres. 6^. page 506. August. ha^es. 20.
Apostolicks, before St. Austines time, in his time our Countryman August
Epist. 89. contra Pelag. and Manich. Q^ast. 4. tom. 2. page 15^. and Epist.
^06. contra Pelag. page ^85.
Pelagius (or Nam Mor aequor, pelagus; ^an apud vel juxta significat. Spelman
Council page 46. So Pelagius in Latin gives and is given by Morgan in We^sh, or,
as we would call him, ^t Sea* in English: which name is contracted and used
frequently enough at our Sea Coasts.
Morgan, for that was his true name here, because he dwelt by the Sea, at least
the name imports so much) and since diverse Separatists have maintained
Community, al-sufficiently confuted by the word of his Text, Charge the Rich.
It Is also laid to the charge of the Manichees by S. Austin Lib. de Moribus
Eccles. cap. 35. tom. 1. page 331.
of Julian the Apostate, by Gregory Orat. 1. contra Julian.
Nazianzene, of Dulcinus and Margarita among the Novatienses, by In the Life of
Clem. 5. f^l. 432.
Caranza, and the Familists and Th. Muncer cried it up strongly in Germany,
Schl. Comment. lib. 5. in Princip.
Anabaptists, all Sects, or names of hatred and aversation enough that they
would down with all Fences, remove all Boundaries, unsettle the Landmarks, and
restore all Enclosures again to their first and natural Community: which
certainly they could nor can others ever do without bringing themselves within
the compass of those (...), ungoverned men, 1 Timothy 1. 9. (...), merely cross
to lawful power, Romans 13. 2. (...), in By whom they are also styled Dreamers,
(whose great pretense of quicker reason then ordinary is scarce yet half awake)
that defile the Flesh, (and yet pretend the Spirit) sleighting not only
Dominum, but Dominium, the civil Magistrate, and the Magistracy, blaspheming
Dignities, and yet Moses did not rail at the Devil, ver. 8, 9 So notoriously
bad that as a great Mountane that is only visible at a distance Enoch the
seventh from Adam could foresee, and did fore-shew of them then: (...)
discontented men, always finding fault with their lot or portion, (be it what
it will) walking after their own lusts, or greedy covetousness, and yet
confident, that will speak any thing, etc. ver. 16.
St. Jude's phrase, that regard not Authority a rush: yea, (...), men out of
their wits, as well as out of their duty, as St. Paul to Titus That the
corrupt, self-loving, deceitful, unjust world keeps it self either safe,
honest, or quiet, refers it self chiefly to these binding, and to every man his
own bounding laws and appropriations, and, by consequent, to remove and tear
them up, can be nothing else but to betray the world to misery and unquietness,
and all the effects of, worse then Poverty, Desolation and Confusion.

Thus are we advanced two steps, and it is hoped on firm ground: that partitions
or proprieties are not of nature, yet (of much need, and by Religion) they may
be: How? is the next enquiry; and this makes way to a third Proposition, scil.
that

CHAP. III.
Proposition 3.
THat which boundeth and severeth humane Properties is humane Law: which, for
the ending of Strife, preservation of Peace, maintenance of Societies, and
bettering that we call Humane Good, the wisdom of man has found out, and the
wisdom of God in his Laws (whether divine or natural) does not disallow but
confirm, for the bettering the condition of our humane frailty, and making our
troublesome earthly life more quiet, calm, and comfortable amid all our
infirmities and tempest-breeding corruptions. This is that Chemists fire that
sets the several forms in compounded bodies on work to excite and raise
themselves up to cause division, and thereby separation, that the potential
parts may come in single out of the heap, and that which might be distinct, may
be. The fan that separates one thing from another, this from that, which were
before in the common heap; the Calamus mensurae, or mete-wand wherewith Chap. 40
Ezekiel was to measure and fit the several proportions of the Sanctuary; and
wherewith are measured out unto us every ones propriety, and limited and
proportioned: The square, rule, fence, measure that helps to cut out properties
and divide them, parts the common, and encloses it, appoints of the whole how
much every man must have, imprinting the Characters of Meum and Tuum upon the
divided parcels, and circumscribing each with Ex dom^nio ad modum jam dictum
privato introducto evenit, ut territorii seu agri, cujus usus universis pariter
erat in arando, aedificando, depascendo, arbores caedendo, fructus pe^cipiendo,
transeundo liber, proprietas ita possidenti, sive per distributionem, sive per
occupationem, privatim acquireretur, ut is liberum ejusmodi usum jure posset
impedire, nec ejus injussu al us licite uti posset. Atque ab hac origin
manavit omnium rerum proprietas seu dominium, quod sive al enatione, sive
quacunque alia cessione in al^os tran^fertur, sive possessione re^^netur, Seld.
Mare Claus. lib 1. cap. 5.
Noli me tangere, meddle not with another, others, touch not pitch least thou
be defiled, lay not a greedy and unjust hand upon another, least it burn thy
fingers. Would we have that which resembles Di^o's Thong, whereby she parted
that which was hers, from his she bought her little plat of ground of, calling
This, City; That, Country? This is it. Would we behold that Sea-banck, that
bounds the raging and impetuous Waves, speaking in the word as 'twere of an
Almighty Creator, Hither shall you come, and no further; Here shall your proud
Waves be stayed; That restrains, I mean, the raging, ravenous, impetuous,
insatiable desires of man's greedy, restless, covetous mind, telling him, He
shall have This, and no more, It is enough. He must and ought be therewith
contented. The Law, the Law does this alone, setting up every one his Hercules
Pillars, how far he shall come and no farther; His bounds that he cannot pass,
nor turn again to any of that community he has thus by his own Act excluded
himself from, and may not re-invade though he never so much desire it. Toll
Jura Imperatorum, and quis audet dicere, Mea est illa villa, aut Meus est ille
Servus, etc. as replied S. Augustine to some woe asked him, what they had to do
with Emperors? And a little after: Per Jura P^^um possidentur Possesiones, The
Laws of Kings give us our Lands: (which was worth remembering, having been laid
down at large before:) And so the Student to his Doctor: The Law of Man gives
man what is his, and therefore may regulate, and therefore may make conditions,
one of which is such as there resolvs the doubt in hand: And Mr Seldom,
speaking of Right, and Civil Right, and the particular Right of these Dues we
call Tithes, makes their strength here immediately founded in humane law. page
14. of the Preface to his History.

And this is very reasonable: for the Law is supposed every ones Act; what is
thereby impaled, Every one to have an hand in the enclosing thereof, even he
that would claim Reentry, but has hereby excluded himself from any such just
hope of: For, Reg. Iur. Can. 29.
Quod tangit omnes, ab omnibus debet approbari, and supposed so done, that what
is past in Law, is past by (...)

NOw I come to Matthew. Matthew. 28. 20.
28. 20. Lo I am with yon always to the end of the world.

Sir, I am with you always unto the end of the World; is no more then this, I
will do you good, whilst ye remain employed in my work. My Author in this
Exposition is old Jacob, no bad Interpreter, Genesis 31. 3. the Lord commanded
Jacob to return into the Land of his Fathers, and to his kindred, and for his
encouragement adds to the promise thus, I will be with thee: which Jacob in
chap. 32. 9. thus expounds, I will deal well with thee, or I will do thee good.
Jesus Christ is present with his Messengers, or deals well with them, when he
does instruct, comfort, strengthen, or protect them: and all these works he
does in his absence by his spirit, whom the Father has sent in his Name, Joh.
14. 26. Let me only (for brevity sake) instance in the work of instruction.
Christ instructed his Apostles, but not immediately; for the spirit which came
in Christ's Name, and received of his, was the Instrument, by which Jesus Christ
did the work, John 16. 13, 14, 15. When he the spirit of truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he
shall hear that shall he speak, and he will show you things things to come. He
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, Hic locus de modo praesentiae
spiritus quo se suaque nobis communicate: caeterum corpore abest. Beza in loc.
and shall show it unto you, all things that the Father has are mine:
therefore said I, he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. Christ is
now in Heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, and is present with the Saints
in Earth by the spirit, and glorious influences of grace and mercy, John 14.
16, 17, 18. This kind of presence by the spirit Beza and others understand to
be intended in Matthew. 28. 20.

REv. Rev. 2. 2.
2. 2. is now to be minded, whether it does join with the foregoing Texts, in
speaking any thing by way of Justification to your Assertion or not.

Answ. Christ could not ( say you) at so great a distance know all the works of
the Churches as mere man.

What could he not? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? What could the Prophet
Elisha know at a very great distance, what the King of Syria said in his
bedchamber? And yet cannot Christ know at a distance? He has the spirit (to
wit wisdom, power, etc.) given him without measure, John 3. 34.

And therefore can know beyond what we can conceive: And yet is not the most
high God, for his knowledge is of another, John 5. 30. I can of mine own self
do nothing; as I hear, I Judge; and my judgment is just, because I seek not
mine own will, but the will of the Father which has sent me. Though he always
knew all things necessary for the perfect discharge of his Offices; yet there
was a time when he was excluded from the knowledge of the hour and day of
judgment, Mark 13. 32. The words from the Greek are these: But of that day and
hour no one knows, neither the Angels which are in Heaven. Nor the Son,
unless the Father. Hence it is plain, that the Father only knew the day and
hour of Judgment, and that the Son himself was at that time excluded from the
knowledge of it; therefore this knowledge was not originally of himself nor
always perfect.

COl. Col. 1. 15.
1. 15. I find next in your Paper, but have already spoken to it; yet was
willing here to mention it; least you should think I had forgot it. Sir, this
Text you say, holds forth the Eternal Generation of Jesus Christ. I pray
consider it again, and by your next let me hear what part thereof it is in
which Christ's Eternal Generation may be seen.

THe next Scripture is Col. Col. 1. 16. with John 1. 3.
1. 16. To which I shall add John 1. 3. being reserved for this place.

Answ. Sir, here you harp upon two other strings, and think they sound that
alowd in your ears which you have entertained in your thoughts, to wit, that
Jesus Christ is the most high God. But pray Sir, consider whether your
Conclusion be the Echo of those Texts, or else of your own thoughts only. But
you seem to gather this Argument from the words to manifest the verity of your
thoughts.

He by whom all things were made is the most high God. But all things were made
by Jesus Christ.

Therefore Jesus Christ is the most High God.

I shall answer to your Major by distinguishing betwixt the Agent Principal
and Instrumental. That there may be in one and the same work, one Principal and
another Isntrumental Agent none will deny. But whether there were in the work
of Creation one Principal, and another Isntrumental, is a thing to be proved.
That the Father was Principal therein, and so the most high God, comes not
under debate. But whether the Son was only Instrumental in that great work of
Creation, is the Controversy, and must be the subject of our present inquiry.
I affirm, that Jesus Christ was only an Isntrumental Agent in the Creation of
the worlds.

The Reasons by which, I shall at this time guard mine assertion from suspicion
of error, are these that follow.

The first is drawn from the silence of all creatures. The book of the
Creatures, Ex Creatione agnoscitur Deus, sed non Deus pater fill. and spir. fi
quoniam vis illa efficiens quia mundus fuit creatus, pertinet ad Essentiam Dei,
non ad subsistentiam ejus personalem, Amesius.
as well as the book of the Scriptures, speak forth with open mouth, this
sacred truth that there is one first cause, and Principal Agent of all things.
Of a Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence, as Principal Agents in the work of
Creation; the whole Creation is wholly silent: Wherefore our Divines
acknowledge, that God is known from the Creation, but not God the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, because that efficient power, by which the world was created,
belongs to the Essence of God, not to his personal subsistence.

Yet by their leave, God is a Person, all actions being proper unto persons;
and therefore by their grant, the works of Creation hold forth but one Agent,
who must needs be the Principal (if not the only) Agent therein; for it is not
imaginable, that if there were then one Principal Agent, they should not all
be equally discovered by the work, being equally concerned in it: Therefore if
Christ were an Agent, he was but an instrumental one.

The Second Reason proceeds from the verdict of pure Reason. If Reason may
obtain credit, she will tell us, that there could be in the work of Creation
but one Principal Agent, because there is by nature and in way of eminency but
one God: For if there were two Principal Agents, there must be two Gods in way
of eminency, (the terms being convertible) which to affirm would be absurd, and
easily disproved. And therefore if Jesus Christ were any, he was but an
Isntrumental Agent in that work of Creation.

The Third Reason issues from the nature of Christ's being. That whole Christ is
a creature, has been already proved: yet let me add a word from Col. 1. 15.
which does immediately precede the Text now in question. Christ is there called
the image of the invisible God; and so is distinguished from God, because the
image and the thing whereof it is an image are not the same; in that nothing
can be the image of its self

Now he is called the image of the invisible God, in that God through him did
principally manifest and declare his Divine Glory, and in that the chiefest
Dominion of the creature was by the Father committed to him; in this sense man
is called the image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7.

He is also called the firstborn of every creature; whereby he is ranked among
the creatures, yet so as that he is the Head of them.

Now if whole Christ be a creature, then will it unavoidably follow, that he
was but an Instrument in the work of Creation: for God and creatures are
contradistinct, and he could not be, unless he were God, a Principal Agent.

The fourth Reason does spring from the manner of Christ's working.

1. Though he had an hand in the Creation of the world, yet was it not
originally of him, 1 Cor. 8. 6. where the Apostle does plainly show us, that
all things are of God, even the Father, and that all things are by, not of
Jesus Christ, and so the Son is distinguished from the Father in the work of
Creation; the Father being the first cause, and original of all things, and
Christ the instrument of the Father, by whom he did manifest his Divine Glory
in producing creatures.

2. Instrumentum and Minist. Ter. (...) Just. (...). Theoph. (...). Origin.
In that in the work of Creation the Scripture tells us, that God acted by him,
Ephesians. 3. 9. where it is said, That God created all things by Jesus Christ: So
in Heb. 1. 2. which openly hold forth Jesus Christ as Gods instrument in
creating the world.

He is frequently called by the Fathers the Instrument and Servant of God.

But you endeavor to strengthen your Proposition by a Reason (such as it is)
drawn from impossibility; God could (say you) make use of no instrument in the
work of Creation. But Sir, this assertion derogates from Gods All Sufficiency.
Is any thing impossible with God? Is any thing too hard for the Lord?

2. It contradicts your own testimony. I remember that in a Conference (where I
exercised both silence and patience, to the Glory of God,) since I received
your paper, you did affirm in the hearing of not few, that God might at first
have made an Angel, or some other creature, and by it have made all things.

How to reconcile one with the other is a thing unfeasible; and therefore you
must confess, that you are not always infallible: yea, that sometimes you
differ from your self; and so it is no wonder, if you disagree with others. But
what shall I take from your present judgment? Must your last words stand? If
so, then you have weakened your cause; and I may save a labor in returning an
answer to that, which follows in your paper: If the former, then you must
recant what you last said, and I must not here make an end of my Reply to your
Major. The truth is, I honor Reason so much, that I should rather prostrate my
self to its shadow and appearance, then to the best man's testimony and
assertion: wherefore I shall honor Reason so much as not to pass by without
examination that which appears in your paper, with Reasons dress on it. Your
Reason thus runs,

Now because Creation is a making of all things out of nothing, and required an
infinite power, God can make use of no Instrument: inasmuch as God cannot
derive and give an infinite power to any creature, because no creature is
capable of such a Divine Attribute, for it would make him God, to be Almighty,
or to be infinite in power.

Answ. I shall not answer to all in this Reason which seems not to be sound
doctrine, but only so far as the matter in hand requires.

1. Though it be true that Gods infinite power was manifested in the work of
Creation: yet was not the Infinity of his Power manifested fully in that, or
any other work; for he has more power then ever yet he had need to use, or
then could in any work be fully declared.

2. Your assertion plainly denies the man Christ Jesus to be God; Almighty, or
Infinite in power; for you say that God could not give or derive an infinite
power to any creature, and that a creature cannot be God, Almighty, etc. The
man Christ Jesus was a creature, how then can that Person be God?

3. The ground of your Argument is straw and stubble; For infinite power may be
manifested by them, to whom it is not communicated, and so their proper power;
As is evident in those that wrought miracles and raised the dead, in which
infinite power was manifested, and yet the instruments thereof were not in
power infinite. The like might be said of Gospel-Preachers, whom God makes his
Instruments in men's conversion, as great a work as the worlds Creation. The
same might be said of Christ in his work of our Redemption.

But enough of this.

I shall now examine your Minor, which was, That all things were made by Jesus
Christ.

This is true, Christ being excepted, of whose Creatural being I have already
spoken.

Obj. But you will say, that in John 1. 3. it is said, That all things were
made by him, and without him was nothing Made, that was Made.

Sol. The words are to be restrained to all those things which by the use of an
instrument were made and created. In the first verse of this Chapter, the
creation of Jesus Christ is included, and in this third verse he is spoken of
as the instrument of God in creating all things, and therefore is here to be
excepted. As when John the Baptist speaking of Christ, ( John 3. 32.) said,
What he has seen and heard that he testifies, and no man receives his
testimony; it is evident that John was to be excepted. Persons are sometimes
segregated from others of the same kind, in way of eminency, being chief
amongst them. Thus in Psalm. 18. 1. where it is said, that David sang that song,
when the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand
of Saul. What, was Saul none of Davide enemies? he was the chiefest, and
therefore segregated from the rest.

Thus having taken off the Charet wheels of your Argument, the Conclusion
cannot advance up by its assistance.

I Come now to Heb. Heb. 7. 3.
7. 3.

I perceive you are willing to gather from this Text the Eternity of Jesus
Christ; that Christ is here resembled, in reference to his Eternity, to
Melchisedek, without beginning of days, or end of life. Pray Sir, was
Melchisedek Eternal? If so, then he was God. But he was neither the Father, nor
the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, whatever some have conceived, I hope you will not
allow a quaternity of Persons in Unity of Essence. And therefore will allow
that the words be taken in a figurative sense. Quod non narratur ponitur quasi
non sit.
Melchisedek was without beginning of days or end of life, in that there is no
mention made either of his birth or death, in the History of Moses: or
especially in reference to his Priesthood, the time of its beginning and ending
being not certainly known. So our High Priest Jesus Christ is without beginning
of days, or end of life.

YOur next Scripture is Prove. Prove. 8. 22.
8. 22.

Answ. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of
old: I was set up from Everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was.

The meaning is this, (...), etc. Sept.
The Lord who is Possessour of Heaven and Earth, obtained or created me when he
began to work, before all his ancient works. And I was set up, or anointed to
have the dominion of all things, and that from Everlasting, that is, from the
Beginning, before the Earth was.

The Septuagint have the words thus: The Lord created me the beginning of his
ways for his works. Dominus acquisivit me principium viae suae, ante opera ex
tunc, A saeculo principatum habui a capite, ab initiis terrae. Mont.
He founded me in the Beginning before the Earth was made. Montanus thus: The
Lord obtained me the beginning of his way, before his works from thence; I had
dominion from Everlasting from the Beginning, from the beginning of the Earth.

The thirtieth verse speaks of Christ as having a being before Gods works of
old; yet so as that it was created one.

THE Scripture which follows next in your Paper, is, Zach. Zach. 13. 7.
13. 7.

Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, against the man that is my fellow, says
the Lord of Hosts.

Answ. I suppose that you would infer hence the coequality of Jesus Christ with
the Lord of Hosts, whose words those are. But doubtless when you drew up this
Conclusion, you hearkened to the sound, not the sense of our English word
Fellow, which does not always note equality, as from Psalm 45. 7. and Heb. 1.
9. you may be informed, where the Saints are called the Fellows of Christ; from
which none acquainted with Reason or Scripture will conclude their coequality
with him. Had you consulted with the Hebrew word used in the Text, you would
have been a stranger to so strange an inference. For the words translated, My
Fellow, might be rendered, My Citizen, my Neighbor, my Second, Hebraea vox
proximum aut amicum sonat qui stat e regione alterius. Et praesto est a omnia
amici officia comparatus quamobrem idem in sinu patris esse, and ad dexteram
illius sedere dicitur intercedens pro nobis. Trem. in Locum.
my Lieutenant, my Vicar, my Friend; So the Septuagint [(...)] the man, my
Citizen, or Neighbor. Tremelius, thus: [Virum proximum meum] The man my
Second, my Lieutenant, my Neighbor, my Vicar, or the like.

Tremellius and Iunius in their Marginal Notes speak thus. The Hebrew word (say
they) signifies one that is very near, or a friend, who stands over against
another, and is ready at hand for all friendly offices; wherefore the same, to
wit, Jesus Christ) is said to be in the bosom of the Father, and to sit at his
right hand, interceding for us. And so the words acquaint us with these two
things especially,

1. That Christ is the Principal object of Gods dearest affection. The man my
fellow, quem maxim amo, says Groti us, whom I most of all love.

CHAP. VI.
Proposition 6.
HHere in England, that which gives me right or title to any thing, is Lex
hujus Terrae, or Our Law. This is the Basis of all English property, and grand
Charter by which every man holds his estate with us: The Fortune Tellers, yea,
the Fortune-giver, and Maker, and Creator of all Right and Title among us,
which lets in first light of possibility of fraud, injustice, or any wrong, and
that alone gives place to the 8th Commandment, ever to take any place, Thou
shall not steal; for, where is no Law, is no transgression: if we had no right,
we could have no wrong; and in bare taking how could I be accused to steal that
which is no man's, but is now by law indeed another?

By Law here I understand that which under sundry beads has been of such force
with us: Doctor and Stud.
As the Law of Scripture first, which is not here a Law only, Dial. 1. cap 6.
but a Law of Laws; whatsoever is here done against it, is (...), as against
the Law of the Land: and farther, if any Law be made against it, that Law is a
grievance and an offense, and thereby both unlawful to obey it, and the order
it self null, as more then revocable revoked, as if it were made against the
great Charter. (Upon which ground also Dismes are here due, says id. ibid.
fol. 11
a very good Lawyer.

Then have we the Law of Rep 7. Calvin's Case. Doct. and Student. Dial. 1. cap.
5.
Reason, or Nature, or Nations, taken in likewise into our Code or Canon, so
that whatsoever is done against the same (generally received) is against Our
Law, as was said of the embraced Scriptures to us Christians; and Because it is
written in the heart, it is never changeable by no diversity of Time or Place,
and therefore against this law, Prescription, Statute or Custom may not
prevail; and if any be brought against it, they be not Prescriptions,
Statutes, nor Customs, but things void and against lustice. id cap. 2. fol. 4.
as a crocked Rule, made by a straight, to make right lines by.

As in the Empire: Omnes cujuscunque majoris vel minoris administration is
universae nostrae Reipublicae Iudices monemus, ut nullu^ rescriptum, nullam
pragmatica^ Sanctionem, nullam sacram Annotationem, quae generali Iuri, vel
utilitati publicae adversa esse videatur, in disceptationem cujuslibet l^tigii
patiantur proferri: sed generales sacras constitutiones modis omnibus non
dubitent observandas. Dat. Kal. Iul. Constantinopol. So the Emperor
Anaestasius. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 22. l. ult.


this likewise, as that, a Rule of Laws. Also that law of Reason, spun out into
certain, as it were derivative branches, which are so many sorts of that we
call positive Law; as, General: whereof the Student to the Doctor, Dial. 1.
cap. 7. as the third ground of the Law of England: or particular, whereof cap.
10, 16. Bract. lib. 1. Sect. 2.
Law Customary, Whereof the Body given by Bracton, Fleta, etc from times before.
Law Common. Vide Doct. and Stud. Dial. eod. cap. 11.
Law Statute. Cook Instit. 1 fol. 11. b.
Law Maritime, or that of Oleron, published by our Rich. 1. there, but of
English mint, though there cast and named; the English Sea Law it is made at
Oleron: The Cook ibid and Instit. 4. cap. 22. page 134, etc. of the Court of
Admiralty proceeding according to the Civil Law.
Civil Law also, as in our Courts of Admiralty, and Marshalsey, and generally
supplying Atqui interea, e locis superius ex Iure Caesareo ab Iurisconsultis
Nostratibus? Fleta utpote aucore, Bractonio, Thorntonio celeberrimis ac
Iudiclis cum primariis (quantum ad posteriores binos attiner) Praefectis, ita
allatis expressimque indicatis, atque in rerum quas tractarunt probationem and
argumenta sic adhibitis, idque velut authoritatem aut saltem rationem cogentem
prae se ferentibus, manifestum fit, Vsum qualemcunque neque cum adeo obscurum
apud Majores nostros ^o in seculo juris ejusdem, a^que illius librorum in
discussionibus nostris etiam ex jure Anglicano definiendis invaluisse. Not with
intent to submit this Kingdom to Caesar or his Laws, or relinquish our own, --
sed ut, tum ubid effct nostri Iuris praescriptum expressius ad rationem etiam
Iuris Caesarei ratione suffultam recurreretur, tum ubi Ius ntrumque consonum,
etiam Caesarei quasi firmarecur, explicareturve res verbis. Seld. ad Flet
dissert. cap. 3. Sect. 4. page 472.
the defects, and eeking out the imperfections thereof by its larger spread
body, eztending thereby to many particular either determinations or
reservations, helpful where the brevity of our shorter Rules and Maxims of
Prudence could not reach.

Lastly, the several pieces of allowed Cook on Littleton, Sect. 648. fol. 344.
and of the Jurisdiction of Courts, cap. 74 p. 321.
Canon, fitly called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws: Doctor and Student, Dial.
1. cap. 6. fol. 11.
which though ministered by Churchmen, Artic. Cleri 9 Edw. 2.
is, or was, one of the Kings arms of Justice, Cricumspecte aga^is. 13. Edw. 1.
whereby he reached out his helping power, Stat. of 24. Hen. 8. 12.
and exercised some part of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to some persons, Sr
Th. Smith de Repub. Anglican. lib. 3 cap. ult.
and in those Cases it concerned him to have both ended, and thus ended, and
accordingly was.

All these are so many Oracles of Justice, Pillars of Right, Distributioners of
property, and Umpires of strife, authorized sufficiently so to do, and to give
me any thing that they do give me, and what is so done or given is lawfully;
and if any thing be so settled upon me it is questionless And of such a Law of
Man that is consonant to the Law of God, it appears who has Right to lands
and goods, and who not: for whatsoever a man has by such ^aws of man, he has
righteously; And whatsoever is had against such laws, is unrighteously had. Dr.
and Stud. Dial. cod. cap. 4. fol. 8.
mine. And as by these, so generally by writing, or custom, by statute, or
canon, whatsoever in the true judgment of Courts, and common reception of those
that are not mistaken, is Law; That is the same pillar of property, assertour
of Rights, foundation of dominion, strength of title, and giver, maintainer,
preserver, defender, assurer, and protector of a man in that he so has: as an
oracle it tells him truly what is his, as more then a Prince he gives it him,
and makes it wrong, injury, fraud, theft, usurpation, injustice, (and these
things only possible this way) if it be taken away from him.

And for this purpose all these are equally and alike sufficiently operative.
In every Law positive well made is something of the Law of Reason, and of the
Law of God. Id. fol. 7.
There is no choice; for where all are the same, and have the like cause of
power, one must needs be as good as another.

All our law is in some sort, (derivatively, mediately, at second hand) the
voice of God approving all just pactions, and humane positive laws, and so his
stamp is upon every part; and he that resists, in any, resists the
Ordinance of God. Neither have we any other: These are the alone limitations,
banks, and boundaries, that hedge in, and hedge out, giving certain
admeasurement, as the law-word is in some case, of properties, to so very many
as there be among us, making us know our home, and giving our home, which none
but they can do in this various world. For the Divine Law immediately is of no
force; the severing by Tribes, or cutting by Joshuah's thread served but once,
unless for example, (and so I believe much use has been made of it here, more
then we are aware of or do readily understand, our Aluredus Rex ( who as all
grant made our political division) ubi cum Guthruno Dacofoedus inierat,
prudentissimum illud olim a letrone Moysi datsi secutus consilium, Angliam
primus in Satrapias, Centurias, and Decurias partitus est. Satrapiam. scyre, a
^scyran, quod partiri significat, Lominavit: Centuriam hunthreth: and Decuriam
teothung, sive tienmantale, id est, Decemvirale Colleg u^ appellavit, atque
eisdem nominibus vel hodie vocitantur. Hence our Tythingmen, etc. And a little
after: Decrevit tum po^ro Aluredus liberae ut condition is quasque in Centuriam
ascriberetur aliquam, utque in Decemvirale aliquod conjiceretur Collegium: De
minoribus negotiis Decuriones ut judicarent, ac si qua res esset dissicilior,
ad Ceuturiam deferrent: ( like the steps of Appeal, Exodus 18. 210. Deuteronomy. 1. 6
17.) Disficillimas denique and maximi momenti lites Senator and praepositus in
frequenti illo ex omni Satrapia conventu componerent. Gloss. ad Lambard.
Archaion. page 217. in vocab, Centuria. Approved by Dr. Cowell in his
Interpreter, in vocab. Hundred. And compare farther Joseph Antiq. l. 3. c. 3.
and 2 Chronicles. 25. 5. Some glimpse hereof appeared to the publishar of Sir H.
Spelmans late larger work of Tithes. page 41.
Shires, Hundreds, Tithings, etc. Coming I verily believe at first from the
pattern of Judah, Levi, Simeon and Benjamin, by exemplification:) If any man
should attempt it, he might be partial; if none, the thing not done: so that
supposing a partition needful, and some to do it, and no revelation from
heaven, (save in pattern or general rules,) we can lay hold of no other umpire
or Judge like to be fit to do it, then that voice of wisdom (implying all
men's consents) which is in the Law; the gracious goodness of God assisting the
grave wisdom of man, yea, inabling and authorizing it to set bounds hereby to
our appetites, and master our unreasonable, proud, headstrong desires; giving
lust a law, covetousness a law, the hand a law, nay, the eye a law, that it may
not so much hereafter as greedily covet what is another. This is that which
binds the Bear and shackles the wolf, lays fetters upon our wild and forest
desires, that else would make us very apt to hearken to temptation to be
preying one upon another. But this restraines our fury, and locks up the Lion
in the grate, bidding, yea forcing all to go home and be content with their
own; Sort tua contentus abi, and cast not a fruitless, sinful, greedy glance
upon the enclosure of thy neighbor.

To give instance in some particulars: From this law thus received amongst us
it is, that I am to succeed in my fathers fee: I have right to succeed, I may
claim my right; and I have wrong if I be kept out of my due and lawful
inheritance. For our Law has divided much land into such tenures, (upon
reasons of profound wisdom not discernable to every common apprehension,) that
has willed I should succeed my father, if his heir; I am his heir, nay, though
a daughter, and therefore I must and ought to succeed.

It is not so in As in the Ottoman Empire where the Timars are much the same
with our military. Benefices, obliging estates for life, upon death the State
disposes, as of our. Ecclesiastical Benefices; that falling not by
inheritance, there may be still choice of fitting men, vide. Knoll. Turk. Hist.
in his Appendix of the Turkish kingdom fol Aaaaaa: and that learned and
judicious observer, Sir Henry Blount has also the same, who was lately among
them, p. 65, 66 and before them Mr Seldom in his Titles of Honor, par. 2. c.
12. So it is also in the Great Mogols State, lately erected and supported by
them: vide Pvrch. Pilgrim l 5. Append. ad c. 6. p. 543, 544, 545. Edit. 1614.
And Scanderbeg used the same policy also in Epirus. Now all this might have
been well enough here, for the same thing has continued, and is yet well
enough in the Ecclesiastical State, nor wrong thought by the ruling
Constitution, if when the man dye, the widow and children are presently
strangers: Nay, even in some nearer parts of Christendom as to secular
succession too: for the Gloss on the Feudall Law, speaking of the old way for
life only: Et hoc adhuc obtinet secundum rigorem consuetudinis in feudo
Marchis, Ducatus, Comitatus, vel alterius regalu dignitatis ab Imperatore
datae, quoniam illud foudum finitur c^m persona acctpientu; quia hares in eo
non succedit, nisi ab Imperatore investiatur, Gloss, ad vitam, ad seud. l 1.
tit. 1. sect. 1. And 'tu true, it use in the Text. De Marchia vel Ducatu, vel
Comitatu, vel alia regali dignitate si quis investitus fuerit per beneficium ab
Imperatore, ille tantum debet habere, haeres enim non succedit ullo modo, nisi
ab Imperatore per investituram acquisierit: lib, eod. tit 14. Though perhaps it
be not strictly executed: But this, it seems, the Law.
other States, nor was it in ours if it be right feodal, where the fee was
either for Or not so long, but dum been se gesserit, at first, as an
ecclesiastical man keeps his Benefice, or as Tenants at the will of the Lord,
to be outed upon distaste, as a stipendary servant from his ten pounds a year.
For the Fee was nothing but so much land given for observance: To suppress
outrages, maintain the Lords title, and help keep the rest in awe. Take the
best anthority, Antiquissime enim tempore sic erat in dominorum potestate
connexum, ut qvando vellent, possent auferre rem in feudum a se datam,
(retained to this day in Castleguard, says the Gloss, as a General
discharges a Captain at pleasure) postea vere eo ventum est, ut per annum
tantum firmitatem haberent: deinde statutum est ut usque ad vitam Fidelu
produceret^r: (so an involved condition of Loyalty.) sed cum hoc j^re
successionis ad filios non pertineret, sic progressum est, ut ad filios
deven^ret: in quem sc. dominus hoc vellet beneficium confirmare; (so now to a
man and his son, no more:) uod hodie ita stabilitum est ut ad omnes aequaliter
filios pertineat: (not, as in Gavelkinde, divisible, which was unusual in
Fees: as Sir Henry Spelman in Gloss. p. 257. but to one and all successively,
(for so many lives he had, the father and all his sons, that All might succeed
in All:) for before only one was taken in, ad quem, etc.) Afterward (about the
year 1025) the favor was enlarged: 2. Cum vero Corradus Romam proficisceretur,
petitum est a fidelibus, qui in eius erant servitio, ut l^go ab eo premulgata
hoc etiam ad nepotes ex filio producere dignaretur: (Now Grand children taken
in; understand immediately to succeed their Grandfather, their Father dead:)
and ut frater fratri sine legitimo haerede defuncto, vel filius in beneficio
quod eorum patris fuit succedat: (now to his father immediately, so here in a
second succession a third possession secured, to a man, his son, and that sons
Brother; or to a man, his son, and that sons son: But this held not unless
the first Donee were in the line ascendant:) Sin autem unus ex fratribus a
domino foudum acceperit, eo defuncto sine legitimo harede, frater ejus in
feudum non succed it; and so goes on to regulate and limit other remoter, or
collateral successions, ending at last in, In masculis descendentibus hodie
nove jure usque in infinitum extenditur. Gerardus Niger. Feud. lib. 1. tit. 1.
By these degrees things crept up. Sr. The Ridley acknoledgeth two sorts of
Feuds, Temporal, and Perpetual: View of the Laws, par. 1. chap 4. sect. 2.
life, so long as the known Miles lived, or for his son after him, (excluding
his daughter,) though since the daughter was admitted because she might marry a
Soldier, and so both she and the son new admitted: It was not so (and the law
just while it was) but a military Benifice, as to succession, as an
Ecclesiastical. For the Lumbards, from whom the Feuds first came, or at the
least were chiefly derived from them, directing all their policy, as the
Lacedaemons did, to matters of war, had no feminine Feuds, among them; But
after by process of time, there were created as well feminine Feuds, as
masculine, etc. So goes on Sir Thomas Ridley in the same Section. And the
reason is given more explicit by P Rob^ff Qum foemina non potest ita been
defendere dominum its Bello, vel alias servire sicut vir: ergo nec feudum
habebit, cum dr^^r ob servitium: (though by custom it be in France otherwise:)
Feud. Decl. p. 3. Septimo.

The bottem of all is that of the Ruling Law: Hoc autem notandum est, quod
licet filiae ut Masculi patribus succedant, legibus tamen a successione feudi
removentur: similiter and earum filii, nisi specialiter dictum fuerit ut ad eas
pertineat, Gerardus Nig-lib, and tit. eisdem, sect. 3.

And so 'twas in the Salike law: wherein inter caeteros spectatissimus est iste
paragrophus: In terram Salicam Mulieres ne succedant: or as others more fully;
de terra vero Solica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri veniat: sed ad virilem
sexum tota terrae haereditas perveni^t: apud D. Spelman. Glossa. page 442. in
vocab. Lex Salica. The meaning whereof has been expostulated at the cost of
Armies of men, and Millions of treasure between us and FRANCE: a few lines are
not fit to interpose for umpirage, after so many and horrible contestations.




Again it is somewhat special here, that if I have a wife, and she be an
inheritrix, and I have a child by her whose life is discernable by crying, that
Lex quidem Angliae est, ut si quis uxorem baereditatem habentem duxerit, vel
aliam terram habuerit in feodo ratione maritagii vel alia causa donationis,
quod feodum habeat and liberum tenementum, si liberos^inter se habuerint ex
justis nuptiis procreatos; si ipsa praemoriatur, remanebit viro terra mulieris
tota vita ipsius viri, sive superstites fuerint liberi sive mortui, dum tamen
sonum emiserint aut clamorem, qui audiatur inter quatuor parietes, si hoc
probetur. Flet. lib. 6. cap. ult. sect 4. But this is only of the first Husband

Vid. Bracton de Except. cap. 30. sect. 7.

Littleton. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 35.

Dr. and Stud. Dial. 1. cap.7. fol. 14.


child shall give me the land, (otherwise a stranger) for term of my life, and
it is per legem Angliae, or per curialitatem Angliae, by the law or courtesy of
this place, (favoring no doubt marriage and fruitfulness) which if it were
elsewhere and common, what means Et est appel tenant per le Curtefie
D^engleterre, par^ceo que ceo est use en null auter Realm forsque tant solement
en Engleterre. Littletou. lib. 1. cap. 4, sect. 35.
says Littleton, the appropriating title, that this is done by that favor
has denomination from England? And in some places the husband shall have Dr.
and Stud. Dial. 1. cap. 10. fol. 21.
half the wives inheritance with us, he superviveing, though he have no issue,
this also giving a right by the place which is not elsewhere.

Further the widow relict here shall have the Rationabilis autem Dos est
cujuftibes mulieris de quocunque tenemento tertia pars omnium ^errarum and
reneme ntorum, quae virsuus tenuit in dominico suo, and ita in feodo quod came
inde dotare poterat die quo came desponsavit. Bracton. lib: 2. cap. 39. fect. 2.
sol. 92.

Vid. Flet. lib. 5. cap. 23. sect. 11 page 341. Glanvrll. lib. 6. cap. 1. and
cap 17. Littleton. lib. 1. cap. 5. Mag. Chart c. 7. and Chart. R Joan. apud
Matt Paris. ad ann. 1215. page 247.


third part of those lands had been her husbands ordinarily, and by the custom
in some County Dr. and Stud. Dial. 1. cap. 10. fol. 21. Littleton. lib. 1.
sect. 37.
half, and in some Town or Borough the whole for life: It is not so in Romany
non in usu fuit uxoribus dotes retribuere: ideo verbo genuino carent quo hoc
dignoscitur: and rem ipsam in Germanorum moribus miratur Tacitus, etc. Spel.
Gloss. in vocab. Doarium p. 216. col. 1
other places, and yet their wives are women. And this with that assureance
that the law allows her a known Not Brev. fol. 6. Bract. de action dotis, c.
1. sect. 2. Flet. lib. 5. cap. 25. Glanvill. lib. 6. cap. 5.
writ to recourt by, and de jure dotium, is a head enlarging into much of our
law, whereof others have little. This I take it, is in special favor of women
here, and this the best reason I have met with: and while it is so, there is as
much right in this (the like not elsewhere appearing) as there is here for any
thing in this Kingdom.

Escheates also, and strayes, Fines, and Herriots (against which some keep now
a grumbling that are worthy only their own low thoughts, as if all were too
deep their shallow capacities cannot reach, and justice folly because fools
understand not wisdom) the Landlords relieve, the Church-mans mortuary, a
quitrent, a days work, Eschuage, Faldagium est privilegiu^ erigendi and
circumagendi faldae seu ovilis per certam camporum ^xtensionem, little
stercorandi gratia, and gregis fovendi: Spelman. Gloss. In voc. Falda. p 248.
It seems a privilege the Lord had to pen upon bi^ land all the sheep fed in
his Manor.
foldage, A kind of tribute paid to the Lord as head or chief, in token of
acknowledgment of him. Chevagium dicitur recognitio in signum subjectionis and
dominii de capite suo: Et quamdiu Chevagium solverint servi, dicuntur esse sub
potestate dominorum, nee solvitur dominica potestas. Bract. lib. 1. cap. 10
sect 3.

Fugitivi esse incipiunt nisi Chevagium annuum Domino suo solverint in signum
servitutis. Flet. lib. 1 cap 7. Sect. 7.


Chevage, Atribute that Woodmongers and others, paid to the Fee-farmers of the
forest toward the ways. They were called Chemini, from the french word
Chemin, for a way. Volumus and statuimus etiam quod decima de foenis ubicunque
crescant, five in magnis pratis ^ive in parvis, ^ive in Cheminis exigantur.
Lyndewood Constit. Provinc. cap. 1. Quoniam propter. Et, pax quatuor
Chiminorum: -- and Chimini minores de Civitate in Civitatem, leg. Edvardi
Confess. cap. 12. It was four pence a year for a Cart, and a penny for a horse:
due and so limited by Chart. Forest. cap. 14. in Pultons abridg. pa, 8. and
vid. Matthew. Paris. Hist. in Charta. R. Johan. p. 250.
Chiminage, I doubt not all these are as due to those can claim then by law, as
money lent, the public tribute, the landlors half year, or any thing is out of
ones own possession; though whither other states have the like I know not, or
what is equivalent to them, we are to walk by our own rules not by theirs, and
that which here with us gives right, is enough though in other places it do
not. We may say as well as the Empire, why not? having equal power within our
selves to choose our own rules, (changing but a few necessary names:) Jus
Quiritum est proprie Romanorum, quod nulli tenent nisi Quirites id est Romani.
In quo agitur de legitimis haereditatibus, de cretionibus, de tutelis, de usuc
apionibus, quae jura apud nullum alium populum reperiuntur, sed propria sunt
Romanorum, et in eosdem solos constituta. Did. 1. cap. 12.

I might farther instance in some other, (proper rules of right for our clime)
but I fear the porch too big, (which yet if it be, may serve for other uses
then to be only here an introduction;) wherefore but to point.

Abroad the use of havens, De divisione rerum. 1. riparum. Instit. 2. tit. 1.
sect 4. Bracton lib. 1. ca. 12. sect. 6.
banks, rivers, etc. is public and unrestrained, but with us Sed publica haec
quae totius populi atiquando fuerunt, jure nostro ad regem transferantur:
quippe qui universi populi atque adeo ipsius Reipublicae personam sustinet. Qui
itaque in ripas fluminum publicorum naves hodie exonerant, vectigal Regi, aut
jus cjus habentibus solvunt. Et in flumine publico, nemo, piscatur, qui a Rege
hanc libertatem non obtinuit Cowell. Instit. Iur, Anglic. lib. 2. tit. 1. sect.
4. vide Bracton. lib 2. cap. 1. sect. 2.
the Kings, (whence he requires new impost.)

Things Instit. 2. tit. 1. sect. 47.
lost and found the finders, but our sea-wracks Cowell ib. sect. 7. Bracton de
Corona cap. 3. soct 4. fol. 120. Fleta lib. 1. c. 43 sect 2 pa. 61.
the Kings.

Treasure trove, Acquiritur dominium per inventionem, ut si Thesaurus
inveniatur, Bracton. lib. 2. cap 3. sect. 3. but to whom? Cum in nullius bonis
sit and antiquitus inventoris, nunc de jure gentium efficitur Domini Regis, Id,
d^ Coron. cap. 3. sect. 4. fol. 120. Flera, ubi supra.
the gift of fortune, meant for the finder, but with us the Kings.

That was no ones, the Quod enim nullius est id ratione naturali occupanti
conceditur, F* de acquirrerum dom. l. 3.
Takers, (as fish, foul, wild beasts, etc,) but with us again Bracton lib. 2.
cap. 1. sect. 2. and cap 24. sect 1. Fleta lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 1. Cowell
Institut. loco citat: sect 12. De feris, piscibus, avibus illud notandum est:
Qui imperium habet in terras and aquas ejus lege impedici posse aliquos, ne
feras, pisces: aves capere, and capiendo acquitere eis liceat: atque hac lege
etiam teneri exteros. Ratio est, etc. Nec obstat quod saepe in jure Romano
legimus, jure naturae aut gentium liberum esse talia animalia venari: hoc eim
verum est quamdiu nulla lex civilis intercedit; sicut lex Romana res multas
relin^uebat in illo primaevo statu, de quibus alia gentes aliud constituerunt.
Cum autem lex civilis aliud constituit a eam observari debere jus ipsum naturae
dictat: Grot. de jur. Bell. 2, 2. sect. 5.
the Kings; and so generally we are ruled by our selves: Our own law is the
measure of our own right; we have that, and that alone, but that firm, and it
is injury, and that injury alone to dispossess us of, that our own national,
home-binding Laws have settled as they have; That, is Here nothing else, right
or wrong.

Some seem to go farther, in requiring to property in the Commonwealth a right
in Religion; to have a right in Christ or none in the Creature, for whose sakes
is that question cut. out: An dominium temporale fundetur in gratia? or as
others, An gratia sit fundamentum dominii temporalis? but (besides that, the
discussion hereof moves properly in another sphere,) I believe if they be
understood aright, their desires may not be altogether irregular: for of that
Civil Right we speak of, they require and seem to have enough in Civil
determinations. To purify so the conscience in the sight of God, they may say
perhaps we must have more; our nature amended, by Christ sanctified, and by
application of him himself owned, and so only to the Pure are all things Thus
pure: But to peace and order and right among men, here the determinations of
the lower scene are enough; and he breaks humane laws that couzens or steals
what is but so settled by them; and by consequent Gods, because Man's.

It were hard to say, that, as on the one side a sanctified man should find no
more sweet in Gods blessings of the same kind then a heathen or a publican; so
on the other, that any should be so vain to think that a wicked man is thereby
an outlaw, having no faster seat in his possessions, then that a godly
neighbor may turn him our of doors to morrow, and by virtue of his share in
Christ (the heir of all things) create himself a principality in present of all
the wicked men's wealth in the world. The Indian is sure master of his own gold
and spices; the King of Spain of his Indies; and a Jew or Turk of their
several Owns; nor can the most deboist Ruffian amongst us (worse in some
regard then Turk, Spaniard, or Indian) but be so true and rightful a Master of
his own wealth, that his most hellish wickedness cannot turn him out of it in
this world, (unless his prodigality do) that he should be henceforth a thief of
his own wine or cates, or so mere an usurper that any of Gods servants may
usurp from him indeed, and rob him as the Israelites did the Egyptians in
equity and conscience. Far be this from every one has truly learned Christ so
to think or do. It Is fit every swine have his own stye, every dog be let alone
in own kennell: The grace of Christ teaches us to use our own, not censure
others; to be thankful for what we have, not covet what is other men's. There
were that it has been laid to their charge they have endeavored to subvert
those laws, to bring in the Civil, and do some such things as Stephen was
accused to say Jesus of Nazareth meant, To change the Ordinances that Moses
gave them, Acts 6. 14. and vid. Cap. 21. 21. So these, what K. Alured, St
Edward, King Edward, Henry, Elizabeth, James, and other Law-founders have with
much bounty of wisdom distributed out unto us: But if, this would have been
such a transcendent attempt both of folly and tyranny that it would have
ushered in more injury then ever the Conqueror could, who changed the Governor,
but could not the Laws, kept and was forced to keep that body entire, only he
set himself a new head at top, and would have rendered them questionless guilty
of that Crimen laesae Majestatis, or highest offense, whereof Glanvill speaks
in the very beginning of his Book, De nece vel seditione domini Regis vel
Regni, leaving little else for a foraign Enemy to do, since the taking off these
would consequentially have taken away all things. For pretend they to amend
hereby what they would, bring in the twelve Tables, the political part of the
wise Alcoran, the Partidaes of Spain, Arrests of France, or whole voluminous
bulk of Justinian and Accursius, there could have followed nothing else with us
but unsetledness of all men's estates, (which are the gift of our Law alone, and
by that alone guarded and preserved) disorder, ignorance, multiplicity,
uncertainty, and to those that had any thing the worst undoing even by law, and
that this should settle them besides their own, all they are now owners of: For
new instruments, must have a new work, a new-fashioned rule draw a new-formed
line, a new Law have a new Righteousness, and so our Fees, Socages, Burgages,
Claims, Entries, etc. would all have been put out of their old course, into
another, that new, and perhaps not consistent with our Government, perhaps, not
with our selves; and in a word, a New right, and what were then become of the
old, and All, as many as had any thing by it? Some would have stuck to this;
others to that; another parcel to neither; a fourth (only to the right) that
we had and is best because fittest, and used, loath to stay in Babylon when
they saw hopes of Sion, while in the mean time all vary, and Sion is made no
better then Babylon. No whole part can tell whither to take, and unity being
gone, thereby a new sad way paved in division, to war, poverty, ruin,
desolation, and by Anarchy extreme disorder and very confusion. Let them bear
their rebuke whosoever they be that should have attempted things so monstrously
exorbitant, and full of sin as well as injustice; All it is like would have been
hereby at stake, if not All lost: for our Law gives and preserves us All, and
the taking away this, or changing, must needs then have taken away or
endangered All: According to what a Lord Chief Justice said not long since, The
Law is the most common birthright that the Subject has for the safeguard and
defense not only of Goods, Lands, and Revenue, but of Wife and Children, body,
fame, and life, Cook Instit. 1. and Bracton before, Justitiu dat unicuique quod
suum est, lib. 1. cap. 4. All is the bequest of Justice, and the parent and
guide thereof is the Law.

And thus my Porch or preparatory Preface seems well nigh finished, raised upon
six Pillars, as I take it, of firmness enough, touching the nature, ground,
rise, growth, strength, and perfection of ours and all Civil Rights. There may
have been some mistake in tempering the mortar, disordering the materials, or
blemishing the whole by unskilful handling, but the truths howsoever seem
solid, and their use enough, chiefly in this, relating (for which they were
given) to all follows, That, if this be the nature of Civil Right, and All
men's best, and tithes have This, in any ones disturbing them, he must needs
disturb what has the common foundation, in withholding them he withholds
what is due by as good Right, as any man claims any thing by, he undermines
that which is the stay and support of his own house or wealth, and does what if
the like should be done to him, would leave him Nothing, because He destroys
that preserves and gives to him and All others Every thing. If we all rest upon
one strength, and this be it, imbarque in one bottom, stand upon one leg, and
settle upon one and the same bough, let any Englishman take heed how he meddle
with this common support, lest he infirm his own, and not be too venturous of
the strokes of his Axe, for fear of danger to himself, by cutting the bough
himself in his greatness, stands upon. He may think to pare about craftily,
and with such prudent caution and an eye to himself, weaken the whole, that
there be strength enough left to support his Own Right: But this is neither
safe nor honest: Not safe to tamper with a common foundation, to sprinkle fire
in the next thatch, that may catch home; to bore a hole at the other end of the
vessel where a neighbors wealth lies, thinking his own safe. Not honest, to
design any other men's equally Just and Due rights to be fed and preyed upon,
to increase ones own heap, by taking (or withholding) from another, or to
wish the next house pulled down, and the inhabitants turned to the Common, that
one may take as much as he needs of the spoil to multiply or strengthen the
Studds of ones own building.

That which is just and Right shall thou do, is the rule of the holy Law, This
is neither: That thy Brother may live as well as Thou, a merciful and
conscionable rule in Israel; This takes away Brother Levi's life, and leaves
him a Beggar with others plenty. A Beggar is not incapable of bounty, nor
unfurnished with a hand to take what another shall arbitrarily give: But we are
not so unacquainted with the holy Law of God, as not to know what heavy
censures are there registered against those whose oppression, covetousness, or
withholding what is due shall make beggars. Now Levi's an owner, as well as
Judah, and by the same right as Simeon or Benjamin. The same equal universal
all-giving, all-preserving Rule of Right, the Sacred common law gives Him his,
and others Theirs: It Is the pillar of the temple upon mount Mo^iah, as well as
the palace upon mount Sion, stablishes the Church-house, as well as the farm or
Cottage, and giving every one his own, gives the Tenth part out of the Nine, as
well as the Nine whereout was taken the tenth. Quod restat demonstrandum: But
first it may not be unprofitable to recapitulate, and show how one and the same
thing may drive it self through all the foregoing considerations: Take for
instance a piece of gold, or Anything, and see how those truths take place, or
in this manner have their several operations, Thus.

I. In absolute consideration it is no ones: no more property of it by God or
nature, then of the moon and stars: It Is mine, thine, his, every ones, no ones.

II, Yet it may be owned, or else much of the good of it would be lost, and the
Courteous intents even of smiling fortune rejected by a sullen neglect of her
proffered cheap favors. But,

III. Who shall make this division? I may not, nor another, nor another, nor
any Man; Therefore it is fit, the Law.

IV. Which varying, yet all have agreed in some things, and that wherein they
all agree is the best rule of partition and possession in the world.

V. But if several States have fancies and ways by themselves, not finding
what is commonly good to be best for them, they May, and their several Owns
be, what they by their select rules shall have chosen.

VI. And particularly in England, that under several forms we have agreed to
make several parts of our one Rule, the English Law. So that then the gold
above was 1. No ones: Yet 2. Might be some ones. 3. Whose, not Man, but the Law
gives it to. The Law, I say 4. Universal in the world. 5. Particular
(overruling) in any place. 6. With us, Ours.
Or cast an eye upon a piece of ground

I. That is certainly no ones by God or Nature; for show me the text or clear
reason that says it is, whose?

II. Do not all mankind know, that several men may have several rights and
interests in the selfsame house and land, and yet neither destroy the other? Is
not the interest of the Lord paramount consistent with that of the Mesne, and
his with that of the Tenant; and yet their properties and interest not at all
confounded? King Charles his answer to the Remonstrance touching HVLL. 26.
Maii, 1642. page 5.
Yet it may be enclosed, (God forbid else!) For, are all possessors usurpers?
or the word of God without meaning, that says, Enter not into the field of the
fatherless? sure, he may have a field.

III. Who has enclosed? who might? Surely, no Man. Therefore the Law.

IV. According to what Effata, or oracular determinations thereof? In the world
by the rules of the world: It Is his who has most need, who first entered, who
does possess, etc.

V. In a region who has bought, inherited, succeeded, obtained, by descent,
donation, exchange, purchase, etc. according to the forms of that Region.

VI. In Our nation, who by the just, pertinent, and impartial sentence and
application of those all-giving forms with us it is settled upon, which also
admits of some further variation: For, 1. By unquestioned maxim the whole
originally was the Kings. He was Directus Dominus totius, though the Dominium
Vtile might be transferred to others. No Alodyes left amongst us: Independency
(of all and absolute) a Monster. All the beams that shine below in the lower
world come first from the sun, and what is in private stock from the public
store. 2. Yet all is not his now pleno jure, in full possession, and round
about every ways: for he has parted with Fees, Feefarms, Serjeanties, Socages,
etc. to entrusted Lords. 3. His honors have Manors, as Chips of the great
block, whereof the Masters think they are to have some subordinate right. 4.
And those Manors also their sub-subordinate dependencies of free and
copyholders. 5. Either of which may have also their under-tenants, for term of
years, life, will, etc. 6. And these also let out the fruit to one degree
lower, him that dwells in the house, manures the land, and immediately, actually
uses and possesses what so many others have their distinct superior rights and
titles in.


Thus we see what may be by supra and substitution, how many considerations the
same thing may pass through (each of which gives a new face,) before it settle
any where: and how many things we must have consideration of, before we can
distinctly know what is whose, and what Right, and no more, any one has in any
thing. Of all which the Basis is still the Law, wherein what footing, or rather
rooting TITHES have, is our work chiefly intended, and now next to be set about.

CHAP. VII.
WHat right then have Tithes? I answer briefly, Manifold. It often comes to
pass it is so, and that one and the same thing has many firm bottoms to
settle on: Two feet for the more strength, two strings to the same bow, though
one be enough, and four better then two; for a surplusage of strength does no
way tend to weakness, nor an accumulation of titles mutually weaken or destroy:
Now at least three distinct Rights, and each strong enough are here: I. Of
Donation. II. Possession. III. Prescription.


Tithes were 1. Given. 2. Are possessed. 3. May be prescribed for.


Nothing they say is more free then gift; it is natural, that what I have is
mine own; it is strong if a long time I have had it, and All these conspire and
meet to settle Tithes where they are. 1. One limb of everybody of the Law is,
de Donationibus, and after many rules and cautions, I^em acquiritur nobis
dominium jure civili ex causa donationis.
the result is, an undoubted Right thereby. 2. What I have is mine own, it is
so, I know it, and till the contrary be evinced, the world will judge on my
behalf. Fleta lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 17.
3. Continuance of possession (just or unjust) shall create a Right. Bracton.
2. 4. 1. Cowell Institut. lib 2. tit. 7. sect. 1. Hen. 8.
He that once had title to the house I dwell in, let him come after a hundred
year possession (in my self and ancestors) I dare now join issue with him, it
is Mine and not His, because I have Kept it. These things are known enough, and
I aver they all meet here, that Tithes Were given, Are possessed, and Long
enough to create prescription; A threefold cord is not easily broken, and here
is that complication of 1. Donation sufficient. 2. Possession undoubted. 3. And
Prescription for time over and over. To which add, that each of these pillars
has also another strong stay by, to support the weight laid on it: Donation is
bettered by Confirmation: Possession secured by him in whose right the
possession is; Dedimus Deo was the form of grant, and is the ground so claim:
Prescription is lengthened through more then half twenty times over so much as
would simply serve the turn: And if these things be so, and they are, and all,
and known, by the Law, be this supposed, and me thinks we may sing victoria
almost already.

But they remain to be proved; by Gods blessing they shall: There is neither of
them but lies clear in view to those are acquainted in those regions of
knowledge (whether of Books or Experience) where a likely information of any of
them is to be looked for; and I shall yet add one thing more as a Coronis at
top, the opinion of the Learned in their own profession. One single self may
have been deceived not inexcusably; It Is hard for a stander by to be acquainted
in all the rooms of a neighbors house; some sparks of true light have sometimes
(by their not right use) but led private men to Error; But as witnesses
produced go for proof usually, and their agreement strengthens their testimony,
and a conspiration of them professing to know, is the fairest of all
presumptions against mistake.

If therefore the Lawyers themselves have apprehended thus with me, if they
have combined and conjoined to say so, if there have bin that combination and
consent that they All have said so, and till within these few years no One
would have been Fee'd to the contrary; nor, if he understands himself, will
yet: from All these I shall not doubt to infer a strength of presumption, that
what men have said, the learned have said, the Lawyers have said, and All of
them both have and do, (no one to be hired to the contrary, whereas they come
in gratis on the other part,) has much more then likelihood that it may be
true which they aver, and for their assertion sake. From whence may we expect
Credibility, if not from the voice of men, of All men, and they agreeing, and
the Seers themselves giving their vote? In ore duorum vel trium stabit omne
verbum, says the Divine Law, 2 Cor. 13. 1. Number. 35. 30. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. cap. 19.
15. Mat. 18. 16. John 8. 17. Heb. 10. 28. How much more, In assensu and
consensu omnium and singulorum? That is a bad case which admits no plea, that
no one will be hired to undertake, or can color for, that neither has
substance nor show. If therefore the grave and learned Judges (the Oracles of
the Law) have gone this way, if the other reverend Sages (I comprehend all
graduated professors) take in along with them, if it be the painful knowledge
of the Student, the costly knowledge of the Countryman, the experienced
knowledge of most men, the general allowance of All men; Doubtless that must be
so which one says, and another says, and a third says, and a fourth says, and
every body says is so; and most likely when the professing too, know, join in,
and say so likewise.

We have made room enough, a large field to expatiate in: God be our guide, as
Truth our aim, and success but as the righteousness of our Cause shall deserve
for us: The first part of the plea was Donation: Which, because it is like to
be large, the fast Corner stone whereupon to settle the chiefest of what
follows, something would be said what it is, who may give, what, to whom, etc.
It may not be safe to go on of our own heads. Here therefore again for the help
of the Sages,

Donation then (says Est autem Donatio quaedam insti^u^io quae ex mera
l^^eralitate, and voluntate, nullo jure cogente, procedit, ut rem transfer at
ad alium. De acquir, rerum dom, cap. 2. sect. 2. fol. 11.
Bracton) is a certain Institution that proceeds from mere bounty and will, no
law forcing, to transferr a thing to another. Or, To give, (says Dare autem est
rem accipientis facere cum effectu. Flot. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect 1.
Fleta) is to make any thing his that receives it. But Et est proprie don^tio
alienatio rei quae liberalitatis causa fit, hac mente, ut nullo casu
recipiatur. Parotit-ad F. de donationibus.
Cuiacius lately thinks he has hit it better then both, making it Properly the
free alienation of any thing, with this mind that it shall not revert to the
Donor. The first of these may leave a rub in the way to hinder that we would by
no means oppose in all this Tract, the free progress of that opinion, that
Tithes are due Jure Divino: As if they be, how can we say they were Given in
the sense there, ex mera liberalitate, nullo jure cogente: Or if the Donari
videtur quod nullo jure cogente conceditur. F. de diversis reg. II 82.
Divine law did enforce, then how are they in this sense clearly given? I
answer, well enough; as well as a man may give that which God had said before
he should give; or do that freely, which the scripture yet irreversibly
commands he should do: Give an Alms to a poor man, says the Scripture: which
man does of himself, (the rather for that command) freely, and yet the divine
Law was enforce, and obeyed, to part with that a man was not bound to part with.

Give the seventh part of thy time, says the fourth Commandment; yet 'twas a
voluntary Quarto decimo statuitur loco, ut Dominicus d es legitima veneratione
a cunctis celebretur, sitque Divino tantum cultui dedicatus; -- Omissisque
exterioribus negotiis, atque secularium conventibus, atque it^neribus: nisi
inexcusabilis quaelibet causa urgeat, religiosae conversationis ac been vivendi
normulam de sacrae scripturae eloquiis subjectis famulis praedicando insinuene.
Sed and hoc quoque dece^nitur quod eo die sive per alias festivitates majores,
populus per Sacerdotes Dei ad ecclesiam saepius inv^tatus, ad audiendum verbum
Dei conveniat, missarumque sacramentis, ac doctrinae sermonibus frequentius
adsit. Council. Cloves. an Chr. 747. cap. 14. apud D. S^elman, council Britan.
page 2^9 Die dominico nihil aliud agendum est, nisi Deo vacandum, in hymnis and
psalmis and canticis spiritalibus. Excerpt. Egbert. 104. circa an. Chr 750. th
page 268. And for the forbearing of working, hunting, mercating, impleading,
etc. are other fuller Laws: How the master should be punished, how the servant,
etc. which by degrees brought off men from their accustomed common employments.
vid. L. Inae Regni 3. circa ann 710. in Lambard. Archaion. pa 1. and Spel n
Council. p 183. Council. Bergamsted. ad ann. 697. can. 10, 11, 12 ib. page 195.
Excerp. Egbert. 36. page 262. Foedus Edvardi and Gutharin regum. cap. 7 and 9.
apud Lambard. Arch. page 43. agreeing with those under the title of, Leges
Eccles. ab Alured and Guth. R. L. latae cap 10, 11. apud Spelm. page 3^7. L
Ecclesiast. Ae^helstani R. circa an. 928. cap. 6. ib. page 400. Constit. Odonis
circa ann 943. cap. 9. ib. page 417. Leg. Eccles. Edgari R. ad an. 967. cap. 5.
ib. page 445. and cap. 6. page 446. Canones dati sub Edgar. cap. 19. ib. page
4^0. Council. Aenham. circa ann. 1009. K. 30. L. Eccles. Canuti R. circa ann.
1032 cap. 14, 15 apud Lambard. page 103. L. Eccles. Canuti, cap 14 and
Capitulare inversi temporis and authoris: cap. 14. in Spelman. page 600.

All which things and the re-inforcement of so many, do show how hardly men
were drawn off their own ways: what need the Commandment of God has of the
abetting law of man that it may take place; and how clearly and fully that may
be after given by man, which God appointed to be given: And this, it is like, a
that alone, which gave the due Sabbath day to God here with us.


Act of our State, that in obedience to that command, but freely in it self,
set aside this part here with us; They might, or they might not, else they had
not been free: but now, besides the fourth Command: it is secondly due to
humane Justice (appointing it,) to have the Sabbath sanctified: So, Give the
Lord the Tenth with a good eye, is interpreted to us the heavenly Oracle; yet
when the believers came to obey, they did it freely, which they might not have
done: Nullo jure cogente, that is, none of the same sort, none on the same
floor, no humane lower positive law having set aside any thing, or commanded,
though the higher Divine law had bound it to be more then expedient, which yet
might not have been obeyed. The sum is, God may have said, the Tenth should
be paid, Man have not obeyed; but he did, and gave by the persuasive influence
of Divine command, that which was his own, and he was bound by no humane Law
before to have given: and so here is a a commanded, obeyed, and yet free and
voluntary Donation.

But, to go on, Donation, which was as before, is divided into Donationum alia
simplex and pura, sc. quae nullo jure civili vel naturali cogente, nullo
pretio, metu, vel vi interveniente, ex mera and gratuita liberalitate donantis,
procedit: Item alia fit ob causam, vbi sc. causa interponitur, ut aliquid fiat
vel non fiat, etc. Et hoc genus donationis improprie dicitur donat^o^ Bract.
lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 3.
free, absolute, illimited, and merely voluntary, or sub modo, under limitation
or Condition, as, Do ut des, or Do ut faciat, etc. Now although this be in it
self more avoidable, as letting out into more ways of evasion, yet if the thing
conditioned be of evident necessity, as, I give that thou should preserve
this man from starving, to do such a thing necessary in public, or for the
service of God, which is most necessary, or the like; Now in this case the
necessity of performance mounts up with the needfulness of the thing depending,
for it is more expedient that such necessary things in themselves should not be
left undone, then any ones simple, declared, single will thrung in to take
place, which yet in Justice ought, though in this necessity (comparatively) it
ought not.

Further, who may give? and it is answered, All, that are under no prohibition:
As, are Dare autem non poterunt illi, qui generalem rerum sua^u^ non habent
administrationem, sicut sunt minores, incarcera^, surdi and muti, and
naturaliter furiosi, etc. Fleta. Job. 3. cap. 3. sect. 10.
those that have no power of themselves, as Pupils, who are like to make their
condition Vid. Bract. de acquirend. rerum dom. fol. 12.
worse, (though they may contract to benefit, though not to loss;) and for this
reason the Church also, Vice autem minoris fungitur Ecclesia Dei: id. ib. and
fo. 32. and Cook Instis. 1. fol 34 sect. 644. Agreeing with the like favor of
the Civil law.
which is always as a Minor: likewise the deaf and dumb, etc. nor the Idem
dicendum erit in rectoribus Ecclesiarum qui nihil possident nisi nomine
Ecclesiae suae, unde nihil dare possunt, alienare vel permutare, nisi de
consensu episcopi vel patroni, nisi inde melioretur conditio Ecclesiae: Si
autem deterioretur non valet, quia sit eis donatio secundario, sicut maxim
patet in ipsa dedicatione, and etiam post dedicationem, Do Deo and Ecclesiae
tali, etc. Bracton, ubi supra.
person of a Church, because he is in possession, but in right of his Church,
and so has nothing to give, for what he has was given Deo and Ecclesiae, who
are the proprietaries, he but the usu-fructuary, and so cannot dispose of
another.

For, to whom; Flet. lib. 3. c. 4. sect. 1. page 179. Bracton. ubi supra.
To any one: Bond or free, Minor, or of full age, Jew or Christian, But not to
a wife, not Quibus dare inhibetur: Fleta lib. eod cap. 5. and Magn. Chart. c.
36.
to the Church in Mort-maine, except by license, (for every thing is to be kept
within its due bounds; and a proportionable equality is like to be the Mother
of longest duration: A monstrous growth tends to the sooner ruin, of it self
or the whole; and therefore in its favor it is provided, the Church may not
spread too big, lest pondere pressa suo, it fall with its own unweildiness.

Lastly, What may be given? what is Corporal or in visible, a possession or a
right, a whole or a part, but not what is Nullius autem sunt res sacrae and
religiosae and sanctae. Quod enim divini juris est, id nullius in bonis est.
Instit. 2. de rerum divisione. sect 7. F. ^ib. 1. tit. 8. lib 2. sect. sacrae.
Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 12. sect. 8. Extra patrimonium vero res sacrae and
Communes: Fet. lib. 3. cap. 1. sect. 3.
no ones, as is every thing sacred: This is supposed out of every ones reach;
it is no bodies (on earth) and so none can lay Item donari non poterit res quae
possideri non potest, sicut res sacra vel religiosa vel quasi qualis est res
fisci: Bracton fol. 14
hand of it to give it forth to another.

CHAP. VIII.
THese things may seem needful to have been pre-considered of gifts, to the
intent what follows may not seem to have crossed the general Doctrine. Among
particular instances whereof to our purpose, A little before the year after
Christ, 600.
begin first with the head, that which was to Augustine, or in that Augustines
time whom some love to call the Apostle of the English men: who found most of
this English part of the Isle as Barbarous, as the whole is like to be when
covetous men may save this expense. We censure not what the grace or power of
God can do, but in likelihood what he will. Miracles are not to be multiplied
without cause, nor he to be put out of his ordinary course of By-causes;
according to which we are likewise to expect and judge that will be, in humane
probability is by them Like to be. He then found here the land dark as Sodom,
the souls of men overspread with Atheism and Idolatry, and no truth or
knowledge of God, which he divulged successfully, and took care, (or the blessed
Providence of God brought to pass) that the Vine and the Elm were planted and
have grown comfortably together, Christian Religion and this acknowledged good
support thereof being by one and the same Hand here planted and rooted; and as
they were born, and have lived, if any be, God grant as Twins they be not taken
away together also.

But whence does this appear? we should gladly have taken it up from Bid or
Malmsbury, or any other creditable story, but we have it from what was more
authentic, the most substantial credit of a solemn law: By all men's leave,
This shall be more creditable then any private Man's words; what is planted and
shining in any public past law, being less subject to forgery and subornation
then any single simple man's Testimony whatsoever. In King Edward the Confessors
Laws then thus we find.

Of all De omni annona, etc. The Latin is after transcribed, pa. 79.
Corn the Tenth sheaf is due unto God, and so to be paid. And if any keep
Mares, the Tenth Colt; but if he have but one or two, so many pence. So if any
keep kine, the Tenth Calf; or if one or two, so many half pence. He that makes
Cheeses, the Tenth; or if not, the Tenth days milk. In like manner, Lamb,
Wool, Sheep, Butter, Pigs, of all the Tenth. The tenth also of the commodity
of Bees, and of Wood, Meadow, Waters, Mils, Parks, Ponds, etc. the Tenth to him
that gives both Nine and the Tenth. He that detaineth, let him be forced by
public Justice, (so I interpret that called there the Kings and the Bishops,
because their powers were then represented together to confirm both ways,
Civilly and Ecclesiastically:) for so preached and taught blessed Augustine,
and so was granted by the King, the Lords, and the People.

Thus far that solemn Law, the authority of whose testimony we shall Vid. pa
90, 91, etc.
hereafter more fully set forth, when, for the sake thereof, we shall show the
whole collection to be one of the ancientest pieces of the Common law, so often
called for by the people, confirmed by the King, and entered into the Coronation
Oath, etc. In the mean while, by all the credit this testimony can give,
Augustine preached Tithes, the People believed, the King and Parliament
granted; for what can be less meant by, Concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus, and
Populo? and under the specification of Colt, Lambs, Fleece, Corn, Milk, Honey,
and most particulars claimed.

Let no man take advantage, by thinking me so unadvised as to suppose
Parliaments so early under that name, which I know came in long after, and
whatsoever should carry that title applied in strictness to any thing beyond a
good way in the Norman times, I should suspect it for Counterfeit: but that
Public meeting which had the power and vote of the Land, consisting of the
Head and its subordinate Members, call it Senate, Gemote, Court, Council, or
whatsoever else, the Collection and Congregation of the Land granted this.

Object. I know well what may be said to the contrary: as that Bid who lived
soon after, and reports that story of Conversion at large, Vid. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 26. in fiu. and cap. 27. Interog. 1.
and is most authentic for those times and the following, says nothing of any
such thing: not when he had just occasion so to do: for he speaks both of
Augustines entertainment ( a few lands) and his sending back to Rome about
Church-maintenance in general, and how it should be divided, but not a word of
TITHES.

Whereunto I answer, True this: but, what then?

Answ. 1. Negative testimonies are the weakest of proofs, upon the matter no
proof at all; as silent witnesses that say nothing.

If Bid had said any thing we should have much listened, and that whether he
had spoke against or for us; but saying nothing he is but a mute, and no more
to be regarded strictly, then he that is called, comes in, and is silent.

2. As to his yet mentioning other things near, the time of both was but when
yet things were raw: when he had not preached, nor the people believed, or in
reward settled what they may have afterward. Time does much, nothing is begun
and perfected at once; the story is plain, the questions sent to Rome, of which
we have account, were, the first return of Austines success: and petition for
supply of Council thence, and so might prevent what was after done, and it be
too soon there to mention what was not till after, granted.

3. And the first of those questions was only of oblations, as a part, and
whereof might be the greatest doubt, not exclusive of other things.

4. Neither were those oblations all that was, positively: for Austine had then
other things, and so that expression not so full and comprehensive as to infer
any thing from it as complete. For the King had given him Dedit ergo eis
mansionem in Civitate Dorovernenst (quae imperii sui totius erat Metropolis)
Eisque ut promiserat, cum administratione victus temporalis licentiam quoque
praedicandi non abstulit. cap. 25.
good intertainment at first, (no doubt continued) and Nee distulit quin ipsis
suis doctor bu^ locum sedis eorum gradui congruum, in Dorovernia Metropoli sua
donaret, simul and necessarias in diversis speciebus possessiones conserret,
id. cap. 26.
afterward, befitting his degree, as one to whom he had entrusted his soul,
another place Donatusque a Regeurbe regia Cantuaria in Episcopalem fedem, and
aula Regia in Ecclesiam Cathedralem Christo erigendam: sic ut aemulari Rex
videtur quod ab Imperatore Constantino Magno factum perhibent. Vita sancti
August. apud D. Spelman. Council. p. 91.
I think his own palace in Canterbury, with needful accommodations of several
sorts. What those Necessariae in diversis speciebus possessiones, were, I know
not: I believe they could not be comprehended within the oblations in the
question mentioned, and so that not comprehensive of all was allowed.

5. It Is yet liker they were Tithes, in specie, for King Alured seems to have
borrowed such a law from this King. My reason is, because when after he
composed a body, with a preface as from Leviticus, whereof one branch is for
Tithes, he says of the whole, that he thought it Has ego Aluredus Rex
sanctiones in unum Collegi, atque easdem literis mandavi, quarum bonam certe
partem majures nostri Rel^giose coluerunt, multa etiam etc. Ac quoniam
temeritatis videatur exsuis ipsius decretis quenquam plura literarum monumentis
consignare, tum etiam incertum sit qualem apud posteros habitura sint fidem
quae nos magni facimus, quaecunque in Actis Inae gentilis Mei, Offae Merciorum
regis, vel Etheiberti, (qui primus Anglorum sacro tinctus est baptismate)
observatu digna deprehendi, ca collegi omnia, reliqua plane omisi: Lamb. Arch.
p 22. Spelm. Council. p. 363.
too great presumption for him to attempt any such thing first anew, and
therefore he modestly borrowed, with the advice of his Council, from his
Ancestors Ina, Offa, and this Ethelbert, Qui primus Anglorum sacro tinctus est
Baptismate, the first of Christians. Now for Ina we are sure enough of him, by
the laws extant, he had none such; if Offa had, then either this was that
Alfred related to, or it was not. If it were, then has Offa's Law much
confirmation in this of Alfred: If it were not, there could be no other to
relate to, but this of Ethelbert.

6. Yet more likely, for that before Any other Act passed (this of Offa or any
other, that we read of) here were tithes said to be paid: For In an Epistle to
Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, de corrigendis vitiis Anglorum, about the
year 745. id page 240.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, blames the then Clergy here for neglecting their
Cures, yet Lac and lanam ovium Christi oblationibus cotidianis ac decimis
fidelium accipiunt. Now he lived about the year 745. and before Offa, or any
other Act we read of but that of Ethelbert.

This sure: we have here a plain affirmation, in a clear law, and so not rashly
to be left for any private conjectures, or blind presumptions, and that in
such a place, that, save in Domus-Dei book, or a few other, we might not look
for more authentic from the tendryes of that age. Some credit uses to be given
to places; we least suspect forgery in a Church-window, or Palace-Inscription;
and an historical truth shall never shine with that evidence, light and
credibility to my soul from Tacitus or Tranquillus, as casually let fall or
engraven in the face of a Roman-law, or publikly inscribed in the commanding
Pandects or Novells. Especially since, here was said to be a consent of King and
people: which last if they had not consented, here would have been work
enough: every simple man would have been a single accuser, and every neighbor
at hand a ready witness: Kings Acts may have many eyes upon them; but to father
any thing upon the people undone or untrue, were to create a Commonalty of
enemies at once, every one with his accusation ready to clamor loud enough
against the forgery.

We will say then, Austine preached tithes; and the King, Barons, and people
believed, and obeyed and conferred them: And observe thereon, their date began
with the Bibles entertainment; tything and preaching went together at the
first, from the first and always. It Is uncourteous to part old friends, hard
to slope the skin from the flesh, dangerous what has long gone and grown
together. Accustomed food proves lightly wholsomest, they that change for
better often fall sick of their remedy, and to be weaned from that an aged man
has been accustomed to, and found wholesome from infancy, cannot but create
much danger to the body by change, if not utter dissolution. Which it is easy
to apply here; and since, minister to Christ, and live by Tithes, are so
intwined together among us as they are, and always have been, God grant the
event extend not beyond good men's desires, intents, doubts, or fears, that the
whole frame of the long continued Church, sink and fail, upon stirring (if
they should be stirred) this united and near co-incorporate pillar that has
hitherto outwardly sustained it. If it be charge or trouble, it may be born by
the experience of a thousand years: If men love their ease now, so they did
heretofore: If they are now wise, they were not then altogether destitute of
wisdom: Lay together, that the clear policy of the Old Testament went thus all
along, the general practice of the New Testament has been according; Here
with us ever since the bright shine of the Gospel dispelled heathenish
darkness, and from the very daybreak of Christianity to this instant, it has
been judged best, and is; what new plots would do is uncertain, and may have
the accompanying danger of experiment upon sick or sound bodies to disturb what
is strong, or ruin what is decaying.

CHAP. IX.
BUt to proceed: and in what follows we may perhaps light on more clearness and
particularity: At the darkness of this remote distance we may not look to see
every Mote, but as things draw nearer, so shall we see clearer. This of
Augustines time may have been only in Kent, for there he settled and Chiefly
lived; the next will look to the cold Climate, and in the next Missive, (which
was about 200 years after,) see what took effect more Northernly: sc. The
account of these meetings in these and more circumstances is returned in an
Epistle to Rome about the year 786. when the things were done by one of the
Commissioners, and published by Illyricus in his Centuries: Vid. Cent. 8. cap
9. col. 316. edit. 1624.
In an Embassage directed to Offa King of Mercenland, and Aelfwald K. of
Northumberland with their Archbishops, where the Commissioners were Gregory
bishop of Ostia, Theophylact of Todi (in Italy both) and they came first to
Offa, (it seems because nearest) and he, (because the business might concern
him) sent and called to council Kenwolfe, (or Kynewlfe) King of the West
Saxons. There the work was distributed: Theophylact stays about Mercenland and
Wales; Gregory and his assistants go to Aelfwald (or Osward King of
Northumberland and Eanbal his Archbishop, where a Parliament was summoned, or
that which had the nature thereof, a meeting of both States, ( Convenerunt
omnes principes regionis tam Ecclesiastici quam seculares,) and the 17 of their
decisions this; Decimum Septimum caput: Ib. col. 320.
de decimis dandis sicut in lege scriptum est: of settling tithes according to
the Law. Decimam partem ex omnibus frugibus tuis, seu primitiis deferas in
domum Domini Dei tui. Rursum per prophetam: Adserte inquit, omnem decimam, etc.
ib.
The tenth part of all thy fruit, or thy first fruits thou shall bring into the
house of the Lord. And again by the prophet, Bring all the tithes into my barn,
that there may be meat in my house, and prove me in this, if I will not open
the windows of Heaven, and pour out blessing abundantly: and I will rebuke the
Devourer for your sakes that destroys the fruit of your land, and there shall
not be a vine barren in your field; the Lord says it. As the wise man speaks,
no man can give his own alms of his own, unless he first separate to the Lord
what from the beginning he has required to be his. And hence often it comes
that he that will not give the tenth, is reduced to the tenth. Whence with all
earnestness we command, that All study to give the tenth of all they possess,
because it is the Lords peculiar, (or reserve) and live of the nine, and be
bountiful as they can.

This was proposed in the Assembly, and besides the King and Clergy, confirmed
with the assent and subcription of all the Elders, Captains, and people of the
land; His quoque saluberrimis admonitionibus, Presbyteri, Diaconi Ecclesiarum,
and Abbates Monasteriorum, Iudices, Optimates, and Nobiles uno opere, uno ore
consentimus and subscripsimus. Ib.
consenting the Judges, Peers, and Nobles: And so to King Offa and his Elders
(or Senators, or Counselors, Senatores is the word) who did the like, his
Princes and Clergy setting their marks: Brorda Dux signo sanctae crucis
subscripsi. Faxwald us Dux subscripsi. Beroaldus Dux subscripsi. Othbaldus Dux
subscripsi: with a cross as the manner then was in their serious and religious
confirmations.

A most observable Law, says Mr. Seldom, if it be genuine, (as why should it
not?) being made by both States, and of two Kingdoms: It is not like Illyricus
forged it, or would venture it to light, without some Authentic authority,
considering who he was; and what he is there a doing: the phrase, style, and
form speak much the tone of that age: Our Vid. Council. Brit. pa 291. and page
298.
Sir Henry Spelman follows him in the substance, though not in the
circumstance, giving it due place in our Councels since published; and unless
we will question every thing, why should we this? He has added the name of the
place, Concilium Calchuthense, that is either Chalchuth, or Calchuth, or
Celchyth, or Cealtide: for these several variations I find; which Camden places
in Northumberland, though he had rather find it in the higher Climate of some
part of Mercia: I should seek for it between York and Durham.

CHAP. X.
ONe thing more is observable, that although Kenulph King of West-Saxon-rie
were present at the first delivery of the Letters, we hear no more of him
afterward, the approbations and subscriptions having only the countenance of
the more Northern parts; for Tithes may not yet have been generally settled,
save in Kent, by Ethelbert; and Mercia and Northwards, as but now; which yet
was after done ere long, and namely by that Celebris donatio Ethelwlphi, so
much spoken of. This clapped the severe and absolute injunction upon all the
Kingdom, (having power so to do, as the other had not) enfolding every part
that was under his power, (and all was) under the same constraint, so that now
to Tithe was as general as to reap, and by a Catholic command from sea to
sea, and from the flood to this worlds end, Gods Ministers had now an appointed
and settled livelihood wheresoever man had.

For the better understanding whereof, this of story would be taken in by the
way: That Cognoscendum igiturest, quod eodem hic titulo utitur Ethelwulphus
Rex, quo Egbertus pater suus bellicosissimmus acquievit, cum universam
Heptarchia^ suae subjugasset ditioni: and how, Vid. Spelm. Council. page 351,
352. Speed. Cbron. lib. 7. chap. 31. Polyd Virgil. li 5. page 89, 90.
Egbert, this King Ethelwlphs father had gathered together (no longer before)
the dispersed pieces of petty-Royalties here, into one greater Monarchy, and
bruising and battering the Coronets of seven (at the remainder of seven) lesser
Kings, had cast them all into one greater Crown, molded for his own head, and
left the power to this his son, under the Title of Monarch of the Nation, or
King of England. A fit time to do any great work, and make or perfect such a
change, as should be Catholic and uniform; not now, This and That, but one and
the same throughout the Nation. Before him, it was King, (or Kings) of Britain
till the Caesar's came: Then, Aulus Plancius, Ostorius, or others, Lieutenants
of Britain: after, the fell Saxons gave denomination to their several shares
of a conquered Heptarchy and we had South, East and West Saxons, besides Kent,
East Angles, Mercia, and Northumberland: But this Egbert mastered All, brake
Stow. Chron. in the life of this Egbricht, page 99. and Speed. ubi s^pr. sect. 6.
the image of Cadwaline last King but one of the Britains triumphantly placed
over Ludgate, crushed the power, and obliterated the partial names of his own
Countrymen, and made all stoop to his sole Command, under the new name of The
Kingdom of England, (whereof he was sole Monarch) which ever since through ages
has to this present remained.

These things prepared, as was said, for the uniformity of any work to have its
extent and operation upon All, and being remembered, makes way for that
Donation, which heed, is Hire given under that name: Other before may have had
the substance, but they had not the proper term, this both name and thing,
under the title of, Celebris illa Donatio Ethelwlphi. Which what it was, take
information first from him that had a great hand in preserving the Common Law
from the spoils at the Conquest, and lived near those times, Ingulphus.

The most noble King of the West Saxons (says he) Ethelwalph, Inclytus Rex
Westsaxonum Ethelwulphus, cum de Roma ut limina Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, ac
sanctissimum ipsum Leonem multa devotione, una cum juniore filio suo Alfredo
peregre visitaverat, noviter revertisset, omnium praelatorum ac principium
suorum, qui sub ipso variis provinciis totius Angliae praeerant, gratuito
consensu, tunc primo cum decimis omnium terrarum, ac bonorum aliorum sive
catallorum universam dotaverat Ecclesiam Anglicanam per suum Regium
Chirographum confectum inde in hunc modum.
when he had returned from Rome visiting, with his son Alfred, the habitations
of Peter and Paul, etc. by the willing assent of all his Prelates and chiefes,
that under him were over all the Provinces of England, had then first endowed
All the English-Church (for some pieces had been before, but there wanted a
Soveraing power, or the union of the parts to extend this good work over All)
with the Tithes of All lands (mark the extent again) and other goods or
cattles, Regnante domino nostro in perpetuum, dum in nostris temporibus, per
bellorum incendia, and direptiones opum nostrarum, nee non and vastantium
crudelissimas hostium depraedationes, barbararum paganarumque nationum
multiplices tribulationes ad affligendum nos pro peccatis nostris usque ad
internecionem, tempora cernimus incumbere periculosa.
which he did by his Royal Patent, thus:

Our Lord Christ reigning, but we tossed up and down etc. wherefore I Ethelwlph
King of the West Saxons with the advice of my Bishops and Princes, Quamobrem
ego Ethelvulphus Rex Westsaxonum cum consilio Episcoporum ac principum meorum
consilium salubre ac uniforme remedium affirmantes, consensimus, ut aliquam
portionem terrarum haereditariam, antea possidentibus omnibus gradibus, sive
famulis and famulabus Dei Deo servientibus, sive laicis miseris semper decimam
mansionem, ubi minimum sit, tum decimam partem omnium bonorum in libertatem
perpetuam donari sanctae Ecclesiae dijudicavi, ut sit tuta and munita ab
omnibus secularibus servitutibus, imo regalibus tributis majoribus and
minoribus, sive taxationibus quae nos dicimus Winterden, sitque libera omnium
rerum, pro remissione animarum, and peccatorum nostrorum ad serviendum Deo
soli, sine expeditione and pontis extructione, and arcis munitione, ut eo
diligentius pro nobis ad Deum sine cessatione preces fundant, quo eorum
servitutem in aliqua part levigamus. Ingulph.
resolving on some wholesome remedy, have agreed that some portion of my lands
formerly inheritable by whosoever, should now as to the tenth of the whole be
set aside (for th^s I conceive to be the sense, the words scarce affoording
any, but by comparing other accounts, this seems the thing meant) for the
servants of God, and a like tenth part of my goods for the Church; so free that
it yield no secular service, nor tribute (more nor less) nor Winterdene (or
Witterdene, a kind of imposition) but that it be devoted to Gods service alone,
that the possessors may pray so much the more diligently for us, as they have
fewer occasions to disturb them. This was done at Winchester in S.
Peter's-Church, Anno Dom. 855. present and subscribing all the Archbishops,
and Bishops of England, and Beorred King of Mercland, Edmund King of the
East Angles, and a numberless number of Abbats, Abbesses, Dukes, Earls, and
Chiefs of the Land, and other approving believers: And the Rex vero
Ethelvulphus pro firmitate ampliore obtulit hanc chartulam scriptam super
Altar sancti Petri Apostoli: and Episcopi pro fide Dei illam acceperunt, and
per omnes Ecclesias postea transmiserunt in suis parochiis publicanda^.
Ingulph. ubi sup. sect. 6.
Charter was offered upon the Altar, and there received for more religious
confirmation. This I take to be the sense of what was there done: Ad anno. 855.
Matthew Westminster, Gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 2.
William Malmesbury, Ethelward, and others give several accounts, but tending
this way, and so great consent is in substance, though variation in expression,
that no one can doubt some such thing was done, men so much varying yet
agreeing to report. No one undertakes to make good all of every thing he makes
use of, and here was interspersion of Abbots and Abesses, offering at the
altar, with Saints and Angels interessed and the Virgin Mary: but such
commixtures do, we know, no more invalid the strength is adjoining good and
sound, then the like in Magna Charta, or the most of all ancient Parliaments,
or some dispersed spots in the Common Law. He that shall once give his busy
humor leave to work, and question things sufficiently done by some infirming
circumstances, will soon leave little enough of approved firmness (by the same
strict rule of estimation) anywhere, no not of those foundations whereon are
raised and stands the stability of the chief worldly things we here enjoy. This
is sure, the grant was made, and let the enjoyed benefit speak the fruit to
our time, the providing for a helpless Church, and it should seem so firm it
needed not be again, nor was after; for it is observeable the style henceforth
changed, and men do now no more Grant, but Confirm; nor had they need Part with
so much as Assure, nor voluntarily Give, but yield to Pay.

Which we shall observe as we go along: In the mean while as to the doubtful
words, various has been the construction, and learned revisors have not all
found the same thing in them.

Chronic. in the life of K. Ethelwolph, pa. 99.
Jo. Stow takes it to be a parcel of land: Animadversions on M. Seldens History
of Tithes. cap 8. page 173.
Doctor Tildesley contends for it by six reasons: Sir Henry Council. Britan.
tom. 1. page 352.
Spelman (inclining thitherward) knows not where to find the benefit save in
the parsonage house and glebe (though it may be well enough thought how they
came in afterward, and otherwise.) In his History of England, in the life of
this King.
R. Hollingshead slubbers it over with a right or liberty (from burdens) to
tithes, (so He ordained that Tithes and Lands due to holy Church, should be
free from all Tributes and regal services. Speed hist. lib. 7. cap. 32. sect.
6.
tithes Then in his acknowledgement were.) Martyrolog. lib. 3. pa. 136. ad an.
844 in the life of Ethelwlph.
Mr. Fox somewhat faintly; the tithe of the Kings lands and goods in
West-Saxon-rick: (with freedom from Servage.) But a Ier. Stephens in page 132.
of Sir Henry Spelman of Tithes.
late setter forth of a very learned and pious tract of this argument alleges
it for a perpetual right of tithes: and above All, Mr Seldom in his Hist. of
Tithe, cap 8. page 206.
he that had compared most accounts and was as well able to judge as any; and
now after near thirty years of painful and succesful study is yet living, and
ready no doubt to make good his constancy, and justify his opinion, then
published, and not appearing yet revoked, makes it out clearly for a right and
law of tithes: His words are these.

If we well consider the words of the chiefest of those ancients, that is,
Ingulphus, we may conjecture that the purpose of the Charter was to make a
general grant of tyths payable freely, and discharged from all kind of
exactions used in that time, according as the Monk of Malmesbury, and John Pike
in his subplement of the History of England express it. Decimam (say they)
omnium hidarum infra regnum suum a tributis et exactionibus Regis liberam Deo
donavit: that is, granted the tithe of the profits of all lands, free from all
exactions. For the granting of the tenth part of the Hides or Plowlands,
denotes the tenth of all profits growing in them as well as Decima acra sicut
aratrum peragrabit, which is used for the tything of the profits, in the Laws
of King Edgar, Ethelred, etc. and doubtless Ingulphus no otherwise understood
it then of perpetual right of tithes given to the Church, where he remembers it
with tunc primo cum decimis, etc. So that the tithe of prediall or mixed profits
was given, it seems, perpetually by the King with consent of his States both
Secular and Ecclesiastic, and the tyth of every man's personal possessions were
at that time also expressly included in the gift, because (it seems) before
that, ( hitherto that learned man) the payment of all tithes had commonly been
omitted. Not so neither; for what was then the operation of those weak, and yet
intended strong and powerful Canons before mentioned, made with so good advice,
and strengthened with the twisted powers of both States in Mercia and
Northumberland, besides what in Kent, a Rege, Baronibus and Populo? But for All
the land, it seems none before had power of imposition; and for West-Saxony
none had attempted; (for the King that was present at opening of the letters,
we found not there at the conclusion of the business Page 70.
before:) So that Tunc primum for this and for All together, the decree might
go forth here successefully, and the liker it did, for that (as before) we read
of no more Donation, but Confirmation, no need to Settle after, but order, as
was said, to Pay.

So that considering the power was then vested in the Monarch-granter, and also
the consent of Tributary, and, as it were, pupil-Kings, with Nobles, Peers, and
all their people: Consider likewise the interpretation of dark words by those
whose inspection was like to pierce deepest into the meaning of what was
delivered (or is perplexed) with obscure expression, And after interpretation
fairly setting of such a purpose, we need not doubt to conclude: That so long
ago as those remote times, about 800 years since, above 200 before the
Conquest, even then when the Common Law was but in her swadling-clothes,
whereof little hitherto, (if she were then born, as I believe she was,) Even
then, and as soon and fast as we may believe the power of Christian Religion to
have had its work in the bosom of believers to make them contrive a continual
and settled support for their soul-saving new-come Gospel, Tithes had a public
vote, which created a legal Right; And, though I will not say All was done
accordingly, and the objection of after Arbitrary consecrations possible in
some sense, may take place in their way notwithstanding; yet as far as Law
may create a right, Then were Tithes no longer a part of Benevolence and
Bounty, but of distributive or retributive Justice, every one living within the
compass of the Church being bound to pay back this support for the Ministry
thereof, in fulfilling those general Canons of the New Testament, that call
for maintenance, and would not have the labourer uncertain of his reward, but
the Oxes mouth unmuzzled (to take thus much) and the Catechist to partake with
the Catechumene in all his goods.

For we are not to look upon Regal and Legal commands; as empty Cracks, fit
only to fill the world with noise and clamor, and exercise the chat of the
busy multitude, or learned men's discourses, but Canons well mounted, which
being discreetly levelled also, are able to make their way through whole
squadrons of opposing Rebels to Law and Justice, of that irresistible power,
that though private men would, they cannot contradict, evade, or gainsay; As
being those words of public vote and highest authority, that if they say, Yes,
will have no Nay, The most serious disputes and results of Reason that are
extant amongst men, and that have this sovereign property always annexed to
them, That they of all other look not to be Disputed but Obeyed. Lex est
sententia, qua bona tum praecipiuntur, tum mala prohibentur, (says Jo. Lexie
Iurisprud. pa. 526. in vocab, Lex.
Calvin) Jus est authoritas seu facultas agendi secundum legem. Justitia est
virtus perducens ista ad exercitationem. Proinde quoties audis has voces, Lex,
Jus, Justitia, statim cogita, monente Oldenb. te divinum aliquid atque excelsum
audire, hoc est, veram and a Deo ipso dictatam honestatis formulam. Almost the
voice of God, and not of man, as if they were.

Neither is one thing more to be omitted, who was present and assistant at this
great work, Him I take the world to have since owned and remembered by the
reverencing name of Vid Spelm. Council. ^om Eod. pa. 349.
St Swithune: formerly the Kings Christian Tutour, now his Chaplain, Bishop of
Winchester, and For the King was committed first to the Care of Helmestan
Bishop of Winchester, and by him consigned over to Swithune: Heimestan dying,
he was made a Deacon, and elect, if not Consecrate Bishop of Winchester, and
thence resumed to the Crown. Speed Hist. lib. 7. cap. 32. sect. 1.

-- subdiaconatus ordine initiatus. Polyd Virg. Hist. lib 5. pa 91.

Vid* Stow. Chron* ad an. 829. and Hen. Huntingdon. lib. 5. page 348.


successor of the King himself in that See, blessed by God to keep the Kings
heart, and the state of the Re-publick firm to Christ in that tottering age,
when it was hard to keep all from reclining and relapsing to flat Idolatry. For
they had lately worshipped stocks and stones, and given the immediate issues of
their souls in their thanks, praise, and All devotions to the works of their
own hands, The names of sundry Idols here worshipped before the Gospel
enlightened: And as the Pagan Romans made theirs praeside over the daves of the
week, whence Dies Solis, Dies Luna, Mercurit, Martis, etc. So here they called
the days from them, if not more, and we yet retain the memorial thereof in
Sunday, Moonday, Tuisco^day, (or Tuesday) Wodensday, Thorsday, Freaday, and
Seaterday. More appearance of truly evil, then in some other things in
jealousy branded for Idolatrous: See Verstegan. Antiq. page 10, 11. and pa 68,
69, etc.
Tuisco, Woden, Thor, Frea, Seater, Herthus,) Suevorum, and Borealium
Germanorum Dea, perinde and little Anglorum qui cum Saxonibus Britanniam nostram
applicantes, nomen nostratibus reliquerunt. Cultum and immanitatem Deae refert
Tacitus, in Mor. Germ. Rendigni deinde, and Aviones, and Angli, and Varint, --
in commune Hertum id est, Terram matrem colunt, camque intervenire rebus
hominum, invehi populis arbitrantur: Stoneheng in Wilishire thought to have
been a Temple to this Goddess, in plain English, The Earth: Vid. Spelm. Gloss.
pa 350 in Herthus.
Herthus, Flint, Verstegan. pa 79, 80
Ermensewl, The Goddess of Hunters and Falconers, worshipped at Rihall in the
edge of Rutlandshire, near Stanford: vid. Ca^^den. Britan. in Rutlandshire.
Another place of note for like worship whereto was God ^^anham (in Bede's time
Godmundingham) near Beverley in Yorkshire, by the priest thereof Coyefi
profaued and delivered over to Christian worship: id. page 702 S. Paul's in
London was dedicate to Diana; (some Houses adjoining are called Dianaes
Chambers yet.) The Church of Westminster to Apollo. id. in Middlesex. God
bless u^ I shall we ever live to fear the return of these Banished and
forgotten Idols to their native homes? Or the removal of what fast kept them
out (being banished,) give cause of that Fear!
Tibba, Or Oster: a Goddess giving denomination to the Month of April, called
by the Saxons, Oster monat: we yet retain the name of Easter thence, happening
usually in that month.
Eoster, and such other sometimes worshipped for Gods and Goddesses here, whose
names are now either almost happily forgotten, or if remembered, not very easy
to be understood. But it seems the Holy Christian Swithune joined in with his
formerly pupil, now Lord and King to keep him close, (and in him vertually and
potentially All,) to the heavenly teaching of the Bible; and that the doctrine
thereof might continue, they added this pillar of worldly maintenance (the
having a hand wherein might procure Swithune so reverend an estimation in
Christians memories ever since,) (according to the pattern in the mount, their
guide, Levi of the Old Testament,) To sustain and provide for the Preachers and
Ministers thereof: And God so blessed, that as that gift has remained sacred
and inviolable hitherto, so by it the ministration and Ministers of sacred
Christian Mysteries have had a subsistence ever since, and endowed preachers
been as so many Candlesticks then set up, which resting on this pillar, have
held forth that light of heaven which yet we enjoy to this present day. Future
superstitions may have made unnecessary additions, and the honor justly given
to the memory of this good man, for a work so gloriously deserving, in the name
and reputation of a Christian Saint, have contracted after rust and blemish by
the zealous ignorance of times and men; who not content save to overdoe, nor
esteeming reverence any thing without worship and adoration, thought the Saint
not enough, unless he were advanced higher to the name and reputation of a
Divus, or petty-God, and so partaking now in nearness of kind as well as name
with his Sovereign, must not wait any longer about the footsteps of the Throne,
but be lifted up to sit higher on some lower seats of honor with his maker;
which cast a blemish on the very Purity of heaven, and as one said, made the
Christian world begin to be ashamed of nothing more then of her Saints, which
were indeed the honor and glory of the world.

But howsoever the work was gracious and glorious, of wonderful influence to
the piety of all following times, such as may speak it self accessory to much
of the practiced public Worship that has been exercised ever since to Christ
his honor, in our land, and hardly to be parallelled by any act of equal
dimensions, save perhaps the contrary work of darkness, (if men's covetousness
should be so far hearkened to,) in withdrawing this support in order and
preparation to the destruction of Religion it self, and bringing Apostasy to
that we had before Tithes were paid, Tuisco, Woden, Thor, Frea, etc. or if
these be forgot, taking up that is nearer hand and known, the sensual dreams
of Mahomet, (though such Which they may have from the Mosaical law, Seldom.
Hist. of Tithes c. 3 sect ult. Joan. Baptista Alfaqui who had been a Mohammedan
priest, says, it is one of the ^reat sins whereof the two inquisitour Angels
examine souls after death, Whether they have paid Tithes duly? [Paget.
Haeresiogr. in the Postscript. The dreadful manner is set forth by M. P^rchas.
lib 3. cap. 12. p. 304. Edit. 1614
worshippers pay their Tithes duly,) or indeed no one can foresee probably
what. And if these be not the dreams of some troubled mind, but the sober and
welladvised thoughts of one jealous for the honor of His God, not the
melancholic muses of some distempered fancy, but the calm and well-composed
serious consultations of one tenderly careful, and tremblingly fearful about
the honor of his believed Savior and Redeemer, prudently casting what may be,
yet providently fore-casting it may not be, and yet but reasonably doubting too
what is like to be; grounded only on rational conjectures, and accompanied
with manly fears, lest Christ his name should be wiped off from the earth, His
honor disparaged, His worship undermined, His faith destroyed, and Himself
forgotten where he has been worshipped for a God; It would then be thought on
again and again by all those who pretending to worship Christ can think of
undoing his Ministers, and in (or with) love of the Master, give themselves
leave to doubt whether they may strip of their Own his Servants that do his
Public work, leaving Religion as naked as in the day she was born here, to be
covered by mere Charity of the Parish, or provided for by some slack and
slender weekly allowance: And (then which cannot come a worse mischief)
intrusting the Religion of the most High God, and its stability, to the
tottering contributions of fickle Men, who if they be of one mind to day, may
be of another to morrow; what now they love, then loathing; and always
esteeming their wealth dearly, cannot but be continually loath to part with what
they love: (which if it should be, Josh. 7. 9.
O Jesu, (As Joshuah fometime threw up complaint to heaven upon a pang of zeal,
in like danger,) What shall be then done to thy Great Name!) But ere this be,
more stones must be stirred, it is like, then we are aware of, or are yet
thought on for motion: intwisted estates do not use to decay single; nor that
sink alone of it self, that settles on the same floor or bottom with others:
The strength of property it self must grow weak, ere these dues can be shaken,
and the owner of the nine parts be left little enough by the Same reason,
(unless by arbitrary disposition, because it is fit he should have it,) before
This Tenth settled with them, and by equal strength of right can be taken away.
Think of ransacking the Tenth rafter out of the roof, or the Tenth stone out of
the foundation, and then compare and Judge. But think withal, that rafter, that
stone was there placed in Swithunes days.

CHAP. XI.
WE have done with Donation; A thing can be given but once, and this has been
here all over; now next, as annexed thereto or a part thereof should follow,
Tradition, without which the Item non valet Donatio nisi subsequatur Tradtio,
quia non transfertur per homagium res data, nec per chartam vel instrumentorum
confectionem, quamvis in publico fuerint recitata. Bracton. de aquir. rerum dom
cap. 18 sect. 1.
Lawyers say Donation is invalid, forasmuch as this in act Videndum est primo
quid sit Traditio: Et est Traditio de re corporali propria vel aliena, de
persona in personam, de manu propria vel aliena, (sicut procuratoris, dum tamen
de voluntate Domini,) in alterius manum gratuita translatio. Et n^hil aliud est
Traditio in uno sensu, nisi in possessionem inductio. id. ibid Sect. 2. vid
Flet. lib. 3. cap 15. Sect. 4.
parts with the thing, and till it be, even a gift remains with the Giver:
but the expectation hereof may well be superseded here, forasmuch as the right
of tithes is a Right, and so not capable of delivery: For it is a Right, and
not De re corporali ideo dicitur, quod res in corporalis non patitur
traditionem, sicut ipsum jus, quod rei sive corporl inhaeret: et quia non
possunt res incorporales possideri, sed quasi, ideo traditionem non patiuntur
sed quasi, nec adquiruntur nec retinentur nisi per patie^tiam et usum. Bract.
ubi supra fol. 39.

Iura siquidem, cum sint in corporalia, videri non poterunt, nec tangi, et ideo
traditionem non patiuntur, sicut res corporales. id. cap 23. Sect. 1. fol. 52

Item acquiruntur nobis temporalia (corporalia I believe, it should be,) per
traditionem: res enim corporales patiuntur traditionem: secus vero de
incorporalibus, ut sunt jura, advocationes ecclesiarum, etc F^et. lib. 3. cap.
2. Sect. fin.


a body, which can nor give, nor take; and the rules of the law must not think
to alter the nature of things, or make that required, which to be cannot.

Tradition is here therefore set aside, in other cases necessary, and this
Gift being perfect without it, our next must be of Ratihabition or
Confirmation, under which head march all the following allegations to our
times, to Confirmare est enim id quod ptius infirmum fuit simul firmare. id.
lib. Eod. cap. 14 sect 5.
strengthen the frame that is now built, and enforce from time to time to part
with and give out what was here set aside and appointed to be given; What those
acts in law are shall not praeviously take up much inquiry from Vid. F. Ratam
rem haberi, and de ratihabi^ione: lib. 46 tit, 8.
Justinian or Vid Cook Inst. 1. on Littleton. sect. 515. fol. 295.
Westminster, I content my self with their Generaliter effectus ratihabitionis
est, ut voluntatem nostram declaremus, and negotium, quod alioqui ad nos nihil
pertineret, nostrum faciamus, Cahl. Lex^c. Iurispr^d. pa. 789.
general nature, to settle what has been Ratihabitio est consensus, qui
negotium perfectum insequitur: Id. ib. Rati enim habitio ad confirmationem
prioris postulati pertinet: F. de bonorum possesseonibus: l. Quotiens.
placed; Rem ratam ha^beri, that that which is, they do, as the Videndum est
igitur quid sit Confirmatio: and est confirmatio prioris juris and dominii
adepti firmatio, cum prima firmitate donationis; nihil enim novi attribuit, sed
jus ve^us consolidat and confirmat: Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 25. sict. 2. fol. 58.
word is, Confirm.

Men, no doubt, were loath to part with their own, to weaken their worldly
estates, though it were to stablish the Religion of the most high God, to make
them baggs which as our Savior Luke 12. 33.
says wax not old, to Matthew. 6. 20. Cap. 19. 21.
lay up treasure in Heaven ( 1 Timothy 6. 19.
(...),) for another world, and to make Luke 10 6. Sermon etiam admonemur
divino, terrenis coelestia, and caducis his nostris aeterna illa promereri:
Aethelst. in prafat. ad leg. speaking of Tithes.
friends of this Mammon of unrighteousness, that when need is, they may receive
into everlasting habitations: This made the laws frequent, the repetitions
many, the reinforcement earnest, the transgression poenal, and each continued
in and through every age; that so, if might be, Ananias might be met with at
every turn, and his wife Sapphira kept back that neither should venture again
to pluck back what only true piety and the love and fear of God had prompted
them at first to give forth. And now behold the laws are not to pay, but be
punished if men paid not.

CHAP. XII.
THe first that occurs, (in time and so in our order) is that of K. Alfred and
is in the preface to his laws, (remember we are now in the dawning of the
common law, and this allowance shall grow up with it,) which, before, he out of
modesty acknowledged to borrow from the tables of his Ancestors; and speaks in
brief, thus: Pra^fat. in leges Alfred. c 38. Lamb. Arch p. 19. Spelman. Council.
tom. 1. pa 360.
Thy tything portion, or thy tithes give thou to God. If any did not, it was
after agreed between Vid. Leg. Eccl. ab Alured and G^thurno ib. page 377. cap.
9.
him and Guthrun the Dane, that the stranger should pay lahslite, that is, as
it is commonly interpreted, twelve Ores, and the English his forfeiture, and
with out this, no peace: which League and Law was after confirmed by Haec ea
sunt senatusconsultaac instituta, qu^e primo Alfredus and Guthrunus reges,
deinde Edovardus and Guthrunus reges, illis ipsis temporibus tulere. cum pacis
foedus Daci and Angli ferie, runt, ac sese mutuo amplexi sunt, ( a part of the
soder that combined them together was a law of Tithes, which they agreed both
should pay-) quaeque postea a sapienti^us recitata saepius, atque ad communem
regni utilitatem aucta, atque amplificata sunt: vid. foedus Edovardi and
Guthurni. apud Lamb. Arch. p. 41. et Spelm. Council. p. 390. and 39^.
K. Edward (Alfred's son) and the same Guthrun, and oftentimes after repeated
and established to the common profit of the Kingdom

K. Aethelstane is after very earnest about the year 930. by all that is sacred
Leg. Eccles. Aethelsta^i apud eund. p. 402. c. 1. Lambard. Archaion. p. 45. and
Fox Acts and Monum, lib 3. p. 149.
conjuring al under his Jurisdiction to pay all: tam vivorum animalium, quam
annuorum terrae proventuum decimas, both of Cattle and fruit: His Aldermen and
Reves he commands to do the same, and seriously advises to consider what Jacob
vowed, my tithes and peace offering will I offer unto thee, and what is
elsewhere with severity enough; If we will not give the tenth, the nine other
parts may be taken away, and nothing left but the Tenth. Remember he was not a
Churchman but a King, and so spoke no doubt as seeing expediency enough of
what he spoke thus, and for his people.

Edmond his successor followed him, and Leg. Edmundi etc. Lamb Arch. pa. 57.
cap. 2. Spe^man. Conc. adan. 944. page 420. cap. 2.
in a frequent Synod held at London about the year 944. as well of Lay as
Ecclesiastical persons, (a Micelne Synod it was, a Parliament, no doubt)
charge every Christen man to pay his tithes duly, and upon his Christendom. I
omitted an Ecclesiastical Constitution made by Decimo capitulo mandamus, and
fideliter obsecramus, de decimis dandis, sicut in lege scriptum est: Decimam
partem ex omnibus frugibus, etc. ib ad an. 943. p. 418. cap. 10.
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury about these times, because it may be judged not
binding; not doubting yet the common law, as then, to consist of such rules,
(as they were after, of the Consistory) as well as the secular: For if this
were not, there should have been no rule brought along with the Ecclesiastical
Judge, for him to Judge by. It Is known how till the Conquerors days, when the
Courts were parted, This Supervisor sat in the County Court, (as over a
Provincial Presbytery,) to Judge with the Kings Reve, or the Reve of the Shire,
or Shire-Reve (since Sheriff,) the one to see Gods right done, as the other to
see the Worlds; and what could be more expedient then that they should bring
their several rules along with them, the Churchman his Canons to rule there in
fitting things, as the other his secular laws? So that till the jurisdictions
were parted, I doubt not to think without haesitation, this and such Canons,
The Canon in general, was a part of the Common-County law, and so used, and
after digested into a form by it self for the Consistory; whereto adding the
way of trial, sc. according to the Civil law, by citation, proctor, libel, etc.
and such after superinducements, made the Court, as it was late found and left:
But this by the way.

CHAP. XIII.
GO on to K. Edgar: and he was not far of, (within the same Century ^^ll:)
which pious King Lamb. Arch p 62. ca. 3. Spelm. Council. ad. an. 967. pa. 444.
strengthened all that was before by adding to law and punishment a course how
the one should be inflicted to further the Execution of the other. And, He that
will not pay his Tithe of Cattle before Whitsuntide, his tithe fruit before the
Equinoctial (or Church-seet, (or Scot, or portion) before S. Martins day) let
him pay his forfeiture, says he, as in the Doom-book. What? Let the Reve,
Bishop and Church-Priest meet; and compel him, if he be unwilling to pay his
tenth to the Church that he ought leaving to him but Nosti, quia Dei sunt
cuncta quae percipis, and de suo non accommodas rerum omnium conditori? non
eget Dominus tuus, non praemium postulat sed honorem, non de tuo aliquid exigit
quo^ refundas. Primitias rer^m and decimas dignatur petere, and negas avare.
the ninth: as for the other eight, let the Lord have the one half, the Bishop
the other; and this without respect of person, whether he be the Kings man, or
Thanes. Which very course and penalty is after approved and stamped for current
by the Leg. Canut. Lambard. Arch. pa. 101. sect. 8. Spelman. Council. ad ann.
1032. pa 544. cap. 8. and page 563 cap. 15.
Danish K. Knout in assembly of his wise men at Winchester, about the year
1032. with some inconsiderable alterations, And in substance continued to our
Leg. Hen. 1. apud Lambard. page 182. cap. 11.
Hen. 1. time, since the Conquest, as appears by his laws lately published.
Quid faceres, si novem partibus sibi sumptis tibi decimam reliquisset? Quod
certe jam factum est, cum messis tua pluviarum subtracta benedictione jejuna
defecit, and vindemiam tuam aut grando percussit, aut pruina decoxit. Quid
avide supputas? Novem tibi parts retractae sunt, quia decimam dare noluisti.
Constat qu^dem quod ipse non dederis, sed tamen Deus exigit. Haec enim est
Domini justissima consuetudo, ut si tu illi decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam
revoceris. -- Dabis impio militi, quid non vis dare sacerdoti: Aug. se^m. 219.
de temp. tom. 10. pa. 370.


Something of the Church intercurres more about this time, which, from the
nature of the thing, it may be expedient but to name; as an Ecclesiastical
Constitution made under the same Edgar, That Docemus etiam, ut Sacerdotes
populu^ instruant, de his quae jure Deo sunt reddenda: decimae scilicet, and
res aliae, etc. Canones dati sub Edgaro: apud Lambard. pa. 71. Can. 54. Spel^.
ad an 967. page 454.
the people should be taught to pay to God that which of Right they ought,
(which mark was Then a Right, whether Humane or Divine, I inquire not; If this,
it was the stronger; if but that, it is it I contend for: but a Right:) as
Tithes and other things: And another calculated for the Northern Latitude,
(for the collection is styled, Si decimas qui Thanus est regis detinuerit, 10.
p^nd to semimarcas, possessor praediorum 6, and Cyrliscus seu Paganus 12. ^ras.
id. page 501.
Leges Presbyterorum Northumbrensium) and bound up with K. Edgars laws, where
is penalty for every of the Kings Thanes (or lords) that detaynes, ten half
marks; for every land-owner six; for every Ceorle or Husbandman twelve Ores:
And another written by Aelfrike Aelfric. Can. ib. ^a. 578 ca. 24. and Lamb. pa.
132.
to Wulfine of the same general nature, thought not unworthy to be preserved
among the undoubted monuments of that Age: All which I yet so slightly pass
over, as that my judgment remains the same both one way and other as before;
and for what was stamped with the authority of the Church, that it had no doubt
the Countenance of the Sat, to be then a ruling part of the Common All-ruling
Law; which consisted both of Canon and Statute, (as they were after Called,)
and each was a rule for what they did concern in the same Court, where both
Jurisdictions were then Combined, and both their Laws executed.

CHAP. XIV.
THe next Century gives us the Concilium Aenhamen^e generale, seu Pananglicum
hortatu Aelfeagi Dorobernensis and Wulstani Eboracensis A chipraesulum, ab
Aethelredo Rege edictum^ acce^sitisq Episcopis, and universis Anglorum
optimatibus, in die S. Pentecostes celebratum. Circa on 1009 Spelm. p 510.
Parliament of Aenham, made up of both States, as well Church as Peers under
King Ethelred: in the contraction whereof is commanded, that, Iura Deo debita
unusquisque annuatim recte pendito, etc. Id. p 517. K 10.
Gods dues be paid yearly, Tithe of young at Whitsuntide, of fruits at
Allhallondtide: but in the larger latin, and a copy of the same date of
writing, Thus: Let Id. page 527. cap. 10.
the tithe of fruits (says the Kingdom,) and Calves, and Lamb, and other
Ecclesiastical duties be paid yearly to the Lord at fitting seasons: Sulh, vel
potius Sullow (verbo paulum immutato) plurimis in locis etiam nunc aratrum
significat: aelmess not^oris est significationis quam ut interpret indige^t
ullo. Ego me legisse memini in vetustissimo quodam legum Ethelredi Regis
libello impositum tunc temporis in singula aratra Denarium unum. Ea fortasse
pensio est quam illi Sulhaelmess appellabant. Glossar. ad Lambard. Arch. pa.
217. in vocab. Arationis eleemosyna.
Eleemosynae aratrales, or Sulh aelmes (as I am informed, a penny a years
pention upon every plough,) 15. days after Ester: Calf and lamb at Whitsuntide:
tithe corn about Allhallondtide; and all these to God, and by order of
Parliament. Dubitaverit forte quispia^, etc. Spelm. pa. 529.
It may breed some doubt of the universality of this power, because it is
called a Council or Synod, which use to be the titles of Ecclesiastical
meetings: But this is satisfied in part by a learned Kinght, that it 1. Beside
what before: Quodam tempore contigit ut Regis Aethelredi edicto concrepante,
Archipraesulumque Aelfeagi and Wul^stani ho: tatu instigante, universi Anglorum
optimates Die sancto Pentecostes ad locum ab indigenis Eanham nominatum, acciti
sunt conven^re: Id. pa. 525. And in the close; Haec itaque legalia statuta vel
decreta in nostro conventu Synodal^ a Rege N. magnopere edicta cuncti tunc
temporis optimates se observaturos fide^iter sponde bant: Ib page 529.
consisted of both States. 2. was convened by the Kings power. 3. treated of
things not of the Church. and 4. met at Sc at Whitsuntide, as K Edmunds was at
Easter: In quibus celebritatibus, (sicuti and in illa Nativitatis Domini
nostri) convocare Reges, ex antiqua consuetudine, soliti erant proceres suos
utriusque Ordinis ad fastum Regium adornandum, and Consilia regni ineunda, quod
latius al^b^ declaravimus: Ib.

K Knouts great Council at Winchester, was after at Midwinters tide, or in
Natalitiis Domini nostri: id. p 539. and p. 560. K. Bertulphs before at Easter;
(and a very Parliament:) id. p. 344. Ex more enim and obsequii vinculo
antiqu^ssimo tenebantur proceres in tribus maximis festivitatibus; Christi sc.
Natalitiis, sancti Paschatis, and Pentecostes, Regi annuatim adesse, cum ad
Cur^am and personam ipsius exornandum, tum at consulendum de negotiis regni,
statuendumque prout fuerat necessarium. Prodire igitur in diebus illis Rex
solebat corona redimitus, and pro Fastu Regio se in omnibus exh^bere: donec
morem labefactav it Henricus 2. etc. Id. p. 347.


Parliament time: which as times then were, was thrice a year.

For in those days at the three great feasts both the King expected his Nobles
to come unto him for greater solemnity of the time, and being met they used to
consult, de arduis rei-publicae negotiis, which was Parliament work: (which
also continued long after, as appears through the course of Matthew Paris his
History, who wrote to Henry the third.) So that I doubt not to affirm both that
this was a Parliament, and that one such meeting in three years is no such news
in England; for of old (beside the law, and observation thereof in practice
about Edward the third's time, for one) before that they had usually three
Parliaments every year.

In the same Kings time was also another general meeting at Habam; Haec
instituerunt Ethelredus et sapientes ejus apud Habam, is the title, and part of
the text (from the Histor. Iornal. fol. 65. apud Seld. de decim: p. 225. since
Published by Spelman: Council. circa Ann. 1012. p 531.
Abbot of Jorneaux,) thus:

Omnis Thainus decimet totum quod habet. Ib. c. 1.
Let every Thane (or lord) Tithe all that he has: And Et praecipimus, ut omnis
homo super d lectionem Dei and omnium sanctorum det Cyrisceatum, and rectam
decimam suam, sicut in diebus antecessorum nostrorum quando melius fecit; hoc
est, sicut aratrum peragrabit decimam acram: Et omnis con^uetudo reddatur super
amicitiam Dei ad matrem Ecclesiam cui adjacet, and nemo auferat Deo quod ad
Deum pertinet, and praedecessores nostri concesserunt: page 531 ca 4.
we command that every man upon his love to God and all Saints give his Church
Scot and true tithe, as in the days of our ancestors, ( it was no new usage,
then, but inherited from the days before) that is, his tenth Acre, as the
plough shall go: and let every custom be made good, super amicitiam Dei, for
Gods love to the Mother Church to whom it belongs, and let no one take from
God ( mark the weighty engagements still) that which belongs to God and our
Predecessors ( again) granted.

CHAP. XV.
BUt none did more in this kind then the Conquering Dane. First, he Vid
Epistolam Canuti Regis ad Anglorum proceres anno Regni sui 15. Domini nostri
1031. in eod. page 535.
sends from Rome, mindeful of Justice here, to all his Officers and Ministers,
threatening if all dues were not paid, particularly Tithes, the disobedient
should smart from the sharpest edge of his severest laws. Secondly, when he
came, ( Nec dicto fuit deterius factum, as says the Historian) he caused all
the Omnes enim leges ab antiquis regibus and m^xime ab antecessore suo
Aethelredo latas, sub interminatione regiae mulctae perpetuis tempo^ibus
observari praecipit. Mal^^esbur. de Gest. Reg. lib. 2. cap. 11.
ancient laws to be revised, especially those of his Predecessor Ethelred,
(amongst which were for tithes, as may be remembered from but now) and Thirdly,
Quotannis quisque Deo jura justasque debitiones rite persolv^to: Arationis
quidem eleemosynam ad decimum quintam a Paschate diem pendito: foetuum decimas
ad Pentecosten solvito; rerrae denique fruct^^m decimas reddito ad fest^^
omnium sanctorum celebre: Or if not, as is said. Vid L. Eccl. Canut. K 8.
Spelm. p 544 etc. 15. p. 563. De decimis ad Ecclesiam Thani pertinentibus, vid.
c. 1 ^: p. 545.
by more assurance and past all conjecture he revived and awakened that notable
past law of K. Whereof befo. e. page 84.
Edgar, made up of 3 parts twisted together for mutual strength, Rule,
Punishment, and order for Execution; willing that men should pay; if they did
not, they should lose 9 of 10. And who should see things done, but they who by
their work were to be rewarded for their labor? Which was much, and as much as
could be expected, in tender regard to what (of that little account is,) finds
so much place, and in very fast and safe accordance to what had been before.
Indeed it should be so: States should be constant. Not uncertainly whiffling up
in loose and various decrees, but be gravely stayed and fixed to their received
orders, Not giving the world occasion to think their Laws are Humane Ordinances
by this, That they change like men; but partaking in stedfastness with him from
whom they are, resemble Him in Immutability who is the Same for Ever. Justice
and Truth are never but the same; Why should then their Rules vary? The same
thing cannot be right and wrong at times; why should the Lesbian rule warp
hither and thither, as 'twere to say it is! It may make the jealous world
suspect ere long that Laws are nothing else but witty devices to serve the
contrivers own turn, if, like the sails of a ship, they may be shifted and
turned hither and thither upon occasion: and cause them wish perhaps rather
they had no ordinance at all, then what may be planted against their own
safety; finding suspicion in the sanctuary of their refuge, and doubting what
was given for their wealth may prove an occasion of their falling. The firmness
of a public decree could never have found a fitter measure then that of the
Laws of the Medes and Persians which alter not; Dan. 6. 8, 12, 15.
whereto the world owes much of its happiness: nor can we ever hope for any
more certainty of any thing we possess and call good on earth, then there is of
Justice; and the rule and measure thereof is the constant Law.

This the wise and victorious Dane knew, (perhaps by cherishing such axioms
and persuasions at home victorious) which made him strike in as much as might
be with the past and established Laws, to shake the Kingdom the less by a
Couqnest, and in their stability to provide for much of the wholes, and his
own. As indeed this course often leaves a Kingdom safe with change of the head,
and Government quiet upon any change of Governors. For the person at top is
never so material as the diffused and coincorporate Law throughout the body
politic, which settles down and is conveyed, as the branching Nerves, into
every the remotest member of the re-publike, and which if it suffer trouble by
change, many a paralytical or spasmatical fit cannot but must needs go
therewith, disordering the whole, and twinging the very heart; if these are
forced out of the way, or suffer any considerable distention, laxation,
mutation, obstruction, trouble or disturbance whatsoever; which also the next
Norman Conqueror found or was taught; for the Nation that was in part willing
(or were forced) to receive him, would never yet give consent that their laws
(the sinews of the State) should be touched, which put him upon this hard
Dilemma either to embrace These, or be rejected by Those, to let Them alone, or
Himself never should have been quiet.

CHAP. XVI.
OUR next step (the last on that side the Conquest,) is to Edward, surnamed the
Confessor; That blessed man was blessed indeed to be the Author or instrument
of much good to this indeared Nation. He first obtained help of God to remove
and dispel that coacervation of tough humors about the throat, ( Strumae, the
Physician calls them, and since from this accident of their cure, The Kings
Evil:) And, which was the greater miracle, obtained also the like wonder
working power to be left inheritable by all his successors. He raised that
stately and magnificent pile at Westminster, a Monument not only of his own
piety but also a repository of the Monuments of Nobles and Kings ever since,
who quietly sleep in that dormitory he reedified and consecrated to this use
from Pagan superstition, and under his roof have found ever since their
peaceable, safe, and everlasting habitations: He was so zealous and succesful
for Justice, that when he was gone, the most people desired, was but right his
way; And as Ziscaes Drum, (he being dead) charmed the enemy to obedience or
flight; so the Concession of his Laws stilled their mutinyes often, whence, at
their importunity too, they have been continued in the Coronation oath ever
since. Lastly, his prudence discovered or acted it self chiefly in this, that,
(treading in the steps of K. Knout before,) he dreaded exceedingly all
perilous innovations, and whatever wit or passion might suggest to the
contrary, knew it was safest always harkening to reason and going in the way
had been trodden; and therefore adhered to this rule by choice, that whatever
others did, He would only be wise in the way of his Ancestors. To this purpose
he caused to be searched, and by his authority reinforced the good old Laws of
the Land, which, whatsoever forward men may deem to the contrary, is still
likeliest to be the readiest way to men's great desires of Happiness, Wealth,
and Peace. For if Justice be the preserver of order, that the parent of peace,
whence wealth and riches follow: to disturb the Law the foundation and rule of
Justice, can be no less then to trouble the pure fountain whence those precious
streams must issue; whereas to keep that fast, is to hold the foundation sure,
whereon all the rest either are or may be built. He then began not, but
continued and confirmed this following order for tithes, CAP. 8.


De decimis ecclesiae reddendis, de ovibus et porcellis.
De omni annona decima garba Deo debita est et ideo reddenda. Of all Corn the
Tenth sheafe is due to God, and so to be paid, etc. But the English hereof was
given before, page 63.
Et siquis gregem equarum habuerit, pullum reddat decimum: qui unam tantum vel
duas habuerit, de singulis pullis singulos denarios: similiter qui vaccas
plures habnerit, decimum vitulum: qui unam vel duas, de vitulis singulis obolos
singulos. Et qui caseum fecerit, det Deo decimum: Si vero non fecerit, lac
decimo die. Similiter agnum decimum, vellus decimum, caseum decimum, butyrum
decimum, porcellum decimum.

De Apibus.
De apibus vero similiter decima commodi. CAP. 9.
Quin et de bosco, de prato, et aquis, et molendinis, porcis, vivariis,
piscariis, virgultis, and hortis, et negotiationibus, et omnibus rebus quas
dederit Dominus, decima pars ei reddenda est qui novem parts simul cum decima
largitur. Qui eam detinuerit per Justiciam Episcopi et Regis (si necesse
fuerit) ad redditionem arguatur: ( perhaps righter, adigatur.) Haec enim
praedicavit Beatus Augustinus, et concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus et populo.
Sed postea instinctu Diaboli multi eam detinuerunt, e^ Sacerdotes locupletes
negligentes non cur abant inire laborem ad perquirendas eas, eo quod
sufficienter habebant suae vitae necessaria, etc. Leg. Edward. Regis. apud
Lambard. Archaion. pa. 139 and Spelman. Council. page 620.

Behold here a plain law: as full as if it had been made in Consistory, as
clear as evident and open words could express, as authoritative as might
proceed from the King and his people, and as much to be reverenced as King S.
Edwards Law: consenting much to what went before, and for what followed after,
we know (and shall be made appear) has had as many after, successive, supreme
confirmations as any public act of this State ever had: Except the great
Charter: nay, not except the great Charter; into whose confirmation this was
also by implication involved, and with it had life, strength, and fruit, even
to the Petition of Right, as shall be hereafter shown.

It usually passes that this devout and wonder-working King was the father of
the Common Law, (which if, we see what shined from its morning beams,) and
that he gave it first life and being of no praexistent materials, as I believe
he did, as it was common: for he, (a little to step aside,) disliking the
several ways of trial that had been to his time, That one should be tried by
Cantiani suas aliquando habuerunt leges, sed coeuntibus iis and Saxonibus
omnibus sub West-Saxonum ditione, horum lege vivitur. Angli lege usi sunt (quam
vocant) Mercia donec ^rruentes Dani East Angliae and Northumbriae provinciis,
suas inducunt consuetudines, a prioribus non in complurimis discrepantes. Hinc
majoribus nostris triplex legum distinctio estseaxna-laga, Myrcna-lega, and
^ene-laga id est, lex Occiduorum Saxonum, Lex Merciorum, and Lex Danorum.
Spelman. Glossar. page 445. in vocab. Lex Anglorum.
Saxon-Lage, another by Dane-Lage, a third after the Mercian: one punished by
Several punishments or forfeitures for the same crime, among several here
then living Nations. The former was the English man's, the other the Danes: (12
Ores, I find it guessed.) Vid. Glossar: ad Lambard. Archa^on. p. ult. Seldom
of Tithes, cap. 8 sect. 10 Spelman. Gloss. page 423. and Foedus Edovardi and
Guth. a pud Lamb. Arch. c. 3. and 6 pa 42. And compare with them Spelm. Gloss.
in vocab. Englecheria, pa. 231.
gildwit, another by lawslite; neighbors, for the same offenses, several ways,
Amassed all both precept and penalty together under one general rule, and from
the composition, indifferency, and use called the result by a fitting name
(relating to whence it had come) the ^now Post Aluredam suas promunt leges
Edovardus senior, Aethelstanus, Edmundus, Edgarus, Ethelredus Saxones, and
Canutus Danus, generales plerunque singulas quoad prohibition's Canonem, sed in
irregandis mulctis Danos respicientes juxta coniuetudinem Danicam (quam Laslit
vocant;) Anglos juxta Anglicam; and Mercios interdum juxta Mercianam. Noluit
vero Rex Edovardus Confessor in uno regno triplicem hanc justitiae lancem, sed
recensens denuo Anglorum, Danorum, and Merciorum leges. suam dedit parem
omnibus, and Communem, quae a Re, Lex Communis; ab Authore, Lex Sancti Edovardi
nuncupata est. Ranulph. Ceftrensis: Ex tribus his legibus (inquit) Sanctus
Edwardus tertius unam legem Communem edidit, quae Leges Edwardi usque hodie
vocantur. Spelman Gloss page 436 in vocab. Lex Anglorum. Though Gervase of
Tilbury refer the work to a little after, as done by the Conqueror. Porro
liber de quo quaeris sigilli Regii individuus est comes; ( that is, Domus-Dei
Book:) Hujus autem institutionis causam ab Henrico quondam Wintoniensi
Episcopo ( son to the Conquerours daughter) sic accepi. Cum insignis Angliae
subactor Rex Wilhelmus, ejusdem Pontificis sanguine ptopinquus ulteriores
Insulae fines suo subjugasset imperio, and rebellium mentes terribilium
perdomuisset exemplis, Ne libera de caetero datetur erroris facultas, decrevit
subjectum fibi populum juri scripto legibusque subjice re. Propositis igitur
legibus Anglicanis secundum tripartitam earum distinctionem, hoc est,
Me^chen-lage, Dene-lage, West Sexen-lage, quasdam reprobavit, quasdam autem
reprobans, transmarinas Neustriae leges, quae ad regni pacem tuendam
efficacissimae videbantur, adjecit. Glossat. ad Lambard. Arch. pa. 219. in
vocab. Ius Danorum Agreement in substance for the Original, Derivation, and
composition of these Laws, though the circumstances a little vary
Common Law: not but that the parts had been before, but he collected and
imbodyed them thus, and from the composition and derivation gave this name.
Just as the famous Justinian before, by help of Tribonian, Constantine,
Theophilus, and others, winnowed the great Sed com omnia percontabamur, a
praefato viro excelso (Triboniano) suggestum est, duo pene millia librorum esse
conscripta and ^plusquam trecentics december millia versuum a Veteribus effusa,
quae necesse esset omnia and legere, and perscrutari, and ex h^s, si qu^d
optimum fuisset, e^igere. De Confirmat. Digest. in Princ.
heaps of the former Roman Civil-Law and of the near two thousand volumnes
that had been 1400. Erat enim mirabile Romanam Sanctionem ab urbe condita usque
ad nostri Imperii tempora quae pene in mill and quadringentos annos concuriunt
-- in unam reducere consonantiam, ut nihil neque contrarium, neque idem, neque
simile in ea inveniatur, and ne geminae legespro rebus singuli; positae usquam
appareant. Ibid.
years a laying together, sifted out some little for his use, that greed with
the Genius of his time and affairs, calling the Collection, his New Digests or
Pandects, a general Receipt, or All-receiving composition; And as was intended,
(and in part perfomed) here at the purging of the Canon Law in the time of
Henry the eighth, (upon the striking of the Pope, the Head,) where it seemed
good to the then wisdom of the state to limit by the prudent fishermen in the
Gospel, who collected and saved the good into vessels, only they cast the bad
away: Or as lastly lawmakers have almost a law to themselves, to cull out no
more then needs they must for rejection, the weeds and refuse; reserving all
the good slips, and picking their posie as near as they can of new flowers
growing on old stocks formerly planted, and hitherto preserved; so was done
here. Our English Justinian (Edward) made his new Digests (the Common Law) out
of those as it were Praetorian Edicts, Senatus consulta, Decreta Sapientum,
etc. of British, English, Saxon, and Danish pieces which had been before, and
was easier to order then to new make, and usurping to himself the power of a
father, having digested it into his new form, called the product his new
Common Law. Whence or from how far came those pieces he thus made use of, would
I believe prove a very hard question and not to be satisfied fully, unless we
could recover sundry things utterly lost; Caput inter nubila condit, as he said
of that river, their original is far among the clouds, and not to be revealed
to us in any degree but from the things of Mulmutius, Dunwallo, Qu. Martia and
such other as being thought of nowhere else in the world but here, are yet with
us wrapped up under very hard names. Yet for an Essay, and because it has not
been attempted purposely by any, for varietyes sake, Take as follows,

First, for granted, that, as before, the Confessor was but -- Anglicarum
legum legitimus restitutor, as Gemeticens. lib. 6. cap 9.
an old book styles him, the restorer, not the contriver of them; and a little
more, that he had them from his Grandfather Exillo die ( from the fourth of the
Conquerours Reign) multa authoritate veneratae, and per universum regnum
corroboratae and observatae sunt prae caeteris patriae legibus leges Edwardi
Regis Sancti, quae prius inventae and constitutae fuerunt tempore Regis Edgari;
Verum post mortem ipsius dimissae sunt annis circiter 68. -- Sed postquam Rex
Edwardus venit ad Regnum, Consilio Baronum Angliae legem 68 annis sopitam
excitavit, excitatam reparavit, reparatam decoravit, decoratam confirmavit;
Confirmata vero vocata est Lex Regis Edwardi, non quod ipse primus adinvenisset
eam, sed cum praetermissa fuisset, and oblivioni penitus dedita a diebus avi
sui Regis Edgari, qui 17 annos regnavit, and qui primus ejus inventor dicitur,
usque ad sua tempora, videlicet ut praedictum est 68 annos post dies ipsius
Edgari, ipse Edward us, quia justa erat, and honesta, a profunda abysso
extraxit eam, and renovavit, and ut suam observandam contradidit. Leg. Edovardi
R. tit. Lex Novicorum, apud Lambard. Archaion, pa. 129. and vid. Chron. Vetust.
Ecclesiae Licbfelden. 16. pa 158. and apud Seldon. ad Eadmer Histor. pa. 171.
Edgar; from whose time they having been laid asleep (for 68. years) and buried
as it were under the spoils of war, long silenced by the Danish tumults, He,
by the advice of his English Barons, revived, awakened, quickened, and gave new
life and vigor to their dull and fainting power, and from the office of a
friend, Guardian or protector got himself the reputation of an Author, or first
Father, setting them toward that state they have in some measure continued in
ever since. But we begin not then: He The Evidence of things speaks thus much
to all that are acquainted with the affairs of those times.
this Edgar, had them questionless from his most noble Antecessor the pious,
valiant, and wise Alfred, who what he did was remembered Page 56.
before, from Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, etc. to whose tendries he added what seemed
fit of the Legislatives of West-Saxony: beyond which, and the farthest our
inquiries go, and there they settle, must be the King Mulmutius, and the Queen
Martia. These coined what had after many following inscriptions, and stamping
for current Law, what had been hitherto but prevailing reason, or arbitrary
opinion, made that first draught whereof we have now any remainder extant, and
that I believe with many alterations and Re-Reformations has continued topical
and national to us ever since to this very day. Seems this a strange thing? I
invented it not: Good authority has led or misled me; take account therefrom
of each distinctly

First, for Mulmutius, Geffry of Et cum totam insulam omnino subjugasset, fecit
sibi diadema ex auro, insulamque in pristinum statum reduxit. Hic leges quae
Mulmutinae dicebantur inter Britones statuit, quae usque ad hoc tempus inter
Anglos celebrantur. Statuit si quidem inter coetera, quae multo tempore post, B
Gildas scripsit, ut Templa Deorum and Civitates talem dignitatem haberent, ut
quicunque fugitivus sive Reus ad ea confugeret, cum venia coram inimico suo
abiret. Statuit etiam ut viae quae ad praedicta templa and civitates ducebant,
Nec non and aratra Colonorum eadem lege confirmarentur. In diebus itaque ejus
latronum mucrones cessabant, raptorum saevitiae obturabantur, nec erat usquam
qui violentiam alicui ingereret -- In urbe Trinovanto prope templum Concordiae
sepultus, quod ipse ad confirm a tionem legum construxerat. Galfrid. Monum.
Hist. Reg. Brit. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Monmouth discovers of him, That he was one of the first, that having subdued
the whole nation, rendered himself glorious by the luster of a golden Crown, and
made certain Laws, from him called the Mulmutian, which are preserved, ( and
the Author lived since the Conquest, in some favor with Robert Duke of
Gloucester, King Henrie's son) among the English to this day. Gildas the Wise
translated them into Latin along time after they were written; a part was;
That Temples and cities should have privilege of Sanctuary, and so the
highways leading to them, and the plough, etc. And having reaped much peace,
the fruit of his diligence, he was buried in London near the Temple of Love,
quod ipse ad confirmationem legum construxerat. The late Mulmutius Dunwallo Rex
-- aur^a Corona primus usus est, and salutares leges quae Mulmutiae dicebantur
instituit. Has in Latinum sapiens Gil^^as, and in Anglicanum sermonem postea
Rex Alphredus convertit, adeo ut diu easdem etiam inter Anglos diligenter
observatas fu^sse constet. Quarum adhuc fe e capita memorantur haec, Vt Deorum
templa, etc. Richardus Vitus Basinstochii, Histor. lib. 3 pa 186.
Dr. White of Basing stoke, his credit is engaged for much the same, adding,
that what Guildas translated into Latin, Alfred did into English to be a rule
here, (of whose borrowing from times past we spoke before:) and Hic igitur
(Dunwallo) est qui primus, etc. Et qui leges patriae quae Mulmutinae
dicebe^tur, instituit inter Britones, quae usque ad hottempus celebrantar inter
Angl^s, ( so then from the Britains to the English they came.) Vrbes, Templa
fecit, ut qui ad alla fugerer, etiam coram inimico abiret, and viae tutae
essent simili modo, quae ad Templa recte ibant, and ad a^atra col norum: Poste^
mortuus est in urbe Trinovantum sepultus juxta templum Concordi^e. Britan.
Histor. lib. 2 in fine.
Ponticus Virunnicus ( living too on this side the Conquest,) ingages they were
observed till his days.

Thus for the man: Now for the Noble and Masculine Queen Martia, the Loyal wife
first, and after learned widow of King Gunteline, or Guiteline, (Remember both
He and she lived before either the Conquest, Christianity (here) or Christ's
incarnation; Mulmutius under the second Monarchy of the Persians about 430.
before Christ: and this Qu. Martia soon after:) she was (says the same Erat ei
(Guithelino) Nobilis mulier Marcia nomine, omnibus artibus erudita. Haec inter
multa and inaudita, quae proprio in ^nio peperenat, invenit legem quam Britones
Martianam appellaverunt Hanc etiam Rex Aluredus inter caeteras transtulit, and
Saxonica lingua Pa March^tie-lage vocavit. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Geffry) both noble and well learned in the Arts: Among other remarkable things
she did, she invented that Law the Britains used under the name of Marcian,
(and from her no doubt might the Province of Mercia take name, a large tract of
Land reaching from Lincolnshiere to the heart of England as now, and formerly
known by this name, as all know that are acquainted at that distance:) which
King Alfred among other translated, and called Pa Marchitie lage, as the print
of Geffry has, but the correcting In the public Library of Oxford, in 4 H. 27
Art.
Manuscript more fitly, Merchenelage, or Martian Law: and Histor. Britan. l. 3.
Pont. Virunnius, Flor. Histor. at. 4 cap. 1
Matthew. Westminster, and -- Leges optimas a se nominatas, and diutissime postea
a Britannis observatas instituit, quas Idem Rex Alphredus sermon donavit
Anglico, ut ante delegibus Mulmu^iis demonstravimas Rich. Vit. lib. 3. page 199.
Dr. White come in also here with their subsidiary assents and confirmations.

William of Malmsbury, Chronia. ad an. ante not. Chr. 442. and ad an. ^56
John Stow, and Histor. Angl. lib 1. pa. 21, 22.
Polyd. Virgil, have the same, or much after the same, And so not very like all
would take up error upon trust one after and from another; But the true
pedigree of the Common Law may, from beyond this Occurrit in Historiis mentio
legis Molmutianae and legis Merciae, alias Martianae. Illam a Molmut^o Rege
Britonum quem floruisse asserunt anno nondum elucentis gratiae, 430. Hanc a
Regina Martiana (Lelando Martia Proba,) Guentelini Regis vidua, dum infantis
filii regnum tueretur, ferunt conditam, anno ante Not. Chr. 350. Has duas leges
(inquit Cestriensis Monachus, lib. 1 cap. 50) Gildas Historicus transtulit de
Britannico in Latinum: and Rex Aluredus postmodum de Latino in Saxonicum, quae
Marchene laga dicebantur. Ipse quoque Aluredus legem Anglice conscriptam
superadjecit, quae West-Saxene-laga vocabatur Tandem Danis in hac terra
dominantibus tertia lex emanavit quae Dane-laga dicebatur. Ex his tribus
legibus Sanctus Edwardus tertius Communem edidit, quae leges Edwardi usque
hodie vocantur. Spelman. Glossar. pa. 441. in Vocab. Lex Merciorum.
Edward, derive it self (in some parts at least) thrice as far with show and
probability. So like is that I say else where, There may be of Laws a
Climatical fitness; They thrive best under such an aspect, and will hardly be
pruned out: We have Native some things, and these Connatural, with other,
whence they continue the same upon endeavor of removal, and still sprout out
again to a kind of immortality. This by the way: Now to return.

Whether these things be of certainty enough or not, for the derivation of
parts thus far, sure enough what is generally received for the whole, that the
Common Law, as Common, fathers it self on this King and S. Edward, as before;
He made of severals this one entire Body, wherever he had his pieces; And so in
this if we have it, we have not only Law, but to (create sure right in
Temporals) Secular Law, Common Law, this our settled and long continued
all-ruling, all-disposing Sovereign Common Law, and this in the infancy, life,
vigor, and most powerful strength, and chief ruling, Reigning power thereof;
and all this for what many take to be no other then some tyrannical imposition
of some latter statute; yes so indeed, we have the morning beams of this
Sovereign light to quicken to best and strongest most assured Right, This Right
of Tithes; Let more or as much be showed for almost any thing in this Kingdom
or Commonwealth.

The highest other titles pretend to, or shelter themselves under, is but under
the Conqueror; the most go not so far, and they are thought to aim at a very
great distance that can but look thitherward; Insomuch that it became Vid.
Seld. of Tithes. Review of Chaep 8.
a doubt long since whether any Plea founded of right beyond, were to be
hearkened to? and though the truth seems, it was, and many enjoyed on this side,
what they had on the other, and had not forfeited by stubborn opposition; yet
an excellent Scholar ( the Aristotle of our Nation,) and a Chancell. Bacon. Of
the use of the Law, pa. 23. And see also the Preface to Hen. 1. Laws, late set
forth by Sir Roger Twisden, pa 155.
professed Lawyer, seems to give his opinion to the contrary, That save
Church Lands, and those in Kent, all else had their rights drowned in that
deluge, and save what was saved by mercy, the rest then perished: But now
behold here not only a present and ancient title, but founded in the Common
Law, and so long since as makes it to have overlived clearly that bloody
battle; Planted there in words at length, by the composer himself of that Law,
and so fully too as few things else are, and so by consequent, from the very
beginning has a fairer, farther, deeper, and more spreading radication in the
inside and body thereof, (as 'twere clasping in almost to another hemisphaere,)
then most other lands, tenements, hereditaments, etc. can pretend to. Flet 4.
5. 14
A tempore coronationis Regis H. patris Regis E. was long since a good Plea,
From the Coronation of Henry the third. And in Bracton fol. 373.
Henry the third's time, from his granfather: But here is that overlookes those
clearly, double and treble, From the Conqueror and before. What can, if this
cannot, settle a thing by Law? to have its title thus written by the Founder
Himself, in clear and evident Characters, even in the infancy and the very
face of the Common Law.

And here then before we go any farther, let us a little stand still, and veiw
the way we have gone, and what we have gained as 'twere in another world,
before and beyond the Norman turn. Sure a Right; a firm Right: a legal,
undoubted, public, Civil Right; as good as any had, as good as any could have,
what grant and assurance could make over, and that public and strongest. What
is that we own any thing by but agreement? public convention! (...), as F. de
Legibus Senatu que. L. Nam and Demosthenes.
Marcian the Civillian spoke from Demosthenes the Orator! which is that alone
parts intercommoners, and is the bottom every ones Own rests upon: Now and
this stands as full under, as powerfully and vigorously supports these thus
apportioned Rights, as any other separate parcels whatsoever, we have made it
appear so in those days. I look upon the Common Law in a twofold state, of
growth, and perfection. 1. As an Embrio preparing to some thing, in rude and
imperfect pieces. 2. As a child, like to be a man, formed to a being, and of
some present power, and abilities. In each of which we could expect no more to
appear for tithes then does; for whether we regard those native and as it were
connatural genuine Laws of our Country as having distinct force, or as after
amassed together into one community; the Several parts, made after into the
Common Law, or the Common Law made out of those several parts, still, in All,
tithes had a clear full mention and grant, And this to the Baptism of John,
from the beginning of Any Baptism in this Nation. We have donation, we have
confirmation; we have Law, we have penalty; we have Thou shall pay, or, thou
shall be punished if thou do not pay: King Etheldreds Law, King Aelfwolds law,
King Offaes Law, King Aethelwolphs Law, and also the noble Alureds, the most
glorious Founder of our state, and government. King Edmonds Law, King
Ethelstanes Law, K. Edgars, Knouts, the Confessors, and whose not beside the
Parliament at Aenham, and other Parliaments, Princes, Peers, People, Lords,
Synods, Senates, What not? and all from as undoubted monuments of truth and
assurance, as any the times do afford: He that will doubt these may as well
doubt any thing: whether those men were? whether these Princes reigned? whether
there were an Heptarchy, and the wrangling, wasting, consuming parts did at
last coalescere into a mutually preserving Monarchy? We have but credit of
story and record for these, and so for them, and indeed for one part, as well
as another.

CHAP. XVII.
COME we next on this side the bloody battle, and Sanguelac conveys us over to
no less assurance or clearness of strength on this side that strangly
successful invasion. Non-revocation is first assured: for who ever heard of
such a prevailing vote as this since the Conquerors days, quickened to life and
power, that no tithes should be paid; Then for positive confirmations we have
many: Ever and anon some new sinews of strength having been added to those were
before, and repeated assurances of them coming in so thick and plentifully
that they had need for their multitude to be sorted into parcels to avoid
confusion.

1. And whereas of K. Edwards Laws Tithes were a part, as but now, our first
search would be therefore, what notice and allowance is of Them, and Tithes in
Them.

2. Next when and how the Consistory was erected, with its lawful powers, the
proper scaen where these dues had motion and translation both as to stating
their right and helping their Recovery.

3. What were the Collateral impressions of state in this interval, chiefly
since the beginning of the printed statutes; as in Magna Charta, Articuli
Cleri, Circumspecte agatis, etc. to the Petition of Right.

4. What is else abroad of Private stamp, but Public allowance, as among the
great Lawyers, Cook, Fleta, Bracton, S. German, Natura Brevium, Book of
Entrys, etc. On each of which heads is like to be found at least something and
all hoped will be abundantly enough. In any whereof yet we shall not so much
tie our selves to follow our method as our business, rather choosing to let our
matter lead us, then we forcing it; and always esteeming our method such a line
of our own making, as that the compass thereof we may at any time without
offense upon occasion transgress.

First then to King Edwards Laws, renewed, repeated, confirmed, and sworn as
they were, (a good part of the account that is of those are very ancient being
spent in the mention of them,) and some wonder it is to see and consider for
some Ages how peoples hearts were not so much bent toward, as set upon, and
wedded to them. Fickle men! that use to love and hate in a breath; with no more
constancy then the wind blows from such a set point of the Compass, Now for
this, and Then for that; Yet such was their Immutable and Immortal love to
their Avitae Consuetudines, as they called them, that they would not admit of
any divorce from them; the sword of a Conqueror could not terrify from their
embraces, and any restraint for a time did but quicken their appetite and
awaken and inrage their thirst to call for them so much the more earnestly
after, and indeed undeniably. It was harder to conquer These then the whole
Nation besides: The peoples hearts were soon quieted or subdued by one great
Battle and a few other: But their affection to these was such, that ever and
anon they were up in bloody Insurrections; They would not be denied their Laws
upon peril of their lives, and still whatsoever bonds of agreement were made,
none would hold; whatsoever peace was agreed on, none would last and be firm,
unless These King Edwards Laws were the soder and braces as it were to keep all
from falling back again to factions and fractions. So in K. Williams time, so
in Hen. 1. and Hen. 2. So in K. John's, so in others, till they were planted in
the Coronation Oath, and there I believe lately they were in the last that was
taken.

See of K. William first, whose Laws bear this title:

The Leges boni Regis Edovardi, quas Gulielmus Bastardus postea confirmavit.
Laws of good K. Edward which William the Bastard afterward confirmed.

Post acquisitionem Angliae praefatus Rex Anglie Gulielmus, quarto anno regni
sui, Consilio Baronum suorum fecit summoniri per universos Angliae Consulatus
Anglos nob les, sapientes, and lege sua eruditos, ut eorum leges, and jura, and
consuetudines audiret. Electi igitur de singulis totius patriae Com^tatibus
viri duodecim, jurejurando eoram Rege primum confirmaverunt, ut quoad possent
recto tramite incedentes, nec ad dextram nec ad sinistram d^vertentes, legum
suarum and consuetudinum sancita patefacerent, nihil praerermi^ttentes, nihil
addentes, nihil praevaricando mutantes. A Legibus igitur sanctae matris
Ecclesiae sumentes exordium, quoniam per eam Rex and Regnum solidum habent
subsistendi fundamentum, leges, libertates, and paces ipsiu^ concionatisunt,
dicentes.
The first Chap. After the Conquest of England, the said William in the 4 year
of his reign, by the advice of his Barons, caused through all the shires of
England, the Nobles and other the Omnis Clericus, etc. Lambard. Arch. pa 138.
Spelman. Council. pa. 619.
Wisemen and Lawyers of the Land to be summoned, that of them He might know
what their Laws and Customs were: (4) See M. Seldens Review of Cha. 8 Of
Tithes, pa. 982.
These being met, twelve of every shire; and having first taken their Oaths to
deal sincerely, not turning to the right hand or to the left, adding nothing,
detracting nothing, changing nothing, began with the Church: Quoniam per eam
Rex and Regnum solidum, subsistendi habent fundamentum; Because this was the
Basis and firm settle whereon all the Rest was seated, and her Laws and
Liberties were (they say) as follows;

2. Let every Clerk and Scholar, and their possessions wheresoever, have the
peace of God and the Church: And so on to the eighth Chapter; for every tenth
sheaf, tenth fool, tenth fleece, etc. as before, which is the And the same limb
is also of the same body, but under another head, as if the whole composition
were Glanvils* in Hoveden. Annal part. post pa. 600.
particular Law we seek for here. That which might occasion this strict Survey,
may have been, when he saw what was, to superinduce or conjoyn his Norway
orders; Proferebat enim quod antecesso es ejus, and omnium Baronum fere
Normannorum, Norwegienses extitissent, and quod de Norweia olim venissent. Et
hac authorita^e leges eorum cum profundiores and honestiores omnibus aliis
essent, prae caete^is regni sui legibus asserebat se debere sequi, and
observare, Lambard. ^bi s^pra ^. 149. and Vid. Spelman. Glossar pa 4^6. and
Chron. Lichfeld. apud Lambard. pa 158.
As well because they were his, and he was willing to govern by his Own, as
because they were better and honester, as he pretended; But chiefly for that
their admission Seldom* ib. pa. 484.
would have removed one rub which lay in his way, and hindered the evennes of
his path to the Crown by succession, which was his unfitness thereto by reason
of his illegitimation; which, as Laws were here under the Church, scarce left
him in a succeeding condition (to his Cosen Edward, for he entered not merely
by Conquest,) whereas the Northern were in this regard more pliable and
favorable. But when Quo audito mox universi compatriotae Regni qui leges
edixerant, tristes effecti, unanimiter deprecati sunt, quatenus permitteret
sibi leges proprias, and consuetudines antiquas habere in quibus vixerant
patres eorum, and ipsi in eis nati and nutriti sunt, quia durum valde foret
sibi suscipere leges ignotas, and judicare de eis quas nesciebant. Rege vero ad
flectendum ingrato existente, tandem eum prosequuti sunt deprecantes, quatenus
per animam Regis Edwardi, qui sibi post diem suum concesserat coronam and
regnum, and cujus erant leges, etc. Lambard, Vbi Supra.
the people heard hereof, their rage was up presently, their swords by their
sides, and spears in their hands, beseeching they might not be ruled by they
knew not what; and when he denied, reinforced their bold requests, conjuring
him by S. Edwards soul, who left him the Kingdom, (and this was a part of his
title, glanced at before,) and whose the so much desired Laws were, that he
would not force a yoke on them they were not able to bear, and like to gall
their necks so much the more, because they knew not how neither to wear it.
This he had in part Vid. The. Spot. prout citatur in Glossar. ad Lambard. Arch.
pa. 222. in vocab. Terra ex Scripto. and Speed. Hist^r. lib 9. cap. 1. sect. 8.
in Will. 1.
promised before to the two greatest of the Hierarchy of Canterbury before they
would lay down with their boughs their swords, but soon forgot his words as
Conquerours use to do; But howsoever now no remedy, He must yield, and did once
for all: Thomas of Cant. and Maurice another Bishop, writing them out with
their own hands, and so they were taken up, Decima Deo debita, with the rest,
and they shall be now observed for ever. Such they may be, it is harder to
conquer Laws then Men, and rooted usages having had time to spread and like,
may contract such a kind of Connaturality with the place by consent, that
though a generation of men may be cut off, These will not. I will not say,
There is a Climatical fitness, and in such a place some love to grow; As of
other things, There do influences produce and cherish, what being There
prospers, being Away languishes, being removed sighs out fainting desires to
return, like the Vine that by the Elm thrives best, (yea, mutually they
cherish each other,) or the plants of Trinacria, which when that Island was cut
off from Italy, (as ours thought from France) reclined lovingly back to the
place from whence they had been taken. No Nullum ibi reptile videri soleat,
nullus vivere serpens valeat. Nam saepe illo de Britannia allati serpents, mox
ut proximante terris navigio; odore aeris illius adtacti fuerint, intereunt.
Quin potius omnia pene quae de eadem insula sunt, contra venenum valent.
Denique vidimus, qu busdam a serpente percussis, rasa folia codicum, qui de
Hybernia fuerunt, and ipsam rasuram aquae immissam, ac potui datam, talibus
protinus totam vim veneni grassantis, totum inflati corporis absumpsisse ac
sedasse tumorem. Beda. Eccles. Histor. lib. 1 cap. 1.
poisoned thing, they say, will live in Ireland: Creatures, their very nature
is The Indian Ounees, What be they but extract from the Cats of Europe? Spanish
dogs, in New Spain, in the second Litter do they not become Wolves? Good Melons
transplanted into a base and barren ground, t^^n quickly to ordinary e^cumbers.
So there in Ca^mannia) the Iackals may be of the dogs of Europe, by diversity
of air, and soil varying in spe^ie from that they were formerly Herb Trav. pa.
124 in Carmannia.
troubled, and they like to degenerate, when they change soil and climate: Some
Northern Beasts are reported to alter (in time) removing to the South, and when
from us to any other Country, against reason, yet more: As things, may not
then Laws naturally love some Countries, desire to be there, prosper in that
Region best, and thitherward therefore recline being separated? bewraying a
kind of sympathy with the place, by that the place seems to want them, and
they desire and make to it, resting and having a strange kind of complacency
and delight (mutually) in that approximation! Many things we see we can give no
reason of: but we Do see and know Native Laws settle (as in love) toward some
places, Ours also so passionately called for Here, as to a despite of
opposition, a scorn of denial; May there not then be a kind of sympathy, and
Connaturality of Them with Us, we understand not?

Well: this formal Concession was upon this importunity howsoever made, but how
kept? M. Fox Martyrol. in the Life of Will. 1. pa. 171.
says the truculent soldier feared not to perjure himself: (whence we learn, he
had sworn:) Upon which endeavor of revocation, the people were soon up again
Speeds Hist. lib. 9 cap. 2 sect 21 Seldom ad Eadmer. nos. pa. 194.
under Edgar Etheling, Englands Dearling as they called him, Fretherick The
stout Abbot of S. Albanes, and Aldred BP of York being their Chief
Councillors, Edwin and Morcar their Chief Generals. These would not bear their
forced change of Laws; though Governors they stuck not so much at, neither was
there any remedy but gratify their discontents with a re-Concession. The King
enters parley with them at Berkehamsted in Hartford shire, where loath to hazard
by the chance of an hour, what he had got not without the expense of blood,
treasure, and so long continued industry; He condescends to hearken, as
Rehoboam should, to his wise Counselor (the Archbishop of Canterbury) to
yield to grant what 'twas dangerous to deny, and to be pliable for once to
those must be his subjects for ever: Non tam libenter itaque quam sapienter,
Tho. Spot. Vbi Su.
as was said of him in another case, not so much willingly as wisely he made
Concession, and being also of carriage fair, and of speech courteous, he so wan
upon the old Abbot Fretherick, and all that were with him, that they were again
content to put their neck into his yoke, so it might be the gentle one they
liked of K. Edwards making. So said, so done: an agreement was thus made which
ratified by Oath and vowed upon the relics of S. Albane, All were satisfied,
and every one went to his own home. Though this were not the only time or
course of affairs that brought about the establishment of these loved
decretals: Elsewhere also they were put into Hoc quoque praecipimus ut omnes
habeant and teneant leges Edvardi Regis in omnibas rebus, adauctis hiis quas
Constituimus ad utilitatem Anglorum. Lambard. Arch. pa. 172. l. 63. Seldom. ad
Aedmet. not. page 192.
K. Williams Code, which willed them to be strictly kept by all, with only
some additions in favor of the English, as in the Red Book of the Exchequer,
lately published. Next him was William 2. of whom we have little account, but
very like his truculent nature would put on for a return of his fierce Norway
usages. More then like he did; for at the coming in of his Brother Henry, He
was fain Eadmer. Histor. Non. lib. 3. page 55.
to stroke the people with a promise to release their heavy burdens, and that
all things introduced contrary to K. Edwards Laws, should be removed, with a
Re-Reconcession of them in their full force and virtue. Promisit emendationem
legum, quibus oppressa fuerat Anglia tempore patris sui and fratris nuper
defuncti; -- Adhaec Clero respondente et magnatibus cunctis: quod si animo
volente ipsis vellet concedere and Charta sua communire illas libertates and
Consuetudines antiquas, quae floruerunt in Regno tempore sancti Regis Edwardi,
in ipsum consentirent and in Regem unanimiter consecrarent. Henrico autem hoc
libenter annuente, and se id facturum cum juramento affirmante, consecratus est
in Regem apud Westmonasterium, etc. Matthew. Paris. ad an. 1100. p 51.
A Monk of S. Albanes who was likest to know, tells us: He sooths the headless
people, desiring he might be their Governor, and all hard Laws should be
amended: They specify, that if they might be S. Edwards Laws, and he would
allow them by his Charter (after made out into the great Charter no doubt) they
would stick to him against his elder Brother Robert, now in the holy Wars at a
distance. With all his heart; for he must, or no Crown: So he swore them
presently, and was not after worse then his word: for he soon directed his
Letter to the Sheriff of every Shire, acknowledging his Election, and
confessing oppressions past, and promising relaxation to come, grants the
Church her liberties, etc. and that all ill customs should be amended, etc.
And coming to particulars, that all past murders should be pardoned, and future
tried by K. Edwards Law, He after reaches in the whole: Lagam Regis Edwardi
vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus quibus pater meus ^am emendavit Consilio
Baronum Angliae. Id. ib.
The Law of K. Edward I restore you, says he, with all amendments mado by my
Father with the consent of his Barons: which is the more like to be true,
because besides this private Author, there is agreement of the public Tables
in two Copies (with some small variation,) in Lately published and annexed to
Lamb. Arch. p. 175.
the Books of the Exchequer, Ib. Pa 176.
the title of whose second Chapter is, De Confirmatione Legum Edwardi Regis, as
if that were the only business. Afterward Robert came home, and they
parlying of the great business Matthew. Par. ad an. ^ 106. pa. 59.
at Northampton, fearing the peoples revolt, he knew no better means to retain
them, then by pleasing them with sugared words, telling them, His Brother was a
Military man, He addicted to Peace: His Brother a new-comer, Himself known to
them: The stranger was like to prove truculent, as arriving to them with his
hands bloody from Syria, but He had granted them King Edwards Law, had sworn it
them, had kept it them; It was his joy to remember the day when that firm and
pleasing bond of friendship was contracted between them first, which also he
wished everlasting: And if they list to desire any thing more in the same
business, they need but ask and have; and thus were they enchanted to be his,
almost against Justice: Parva Ieves animos capiunt; Good words go far with the
multitude.

At King Stephens coming to the Crown, we find not much, but Id. in vita
St^phan. Reg. in prin. pa. 71.
he swore the Liberties of the Church, and gave Charter of them, etc. Speed
Hist. lib 9. ca 5 sect. 3.
He promised to reform the over-hard Laws of his Predecessors, and to mollify
extremes under his Seal and Charter: which words considered, seem much of the
import with the And Will. Malmsbury, speaking of K^outs severity, and picking
from K. Ethelreds Laws, and eternizing them, whereof before: In quarum Custodia
( says he) etiam nunc tempore sub nomine Regis Edwardi juratur, non quod ille
statue rit sed quod observaverit. De Gest. Reg. Angl. lib. 2 cap 11. pa 75. He
lived in this K* Stephens ^worf^.
former. But before his reign was out, Florent. Wigorn. in Glossar. D. H.
Spelman pa. 440.
the Londoners were up, and made earnest request to Maud the Empress, then, it
seems, recovered to some power, and gotten thither, that these Laws of K.
Edward might be restored expressly: quia optimae erant, and non patris sui
Henrici, quia graves erant: whereunto she giving an unadvised answer, there
rose presently such a storm of men's passions and arms both together, that she
was glad, with disgrace enough to leave the Town, without taking so much as her
Trunks along with her. In Hen. 2. (her sons) time, R. de Glanvilla was made
Chief Justice. His Book entitled, Tractatus de Legibus and Consuetudinibus
Angliae tempore Regis Hen. 2. compositus, has, for reasons I shall allege
hereafter more seasonably, little of Tithes, Nothing of King Edwards laws, as
that Book is come to us: But Videturque Hovedenus leges Edovardi Confessoris a
Gulielmo emendatas, and ab Henrico secun. do denuo restitutas, restituenti
attribuere. Id. pa. ead. col. 2.
to the same Henry as Author, and the fame Glanvil as under him Composer, are
ascribed this very Body whereof I speak, and under the same Head given by To.
Hoveden the Historian; Though he* was yet, I take it, but the Vid. Hoveden.
Annal. part. poster. ad an. 26 Hen. 2. pa. 600.
Compiler of them.

But now in K. John's time arose those terrible tempests, were like to shake and
overwhelm all, the noise whereof was heard all over Christendom; Neither was
there any appeasing the storm, or settling toward peace and quietness, but by
so far as these Laws had approbation. Matthew. Paris Ad. an. 1213. pa. 229, 230.
tells us, that at the end of some broils, when the King was absolved at
Winchester, he swore upon the holy Gospels that he would defend the Church and
Churchmen, etc. and revive all good Laws, especially King Edwards, abrogating
all that were unjust: which I take it, was done not long after at S. Albanes,
when peace was restored to all, and on behalf of the King commanded, that the
Laws of This was, being strictly taken, Henry the second: but a judecious
Conjecturar rather ^astens it on Hen. 1. as if it were, Proavi sui. (Spelm. in
Gloss. pa. 436.) which is the more likely, because this was word for word that
K. John swear, and is here found* remembered and recited: as may be seen in
Matthew. Paris.
his Grandfather Henry (of him we had but now) should be observed, and all hard
Laws repealed throughout England: which when after upon displeasure it was
endeavored to be revoked, the Archbishop follows the King to Notingham, and so
deals that that unjust purpose was revoked; and after, having found a Copy of
Hen. 1. Charter (of which before) He takes aside many of the Peers, and thus
bespeaks them: Ye may remember what was done at Winchester; How I absolved the
King, and he swore to revive and preserve K. Edwards Laws: I have lighted upon
a Copy of them; here it is, Hear it read, and let us make our selves happy once
for all by a combination that it Shall be observed. Hereupon he produces the
Charter, word for word, the same as from Hen. 1. even to the particulars of a
double mention and confirmation of K. Edwards Laws; and having read it and
sworn to it and the Combination together, by the next Id. pa. 233.
news we hear of K. John, he is like to turn Mahumetan to shift himself of
those troubles his inconstancy to these good Laws had wrapped him in. Nor ended
the business so: An 1214. id. pa. 243.
The year following was a great meeting at Saint Edmundsbury, to force the King
again to make good the liberties and They produced the Charter. Continebat
autem Charta quasdam libertates, and Leges Regis Eadwardi Sancti, Ecclesiae
Anglicanae par^ter and Magnatibus concessas, exceptis quibusdam libertatibus,
quasidem Rex de suo adjecit ib.
those Laws: soon after Ch^istmas the year following, they come boldly enough
upon him and demand the observation of them, and performance of his promise;
when he craved time to deliberate; and meant but to delay, they smelt it, and
assembled a great Host at Stanford, and coming after to Brackley, where they
had a parley, offered a Schedule of their demands, containing the old Laws and
Customs of the Land, and those are Capitula quoque legum and libertatum quae
ibi Magnates confirmari quaerebant, partim in Charta Regis Henrici superius
scripta sunt, partimque ex legibus Regis Eadwardi antiquis excerpta. Id pa. 244.
after said to be partly out of K. Henry's Charter, (of which before) and
partly out of K. Edwards Laws still. So that thus far plain and even way till
among the Charters, and in Treaties and Consultations, Acts, Orders, Grants,
and Demands, still these were a considerable part, the only soder to combine
the disagreeing parts, of the brittle body Politic; and when the rage and
fury of the people was up, nothing was so effectual as this, like cool water
to sprinkle upon their raging fiery passions; Stroke them with a Concession of
these, and they were calmed presently. I confess we are yet short of Hen. 3.
whose was the ratification and renewed allowance only, not first grant of that
our present laws take chief notice of, by the name of The Great Charter; But
withal it is to be observed, that This was chiefly an extract of Those, and
that which K. John confirmed by Oath, and his Barons contended for, and would
not be denied to have made good in Deed, was but Hen. 1s. Of which one that had
searched and was like to know, tells us: Vere Sir Roger Twisden, in his Preface
to the Laws of Will. 1. page 157. Cook has the same in his marginall notes on
the Charter in his Instit 2 cha. 1.
itaque haec (Henrici 1.) dici potest basis and fundamentum ipsius Magnae
Chartae, quae ex part maxima leges antiquas and Regni Consuetudines
continebat, quamque Hen. 3. non confirmavit antequam per milites 12, vel
legales homines uniuscujusque Comitatus per Sacramentum inquiri fecisset quae
fuerant Libertates in Anglia tempore Henrici avi sui. So the Great was but
taken out of the other Charters, renewing (with some variation) what they had
granted before, and there is urged authority for that derivation, which their
comparison and consent will well enough make good. Thus having brought these
Laws among the Charters, thorough them, and to the last and Great; They now
with ease and pliableness enough come along and have a place in the Petition of
Right, where That was owned sufficiently, and as many Ratifications as there
were intercedent, even Parliamentary, so many-must be acknowledged to fall in
by the way (at least by implication) Hither: Of that great Law of Tithes I
mean, which having so fair and eminent a place in K. Edwards, must also have as
full and frequent a ratification all along in that bulk of laws so ratified,
which justly occasioned this Narrative; And by it we see a a part of that
strength the Law of Tithes has on this side the Conquest, even in the Common
Law still, by that it was part of it at first, and a very remarkable part of
that is taken to have been the foundation and first rise of the beginning of
the Common Law, and since has, as now, been seen, allowed, and approved with
it all along, with impetuous rage and violence called for by the people of the
land, and they would never be quiet but under this Regiment, or without these
beloved orders whereof Tithes were a considerable and eminent part. If they had
been pressed upon them by those were interessed by profit, or the tyranny of
command from above had settled, or kept them upon their weak and declining
shoulders, as unwilling as unable to bear, Reason would there should be at
least some more color of struggling to free themselves from the force, and
their hands have leave to loose their necks from the yoke of unjust imposition;
But since they desired them, bespake them, contended for them, and would not be
denied, but fought that they might pluck and keep that Burden upon themselves;
what can be more equal then that* as their own act bind themselves, so their
inheritours and successors also, and that whether to gain or to loss, yea, to
loss as well as to gain, they stand to them, and every good man with his own
whether Act or Right, sit down and Rest satisfied and very well contented?

Most things indeed find some opposition; few are so happy to escape
altogether free, and some Persons may perhaps think good to doubt of All here:
As, whether these references dispersed and represented as before, point to King
Edwards Laws, or some other? which latter If, All hitherto would seem beside
the Cushion. But in answer would be considered, 1. That no such thing appears
as mis-application, neither are other with much probability suborned in their
place. 2. The title, the old title, and that from as far as Roger Hovedens
time, speaks for them, and plain, Hae sunt leges boni Regis Edovardi, etc. 3.
Diverse passages alleged, glanced at, and extant beside can hardly be
understood but to contribute the strength of their Testimony this way. 4. To
this also the likeliest guides have led us: M. Lambard, in his Edition; M.
Hist. of Tithes cha 8: pa 224.
Seldom, in his Allegations; Animadverson that Chap. pa. 164.
D. Tildesley, Council. Tom. 1. p. 620. and of Tithes, chap. 27. pa. 131.
Sir Henry Spelman, View of the E^cles. Laws, Par. 3 chap 2. sect. 1. pa. 141.
Sir Tho. Ridley, and of late In his late E^^dition of M. Lambards Archa^on.
Anno 1644.
D. Wheloc of Cambridge. Could all have been mistaken? Were they all in the
wrong? Shall we take in a point of doubt the whole world of Learned men to be
nothing else but a flock of sheep, wandering from the truth themselves, and
leading others unto error that follow them? Take what we find: They are
generally reputed His, clearly styled His, have continued to be reputed and
styled so long enough, and naught appears clear to the contrary; and Why Then
may we not Therefore embrace them for His, and Genuine, crediting the voice of
the world? Which how, and why taken into the Coronation Oath, we may by these
things, as they were, in part also conjecture. But of this hereafter, or as
shall be occasion: In the mean time, of them, and of this Branch of Tithes in
them, Thus much.

CHAP. XVIII.
STEP we next into the Church, but by degrees, and taking in some such things
by the way, as could not have found so fitting place elsewhere: As namely,

1. Remembered be it, that Tithes were paid under the Conqueror: They were so;
For as well Chap. 10. pa. 279 etc.
M. Seldom has it in diverse particulars from the most authentic account of
this Lands Survay represented in Domus-Dei Book, (others agreeing, and
enlarging his proof:) As Ad An. 1074 pa. 8. and vid. Seldom. ad Eadmer. Histor.
pa. 168. And for after, see the complaints, (supposing payment) in John of
Chartres. De nugis Curial. lib. 7. cap. 21.
Matthew. Paris consents, in thus relating a dismal Tragedy acted under William
the first, about forcing Priests from their wives; They, says he, (the
Priests) grew scandalous, the people rose up against them, Laymen fell aboard
with the Sacraments, Any would administer Baptism, and then went Tithes to
wrack: Decimas etiam Presbyteris Debitas igne cremant: They acknowledged their
Dueness, but of malice they set them on fire, loath the scandalous married
Presbyter should have any good by them, and yet afraid it seems to meddle with
them for common profane use; And they that did so, in the next words we find
treading the Sacrament under their feet.

2. Own, as about this time owned that Law of K. Edgar, avowed after by K.
Knoght or Knout, and L. Hen 1. c^. 1. among the additionals to M. Lambard:
whereof before, pa 84. and pa. 8^.
now renewed by the Norman Hen. 1. for rule, penalty, and order for execution:
And this here assured from the best means of information, a double entry
thereof in the Exchequer Book, among the fairest testimonies extant of the Land.

3. Add, not mentioned before, that which resembles a Parliament in the same
King ( Hen. 1.) days, assembled at Westminster about the beginning of his
Reign; where, for stating diverse things then raised in doubt, among others was
ordered Eadmer. Hist. Novorum, lib. 3. pa. 68.
Thus: Vt decimae non nisi Ecclesiis dentur: Let Tithes be paid to none but
Churches; Supposing their Dueness, but limiting to whom they should be paid:
They might Not but to the Church, Therefore There they Might; else the
supposition had been a vanity, and the public voice said as good as nothing.
Darkness seems to be over the meaning, (or what should be the import,) but
light may be borrowed from the state of things then about; and I conceive of it
and them thus. Then was not only started, but in a warm C^afe, the great doubt
between the Secular and Regular States, about the due and immediate Receiver of
Tithes* (not the Dueness, but the Due receiver;) and the claim parted between
two, the Church and the Monastery: The last might have heard Sermon. de Temp. 218.
Saint Augustine, should say, Decimae suns tributa egentium animarum, (after
Cause. 16. Qu. 1. cap. 66 And a^ home in Excerp. Egberti. Can. 100* much to the
some.
taken into the Canon Law,) Read ergo Tributa pauperibus, Libami^a
sacerdotibus; And the Res Ecclesiae sunt vota fidel^u^, patrimonia pauperum.
C^gitut. Carol. lib. 1. ca. 83.
Capitularies, That they were the vows of the Faithful, and the patrimony of
the poor: Hence allowing the Churches claim indisputable, They might There, In
signum universalis Domini, They doubted whether they might not also be paid in
to the Monastery, and that duty of a Real confession of a Deity be
sufficiently discharged in giving to Themselves, the poor* that whereby they
might as well confess and acknowledge a Divinity and high Providence by, as by
giving to the other Churchmen? Now how votes the Assembly? Vt Vid. Gratian*
Vbi Sup. ca. 57. and 59. agreeably.
Monachi Ecclesias non nisi per Episcopos accipiant, afterward, That none
receive what was the Churches, but by the Church; (and then (...) sibi datas
(Ecclesias) ita expolient suis redditibus, ut Presbyteri ibi servientes, in iis
quae sibi and Ecclesiis necessaria sunt, penuriam patiantur. Eadmer. Vbi Sup.
not to shave so close, that the laboring Minister might be to seek of
wherewith to cover his Nakedness; a very conscionable and reasonable
provision!) And here, Vt decimae non nisi Ecclesiis dentur: That is, Those
Tithes that are paid, and openly known to be due, in exclusion of the Monastery
(immediately,) let them be issued forth only to the Church. Another remote,
mediate title they might have, that is, in the Churches Right, bringing them in
in the Churchway, but of themselves they may not presume so high to lay any
claim. Much more might be said, but this seems enough to enlighten the meaning
of a dark Law, and as by all states equally and indifferently made, seeming to
be universally binding: For it was not only a Synod, but Anno dominicae
incarnationis 1102, tertio Regni ^enrici gloriosi Regis Anglorum, ipso
annuente, celebratum est concilium in Ecclesia B. Petri in occidentali part
juxta Lundoniam sita, communi consensu Episcoporu^ and Abbatum, and Principum
totius Regni. In quo praesedit Anselmus, etc. Huic conventui affuerunt, Anselmo
Archiepisc^po petente a Rege, Primates Regni, quatenus quicquid ejusdem
concilii authoritate decerncretur utriusque Ordinis concordi cura, and
solicitudine ratum serva retur. Eadmer. Hist. Nov. l. 3 p. 67.
a part-secular-Assemby: For, besides the Royal Authority, there was also the
Peerage; I will not say, the Commons, but Primates Regni, which in some sense
They may be styled, as the Heads of those they represent. Adunatum est
Concilium; for more firmness, both states met, and united their Councels, to
give things the more countenance and strength of universal authority.

But the chief strength of these Dues was in this Interval in the Church, and
so properly to our days, and the discussion of them in its own sphere with
Churchmen only: For by this time they had gotten such a strength of credit
and reputation, as well as power to be trusted with their own matters, and with
the things of Religion, (their proper cure,) Tithes came in, as the support and
maintenance, That now, grounding themselves upon the allowance and permission
of the State, they might make Canons for themselves, and see them do execution,
make orders for their Dues, and send for them in; and that ordinarily they did
so, is sufficiently known to all that are acquainted with them, and the then
transaction of things in this State. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge
the earth? (says 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
Paul) And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? how much more the
things that pertain to this life! Lower, trifling, perishing things! Can a man
be thought fit for Those, and not for These? Is it like that his discretion,
learning, judgment, honesty, and universal integrity and sufficiency, should
be an equal match for Heavenly matters, Divine things, Scripture-Oracles,
reserved Mysteries, Articles of Faith and Religion, and yet he be unfit to
determine in a few worldly trifles? Heaven is under his hand, and Earth above
him! These and such persuasions wrought, it seems, upon the reason of those
times, (to have the Ministers of Religion entrusted at least with their own,)
and thus much farther and out of the way, that the Temporal Courts were then
chiefly ruled by Ecclesiastical advice, Councillors, and Judges; the Council
Table, Common Pleas, Chancery, Judges Itinerant, and even the Vice-Royes Seat
being often filled with those men, whose breeding to letters, successeful
progress in them, gravity, piety, and more then presumed honesty, made King
and people of all sorts think nothing so well done, as what they would set
their hands to, and the government of no affairs so well steered and managed,
as what the Teachers of Religion and Men of God, (to whom they had committed
the government of their souls,) would condescend to stoop and interpose for the
conduct and guidance of; But as to Tithes, sure their Jurisdiction, as things
belonging to Religion, was now brought in from the mixed County Court, and
settled among them alone, Illa se jactet in aula, Authority had said so, and
given leave; And then, as the Lord of a Manor having authorized his Steward
to keep Court, the Acts pass with his Authority, though by the others
Ministry; So though Decrees and Determinations of emergent affairs were
agitated by Ecclesiastical persons, and had their sentence and seal by their
consent and mediation, yet the Supreme and Universal Power having given
Commission, the things were authoritatively done, and regularly firmly enough
Thence without any usurpation or irregularity, As in the Common Pleas, Seat of
Assize or Sessions, where the Kings Substitutes did (whosoever or whatsoever)
firmly enough by his power in his personal absence. Neither was this any wrong
to Any: for so the public hand gave out Justice, what matter was it, Vid.
Ridley, View of the Laws, par. 3 cap. 2. sect. 2. pa. 147.
which? So the Throne were established in Righteousness, what matter who the
Supporters? So Right were done, which was the Thing whereof came the benefit,
what matter who were the Ministers that gave it forth, whether of this sort or
that, one or another? Though a fair presumption be still for him that wears the
Gown, and turns the Bible; and generally even Humane affairs are thought and
found better stablished, that have their stay by Religion. In fact thus, Here
it was so: that Causes Decimal moved in this sphere of the Supreme Powers
Ecclesiastical Cognizance and Jurisdiction solely, properly and only; Neither
may we henceforth expect, save in a glance or by reflex, any memory of Regular
discussion and determination of them save in this compass: Or, as one
Neighbour-Court takes notice of another, the Common Pleas of the Kings Bench,
or the Chancery of the Exchequer; So the Secular whether Courts, Acts, Rules,
or Decisions, took notice henceforward no otherwise of the duenesse or
disposition of Tithes, then by a neighbourly Reflexe, as the Admiralty takes
notice of Englands Common Law* or the County Court did of the Bishops
Vi^itation.

Here therefore it may not be unseasonable to give the Original of that Court,
(which after a thousand others, would never have been so fitly called as by
that proper name the Lawyers and the Law called it, of Glanvill. de legibus
Aug. li. 2 cap. 12. 7. -- 8, 13, 14. 10. -- 12. 12. -- 21, 22.

Bracton de Except cap 3. sect. 2. cap. 4. sect. 2, 3. 7. cap. 10. sect. 1.
Radulph. de Hengham sum. parva, cap. 8 pa. 105.

Fl^t. lib. 5* cap. 5. sect. 50. cap. 26. sect. 26. cap 28. 10. ca. 30. 1, 2.
li. 6. ca. 39. sect 5 9. ca 44. 6. Stat. de Westmin. 2. cap. 5. Circumspecte
Agatis, 13 Ed. 1. Cooks Institut. 2. pa. 487. Doct. and Stud. Dia^. 2. cap. 55.
Book of Entries, fol. 488.


Curia Christianitatis, or, The Court-Christian, Our Ancestors having the
Commonwealth before ordained and set in frame, when they did agree to receive
the true and Christian Religion, That which was before and concerned extern
policy (which their Apostles, Doctors, and Preachers did allow) they held and
kept still with that which they brought in anew. And those things, in keeping
whereof they made conscience, they committed to them to be ordered and governed
as such things of which they had no skill, and as to men in whom for the
holiness of their life and good conscience, they had a great and sure
confidence. So these matters be ordered in their Courts, and after the fashion
and manner of the Law Civil, etc. Sir The. S^^ythes Common Wealth, Lib. 3.
cap. 11. Vid Cook Instit. 2. p 488. agreeable hereto.
because Secular things (it should have been so) and of humane life being
referred to their Regulations elsewhere, where there was blessed Law provided
for them, The things Curia Christian^tatis, id est, Ecclesiae in qua servantur
leges Christi: cum tamen in ^oro Regio serventur l^ges mundi. Lynd^wood tit, de
foro compet^nt. Gloss. Curia.
of Christ, the affairs of the Church, Agantur itaque primo debita verae
Christianitatis jura, secundo Regis placita, postremo causae singulorum. L.
H^n. 1. cap. 7. in Lambard, pa. 180.
Christianitatis Jura, as they were styled, the super-inducements to the Civil
state of Religion and Salvation, were here set a^ide to a select Committee by
themselves, who by their rule should judge of Heresy, Schism, Apostasy,
Scandal, etc. comparing spiritual things with spiritual; Neither was the
purpose of erection, the natural Jurisdiction, the lawful bounds, or intended
first power as far as I could ever know or learn, meant of any excess beyond
this compass: Men might be irregular, and their courses exorbitant, Themselves
wild, but this their first and intended, allowed path: It may not be amiss
therefore, I say, to give the Original of that Court,) its rise, growth,
strength, and first power, when and by whom set up, and to what likely purpose:
All which, may not be better sought then from the very Patent of Erection,
which here therefore, (and because it is some rarity, at least not vulgarly
known) from suggestion of good credit, I give and exhibit. The Law of
Ciroumspecte Agatis was directed to the 13 Edw. 1.
Bishop of Norwich, and the old Charter upon Record to the Matthew. Par. ad an.
1100. pa. 53. in Hen. 1.
Sheriff of Herefordshire, yet so as either the power and virtue of each was
meant to reach to all, or, Mutatis mutandis, several like Copies were sent: So
here to Remy Bishop of Lincoln; but it was the mould of all Ecclesiastical
power. The Charter speaks thus:

Willielmus Gratia Dei Rex Anglorum, Cook Instit. 4. Of the Iu^i^ diction of
Courts, cha. 53. p. 259. and see M. Seldom of Tithes, cap. 14. sect. 1. and in
his Not. ad Eadmer. pa. 167.
Comitibus; Vicecomitibus, and omnibus Francigenis and Anglis qui in Episcopatu
Remigii Episcopi terras habent, Salutem. Sciatis vos omnes, and caeteri mei
fideles qui in Anglia manent, quod Episcopales leges quae non been, nec
secundum fanctorum Canonum pracepta usque ad mea tempora in Regno Anglorum
fuerunt, communi Concilio, and Consilio Archi-Episcoporum meorum and caeterorum
Episcoporum, and Abbatum, and omnium Principum Regni mei, emendandas judicavi.
Propterea mando, and Regia authoritate praecipi^, ut nullus Episcopus vel
Archi-Diaconus de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundretto placita teneant,
nec ca^sam quae ad regimen animarum pertinet ad judicium saecularium hominum
adducant, sed quicunque secundum Episcopales leges de quacunque causa vel culpa
interpellatus fuerit, ad locum quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit, and nominaverit,
veniat, ibique de causa sua respondeat, and non secundum Hundrettum, sed
secundum Canones and Episcopales leges rectum Deo and Episcopo suo faciat. Si
vero aliquis per superbiam elatus ad justitiam Episcopalem venire nou voluerit,
vocetur semel, and secundo and tertio; quod si nec sic ad emendationem venerit,
Excommunicetur: Et, si opus fuerit, ad hoc vindicandum, fortitudo and Justitia
Regis vel Vicecomitis adhibeatur: Ille autem qui vocatus ad Justitiam Episcopi
venire noluit, pro unaquaque vocatione legem Episcopalem emendabit: Hoc etiam
defendo and authoritate mea interdico, ne ullus Vicecom. aut praepositus, aut
Minister Regis, nec aliquis Laicus homo de legibus quae ad Episcopum pertinent
se intromittat: nec aliquis Laicus homo alium hominem sine Justitia Episcopi ad
judicium adducat; Judicium vero in nullo loco portetur nisi in Episcopali sede,
aut in illo loco quem ad hoc Episcopus constituerit.

This is by good information the erection of the Court-Christian: Before which,
things (Tithes) were handled in Conjunction with other matters, at one meeting
under several persons; but here their Jurisdictions were parted. There seems
observable in this Concession:

1. That the Royal power acts, and derives this Authority and leave to exercise
Jurisdiction, and where, and how far, from it self: Mando, and Regia
authoritate praecipio. For Quis? Who is to grant here Ipse Dominus Rex, qui
ordinariam habet Iurisdictionem, and dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui
in regno suo sunt: Habet enim omnia jura in manu sua quae ad Coronam and
Laicalem pertinent potestatem; and materialem gladium, qui pertinet ad regni
gubernaculum; habet etiam Iustitiam and Iudicium quae sunt Iurisdictiones, ut
ex Jurisdiction sua, sicut De^ minister and Vicarius, tribuat unicuique quod
suum fuerit. Habet etiam ea quae sunt pacis, etc. Habet etiam Coertionem, etc.
Item habet in potestate sua leges and constitutiones, etc. Nihil enim prodest
jura condere nisi sit qui jura tueatur. Habet igitur Rex hujusmodi jura five
jurisd^ctiones in manu sua. De acquir. rerum dom. cap. 24. sect. 1. fol 55.

For he was under God sole Monarch: and so though he might not exercise all
powers, it might be fit he did dispose of all powers, as to rule Preachers,
though he did not preach: and so ease his shoulders by laying the burden of
Duty upon whomsoever he should think fittest. He should have been everywhere,
but since he cannot, says the same Author, of Delegations: Si ipse Dominus Rex
ad singulas causas terminandas non sufficiat, ut levior sit ^lli labor, in
plures personas par^ito onere, eligere debet de regno sue viros sapientes, and
timentes Deum, in quibus sit veritas eloquiorum, and qui oderunt avaritiam
(quae inducit cupiditatem) and ex illis constitue^e justitiarios, etc Id. de
Action. 10. 1. fo. 108

This very Patent is alleged by M Seldom, as an instance of the Kings
Supremacy, in all causes, over All persons. Ad Eadmer. Not. page 166.


Liberties but the King? says Bracton: He speaks it of Lay, but who sees it not
to be fairly interpretable a part of Lay-business to oversee and appoint
Churchmen what they should do, to direct and order where they shall speak, and
treat, and act, or where not, if the manner or consequents foreseen import just
fear of trouble or disturbance. Neither is this an usurpatio^ or incrochment
upon what is of spiritual office, any more then for David or Hezekiah to
appoint the Courses of the Priests, How their Ephemerides for divine services
should be observed, for Solomon or Joshuah to rule All Israel, or, amongst us,
a Churchwarden to examine, and grant or deny a man license to Preach, where he
has power, and he is entrusted with the peace and order of the place, which is
not to meddle with Preaching, but order about it.

2. That Royal power was full: for it was done in Common Counsel, Communi
Concilio, and Consilio (by the advice) Archi-Episcoporum, etc. Et omnium
principum regni mei, All the Chiefs of the powers about him.

3. The things limited to be directed about, were merely spiritual, quae ad
regimen animarum, no danger or intent of meddling with affairs of the
Commonwealth, or interposing in business of Lay fee. A very good, and the best
boundary of this Jurisdiction, and which alone secures extravagancy, from power
to disturb in secular business, or so much as meddle with merely humane affairs
or interesses: whereunto the title also of, The Court-Christian, or of
Religion, should have not a little furthered.

4. The remedy upon contumacy in not appearing, was proper, of Excommunication:
Peter's only sword he might lawfully wear and use, and this but only by the
Kings Commission.

5. Yet the King assists him in the use of this, and comes to relieve his
spiritual by the temporal, if need be. For the sword should back the Word, yea,
gladius gladium juvat, intwisted power is strongest, and needs to be mutually
assistant one part to the other.

6. No Lay Judge was to intromixe: What needed? the things treated on were, or
were to be Ecclesiastical, and of another sort: They had their shop by
themselves, and work to do, and each his own proper and fit; And it has been
the great wisdom of the Nation to keep them apart, every several thing by it
self, that no work or power should cross another.

Object. Some Objections are from a Lo. Coke, Vbi Sup.
name not to be despised: as the time of inrolling, not before R. 2. time, and
some oblique As if, that Book being of Hen. 1. time, the Bishops sat then in
the Shire Court, and Christianitatis Iura were then there pleaded. Vid. L. Hen.
1 cap. 7. pa. 180. annexed to M. Lamb. Arch.
contradiction from the Red Book in the Exchequer: as if by these the Patent
were not authentic: But,

Ans. 1. Scarce is there any thing but somewhat may be said against.

2. At fair distance enough is the time of inrolment, sc. Rich. 2. and then it
was but enrolled.

3. The preserver with the place of preservation are of much moment, scil. in
the Tower, by the King: neither of which but gives much of presumption against
forgery.

4. And other transcriptions do also agree: Manuscript, like this, and of those
several kept too where least suspicion of forgery is again, in Registers. As
those of the Cook ib.
Bishop of London, and Archbishop of Cant. In which Caeterum in actoru^ Rob.
Winchelsii Archiep. Cant. Registro seu publicis ejus tabulis Mss. totidem fere
verbis occurrit id quod Guilielmo Regi hic tribuitur. Regi etenim Edwardo 1. in
ordinum Comitiis, etc. Seldom Not. ad Eadmer. pa. 168.
last Robert Winchelsee so long since as in Edw. 2. time, (and so long before
Rich. 2. as in his great Grandfathers days) settles his draught of Articuli
Cleri upon it, Presented to Edw. 2. as the grievance of the Church, and in his
ninth year assented to for remedy.

5. M. Seldom (a great name) questions it not. He made use of it Hist. of
Tithes cap. 14. sect. 1.
thirty years ago publicly enough: He since exhibited it to view in Printed in
An. 1623. p. 167.
the edition of Eadmers History, and has not (I believe) yet manifested any
revocation of opinion.

So that I see not but we may set down this for the Bishops Patent of
Jurisdiction, authentic enough, so long as he had any, and the first
foundation of the Consistory, or as it was called Curia Christianitatis, in
England the Court of Religion: not unfitly remembered here as the bottom of
that power whereby the right of Tithes was with us discussed, and themselves
recovered, as they had been, and were after, (as shall continue to be showed,)
stated by the Law. Whereunto there was also successfully and ere long such
following and thronging recourse, that the great Inquirer here last mentioned
finds it a task worthy his painful search and curious diligence, Hist. of
Tyth. cap. 14.
whether, after, the right were regularly handled under any other Jurisdiction?
He finds sparingly some instances, Pa.. 422.
as about Hen. 1. and his successors time till Hen. 2. and K. John: But since
only in fives cases. 1. By way of prohibition upon a suggestion of a Modus
decimandi. 2. In a writ of Indicavit: (But neither of these were at first
instance.) 3. By Scire facias from the Chancery in some aases. 4. In some other
by process of b^re command. And, 5. By virtue of the late Stat. of 32 Hen 8.
and 2 Edw. 6. No more: And these were but some scattering exceptions from the
general rule neither. He prefaces that inquiry with Pa. 411.
these words: It is clear (says he) by the practiced Common Law, both of this
day, and also of the ancientest times that we have in our Year-Books, that
regularly the Jurisdiction of Spiritual Tithes (that is, of the direct and
original question of their right) belongs, I think as in all other states of
Christendom, properly to the Ecclesiastical Court. And the latter Sta^utes that
have given remedy for Tithes infe^dated from the Crown after the dissolution,
leave also the Ancient right of Jurisdiction of Tithes to the same. He inserts
Pa. 421.
after, that since about K. John's time Original suits in T^mporall Courts for
Tithes have been rare: Adding (...) discourse of the Indicavit, and changing
the proportion of the dues of a Church to be the ground of it by the Statute of
West. 2. cap. 5. Pa. 427.
that long before, Tithes were demandable of the owner detaining them, of their
own nature, and pleadable in the Spiritual Court, and there only; and
concludes, Pa. 447.
that since 22 Edw. 3. there have been no Original Suits for Tithes in Temporal
Courts, saving only upon Prohibitions (at second instance,) and by the Stat.
of 32 Hen. 8. and 2. Edw. 6.

It is some difficulty to understand learned men; but the consent these things
seem to have with the truth, and have both among themselves and with other of
like nature abroad, renders it hoped there has been here no mistake; which if,
Then has been gained 1. The erection of the Court Christian by Will. 1. 2. The
transaction of Spiritual things there, even though formerly under the
cognizance of the Common Law and Lawyer immediately. 3. Tithes, (as
Spiritualibus annexa, and evidently belonging to Religion, and thence within
the compass of the Canons,) To move here as in their proper sphere. (Remember
their Right was well enough provided for before, Here were only to be some
emergent decisions for their regulation, or Recovery of stated dues.) 4. The
Lay Jurisdiction outed as to cognizance immediate, direct and ordinary. 5. In
practice things have been no doubt according. 6. And therefore we must now
chiefly for a while attend the Church.

CHAP. XIX.
WHich we shall in two parts: as well to the Jus dare, as Ius dicere; to what
we find in this Interval to have been Legislative, as what was Executive;
Giving more largely what belongs to the former, wherein was used the allowed
power given in Regulating the Rule, framing Canons, or setting or keeping to
right, that Law was here the rule of Right, but more sparingly touching at the
later which concerned known practice: For, that such Courts were kept, is a
thing vulgarly and to all known; That a discussion was there, and a sentence
the ground of Right and Own, the Lawyers of the other Gown will not deny; That
things were there disposed, transposed, and settled to full property, the event
did show. Of this therefore the more sparingly, which is known and did but help
to Recover Right; That which Gave it, being more proper for us, and both fitly
ranged under that general head of what was done by that power we are now
confined to, which is Ecclesiastic. And here first,) If the Synod at
Westminster, whereof Page 111.
before, were but a Synod, remembered be it and granted hence, what authority it
must then have had: And likewise another more clearly a Synod under the
Conqueror, but written in Saxon, where, (diverse laws preceding of fasting,
alms, penance, etc.) we have, Seldom. Hist. of Tithes, chap. 8. sect. 14.
Le^ Tithes be paid of all that is possessed by the Lords bounty.

In a Council at Clevemount in France, one Matthew. Par. ad an. 10^5. pa. 21. in
Will. 2.
Canon was, Vnaquaque Ecclesia decimas suas habeat, (...) ad a^^am
transferantur. Let every Church have its own Tithes without confusion: Which
would not likely have been taken notice of in our authentic story, if it had
not concerned us, as indeed it did, and was no doubt Haec quae sequuntur
ca^itul^ constituit (Yr^^nus) and universali Ecclesiae tradi^^it observanda.
Id: pa. 20.
of Catholic observation.

In Tildesly An^madvers. on M. Seld^^s Hist. pa. 164.
Hen. 1. time, I find it decreed in a Council held under William the
Archbishop about the year 1129. De^imas ^icut. Dei summi Dominicas ex integro
reddi pracipimus. We command they be fully allowed a^ the Lords Demo^^es.

In Seldom Vbi Sup sect 15.
another at Windsore* about then is this Canon: Vt Laici decimas reddan^ sic^t
praeceptum est: That Laymen pay, as is commanded. (I am now transcribing, and
so hastening: It will not be long ere we get on our own wings again.)

Id. sect. 18.
Alberique Bishop of (...) was ^egate here under Innocent the second, in K. Se^
v^nt (...), and He held a Synod in Anno 3. where is this Canon: De omnibus
Primitiis rectas decima^ dari Apostolic^ a^tl^^ritate praecipimus, quas qui
r^ddere no^^^rit, Anathema^is in enm sententia proferat^^s. Let him that pays
not be Excommunicate; where it seems Primi^i^^ must be understood for every new
years increase.

Mss. in the public Library at Oxford cited in the (...) of^.) D. Ridleys
View of the Laws, pa. 1^5.
In Eugen. 2. time, about the year 1147, under the same King was held a Synod
at Westmiuster, wherein tithes are disposed of. It has no more then a
supposition of them, and that the Church disposed, which may yet crave place
here as not of no consideration Nullus Abbas, Nullus Prior, Nullus omnino
Monachus aut Clericus Ecclesiam sive decimam -- sine Episcopi Consensu, etc.
And Ib.
two years after in another Synod there to the same purpose: Vt nulla persona
Ecclesias vel decimas accipiat -- sine authoritate Episcopi.

By the way, we may not about these times much look for set and purposed
binding Laws about Tithes; They needed not, For Such had passed before,
sufficient to raise and assure a Due: But only to Regulate, dispose, or
determine about emergent controversies, concerning them, and these not wanting.

In Hen. 2. time, I find Alexander the third directing several Constitutions
(for that force his Orders had here) to the Bishops of Canterbury, Winchester,
and Excester. They are taken by Gregor. 9. into Lib. 3. tit 30. de decimis.
the body of the Decretals, and no doubt had their power and found obedience
here: for Vid. Seldom Review, pa. 489.
where the Kingdom did not cross, the Canons were, and it seems by the
Proviso of 25 Hen. 8. 19. are binding Laws. And let no man object here the
usurpation, or allay of credit from forain authority: Things so settled do, no
doubt, often contract a right in Time, which (if the power be able to support
and bear it self out,) does with continuance grow up and soder into strength
and firmness enough, able ere long to walk the world without guide or aid, or
we have little of stayedness and solidity here in England. If we go about to
undo all (of secular depending on sacred) which had its first rise, and that
whereby it yet stands, from Rome, We need not go beyond Sea for Babylon, it
will come home shortly to us, and we shall have confusion enough within our own
Thresholds. Though we do not in present, we must allow of many things done
heretofore and settled by usurpations, proceeding as well from abroad, as
exercised at home, or the fruit of weightiest transactions will be robbed away
from us, perhaps the pillars of the Commonwealth shaken. As to those three
Epistles, the first of them gives order as 'twere by a binding Law, thus: Cap.
5.
Pervenit ad nos, etc. Mandamus, quatenus Parochianos vestros monere curetis,
and si opus fuerit sub Excommunicationis districtione compellere, ut de
proventibus Molendinorum, Piscariarum, foeno, and lana decimas Ecclesiis,
quibus debentur, cum integritate persolvant. It was for four sort of Tithes to
be paid, of Mills, Fish Ponds, Hay, and Wool: having after monition,
Excommunication to refusers.

Cap. 6.
The next is to the Bishop of Winchester: Nuncios; and infra. Mandamus quatenus
Parochianos tuos de apibus, and de omni fructae decimas persolvere
Ecclesiastica districtione compellas* for Bees, and Fruit.

Cap. 7.
The last to the Bishop of Excester: Cum homines de Hortona, de frugibus, novem
partibus sibi retentis, decimam Ecclesiae cujus Parochiani sunt, sine
diminutione solvere teneantur; and antequam id faciunt servientibus, and
Mercenariis suis de frugibus non decimatis debita totius anni pro servicio suo
impendant, tunc demum de residuo decimam solventes, Mandamus quatenus eos
cogatis, ut decimam statim fructibus collectis persolvant, atque de subtractis
and retentis dignam satisfactionem exhibere procurent. It seems they were
willing to deduct the charge of the Fermage before they marked out the Tithes,
paying their servants out of the fruit for the work bestowed about them, and so
apportion only out of the free bounty of heaven, Cap. 22. 26. 28. sequ. and
Vid. Lyndewood tit. de decimis cap. Erroris. Cap. Quoniam propter. and cap.
Sancta Ecclesia.
a thing much stood upon, and by this Law stood against, which willed the tenth
of all as it grew, and so was the pattern of the Old Testament: Their seed and
labor were also chargeable, yet they were bound up, of All, without any
deduction: And if Jehovah gave them their land, which, (presuming they would
sow,) he might the better expect a charge from his own gift, This exaction is
no less reasonable, or more burdensome from us who Give nothing (of our own,)
but issue out only what was Given and set aside by others; it Jehovah required
to be restored back to him of his own, we do but pay what others of their
bounty Gave, And therefore with them as to separating any thing we are
possessed of in full title as our Own. Jam sumus ergo pares.

Out of the Canon Annal. par. 2 pa. 543. Edit. 1601. Francofur. That it was
taken out of the Council of Rosne ( ex Concilio Rothomagensi) the setter forth
has noted in the margin.
Roger Hoveden points us to another plant growing in our own soil, which no
doubt lived to take fruit downward, and bear fruit upward; and it was set
toward the end of this Hen. 2. time by Rich. Archb. of Cant. in a Synod at
Westminster the Lo. day after the Ascension, where (the King and his son being
present) passed thus: Omnes decimae terrae sive de frugibus sive de fructibus,
domini sunt and illi sanctificantur. Sed quia multi modo inveniuntur decimas
dare nolentes, statuim^is; ut juxta Domini papae praecepta admoneantur semel,
sec^ndo and tertio (according to the High Commission before given out by Will.
1.) ut de grano, de vino, de fructibus arborum, de foetibus animalium, de lana,
de agnis, de butyro and Caseo, de lino and Canabe, and de reliquis quae
annuatim renovantur, Decimas integre persolvant: or if not, Anathema. A full
and plain Law, speciatim for Corn, Wine, Fruit, breed of Cattle, Wool, Lamb,
Butter, Cheese, Flax, Hemp, and all that grows and renews yearly, etc. and of
what power in the state, may be guessed both by from what before, where the
Superior Powers had joined to entrust the Church in such matters (which
implies their authority still;) and further here the K. and his son gave the
present countenance of their persons to patronize and establish it. And heed
also the Dueness supposed in the beginning, they were not now so much willed to
be paid, as shifters to be brought in to discharge of known duties. Elsewhere
also in the same Par. ead. pa. 75.
Author, Hubert Arch. of Cant. kept a Synod at York the Tuesday after Saint
Barnabies day, 6 Rich. 1. where one of the binding results of Council speaks
thus: Cum Decimae sint tributa egentium animarum, and ex praecepto Domini dari
debeant, non est reddentis eas diminuere: Therefore all to be paid without any
diminution for Fermage, of which before, entirely. And much severity is again
in another In ead pa. 808.
Provincial of the same Hubert afterward, with Excommunication to those should
withdraw any thing to pay the Harvest-mans wages, or the charge of newbroke
grounds, or not to the Parish Church, etc. But because this meeting was against
the Lord Chief Justice his Prohibition, and so had not the authority of the
secular power, I pass it over: though then it were of some doubt whether such
meetings were valid, which is since clearly resolved that they are not, by the
Statute 25 Hen. 8. 19. And so for another Ib. Pa. 809.
Canon against whether Templars or others should receive Tithes from Lay-hands,
in the same Author.

To some time of Hen. 2. is referred a Council Lateran under Alex. 3. limiting
the former liberty of paying to Any Church, to the Parochial, as fittest to
have benefit, and nearest to take the dues up: though later and quicker
apprehensions remove the scene to Innoc. 3. who in K. John's time expressed his
single will only from the Lateran Church. This gave the mistake, or might
well. M. Seldom has it from the Cap. 8. sect. 23. and Vid. cap. 10. sect. 2.
print, and the Instit. 2. pa. 641.
Lo. Cook from the more authentic Roll in the Tower, speaking fully what a
papal Constitution might, and no more, thus: Pervenit ad audientiam nostram,
quod multi in Diocesi tua Decimas suas integras, vel duas parts ipsarum, non
illis Ecclesiis in quarum Parochiis habitant, vel ubi praedia habent, and a
quibus Ecclesiastica percipiunt Sacramenta, persolvunt, sed eas aliis pro sua
distribuunt voluntate. Cum igitur inconveniens esse videatur, and a ratione
dissimile, ut Ecclesiae quae spiritualia seminant, metere non debeant a suis
Parochianis temporalia, and habere: Therefore proceed according to the Canons,
and see obedience yielded by Church-censure, etc. Dat. Lateran. Nonas Iulii.

Here, they say, was first a Parochial Right established: And if so, a Right;
which I think none will deny, and is all I contend for: and the Lord Chief
Justice grants it his way; though not by force of the Decretal, yet as Just and
Right it was allowed, and so became Lex terrae. Any way serves the turn, and if
the Position, much more the Supposition: If a Parochial right, then a Right, at
least. Review some of the words: to which purpose, The grievance complained of
was, that Many did not pay their whole Tithes, Decimas suas integras vel duas
parts ipsarum -- to their own Minister, but at pleasure: So they paid, the
thing was done, And this the height of what I reach at.

To the same Kings time also I refer another Decretal sent hither from Innoc.
Decret. Gregor. Lib. 3 cap. 28. col. 1230. Edit. Taurin.
3. to the Bishop of Ely, which had no doubt the same force here, not for right
of Tithes (which remember had been before established, and was now but made
Parochial; More then To Tithe, To the Parish Church, now growing as common as
to enjoy,) but to satisfy a doubt that might arise about the manner of
Tything, and wills no deduction should be for Mils and Ponds: (And still
remember also by what immediate consequence the supreme power went on
confirming All, whereof we read no contradiction.) Pastoralis Officii, etc.
Explicari postulasti utrum quis possit de molendinis and piscariis necessarias
expensas deducere, priusquam solvat decimas ex eisdem, sicut est in
negotiatione concessum? But it is long, and I refer to it. The forain power
does somewhat again here blemish: but remember again too what before, and add
the so often mentioned confirmation to us of Hen. 8. If a steward can do
nothing, yet if a Lord ratify, the Act is good: If the Chaplain be over-busie
in a family, yet if the Master confirm, now it is valid, though the thing were
besides his Cure: So if the Pope meddled with that he should not, the King and
State looking on, and not contradicting but consenting and approving; Here
seems now a consummation of all sufficiency of power at the first, and time
going on to ripen what at first production was but raw, a growing up to all
perfection. And so in that which next follows which I take to be of the same to
the same, wherein resolution was given about new-broke grounds, supposing, I
understand the Tithes of a place to be payable to a person, or Church out of
the Parish, who should then have those new Tithes? It Is answered in favor of
the Parish Church there, That Church; unless the forainer can show a very fair
plea for them: Cum enim perceptio decimarum ad parochiales Ecclesias de Jure
communi pertineat, (so far it was gone then,) decimae novalium quae fiunt in
parochiis earundem, ad ipsas proculdubio pertinere noscuntur, nisi ab his quae
alias percipiunt decimas, rationabilis causa ostendatur, per quam appareat
novalium ad eas decimas pertinere. Since of Common right Tithes did belong to
the Parish where they grew, The new-broke grounds must tithe thither also,
unless very sufficient reason can be shown to the contrary: This the substance.

But the strongest and most vigorous Constitution which with life and power
has acted among us, and indeed was the late seen and looked upon Rule and Law
to guide All, was that Lyndwood Constit. provinc. lib. 3. tit. de decimis.
Canon of Rob. Winchelsey, as it is usually styled, though Lindwood (the setter
forth) says he found it in some Books ascribed to Boniface (of the same See,)
or as in one very ancient copy, Constitutio communis Episcoporum congregatorum
apud And so it is also in Pupilla oculi, part. 1 cap. 3. says M. Seldom.
Merton in Communi Concilio; as if so, it was the stronger, an act of the whole
Convocation. But whose soever it was, it was about those times. (Remember Rob:
Winchelsey Polyd. Virg. Histor. Anglic. lib. 17. pa. 324.
entered his charge Anno Domini 1293. about 19 Edw. 1. and Id. lib. 18. pa. 3, 2.
ended it about 1312, and 4 Edw. 2. and so we are, as we took leave, a little
without the strict bounds of our method, behither M. Charta.) The words are as
follows; (and I English them for the use of every Reader.)

Quoniam propter diversas consuetudines in petendo decimas per diversas
Ecclesias inter rectores Ecclesiarum and Parochianos suos rixae and
contentiones, scandala and odia maxima multotiens oriuntur. Volumus and
statuimus quod in cunctis Ecclesiis per Cantuariensem provinciam constitutis
uniformis sit petitio decimaru^ and proventuum Ecclesiaru^. In primis, volumus
quod decimae de frugibus, non deductis expensis, integre and sine aliqua
diminutione solvantur, and de fructibus arborum, and de seminibus omnibus, et
de herbis hortorum nisi parochiani competentem fecerint redemptionem pro
talibus decimis. Volumus and statuimus etiam quod decimae de foenis ubicunque
crescant, sive in magnis pratis, sive in parvis sive in Chiminis, exigantur,
and prout expedit, Ecclesiae persolvantur. De nuirimentis autem animalium,
scilicet de Agnis, Statuimus quod pro sex agnis and infra sex oboli dentur pro
decima: si septem sint agni, in numero septimus agnus detur pro decima rectori:
ita tamen quod rector Ecclesiae qui septimum agnum recipit, tres obolos in
recompensationem solvat parochiano a quo decimam illam recepit. Qui octavum
recepit, det denarium. Qui vero Nonum, det obolum parochiano: vel expectet
rector usque ad alium annum donec plenarie agnum possit recipere si maluerit;
and qui ita expectat semper exigat secundum agnum meliorem vel tertium ad minus
de agnis secundi anni, and hoc pro expectatione primi anni. Et ita
intelligendum est de decima lanae. Sed si oves alibi in hyeme, alibi in aestate
nutriantur, dividenda est decima. Similiter si quis medio tempore emerit vel
vendiderit oves, and certum fit a quae parochia illae oves venerint, earundem
dividenda est decima, sicut de re quae sequitur duo domicilia. Si autem
incertu^ fuerit, habeat illa Ecclesia totam decimam infra cujus limits tempore
tonsionis inveniantur. De lacte vero volumus quod decima solvatur dum durat,
videlicet de Caseo tempore suo: and de lacte in Autumno and hyeme: Nisi
parochiani velint pro talibus facere competentem redemptionem, and hoc ad
valorem decimae and ad commodum Ecclesiae. De proventibus autem molendinorum,
volumus quod decimae fideliter and integre solvantur. De pasturis autem and
pascuis tam non communibus quam communibus statuimus quod decimae fideliter
persolvantur, and hoc per numeru^ animalium and dierum, ut expedit Ecclesiae.
De piscationibus, and apibus sicut de omnibus aliis Bonis just acquisitis quae
renovantur per annu^, statuimus quod decimae solvantur and exigantur debito
modo. Statuimus etiam quod decimae personales solvantur de artificibus and
mercatoribus, sc. de lucro negotiationis. Similiter de Carpentariis, Fabris,
Cementariis, Textoribus, Pandoxatricibus, and omnibus aliis Stipendiariis
Operariis; ut videlicet dent decimas de Stipendiis suis, nisi Stipendiarii ipsi
aliquid certum velint dare ad opus vel ad lumen Ecclesiae, si rectori ipsius
Ecclesiae placuerit -- Sed quoniam inveniuntur multi decimas sponte dare
nolentes, statuimus quod parochiani moneantur primo, secundo and tertio ut
decimas Deo and Ecclesiae fideliter solvant. Quod si se non emendaverint, primo
ab ingressu Ecclesiae suspendantur, and sic demum ad solutionem decimarum per
censuram Ecclesiasticam, si necesse fuerit, compellantur. Si autem dictae
suspensionis relaxationem vel absolutionem petierint, ad Ordinarium loci
mittentur absolvendi, and debito modo puniendi. Rectores autem Ecclesiarum seu
Vicarii aut Capellani annui qui praedictas decimas praedicto modo propter
formidinem hominum seu favorem, timore Dei postposito, (ut praedictum est) cum
effectu non petierint, poena suspensionis innodentur donec dimidiam marcam
argenti Archi-Diacono loci persolvant.

Whereas by reason of diverse ways of tything in diverse Churches, strife and
contention are wont to arise between the Church-Governour and his people; we
will and appoint, that through the Province of Canterbury there be this uniform
way of Tything. First, we will that Tithes be paid of Fruit without any
deduction of charge entirely, and without diminution, (so reaching in an order
about the charge of Fermage, spoken of before, and preventing that exception;)
and of fruit of trees likewise, and of all seeds and garden herbs, unless the
Parishioners will make some competent exception for them. Also we will and
appoint, that Tithes be required of hay, (or green grass, if it be cut to
spend, says Lyndewood in his Gloss) wherever it grow, in greater Meadows, or
lesser, or in the Highways, and that it be paid as is best for the Church: For
breed of Cattle, as, touching Lambs, we appoint that for six and below, so
many half pence; if there be seven, the seventh shall be tithe, yet so, that
the Church-Govenour receiving the seventh, shall pay 3 halfpence to the
Parishioner: He that takes one of eight, a penny, one of nine, a halfpenny; or
let the Rector stay for the tenth, if he had rather, to the following year. And
he that so stays, let him always have the second or third best of the
following year, and this for his stay. And so is it to be understood of the
tenth of Wool. But if the Sheep depasture one where in Winter, another where
in Summer, the tithe is to be divided. In like manner if any one shall buy them
in the middle of the year, and it be known from what Parish the sheep come, the
tithe is to be divided, as of a thing belonging to several places; but if it be
not known, let the Church have the benefit where they are at shear-time.
Concerning Milk, we will that the tithe be paid as it arises, that is, of
Cheese, so long as it is made, and of milk in Autumn and Winter, unless the
Parishioners will make due compensation according to the value of the tithe,
and to the Churches advantage. As concerning the profits of Mils* we will that
tithes be faithfully and entirely paid. As for pasture and feeding grounds, as
well Common as other, we appoint the tithe be fully paid, and this with regard
to the Beasts and time of going, as shall be best for the Church. For Fishings
and Bees, as of any other goods honestly gotten, which renew yearly, we
appoint, that the tithe be paid and required duly. We decree also, that
personal tithes be paid by Handy-crafts-men and Merchants, that is, of the gain
of their trading; the like of Carpenters, Smiths, Masons, Weavers, and all
other hired Laborers, that they give the tithe of their wages, unless they
will give any thing certain toward the Light in the Church, and this at the
Church-governors choice --

Then (after some words of Mortuaries.) But because there are many that refuse
to pay their tithes, we will, that Parishioners be warned once, twice and
thrice, (which was the number of essoyns allowed in the Conquerours Charter, as
before) to pay their tithes to God and the Church truly. Or if they refuse,
they be first suspended from entering into the Church, and so be compelled by
Ecclesiastical censure, if need be, to pay. Or if they require release or
absolution from suspension, let them be sent to the Ordinary of the place for
it, and duly punished. And as to the Church-Governors themselves, or Vicars, or
Chaplains by the year, who for fear or favor of men, setting a side their awe
to Heaven, do not effectually require their tithes aforesaid, let themselves be
suspended till they pay a mark to the Archdeacon of the place for their
disobedience.

I have both transcribed at length, and translated this, as I said, because it
is the chief Law, whereupon (immediately) the dueness of tithes is grounded and
known by the Canon: as to the Regulation of the manner of collecting this
prevailing, though not as to the dueness it self; for this, as has been
showed, was secured before, and therefore the law begins with supposition, and
blame, that men did not Pay as they ought, which was here intended to be
remedied. And for the sufficient authority hereof, we need not much doubt; for
Lawyers and Men were awaked both then and ever since, and would not through
ages and generations have been frighted or cheated with mere empty shows of
Paper Canons into a foolish and childish awe of what was but terrible. They
knew no doubt, from time to time there was strength enough (with help of former
grounds) to carry things on and force them, if any rub of opposition were laid
in the way, which made them pick a virtue out of that was indeed a kind of
necessity, and do with seeming willingness, what if they would not, they must
and might have been compelled to. Other Constitutions are also about the same
time, but not of so great moment; yet, because they have some force, our
niggardize shall not suppress what may be pleasing, profitable, or in any
regard useful. The next is about Cattle removeable from place to place, and
has vertually six propositions.

Quoniam ut audivimus, etc. Nos viam pacis praeparare volentes statuendo
definimus, and definiendo statuimus, quod ad Ecclesias in quarum parochiis oves
a tempore tonsionis usque ad Festum S. Martini in hyeme continue pascuntur and
cubant, decimae lanae, lactis, and casei ejusdem temporis, licet postea amotae
fuerint ab illa parochia and alibi tondeantur, integre solvantur. Et, ne fraus
fiat in casu praemisso, praecipimus quod antequam oves amoveantur a pasturis
vel etiam distrahantur, Ecclesiarum Rectoribus sufficienter de solvenda decima
caveatur. Quod si infra praedictum tempus ad diversaru^ parochiarum pasturam
transferantur, quaelibet Ecclesia pro rata temporis portione decimam percipiet
earundem, minori 30 dierum spatio in rata temporis minime computando. Si vero
per totum tempus praedictum cubant in una parochia, and pascantur continue in
alia, inter ipsas Ecclesias decima dividatur. Quod si post Festum S. Martini
ducantur ad pascua aliena and usque ad tempus tonsionis in una vel diversis
parochiis, sive in propriis pasturis dominorum suorum sive alterius cujuscunque
pascantur, habita ratione ad numerum ovium pascua aestimentur and secundum
aestimationem pascuorum ab eorum dominis exigantur decimae.

1. Where sheep are continually feeding, and folded from shear-time to S.
Martins day, there the whole tithe to be payable to that Church, and caution
given accordingly before the removal.

2. Within that space if they change from place to place, each Church to be
satisfied for the time, not reckoning of less then thirty days; Or if they feed
in one place, and fold in another, then to divide; and so after rateably.

3. Milk and Cheese to be paid where the Beasts feed and couch: If these in
several places, then to divide.

4. Lambs, Colts, etc. to be paid, habita ratione ad loca diversa ubi
gignuntur, oriuntur, and ad moram quam traxerint in eisdem: with regard to
where they were bred, kept, and stayed: Milk, where the quantity is small, and
so for Lambs, Colts, etc. according to the usage of the place.

5. What sheep live to S. Martins day, to be accounted for, though they be sold
to the Shambles, or die after.

6. If shorn in any Parish, the Wool supposed there due, unless it were made
appear to the contrary.

This I said, is but supplementall, for parting strife. Men would be ready to
require their dues, and every honest man should be as ready to pay; but
occasions requiring them to chop and change before the year came round, this
was an equal and conscionable both provision and praevision, to set down
beforehand a fore-appointed rule what either should expect, and so part strife
before it was begun. A summary confirmation of all which before, and more
distinct recitation of some things, is in another of the same Author following:

Sancta Ecclesia, etc. Cum Sacro eloquio jubente de omnibus quae novantur per
annu^ nullo tempore excluso decimae sint cum omni integritate and absque
diminutione solvendae, Lice atque unicuique capellano parochiali, Rectori sive
Vicario Parochianos suos per censuram Ecclesiasticam ad solutionem decimarum
compellere, Omnibus and singulis Rectoribus, Vicariis and Capellanis
Parochialibus and Ecclesiaru^ Parochialium Curatis per nostram Provinciam
Constitutis in virtute obedientiae mandamus firmiter injungentes, quatenus
diligenter moneant and efficaciter inducant, and quilibet ipsorum in Parochia
sua moneat and inducat, quod praedicti Parochiani omnes and singuli integre and
sine diminutione decimas inferius annotatas Ecclesiis suis persolvant: sc.
decimam lactis a primo tempore suae novationis, tam mense Augusti quam aliis
mensibus, de proventibus etiam boscorum, pannagiis sylvarum, and caeterarum
arborum si vendantur, vivariorum, piscariorum, fluminum, stagnorum, arborum,
pecorum, columbarum, seminum, fructuum, bestiarum guarenarum, aucupitii,
ortorum, curtilagiorum, lanae, lini, vini, and grani, turbarum in locis quibus
fabricantur and fodiuntur, cygnorum, caponum, aucarum, and anatum, ovorum,
thenicii agrorum, apium, mellis, and cerae, molendinorum, venationum,
artificiorum, and negotiationum, necnon agnorum, vitulorum, pullorum equinorum
secundum eorum valorem, and omnium proventuum rerum aliarum de caetero
satisfaciant competentes Ecclesiae quibus de Jure tenentur, ( harping still
upon the right and that granted) nullis expensis ratione praestationis
decimarum deductis seu retentis, nisi tantum de praestationis decimarum
artificiorum and negotiationum. Quod si monitionibus suis parere contempserint,
per suspensionis, Excommunicationis and interdicti sententias eos ad
praestationem decimarum hujusmodi compellant.

Forasmuch as by holy Scripture all that renews yearly is to be tythed, and it
is lawful to compel men thereto; we command all Church Governors and their
Substitutes to move and enforce all under their powers to this duty: that is,
to pay of milk, of the profits of wood, of mast if it be sold, of stews, ponds,
rivers, pools, trees, cattle, pigeons, seeds, fruits, beasts of warren, (that
is, under known custody and guard, for so the word imports) of hawking,
gardens, orchards, wool, flax, wine, grain, peat, swans, chicken, geese,
ducks, eggs, hedgerows, bees, honey, wax, mils, hunting, handicrafts,
merchandise, lamb, calf, colt, and all other revenue without deduction of
costs, etc. or if not, to proceed to Suspension, and Excommunication, etc.

These three Constitutions (Decrees, Statutes, Laws, Orders, they were for
payment, call them what you will,) were in one man's time, and about the parting
of Edw. 1. and Edw. 2. Raigns: which (it seems) did not yet so remedy things as
to prevent all future broyls. A thing impossible: Contentions will last while
the world: Laws can never reach their full intended force and operation in
quieting strifes, and calming the storms of men's rage and wrangling passions
full and wholly, but ever and anon they will break out to mischief and
disturbance: the Root is in our corrupt nature, which will not but have Spring
at some time of the year or other to shoot forth and fructify unto grief and
trouble, in resemblance of the earth, cursed for our sakes into a proneness to
weeds, and most Natural feracity of Briars and Thorns. We shall find this
disposition generally received through the world, Act. 20* 35.
that most men are more quick and nimble of the receiving hand, then of the
giving, and though they be the words of the Lord Jesu, That it is more blessed
to give then to receive, yet they will take the contrary by a bold inversion,
and think it better howsoever for them, to Receive then to Give. Of the same
extent is also this Constitution of things, That where many are to pay known
dues, some will be found backward, standing off as far as they dare till
necessity constrain them to come in; Which makes it a rare instance but if any
be to receive never so known dues, some will fall short, at least there must be
wrangling with a multitude, and this shall be hardly avoided with some,
whosoever has to deal with many. A fruit of our corrupt nature; mourn we for
it in private, and sorrowful mischance to many of all mankind, condemned hereby
to live as it were in fury of a tempest, in the flames of passion burning and
renewed to the mutual torment of One another: A great disturbance of the quiet
and peaceable world, and unfortunate occasion of many troubles to many, who
being of themselves not disposed to trouble, are yet (by the things they have
to deal with) forced beside their nature, and by the cunning craftiness of
those that lay in wait to deceive (whose versatilous shifts are hard to be
avoided) often put upon this Dilemma, of either gaining contention, or losing
right; and if there be but one of a multitude disposed to wrangle, he that has
to deal with All, must oppose that man and bear half the blame; and as suits
and troubles increase with his unjust vexation, his seeming guilt increases
also. If this were not, we should have much toward a quiet and thereby happy
world, approaching the simplicity of the golden age, with return of its peace,
calmness, meekness, love, and a constant serenity of all things; A blessing so
highly enriching, that it seems the wise Providence above does not think fit to
trust, or rather tempt us with, because perhaps beyond our power to manage or
bear so great a happiness. Which aptness to contention showed it self soon
after the Canons formerly made and mentioned, diverse seeking shifts to evade
and disappoint the clear intent of those plain and well-meant Laws, so plain,
one would think, that there were no way left to delude or shift from the
meaning and purpose laid forth in such plain and perspicuous expressions: Which
awaked also ere long after that, the watchful prudence of him sat then in
highest place of power and trust for such things, to cast the best he could to
advance ready justice, and yet further prevention of all disappointments
thereof. In time it follows (as in place it goes before, in the same Lyndewood)
those we have given, and was intended to strike off their exceptions, who could
not deny their dues, or to set them out, but Alii vero no^ attendentes quod
Dominus Omnipotens, cujus est terra and plenitudo ejus, and universi qui
habitant in ea, decimas in signum universalis Dominii sibi reddi praeceperit
and pro suo cultu easdem Cleric^s Assignavit, aliquando m^^^itiose impediunt,
impedi^ive faciunt vel procurant vir^s Ecclesiasticos ad quos spectat perceptio
decimarum corumve servitores quo minus liberum ingressum and egressum in
praedia and a praediis de quibus hujusmodi decimae prove^iunt habere possint,
etc. Alii etiam nisi prius chirothecae vel caligae seu quicquam aliud eis
dentur, seu promittantur, decimas hujusmodi asportant and consumunt,
asportarive and consumi faciunt, seu aliquod damnum inferunt inferrive faciunt
in eisdem* Simon Mepham. cap. Quia quidam.
they would hinder those should fetch them from coming upon their ground,
without which they could not obtain them effectually, unless they had gloves,
stockings, or some other such bribes given them for the quiet delivery of what
they acknowledged due; which if they had not, they would purloin or corrupt, or
one way or other disappoint the true and rightful owner. O malice, whether will thou! O guile, when will thou leave working! O fraud, deceit, and wretched
covetousness, when will you cease your injurious combinations! O cursed craft,
and griping, shifting, overreaching worldly-mindedness, when will you give
over to disappoint the best-meant Laws of men, since your use has been of old
to pervert even (...). Crooking his straight ways. Act. 13. 10.
the Righteous ways of the Lord! The remedy was here, as in former cases, the
severity of Excommunication: Nos igitur perversorum damnabilibus consiliis
salubre remedium imponere cupientes, nihil novum statuentes, sed antiquorum
Canonum statuta in medium deducentes, (mark that, no innovasion) universos and
singulos hujusmodi instigatores, impeditores, and alios supradictos, etc. to be
fast locked under the heaviest of Church Censures, and not released from that
Bond of God, save at the hour of death, or upon promise of amendment with
satisfaction. Yet this helped not all: The wit of malice that pierces deep had
found out another nest of manifold devices to hinder the course of right Joan
Stratford tit ^od cap. Erroris damnabilis
by these four disturbances: 1. Paying but the Eleventh for the Tenth, in
regard of Summer-charges, etc. 2. Dividing but not marking out the sheaf, and
The remedy of the grievance might be that which King Richard after intended to
grant by his gracious Concession of 2 Rich. 2. cap. 14. remembered below, pa.
then molesting the taker of it away as for theft. 3. Arresting the workmen for
taking the convenientest way. 4. Forbidding to take what was ready, till the
whole field was rid, which occasioned much spoil: Against all which is drawn
the glittering sword, of which before of Church-censure, and the power used
(lavishly) enough which should not be used upon trifling occasions.
Excommunication is a heavy doom, it is hard it should be laid on for trifles, as
the petty things of this world, or the powers of the world to come drawn forth
to vile and sordid profanation, degraded below their due value, and highest
worth to serve any ends which are not spiritual.

CHAP. XX.
HAve we yet done? no; we are now but to begin another tedious wrangling
controversy about Tythe-wood, and this indeed lasted long with much violence
between the parties contending, till at last it settled (well near) in the
binding statute of Sylva caedua. The grievance on the Churches part was Tit.
eod. cap. Quanquam ex solventibus.
this; That whereas less charge was in manuring for Woods, and longer
expectation for one Harvest in many years, yet disbursements for the felling,
etc. were claimed to be allowed when it came, before the Tithe set out, and the
Country, which was worst, had a custom for this unreasonableness. No such
matter: The continuance of the disease did rather call for a more speedy
remedy, which it had, and therefore is first determined what Sylva caedua was;
Quae cujuscunque existens generis arborum in hoc habetur ut caedatur, ('it was
let grow to be cut,) and quae etiam succisa rursus ex stirpibus aut radicibus
ren^scitur, (being cut, it grew again afresh:) and then that All should be
tythed as it was felled; or if not, proceed to censure as before. But this it
seems the State would not allow; for the inconveniences emergent occasioned
that complaint put up by the Seldom Hist. cap. 8. sect. 28. and sequ.
Commons then sitting in Parliament for remedy: And so the year following, sc.
18 Edw. 3. and three years after again, sc. 21 Edw. 3. and four years after
that, 25 Edw. 3. and yet not full remedy till about twenty years after, scil.
45 Edw. 3. where ordered in Parliament, and 45 Edw. 3. ca. 3. Pulton. pa. 196.
ordained: Item, at the complaint of the great men and Commons, showing by
their Petition, that whereas they sell their great Wood at the age of twenty
years, or of greater age to Merchants to their own profit, or in aid of the
King in his wars, Parsons and Vicars of holy Church do implead and draw the
said Merchants into the Spiritual Court for the Tithes of the said Wood in the
name of this word called Sylva caedua, whereby they cannot sell their Woods to
the very value, to the great damage of them and of the Realm, It is ordained
and established, that a Prohibition in this case shall be granted, and upon the
same an attachment as it has been used before this time. This was intended a
final end, but it seems was not: some doubt sprung out afterward upon pretense
this Seldom ubi sup. sect. 33.
was not an Act, but an Ordinance, whence a return of the former circulation of
things; occasion given, discontent arising, dislike, trouble, and complaint for
remedy. How it was pacified I find not, but have heard that the Statute (or but
Ordinance) prevailed: A sign that it was strengthened with some Yes: there was
a Petition put up in the next Parliament, 47 Edw 3 and by order thereupon a
Prohibition to be formed in Chancery, which was formed, and that has quieted
all to this day. Co. Inst. 2. page 643.
additionall sinew of new and fresh authority, forasmuch as what we see
prevailing in Law, we may well suppose some Decree to have ushered the
lawfulness thereof; and if upon altercation, the scales hanging even on both
sides, one does at last evidently preponderate, some weight of auth^rity may be
thought likely to have been thrown into that scale we see settle and keep the
advantage, and That is it there keeps and settles it. So likely it did here;
and in and from this agitation of things, and so as they did settling, this
seems observable, and not to be passed over: The Temporalty did, we see,
interpose to alter and change what the Church had decreed and settled by her
best power; Their temporals were their own, and they would not endure
themselves to be unreasonably incroached upon by any forced impositions, which
made them move again and again, and would not cease till their grievance had
remedy; I do not find they did the like in other cases, bound up fast by
other the Churches decrees before; but let them pass; Therefore (by comparison)
I judge they approved what they did not dislike; Their Qui tacet, consentire
videtur. Reg. Iur. Can. 43. Scienti and consentienti non fit injuria neque
dolus. Reg. ^8.
silence gave consent, and so they suffered themselves to be carried along with
that stream of power they saw come from the Church to carry on what it
undertook, and to make a Convocation Act strong enough in this case to settle a
temporal sort of things that had a touch (in that they were annexed to, and
the support of Gods service) of spirituality. (For all along I desire it may be
carried in mind, The Consent of men is the firm and only bottom whereupon
temporal Right and Dominion do rest here: Men have agreed, Therefore Thus it
was; Which was here and thus complete and perfect.) If the Temporalty had not
stirred at all, it had been some sign they might not: If they had stirred and
not obtained, the victory might have seemed over their power, not their Right,
and so the use of their discretion to have stayed for their right and moved by
their power for it, in a time when they were likely to obtain: But since they
stirred, and obtained, and had redress real and effectual, A sign they might
at any other time, A sign they might have obtained, A sign that in other things
they let silently and quietly pass: Which since they did not, Therefore they
consented, Therefore they allowed, Therefore what was done was authoritative by
Them; And so this whole disposition of things (even all Lindewoods Collection)
had their Negative implied confirmation, in that they did not hinder, And by
Consequent even by them, (save in the case of Sylva caedua) the Canon was Law,
English Law, and approved by all, in that none cast a rub in the way to hinder,
whereas they might, and in other cases did, But Here they did not. The same
Author has other things dispersed, (for these were hitherto together under
one title,) as, where Lib 1. tit. de Cons^etudine. c. Nullus Rector.
Prohibition is to sell any Tithes before the 25 of March; After, the Rector
might declare his will of the fruits, to pay his debts, or satisfy legacies,
which was ordered in Hen. 3. time: And elsewhere Lib. 5. tit. de Sententia
Excommun. cap. Cum saepius.
they were to be Excommunicate who suggested by Calumny to the King and his
Judges, that the Ecclesiastical Justicers held plea of Advowsons, Chattels,
and other (temporal) things belonging to the Kings Court, Cum iidem praelati
and Judices super decimis, peccatis, and excessibus suorum subditorum suae
Jurisdictionis officium, prout ad eos pertinet, exercent; They did but do their
duty and discharge their office, meddling of those things that did appertain
unto them, tithes among the rest. Neither was this the less true, or the
judgment of it of no credit, because 'twas spoken of and by themselves: The
thing is evidently and notoriously known, nor shall want the recognition of
their jealous neighbors, the other Courts, who cannot but acknowledge the
Jurisdictions here severed and cut out as it were impartially and by a thread;
nor could a more proper and formal essential difference have been found out
between the one and the other then this, That the one did handle De jure
Patronatus and catallis, etc. as it ought, universally of the things of This
world, and the other of the rest, and tithes among the rest.

Which lets us fitly onward to the other, the Executive part of these
Legislatives hitherto, and how they had their force in the proper place
designed thereunto for recovery of these things thus made Due and stated
according to these Laws; but hereof I have not much to say. I was always a
stranger to their proceedings, nor as to gain or lose, did I ever do or suffer,
what might import favor or wrong, to be thereby helped or hindered at any time;
Only this I have heard spoke out by the clear and loud fame of the world, That
here men's rights were tried, and examined, and lost, and recovered: Pleas were
heard, and sentence given, and that sentence did, or should, or might have
found obedience. If all had not been right and square, as we say, exactly
justifiable, If there had been any remedy at Westminster, or any where else
that could have been thought of, If the Goddess Themis had had any Asylum or
refuge upon Earth whereunto covetous and carnal men might have had recourse in
their fears, with any hopes of protection in those affrighting tempests, that
like some kind of lightning melted their gold and silver in their purses, yea,
out of their purses, No doubt but such desired shelter would have been made to
with greatest diligence and truest endeavor: Questionless in what dark or
remote corner soever it had hid it self above ground, men would have both
sought it carefully, and found it successfully: Undoubtedly every one man would
have told his neighbor, and he another, these more, and by degrees all; The
information would so soon and luckily have propagated it self, that no manner
of doubt should now have remained, whether such a place had been or not; the
path would have been more trodden to it, then to any Church or Marketplace in
England: But they knew there was none such, They knew all was there, of this
nature, (while it was,) firm and answerable; They knew those sentences were
there (in their kind,) by the approbation of all men, and Authority of the
Law, valid as those at Westminster, Pulsa dignoscere cautus, quid solidum
crepet: They knew, Try whosoever would, There was that solidity. Civil Laws did
approve, successions of Parliament had allowed, the King had given leave, the
whole State had given allowance of those proceedings, and above all, the Law
held them just and according to Law: And so unless her self would contradict
her self, the head fall off from a principal member, or Justice oppose
Righteousness, They (all the Magistrates, Powers, Laws, and Lawyers of England)
knew, and could not but pronounce a just sentence in that Court for Tithes to
be just: were it for sheaf, lamb, fruit, venison, the tenth Thrave, or but a
Tythe-lock of wool; What a sentence did at Westminster, that a decree did
there; What a Verdict and Judgment upon an Assise, That a conclusive
determination upon mature deliberation did here; and What sufficient ground of
Right that gave of Dominion, that a man might thence claim a piece of ground or
debt of money, Hic codex est meus, Haec domus est vestra, By equal virtue of a
like sentence here, this due charged upon every parcel of land or herd of
Cattle had declared right, yea, and judgment for it, in order to execution; Or
if any would not come and submit, vocetur primo, and secundo, and quod si nec
sic ad emendationem venerit, Excommunicetur, as tertio; leave was given in the
Charter.

Thus as to the power entrusted with the Church, I have now almost done; we see
what the Supreme Authority gave in Commission, we see what use was made of it,
we see what connivence or more there was of all other powers, and what
obedience likely; but of this the less being unacquainted at Offices: We cannot
in short doubt but the Church made Laws about Tithes, that they caused them to
be done to execution, that the State enabled them, that the whole Civil Power
more then connived or permitted, appointed, authorized, and strengthened that
power whereby was acted thus according to office and duty on one part, and
leave, desire, expectation, and full trust on the other: The result of all
doubtless a full right, a clear, assured, undoubted, fast, safe and honest
title, as good as Any had to Any thing, and the evidence of things may
discharge the superfluity of more wast words; If any right were anywhere, it
may doubtless be reasonably thought to have been unavoidably, Here, Sure, and
Thus. There remains yet one only thing more, somewhat in intention, was never
quickened to full Act, but was purposed to give much in little, the life,
spirits, and virtue of all before in the new intended to be purified Canon Law
by Hen. 8. authority. A thing often glanced at, but here fit to be represented
together, and briefly and summarily was therefore thus: The 25 Hen 8 19.
Clergy upon casting off the yoke of forain Supremacy, and submitting to that
King, petitioned to have the Provincial Synods and all the Canon Law as far as
of force here, to be viewed and purged, and this to be done by thirty two
persons to be chosen by the King, whereof sixteen of the Temporalty, sixteen of
the Clergy. The King granted readily what perhaps he had willed to be asked,
and the persons were to be members of the present Parliament; but because so
great a wheel could not be brought about in so little time, the Parliament
sitting, their desires enlarged, were also granted, that it might be done
after, and then so many Canons as should continue approved, should be retained,
the rest as refuse cast away. This was upon the matter to furnish the
Spiritual Court with a new rule, whereto as much of the old as would should
have served the turn again but till that were done, what was in being to
remain. and this so far intended and minded, even with an eye to this very
particular, that after when a Provided always, and be it enaed by Authority
aforesaid, that this Act for Recovering of Tithes, ne any thing therein
contained, shall take force and effect, but only until such time as the Kings
Highnes^e, and such other 32 persons, which his Highness shall name and
appoint for the making and establishing of such Laws, as his Highness shall
confirm and ratify to be called the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Church of
England. And after the said Laws so ratified and confirmed as is aforesaid,
that then the Tithes to be paid to every Ecclesi^stical person, according to
such Laws, and none otherwise. 27 Hen. 8. chap. 20.
new Law was needed for Tithes, Proviso was thought as fit to be added, that it
should obtain but till the promised reformation: In the mean while time
slipping away, and little or nothing done in the business under nor after
Parliament, there was need to have the power 27 Hen. 8. 15.
renewed for longer date, which was done once and again, and so at length for
the whole 35 Hen. 8 16.
time of the Kings life. K. Edw. 6. also 2 and 3 Edw. 6. 11.
continued it for three years in his time, All repealed by 1 and 2 Phil and
Mar. chap. 8.
Queen Mary, but revived by their Elizab. 1. c. 1.
Maiden Sister. The fruit I find no less then the work in some sort done, and
published in the Queens time by J. F. but reprinted about ten years since,
under the title of Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum ex authoritate Regis Hen.
8. inchoata, deinde per Regem Edw. 6. provecta ad auctaque, etc. Londini 1640.
Where heed the title, It was but Reformatio legum Eccles. in what form soever
the new Mint should have come forth made of the old metal; Not Inventio,
Rogatio, Interrogatio, Promulgatio of any thing anew, but its very self,
Reformatio, Confirmatio, or Novatio, a new setting out of what had been before:
Not the sending for new Tables to Athens, or such godly and costly proceedings
as the poor blind Indians must make, (rising from the flat level) if it shall
please God at any time to give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the
truth, that they may recover themselves from the snare of the Devil who are
taken captive by him according to his will, To make their Native Ordinances
square and fit into one building, as to the new teachers maintenance; Raising
perhaps the tenth fliece from the flock, the tenth lamb from the fold, the
tenth sheaf from the shock by a costly devotion, and out of their Own creating
unto him a new Right; But to revise and settle that which was, to consider the
ways of taking up, remedy the inconveniences, remove the obstructions, and
scour the wheels upon which suits moved, still leaving the thing they found,
they needed add no more, but say, Those rights shall be paid that have been.
This all they intended, a Reformation, not destruction, which would infer need
of a new creation; Not to add an apple or an aye more, as that Poet said,
which I shall always account unjust (unless with much caution limited,) and
would not have done for God or man. No not for Religion, which needs not
injustice, or that any be put out of his Right for Gods sake; And God be
thanked, as things are, and the world has been devout heretofore and devoted,
it needs not; Let but God and man have their Due, and Religion is well provided
for. We may talk of raising more by fruitful beneficence, and the good will of
men shall move Mountains this way; But let the Law of the Gospel have but our
equal justice, with discreet administration of that which is, and it seems not
to want already what the world can or need do for its outward sustentation by
what was done for it before our fathers were born. Well: this plotted
Reformation as it is called, (to go on,) was as to the work to be performed,
taken into four quarters, and each quarter again into as many Cantons, whereof
every one had two Bishops, two Divines, as many Doctors of Law, and so many
Common Lawyers, (contributing their powers and endeavors to study, act, and
oversee,) and to perfect all. Sir Walter Haddon and Sir Jo. Cheek were to fit
it with ornament for the setting forth, which they did representing it to the
world, (and so it is now to be seen,) dressed up in a very fair Robe of curious
Roman language: As to Authority published it was with two Manifestors of the
two Princes, willing it Stricte praecipientes ut his nostris Constitutionibus
vos omnes and singuli tam in judiciis quam in Gymnasiis utamini. Hen. 8. in
Epist prafixa.
to be studied and followed in Universities and Courts, it is hard to give the
reason why it was not; All which was needful to know, that we might infer of
what power and authority is that we shall allege. One Pa. 215.
title is, de Decimis, having under it nineteen Chapters as follows:

Cap. 1. Decimas esse solvendas.

Quoniam Dominus noster Jesus Christus hanc ipse legem sancivit, ut qui
doctrinam inter homines conferunt, ex docendi labor praefidia vitae metant,
and ejusdem Domini nostri testificatione, Digni sunt mercede quicunque sunt in
opere; Porro divinum jus scriptum bovi trituranti cum os obligari ^on sinat,
nobis exemplum divinae clementiae repetendum est, and valide videndum, ne vel
nimia nostrorum hominum avaitia vel negligentia fiat ut Ecclesiarum nostrarum
ministris justi and convenientes fructus ex sanctissimorum occupatione munerum
non suppeditentur.

Cap. 2. Decimae praediales quo modo solvi debent.

Igitur authoritate nostra constitutum sit, ut omnes singulique subditi nostri,
locis and temporibus designatis and legitimis, decimas omnium rerum ex praediis
provenientium ministris seponant, sive foenum sint sive fruges qualescunque
quorumcunque locorum, sive Crocus, sive Canabis, sive linum, sive sint olera
vel arborum fructus, etc. and so on to the exactness of the Pharisee to tithe
All. Of Mills, Turves, Coals, Quarries, Pastures, (Agistment cattle I think
they mean,) the breed of Cows, Swine, Sheep, Mares, Swans, Hens, Geese,
Pigeons, Conies, Deer, Fish, Bees, etc. Revising and expounding the Act of
Parliament a little before made and approving it. But because the rest at large
may take up too much room, therefore take but the Quintessence as it were
extracted in the Contents of the Chapters.

Cap. 3. Animalium decima annua quomodo juxta numeri rationem solvatur. How the
tenth shall be reckoned. Cap 4. Divisio decimarum qualis sit. Cap. 5. Decima
rerum alienatarum quomodo recupenetur. Cap. 7. De Jure Vicariorum. Cap. 8.
Quando minister ex proventibus Ecclesiae ali non potest: Directing and
counselling to all lawful means can be thought on for augmentation. Cap. 10.
De decimis colligendis in aliena parochia. Cap. 11. De locis qui sunt a decimis
liberi. Cap. 13. Decimae praediales and personales quomodo solvendae. Cap. 14.
Solvendas esse decimas personales. Cap. 15. Proprietarii quomodo decimas
solvent. Cap. 16. Decimas utriusque generis solvendas esse, sc* both praediall
and personal, if they arise due from the same man. Cap. 17. Causa decimarum
inter ipsos ministros non progredietur. Cap. 18. Consuetudo non solvendi
decimas invalida sit.
It might have been convenient to have represented here a full transcription of
these things; but there is intimation where they may be had for use, which may
be enough, where brevity is studied. These Provisions of a Law show clearly
what the state then meant, as to Reformation, and even in this particular (if
the purpose of the statute had been obtained for abolishing the old Canons,)
and how inviolable the right of Tithes should have been Then by their profound
wisdom and discreet piety, which is also better seen by account from these
public consultations then any private informations. The results they were of a
severe and searching reformation, wherein as many stones had been moved (hoping
thereby to settle others) as in any tumbling Age; and for the distressed Church
what men durst do, if it had been judged convenient, needs no other
demonstration then what was done: But profound wisdom joined with much piety,
and a conscionable regard (proceeding in the fear of God) not to destroy what
they meant to reform, or to purge out corrupt humors to the death of the
patient, made them soberly careful we see, and tenderly jealous not to meddle
too far here, and for fear of darkness over all discreetly advised to let none
of the oil be meddled with that kept the Parish Lamp burning, but rather gave
hope of adding more where need was, (with encouragement to bring it in,)
setting open a door to let in other supplies of needful expense for these
Lamps dispersed all abroad, if God should so move the hearts of those that
loved the Tabernacle and the light thereof, to bring any offering; To strip all
having been a thought of such horrid injustice and barbarous impiety, joined
with Improvidence (as to Religion) and imprudence into the bargain, that in
likelihood truth might have been in danger of perishing from the earth by this
time, and according to ordinary dispensations of Providence, we have now had
little enough of Law or Gospel to take up consultations for the maintenance of,
by that the Bible might have been near a stranger, if this had prevailed: But
into their soft and tender bosoms, by the Grace of God, such thoughts had not
leave and power to enter.

Why the tree thus planted has not been known to bear fruit, or this new body
thus framed, not received to be practiced by, is, I said, hard to guess; the
best reason I can think of is for want of Parliamentary allowance and
subsequent confirmation, for naught else see I wanting: yet as strange that
what a Parliament had appointed to be done, and being done, and accordingly,
should not have therewith what strength it could give. But so it has been, a
dead letter hitherto, only living in the good wishes of knowing good men, that
it were quickened to full life, and the last Ecclesiastical piece (I call it so
in regard of the Materia prima, out of which it was made, the end whereat it
aimed, the things it directs about, and its distinct standing off from the more
common or secular,) that, of this kind, our Commonwealth has afforded: Not
unfitly reduced to this head of Ecclesiastic, whose proceedings have been such
by virtue of due power throughout this business, that it needs no protection of
Hyperbole to excuse that all have either liked or willed; Kings, States,
Parliaments, Judges, Lord, Laws, not sparing their vote of approbation, (to
this particular still I mean) and all that have, have looked on either to allow
or confirm. With this one intimation more I close up the point, that whereas
this new body is not yet it seems authorized perfectly, till it shall be, All
the old (including those also I made use of before) are in force by a
concluding Proviso of that first statute (25 Hen. 8. 19.) where the whole
business was started. The words are these: Provided also, that such Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial, being already made, which
be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this
Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative Royal, shall now
still be used and executed, as they were before the making of this Act till such
time as they be viewed, searched, or otherwise ordered and determined of by the
said thirty two persons, or the more part of them according to the tenor,
form, and effect of this present Act. But this not yet done, and therefore all
the former Canons yet of force till, etc. and that by this Authority.

CHAP. XXI.
AND hitherto then upon the proper Stage: Let us next look upon the lookers on,
and see whether the Neighbor secular powers have either not looked this way,
or said nothing, or not in allowance of what there: The Church empowered as
before, has acted as has been seen, to a full and fast determination of Right
according to what she had in Commission, (or if she exceeded or went too far,
was checked, as has been showed also:) But now has the secular state added no
collateral strength, to connive at least, and more, at what has been there
done? Surely so: As they have done their own business, Hers also having been
taken in by the by, sometimes in direct assertion, oftener by glance and
occasional reflexe, but by supposition constantly ever; That supposition also
often expressed, as uses to be in collateral, not purposed mention of things,
but never but understood and meant, as may be known by the evidence of things,
as they have been done, and are left remembered; Their very Sub factis autem
moraliter veniunt and non facta considerata cum debitis circumstantiis. Sic qui
sciens and praes^ns tacet consentire vide^ur, nisi circumstantiae ostendant quo
minus loquatur, metu eum vel alio casu impediri. Grot. de Iure Bell. l. 2. c.
4. sect. 5.
silence (if naught else were) implying consent, and suffering the
Ecclesiastical to continue meddling with things of Temporal worth, and not
forbidding, being strong evidence that they did allow. Sometimes indeed the
transgression of limits has been questioned, and this the true ground of All
Prohibitions, when the Church would meddle of things of Regulariter verum est,
quod judex Clericus cognitionem non habet de Laico feodo alicujus. Bracton de
Except. cap. 12. sect. 3*

Rex illis Iudicibus Ecclesiasticis salutem. Prohibeo vobis ne teneatis
Placitum in Curia Christianitatis quod est inter N and R: de Laico Feodo
praedicti R. unde ipse queritur quod N. eum trahit in placitum in Curia
Christianitatis coram vobis, quia placitum illud spectat ad Coronam and
dignitatem meam. Glanvill lib. 12 cap. 21. and vid cap. Sequ. Bracton de Excep.
cap. 3. and 4. vet. tot. Flet. lib. 6. cap. 37. sect. 5. and alibi pasum.


lay fee, as the general word was, de rebus tangentibus Coronam and dignitatem
nostram, for then the King would forbid that extravagancy, and stop the
proceeding, as reason he should: But if keeping the due bounds, and not going
besides the nature of allowed businesses, in spiritualibus and annexis; Now the
Jurisdiction it self was never questioned, but things reputed immoveably firm
that had their determination here, and the watchful eye of a jealous neighbor
either spied nothing, or said nothing, (and in that much:) or if any thing, by
insinuation, All was well; Hucusque, and contentment there should be no
Prohibition.

But to come to some particulars, having secular and more immediate Royal
influence, (in giving of which I doubt not but the performance of promise shall
far exceed the measure of my undertaking, or reasonable expectation, all
things considered, and that the proper Repository of such things from their
nature is elsewhere:) and I begin with the great Charter, one of the most
Authoritative Instruments, and solemn sealed and proclaimed deeds and Laws that
our State has, or the Lawyers themselves know where to seek for. The beginning
thereof is this, Edward by the Grace of God King of England, etc. We have seen
the Charter of the Lord Henry, sometime K. of England, our Father, of the
Liberties of England in these words: Henry, etc. which we confirm.)

Chap. 1. First, we have granted to God, and by our present Charter have
confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall be
free, and shall have all her whole Rights, and Liberties inviolable. We have
granted also, and given to all the Freemen of our Realm, for us and our heirs
for ever, these Liberties, etc.

This is a little more emphaticall in the Latin, which for the better
countenancing both of the testimony and the thing, I choose to represent from a
fair Manuscript in the public S 1. 8. Iur.
Library of Oxford, where thus: Imprimis concessimus Deo, and hac praesenti
Carta confirmavimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris imperpetuum; quod
Ecclesiae Anglicana liberae sit, and habeat That is, That all Ecclesiastical
persons shall enjoy all their lawful Jurisdictions, and other their rights
wholly without any diminution or subtraction whatsoever; Cook Instit. 2 pa 3.
Jura sua integra, and lib^rtates suas illaesas. Concessimus etiam omnibus
liberis hominibus, etc. This is that Charter in the ninth Chapter whereof is
confirmed the Charter of the City of London; in the fourteenth, That none shall
be amerced unreasonably, but salvo contenemento, as he may be able to bear; in
the twenty ninth, That no man shall be outed of his Freehold but by course of
Law; (so much stood upon formerly, lately, and justly, and ever to be stood
upon:) Every line whereof might have been written with some of the subjects
blood it cost; and in answerable price of worth contains some piece or other
of a firm wall to keep out Invasion, and hindering will and power gotten strong
from entering upon and trampling down the peoples Liberty; Wherein note two
things granted to the Church, sc. That she should have all her 1. Rights, 2.
Liberties: Those Rights, Entire: Those Liberties, Inviolable. What were first
her Rights? The Council of Aenham had flyled them before Deo debita Iura. cap.
1. in Spelm. Council. page 517. and K Knout likewise in his Laws, cap. 8. in
Lambard. Archai. pa. 101. And before either, K. Alfreds League with the Danes:
Dei Rectitudines. Spelm. pa. 377. The whole face and condition of things
represents it self such, that if any thing were, These were now Rights.
Tithes, no question: Even then: generally due, and universally paid, and so
for a long time had been: There needed no more then, or the Ages before, but to
prove the land in the Parish of Dale, and the Tithes were cast upon the Church
of Dale without any Evasion; And this so true and known, that there is none
from the information before or other acquaintance with the state of things as
they were, truly informed, but must grant as much as I say without haesitation:
And these rights were also granted Entire. Next, what were her Liberties? A
volumne were here little enough, and I had once thought of laying together
Many. But to our present purpose let a few Acts of Parliament expound what one
privilege at least was. In 18 Edw. 3. there is a statute for Pulton p. 143
the Clergy, and it was granted in regard of a Triennial disme given that
Martial Prince to further him in his Wars for France. In the sixth Chapter,
whereof is mention of some Justicers appointed to the impeachment of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (of The knowledge of all causes testamentary,
causes of matrimony and divorces, rights of Tithes, Oblations, and obventions
by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and Customs of the
same, appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this Realm, etc. Statut. 24
Hen. 8. ^2.
Tithes among other things, why may we not well understand?) and is against the
Franchise, this Statute says, of the Charter. Let the words speak their own
sense. Item, Whereas Commissions be newly made to diverse Justices that they
shall make inquiries upon Judges of holy Church, whether they have made just
process or excessive in causes testamentarie and other (causes decimall, as
notoriously do belong hither as testamentarie, a hundred proofs are for it)
which (yet) notoriously pertains to the cognizance of holy Church, the said
Justices have inquired and caused to be indicted Judges of holy Church; in
blemishing of the Franchise of holy Church, that such Commission be repealed,
etc. See here what Franchise is in part, sc. to have Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction free, proved by that to disturb it is a breach or blemish of the
Franchise. Next take another gloss in the plain text of 1 Rich. 13. where Id.
pa. 200.
The Prelates and Clergy of this Realm do greatly complain them for that the
people of holy Church, pursuing That this apprehension may not seem a mistake,
this very Chapter I find alleged heretofore to prove that the proper scene of
trial of tithes is the Ecclesiastical Court: by M. Fulbe^k in his parallel,
par. 2. Dial. 1. sol. 6.
in the Spiritual Court for their Tithes (there is the Jurisdiction and this
particular asserted) and their other things which of right ought, (there is more
then possession, Due,) and of old times were wont to pertain to the same
Spiritual Court, (there is continuance of time, or prescription) and that the
Judges of holy Church having cognizance in such causes, and other persons
thereof meddling according to the Law, be maliciously and unduly for this cause
indicted imprisoned, and by secular power horribly oppressed etc. against the
Liberties and Franchises of holy Church: Wherefore it is assented that all
such Obligations shall be of no value, etc. Here another statute interprets
what Liberty and Franchise is by that the clogging of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, in this matter of Tithes was a breach of that Franchise; and so
after when the Cistertians endeavored to exempt their Formours Lands as well
as their own from paying Tithes, that due power could not fetch them in, this
was again against the Franchise, as Alleged hereafter.
complained in Parliament, 2 Hen. 4. 4. And lastly, a The Annals of Burton
cited by M Seldom of Tithes, cha 14. pa. 419.
National Council represented as one of their grievances at London, 21 Hen. 3.
The over-lavish use of the Indicavit, whereby the Kings Judges would first
determine what tithes were due, to what Church, and this was in Regno Angliae
in praejudicium libertatis Ecclesiasticae. Which things may together show fully
enough, what the breach of Franchise was, and by consequent what the Franchise
it self, by the best which is public interpretation: Whence also likeliest
this was the meaning of the Grant: That the Church have all her Rights, that
is, Tithes (with others) entire: and all her Franchises, that is, Jurisdiction,
(Decimal, as for other things, to bring them in,) Inviolable; no less then
which could be meant by any likely construction. Or otherwise Thus; and the
strength of this title may here have received two ways augmentation. 1. As
Tithes were a Right and so warranted and intended to remain such. 2. As they
came within the compass of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which, if they were
given before, and any Law had assured them, (as many had doubtless,) This was
then here allowed to bring them in: And so were it personal or praediall, lamb
or wool, sheaf or heap, must not now then have been withholden, but were due,
and must be paid, yea, by the great Charter, yea, while that Charter was in
force, could not be denied, for that herein were confirmed, to the Church all
her Rights (Tithes) entire, All her Liberties, (Jurisdiction, Decimal)
inviolable; and Wrong must have been to deprive her of those Rights, (of these
Tithes,) of this Franchise, (of that Jurisdiction) Or otherwise lastly, Thus:
Let but the Jurisdiction, that Liberty, be supposed to have remained, and this
would bring in all the rest: For, let the Church but have been heard to speak
out in that which some accounted then doubtless as things were (in a qualified
sense) the voice of God, which was the voice of the Law, and this could have
spoken out nothing but roundly and home for Tithes: For they were Due, then
Due, and so Due: Let that dead letter be then but thus have been quickened by
lively sentence, and the Law be heard speak out according to truth and
righteousness, and the voice could be nothing else but for desired Justice,
Truth, and Them.

Of what estimation this Charter yet is and duly ought to be with all the good
people of England, much need not be said: Magna fuit quondam magnae reverentia
Chartae, as one said, It used to be looked upon with no other but an eye of
reverence. It cost the subject both wealth, and treasure, and blows, and blood,
before it could be obtained; And after at the rate of the lives of thousands,
and by the prudent and successful intercession of some Church-Ministers (who
persuaded and prevailed with the King to pass it,) as well as any other; it was
granted, it had the most The Archbishop, Bishops, and the rest of the Prelates
pontifically apparelled, pronounced that curse with tapers burning, which when
they had thrown away upon the pavement, where they lay extinguished and
smoking, the King (having laid his hand on his breast all the while,) swear to
keep all Liberties upon pain of that execratory sentence, As he was a Man, a
Christian, a Knight, and a King anointed and crowned. Speed Hist. li. 9. c. 9.
sect. 82. What the curse was, who was present, against whom thundered, that
should either break it, or bring in another, or observe it being brought, with
the signing and sealing, may be seen in the old Edition of the statutes,
printed 1543. at the end of Hen. 3. and in Flat. lib. 2. cap. 42. pa. 93.
solemn present confirmation that it now appears any public Instrument of this
state ever had. It has had The Lord Cook has computed to thirty two (in the
Proeme to Just. 2) I believe more; sc. twice in Hen. the thirds time: that is,
Anno 9. at Westminster, and Anno 52. at Marleborough, cap. 5. Also 25 Edw 1.
cap. 11. 28 Edw. 1. cap. 1. 1 Edw. 3 cap. 1. 2 and 3 Edw. 3 cap. 1. 4 Edw. 3
cap. 1.

Memorand. And beside these ratifications of the Charters, and thereby the
Churches R^ghts and Liberties in them, Tithes (in the way shown) with the rest;
There were many distinct Ratifications in several either Chapters or Clauses
besides of the same Churches Rights and Liberties. As in the Statute for the
Clergy in 27 Edw. 3. chap. 1. in 50 Edw 3. chap. 1. 1 Rich 2. 1. 2 Rich 2. 1. 3
Ri. 2. 1. 5 Rich. 2. 1. etc.


more then 30 other confirmations in Parliament since: For, for diverse Sc. in
Edw. 1. time: Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen 4. till about the end of Hen 5. Where it
occurs often.
Kings Raigns after successively, till by repetition that reverence before
spoken of, was bred and rooted in all men's hearts toward it; one of the first
things still done in that most honorable meeting was to confirm This, and the
Charter of the Forest; with no less regard of care and love, then in Councels
and Synods had been wont to be showed to the doctrine of Unity and Trinity in a
Deity, by keeping the belief thereof in faith and fresh memory by some of the
first Articles. In present, several draughts were Cook Vbi Supra pa. 4.
taken forth, and the exemplifications sent under the Great Seal to the great
men of the Realm, one of which yet is, (or lately was) at Lambeth, and 25 Edw.
1. c. 1
after renewed under the same Signature again, as well to the Justices of the
Forest as to the Sheriffs and other publik Officers, and to all the Cities of
the Land, with Writs to have them published, and order to Ib. cap. 3.
every Cathedral to read them twice every year to the people. And not only
their Effata or most reverenced contents equalled by Parliament to the Oracles
of the Common Law; But whereas Judicia are Iuris dicta, and should bind if any
thing, yet all sentences given in Court Ib. cap. 2. and M. Charta ca. ult. Quae
contra jus fiunt debent utique pro infect is haberi. Reg. Iur. Canon. 64.
contrary hereto, are declared null, and of no force, and that by sentence of
Parliament as soon as they are given. In present all were Excommunicate that
were infringers thereof, even with severe and bitter devotion; all the
Authoritate Dei, Patris Omnipotentis, Filii, and Sp. Sanct, etc. Flet Vbi sup.
powers that men on earth could devise or implore from Heaven being used to
procure and work terror; And for the future, it was appointed And that all.
Archbishops and Bishops shall pronounce the sentence of Excommunication against
all those that by word, deed, or council, do contrary to the foresaid
Charters, or that in any point break or undo them. And that the said curses be
twice a year denounced and published by the Prelates as aforesaid 25 Edw. 1.
cap. 4. With another curse at the end (to bind things as fast as might be) and
Excommunication announced against those that should (...) the seven Articles of
that Concession, (of which that was the fourth:) In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost etc. in the said old Edition of 1543.
this Excommunication should be renewed twice a year in every Cathedral, and
Artic. Super Chart cap. 1 28 Edw. 1.
Proclamation twice as often as that made by the Sheriff in his County Court (
sc. after Michaelmas, Christmas, Easter, and Midsummer,) Three substantial men
being then chosen to be Justices by virtue of that Commission to inquire of
transgressions, and merely by virtue of that Writ without any other power, they
were such Justices. It Is, in short, Iam aderat annus salutis humanae 1226, and
nonus cum regnare coepit Henricus, quo anno Concilium Principum est habi^um: Eo
in Concilio de Re is pariter ^ principum sententia, non parum multa privilegis
ordan^ sacerdotal, atque reliquo populo irrogata sunt, multaeque leges latae,
quas Reges qui secut^ sunt, Ita approbarunt, ut inde bona pars juris collecta
sit, quemadmodum extat in co libello cujus inscriptio est, Magna Charta, and
altera, vulgo de Foresta, id est, de ferarum faltibus. Po yd. Virg. Angl. Hist.
lib. 16. pa 292.

It was for the west part declaratory of the principal grounds of the
Fundamental Laws of England, and for the residue it is additional to supply
some defects of the Common Law, etc Cook Instit 2. in Prooem. page 2. So of
King John's Charter; the Barons reached him, -- Schedulam quae ex part maxima
le^es antiquas, and regni consuetudines continebat. Matthew. Par. ad an. 1215.
pa. 244. And see R. Twisden, Praefat ad Leg. Guil 1. and Hen. 1. pa. 157.


the cream and quintessence of the whole bulk of the Politics of our Nation,
the Charter of the peoples right, the hedge of their property, the fence of
their liberty, the strength of their security, and the chief bottom of our
Laws: Which in the dawning of our late troubles about twenty years since, had
the violation thereof, all know, looked upon with so jealous an eye, that
nothing more egged the people to enforce the Petition of Right (to regain the
breaches made whereinto was a part of that Petition,) then a fear they had
wrong done them in this their chiefest and choicest love, which let be but
read, and it alone will show what estimation quiet subjects had thereof in
those calm times, and what advantage has been made of both since, all know. A
Volumne were here again too little: and yet the beginning was plainly, fully,
and home for these Rights among other: And the Concession of them, which is
more, made over, as 'twere, into another world, into the When anything is
granted for God, it is deemed in law to be granted to God; and whatsoever is
granted to his Church for hi^ honor, and the maintenance of his religion and
service, is granted for and to God Quod datum est Ecclesiae datum est Deo. Cook
Instit. 2. pa. 2 upon this Charter.
Hands of God, that man should not dare recall or lay his hand upon that was so,
and To God was Given. Concessimus Deo and hac praesenti Charta nostra
confirmavimus pro nobis, etc. quod Ecclesia, etc. Whereas the peoples Liberties
were given only into their Own hands. What will, if this will not, preserve
them entire as they were given? What will render them inviolable, if not the
sacred Omnipotent hand of the Semel Deo dicatum non est ad usus humanos
ulterius transferendum. Reg. Iur. 51.
most High God, to whose protection, power, and safeguard, as well as honor
and glory, they were by our Ancestors (who thought themselves awake in the
business of the Charter) commended? and they thought to equal it with the
highest offense, that of the Giants heretofore making attempts against Heaven
by their daring presumption, if any should at any time presume to rob them from
That Hand to Which they were, and So given. Many yet allege and take a part:
The ninth chap. in Whose old liberties and customs are there confirmed: and
likewise of all other Cities, Towns, Boroughs, etc.
behalf of the City of Lond^n: the twenty ninth for a Legal trial of Tithes;
and the Petition of Right joined thereto for liberty and property; that none be
outed of his Freehold but by due process of Law, and many exclamations, bitter
sufferings, hard imprisonments have been, perhaps ought to be rather then lose
their childs portion, in that great Charter, the enriching due Birthright of
every Englishman. But is not one man's Right as good as another? Does not any
injury sit to as much discontent, irksomness and wrong upon the galled back of
one sort of sensible persons, as it does of another? Or, may not I cry for my
Childs part as well as my Brother? The despised Minister of Jesus Christ, Can
he have no wrong? Or has he no right? Or is not he perhaps a Christian, an
English man, a Man, as well as all his kindred, that any private spleen, envy,
malice, greedy covetousness, self-love, or other wrongful and injurious
passion should work in the bosom of his fellow-Christian and Neighbor (who yet
loves His Own well enough, and can be content to stretch all his powers to make
the most and best of it) to wish Him out of His, or endeavor, if it be in his
power, to put him out, Quarrelling with him to rest contented to see his name
stricken out of the Common Fathers Will; and he shall be yet in more danger, if
he strive or cry, or do any thing but sit still and submit, and be quiet while
his part of the Charter is taken from him! May not this very same evidence, if
the poor Preacher and Servant of Jesus Christ, who takes cure of souls for his
Master, feeding the flock of God committed to his charge, not by constraint,
but, willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, have any part
therein, be as honesty, reasonably, piously, safely, and Christian or English
man-like pressed home, and contended for earnestly in his behalf, as for a man's
right, a man's estate, a man's property? Perhaps a single, simple, mere natural
man, that as such, by any thing he possesses is bound to little, that he knows
of, save to make himself ready, eat and drink, keep himself quiet or merry,
expect the quarter or half years day, tell his rent when it comes in, and in
the mean while is at leisure for Any thing: To sport and play, game and riot,
perhaps for Rom 13. 13.
gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, lust and envying; and
other such things Col. 3. 6.
for which the wrath of God is wont to come upon the children of disobedience.
For such are known to live among us and enjoy their dear Own without
disturbance, (which is worse, in Christian Communion too,) and relinquishing
neither hopes of Law, nor Gospel, (not our Law I mean,) to see the streams of
Pactolus flow, their heaps of wealth come tumbling in on every side, which they
abuse (God forgive them) to be the fuel of their sins, to keep their vices and
iniquities not only burning, but flaming in the sight of the world, 1 Pet. 4.
3, 4.
Working the will of the Gentiles, and walking in all lasciviousness, lusts,
excess of wine, revellings, banquettings and abominable idolatries, wondering
that others (who by the Grace of God have escaped the pollutions that are in
the world through these lusts, and old things are past away with them, all
things are become new) run not with them, as formerly, into the same excess of
riot, speaking evil of them for it, as the Apostle says: And shall these I
say, do thus, and no man molest them, or trouble them, or question (as God
forbid they should) for craving, having, and misspending what they have Civil
right to, while the Matthew 20. 8. chap. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. 1 Timothy 5 18
Labourer is kept short of his hire, 1 Cor. 9. ^. 1 Timothy 5. 18. Deuteronomy. 25 4.
The mouth of the Ox muzzled that treads the mow, and kept short of his due
allowance; Gods Minister only is pittanced of what may keep him alive and
honest together, and they that take themselves for good men, doubt whether they
may subtract from him his part of the Charter. He is, I aver, He is one of the
most Necessary men in his Parish, for discharge of duty he would soonest be
missed of All, if he should be absent; As great expectation is of Him while he
is there, and there is neither Freeholder nor Copyholder, Yeoman, Gentleman,
or scarce Any other, who in sickness, absence, exclusion, or so, would be more
missed of the Neighborhood, of any of whom they expect no more then what duly
they have of him, and more: And what wisdom or equity were it then to choose out
Him to be robbed at the root, despoiled of his right, shrunk in those sinews
must give all his designs or godly good works, life, power and motion in this
world, and desire his means of living to be withholden from him due by Law,
While other that would very likely do less good with it, certainly have less
duty expected of them for it, have enough and to spare, yea, Fruges consumere
nati, men born only to live and spend, have plenty, that nor own, nor pretend
to own any necessary, fitting, honest, manly employment to the furthering of
that common good, whereof they reap the chiefest benefit, But (like drones)
suck the sweet, and make sport with the sweat of other men's brows, wearing
Mannours on their backs, and pouring Farms down their throats, swimming in
golden Lard up to the Chin, as he said, live at ease in Sion, neither Fish nor
Flesh, having nothing of Human or Christian, Lay or Ecclesiastical, Magistrate
or Officer, public or private, charged or they think fit should be charged on
their account to God or man, Church or State. I speak not this, that they
should be deprived of anything is Theirs, or to stir up discontented
fault-finders against them, which I assure my self cannot be attempted without
sedition in the State, or sin to their souls who should be so troublesome; Let
every Swine have his own dunghill, every man have his Own, as well as do Mat.
20. 15.
what he lists therewith, as the Scripture says; if He mis-spend, Who art
thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls. Romans 14. 4. And, Why do thou judge thy Brother? or, why do thou
set at naught thy Brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ. For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, Every knee shall bow to
Me, and every tongue shall confe^s to God. So then every one of us shall gave
account of himself to God, ver. 10, 11, 12.
God shall judge: But comparatively, If These, then Those, if They have, and
none subtract or deny, how much less, or with equal necessity, not from him
that 1 Cor. 15. 10.
labors more abundantly then they all, as the Apostle speaks; and in
another place is 1 Timothy 5. 17.
worthy of double honor, laboring still in the word and doctrine. God forbid
any should have wrong, or not their right, be it much or little, and Who or
Whatsoever: But is this sort of men Only inconsiderable, to be shut out of
door when right is distributing, and they alone are Chidden if they ask their
Due, or expect their Right from the Petition of Right, and the every man else
enriching Charter: Heu quod literulas stulti docuere parents! Nay, will they
not blame their calling that deprives them of common equity, and shuts them out
from the open Hall of Justice, and they may not claim their due in Every ones
Inheritance? It grieves me to consider, and I wonder it should be so: The same
men that urge those public Concessions so earnestly, and would suffer more
rather then lose any of their little shares in this universal Grant, yet cry
out against Tithes without moderation or measure, take on and complain as of a
burden insupportable, and when their own parts are taken out, They may not be
restrained of their liberty or abridged of their property, (God forbid they
should;) Other men's right or liberties, they may be stamped under feet, their
Dues are inconsiderable, no dear Own by their Property. I hope and believe they
have been hitherto but mistaken in judgment, and thinking Tithes to be no
other but the impositions of some later statutes, or the usurpations of the
Consistory; no wonder or blame they would have tyranny abolished, and exactions
removed, that every man may enjoy his dear Own, and no man usurp upon his
neighbor in any the smallest matter: But would they consider what deep and
settled, and al overspread radication these claims have in all the Civil laws
of the land; How the Parliament allows them, the Petition of Right involves
them, the Canon gave them, the Charter confirmed them, the Common Law set them
up; and all the Politics of the Nation combine and conjoyn their strength for
their legal Dueness, as of Any thing: Could they look (past some single Order
or Act,) into the depth of that diffused and far-spreading Rule and Giver of
all Right with us, the Sovereign Law, and there find that what gives all men
right in this Nation, gives here with as undoubted assurance, and a manifold
accumulation of more strength and evidence, They would then, I trust, change
their notes, or as the word uses to be, sing us another song; They would not
betray their discretion to such necessary disgrace as must follow upon their
destroying with one hand, what but now they had set up with the other, nor
would they take away with their left what they gave with their right; but Right,
and Charter, and Liberty, and Property, should be all of a sort, and one man's
claim of any thing from or by any of Them as good as another. Could they espy
(that which is) an involved title in these public evidences they contend for,
and these Dues to be as certainly implied in the Charter (as they are) as their
own inheritances; They would no doubt soon change their English minds in a
contrary way to the new-instructed Acts 28. 6.
Islanders of Melita, settling for truth and no longer for error, ( Father
forgive them, I doubt they have not yet known what they do,) Hence ceasing
their clamor against their neighbors, as those would have no wrong done to
themselves, and accounting it a most unreasonable partiality, not to be owned
by those that are in any degree among the lowest sort of Honest men, to pick
out that which is for their These be those excellent Laws contained in this
great Charter, and digested into 38 Chapters, which tend to the honor of God,
the safety of the Kings conscience, the advancement of the Church, and
amendment of the Kingdom, granted and allowed to All the subjects of the Realm
Co. Inst. 2. pa. 1.
turn in a public evidence, and throw away the rest, or make that they have
got of power to disanul it. Mr. Petitioner, whosoever thou be, I name None, but
mean All, and in love and friendliness bespeak and petition Thee: A. B. C. D.
E. F. G. H. or whosoever thou be that love the Charter, the Petition of
Right, or Right it self, hearken; And if thou be a Christian and English man,
be persuaded hereafter to proceed upon more equal terms, and from a better
information of judgment, cease to pervert the right words of the Law; Whatever
thou have done heretofore in the days of thine ignorance, now taking no other
course but what is justifiable by the rules of common Honesty. Could I but hear
you once resolve, that every man should have his Own, and Law should be the
rule of that, your own chosen Instruments should be the evidences, and not any
just man's plea shut out of the Court, be it what, or of, or for whomsoever, I
would not then doubt to have gained of your honesty and simplicity a strong
patronage of that righteous cause now in ignorance and by mistake ye go about
to suppress, and that ye would appear valiant, yea suffering Champions for that
equity and right, ye now seem resolved to take pains, if not to suffer, rather
then permit any longer those that have right to enjoy. Let but a love to truth,
and constancy to your own principles be with you, and I have enough, I
petition, I ask no more. Nor do I altogether despair; As great changes have
been in the world, and faces about from West to East, quite contrary to what
was once persecuted or prosecuted in ignorance. The two Thieves shamed not to
confess the truth at last: (I equal you not in injustice, or meaning wrong,
but God grant you and I may equal them both in Turning from out our evil ways,
passing from death to life, repenting our hidden sins, and converting from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.) Martha loved much after,
who before had done that needed much forgiveness. Matthew the cheating
Publican, turned upon admonition a Disciple and Apostle; And is not Saul among
the Prophets, Paul among the Preachers! Good men and true, Remember chiefly
that last example: Wonder, but Believe it was even so; Inquisitour Saul is
turned a zealous Professor, and he that was a busy Persecutor, now as active
an Evangelist and Professor: When Christ, who is the true light, shined to his
soul with awful beams, he fell down, and recanted, and repented his I verily
Thought this with myself, that I Ought to do many things contrary to the Name
of Jesus of Nazareth, which I also did at Jerusalem, etc. Acts 26 9
zealous ignorance, and though he had received Commission ( Acts 9. 2.) from
the highest then of Priests and Powers, yet God caused him to revoke all, and
we have Gal. 1 23.
heard say, (as the Jews of him truly,) that He which once persecuted in times
past, now preaches the faith which once he destroyed: for which, men glorified
God in him. Why should the like be despaired of you? of whom I must go against
mine own both hope and full persuasion, if I should say otherwise then that I
believe ye have profited thus far, That ye love the truth. Ye mean well, ye
will, (why will you not?) be fast men, and true to those great names of
Justice, Equity, and Righteousness, as they shall be revealed to you, not to
your own opinions, (frowardly persisted in) how plausible or profitable soever,
and as new and better light shall shine, not be in love with former darkness?
Be persuaded, ye may have erred: The Church has right, a Right of Tithes, a
Civil Right, a Charter Right; and will you yet go against your own principles,
and deny other men that right your selves think fit almost to resolve to die
for? Will ye not grant, what in your own cases ye ask, and refuse to give to
others, what ye expect to receive your selves? shall they not have what ye will
not be denied? What Equity, Reason, or Conscience were this? Be valiants be
wise, be just, and constant, I crave no more: Or, if ye ye will not, ( striving
to do to others, as you would your selves should be done unto,) How dwells
the love or law of Christ in you! How can you expect that God, who is a God of
Wisdom, Justice and Truth, should ever more shine with the least ray of his
favor upon any of your enterprises! This Apostrophe was needful: God lay it to
your hearts. Remember, there is a day appointed, when God shall judge the world
by Jesus Christ; and then if you should appear to have wronged his Messengers,
despised his Prophets, or driven on any close unjust design (with success) of
impoverishing and making a prey of their worldly weakness whom God has
entrusted with your souls; How would you answer this worst of wrongs? What put
up in excuse of so aggravated injuries? Or, what could you think to say to such
an imputation, Alleged by his justice, Enforced by your adversary, Assured by
the things, Recorded in his and your memories, Attended with the furies of
another world for complete revenge, and that of the worst of crimes, has the
least of excuse, the most of shame, and (of all you can readily think of) the
weakest and lowest hopes of mercy? Especially since now the light of truth has
shined into your souls by better information, at least shined upon your souls
by offer of its bright and piercing beams; ye May have received the truth,
which truth would set you free (from errors;) Or if no more, yet it has been
laid before you, or you have been told but where it is, that ye may seek for
it, which will render you far toward Without excuse.

CHAP. XXII.
AND thus much of, for, and from the most known Head of all our Laws, the great
Charter; whereof the more, because it deserves more: Proceeding, next whereto
is a Concession of about the end of Hen. 3. confirming the Jurisdiction, and by
consequent the things thereunder in a Parliament Ordinance called Regia
Prohibitio. I first met with it in the In Biblioth. Bodl. Oxon. S. 1. 8. Iur.
Ms. before mentioned, and set before the statute De Anno Bissextili: which
being referred to 21 Hen. 3. I think may well be placed hereabouts: the Pulton
pa. 109.
print has it of uncertain time, and Instir. 2. pa. 600.
Sir Edw. Cook as about the beginning of Edw. 1. I believe it to be that with
Articuli Cleri, Circumspecte agatis, etc. referred to in the end of the statute
of 2 Edw. 6. 13. though Ib. Pa. 663.
others point it to, Probibitio formata super Articulis Cleri: Well, Howsoever:
Incipit Regia Probibitio. Sub qua forma impetrant layci Prohibitionem in genere
super decimis, oblationibus, obventionibus, Mortuariis, etc. Respondit Dominus
Rex ad istos articulos, quod in decimis, oblationibus, obventionibus, etc.
quando agitur ut praedictum est, prohibitioni non est locus. None to be granted
in case of Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, etc. and then is my drift secure:
It Is known what would be the issue of other proceedings. Indeed it follows, If
by sale the things change nature, becoming temporal, or the quantity may justly
occasion an Indicavit, then, etc. But in the ordinary course, none.

In 18 Edw. Puiton pa. 70.
Edw. 1. time we have the noted Statute of Circumspecte agatis: made, it seems,
to restrain and keep within due banks some powers granted a little before to
the secular Judges to curb in his Jurisdiction the Bishop of Norwich: (whose
Put but for an example: The thing extends to all the Bishops of the Realm Co.
Inst. 2. pa 487
name yet might be but as A. B. an Individuum vagum, appliable to all who had
their due liberty in danger of being fettered, and indeed to them Rex enim
misit certos Iusticiarios suos ad procedendum sub certa forma contra Episcopum
Norwicensem and alios de cle^o sibi adhaerentes, quibus postea Rex scripsit ut
hic habetur Gloss. Norwicensem. Lynde^ wood. de for^ compet. 1. Circumspecte.
severally it was directed:) The King (therein) to his Judges sends thus
greeting. Deal circumspectly in all matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich,
and his Clergy, not punishing them if they hold plea in Court-Christian of
such things as be merely spiritual; that is to wit, of penance, etc. Item, If a
Parson demand of his Parishioners oblations or tithes due and accustomed, or if
any Parson do sue against another Parson for tithes greater or smaller, so that
the fourth part of the value of the Benefice be not demanded. This is so plain,
nothing can be more: though the secular Judge might send his hook to fetch
causes to his Court in some doubtful cases, yet for things merely spiritual,
or for tithes by name, This Law says, He may not. Which for better
preservation Ibid.
Lindewood has also in the Churches behalf taken into his Provincials.

In the same Edw. 1. time was granted the Statute of Consultation: It has not,
I confess, express mention of tithes by name, but the Jurisdiction, (and that
enough) allowed: for it being granted, which cannot be denied, from other
assurances, both that tithes were due, and This would bring them in, in the
grant hereof entire, is enough, the rest will follow. It seems some there were
would then obtain a Prohibition to stop the wheels should properly move to
Justice in this case, and when the business came to the Lay Judge, go no
farther: So the Plaintiff (was delayed, yea, denied right, and almost wrong,
for he could have no sentence any way, for remedy whereof, it was ordered: That
24 Edw. 1. Anno Dom 1296 id. pa. 75.
Whereas Ecclesiastical Judges had often surceased, etc. by virtue of
Prohibition, whereupon nothing done in either Court, Our Lord the King wills
and commands, that where so, the Chancellor or Chief Justice upon sight of
the Libel upon instance of the Plaintiff (if they can see that the case cannot
be redressed by any Writ out of the Chancery, but that the Spiritual Court
ought to determine the matters) shall write to the Ecclesiastical Judges before
whom the cause was first moved, that they proceed therein, notwithstanding the
Kings Prohibition. Plain, that in some cases And this is the very reason why
the 12 Chap. of 32 Hen. 8. was made law, because Lay men that had use of all
other Co^rts, yet could not come at their d^^ tithes now settled upon them by
any of those Co^rts, which made it necessary they should be enabled, to sue in
the Court Christian, where only these d^es were tried, and that was the thing
th^^e done, and the new indul^enc^ there granted Them, as appears by the
Preface
the other Courts could afford no Justice, and therefore of necessity must be a
remission hither; so appropriate was the remedy and indeed cognizance and rule
of Justice to this Court, that all the rest could not so much as hear; and that
righteousness might not fail from the Earth, hither loyal subjects must only
come for it. To some time of the same Kings Reign is yet farther ascribed
Palton, pa. 91.
this grant, that, (Where Ib cap. 1.
No Tallage or aid shall be levied withon consent of Parliament, Nor Ib. ca. 2.
any thing purvayed to the Kings use without the owners consent; There) We will
and grant for us and our heirs, that all Clerks and Laymen of our Realm shall
have their Laws, Liberties, and free Custo nes as largely and wholly as they
have used to have the same at any time when they had them best And if any
Statutes have been made by us or our Ancestors, or any Custo nes brought in
contrary to them, or any manner. Article contained in this present Charter, We
will and grant that such manner of Statutes and Customs shall be void and
frustrate forevermore. With Ib. cault.
order to have it read every year twice in every Cathedral, and a curse upon
the breakers. I infer: If, 1. All Laws, Liberties, and Customs were here
granted. 2. To Clerks as well as Laymen. 3. Of the largest size or use. 4. In
despite of any Law to the contrary; Then, 1. here be tithes, which were then
due by Law: 2. the Jurisdiction of them, a Liberty, which would bring them in;
3. And so they were both due and must be paid, (taking in consideration of the
Then state of things,) by virtue of the Law, and by virtue of this Law, for
that herein were granted all Laws and Liberties. Remove to Edw. 2. and there we
find those are styled 9 Edw. 2. id. pa 98.
Articuli Cleri, and so not like to afford nothing; but Englished, Articles In
the old edition of 1543.
for the Clergy, and so like to afford something for them. The first thus
proposes and resolves: Whereas Laymen do purchase Prohibitions generally upon
tithes obventions, oblations, mortuaries, etc. The King does answer, that in
tithes, oblations, obventions, and mortuaries (when they are propounded under
these names) the Kings Prohibition shall hold no place, although for the long
withholding the same, the money may be esteemed at a sum certain. But if a
Clerk sell his tithes gathered into his barn for money, etc. then otherwise.
And if the Kings Prohibition should not lay any impediment, but things must be
tried by the Canons, we know and are assured whether tended, and what that
meant. But more particularly here observe, 1. That the power which is known
would give them in, is here, without dislike mentioned. 2. Plainly allowed. 3.
As to tithes by name. 4. Strengthened; By this that as in Circumspecte agatis
no disturbance should be offered by the secular Judge impeading to proceed in
their own way. 5. And all this by Parliament, Sending the trial where
beforehand it was known how the business would go; And then, as if the supreme
power send a criminal offender to the Bar of Criminals, knowing how the case
will there go, looking on, permitting, and acquiescing in the sentence there to
follow upon that sending; They more then seem to confirm and allow, whatever
prove the issue; such interpretation may reasonably be made here of the
remission of these cases, and the temporal power could not but be thought to
own the event, and what was done whether themselves sent for trial. The
provisions were as strict as well they could to hinder extravagancy, for, as
treading in the steps of the Regia Prohibitio before, if once the thing were
never so little converted to seem temporal, Away with it presently, Grant it no
longer protection here, but allow suit for it wheresoever; But if it remained,
spirituale vel spirituali annexum, it self, As reason would and the nature of
the thing required; the King says, the Law says, the Parliament says, and all,
let the Church have her due; If it be to try these things and bring them home
to her own house, let no envious incroachment grudge her right, no not though
by continuance of time the things have run so long, as they may seem to have
degenerated into a Lay-commodity. Chap. 2. Also if debate arise upon the right
of Patronage, and the Quantity of the tithes do come unto the fourth part of
the goods of the Church, the Kings Prohibition shall hold place, if that cause
come before a Judge Spiritual: Insinuating, (and the practice has been
accordingly) that if less then a fourth part, (or the Patron of both the same,
for so it was,) it must be tried as before. And so chap. 5. where no
Prohibition is to be had (as in the title) if tithe be demanded of a new Mill;
And the text: Also if any do erect in his ground a mill of new, and, after the
Parson of the same place demands tithe for the same the Kings Prohibition
does issue, etc. the Answer: In such case the Kings Writ of Prohibition was
never yet granted by the Kings consent, nor never shall, which has decreed
that it shall not hereafter lie in such cases. And then let the Parson alone:
His strength is, those Canons will do execution enough; De proventibus aute^
Molendinoru^ volumus quod decimae fideliter and integre solvantur, had Constit.
provincial. tit. de decimis. cap. Quon a^ propter. Also, Decima etc. Molend
no^um, Venationum, Negotiarionum, etc. tit. eod cap. Sancta Ecclesia. De prato,
de aqu^s, and molendinis L. Edovardi Confess cap. 8. cited before. De
molendinis, and piscari s, and ^oenis. Consti^ut. cujusdam Episcopi, about Hen.
3. time, alleged by M. Seldom, pa. 231. D^ proventibus Molendinorum,
piscariarum, foeno, etc. Decret. Gregor. tit. de decimis ca. pervenit. Of those
forced by winds as well as water. Mandamus quatenus. H. Militem, ad solutionem
decimarum de h^s quae de molendino ad ventum proven unt, sine diminutiore
aliqua compeliatis, tit. e^d cap. 23. Ex transmissa. And, as of Mercha dise or
praedial^, without dimin^tion of expense. tit eod. cap. 28 Pastoralis officii.
Rob. Winchelsee said before, then in force. Integre, that is without
diminution, the tenth dish, not the tenth penny, says Sc. sine diminutione,
sic ut solvatur decima proventuum vere sicut proventus accidunt, viz. decima
mensu^a quorumcunque granorum molitorum ad commodum domini molendini vel
molendinarti pertincntium; and sic non sufficit solvere decimam p^out
Molendinum transit ad firmam, quoniam in firma de verisimili non est verus
valor, cum firmarius ultra firmam aliquid speret lucrari. Gloss. Integre cap.
Q^ioniam propter.
Lindewood: And m^morand. these ( Articuli Clori) and Circumspecte agatis, and
some other had a clause to keep them inviolable by the late Parliament
determination of 2 Edw. 6. 13. in the end.

Follows next Edw. 3. and here we have more: In every K. Reign almost somewhat,
if but for recognition, and to show that that piece agreed with the whole. As
first, There had been over-lookers, as before, of the Jurisdiction Christian,
who disturbed, and discouraged, (but they did but overlook and hinder, not
absolutely take away; the thing remained, and hence proved.) Also some that
pulled away a branch or bough rather from the tree, hindering by Scire facias
from the Chancery the trial of Dismes from its proper Court: The King in the
Statute for the Clergy before mentioned, gives remedy for both in the two last
Chapters of that Act. Chap. 18 Edw. 3.
6. Item, Whereas Commissions be newly made to diverse Justices, that they shall
make inquiry upon Judges of holy Church, etc. But the whole was transcribed
before, whereto I therefore remit. Mark chiefly that clause, that Causes
testamentarie and others, did notoriously belong to the Cognizance of Holy
Church, and the King said so. Not Rob. Winchelsee, or Jo. Stratforth, or any of
the past or then present Church-Ministers, who did no more then they had power;
but the King: Nor did they incroach, says He; It was rather Then an
incroachment upon them to interpose and trouble the orderly motion of their
wheels tending to a just administration of things and giving every man his due
in a way allowed by all the power that then was above, and public. Chap. 7.
Item, Whereas Writs of Scire facias have been granted to warn Prelates,
religious, and other Clerks to answer Dismes in our Chancery, and to show, if
they have any thing, or can any thing say, wherefore such Dismes ought not to
be restored to the said Demandants, and to answer as well to us, as to the
parties of such Dismes: that such Writs from henceforth be not granted, and
that the parties be dismissed from the secular Judges of such manner of pleas.
Saving to us our right, such as we and our ancestors have had and were wont to
have of reason. God forbid else, and that whether Supreme or Temporal power
should be abridged of its due by any dependant or inferior: for the Charet
never moves so well as when every wheel keeps its proper place, and every power
does its own work without any others troublesome let or interposition. A wen in
the body, or any monstrous excrescence (besides that it deforms the whole) robs
the other parts, and none is so much pleasured with what is superabundant, as
the rest is displeasured by following necessary defect: The injury of any
member redounds to the prejudice of the whole body; And the Commonwealth
flourishes so prosperously never, as when every limb acts for it self, every
member does its own office, the head, foot, hand, eye or other part commanding,
obeying, ruling, or being ruled as it ought, and none usurps or launcheth out
over-busily into that of cure which belongs in proper design to another. Here
it was meant so: and therefore, Saving to the whether Supreme or Temporal
power, what did belong thereto, the appearance upon the Scire facias is
discharged. Can any thing be more plain? And if such inquiries had been used to
be made in the Court of Religion (as this Statute implies) Then, and must be
there, and were here sent thither by the Parliament, And They when things came
thither, said the tenth sheaf, fleece, colt, or lamb was due. Can any thing be
more certain then that it was so done even by their recognition, assent, and
purposed appointment, and ought accordingly to be paid? Whosoever did, had an
unequal task to struggle against, the mighty Law, and Sovereign power that
made Right, if he would go on yet waywardly to contend. The Law is, as Heb. 6.
16.
Gods Word says of an Oath) the end of all strife; since then It said so, and
in other matters it uses to make an end, being the bottom of Right, the
highest appeal, and uttermost any other men had to say for any thing, how vain
must they be, who would contend, that were thus concluded before they began,
and all-ruling oracles of Law rightly sought, and duly applied, and discreetly
drawn forth, had determined of before, The tenth was due, and must be parted
with?

About three years before, 15 Edw. 3. cap. 6.
in this Kings Reign there was a repealed Session, part whereof is made to look
this way: The words are these. Item, It is accorded that the Ministers of holy
Church for money taken for redemption of corporal penance, nor for proof and
account of Testaments, or for travail taken about the same, nor for solemnity
of marriage, nor for other things touching the Jurisdiction of holy Church,
shall not be impeached or arrested, nor driven to answer before the Kings
Justices, nor other Ministers, but have Writs from the Chancery for discharge,
etc. which I find construed in favor of tithes: By Sir Tho. Rilley: in his
view of the Laws, par 3. c. 2. sect. 1 pa. 143.
But because it was repealed soon after, and doubtful when it was in being, the
several possible senses of the words leading the grantors mind to look (not
improbably on either part) two ways; I pass it over, and come to the Statute of
Sylva caedua, which was sure to the purpose, at least by consequent. It was
made indeed against 45 Edw. 3. c 5
some exactions of tithes, yet so as it implies for other; The by-blow sets up
to rights what the direct had pulled down, and By saying Some should not be
paid, The rest it should seem Should; For a Prohibition allowed to take place
for trees of twenty years growth, and no more, seems to whisper and suggest
that in others it shall not, or the rest is left to course of ordinary
proceeding. The words were given Pa. 137.
before, not needful to be repeated again, and the most of practice and the
regulation of things has been, I believe accordingly. Laws are commonly like
two-edged swords, they cut both ways: If they say This, they mean That; If they
give the Negative, they imply the Affirmative; If one in prohibition, the other
to permission; If they say, a thing shall be hindered, and so far, they imply
farther hindering is not meant, but the thing as to the rest is left at
liberty. Forasmuch then as the Canon gave tithe of all (growing and renewing)
and the Statute, finding fault with some of the latitude, gave order to
prohibit but of twenty years growth; the restraint of this size is implication
that liberty is left to the rest, and the hindering but so far that in the rest
was scope; Which being for the tenth Faggot, Heap, or Cord, the Jurisdiction
thereof, yea the Law thereof, and thereby Right is not a little hereby, nor
obscurely furthered and ratified. Or otherwise observe, as before, twothings:
First, Lex terrae did here interpose, and when any thing passed the Synod, the
State could not brook, This 's power controuled That 's Canons, which hindered
the Right of Tithes effectual from going any farther then the Crown Law would
allow. Secondly, but in that which was Sylva caedua properly, or Copp^ce-wood,
this interposition was not, but the other power left at liberty (known to
resolve as before) Therefore there was still a connivence, and so far consent
and approbation, and so this Law was first against Tithes, is secondly for
them; at first hand against Some, at second for Others, And affording but a
prohibition for twenty years growth, leaves, yea wills, (upon the matter) the
rest, and less to be paid.

Touching which Prohibitions one thing more is in this 50 Edw. 3. 4.
Kings Reign (from the Statute too, for still that is to me most authentic,
and as a public Act, more safe ground of opinions then any private thinkings,
which I would make use of only in defect of those) and it is against
multiplying Prohibitions upon Prohibitions: Corrupt practice may after have
prevailed, and by degrees it have been brought in, that a So averred and
complained in the articles exhibited to the Privy Council, 3 Iacobi, in Mich.
Ter. Object. 5 Cook Instit. 4. p. 603.
succession to five or six generations has followed, the Libel remaining the
same, but by a Law then it should not have been so, but one be all, and all but
one: after that and consultation releasing, the Ecclesiastical Judge was
allowed to proceed notwithstanding any other. And this shows both there was
need of a Prohibition to hinder, the Court might proceed without a Prohibition;
And that a Prohibition should not prohibit after a Consultation, all to the
strengthening of this jurisdiction, (which still strengthens this right and
title:) and hitherward also tend many things in that statute as it is called,
For the Clergy, Anno 25 Edw. 3.

Richard 2. was the next that sat in the Throne, whence at the instance and
special request of the Commons he published sundry things in amendment and
relief of the Realm, and among them two in relief of the still oppressed as
then thought and disturbed Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. 1 R. 2. c. 15.
The Prelates and Clergy of the Realm do greatly complain them of that
Disturbance, in matter of Tithes, against the Franchise, etc. But the words
hereof were given Page 151.
before, there needs only now to remember thence: 1. That Trial of the Rights
of Tithes is there said to belong to the Church Court. 2. It was then so. 3. It
How long? Sir Edward Cook looks back to some then late. ^cts of State, as 18
Ed. 3. cap 7. Articuli Cleri. 9 Ed. 2. circumspecte agatis. in 13 of Ed. 1.
etc. But the farthest of these was but within the compass of a Century toward
the end of this yo^ng Kings great Grandfathers days, and so far unlike^y and
^nfit then to take the style and date upon them f^o^ the gravity of a
Parliament, to have it said, Of old were wont to be: It was then scarce out of
many men's memories, and if it had been within ken of any such apprehension, the
plain intention of those sages would no do^bt have meas^red out their words by
things, and set it upon its right bottom of something within view, which some
of them had seen: to omit what shall be after said is fuller answer and plainer
proof that in Hen 3. time, (and then likely by ^s^ and c^sto^e too) this
discussion of Dues was made and acted here upon this Scene.
had been so. 4. Of Right it Ought to be so. 5. To disturb was against the
Franchise (allowed and ratified by the Charter) All which things are there
plainly in a Parliament law acknowledged. It was no new Incroachment, but an
allowed usage; It was no new Custom then sprung up, but (...) delivered from
hand to hand through many Generations: It was not a senseless Custom, getting
head, tantum non against reason andequity at first, but the sage and advised
Law had thus at beginning stated, and till now declared and appointed: And
maliciously and Unduly, it is said, (to note the Fountain whence that grave
Assembly thought those bitter Streams proceeding Malice and Wrong) men were
indicted for doing their then duty, as of Right they ought to do, and of old
were wont to do: but to proceed; in the next Chapter is more.

Item, It is accorded, that at what time that any Person of holy Church be
drawn in Plea in the Secular Court for his own Tithes taken by the name of
Goods taken away, and he which is so drawn in Plea makes an Exception, or
alleges that the substance and suit of the Business is only upon Tithes,
due of Right and of Possession to his Church, or to another his Benefice: that
in such case the general Averment shall not be taken without showing specially
how the same was his Lay Cattall. Here was 1. Somewhat distinct from Lay
Cattal, and to oppose thereto. 2. Tithes due of Right, and that by
Statute-testimony. 3. Something to be done before the Secular Court can take
notice when the subject is Tithes: 4. The scope of all to hinder that Court.
For if the Land-owner might suppose them Lay; then as it was an offense for
the Churchman to take them, so that offense must be examined in the proper Lay
Consistory: but if they were Tithes taken away, (the Church-mans due Own) then
elsewhere, (where it was known what would be said) and That seems forbidden,
This furthered. The Goods must not be supposed Lay Cattall, They might be
proved the Takers own Tithes, which must be done only it is known where; And so
the whole doubt of the Lists where the Controversy was to be tried, (which was
the thing in question) vanishes. This I take to be the meaning, the words
being dark, and observe all along that Lindwoods Collection seems referred to
as Text, and even the Secular Law relates still to those Rules (as approving)
to try by them, whether this or That shall be taken for Tithes or not? So that
interpretatively the very Canon (by approbation and allowance from abroad) is
the Rule of some Civil Right immediate with us, and the Giver of some Title of
Dominion, the Church by intimation and supposition of the Parliaments Civil Law.

Immediately the next was Henry 4. of Lancaster, whose fatherly care continued
to keep together these Dues to the maintenance of Religion; and whereas some of
the Order of Cisteaux had procured Bulls for the discharge not only of the
Land they used, (which was Decr. Greg. t^t. de decimis. cap 10. ex part tua.
allowed and a singular Exemption) but of what they Licet de benignita^e sedis
Apostolicae sit vobis indultum, ut de laboribus, quos propriis manibus vel
^umptibus colitis, nemin^ decimas solvere teneamini: propter hoc tamen non est
licitum vobis, decimas de terris vestri, subtrahere, quas aliis tra^itis
excolendas. id. cap. sequ
farmed out, which would not be allowed in manifest dis-agreement from the
rest, against this it was ordered. 2 H^n 4. cap 4.
For as much as our Lord the King upon grievous Complaint made to him this
Parliament, has perceived that the Religious men of the Order of Cisteaux in
the Realm of England, have purchased certain Bulls, to be quit and discharged
to pay the Tithes of their Lands, Tenements, and Possessions let to ferm or
manured, or occupied by other persons, then by themselves, (for such discharge
must be, or else all paid;) In great prejudice and derogation of the Liberty
of holy Church, and of many Liege people of the Realm: our Lord the King
willing thereunto to ordain Remedy, by the advice and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and at the instance and request of the said Commons
has ordained and stablished, that the Religious Persons of the Order of
Cisteaux shall stand in the state that they were before the time of such Bulls
purchased: And that as well they of the said Order, as all other Religious and
Seculars, of what estate and condition that they be, which do put the said
Bulls in execution, or from henceforth do purchase other such Bulls of new, or
by color of the same Bulls purchased or to be purchased, do take advantage in
any manner, That Process shall be made against them, and every of them by
garnishment of two months by Writ of Praemunire facias. And if they make
default or be attainted, then they shall incur the pains and forfeitures
contained in the Statute of Provisors, made in the 13 Richard 2. Done in the
Parliament at Westminster, in the Vtas of S. Hillary; and we have by it a
notable evidence of the King and Kingdoms good will and allowance of the
continuance of these Rights, that they would not suffer them to be curtolled or
kept back unpaid, not by virtue of an Order from Rome, (whose power how great
it then was, all know) but willed rather a Praemunire against the Detainers,
Perverters, and their Adherents and Assisters: The rest did, so should they set
out their Dues, as of Right and accustomed; A strong evidence they were due
indeed, when the State would not suffer them unpaid! Now not only these but
some others, it seems were wavering or shifting: The Fermours of Aliens gave
within few years after occasion to this Vote. Item, 5 Hen. 4. cap. 11.
It is ordained and established that the Fermours and all manner Occupiers of
the Mannours, Lands, Tenements, and others Possessions of Aliens, shall pay,
and be bound to pay all manner of Dismes. (It seems others did, for this was no
positive single Imposition upon them, but only an Exemption from that they
would have been exempted from) thereof due, (they were then no voluntary
Benevolences, but discharge of Duty, and Due upon Command, though more
acceptable if their readiness made them free-will-offerings,) To Parsons and
Vicars of holy Church in whose Parishes the same Mannours, Lands, Tenements,
and Possessions be (according to the manner then used and custom established
for parochial discharge) so assessed and Due. Again, as the law of holy Church
requires. (That the bottom, indeed of all, looked upon by the State, and here
required to have obedience; and in others by the same reason; for why should we
think These had any special Obligation to a Rule by themselves from the
universal, which did rule all?) Notwithstanding that the said Mannours, Lands,
Tenements, or other Possessions, be seized into the Kings hands, or
notwithstanding any prohibition made or to be made to the contrary. And yet
notwithstanding all this too, that backwardness and evasion of the Cistertian
crept further, which made it needful to bind up all by an universal Decree
within few years after, The grievance and remedy are there both thus proposed
together. Item, It 7 Hen 4. cap. 6.
is ordained that no person Religious or Secul^r, (which is large enough) of
what estate or condition that he be, by color of any Bulls containing such
Privileges, (There must be Privileges, and if Bulls from Rome could not
afford them, What as then could? The common condition of things is known; ( to
be discharged of Dismes pertaining to Parish Churches, (Payment and Parochial.
Again,) Prebends, Hospitals, or Vic. rages purchased before 1 Rich. 2. or
sithence not executed, shall put in erecution any such Bulls so purchased, or
any such Bulls to be purchased in time to come: And if any such Religious or
Secular person, of what estate or condition he be, from henceforth by color of
such Bulls, do trouble any person of holy Church, Prebend^ries, Wardens of
Hospitals, or Vicars, so that they cannot take or enjoy the Tithes Due or
pertaining to them of their said Benefices, Then to incur like pain at the
Cistertian before. Thus to and in the time of Hen. 4. whither the proceedings
show all along the good will of the State (whose Acts these have been) in
favor of these Dues; looking on and not hindering, but as was occasion and
fit, furthering the due execution of their neighboring Courts Laws, ever and
anon renewing the pledges of their love and testimonies of their good will,
that the wheels might keep moving that brought in Tithes from every Possessour,
and now it was as clear all abroad and evident to us they did so, as that men
possessed any thing. Henceforth therefore particular Laws were not multiplied,
(as they needed not,) aiming purposely and directly at the settling or recovery
of them, but those that were, were left to due execution, and that enough. The
fruit doubtless (by the Churches Authority as before directly used to call for
them, and the Secular Powers assistance thus to bring them in,) such an
universal Payment (save where Achan would hide his Golden Wedge from the holy
use it had been designed for, or (...). Acts 5. 2. Slipped off somewhat from it.
When our Tithes might have probably seemed our own, we had color of liberty to
use them as we saw good: But having made them H^ whose they are, let us be
warned by other men's example what it is (...), to wash or c^^p that Coin which
has on it the mark of God. H^^ker Polit lib. 5. Sect 79. page 429.
Ananias and his Wife (...), clip the Shekel appointed for the Sanctuary, I
mean, coveteous or profane men did by evident injustice hold back known Dues,
against the Law,) that it needed and had a peculiar Exemption, whoseover now
paid not. I need not be exempted from a Nineth or Eleventh, because none due to
be required: I want no special Privilege to be free from contributing to a
Paschal Lamb, or my Shekel for Jerusalem yearly, or the old Peter Pence,
because none such now exacted among us: but to be free from this Tribute to the
maintenance of Christian Religion, an Exemption was needed, which proves the
Suppositum strongly, even as an Exception supposes an allowance of things
otherwise by the general Rule, and an Exoneration or Discharge from an Impost
or Quit-rent to have been paid, allows that it was due. Three See a little
before; but remember, that this Exemption was not then so much granted to these
Orders, as a general Exemption granted before to all Orders restrained then to
these.
sorts were indeed so exempted, (and it was need so, else they must have paid)
1. The Templars, till they were Vid. Stat. de terris. Templariorum in 17 Ed. 2.
p. 111. of Pultons Abridgement.
taken off in Ed. 2. time, and their Indowments settled on the Knights of
Jerusalem. 2. Those Knights themselves keeping their own, and succeeding to
what as but now. And thirdly, the Cistertians* (of which also before,) all by
the Decree of the Laterane Council; and with them some others also: As All the
Orders Caeteris vero ut de novalibus suis quae propriis manibus vel sumptibus
excolunt, and de nutrimentis animalium suorum, and de hortis suis decimas non
persolvant. Alexand. 3. in Deciet. lib. 3. tit. 30. cap. 10.
for their own new broke Grounds, their pasture ground for their Cattle, and
their Garden fruits; some Whereof see a very learned Discovery in Mr. Seldom of
Tithes. cap. 13. Sect. 2.
for all their demains by particular Charter from Rome; or by prescription, (of
lands in the possession of Clerks;) or by Grant, or by Composition, or by
Custom: but these still, and the more they were, do all so much the more
confirm the general usage, from which that men might be free they needed this
Exemption. And this so well settled and quietly submitted to, that till the
loud and boisterous storms in Hen. 8. time, when all was shaken, I meet not
with here any disturbance, or any public order, that (it seems) needed or had
occasion to call for any new obedience. The Canons, last as they had been,
placed as they were, and assisted (which was never wanting) with the whole
force of the Temporal Power, kept all in awe, nor were Tithes but brought into
the Storehouse All, in the Prophets phrase to have better use made of them
than I doubt commonly was. For it is the charitable intention of man, the wise
provision of the Law, by the blessed providence of God that sets things often
in a good way to honest or holy ends, but the corruption of man hinders; seldom
does one half come to good, or are the things not to abuse enough perverted,
how well or piously soever levelled and intended.

CHAP. XXIII.
THus for six successive Princes Raigns: Under Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Edw. 4. Edw. 5.
Rich. 3. and the wise puissant Hen. 7. nothing being heard of murmr and
discontent, but all in peace and silence. The Canons as in Lindewood, etc.
governed the Consistory: Westminster sent to control as often as any noise was
made of extravagancy, by Prohibition: Some prudent Statutes, as Circumspecte
Agatis, Articuli Cleri, etc. had bound their hands too, that they might not
send as often as they would, but when abuse called for remedy; And so things went
on in Harmony for justice, peace, and order through this intervall: Laws
already made were obeyed, and more were not made, because those that were, were
both for their end sufficient, and set in a way to have sure execution.

But now in that general Earthquake when this Earth was moved, and all the
Inhabitants thereof, though some Men stood, and some Parts were not overthrown,
When the turbulent passions of that mighty and boisterous Prince left nothing
untouched or unshaken, and that some might seem at least to stand the faster,
other parts were thought fit to be quite pulled down; yea, buried and intombed
under the ruins of their own glory, as 'twere by the fatality of Jerichoes
curse, Josh. 6 26.
Never more to be reedified, Maledictus vir ille coram Jehova, qui surget ut
aedificet, etc. yet even Then was no prejudice offered nor diminution made of
this part of Ecclesiastical Revenue, or Jurisdiction to bring it in, (a great
argument of its strength that had over-lived a storm, and some necessity that
it was preserved when that next was chosen to be cast away;) But before this
great work was done by himself and his son, diverse new sinews of strength added
to confirm all that had passed before, as well by clearing the right had been
by 27 Hen. 8. 20 32 Hen. 12. 2 Edw 6. 13.
some new Statutes to evidence the justice of the claim, as by creating a new
power to fetch them in, and inabling (secular persons at least) to sue for them
in their own Court, the new Statute way: Not abrogating the Ecclesiastical, but
giving choice of this; Pointing to a new remedy besides the old, (as So is
interpreted and used, and of force that of 2 Edw 6. 13.
commonly understood, though some doubt That the cla^se of treble damages in 2
Edw. 6 13. is to be s^ed in the Ecclesiastical Court only: See Dr. Ridleys
view of the Laws, par. 3. chap. 2. sect. 5.

That Customs in payment of tithes are t^^able only in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, was averred to be proved before by him, Sect. 3 and see hereof the
Proviso transcribed below.


rationally,) But for certain not destroying That utterly: For the And that for
subtraction of any of the said tithes, offerings, or other duties, the Parson,
Vicar, Curate, or other party in that behalf grieved may by due process of the
Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of England convent the person or
persons so offending before his Ordinary or other competent Judge of this
Realm, having authority to hear and determine the right of Tithes, and also to
compel the same person or persons offending to do and yield their said duties
in this behalf. 27 Hen 8 12.

And in case any person or persons of his or their ungodly and perverse will
and mind, shall detain or with old any of the said tithes or offerings, or part
or par^el thereof, then the person or party bring Ecclesiastical or Lay person,
having cause to demand, or have the said tithes or offerings, being thereby
wronged or gri^ved, shall and may convent the person or persons so offending,
before the Ordinary, his Commissary or other competent Minister, or lawful
Judge of the place where such wrong shall be done, according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws. And in every such case of matter or suit, the same
Ordinary, Commissary, or other competent Minister or lawful Judge, shall and
may by virtue of this Act proceed to the examination, bearing, and
determination of every such cause or matter ordinarily or summarily, according
to the course and process of the said Ecclesiastical Laws, and thereupon may
give sentence accordingly. 32 Hen. 8. 7.


often mention of it upon other occasions as well as this, with a clause of
Proviso And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person do
subtract or withdraw any manner of tithes, obventions, profits, etc. that then
the party so subtracting and withdrawing the same, may or shall be convented in
the Kings Ecclesiastical Court by the party from whom. etc. to the intent the
Kings Judge Ecclesiastical, shall and may, then and there bear and determine
the same according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And that it shall not be
lawful unto the Parson, Vicar, etc. to convent or sue such withholder of
tithes, obventions, or other duties aforesaid before any other Judge then
Ecclesiastical. 2 Edw. 123.
inserted to fence all from violation, shows plainly that K. Henry meant what
he did, and none should or could cross his purpose, sc. though the Pope went
off to keep the Church Power up, and though the Abbeys went down, yet Tithes
for the support of Religion Must Not be meddled with. Such power I mean as might
begin and end its motion wholly within it self, like the wheels of a watch that
keep themselves going by help of a Spring at home* needing no power from
abroad, not of a clock whose moving weights are without, and so liable to the
inconvenience of forain disturbance: or as the highest sphere of all, Primus
Motor, that keeps it self a going by it self merely, not like the inferior
that wait on superior influences; Such power, and the Jurisdiction of Tithes
therewith and thereby, and the right of Tithes by consequent, yea, in Statute
words expressed, not needing any derivation, He kept up in vigor, life,
strength, and quickness, as it was of use; And as well the Records preserved as
other means of information obvious enough do assure, that to his time, through
his time, in it, and on this side the Law continued, which settles all, to
settle these, and leave them settled, an indefeasible inheritance to us their
unworthy posterity: And as they were left, so I hope for Gods glory, and the
maintenance of his service and servants, (the laborers that bring in His
Harvest) they shall not but always continue to all succeeding generations. For,
Who has despised the day of small things? says the Lord in the Zach. 4. 1.
Prophet: Or, who can deny but small things may be of great use and
consideration in the greatest, since by Divine appointment Badgers skin and
Goats hair Exodus 25 4, 5.
were offered acceptably to the building of a holy Tabernacle, whereby, was
intended the great God of All should be honored and sanctified? That Lord (
Dominus Psalm. 24. 1.
cujus est terra and plenitudo ejus) who Matthew. 21. 3.
despised not a convoy of the meanest and simplest of beasts for his person on
earth, seems Still to Need the vile things of this lower world to set forth his
glory in this vile and lower world, and if any one say ought to the contrary,
or in froward opposition, say still, as then, the Lord not only uses, but
has need of them: His servants, though His, live yet by bread, if men, as well
as by every word that proceeds out of His mouth, their Lord and God. And
since, Though Jehovah could not be pulled out of Heaven by extinguishing any of
those Lamps that burned to his honor in the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem,
yet his wise old servants knew that unless their care, cost, and love did
procure profane oil from Syria and Arabia, Those Lamps (with his honor)
would go out on Earth, which made them contrive, purpose, and do accordingly;
Even so, since the nature of things is still the same, unless there be left such
loving and discreet followers of his now, by whose vigilance, industry and
care, some constant supply may be apportioned, and issued forth for the
maintenance of the outward part of his honor and support of his Gospel, and
those servants of his that do his pleasure in holding it forth ((...), Romans 13.
6.
Ministers that attend this very Thing,) It is not without the compass of manly
and Christian fear to be jealous, lest the light and brightness of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, (now shining in the faces of all men, though not
reaching to their hearts, it is much to be doubted, much less returning fruit
in their answering upright lives,) should (which God forbid!) be extinguished
upon Earth by our negligence and parcimony, though his Deity we trust shine now
in Heaven, and shall, and ever, above the brightness of the Sun, and beyond all
Eternity. We hold God to be the end of the soul, Truth the way leading to it
and Him; The Church the pillar and ground of truth, to hold it out in view to
the world, (this we are sure of, (...), 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the Apostle tells it us,) and the public Ministers are the Churches servants:
If then these servant shall do that work in holding forth this truth to guide
to that end, They (being Men) must not have their daily allowance of Bread
withheld from them, which keeps them hayl and strong, that they may live and be
Able to follow their business; or if it be, the bottom foundation fails, and
the whole frame must be left to sink and ruin with it for want of sustenance,
or undersustentation: Unless by an unhallowed presumption we dare go on
Tempting God in stead of Trusting him, still urging him to do, and expecting he
should do, even ordinary miracles for our extraordinary preservation (and then
daily miracles would scarce be any wonders,) putting him upon more work yet,
after his Consummatum est, to multiply loaves for his improvident Disciples,
and leading him once more out of the way into the Wilderness, to lead us out of
the path of his ordinary course of Providence to expect food from Heaven, when
there is plenty enough upon Earth: Which if, and the boldness of our
unreasonable presumption rather then well-instructed Christian faith, could be
content to put upon Him, Whether yet his servants who are to do the work, and
being party to the whole had need of some liberty of choice for refusal of the
conditions, could be content to accept for enough for their parts, and hardy
enough to trust to as their sufficient Viaticum for this convoy and their
journey, may not, (considering their humane frailty,) be without some doubt: I
have led you forty years in the Wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old
upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot. Deu. 29. 5,
As in the space of forty years to hope for no reparation of clothes, nor to
put on a new shoe in half an age, and go provided with nothing but naked
poverty to carry them through a dry and barren Wilderness, (where no water is,)
Hungry and Thirsty, their souls fainting in them? Yes, They will; questionless,
This and more, if they be called and compelled thereto; See Chap. 8. 4 Ne. hem.
9. 21.
if the enemies of God will deny them the way, and the condition of things in
an orderly Dispensation of Providence lead them to want as well as to abound:
But all the friends of God will rather guide and help them in the direct right
way to their Canaan, Neither denying them bread and water for their money, as
Deuteronomy. 2. 27, 28. 30.
the cursed Amorites did, (but were after sufficiently plagued for it,) nor
money, if needful, to buy them what they want for their comfort in the way; It
being one of the most reasonable things in the world, that they that give
Heaven should not want Earth, and They that sow to us Spiritual Things should
not but reap our Carnal. To all which things answering and well agreeing, it
was therefore religiously, piously, and prudently, as well as justly resolved
by those Councels guided Hen. 8. to diminish nothing here, but to keep this
settled and ancient Revenue of Gods honor free from the touch of sacrilegious,
profane, and imprudent as well as unjust hands, That no covetous Gehezi that
loved his gain more then godliness, should meddle with that belonged not to
him: nor greedy unconscionable Israelite with this portion of his Brother Levi,
due Numb. 18. 21.
for his service he serves in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, (and as
necessary for the Commonwealth of Israel, as Judahs, Simeons, or Benjamins;)
but when every one has enough, he should be free from want, and by as good
security as any other claims his Right by, his Tribe have its Own also, (not by
benevolence but by Right,) and so have occasion to bless the Lord his God for
the good land he has given him with the rest of his Brethren: It being among
our Divine Oracles, agreeable to the Laws of Nature, Equity, Reason, and Civil
Commutative Justice, that He that gives should receive; Matthew. 10. 10. Luke 10.
7. 1 Timothy 5. 18.
The labourer is worthy of his reward; 1 Cor. 9. 7.
No one going on warfare is to march at his own charge; He that feeds a flock
should eat of the milk of the flock; And as He Ver. 14.
that waited on the Altar heretofore, did partake of the Altar there, So he
that ministers the Gospel now, should live, (...), not of the Gospel, but of
the Reward of his good message, or Glad tidings, as By M. Mede in Diatrib. on
the place, pa. 329.
has been somewhat Critically, but very Judiciously and Soundly observed on
that Text.

Thus then this Politic and herein wise and just Prince resolved, and
accordingly gave his mind in sundry Acts passing his seal. The first whereof
(clear enough in it self, and consequentially much to our purpose) was in
cutting off Appeals from hence to Rome, and so making this Island-Church (as
having no dependence of abroad,) a perfect Independent Congregation. For so it
was then judged most expedient; that the affairs of Judea should not be sent
necessarily to Egypt or Babylon; Jerusalem might conclude all controversies
that arose in the Land where Jerusalem was, and our Kings Crown being of
Circular and thereby most capacious form, was large enough to involve and
comprehend under it a resolution of all those difficulties might arise under
it; And that Therefore all doubts should be referred to him, Therefore all
forain Appeals should cease, Whereupon ordered and set forth as follows: 24
Hen. 8. cha. 12
1. That this of England was an entire Monarchy: 2. Had suffered prejudice by
appeals to abroad so long, as in Causes Testamentary, of Tithes, Oblations,
etc. 3. It should be so no more, but even those causes (of Tithes again
expressed,) be here put to a period: And therefore, 4. Enacted, That All causes
testamentary, causes of matrimony and divorce, Rights of Tithes, Oblations and
Obventions, (the knowledge whereof by the goodness of Princes of this Realm,
and by the Laws and Customs of the same appertains to the Spiritual
Jurisdiction of this Realm,) (mark that Parenthesis, and the weight thereof,
and this engraven in the inside of a Law, inferted into the heart of an Act of
Parliament, to give the testimony certainty of credit, and the thing as much
assurance to us, as any thing we have, without the Bible; that all such causes,
I say,) already commenced, or happening hereafter, etc. shall be examined,
discussed, and definitively determined, as the nature of any of the things
aforesaid shall require, (here at home,) With power, command and threat to all
to do their duty; Appeals to whom they shall be made; and from whom; and where
the final decision shall rest; and All in All the Branches before specified:
Which does as much as any one Parliament Law can establish and assure the then
power of the Church, and thereby her following Acts, (even about Tithes
expressed and by name,) and by consequent the Right and Property that should be
at any time the result and fruit of all: Which must amount to we know what.

In the next year we have more of the same nature, in that concluding Proviso
of 25 Hen. 8. 19. (before mentioned) about keeping life in the body of the
Provincials (for a while, and till the new could be made) when the Pope the
seeming Head of them was taken off. All know what dependence had been, and both
to composition and execution, what influences were formerly derived from that
forain power upon those Laws: When the Head is cut off, the lower Nerves use
(and by consequent limbs) to lose all power and motion for want of intercourfe
with the brain wherein they were rooted; which might be feared or doubted here
reasonably, and this made it necessary to infuse a new life of power that
should serve (as then intended,) for a while, to quicken the old body, till a
new should be framed by chosen workmen to fit the King better, as to making and
execution depending solely on his authority. Accordingly done. The mentioned
Proviso ratifies all Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals, till the
thirty two should have proceeded effectually: If they have so done, we have
gained enough, (even to this particular,) and Page 145.
showed how before: If not, this Howsoever we have gotten, that the strength
that is in the Provincials, all of them, Those for Tithes before, and all
other, (save what since revoked, as about Tithes nothing has) stands firm and
fast by Parliament Constitution, and the evident sense of the words is to the
purpose of these things unavoidable.

But if both these be yet remote, or not so fully home, wrapping things only
in implying generals (or consequences) that take in Tithes but implicitly
wherein by derivation, (which is always to us fallible) may be mistake; Come we
next to that which principally and fully, and in its final and clear utmost
scope intends and expresses Dueness, yea, Makes it, and where the words of the
Law give the utmost any order can, a purposed Right and way for Recovery. Where
is that? When the Cloisters went down and the whole Ecclesiastical state was
thereby troubled not a little in 27 Hen. 8. Then was it needful, and Then was
it done; and Then the right of these dues established, intended to be
perpetual. How appears this? By the Statute made the same year, in chap. 20.
which (thereon to make some judgment by the way) as it is among the next that
are nearest on this side toward us, So is it the utmost and farthest on the
other, most men's weakness of sight is able to discern or reach to the
apprehension of, and yet they think they ken all, and reach (as they do, as far
as they can,) the bottom whereon all is settled: But blame them not, their
sight is dim, and being hindered by business, idleness, averseness to the thing,
or manifold other sorts of encumbrances, or distractions, that they cannot, or
do not purify or strengthen it, by art, study, industry, and other painful
and laboursome means usual of searching and gaining the truth, they work not
beyond the sphere of their power and ability, making able and fitting judgment
of those things, they have not the plain and simple knowledge or apprehension
of, that thereby they may be so able and prepared to judge. They are reputed
Learned, if they can little more then turn an Almanac, understand some plain
English Author, or but have seen a Statute, and then, as the Aborigines of
Italy, which born and bred there, travailed never far from their simple homes,
but wonder at all abroad which strangers tell them; Or, as some simple
Rusticks, who used to behold only the hills that incompass the valleys where
they live, think them to be near the end of the world; if any thing be showed
them done beyond the mountains, they dare scarce believe a part, and will rest
much persuaded that, whatever travelers tell them, is, (though they say, what
we have heard and seen, declare we unto you,) little better then well-composed
fables. For they walk by sense, and not by faith, or that little faith they
have, is confined to the things of their own narrow hemispheres; Even so These,
the utmost of whose knowledge, or highest of whose possible conversation or
acquaintance, is but in some plain simple English Book, perhaps broken Statute
Book, or perhaps but some Abridgemement or Compendium (Dispendium, those
excellent instruments of advancing ignorance, and by help of little cost or
pains inabling sluggards to know upon the matter as much as comes to just
nothing,) build certainly and confidently upon this little as if it were All
and enough, are resolute and confident as if there were no more, and if any
thing be obtruded or questioned farther, they bestow but their attention or
wonder, with Act. 13 41. Habak. 1. 5.
Jewish incredulity they will not believe, nay, though a man tell it them:
Suspecting all that is beyond the narrow compass of their very short reach, and
not much caring if all other superfluities (they esteem them so, because they
are not able to judge of them) were buried in the pit of utter forgetfulness:
As little considering that their foundations have foundations, and those yet
again other, and other, and under, and yet farther under, and take away either,
or the advantage and stay of either; the readiest way is taking to stir all, to
unsettle the firmest, to tumble down the highest, to leave order, happiness,
peace, and wealth, buried under a heap of rubbish, and the fair piles we now
behold and enjoy, even All the fruits of an orderly and advised disposition of
things intombed under the scattered fragments of its own ruin and very
confusion. For old things are not to be cast away without possible
inconveniences to new; the foundations unseen, are still a part of the fair
building, yea, do support it; and take away the lowest, the next still sinks of
any thing, and by degrees All; Even so take away the first settling Laws, the
under-praestructions whereupon things had their first settling composition and
stay, the rest totters, and may expect ere long ruin in a State; Particularly
for tithes, their fastest and most solid strength seems below in the old unseen
acts of gift and first disposition; the new can be never but a fair and
presently useful declaration, to set out uttermost to the sight of the world,
and as the paint that shines for people to gaze upon; the strength of the wall
and house both is in the enclosed materials and rocky foundation. Yet because
these are of great estimation with the multitude, and ought indeed to be of
some with All, I shall not shun to give them entire, in the opinion of the many
enough to create a right, if naught else were, as if naught else were, perhaps
they might: But as now things stand, are so far from doing it effectually and
only, that they do it not in any degree; Any more then if a present Act should
be made about Fines and Relieves, the next age might think it gave the Lord
that Right we know he enjoys already; Or, as a new Act about Quit-rents and
Herriots should be mistaken to raise or warrant the things no man but knows had
right before; (The most in addition any new order can do being but to
rectify, dispose, or settle some new course about the things so due already,
that it is that injury comes near a Theft, to subtract or deny the just payment
of them:) So the following later Statutes nor do, nor can any more but to
revive, quicken and establish the ancient right of tithes, (extant and of long
being before,) awaken men's dullness, enforce their payment, remove obstructions
that have grown in by corruption with time, and make that which is shine
brighter and fairer by the fourbishing over of a new and fresh authority; Their
dueness being that these statutes did never intend to meddle with, infringe,
further, help, nor hinder, but they were what they were before; and it were one
of the most pitiful pieces of Ignorance befitting only the Vulgar heard of
unlettered Simplicians, and deserving rather commiseration then the exercise of
any of our manly passions to entertain a thought to or toward the contrary.
What! that these later Statutes created tithes! Made them due! Gave them! that
their abrogation should have a possibility of taking them away! and what the
service of God has to trust to by virtue of their promulgation! This is such a
shallow conceit is only worthy the weak brains of the multitude, where only
it possibly could be hatched or can be tolerated or endured; no more excusable
then if any should say, Aristotle's Astronomy gave the Sun a being in the
Firmament, or Charta Forrestae first set up Game, or a present Law, if it
should dispose of, did erect Parks, and Chases, or a new order about Escheats
or Mortuaries, the next mistaken Age might interpret to give them being and
first beginning. But to the words of the Statute, which both in the beginning
and progress have dueness of Tithes existent and then in being supposed, and
they are as follows.

For^smuch as diverse numbers of evil disposed persons inhabited in sundry
Counties, Tithes shall be paid according to the Custo^e of the Parish, etc.
Cities, Towns, and places of this Realm, having no respect to their duties to
Almighty God, 27 Hen 8. cap. 20.
but against Right and good Conscience, have attempted to subtract and withhold
in some places the whole, and in some places great parts of their Tithes and
Oblations, as well personal as predi^l, Due unto Almighty God, and holy Church;
and pursuing such their detestable enormities, and injuries, have attempted in
late time past, to disobey contenm, and despise the process, laws, and decrees
of the Ecclesiastical Courts of this Realm, in more temerons and large manner
then before this time has been seen: For reformation of which said injuries,
and for unity and peac to be pre^erved amongst the Kings Subjects of this
Realm, our Sovereign Lord the King, being Supreme Head in Earth under God, of
the Church of England, willing the spiritual rights and duties of that Church
to be preserved, continued and maintained, has ordained and enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament, That every of his Subjects of this Realm
of England, Wales, and Calais, and the Marches of the same, according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances of his Church of England, and after the
laudable Usages and Customs of their Parish, or other place, where he
dwells, or occupies, shall yield and pay his Tithes, and Offerings, and
other duties of holy Church, and that for such subtractions of any of the said
tithes, offerings, or other duties, the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or other
party in that behalf grieved, may by due process of the Ecclesiastical Laws
of the Church of England convent the person or persons so offending before his
Ordinary, or other competent Judge of this Realm, having authority to hear
and determine the right of tithes, and also to compel the same person or
persons so offending to do and yield their said duties in that behalf.

This was the Legislative part: follows order in case of contumacy, that the
Ordinary or other Judge shall crave the assistance of the Justices to attach the
party, and commit him to ward, till he shall recognize to yield quiet
obedience, etc. Provided that this extend not to London, who were to have a way
by themselves: nor to hinder any remedy by due prohibition, etc. Nor any thing
to continue longer then till the new Canon should be made, which is not yet
done, and whereof before enough. Mark the whole Tenor; Is here any thing of
giving Tithes? Of wronging any man of a Farthing by a new and forced
Imposition? Of removing from one to settle on another? To enrich Peter by
taking from Paul? Not a syllable. But all upon supposition, that somewhat was
due before; Let that be paid; or if not, the allowed ancient course is awakened
and quickened for recovery. So it is only a Declaratory Law, as Sir Edward Cook
speaks often upon like occasion, renewing what was, and rowsing up the dullness
of perverse and covetous men to pay, who were found backward; but this was a
goad to force them on forward in the way they had went, and wherein they ought
to go. It were a disparagement to have here a Right settled to the Thing, and
to it in our opinion, (yea, to our opinion it self) to think so.

But it seems things went not on by help of this new Law fully according to
desire: The Times were we know troubled, and many other Rights being both
unsettled and removed, no marvel if these (Neighbors to them) were also
shaken. Diverse no doubt wished them more then so, quite down, the mouths or
rather Gulphs, or rather then both hellish depths of sacrilegious and covetous
carnal men having never been but wide open to devour what ever was sacred, and
here stood gaping to swallow this morsel none of their Own, but due to man in
Justice, as well as to God for Religion, and by Dedication. For going on to
subtract the just payment, the complaint is evident, inshrined in the sacred
Monuments of the Law it self, and entered the Parliament Roll for memory, with
what the wisdom of that Council (the Representative of the Nation) could
afford for remedy of so large a spreading inconvenience. It was intended
chiefly for the new Impropriator inabling him being Lay to make his Complaint
in the spiritual Court, but reaching in all other also; with intent to let him
in with them, by no means purposing to shut or let both out, and though with
due restraint at first to that examen only, yet Evasions were after found that
both have used to go out, where no more was intended but to let one in. The Law
speaks as follows.

How Tithes ought to be paid, and how to be recovered being not paid.
Where diverse and sundry persons inhabiting in sundry Counties and places of
this Realm, 32 Hen 8. cap. 7.
and other the Kings Dominions, not regarding their Duties to Almighty God, and
to the King our Sovereign Lord, but in few years past more contemptuously and
commonly presuming to offend and infringe the good and wholesome Laws of this
Realm, and gracious commandments of our said Sovereign Lord then in times past
has been seen or known, Mark: Laws, duties, and lawful Tithes.
have not let to subtract and withdraw the lawful and accustomed tithes of
Corn, Hay, Pasturages, and other sort of tithes and Oblations commonly due to
the Owners, Proprietaries, and Possessours of the Parsonages, Vicarages, and
other Ecclesiastical places, of and within the said Realms and Dominions, being
the more encouraged thereto, for that diverse of the Kings Subjects being Lay
persons, having Parsonages, Vicarages, and tithes to them and their heirs, or
to them and to their heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, or for form of
life or years cannot by order and course of the Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm, sue in any Ecclesiastical Court for the wrongful withholding and
detaining of the said tithes or other Duties, nor cannot by the Order of the
Common Laws of this Realm have any due remedy against any person or persons,
their heirs or assigns, that wrongfully detaineth or withholds the same, by
occasion whereof much controversy, suit, variance, and discord is like to
insurge and ensue among the Kings Subjects, to the great detriment, damage, and
decay of many of them, if convenient, and speedy remedy be not therefore had
and provided.

Wherefore it is ordained and inacted by our said Sovereign Lord the King, with
the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, that all and singular
persons of this his said Realm, or other his Dominions, of what estate, degree,
or condition soever, he or they shall fully, truly, and effectually divide, set
out, yield and pay all and singular tithes and Offerings aforesaid, according
to the lawful Customs and Vsages of the Parishes and places, where such
tithes or Duties shall grow, arise, come, or be due. And in case it shall
happen any person or persons of his or their ungodly and perverse will and
mind to detain or with hold any of the said tithes or Offerings, or part or
parcel thereof, then the person or party being Ecclesiastical or Lay person,
having cause to demand or have the said tithes or Offerings, being thereby
wronged or grieved, shall and may convent the person or persons so offending
before the Ordinary, his Commissary, or other competent Minister, or lawful
Judge of the place where such wrong shall be done according to the
Ecclesistical Laws.

And so on to the Appellants paying Costs before he remove the Suit; Order to
call in the Magistrates help in case of contumacy; saving Lands discharged of
Tithes, and the City of London, etc.

This is that clearly is, and if there we no more, one would think, enough to
settle as far as an Act of State or public Decree can, both a right and a
course of Justice, that men should both be apportioned these Dues, and know how
to come by them; of which yet I remember my word before, and far deeper is
laid, and upon more firm, and lower, faster ground then any single tottering
Act the Foundation of this Right, which settles not but upon (or with) the
whole body of immovable Fundamentals of the Kingdom, is clasped in with the
Roots of Government, has grown up with it through all her known progresses to
the present State of perfection, is flesh of her flesh, bone of her bone, nor
can, is much to be feared, without mortal violence admit a partition and
segregation: such, as if men's private parcimony and pinching, wretched
Covetousness, joined with improvidence and injustice, should go on to call for
so great a mischief upon themselves, would endanger to shake the frame of the
whole Compages, and by the same unadvised Principle of its unjust and violent
removal leave little constancy or assurance of any thing. Which great
Possessours had need chiefly to look to, and prevent if they can, upon any
pretense; as of easing poor men of their heavy burdens, preventing Troubles
usual in separation, hindering costly Suits formerly multiplied, wherein
Christ's Minister had sometimes the hap or favor of Justice, and to get the
better of his wrangling adversary, that will remove the ancient Landmark,
will remove any; they which complain of this Imposition may ere long think
others heavy; that will unsettle one property will unsettle another. None is
more rooted then this, has its arms and fibers dispersed through the whole
body of the Laws Common Law, Canon Law, the Statutes, the Conquerours, S.
Edwards, King Edwards, (the one past, the other to come) and has indeed
over-lived all the mutations and revolutions of State that have been ever since
here we have account of any thing. Good Englishman take heed in time, thy lot
is fallen to thee in a fair ground, yea thou have a goodly heritage, if thou
can be contented, thankful, quiet, serve God, and give every man his his
Due. Genesis 34. 21.
As Hamor and Shichem to the sons of Jacob, The Land behold it is large; Here
is enough for every one, if we can do as we would be done unto, give every man
his Own, and suffer the Law to be master and only safe Rule* to walk by; I am
thine own flesh and blood, and cannot but love thee, (yea, my self in thee,)
with such tears of love I beseech; Let no grating Encroachments procure mutual
Trouble and molestation; Let not cruelty, covetousness, self-love, pride,
malice, discontent, or pining envy that another man should have more then our
selves, that another should have as much as our selves, that Gods Minister (our
Governor in the Lord) should have an Own with us, (his known and granted Due,)
prevail, least we wrap him with our selves in misery and woe, and all together
in rage, fury, trouble, war, and by these woeful steps at last, temporal if not
eternal confusion. If the public had passed any thing to the contrary, This
would alter the case; But I speak as Things are.

CHAP. XXIV.
THere remains yet one Statute more, the last direct: He that reads the
former, and considers their plain, open, and full Contents, would scarce think
it requisite their plainness should have an exposition, or their fullness and
sufficiency could need any supplement: but men love the things of this World
Dearly, if any evasion be to be made from parting with the love of their souls,
they will find it: Call they the things of this World Goods? their fears,
hopes, cares, desires, and all the affections of their souls show an higher
price in their estimation, as Best; and loath to depart they sing, for
Religion, Gospel, the Service of God, and to redeem the acknowledged Ordinances
of Heaven from the land of utter forgetfulness. Such is their worldly
mindedness: I speak not of all, but so many there were heretofore as made it
needful to add, what young King Edward did, and by the advice and Authority of
his Parliament to make yet stricter provision that former good Laws should not
be perverted (though it is complained His is since as much perverted as any) and
men might not withdraw their Dues upon any occasion. This was done soon after
he began his Reign, and in the words following.

Whereas in the Parliament holden at Westminster the fourth day of February, In
what manner Tithes ought to be paid. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 13.
the seventeenth year of the late Hen. 8 there was an Act made concerning
payment of Tithes predial and personal, and also in another Parliament, July
24. in 32 Hen. 8. another Act was made concerning true payment of Tithes and
Offerings; in which several Acts many and diverse things be omitted and left
out, which were convenient and very necessary to be added to the same: In
consideration thereof, and to the intent the said Tithes may be hereafter truly
paid according to the mind of the makers of the said Act: Be it ordained by
the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That not only the said Acts made in the said 27 and 32
of Hen. 8. concerning true payment of Tithes, and every Article and branch
therein contained shall abide and stand in their full strength and virtue; but
also be it further enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that every
of the Kings Subjects shall from henceforth, truly and justly without fraud or
guile, divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of their prediall Tithes, in
their proper kind, as they rise and happen, in such manner and form as has
been of Right yielded and paid within forty years next before the making of
this Act, or of Right or Custom ought to have been paid. And that no person
shall from henceforth take or carry away any such or like Tithes, which have
been yielded or paid within the said forty years, or of Right ought to have
been paid in the place, or places tythable of the same, before he has justly
divided or set forth for the Tithe thereof the tenth part of the same, or
otherwise agreed for the same Tithes, with the Parson, Vicar or other Owner,
Proprietarie, or Fermour of the same Tithes under the pain of Forfeiture of
treble value of the Tithes so taken or carried away.

And be it also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that at all times
whenever, and as often as the said prediall tithes shall be due at the ^he
tithing time of the same, is to be In continuance of care the might be for
remedying that (...) mentioned to be redressed, and was redressed by the
Provincial of Sim. Mepham before, Cap. Quia quidam, tit. de decimis. Vid. Sup
pa. 136. and 171.
lawful to every party, to whom any of the same tithes ought to be paid, or
his Deputy, or servant, to view and see their said tithes to be justly and
truly set forth, and severed from the 9 parts, and the same quietly to take and
carry away. And if any person carry away his Corn, or Hay, or his other
predial tithes, before the tithes thereof be set forth, or willingly withdraw
the tithes of the same, or of such other things, whereof predial tithes ought
to be paid, or do stop, or let the Parson, Vicar, Proprietarie, Owner, or other
their Deputy or Fermours, to view, take, and carry away their tithes, as is
abovesaid, by reason whereof the said tithe or tenth is lost, impaired, or
hurt, that then upon one proof thereof made, before the Spiritual Judge, or any
other Judge, to whom heretofore he might have made complaint, the party so
carrying away, withdrawing, letting or stopping, shall pay the double value of
the tenth or tithe so taken, lost, withdrawn or carried away, over and besides
the costs, charges, and expenses of the suit in the same, the same to be
recovered before the Ecclesiastical Judge, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws.

And, Be it farther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person which has, or shall have any Beasts, or other Cattle (...), going,
feeding, or departuring in any waste or common ground, whereof the Parish is
not certainly known, shall pay their tithes for the increase of the said Cattle
so going in the said Waste or Common, to the Parson, Vicar, Proprietarie,
Portionarie, Owner, or other their Fermours, or Deputies of the Parish, Hamlet,
Town, or other place, where the owner of the said Cattle inhabiteth or dwelieth.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that (...)
person shall be sued, or otherwise compelled to yield, give, or pay any manner
of tithes, for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by any Privilege or Prescription, are not
chargeable with the payment of any such tithes, or that be discharged by any
composition real.

Provided always, and be if enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such
barren, heath, or waste ground, other then such as be discharged for the
payment of tithes by Act of Parliament, which before this time have lain
barren, and paid no tithes, by reason of the same barrenness, and no to be, or
hereafter shall be improved and converted into arable ground or meadow, shall
from henceforth, after the end and term of seven years, next after such
improvement fully ended and determined, pay tithe for the Corn and Hay growing
upon the same: Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be if enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
such barren, wa^te, or heath ground, has before this time been charged with
the payment of any tithe^, and that the same be hereafter improved and
converted into arable ground or meadow, that then the owner or owners thereof,
shall* during the seven years next following, from and after the same
improvement, pay such kind of tith^ as was paid for the same, before the said
improvement: Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it farther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person
exercising Merchandises, Bargaining and Selling, Clothing, Handicraft, or
other Art or Faculty, being such kind of persons, and in such places, as
heretofore within these forty years have accustomably used to pay such
personal tithes, or of right ought to pay, (other then such as have been common
day-labourers,) shall yearlie at or before the Feast of Easter, pay for his
personal tithes, the tenth part of his clear gains, his charges and expenses,
according to his estate, condition, or degree, to be therein abated, allowed,
and deductes.

Provided, And be it also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
person refuse to pay his personal tithes in form aforesaid, that then it shall
be lawful to the Ordinary of the same Diocese, where the party that so ought
to pay the said tithes is dwelling, to call the same party before him, and by
his discretion to examine him by all lawful and reasonable means, other then by
the parties own Corporal Oath, concerning the true payment of the said personal
tithes. Then after a Proviso about Easter-offerings.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act or
any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Parish, which stands upon
and toward the Seacoasts, the commodities and occupying whereof, consists
chiefly in fishing, and has by reason thereof used to satisfy their tithe by
Fish: but that all and every such Parish and Parishes shall hereafter pay their
tithes, according to the laudable customs, as they have heretofore of ancient
time, within these forty years used and accustomed, and shall pay their
offerings as is aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend in any wise to the Inhabitants
of the City of London, and Canterbury, etc. And be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that if any person do subtract, or withdraw any manner of
tithes, o^ ventions, profits, commodities, or other duties before mentioned, or
any part of them, contrary to the true meaning of this Act, or of any other
Act heretofore made, that then the party so subtracting, or withdrawing the
same, may or shall be convented and sued in the Kings Ecclesiastical Court, by
the party from whom the same shall be subtracted or withdrawn, to the intent
the Kings Judge Ecclesiastical shall and may then and there hear and determine
the same according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And that it shall not be
How then have suits been ordinarily and at first instance commenced where they
have been?
lawful unto the Parson, Vicar, Proprietarie, Owner, or other their Fermor, or
Deputies, contrary to this Act, to convent or sue such withholder of tithes,
obventions, or other duties aforesaid, before any other Judge, then
Ecclesiastical. And if the sentence given find not obedience, the party to
be excommunicate, in which state if he stand forty days, upon Certificate
into the Chancerie, to have the Writ sued out De Excommunicato Capiendo, etc.

And before a Prohibition granted, the Libel to be showed to the Judge, etc.
whose hands (the Ecccles. Judges) are after bound he shall not hold plea of any
matter, cause, or thing, being contrary repugnant to, or against the intent,
effect, or meaning of the Statute of West. 2. cap. 5. the Statute of Articuli
Cleri, Circumspecte Agatis, Sylva Caedua, the Treatise De Regia Prohibitione,
ne against the Statnte of 1 Edw. 3. cap. 10. (as it is printed, but it seems to
be rather from the second Parliament of 1 Edw. 3. ca. 11.) ne yet hold plea of
any thing whereof the Kings Court of right ought to have Jurisdiction: Any
thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding, Except for
tithe of Marriage goods in Wales.

I have given this the more fully, because it seems the last direct binding
law: and though it be at top, the bottom whereon all is settled; But so is it
not: There is that lays five times deeper, as has been shown, and the axe must
be laid to the root of the tree, even the bottom of all Law with us, and more
then 500 years deep before the utmost can be reached here, which every private
man should do well to think of, that dares give his thoughts scope to
deliberate about eradication. What is it to go down so low, and strike at those
humors by strength of Physic that have their sediment at the Root of Nature?
Galens hand trembled the day before he gave his Rubarb, foreseeing thereby the
violence he must offer to the whole by pulling away a part, and to fetch some
superfluities away, the Body must be shaken: If vigor of nature should not
here meet to assist, no less danger or fear then which it might import to think
of purging out so settled corruptions; if tithes be such, and not as many take
them, very wholesome juices. But to the Statute; the words whereof carry as
much show of openness and plainness, and this written in the face of them, as
can be expected or could be devised, and that for more then a tyrannically
imposed exaction, a legal and just right of all accustomed Tenths to be hereby
both payable and demandable: Nor do I fear to be mistaken, because lately
perusing them, the most Learned Lo. Cook I find his interpretations agreeing
with these my apprehensions. Though why name I him alone, when all the Learned
go the same way? the painful Students, the professing Graduates, the whole
Innes of Court, doubtless, and as well as the Reverend now Judges as the whole
Bench of them ever since have gone on interpreting, declaring, and judging
according to this opinion.

CHAP. XXV.
Only there is one thing wherein (with due respects) I should crave-leave to
give in mine opinion with some difference from that most Learned man, (which
seems also his constant resolution, because he repeats it,) and it is, That the
proper scene of the trial of these dues was not anciently in the Consistory,
Cook in Instit. 2. pa. 661. on this very Statute of 2 Edw. 6. And before, on
the Statute of Circumspecte agatis. pa. 489. and in Instit. 4. chap 53. pa 260.
till placed there by Circumspecte agatis, Articuli Cleri, 18 Edw. 3. chap. 7.
etc. but in the County Court; Which if, much of what before would lose much of
its strength, But seems not so allowable for these following reasons:

I. No such thing is averred plainly and positively, in any of these Laws, or
any other, And that had need be plain and positive should have changed a thing,
Such a thing in being.

II. The evident contrary is in them all either expressed or insinuated. For,
for the latter it mentions the remanding or dismissing suits of Dismes back
from the Secular Judge, which must be sure somewhither: And for the two former
which might be answered to create that referrer, take them either together, or
apart:

1. Together, and so they mention severally a Prohibition: Prohibiting, what
say I? That which never was? Or, then was no where? This were nonsense as to
the reason of it, and it were a great blemish to the wisdom and gravity that
has always attended those Assemblies to suppose they would declare any thing
for Law that might imply contrariety or absurdity in truth and reason: As that,
That should be prohibited to be, that had not been, or that the Kings Judges
should deal circumspectly with the Ecclestastical, not forbidding them to hold
plea of that they never did hold plea. The rule is in nature before the
exception, the thing before the limitation; And exhibition of something granted
and used before there can be thereof a Prohibition; As there must be Marriage
before Divorce, and a property of Meum and Tuum, before the Decalogue can take
place forbidding to steal: Even so here, there must have been a trial of tithes
before with the Eccles. Judge, before the Kings could be prohibited to prohibit
him; his hands must have been loose, before they could be forbid to be bound,
and He used no meddle before any could soberly and rationally meddle to hinder
his meddling.

2. Apart, and so all is yet plainer: for consider them distinctly, and by the
first Chapter of Articuli Cleri, No prohibition was to take place to hinder the
proper Court in matter of tithes, and surely then the business was there: And
for Circumspecte agatis there is express mention of their there trial. For the
Judge of Norwich was not to be hindered, nor his Clergy, if, 1. they held plea
of things merely spiritual, as of penance, etc. in their Court Christian.

2. Nor if a Parson demanded of his Parishioners oblations or tithes due and
accustomed, etc. (So that, They were there Then demanded:) and in the close: In
all cases before rehearsed the Spiritual Judge shall have power to take
knowledge notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition. Which is not a little
strengthened by a former Statute, (as it seems it is, though of the same year,
for it is placed before it,) where Westminster. 2. c. 5. 13 Edw. 1. in Pultons
Abridg. p 50
it is said: When once in a Writ of Indicavit the business is deraigned in the
Kings Court (that the prohibiting Patron can sustain no considerable loss in
any part of his Lay Advowson,) presently as it comes to be a case of tithes it
is sent back to the Court Christian, and The same Statutes (of Articuli Cleri,
Circumspecte Agatis, and Westminster. 2.) allow to the Spiritual Jurisdiction
cognizance of a fifth, and of all parts less then a fourth of the value of the
Church in tithes controverted between two Parsons. And no Iudicavit is
grantable to forbid the suit of one of them commenced for any less part in
respect of the Patrons Right only. Neither upon them by consequence has any
Writ of Right of any part of Tithes that appears not to be a fourth part of the
Churches value been allowable. So expounds M. Seldom in his History of
Tithes, pa 427.
the plea shall pass there so far forth as it is deraigned in the Kings Court.

III. The Stat. of 1 Rich. 2. 13. mentions it then, as Of old, and had Wont to
be, that tithes should be tried where they were sent, but had been lately
restrained; which had been very inconveniently said of such late times as were
so little before as almost within an hundred years, especially by a grave
Parliament, as was urged before, which uses to measure words and know things.
But of this sufficiently there.

IV. The Statute of Consultation, alleged also before, was made 24 Edw. 1. sc.
before two of the three alleged, and so speaks as could not be supposed more
plain against stopping the Ecclesiastical Judges by Prohibition: which shows
surely they did proceed then.

V. Review and call to mind what was said before here, Pa 103, 104. etc.
both of erecting the Ecclesiastical Court, and trial of tithes there, and how
long, (for they were under the Canon) and this will be much toward, or reach
home to the clearing of the whole business.

VI. Examine things according to their nature, and they would seem always
fitliest here considerable: For who looks upon things as they are, and thinks
not every man fittest to take care of his own matters? The Church fittest to
look to the things and support of the Church? Or, that the maintenance of our
Religion could have been ever anywhere more fitly inquirable and determinable
of, then in the Court Christian, the Court of Religion? Yea, even frther for
this reason, because they were spiritualibus annexa, as Bracton calls them
ordinarily, they must be in way of trial spiritualitati annexa. And hence also
we find the purposed and dispersed tractation of them, as in their proper
Cell, in the Canons; Not in the Statutes, nor in the Year-books, nor in
Bracton, nor Fleta, nor the Common Law it self, (of late days,) for the nature
of them brought them elsewhere for Regulation and Tractation; Why not? Yea,
necessarily Therefore to the answering Court for discussion.

VII. Take the opinion of one, not less Learned (without disparagement,) then
that Learned Justicer, who with judgment and much freedom inquired here into,
and purposely long since; And he settles the Jurisdiction from the County to
the Consistory by the Conqueror, as before. Seldom Hist. of Tithes, cap. 14.
His 14. Chapter is a Judicious and Intended History of that Jurisdiction,
which having found commixed with the Secular under the Saxons, and Danes, He
makes them part with the Conqueror: He produces some instances of Cases soon
after reasoned and determined before the Ecclesiastical Judges, and with equal
diligence is troubled to find, as a rarity, some other in the Kings Court so
low, as about Hen. 2. and King John, and then Regularly they began to come to
the Church alone, and nere there handled at first instance only. This, (and it
has been so ever since) is long before 9 Edw. 1.

VIII. The Stat. De Regia Prohibitione, seems made when before. The print has
it indefinitely for Hen. 3. or one of the first Edwards: But since no evidence
is for any of these, the place and manner of entering may give it to pass that
it was in the former, since, as before, in the least deceiving or to be
suspected way of entering in Manuscript of about those times written, it is cast
in among the Laws of that date, and by name before the Statute De Bissextili,
made 21 Hen. 3.

IX. Plainly in another Manuscript of that Kings Reign, among other grievances
which the Annals of Burton, in M. Seldom, pa. 429. And observe what follows in
Rob. Grossetell hu complaint there next, especially that, A seculari n. Iudice
discin^ di non poterunt, pa. 431. and the advice of the Synod at London, p. 433
Clergy in a Synod at London represented to Otho the Popes Legate, desiring him
to represent them to the King for remedy; One was, The lavish use of the
Indicavit, whereupon, Solent Justiciarii Domini Regis judicare, quota pars
decimarum peti possit vel debeat coram Judice Ecclesiastico: which was to bind
the hands of that Judge, presupposing therefore certainly, and therein that he
had then some liberty to use them. And another Article: Item ne currat
Prohibitio Domini Regis, ne Rector Parochialis Ecclesiae impetat eis qui
percipiunt decimas infra limits Parachiae suae. There needed a Prohibition
then to stop the usual course of the Parsons, suing for the tithes of his
Parish; where? think we.

X. To omit Decimae quatenus decimae debent in foro Ecclesiastico intertari.
lib. 6. cap 37
Fleta, who might be but under Edw. 2. (and yet many passages are in him fair
for proof, that as sure they were then, so things had continued from Bractons
time:) But for Bracton by assurance enough it is evident from him, that he often
mentions tithes as Spiritualibus and spiritualitati annexa: and indeed he that
can judge any thing by complex on of things, will be apt to pass his sentence
from their nature; they were not far off from Causes Testamentary, Matrimonial,
and other of tenderest like nature and consequence, then known to have their
walk here. Among other Lib. 5. Tra. 5. de Exceptioni^bus, cap. 2. sect. 5. so.
401.
Exceptions (treating of them in general,) he lays one sort against the
Jurisdiction of the Court, describing and defining what each is, and coming to
that Section, Quae pertinent ad forum Ecclesiasticum, and quae ad forum
seculare, among other things this comes in: Nec pertinet ad eos (the King and
Secular Judge) cognoscere de iis quae sunt spiritualibus annexa; sicut de
Decimis and aliis Ecclesiae proventionibus. Item, nec de catallis quae sunt de
testamento vel matrimonio. After proceeding to the Common place of
Prohibitions, Lib eod. cap. 9. and 10 fo. 406, 407.
quando and in quibus locum habet Prohibitio, sicut de re sacra, etc. when
allowable, when not; They do lay he says in case of lay fee, etc. but they do
not when the doubt is de aliquo spirituali, vel spiritualitati annexo: Is
tithes any such directly? It follows: Item locum non habebit prohibitio si
agatur de decimis: which gives more then their Jurisdiction here, here alone
without any removal; a Prohibition could not prohibit, and it had been vain
again to suppose a Prohibition of that might not be prohibited. This is farther
that alone that takes place to cause a suit to be new Cap. 4. sect. 1. fol 402.
graffed from a Clerk to the Patrons name, bringing (upon supposition of wrong
done to him in his Lay-Advowson,) the main to the temporal Judge by Indicavit;
And this not only if the whole tithes were in question, but a Ib. sect. 2.
fourth part, a fifth, or a sixth, but no farther: for so far the Writ of
Indicavit would then reach, though By the Statute of Westminster. 2. ca 5.
Circumspecte agatis, sect 2. and Artic: Cleri, cap. 2. Whereof see a notable
disquisition in M. Seldom, de dec. cap. 14.
since it be altered, and to the fourth part limited. Again, Item Cap. 10.
sect. 6. fo 408.
locum non habebit prohibitio de recenti spoliatione, ut si Clericus Clericum
spoliaverit de Decimis vel aliis de quibus cognitio pertinet adforum
Ecclesiasticum, in another place. And yet again in another, they are both
styled Ca. 16. fo 413
Res Spirituales (not only Spiritualitati annexae, in their Jurisdiction as
was alleged, where Cook Inst. ubi supra.
before, but Res Bract fo. 412
Spirituales,) and are said to shift faces and change shapes; now for This,
anon for That; One while for lay, Then for tithes, and back again ere long (as
it may be) to Temporals. As Lay, Laica catalla, So they are under the secular
authority: As res decimatae, tithes marked out, so under the spiritual: and as
sold returning back again to Westminster. Quo teneam nodo? yet thus it is, and
the thing the same under several suppositions and considerations. Many other
such assertions, suppositions, and intimations there are in him; The whole
frame of whose Discourse bends this way, or is managed as supposing things
thus, and I am confident he has not any thing to the contrary. As for Glanvil
who was before, he mentions the Court Christian often, but never tithes tried
there that I could find, (though Glebe often;) This I confess: But then
withal he mentions them not all to trial, nor as here, nor anywhere else, and
so his authority is to be drawn neither way. Bracton dates from the farthest
backward besides, And he has as has been seen.

And these things do, I rest assured, secure the thing undertaken for the
Jurisdiction of tithes sooner in the Consistory (and by consequent their right)
then was allowed by that most learned man. I hope his friends and favorers
will not take it amiss that a Pigmy dare confront a Giant, or Hercules in his
power have some opposition by a weak and common passenger: Magis amica veritas,
it must be so with me, and before whomsoever the beauty of Truth most gracious
and lovely. Exosculor, I profess to love and reverence the memory of that most
deserving man, both blessing and admiring the footsteps of his ingenouous
sedulity, wherever I see him tracing with so much care, industry, eloquence and
gravity, the windings and turnings of his sacred profession, (for he was a
Judge of Israel:) But magna est veritas and praevalebit, Truth has the
greatest command, power, and luster with me before All, and must ever
prevailbefore any opinions, persuasions, persons or names of men in the world.
Which I take to be here, that the Jurisdiction of tithes was not made a branch
of Church Power by force or permission of any ancient Statute, but a native and
connatural branch of her first power, born with it and receiving life in this
world, and has been bred, continued, conserved, and brought up with it
hitherto, nor since that Court has been, but this has been a part of its work
through all ages and generations. And so should I have done with this Statute,
(whose comments have occasioned this digression,) but that finding there a
clause for personal tithes, yet in force, and the things due, but little said
of them elsewhere, and this thought the Only ground; For illustration of a
dark truth, and clearing their doubted right, I think it not amiss to continue
a few steps more besides the direct way, to enquire presently what deeper
radication they may be discovered to have then the bare command of that single
authority: For no question is, but they are due, and in conscience ought to be
paid, as well as other dues, the Law remaining, whose Dueness arises only by
the word of the Law: Necessitate praecepti, as we say, merely by virtue of the
commandment; no other equity or necessity of the Thing appearing, but only
because they are stated settled Rights, by like reason where to here. He that
denies my Heriot or Relieve, may as well his half years rent: He that shuffles
for his suit or service, Homage or Fealty, by like reason (why not?) for his
Corn or money: For the same Law gives the same Due to all; They stand upon the
same bottom, are brought in by the same Spring, and if this prove too weak for
the one, it may not be long ere Thence the other fall short of Home also.

CHAP. XXVI.
AS to Personal Tithes then, (to lay the whole under one view,) two things very
material are to be observed to have been laid down before in the bosom of the
alleged Law: 1. That they were not now set up, but the Statute in making them
payable says they shall be paid where for forty years past they had been:
(which if it had not been here averred, without any great difficultymight have
been made good from the condition of things, But we take that is.) 2. There was
not only an Usage but a Right: So are the words; All persons shall pay where
for time past they have paid, or of Right they ought to pay. A Right then, and
an Usage, a Title and a Possession are already secured. Thus from the Statute,
and beyond the Statute; but we must go much higher to search how. And we may
not seasonably urge the Pattern of Abraham's spoils to Melchisedek, nor what I
find By Dr. Tildesley e^ his Ani^ madvetsion on Mr. Seldens Preface to his
History At this day. Qui Religiosiores sunt inter Iudaeos, loco decimarum
eleemosynam pendunt de omnibus l^cris; december aureos de ce^um, centum de mill,
etc. Pirki Abboth. remembered by Mr. Seldom in his review of cap. 2. p. 455.
urged, Decimas and primitias manuum tuarum; Deuteronomy. 12. And Bring ye All the
Tithes into the Lords storehouse, (not some but All,) Mal. 3. Or, which is
most pertinent, Give the Lord his honor with a good eye, -- and dedicate thy
Tithes with gladness: Give unto the most high as he has enriched thee (as
'twere howsoever,) Ecclus. 35. 8, 9, 10. Da secundum Donatum ejus, is the
vulgar there: whence Alensis nimbly, Si ergo ex dono Dei possidentur omnia quae
acquiruntur justo negotio vel art, de illis decimae dandae erunt: If we must
render of all God gives, and he give what ever we get, then of all we gain in
what just way soever: nor yet may I insist upon Councels and Fathers, as
Hierom, Chrysostom, Gregory, Ambrose, Augustine, etc. the latter of whom De
tempore Sermon. 219 Tom. 10. pa. 169.
speaks out fully indeed, Quod si decimas non habeas fructuum terrenorum quod
habet agricolas quodcunque te pascit ingenium Dei est, and inde decimas expetit
unde vivis: (good Reason and Divinity both;) De militia, de negotio, and de
artificio, read decimas; Aliud enim pro terra dependimus, Aliud pro usura
vitae postulamus. If thou have no Land, Render of that thou have, of Gods gift
whatsoever, is the short of it. But all these are without my pale. And so it
may be is also that of the Demilitia, de negotio, de artificio read decimas.
Cause 16. quest. 1. C. Decimae. Quid est fideliter decimas dare? nisi ut nec
prius, nec minus aliquando Deo offerat aut de grano suo, aut de vino suo, aut
de fructibus arborum, aut de pecoribus, aut de ho^^o, aut de negotio, aut de
ipsa venatione ua. Cause. ead. Quaest. 7. Ca. Quicunque. De vino, grano,
fructibus arborum, pecoribus, hortis, negociatione, de ipsa etiam militia, de
venatione, and de omnibus bonis, decimae sunt ministris Ecclesiae tribuendae,
ita ut qui de his eas solvere neglexerint, Ecclesiast ca dist^ictione debeant
percelli. Decret. Greg. lib 3. tit. de decimis, cap. 22.
Decrees and Decretals; and yet perhaps not neither, by reason of the last
Proviso of 25 Hen. 8. 19. which speaks doubtfully, and whether all Canons
before of force remain not yet so here, (that are not against the Temporal
State,) as well as our Provincials, is at least from the words very dubitable.
But our own bind strongest, like our English Oak which admits no compare; So
nor for strength and certainty to us our English Constitutions. Look then at
first far back, and even so far as before the Conqueror, somewhat was thought
on here tending this way. Some Canons I find or Rules of good credit digested
and left to us under the Title of Excerptiones Egberti, who lived about the
year 750. (soon after the first faith of the Nation,) and had it seems for his
own use and others laid together sundry Rules which he judged most expedient to
be followed; among which, (after for Tithes in general) for Personal. Vid.
Exce^pt. Egherti, can. 100. in Spelman.
Decimae igitur tributa sunt Ecclesiarum, (says he) and egentium animarum. O
homo, inde Dominus expetit decimas unde vivis. De militia, de negotio, de
artificio read decimas. Tithes are a Tribute due, Therefore pay of all thou
live by: of thy spoils, of thy work, and of thy handicraft. Of about K.
Knouts time were also some other Capitula incertae editionis. cap. 35. in cod.
p. 610.
affording reason again with command, and equity mixed with true piety.
Admonendi sunt qui negotiis ac mercationibus rerum invigilant, ut non plus
terrena lucra quam vitam cupiant sempiternam. Merchants and Tradesmen are to be
minded that they look not more after gain then godliness, their estates then
their souls: and a little after, Sicut ab his qui labor agrorum, and caeteris
laboribus victum atque vestimentum quaerunt, and necessaria usibus humanis
acquirere inhiantes instant, decimae and eleemosynae dandae sunt; ita his
quoque qui pro necessitatibus suis negotiis insistunt faciendum est. Vnicuique
enim homini Deus aedit artem qua pascitur, and unusquisque de art sua, de qua
corporis necessaria subsidia habet, animae quoque quod magis necessarium est,
subsidium administrare debet. As of Husbandmen and day-labourers Tithes and
Alms are to be spared, so of those that deal in any Trade; for God gives to
every man how to live, and what from his gift man so uses to provide for his
body, much more ought he therewith to be at cost to provide for his soul. But
the most observable of this intervall was that given before from King Edwards
Law, In cod p. 621. cap. 9.
De hortis and negotiationibus, and omnibus rebus quas dederit Dominus, decima
pars, etc. of merchandise, and All the Tenth to be returned to God that gave:
which yet because it was there both given and repeated needs not here again to
be transcribed and recited. Remembered be it that whereas before the Common Law
was said to be made up of certain pre-existent materials, They as to this
particular may have been such Laws as these: Whereas also those parts were
after made up into one common body by King Edward, in giving this he may seem
to have given the extract of Those (of this Nature before him:) Lastly, whereas
those so distinguished Laws had after several Scenes whereon things within
their several charges were acted, what was Ecclesiastical being separate for
the Consistory, what Temporal left to the Shire Court, etc. Therefore we may
not now reasonably hereafter look for any thing more of these personal Tithes
but where they were, that is, among the Synodals and Provincials, and there
indeed we find, nay we have both found and already given them before remembered
and recited: as, What said Lindwood lib. 3. tit. de decimis cap. Quoniam
propter.
Rob. Winchelsee? Statuimus etiam quod decimae personales solvantur de
artificibus and mercatoribus, sc. de lucro negotiationis. We appoint personal
Tithes be paid by handicrafts-men and merchants. Similiter etiam de
Carpentariis, Fabris, Caementariis, Textoribus, etc. and of Carpenters, Smiths,
Masons, Weavers, and all workmen. What Ib. Cap. Sancta Eccl. sia.
said he again? Decimam lactis, etc. venationum, artificiorum, and
negotiationum: of hunting, handicrafts, and merchandise. What said Simon Mepham
and Jo. Stratforth, but to confirm and enforce what before he had before
stated? and as well might then those that were predial and acknowledged due
have been denied as these, They stood both on one bottom. So Edward 6. found
them, and did by no means raise and impose this personal burden, but bound it
on to continue fast where it had been, and was; insomuch that in stead of
barren words, and empty lines, a special emphasis is to be acknowledged in that
part of the clause laden with much Truth, where Every person exercising
merchandises, etc. being such persons, and in such places as have within forty
years past used to Pay Personal Tithes, or of Right Ought to pay (save day
laborers) is commanded yearly before Easter to bring in their Dues. They were
used to be paid: Then as Now, and Now as but Then, they must and ought. To make
the Payment whereof more sure, or supply the defect, there was appointed a
distinct Si decedens tria vel plura cujuscunque generis in bonis suis habuerit
animalia, optimo cui de jure fuerit debitum reservato, Ecclesiae suae a qua
sacramenta recepit dum v^ve^et sine dolo, fraud, seu contra dictione qualibet
pro recompenlatione subtractionis decimarum personalium and oblationum secundum
melius animal reservetur post obitum, etc. tit de consuetud cap. statutum, per
Simon, Laughan.
mortuary, of those that were not very poor, for compensation of such personal
Tithes subtracted. The force of all which things, and particularly the two
Constitutions before mentioned was such, even before the statute, that as grave
a St. Germane, lib. 2. Dial. ult. fol. 172, 173.
Lawyer (as I believe) any lived in H. 8. time, though he wonders at some
particularity here, that they may be demanded, and if denied, sued for, whereas
in other places they are left it seems to the Debtors conscience, yet he avers
their Duenesse, describes their Nature, speaks of them as of known Right, no
more questionable then predial; And what should have been done about them if
the intended Reformation, so often spoken of, had proceeded to maturity, might
be guessed by that which was. For Magnam indignitatem habet a tenuibus and
laboriosis agricolis decimas annuas Ecclesiarum ministris suppeditare,
mercatores autem opibus affluentes, and viros scientiarum and artificiorum
copiis abundantes, nihil ferme ad ministrorum necessitates confer, praesertim
cum illis ministrorum officio non minus opus sit, quam colonis. Quapropter, ut
ex part labor par consequatur merces, constituimus ut mercatores, pannorum
confectores and artifices reliqui cujuscunque generis, ac omnes qui scientia
vel peritia qualecunque lucrum percip^unt, hoc modo decimas persolvant: pro
domibus nimirum atque terris quibus utuntur, and illarum ratione decimas
prae^iales non solvunt, quol bet anno dabunt annuae pensionis decimam partem.
Reform. L. Eccles. tit. de decimi, cap. 14. p. 122, vid. etiam cap. 13. 15, 16.
four several Chapters are taken up there about the disposition of them, the
heads whereof were given before, and into the Contents of one of them this very
Statute is taken and authorized; If there had been a new Canon Law, those
Chapters should have been part of it; As there is none, the old is of force,
and in all its power beside the Statute, and that again by Statute. Neither had
the thing only consideration in Books; we find regard given to it in the Acts
of Men, and the World busied, not to say very much troubled about the Wealth
that came in by them. The great and vexed Controversy in Oxford, in Henry 6.
time about Fr. Russell and his Doctrine which took up the learned Disputes of
the University there, and smoother Consultations also of the Convocation at
London, and after was transmitted to Rome, and there not ended, was only about
the necessary and fit Receiver of personal Tithes; while he maintained, it
seems, to his own advantage, and against the Secular Priests, that they might
be given as well to the poor as the Church, as we say, to the Monk as to the
Priest, (and then he stood ready as a Mendicant, as the Priest for his Parish:)
They on the contrary to the Church only, and so He and His were excluded. The
determinations it seems settled (the major part) against him, and he for his
error was enjoined to recant publicly at Paul's Cross, less then the
performance whereof would not serve the turn, and all the Pulpits in England
commanded to ring of what an Heresy Fr. W. Russell had maintained (indeed
against the Pulpits) about personal Tithes, now to be cried down by all
opportunity, and the utmost of possibility. The Particulars I find By Mr.
Seldom in his History of Tithes, cap. 7. Sect 5.
related at large; the use I make of them is only this, that These things Have
been of Real consideration, not an empty Book Order, but such as had influence
upon things and produced visible effect, the Consultations of Men having been
taken up about the disposal of the seen fruit of them, much busying, yea not a
little troubling the World, for long since, and so long together, and so no
doubt things stood to Edward 6. time, and so he found and left them. Whereupon,
and that ancient rooted Right (spreading likely further, as might be found by
further inquiry, if it were also needful,) he settled his new vote and order of
confirmation as it were: What, to make personal tithes due! to give them life
and raise them to being! Nothing less: to revive and quicken the Law, that dull
men that were to pay, and had wont, might be rouzed up to a ready and obedient
performance of that which was their ancient known duty, to awaken justice, and
force backward men to bring in their public tribute, which though for Gods
service their worldliness had rather perhaps were left out or let alone: Due
they were before; This vote of public power only cleared the channel that the
in-come might be it self, and come in fresh and free, without impediment, for
which His words and Act reach, we see, fully his meaning.

By occasion of which clause of such import, thus much: Thus much of Personal
Tithes, And thus much also for that last binding Act of State both for personal
and predial, in 2 and 3 Edw. 6. Behither which is little but the implying
Petition of Right, (in the grant of All men's, without doubt meaning These,)
That other was the last, clear, full, express, purposed and direct binding
order. Not yet of no force; Even for it self; though the chief strength (beside
the Legislative power of the Land, here drawn into Act) is in abroad and
before; The Root that supports and cherishes most powerfully (both predial and
personal still,) laying farther in the Right created by ancient Constitutions,
deeper then possibly can be thought by any new declaration. For we shall
seldom meet with a tree that planted the last year has attained much
strength; It must have time to root and settle, before it can be able to endure
the shock of a tempest, or make good its being against any forceable
opposition: So the best and usefullest Constitutions of State are those
experienced firm ones, that have lived, summered and wintered with us, as we
say, and given approbation of their agreeing with the soil by having safely
endured there all influences; Settling and gathering strength, (as it uses to
be, and Must) by degrees, and in and with time clasping in fast to be made one,
and co-incorporate with the soil of a Re-publick. Rash decrees use to be as
soon revoked almost as made, bespeaking little but uncertainty at first both to
themselves, and all things and persons that they are conversant about: Blessed
are the days when the Aged decree Judgment, the ancient and experienced good
Laws, I mean, are made the sure and constant rule of Righteousness. And even
this Humane Ordinance has so much in it of Divine, that it partakes of toward
his nature who is Constancy and Immutability.

CHAP. XXVII.
BUt to go on to the mentioned Petition of Right, a great and bright star
shining hithermost and very clear in the firmament of our Law; whose allowance
vulgar apprehensions still gaze at for the great and only stabiliment of all,
as indeed an excellent and needful stay it then was, when it was, of the
subjects tottering property: But to look upon it as the only bank and bulwark
against tyranical invasion, both the settler of Right and Giver; the knowing
know there is more then twice ten times as much dispersed abroad (though in
latebris to plain English Readers) as this, Nor could the supreme power without
breach of trust, and transgression of duty have before, (and so it may still)
invade the peoples Right, or without injury have then (and so it may yet) do
injustice and unrighteousness. A Bond this was upon the former Covenant, a new
lock added to the former bolts and bars to keep out invasion from above from
protectours, now explicitly, purposely, newly, and afresh confirming to all
their old Rights, (no more,) And say which: The Merchants right, the Gentleman's
Right, the Noblemans, the Freeholders, and why not also the poor Scholars too?
the Church-mans too? whose work is Church-work, and his Trade and Calling
public, holy, heavenly duty: that so having his Due, he may the better do his
Duty, having his Right, people may the better look for Theirs; and having his
property to live on (his Living) secured him in peace, and with assurance, he
may now (...). That ye may wait on and stick close to the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 35
serve His Lord above Alone; and having naught of this vile, yet necessary
world to interrupt and stop his course, he may now wait upon Him (...). Not
whi^led and turned hither and thither, (as men: ^se that are distracted with
cares how to live;) for violent are the pullings of flesh and blood to preserve
it self, and selfloving nature will look about before it yield to be suppressed
or choked. But that ye may attend this Thing alone, and serve your now only
Master without avocation, ib^d.
without distraction. The rather considering what a prosperous and lucky hand
he had in helping to procure as well the Charter, as this Petition, much of
reason would stand on his side, that he should gather some of those grapes
himself had helped to plant the sciences of, he should partake of the harvest
he had sown, and reap some fruit of his own successful impetration; at least to
have his own Right secured in that he helped to obtain to All, The Petition of
Right. The title whereof gives: Petition exh^bited to his Majesty by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament assembled, concerning diverse
Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, etc. and The Contents, Humbly show unto
our Sovereign Lord, etc. (the persons before,) That whereas it was declared (34
Edw. 1.) that no Tallage, etc. yet of late diverse Commissions have issued, etc.
And whereas by the great Charter, etc. no Freeman may be taken or imprisoned,
or It might have been by the same reason, Whereas the Church had some sp^ciall
rights, and those contained in the Charter; Also privileges and im^unities
granted there, etc. as before; Pray they therefore every man or sort of men may
have their Own: and as much was after allowed under the general word of
Rights, and according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm.
be disseised of his Freehold and Liberties, etc. but by the Law of the Land:
yet, etc. And some other things touching life, etc. Now they pray that the like
may not be done hereafter, etc. All as their Rights and Liberties according to
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; and that all Officers and Ministers serve
in their places accordingly. Whereunto the Kings answer being, That Right be
done according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and that the Statutes be
put in due execution, that his Subjects may not have cause to complain of any
Wrong or Oppressions contrary to their just Rights and Liberties; This not
satisfying, upon reply this second personal answer was added, Soit droit fait
come est desire, Let Right be done as is desired; And this after expounded to
be mistaken, if it were drawn to any other then the Ancient Rights and
Liberties, which he willed, and no more. Where still we find Rights sounding
all along, and concession of Them, and in answer to such a Petition, the
particulars are within the possible and easy view of every English man's eye,
and they fitly All march under the Head of the Petition of Right. Now then I
infer and argue: What is that was here granted? Was it not Right? Right to All?
and one man's Right as well as another? Did not the whole Commonalty petition?
Were not All heard? Was not All granted, and to All? And if those that wait
upon the Temple of the Lord in England in his holy Service, had thereby then,
and yet have, they and their successors an Own and Right, was not this then
meant to be granted? and was granted and settled upon them Therefore thereby,
nor can be revoked, but by the revocation of this, or a part of this Concession
of Right? Each man's wrong is of the same nature, guilt, injury, crime, and
grievance, Nor can they ever be interpreted but partial and unjust sharers of
such a claim to themselves, as, Any others having equal part with them
therein, they can be contented earnestly to strive for their own, and will not
be denied, but for those others, think they may be excluded, (or help to
exclude them) at pleasure, and no matter whether they partake of any share in
the common allowed stock of Right. As if it were Theft to steal, but not from
some: Injury to defraud, but the Red or Gray Coat, not the Black: The Law must
hold in some cases, what need it in other? to retain him in possession of his
Right that has nine parts, but not him that has right to the Tenth; One man's
Own may not be taken away, nor injuriously invaded, but his Neighbors may,
(that holds by the same Charter,) and himself outed, or spoiled, or wronged at
pleasure, and That shield is large and strong enough to protect against al
assaults the former, for the later is infirm and narrow, though it were seen to
be made of the same breadth, strength and firmness. What equity is this? Should
not every ones case that is the same be alike, and every Childs part equal in
the same stock of the Common-weal^h? Murmurers were in the Apostles time, and
discontented fault-finders no doubt in ours; But let no private worldling be
heard as speaking reason, that Right is wrong, or the expectation of this Right
is now to him and others grown burdensome. There is none fit to judge, who is
able to say, Any part of the Law is Burdensome. Exactions are burdensome,
injuries are burdensome, oppressions, spoliations, depraedations, undoings of
those that are innocent and quiet in the Land, All iniquity is generally
burdensome: But the Law is a gentle yoke, justice lovely, Right a favor, the
dictates of these never were nor ever can be truly Burdensome; 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
Unless, as Gods Word says, to the disobedient and lawless: (...), to the
irreligious and sinners (that have no true fear, or worship of God, for this
would teach to obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake;) (...), to
unsanctified and profane men (that have never known true purication, whatever
they pretend;) patricidis, matricidis, homicidis, (fit company, it is pity they
should be parted;) To Whorem^ngers, also to Plagiaries, deceitful liars,
forsworn liars, and such other; To all these the Law is Burdensome, Blame them
not, they are weary to bear it, It Is a beam to their backs, and lays on fast
and close, wrapping them under everlasting as well as heavy inconveniences:
But that the Law is burdensome to any Just man, can hardly be believed by any
wise man. It Is Gods great blessing to a Nation, it makes rich, happy, safe, and
quiet where it comes; An humane Oracle for deciding humane doubts in matter of
own and equity amongst men, the voi^ of Justice, the measure of Right, that
gives to every one (...), every one something, most men enough, all whatever
they enjoy; Allotting upon grave consideration what they should have, why they
should have, how much they should have, why no more, and generally upon good
reason, why things throughout Be as they Be, (if our wisdom drew deep enough to
fathom the reason of her profoundly prudent consultations, resolutions and
dispensations) and shall we yet say, That Law is burdensome? My neighbors will
is burdensome, his covetous desire is burdensome, his unjust, wicked, worldly
ambition may be, to sit Umpire on my estate, to inquire what I have, to
determine I have too much, but I shall have less, the superfluity of my
abounding right (which is but one part of ten to keep me alive to serve God in
his Church already, whereas he has the other nine to serve none but Himself, or
perhaps Venus, or Bacchus, or Mammon,) must be pared off to piece up supplies
for his riot and prodigality, to feed the greedy worm of his covetousness, or
rather to help fill up the wide and insatiable gulf of his craving ravenous and
cruel soul; This were indeed, what were if this were not heavily burdensome?
But shall I serve the Lord Christ with such an inside? Shall I profess my self
a Churchmember, yea, a member of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritour
of the Kingdom of Heaven, harboring in my bosom a nest of such unreasonable,
griping, cruel, carnal lusts? Shall I go on to read the Scripture, profess the
Light, hang on Jesus Christ and all his Ordinances, with pretended love to his
Law, and grudge or subtract any man's known worldly dues, refuse to give every
one his own, detract from the humane ordinance, and dare say in any case Right
is wrong, or Law burdensome? Shall my turbulent, greedy, envious, unruly
passions prevail with me so far to make me think my neighbor has too much,
though it be his Own, I must covet it, I will have it, Nay, Gods Minister has
too much, of his known Right, I cannot temper but I must covet my neighbor
goods, That neighbors goods, Let a man so account of us as of Ministers of
Christ, and ^tewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Gods Ministers Right, Rob the Church, yea, perhaps rob God, and starve, or
occasion the starving of souls by withdrawing that which should warm the blood
and quicken the bodies of those should and would feed souls in present, and
discourage those that are to come in hereafter? furthering in the least degree
or upon any pretense by my wilful parcimony, that the thing we have so long
feared, may at last fall upon us, That children may cry for bread and there be
none to give it them, a worse famine may pinch us then that of bread and water,
even a famine of the Word of Life, that hungry souls may run hither and thither
for meat, and grudge being not satisfied; from Parish to Parish, from one empty
Church I mean to another, for the Ordinances of Life, and none be found in Sion
to comfort her children, a well-instructed Teacher in England be as rare as was
a man in Israel, and because no more means is left to sustain his natural life,
One Preacher must serve for twenty Congregations. Away Pluto and Mammon! Let
Judas and Achan be for ever separate from the Congregation of the Lord! Cursed
be Ananias and Sapphira, and all their brood! Let their posterity never find
fig leaves to cover the shame of their sin in this world, nor any thing but
Gods mercies and Christ's merits to shelter their guilty souls from condemnation
in the world to come. Let me have ever light enough to know mine Own, Justice
to give every man his Due, Religion to direct, I Ought to do so, Prudence to
measure it out by the only wise and safe Law, and either cast away my Bible,
(Gods Law,) out of my hands presently, or cease eternally to covet my
Neighbors goods. One word also in the spirit of meekness, to him not hitherto
thought of, that is, I take it easy enough to be led, but as it falls out
miserably out of the way, that follows the light of his eyes, and they guide
him to error, urging the Petition of Right for every ones and his own, and yet
crying down tithes thereby, which being a Right can certainly have no
discountenance, but must rather have a firm, consequentiall establishment by
that Petition. Philip, Philip, understandest thou what thou read? Do but
say, I pray thee, what is it thou so importunately call for? Is it not for
Right? Civil Right? Every ones? Thy Neighbors as well as thine own? And
Christ's Ministers, if he have Right, yea, Civil Right, hereby to his Tenth, as
well as thou to thy Nine? If this; why pervertest thou the right words of the
Law, destroying again presently what but now thou buildedst up, and by or with
thy hoarse and importunate outcries for this Petition, endeavourest to cry
down tithes thereby, which being a Right (sure Man's right is not Gods right)
cannot but have thereby a clear and evident confirmation. Is not ones man's
right of the same kind with another? and as good as another? Must not thy
Pastors have been included in All? Or, could thou be content to have his
little portion understood at least to be struck out of this book of temporal
life to augment thy part, to a proportion of ninefold bigger then His already?
What equity were this, or show of Conscience? Suffer I pray thee the word of
exhortation, and be not offended if I tell thee the truth: If thou be a
Christian indeed, thou will not entertain a gentle reproof with disdain, nor
repay meekness with rage, storming at him that would by the grace of God, and
according to the light given him, deliver out nothing to thee but the words of
truth and soberness. Ask thy Lawyer, and he will tell thee: Advise with the
Learned in his own profession: Consult with the Potter about the things of his
own trade. There is never a Judge at Westminster, never a Sergeant in their
Innes, never a learned Counselor or knowing man in this Land, but will assure
that tithes are as due (besides the rules of equity, for work, and generals of
Scripture, for competent maintenance) by the Law, the rule of Civil
righteousness among us, to their due receivers here, as any rent, or
rentcharge, debt or bond, (not a benevolence, but a strict Right,) and that
the settled and complete body of the Law does with as much unanimity, evidence,
constancy, and aged consent agree to settle and say so for them; and yet do
thou contend, and urge a public grant of right as an argument to destroy them?
Those sages are wise; They will not deny their books; They cannot deny this;
Thou must consent to it; Thou have nothing to say against it; Where art thou
now? On Gods side, or on Baals? for Christ, or for Mammon? For Righteousness,
or Unrighteousness? Would thou but have every one have his Own? Do thou
not covet thy neighbors goods? Will thou own the power of as much Religion as
in one verse of one Chapter of the whole Bible; Render therefore to every man
his due, Romans 13. 7? Keep to this, I desire no more: I know I have gained with
thy honesty, thy sure vote for tithes, and for ever hereafter; Hold to this
Concession, and be constant, thou will never hold up an angry hand nor finger
against them, or but for them, unless thou change thy mind to petition against
the petition. Thou will not I suppose be wiser then the Law, mangle the Royal
Grant, or deform that Petition of Parliament: If thou do, 1. Thou art unjust,
because not impartial: 2. Inconstant, because even now thou chosest to submit
Hereto, and made use of it: 3. In plain terms little better then a fool! Bear
with my plainness, thou will rather thank me for it, when thou shall see I
intend not Reviling, or Reproach, but necessary home caution and admonition.
Resolve with thy self, There is none so highly such, and dangerously too, as he
that thinks himself wiser then the Law: Which is, as a Lord Chief Justice said,
Summa Ratio, the strength and Quintessence of Humane reason applied to the
common good; and what must He needs be then that goes on the contrary part?
that undervalues it? that opposes it? that censures it? and in stead of obeying
the Oracle, quarrels with it? Laws are made to be reverenced, not disputed of,
obeyed, not judged, submitted to, not censured by every forward man, scarce by
every Congregation of men, scarce by knowing, wise men: and who is he then that
of his own private head dares busily control and censure? abrogate and revoke,
repeal and establish the whole or a part, (as much as seems good unto him, be
it what it will) of a Wise Parliaments Petition, a dead Kings Concession, the
Statute Law, the Canon Law, the Common Law, that whole body that has ruled all
actions and possessions here? Thinking, such a part may be changed, another
spared; The great Charter was well thought on in some things; The Petition of
Right was part as it should; K. Edwards old aged and reverenced Laws, that had
so many requests made for them, so many bloody battails fought about them, and
were wrested by the people into the Coronation Oath, may now be advised of: I
see a way, not spyed by any since Christianity came hither (and yet they had
the voice of the Spirit, in the Word of the Gospel) of Civil Justice and
Righteousness, I will make Laws, change Ordinances, reverse Rights, new-mould
properties and dominions, etc. though all that is be troubled, etc. and the
Petition for every man's right shall not hinder: What arrogance is this? What
intolerable presumption? Does it become a private man! a single man! a simple
man! Any man! Were not obedience better then this sacrifice? To be ruled by the
Law, better then thus to quarrel about it? Say but this one thing, Every man
shall have his own: and I have obtained my end, and wish all unsaid has (to
thy offense or otherwise,) not tended hereto. Say but Right shall be done as is
desired, ( Soit droit fait come est desire, as the King:) I will not be wiser
then the Law but follow it: I will not judge the Rule, but be ruled by it; it is
the blessed Ordinance of God, whereto I ought conform, and must, and will,
ingenuously, and fully, the whole and every part, and then we are met and
friends. Especially the Petition of Right, let no one be defrauded of his part
of that, No One, and then be the issue that God will give.

CHAP. XXVIII.
ANd now it may be time to look forward, but first a glance or two backward,
that we may not lose our selves, to see the way we have already gone. I hope it
is either made evident, or at least much has been said for it, that Tithes are
Civilly, Politically due; They are so, for they have been given; they are so,
because that gift has been confirmed: comfirmed by the common Law (in its
Cradle:) confirmed with the confirmation of King Edwards Law, confirmed by the
Church Law, of Authority sufficient, and now lastly by the glances of the
State. But by-blowes I confess these last, yet as they have been set on, I
hope reaching home, till of late some were direct in Henry 8. and Edward 6.
time, (yet of force;) and so is also the Petition of Right, it being taken they
were before a Right. Descend we now from public to private, and see what the
Sages have said, who are either Law, or after next to Law. The Romans had their
Responsa Prudentum taken into the Digests which although they were at first but
the issue of private thinkings, given by single men upon occasion in decision,
yet with time they got credit, and being found useful, and meetly well
agreeable with reason (the great Standard even of Rules,) They were at last
taken into the Rule, and urged as the twelve Tables, or the Senatusconsulta, of
original and ruling Authority for themselves: So and by the same degrees have
some men's credits and savings been advanced with us, whose ipse dixit is next
to Oracle, and their private voice so highly advanced as to be for Authority
and Rule next to the Public of the Kingdom. We shall not be long nor curious
in this search; for still the Public speaks louder to Credit then any Private;
and why should we care much for Silver, when we had plenty of Gold before? or
look after even the Judges, when their Masters stood ready, yea the Rule of the
Judges Masters in public Agreements subservient to justify our Assertion and
undertaking?

And Lord chief Justice, Cook is here first, (for we will now take leave to
proceed ordine retrogrado according to license reserved) He is now become
almost a good Author; but because his opinion and practice are both in fresh
memory with many both as to Pleading, Council, and Judgment, the less would
therefore be said of him, because known. In 2. of his Instit. alone he so
comments on four ancient Statutes, sc. pa. 489, 490.
Circumspecte agatis, pa 610, 611, 612, 619.
Articuli Cleri, page 619, etc.
the 18 Ed. 3. 7. touching the Scire facias from the Chancery, and that page
648, etc.
of 2 Edw. 6. 13. that none that knows the occasion can well forecast any doubt
of the event; none that considers the Text can much doubt of his Comments,
unless he will make so cross and absurd interpretation of his likely meaning,
as that he chose his Theme to go against the Suppositum, or meant to darken and
contradict what was taken in hand to expound and illustrate: such were Commenta
indeed rather then Commentaries, strange inventions: but He raised his Doctrine
according to his Text, and prosecuted it punctually, as he had raised it. Let
them heed him well who allege him frequently, accounting him Authority in one
part as well as another, or else the World will account them I know what,
Partial, I mean; That All; and that is true enough, That they do but in stead of
representing his sense fully as they find it, pervert it, picking a Posie
perhaps of the sowrest flowers, and leaving out what is not to their advantage,
or to their disadvantage, insinuate, that is not, which perhaps they would not
have. Sure he thought, spoke, wrote, and judged, that Tithes are civilly due,
when he shunned not to declare they were every where due, Report 2. fol. 49 6.
in the Archbishop of Cant. C^se, avouched by a London Minister in his late
answer to a Do^bt about the a^ienation of Tithes, p. 17* And in the same Report
fol. 45 in the Arch Bishop of Winch. Case, alleged by Spelm. de non ^emerandis
Eccles. Sect. 16.
Jure divino. To omit his own References to his Reports. Be Sir Thomas Smith
next, a Doctor of both Laws and a principal Statesman; His Description of
Englands Republic passes with good credit, in the last Chapter whereof he
describes the Court Christian, acknowledges its jurisdiction, sends matter of
Tithes thither as a part of the Work, and if once he had them there, he knew,
being not only (...), but (...), what even to Mint and Cummin, would become of
them. The Author of the Dialogue between the Doctor and Student is By Dr
Cowell in his Interpret. in the word Docto^r.
said to have been Mr. St German. It was wrote in Henry 8. days, not toward the
end, and for the solidity and depth of it may pass for one of the very
excellent and singularly jndicious pieces of that most excellent Learning. Now
He admits Tithes as consequentially due upon that account of Dial. 1. cha. 2.
so. 11. And in the new additions to that Book printed. 1531. He tells us; In
the Kings Bench and Common p^ace they will suffer no issue to be joined,
specially betwixt person and person, whereby he Right of the Tithes may be
tried, howbeit that in the Exchequer sometimes they have done otherwise. Addit.
5 fol. 14.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and this reducibe to the second ground of Law
received here, which is, the Law of God, and though the Student cannot
afterward well away with the Doctors Jure divino, yet by Ours, Positive, and
here, he makes no question. For by the Law of Reason (one of the Grounds he had
made of the Law of England before) he would have somewhat; for the Labourer is
worthy of his hire, and then by the Law of the Church, (This I question not how
reasonably, but thus 'twas settled, and the Constitution prevailed,) And he
gives reason for all: For Dial. 2. chap. 55. fol. 165.
there is no cause (he says) why the People of the new Law ought to pay less
to the Ministers of the new Law, then the People of the old Testament gave to
the Ministers of the old Testament: for the People of the new Law be bound to
greater things then the People of the old Law were, as it appears, Matthew. 5
20. And the sacrifice of the old Law is not so honorable as the sacrifice of
the new Law is; for the sacrifice of the old Law was only the figure, and the
sacrifice of the new Law is the thing that was figured; That was the shadow,
this is the truth. And therefore the Church upon that reasonable consideration
ordained that the tenth part should be paid for the sustenance of the Ministers
in the new Law, as it was for the sustenance of the Ministers in the old Law.
So howsoever it is a Due, and he is there discussing the equity of the Statute
of Sylva caedua, which although he defend, yet no more, and in that enough, as
before was said, speaking of it. For if there were Assertion, that a
Prohibition should take place in that particular Case, there was implication in
others it should not; a by-confirmation, here and there, and in neither can be
doubt of what I desire. Ascend at next step up as high as Fleta and Bracton,
for we are now among particular fallible men, the Credit of whose Vote is not
to be compared with the Public, and therefore we hasten accordingly, yet so as
we know what sway these bear in Judicature, and that they overruled the very
Rulers and Judges: Ego vero illos veneror, and tantis nominibus semper assurgo;
as I believe, after Sir Edward Cook most of the chief Justices have been ready
to say, and I do unfeinedly. Let Fleta be first, and He Lib. 2. ca. 60. Sect
27, etc. p. 1 31.
speaking of Contracts and Obligations by them, and an Action of Debt justly
grounded upon both gives the Trial of Tithes in that Court, will surely give
Them. Ex hujusmodi autem obligationibus, promissionibus, and stipulationibus
oritur in curia Regis quaedam actio, quae dicitur Placitum ex debito, eo quod
spectat ad Coronam Regis, says he. But except, Nisi sint debita a testamento
vel matrimonio suborta: quae quidem in foro Ecclesiastico habent terminari,
sicuti and omnia quae mere sunt spiritualia; as Penance for sin, though
pecuniary: So for Church Reparations, etc. 29. Item si Persona, (that is, that
living Man, who as one seen and known, stands forth and acts for the Church,
which is always in it self a dead Corporation, a Suppositum, or Non ens,
without any real subsistence, and must therefore have a seen, known, living
Executour, whose name may be used, and being clothed with Circumstances under
being and existence; In that name and under that Personality may do sundry
things which otherwise conveniently could not; As give or take, gain or lose,
do or suffer; the Churches Man, we may style him; Rector is another thing
Laicus igitur praesentat ad Ecclesiam vacantem ut praesentatas Ecclesiam Regat,
and Episcopus eam dat, sc. praesentatum admi^tit ad Regimen, and inst^tuit.
Bracton. l. 2. c. 23. f. 53.
implying duty, and grounded upon supposition of Power. Now if that Person or
Churches Man petat a Parochianis suis debitas decimas and consuetas, (in the
very words of the Statute of Circumspecte agatis) vel si Rector agat contra
Rectorem de decimis majoribu^ vel minoribus, dummodo non petatur quarta pars
valoris alicujus Ecclesiae vel decimarum: (for then, (if also the Churches be
of several Patronage, not otherwise,) the Indicavit takes place, and the Right
of Tithes must be tried in that of the Advouson, between the Patrons whose Lay
interesse is in question:) And of these all, Sect. 32. Haec autem praecipue in
foro Ecclesiastico habent terminari, non obstante Regia prohibitione. It seems
the nature of them was such, that if they were drawn aside they could not rest
there, but must return to their proper channel, and with other things of the
same nature have properly and together their discussion and determination in
the Court of Religion: And remember this all along, That, as the Philosopher
says, that which gives the Cause (sufficient) gives the Effect; That which
gives the means to compass such an end may be interpreted to allow and give
virtually that end will be so wrought in and brought about by those means; Even
so mediately, that which gives the Jurisdiction gives the work, and effect
thereof; That which gives the Trial gives that which will come of the Trial,
be it what it will; (virtually, and in the sufficient and necessarily producing
Cause) Which is also of use in that which follows from the same Fleta in his
Citation of the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Where approving the Clause before
of the Indicavit, and ruling power thereof, he yet Lib. 5. ca 17* Sect. 9. page
330.
makes the bottom, after discussion in the Kings, to be the Churches Court; and
as that shall sentence such or such a Patron to have right or wrong in the
Advouson of Tithes, so after the binding sentence, though regulated before,
must be formally given in Curia Christiana for them. 9. In casu autem quo
Rector Ecclesiae impeditur ad petendas decimas (says he) in vicina Parochia
per prohibitionem de Indicavit, habeat patronus rectoris sic impediti breve ad
petendam advocationem decimarum, and cum disrationaverit, procedat postea
placitum in Curia Christianitatis quatenus disrationatum fuerit in Curia Regis.
The final sentence must be here, though the discussion be elsewhere, as upon a
Verdict at the Assizes the Judgment Postea is given at Westminster, though the
Trial were in the Country. Afterward, then which nothing is plainer, treating
of Exceptions to Pleas, among the first is the Court Lib. 6. ca. 36. Sect. 7.
page 428.
Erit igitur a digniori incipiendum, sicut a Jurisdictione judicantis and
persona Judicis, cum ipse sit pars principalis Judicii. And what is that? it
follows, Cap. 37. Sect. 3. p. 429.
Cum autem diversi sint Judices, aestimare debet quilibet an sua sit
Jurisdictio, ne falcem ponat in messem alienam. Iudex autem secularis de rebus
spiritualibus cognoscere non debet. (The greatest reason in the world) Decimae
autem in quantum decimae, and res testatae in possessione testatoris tempore
obitus sui existentes, etc. in foro ecclesiastico debent intentari. In a near
case indeed, not: as if the Tithes have been once sold, for then Per
venditionem jam translata est spiritualitas in temporalitatem, and quo casu
locum habebit Regia prohibitio ad inhibendum judicibus ecclesiasticis ne in
cognitionem hujusmodi catallorum procedant, etc. If sold, they change nature,
and by consequent Trial: and much there follows of such prohibition and
permission, but of Tithes as Tithes nothing but as before. From Before p. 202.
Bracton (to come to him next) four of five places were given before for
permission of Jurisdiction decimal hither, which have all their use here* to
which may be added this one, (for those I repeat Not, but remit to them) which
speaks thus. If a Clerk wrong another of Tithes, a Prohibition shall not lay
('it is in the Treatise of granting Prohibitions,) because there is no wrong to
the Patron in his Lay fee, which is his Advouson; Bracton. l 5. tract. de
except. ca 10. fo. 408.
Sect. 6. Item locum non habebit prohibitio de recenti spoliatione, ut si
clericus clericum spoliaverit de decimis vel aliis de quibus cognitio pertinet
ad forum ecclesiasticum, quia de hujusmodi restitutione non generatur
praejudicium patronis, quantum ad jus advocationis. And this granting the scene
of Trial is still upon the matter a granting of all: the sending for Trial to
where before it is known what will be there said, a virtual approbation and
confirmation of what shall be there done; As he that refers to the Admiral
Court does, upon the matter like and approve the Civil Law so far forth there
ruling. And our state having many Rules de pactis, but few de legatis, or of
Wills themselves, sending, in its Own want, to Another place, and willing the
Rules of the Canonist or Civilian shall take place, does interpretatively speak
further, That what is there done and decreed is just, and by it self approved;
Even so the party grieved appealing to the Temporal Court, making his Case
known there, Praying relief which is denied, His tenth fliece or sheaf are like
to be taken away, and upon Complaint, nor Parliament, nor Common Law afford him
any comfort, but their Ministers or Consultations and Resolutions send him back
to where the taking away shall be allowed; What is this but mediately,
remotely, and implicitly, but fully to approve of what is there done? For they
are presumed willing to do justice, and known able, but not interposing, do
consent and partake in the decision they order to, be it where and whatsoever.
So that it is no vain suggestion so often repeated, and necessary to be always
understood, that the making good the Jurisdiction is the securing all, for all
comes along with it, as Mahomets Alcoran will bring a long Tenths with it to
Religion and for Conscience in way to his Paradise, (but no Wine upon earth)
and as the entertaining the Jews Law includes Circumcision, Passover,
Pentecost, the Sabbath too, and even Decimals. And so have been the proceedings
with us, That Court, and those discussions have used to bring in Tithes
effectually, and not but ever; Ask either the Lawyers or Owners, they who did
judge or were judged, They both found the transposition of Wealth and Riches to
be accordingly: Prohibitions if they were often granted, were seldom asked, and
always denied, but if according to these Rlues: The Judge was Lex loquens, the
speaking Oracle, and nor did, nor would oppose, or speak or do otherwise: and
to their cost always men found it to be most true. In the Manuscript before
mentioned, with Magna Charta, and the other old Statutes, are also the Writ of
Indicavit, and many other such Prohibitions grounded upon the same Reasons that
are alleged in the Register, and leading to the same end, sc. of withdrawing
Lay-inquiries from the Court Christian, the subject matter whereof is mostly
Tithes, which shows they permitted in other Cases the Trial to go, where it
would, and certainly did carry them. In the usual Registers are inhibitions
enough composed so, that none of them will vary any thing; they are Et dicitur
ideo Breve quia rem de qua agitur, and intentionem pe^entis paucis verbis
breviter enarrat. Bract. de Action ca. 12. Sect. 2.
Briefs, and give the Brief of the thing in trial: In the Book of Entries The
Declaration sets forth great Complaints for suing in the Court Christian for
tithes of Oaks under the Title of Sylva caedua to the disturbance of the King,
etc. but meddles no further, fol 226. and f. 489. Restraints there are enough
for suing for Fol. 483.
Annuities because they were De catallis and debitis quae non sunt de
testamento vel matrimonio, etc. in laesionem coronae and dignitatis nostrae:
but Tithes are spared, not a word of them. So far Fol. 488.
Debts, alleging this reason, and under this danger, Machinans nos and
coronam nostram exhaeredare, and cognitionem quae ad curiam nostram pertinet ad
aliud examen in curia Christianitatis trahere: so for defamation, so for
demanding Tithes of Lands discharged. But not else: so for recovery of Tithes
Fol. 489.
set out, and become Lay Chattels, yet so as in All still, no pretense was to
impede the Jurisdiction of known due Tithes; but if the Court were extravagant,
and would meddle with what was Lay, then clog it with a prohibition that it
might not exceed its bounds; otherwise let it go on and proceed freely and
fully without any manner of disturbance. And this I say, has been the known
way of proceeding; view their Books, ask the Lawyers themselves, they will
allow (though they may find some fault in my expression) the reality of
things, and that what I aim at is right, though I may faulter in the way of
expression: Nor is any thing more certain then the Restraint of their
Restraints, the Prohibiting of their Prohibitions, that they should not step
forth to hinder the Court Spiritual in that was such, or belonged thereto, the
certain Consequent whereof was a known Recovery, and translation of one fliece,
sheaf, lamb, or thing whatsoever of ten, from one man to another. This was a
little extravagant, but I providently forecast, and conditioned not to be tied
too strictly to Rules of Method though of mine own making: Too much exactness
may be as incommodious, as altogether loose: This belongs to what I was upon,
the Jurisdiction of Tithes, and thereby right: and to the reflections of the
Temporal State, as it stood separate, and favoring glances (of which sort
only is all in this Cell we may properly look for) and these, though not
alleging one quarter of that is, seem to make good what was undertaken
abundantly.

CHAP. XXIX.
AND this of the first branch of Donation, made out by many subsequent
confirmations, before, under, by, and since the beginning of the Common Law, as
well before the Conqueror, as since under these four heads of, 1. The
Confirmation of K. Edwards Laws, (whereof these were a part:) 2. The Church
Decrees, (authorizing the King, licensing the State, looking on and approving
all the other power that was:) 3. The Acts of Parliament, such as looked this
way out of their direct way from the great Charter to the Petition of Right,
inclusive:) 4. The Learned Expositors, taken for Oracles of Law particular, as
Cook, Fleta, Bracton, etc. Adding some hint of proceedings accordingly, and
especially asserting throughout the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction for them, which
will alone induce and make good all the rest. All which together has been so
much, and the Roots of this Right so far showed and evidenced to be spread
hereby, that few men's estates I believe can hardly show, or color for the
like, and yet the men possess and enjoy what they have in peace and firm
security: for through all the good old Laws of the Land these roots are hereby
manifest to have been dispersed, and as it were through every part and member
of our English State and Corporation; Fees, Socages, and Serjeanties are but of
yesterday, the Children of Power rather then Right at first, and take their
utmost date on this side the battle of Sanguelac, besides age and to us
unusefulness, affording other infirming considerations enough; Mannours and
Fee-farms of not much greater reason and equity; and both Copy and Freehold
chiefly grounded on (as they are come to us, and understood to be possessed)
the Word of the Law: But these were voluntary Concessions of the highest
powers, in their solemnest meetings, long since, upon so reasonable
consideration, as to establish the doctrine of the Bible, (and so they yet
stand to bear it up like the pillars that supported Solomon's Ivory Throne,)
Behither and beyond the Conquering day have held up strong and fast in despite
of all storms that have been since our Nation believed the Bible, (whether to
decay with it time will show,) and if the reasonable and continued, willing and
authorizing powers of the Nation, all of them, could by their pactions (the
surest ground) create a Right, Here it must be Sure and Firm, such as the like
is scarce to be found again in our Community. All could not have been deceived,
nor force in every thing it is very like mis-placed: Laws, Canons, Acts,
Ordinances, Decrees, Statutes, could so many effectual, and in other cases
sufficiently made Rules of Right be here made, and yet not made, and yet have
born rule with obeyed power? If Civil Right be stood upon, could All so Many
operative and continuing causes thereof have wrought from time to time kindly
and vigorously without any effect, or but Must contribute and do what humane
Pactions and Concessions could, or any thing below the footstool of Gods
Throne? The Divine Right I confess is of another sort, more awful, it separates
clearly to an higher kind, and we look upon it as (more venerable,) founded in
God, and partaking therewith of his constancy as well as holiness, must be
always without shadow of change the Same, Nor can be touched upon rudely with
profane hands without a Relative violation of that Majesty above from whence it
proceeds: (And Therefore men should be very wary how they affixe this seal of
Heaven to every Imagination of their Own, stamping the Character of Divine
Right upon disputable opinions, entituling God thereby to their persuasions,
perhaps errors of fancies, and but what they strongly conceive must be Thus of
equal authority with Divine Oracles: Highest presumption!) But speak of Humane
Right, what has its firmness whence* all lower titles and enclosures have, the
agreeing Acts of Men, and Mutual Humane Stipulation; Of this sort I believe we
shall seldom find any thing better grounded or faster settled then This, (And
if seconding and conspiring rules of common equity can contribute any thing to
the backing and strengthening of what is so placed and settled, these not
wanting neither) and by as good title as any men have any thing with us, our
tribe of Levi has here in England the same to the Inheritance of Israel. Equail
in this too, that it is as good as the best, and if we had any better or higher,
this would no doubt come out with the highest: But we have none; Our Tribes
pretend not to a partition from Heaven; nor Dominion, or Property, Lordships,
Mannours, or Honors to any thong to be cut out by but inferior, lower,
inconstant rules of arbitrary good Will and Pleasure, guided by compact and
Humane Wisdom; And therefore Levi has no reason to take it amiss if in this
he be not preferred above his Brethren to a right of another sort (if it should
prove so) and higher strain having a touch of sacred and extraordinary, sealed
from Heaven; But rather bless his God if he have done full out so much for him,
as for others, (and as he did anciently heretofore among his own people,)
giving him an Equal Highest Claim and Right with the Best, and as near Divine
as any of his Nation. Which is both done and cleared certainly, and should
serve his turn sufficiently and abundantly.

CHAP. XXX.
NOW proceed next to other helping supports amongst men, firm enough in other
cases to create Right, if these hitherto should fall short of reaching that
aim, though of their nature they seem not so well and aptly proportioned to so
good an end, and they are Possession, and Prescription. Against which many
things have been said by many, chiefly this, That they seem but a kind of
necessary Politic devices for advantageous peace and as it were Quiet injury;
settling many a man in that he has really and truly no just title to, and by
consequent wedging Him out necessarily upon whom that right was devolved, or in
whom it is inherent: Which yet notwithstanding, and all that can be said
against them, they do pass, and are allowed, and a man is thought rightly to
possess and enjoy what by so, and no other means is come unto him or seated and
settled with him. For though it may seem most reasonably Mine, (and is,) which
another makes over unto me, or which falls to me by inheritance from another, or
is escheat, (that is, reversed) or purchased, or given, etc. wherein by the
contrivances of the Law, and reasonable devices of honest wisdom, that title
which was really and truly existent in another is conveyed over unto me and
vested in me, and so I have, as 'twere by removal, His right; yet when I shall
have and enjoy any thing upon this naked presumption, That it is Mine, because
I Have it; or, I ought, Because Long I have Had it; These as they are with
cautions and limitations served in, do not only put an end to many
differences, and to more advantage then what has more of strict right in it;
But having Law on their side, do no doubt bring along a true Right with them,
and I may, by reason of that Law, (the foundation of All right,) have, enjoy,
possess, defend and keep against all men, what is but so settled upon me, upon
these and no other pretensions.

The first of which, the second ground in all of the Civil Right of Tithes, is
Possession: a good plea in other cases, and so not to be despised here, which
Others hold forth as sufficient, and One may as well as another, affording this
argument not easy to be answered or evaded; Tithes are belonging to our Tribe
of Levi, Placet definitio Aeli^ Galli, Possessio est usus rei, si modo usum
accip as pro de^entione, five ^t in his libris scriptu^ est duobus locis,
detentatione, non pro eo quod graeci (...) dicunt, ab usu enim hujusmodi
possessio plurimum distat. Paratit. ad F. de adquir. vel amittend. possessione.
Vid etiam paratit. ad Cod. lib. 7. tit. 32.
Because they have them; They are Theirs, For they are theirs; They possess
them, Therefore they have right unto them. For it prevails, (as said,) in Other
cases, why may it not also Here? Other Men defend themselves with no other
shield, being in, against invasion, or recovery; therefore may these: And if
having his little loaf in his hand made up of few grains, Gods Minister account
it his Own by Possession merely, why may he not as well as his neighbor, who
holds nine times as big upon this title often and by no other, and yet will not
part with it?

But for understanding these things the better, and therewith some other, As of
Donation before, it may be no less expedient to premise here sundry things also
of Possession in general; The nature of it, the force it has, the equity
thereof, and sundry other such things, that so the general doctrine may a
little strengthen that particular we are to insist on.

Possession then, says Cujacius out of the Roman Gallus, is the use of a
thing, if so be we take use for the only holding and detaining it, not for the
enjoying and using which are different and somewhat farther. I understand by it
that we call Having; as Things Corporal by taking them in our hands,
Incorporeall by making use of them upon occasion; which when we so Have and
Handle the one, or make Use of the other, we may be said to have, hold, detain,
occupy, or possess them. Which such having and possessing (to note so much by
the way, and in the very entrance) that it has been here of and belonging to
the Ministers of sacred things, as before, and to others in their right, is I
suppose doubtful to none but he that is ready also to doubt, Whether there
have been Harvests? Whether the Sun have shined? Whether the four Seasons of
the Year have had their vicissitudes? or the Blessings of God been reaped by
Men who have in gratitude returned to Himself some of the fruits of his own
bounty? I except onley those who are to be excepted, and they are who claim
effectual exemptions; As those that succeed the Templars, Hospitallers, or
Cistertians: that inherit a Custom for a Modus decimandi, or Our Books say, A
man may prescribe in modo decimandi* but not in non decimando. Hobart. in
Slades case, pa. 297.
De non decimando, (if in Corners this has with us perhaps prevailed
anywhere,) and some such other: But for the general, it is known the use has
been of as wide extent to set aside One, as to carry home Nine, as diffused as
to plow, sow, reap, and feed, And tanquam de jure Communi, as was wont to be
put into the Libel for recovery, Commonly prevailing all over the Kingdom. The
Lord of a Manor has not more usually taken up his quitrent once a year, and
thereby secured his Right Perpetual, nor the Landlord his Farmours rent, nor
the Merchant his debt, then the Lords Minister these Dues for his heavenly
work, (and he has not been wont to require them of Courtesy, but take them as
Due,) or somebody else in his right, and this wall over and everywhere without
delay, dispute, or denial. Which Postulatum was need to be not proved, but
called to remembrance: And this done, proceeding to possession it self, the
Great force it has in the world, and by consequent may here, is not hardly
discernable from the heeded truth of these following Positions or Observations:
1. That it gives Right. 2. Was the first Natural Right. 3. Is a very Right,
able to endure examination. 4. Defending it self against all comers. 5. Even
against the true owner, sometimes, ( scil. at last.) 6. Against whomsoever at
any time that has but equal Right. 7. Against all the world still till it be
evicted. 8. And enables a man to keep what he could never have gotten.


This force it has, and it seems a great force; The simple assertion was first,
It gives Right, And it does so: for in some cases a thing is Mine, from or for
no other reason, but because I Have it. If another Had it, it were His, (as now
it is Mine,) But because I have it, it is Mine, and not His; and it is injury
and wrong to deprive Me of it. Iu^e naturali prim^evo ante quam essent jura
civilia, id est, leges, fuit statutum, ut quamcunque terram calcaverit pes tuus
tua sit. Gloss. quta naturaliter, ad F. lib. 1. tit. de adquirend. vel
amittend. possess.
This Book, That Field, This Garment, or Sword, or Diamond, my Hand gives it
me, I have right to it in Conscience, because I have it; and as any other thing
is another man's by his plea whatsoever, so these Mine by bare Possession. Which
chiefly prevails in vacuity of title: for then, Quod nullius est, id jure
naturali occupanti concreditur, says F. de adquir. rerum Dominio, L. 3.
Singulorum autem hominum res multis modis fiunt; quarundam cnim rerum dominium
nanciscimurjure naturali, etc. And of the several such natural ways of
procuring one is by possession. Institut. lib. 2. tit. 1. sect. 11, 12. Iure
autem gentium sive naturali dominia rerum acquiruntur multis modis: Imprimis
per occupationem little quae non sunt in bonis alicujus. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 1.
sect. 2 and vid. Flet. li. 3. cap. 2. sect. 1.
Gaius, That is No ones and comes in my way, seems naturally to come home to
Me; as Beasts, that are wild, Fish, Fowl, etc. which if I can take, no one
will doubt my right to Own them. Nor skils it much Nec interest feras bestias
and volucres, utrum quis in fundo suo capiat, an in alieno Plane, qui in
alienum sundum ingredit^r venandi aut aucupandi gratia, potest a Domino si is
praeviderit prohiberi ne ingrediatur. Quicquid autem eorum coeperis, eousque
tuum esse intelligitur, donec tua custodia coercetur. Cum vero tuam evaserit
custodiam, and in libertatem naturalem sese receperit, tuum esse desinit and
rursus occupantis fit. Instit. Vbi Supra.
where: for though I might have been hindered coming into another man's Field,
what yet I take there is for my self, I might have been keep out, not from my
fortune, The wrong was in the intrusion, not in what I have gotten. But then I
must fully have it: For Illud quaesi^um est, an fera bestia quae ita vulnerata
sit, ut coepi possit, statim nostra esse intelligatur. Trebatio placuit statim
nostram esse, and cousque nostram videri, d^nec eam persequamur. Quod si
desierimus eam persequi, desinere nostram esse: and ru^sus fieri occupantis.
Iraque si per hoc tempus quo came per^equimur, alius eam coeperit eo animo, ut
ipse lucrifacret, furtum videri eum nobis commisisse Plerique putaverunt non
aliter came nostram esse, quam si eam coeperimus, quia multa accidere possunt,
ut eam non capiamus, quod verius est. F. de adquirendo terum dominio. L. 3
Sect. 1. Vid. Instit. Vbi Sup. and Bracton and Flet.
if I wound, another take, He that possesses must only have the benefit of
Possession: and so I must keep, else I have lost what I had gor. So in the
wars, Item ea quae ex hostibus capin^us, jure gentium statim nostra fiunt: adeo
quidem, ut and liberi homines in servitutemr nostram deducantur: Qui tamen si
evaserint n^stam poteftatem, and ad fuos reversi fuerint, pristinum statum
recipient. Instit. eod. sect 17. Our Bracton and Fleta have also the same.
Habet etiam locum ista species occupationis in iis quae ab hostibus capiuntur,
etc

Item quae ex animantibus domin^o nostro subjectis nata sunt, eodem Iure nostra
sunt: Idem etiam in insulis in mari natis, and in similibus, and in rebus pro
derelicto habitis, nisi consuetudo, etc. Bracton ib. And elsewhere: Possessio
aliquando jus parit, and pro possessione praesumitur de Iure, Id. lib. 4. tract
1. cap. 2. sect. 7. fol. 160.


the spoils of an Enemies Camp are Mine, so much thereof as I can lay hold of:
Those Captives a Capiendo, or Instit. de Iure personarum, sect 3. servi. lib.
1. tit. 4. and F. de statu hominum, lib. 4.
Mancipia eo quod ab hostibus manu capiuntur, because they are touched to
Property; Servi also ( a Servorum appellatio ab ^o fluxit, quod imperatores
nostri captivos vendere, ac per hoc servare, nec occidere solent. F. de
verborum signif. l. 239. and vid. Instit and Digest. in locis citatis.
servando, non a serviendo, from being kept, not made slaves of,) are all
reduced within the compass or restraint of Property, to be disposed of as the
New Owner pleases; But so long as they are kept again; for if they break out
and return again to their former liberty, they are now again their Own as
before, and not His whose they were, who has lost that whereby he had them.
These things may See Bracton and Fleta in the places ^ited before.
have some special way of ordering with us; but then generally they prevail
Thus abroad, and with Us too in some and most cases; Nor want we instances of
Right of Land so gained merely by virtue and power of occupancy. For although
all were originally in the Crown, if out, derived from it, and so upon
extinguishment of the derivative title, as Escheat should have naturally
reverted to whence it came, yet in some cases and by some circumstances it
proves not so, but a title may be Chancellor Bacon gives an Instance, Where an
estate is granted to one Man for the life of Another, and the first dye without
disposing his Right, Nor Heir, nor Execut^r ^. nor Reversioner can have it, So
it is his that lays hold of it. Use of the Law, page 24. See the example as
large.
gainable and tenable by Entry as they call it, and a man Have and have Right
to Land merely by Possessing it.

2. I said moreover, Possession is the first and natural title: Nothing is
more Naturally Mine then what I do lay hold of. Justinian Possessio appellata
est, ut and Labeo ait, a fedibus quasi positio: quia naturaliter tenetur ab eo
qui ei insistit: quam Graeci (...) dicunt. Dominiumque retum ex naturali
possessione coepisse Nerva filius ait: cujusque rei vestigium remanere in his,
quae terra, mari, coeloque capiuntur. Nam haec protinus eorum fiunt, qui primi
possessionem eorum adquisierint, F. de adquir. vel amittend. possess^in princ.
taught me so, and Thence yet, what we take is our Own, as he has from Labeo.
Ecce effectus possessionis, the Gloss. Dominium. ibid.
Gloss there bids us mark it, and it is remarkable: For even beasts, we see,
will rarely exclude the Possessour: They have only the Law of Nature, they
skill no compacts or force of agreement, yet they observe (whence but from
natural impression?) for a kind of right by Having; whence though their ravin
be greedily set, we shall find they cease to pursue what they see another has
got.

3. Yet more: this title is firm and solid and will endure the touch of
Examination. It Is not a fraud or disseisin, which are wrongs, and have their
known remedies, but a very Right which the Law looks upon and approves, and
more then permits, justifies and protects the possessor. If the other are once
searched and found, they are lost, but this how much the more it is examined
and known; is so much the more approved and justified.

4. Against all but the true owner at first, though the bottom of the claim be
no better then in some regard an unjust entry. The words of the Law are such:
Hoe Doct. and Stu. Dial. 1. ca 9. f. 19.
that has possession of Land though by disseisin, has right against all men
but he that has right. Chancellor Bacon Use of the Law, p. 25.
adds also, that whether he outed any one of his quiet possession, who is
properly a Disseisor, Or stepped in after a Possessors death before his heir,
who is an Abator; In each of these cases whether Disseisor or Abator possessing
and dying possessed, His heir has gained the right to the possession of the
Land against him that has right, till he recover it by fit action at the
Common Law. And if it be not sued for within sixty years after the disseisin or
abatement committed, the Right Owner has lost his right by that negligence. If
either of these, the Abator or Disseisor, be excluded by a third invader, Is
not now this third person, a second Disseisor, his title good against those
before, who were no better indeed then Usurpers? Answ. No: For to the two
former the Possession gave, besides the present Having, such a Right that
against All but the right owner it gives title to be as ground still left to
recover upon again: and it shall not be excepted against such a man, He had no
right, the thing was never His; For he Had, it Was, and He is to the second
Disseisor an Owner and may out him, as having by his former possession, not so
Good, an Equal, but a Better and Prevailing title: And this in favor of
possession, which to all but the rightful Owner, gives true title, and may not
be evaded or rejected. The question is put by Tract. de Assisa nova disseisin.
cap 7. sect 2. fol. 165.
Bracton under this Head, Who may grant a Writ of Assise? (the known remedy of
a possession, not an usurpation,) and upon Answer, That None save he that is
possessed in his own right, no Guardian, no Fermour, no Servant, etc. He
replies, But whether then a Disseisor disseised? It should seem not, for he had
no title in his own right; indeed None? Yes; though not against the owner,
against all else, and so is truly dispossessed, and of his right, and may have
his remedy as of a disseisin: and this propter commodum possessoris, (or as
Fleta, propter commodum possessionis,) and there is no exception against his
wrongful title. Indeed such a one should not recover against the rightful
possessour upon even terms, for he wanted ground to fight on, compared and
contesting with him, and so things must remain as they are: But when neither
has true right, the possession (comparatively among themselves) shall create a
right with the first to keep as his own, or recover being out, Et Hoc propter
commodum possidendi, only for Having. Lib. 4. cap 2. sect 5. pa. 217.
Fleta has the same, and the Bracton Tra. sup. ca. 2. sect. 8. fol. 161.
former again, Cum neuter Jus habet, metior est causa possidentis: and Vid.
lib. 2. ca. 22. sect. 1. fo. 52.
many other such things which I forbear to transcribe. All which and many such
other do together so much favor and strengthen his right, who Has, that if I
am In any thing (only In) and all the world against me but One Man, ( sc. He
in whom is the True right) yet I shall defend my self against them All, not can
be justly outed by any, but shall for Possessions sake and Because I am in, sit
fast, (or if I am thrown out, Recover,) and this by Law, which may be bottom,
good, and justifiable enough for me to rest upon, because it settles all things.

5. Moreover, against that one man, the true owner too in time; for They are
the words of the most Learned Chancellor Bacon in the place before.
if the Abator or Disseisor (so as the Disseisor has quiet possession five
years next after the disseisin,) do continue their possession and dye seized,
and the Land descend to his heir, They have gained the right to the possession
of the Land against him that has right, till he recover it by fit action real
at the Common Law. And if it be not sued for at the Common Law within sixty
years after the disseisin, or abatement committed, the right owner has lost
his right by this negligence. ( For, Flet. lib. 2. cr. 60 sect 7 p. 129.
Currit tempus contra desides and Juris sui contemptores, as is elsewhere:) And
if a bastard possess quietly, and dye so, his Children shall hold against the
lawful Children and their issue. This still in favor of possession: and --
Longae^im possessio (sicut Ius) parit Ius possidendi, and to lit actionem vero
domino petenti, quandoque unam, quandoque asiam, quandoque omnem, quia omnes
actiones in mundo infra certa tempora habent limitationem, de acquirend. rerum
dom. fol. 52.
Bracton agrees thereto, that long, peaceable, and continual possession locks
the rightful Owner quite out: for there must be a time to end strife, and he
has lost his time of regaining.

6. Yet farther: Where many titles are equal The Possessours is Therefore
Best; and if the scales hang even, the Advantage of Being in shall sway the
Right also to that side where is the Possession; Not only the Having but the
Right: For it must be always a better title must evict that which is, as if I
have footing any where, it must be a strength whose Greater power shall out me,
and take possession of my room. Hence the Reg. Iur. Canon. 65.
Canonist: In pari delicto vel causa potior est conditio possidentis: In
equality of state the possessours is the better. And the F. de diversis Regalis
Iuris antiqui, l 170. D^m quaeritur d^ damno, and par utriusque causa sit, (
one must lose,) quare non potior sit qui tenet, quam qu^ persequitur? de
verborum obligat. L. Si servum Strchiu. n. Sect. Sequitur.
Civilian: In pari causa possessor potior haberidebet: much to the same. And
when with us one contended for a Wardship, and one possessed, upon equal Right
neither should have been outed, and then He was well enough was in, He kept
what he had. For, Bracton l. 2. cap. 38. Sect. 5. f 90.
Non sufficit quod petentes probent se jus habere, omnes, vel quidam eorum, ad
hoc quod auferatur possessio a tenente, nisi sit qui probet se majus jus
habere: Paritas enim juris non aufert seysinam a tenente, propter commodum
possidendi, and privilegium possessionis. A stronger weight must be to fetch up
the Scale when a Possession is settled any way: a parity or equality of Right
leaves the thing only where it was. Again, if an Action be begun only upon
pretense of Id lib. de Exception. ca. 19. Sect 6. f. 418. Et si uterque
Bastardus fuerit, tam petens quam tenens, and petens Bastardiam objecerit
tenenti, si tenens replicando dixerit petentem esse Bastardum, oportet petentem
se do cere legitimum; alioquin nihil capiat, cum melior sit in hoc casu
conditio possidentis, etc ib. Sect. 3. And see also before the very end of the
Book de Assisa mort. Antecess. Agreeable with Flet. lib. 6. ca. 39. Sect 7. p.
433.
Bastardy, and the Defendant put in his Recrimination; The other is what he
Accuses; This Plaintiff must both prove his own legitimation, or else all is
well again, and shall continue as it is, and which is more, is Therefore well
Because it so is, unless there be a greater strength of Reason to alter and
remove. For the Law still favors that which is in Being, which shall not be
altered for equally good, or unless for clearly better; as an Army of ten
thousand upon equal Advantages in Nature is able to stand upon the defensive
against a far greater number, a like force is not like to remove it. Farther;
What must be done if a man fell his Right to two men, or a pretender his
colored show of Right for Right, Who shall then obtain? The Bracton l. 2. c
18. Sect. 2. f 41. Flet. li. 3. cap. 15. Sect. 8. p. 202.
Rule is given:

Rem Domino vel non Domino vendente duobus,

The first Buyer had first Right, and shall carry it: agreeable enough to that
of If a man sell to two persons, who shall enjoy? Iuhanus libro septimo
digestorum scripsit, ut si quidem ab eodem non domino emerint, potior sit cui
priorires tradita est; quod si a diversis non dominis, melior causa possidentis
sit, quam perentis, quae sententia vera est. F. de Publiciana in rem l. 9 Sive
autem Sect. Si duobus. Et cum de sucro duorum quaeratur, melior est conditio
possidentis; de diversis reg. Iur. l. 168. Sect. 2.
Vlpian in the Civil Law. Nay, sometimes this carries a victory where there is
no fast ground to fight on, and maintains the field stoutly, having only this
to say, I am there. ^Tis in the case where he that has no Title, sues against
him that has but as much, and in possession, where can scarce be comparison,
neither having any thing, and yet the Possessour Thereby has enough to carry
All. Bracton fol, 161.
Quia cum neutor Jus habeat, melior est conditio possidentis. And no marvel
again then, if the Et quia long commodius est possidere, quam petere: ideo
plerunque and fere semper ingens existit content io deipsa possessione.
Commodum autem possidenti in co est, quod etiamsi ejus res non sit qui
possidet; si modo actor non poterit suam esse probare, remanet in suo loco
possessio; prop^^r quam causam, cum obscura sunt utriusque jura, conrra
petitorem judicati solet: Iustit. lib. 4. tit, 15. sect 4. ver Retinenda.
Emperor observed so much Contention to be for Possession, as that would
sometimes wind in all the rest, and carry the whole business. These are the
favors of Possession when in a double claim the measure of Right is on both
sides equal; which seems to be grounded upon that repeated, and so much varied
Axiom both of the Canonist and Civilian, or rather upon that reason upon which
they both are founded, In favor of Peace, to keep that in being, that is. For
if quarrelling men should be hearkened to in every motion, and but upon equal
terms be heard with no disadvantage to him that begins the Fray, little would
soon be left quiet among men; our nature is so peevish or weak, and many or
most herein so very natural, that Contentions would multiply beyond either
doubt of reason or hope of end, if there were not some public devices and
honest discouragements invented to choke and stifle them at the very beginning;
whence prudently he that first stirs is only assured of disadvantage to begin
upon; the uneven Ground must give him so much the worst at first, that if his
Plea be no better then his Antagonists, it is in no sort good. If his
Antagonists be but as Cum par delictum est duorum, semper one. ratur petitor,
and melior habetur possessoris causa. F. de diversis reg. Iur l 196.
good as his, it shall be better. For, In Fleta lib 2. cap 63. sect. 11. page
137.
paritate Juris prior admittitur defensor quam pars actrix: In equality of
Right none shall be dispossessed of that he has. And F. de diversis regulis, l
167.
Favorabiliores Rei potius quam Actores habentur. If there must any favor be
showed, it shall be to the Accused: and if the Judges De rejudicata. l. 38.
Inter pares.
cannot agree or be equally divided, He that is impeached shall be quit, though
he be guilty; for if the Scales hang even, of proof and Cum sunt partium Iura
obscura, Reo favendum est potius quam Actori: Iur. Canon. Reg 11.
probability, it is presumed for him that Has innocence: still and in all
looking as it were with an evil eye upon those that move complaints, and in
favorable supposition of that well that is; Hanging back with might and main
from alteration upon equal strength ( Reg. Iur Can. 56.
In re communi potior est conditio prohibentis, both must agree to stir, or
the thing stands) and One shall never draw forward so powerfully to alter and
change, that which is, as another with equal strength shall hold back to stay
things where they be, because Melior est conditio possidentis; if both be, or
seem good, the Possessors title is thereby best. Peevish malice is apt to
cherish melancholic Dreams of black Distempers every where, but the serenity
of clear and firm wisdom is always mixed with that goodness that thinks most
things well. That deforms all for amiss, that (looking on with an evil eye) it
sees not well. This charitably inclines to believe well of all it finds not
evidently ill: whence with aversation to change as little alteration is made as
may be without apparent wrong. That must be not so good but better and truer
which is promised, and he that is in possession of In eo quod vel is qui petit,
vel is a quo petitur, lucrifacturus est, durior causa est petitoris. F. de
diversis reg. Iur. antiqu. l. 33.
wealth or innocence, unless there be greater strength to assail and remove
then is to defend, let him keep fast and sure without any molestation in his
present possession. But go on;

7. I said further, The Plea of Possession is against all the World
everlastingly good till it be legally and orderly everted. So said A London
Minister in his Resolution a* Doubt, printed with Sir Henry Spelman of Tithes.
l. 19.
one in this very Case of Tithes not long since, honestly, judiciously, truly
and very prudently: nor is it but fit it should be so: for if a man might be
presumed wrong in, at any time he might be cast out: if one, then another: if
by one, then by another: and so no one from any one could be safe at any time,
or any thing constant, settled ever; no remedy therefore but all be judged
right that is, and till orderly proceeding do cast out of doors, a man be
presumed justly in his own home where he is. It Is one thing to have a Benefice
void in Law, another thing but voidable, says the Canonist; the murderer is
not to be hanged presently, though he deserve death, and must die, and though I
am in condition and may be cast out of my house, till by order I am so I ought
to be safe and fast there. Do not Hooker in his Preface. Sect. 6.
Equity and Reason, the Law of Nature, God and Man, All favor that in being
till orderly decision of judgment be given against it? said he, whom some
count next to an Oracle; and Praesumptionibus standum est, donec probetur in
contrarium; Things are to be thought well, till the contrary appear; and where
any thing is under the God of order, it is a fair likelihood it should be there,
and we are reasonably and piously to believe it so, till new light show it
clear to the contrary. But one word more, and it is, That Possession shall in
sundry Cases help a man to keep what by equal strength of title he should never
have been able to get. If he were out he should never make way to get in, but
being in he sits fast, and out no man shall ever be able to put him. For in
many Cases Frequens enim est apud Iurisconsultos aliquem esse tutum exceptione,
qui non sit ipso Iure. Io. Calvin. Lexic. Iurisp p. 731.
there lies Exception (a ward to defend) where there lay no Action, (or
effectual means to assail) A man may have power to keep another out, that could
never (there) himself have got in; defend that Castle he could not take, and
bolt his Adversary out by help within effectually, where himself could never
get in, if he were out, nor can be put out, Therefore, because he is in. The
Bracton. l de Action c. 12. Sect. 4, f, 113.
Father of our Law speaks to this purpose: Item, and est alia ratio, quod qui
rem petere voluerit, si caute sibi providerit, videat primo an aliqua ratione
nancisci possit possessionem: quoniam commodius est possidere, quam petere.
Multi enim sunt qui si possessionem habuerint, se defendere poterunt per
exceptionem: Si autem fuerint extra, vix aut nunquam fere recuperabunt per
actionem. And these are the benefits, privileges, and advantages of
Possession, (no marvel if before observed the reasonable object of great
ambition;) for it gives Right, the most natural, of proof, against all but one,
and him at last. It swayes the Scale in an equality, is safe and just, till it
be evicted, and keeps a man whether he could never have been advanced.

1.

2. And for the unreasonableness here, it is without cause imagined. For it may
be considered, and must be granted, 1. That the Stage is open, what is or is
done in the World cannot but be known. 2. Men love their own. 3. Are apt to
make out for it. 4. Have means to come by it. 5. In the honestest, surest, and
best ways that could yet be found of Law. 6. Whether in Possession or Action
what is not found amiss, is reasonably to be judged well. Now these things
presumed and known, and withal it being seen, such a one Has; how unlikely is
it but that he should and ought to Have, else we should not see him Have? or if
the right were in another, the Possession, which he cannot but love, must be
with him? If there were no Courts, or presumed Partial, or men negligent, or
the whole frame of things composed toward injustice, to make or let things
alone ill, or not well, Then might we doubt reasonably, and against the
Possessour cherish vehement suspicion: but nothing being more evident then the
above mentioned and to be granted assurances leading directly to the contrary,
How can we but judge for what Is? and that the Law is reasonable favoring the
Possessour as it does; ( Praesumptionibus standum est donec probetur in
contrarium, as before:) and that he has right, for if he had not, as things
are, he should not have? I will not deny but some hard measure may be hereby
meted out to sometimes, or perhaps wrong, But this in some degree may well be
allowed the Sovereign Author of All our right: Better this then worse, (as
worse would be if this were not,) and since of two this way is the best,
reasonably is it chosen though it be not in all regards so good as it might be.

This of Possession in general, and our loved Law about it, (as in every thing
else, so here very amiable, and as he said of truth, Si oculis cerneretur
humanis admirabiles excitaret amores.) But now some one may ask, what is this
to our argument? That was of Tithes: How are They advantaged hereby? Romans 3. 2.
I answer, with the Apostle, (...); Much, Every way. Be it first resumed, that
They are Possessed: It is not more known that men have Harvested, Or plowne, or
sown, or their Garners been madeful and plenteous with all manner of store;
but with equal certainty and evidence this advances it self in the face of
the world, and he is scarce acquainted out of his own Parish, nor in his own
Parish in England, to whom this is not known by evidence certain and notorious.
This then laid in to the former, I infer: What has been said of possession,
what can be more said of it, has it not All force here? Does it give right,
right alone, full and natural right, the most natural, the Law looking on,
approving and consenting, and shall it have no operation here? Shall the
Churches case be singular, and the Ministers of Jesus Christ have no benefit of
common axioms, no fruit of those are to all other fruitful operations? Shall
they have no favor by that All have favor, no benefit by that All have
benefit, the Having their Own in their own hands? and shall that helps others
many ways, advantage them no ways? Shall men look upon securing enriching
Possession, shall wise men look upon it? Shall the quintessence of wisdom in
most reverenced Laws, and those diffused all abroad have consideration of it?
Nay, shall that little measure of knowledge imparted to tame Beasts, enable
them to espy the good, and prompt them to observe the Law and order of it? And
shall only in one case the poor Servant of God, that secludes himself from all
the world to wait on his Lord in the Temple, nor for his own sake, nor for his
Masters sake partake of the common benefit of the Sunbeams as it were, that
shine cheap to all others to their comfort and benefit? To keep him in that he
has, to preserve him from injury and spoil, to secure his dear Own, to render
him but so much regard from his fellow as one brute creature gives another,
whith will not lightly snatch the prey ravenously out of his fellows mouth, yet
more unreasonable men will! Will they? (and plot to undo those that dare but
mutire contra?) take away, or keep away I say, from their Brother, Neighbor,
fellow-Christian-subject, and Gods Minister his rightful possession! without
regret! without mercy! casting him out of the vineyard, and as good as slaying
him! for to strip is next to starve, and that worse then to kill;) not dreading
to act over again the mighty man's part against poor Naboth, who had but a
little, yet he must not keep that; He that has nine for one already, must have
his Tenth also to make elbowroom for his pleasure, or content, perhaps for his
Riot and Sensuality. Can this look like good, Christian, or well-pleasing in
the sight of God or man! Is any unrighteousness, and this not
unrighteousness! Is any thing unequal, and this not unequal! Is any thing
with impious rude and uncivil, and is not this of the worst sort of impiety
joined with incivility and barbarous cruelty! Every man claims his Property,
Every one owns his Own, and shall not Ones? Must he alone be excepted? Every
one has benefit by it, comfort from it, with expectation (well enough agreeing)
of joy in the world to come; Shall one sort only be pent up to fast or feast
himself with his spiritual apprehensions, comforting no higher then with the
expectation of the world to come, denied his own bread here in a Land flowing
with milk and honey, to all other the joy of all Lands? If there be no due, I
say nothing: If there be, I could say no less: There is something of Justice
due to Truth, and the seriousness of things sometimes calls for sober
vehemence. The Law is every ones birthright: The Husbandmans, the Laborers,
the Tradesmans, the Beggars: Soli ex omnibus Clerico commune jus clauditur! as
spoke S. Ambros. li 2. Epist. 12. tom. 5. pa. 98.
Ambrose upon like occasion, shall they alone that wait on the King of Heaven,
have no benefit by Imperial Constitution! The tenderly regarded Church was
wont, and even by judgment of the Law, to be compared to a See before p. 61.
and Brit^n. Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris, meliorem potest facere conditionem
suam, deteriorem nequaquam: fol. 143. cited by Cook Instit. 1. fol. 431. and
vid. Bract. de acquirendo rerum dominio: l. 2. c. 5. sect. 5. etc. 15. s. 1. In
proximis infanciae propter utilitatem eorum benignior juris interpretatio facta
est. Inst. l. 3. de inutilibus stpulation bus. sec. sed quod diximus.
Pupil, (under age and subject to wrong) As much religious Charity or
demonstration of true Christian piety to be helpful to her weakness, as to
relieve a fatherless child, wherein Pure Religion and undefiled before God,
is, to visit the fatherless and widow, etc. Chap. 1. ult.
S. James places the power of that Religion that is Pure: Are things so much
changed? No, they remain the same: Or, are wise men's pious thoughts so much
altered, their Pure Religion corrupted, themselves set upon Pelf and Mammon,
yea, spoil and wrong not declined for conscience sake, that they dare invade
another, Religion instructs or permits them to take from Religion, strip this
Orphan-Church, withdraw from her Ministers, force from their hands, and extort
and wrench their very meat out of their mouths, I mean in their rightful dues,
held back, grudged, or squeezed from them by fraud or force? Must not Gods
bright honor be darkened, if his Lights go out? Must they not go out, if the
oil be taken from the Lamp? Can it be there put without the Levites help? and
how can they attend to do it, if that which the Laws of God and man have
settled upon them to live on, (in equality of strength for right with all other
Tribes) be surreptitiously or violently taken or withheld from them (for He may
starve me as well that gives me not my allowance of meat being appointed so to
do, as he that takes it away from me,) and they have no benefit of Law, no not
of that whereof all the world has benefit, and by Law, I may keep mine Own
that I have in Possession. Heed every syllable of which proposition, striking
in with the interest in common of every One man in this Nation; and if it be a
very small thing now that Possession may not be stood upon by some, but they
turned out of theirs, or it be questioned whether it may be withholden, who
knows how long it may be ere others -- etc. But I forbear. I ominate no ill, I
wish nothing but good, I pray they may enjoy their Own who grudge, or quarrel,
or want but leave to withhold other men's; Only I fear that Circular Curse
which has For it is (...): a demonstration of Heaven a ^stice, or a sign or
example of it thus to do: (...), to return Affliction to the Afflicter, or One
for Another, 2 Thessalonians 1 5.
used to come about, which also I invert into a hearty prayer: Let not, O Lord,
the Extortioner consume all that They have Psalm. 109. 10.
, Nor the stranger spoil their Labor. Hoc avertat Deus. (...). Absit. Amen,
Amen.

Object. But here comes a great Objection to be answered, How the Churches
Person or Man, in the sense before, can be said to be possessed of these
things, since they are known to be in another, the Husbandmans possession? He
plows, and sows, and looks to, and Has: Much good do it you, says he then,
with your part, since I have nine and the Tenth, As was jestingly put upon the
Sophister, who when he had with much subtilty of Syllogism proved two eggs
three, was bid take the third for his supper. Ans. Nay, not so neither: Here is
more reality, a possession (or quasi possession) of these things, beyond fancy
or speculation: Not of the things indeed strictly, but of the Is qui action
habet ad rem recuperandam, ipsam rem habere videtur. F. de diverse. regulis. l.
15.
Liberty and Right to take them up, and that is possessed continually, even
when the things themselves are not: As a Lord is possessed of a Quit-rent seven
years together, and yet he receives it but once a year, his right is inherent
when the power is not used: Or, as a man possesses a way over such a ground,
not by the Land it self, but by the leave, he may when he will, and will when
he lists, and that list comes as often as there is occasion, Thus to make use
of the Land for his Service. For understanding which things the better, we must
have recourse to a known distinction, even in Law, or a separation or sorting
out possessions into two kinds, of Rights, and Things; Corporeal, and
Incorporeall. The one (Corporeal) are possessed but by grasping, or clasping
the Things, as in our hands, etc. The other Incorporeall (the Rights) are
enjoyed, even in the use, or having used, and so continually enjoyed, even when
the use it self (the fruit) is not. As the Patron of an Advowson in gross, 1.
Has never the Glebe, nor Church, nor Tithes, nor any thing seen: 2. Nor has (it
may be) presented these 20 years past, or for these 20 years to come may not,
yet still all this while he has ever a Right to present, (if Vid. Bract. lib.
2. cap. 23. sect. 3, 4. and Flet. l. 3. cap. 15. sect. 16.
ever he presented, or had right, which right is lieger dormant with him
continually, till he draw his power into act, as he does when is occasion,
reaping some fruit of that right which was though seldom used, inherent
continually: Even so the occasional Receiver of Tithes, it may be once a year,
or whenever, has still Jus ad rem, that is, to the taking them up when they
shall be, which is the fruit, Though not Jus in re, the continual actual
perception of them: In short he is possessed fully and clearly of a right to
them all the year, but he reaps the fruit of this power only in the fruits of
Harvest. Much is said of these things both among our Lawyers and the Civilians;
But this may clear the thing, how the proprietary has continual possession of
his right in the interception of use of his power, and yet always leave and
power to use it when there is occasion. without Interruption, Ever, there is a
perpetual right of taking them up when they shall arise: a continuance of claim
though the things arise not to be claimed.

But it may be replied to both, quae tangi possunt, within reach of All the
senses; And how throng we them up then into that notional airy speculation of a
right in the clouds; Solut.
Such Things should be Possessed actually, or they are not within the Claim of
Possession. For a The redouble upon that is given in answer to an answer: a
term familiar in Law. Ad replicationem vero sequitur triplicatio, and ad
triplicationem quad^nplicatio ( one rejoinder farther) ex causa, etc. Bracton
de Except. cap. 1. sect. 4. so. 400. and vid. fol. 428. and fol. 242.
Replicatio est, etc. and contra replicationem datur triplicatio Reo, and iterum
quadriplicatio petenti. Flet. lib. 6. cap. 36. sect. 10. pa. ^^8.
Triplication to which reply, Yes; so they may indeed; The Things may be seen,
but their Right is invisible: as a Church may be seen, the Glebe is tangible,
but the Right of Advocation thereto is, what? Ask, who ever Quamvis Ecclesia
secund ^t quod constable tuitur lignis and lapidibus, sit res corporalis, jus tamen
praesentand^ erit incorporale. Bra. fo 53.
had it in his hand, or can tell who saw it, or where it is. The Instit. lib.
2. tit. 2. de^rebus corporalibus and incorporalibus.
Emperor has fully satisfied this point; Let patience bear with a little more
length then ordinary in transcription, because it tends to illighten all
before: Quaedam praetereares corporales sunt, (says he) quaedam incorporales.
1. Corporales hae sunt quae sui natura tangi possunt: veluti fundus, homo,
vestis, aurum, etc. 2. Incorporales autem sunt, quae tangi non possunt: qualia
sunt ea quae in jure consistunt: sicut haereditas, ususfructus, usus, and
obligationes quoquo modo contractae. Nec ad rem pertinet quod in haereditate
res corporales continentur. Nam and fructus qui ex fundo percipiuntur
corporales sunt, and id quod ex aliqua obligatione nobis debetur, plerunque
corporale est; veluti fundus, homo, pecunia. Nam ipsum jus haereditatis, and
ipsum jus utendi fruendi, and ipsum jus obligationis incorporale est. 3. Eodem
numero sunt jura praediorum urbanorum, and rusticorum quae etiam servitutes
vocantur. And the same is also the nature of this Right; Though the Things
themselves admit possession as visible, tangible, yet the Title to them is in
nubibus, a conceit, or supposition of the Law, without any sensible existence;
And we may not argue from a Thing to a Title, from Land to an Inheritance; for
they come under several conceits of the mind, and must be clothed with
several expressions, and though they are about the same thing, yet they are not
The Same thing, nor admit the same words and considerations. So that it remains
then, Tithes may be truly possessed, even when they are not, that is, A right
to them against they are or shall be; That quasi possessio is enough to go
along with the measure of time in even paces to be a ground of Prescription by
that continuance; and though the things themselves may be seen and possessed
Corporally, yet the Right cannot, nor is expected should. Be sure of this; That
if the Lord of a Manor, or that higher of an Honor, a Patron of his
Advocation, or Copy or Freeholder have right or possession of any thing they
have, the Corporation of Public Sacred Ministers has as certainly possession
present and continual of Tithes in the several Trustees or Persons, of or for
that Corporation, which stand forth to Act for it, being a thing otherwise
only in Nubibus and consideration of the Law; That Right is vested in Them
while they live; When they die the Law has provided them of a Chain of never
failing successors to supply their mortality; Thus it has been, Thus it is,
Thus it may be if Justice may be suffered to have its course, and innocent
forms of Justice not disturbed by parcimony and improvident troublesome folly;
and Thus is Religion, and with us the Rule thereof, the Bible provided for and
possessed of (in its public Ministers) sufficient, outward, visible support to
the end of the world. O Christian, if thou be, Think of this one word; What it
is to Wrong the Righteous, to dispossess innocent poor Naboth of the
inheritance of his Ancestors, to thrust any Poor man out of his Own, or get or
Wish any helpless just man out of his Due and lawful Possession! If thou be
such, think of this, O Christian!

CHAP. XXXI.
IT follows, and is fitly joined to the former, In whose name this Possession
is, which may bring it about that in a strict sense indeed no Man was or is or
can be thought to be immediately in possession of these Rights but God
himself, and that in the words and thoughts of the Law: (for, I give not mine
own, but only as the Priest heretofore delivered forth the mind of his
Oracle:) For, ^leta lib 4. cap 3. sect. 1.
Is Possidet cujus nomine nomine Possidetur, says the same Oracle again,
Bracton de Assisa nov. disseisin. cap. 7. sect. ^. fol. 165.
It is not so much He that is In, as He in whose right he is in, is strictly
the Possessour: As in a Tutor compared with his Pupil, or a Servant with his
Master, etc. And this then fitly advances us onward to the additional strength
this Pillar of the Support of This Civil Right has by Another interessing,
That he that takes them up is never estated in them in his Own Right, but the
true and farther uttermost Possession of them is vested and seated elsewhere,
terminated Higher, above in Heaven. Men are Takers up of Gods Dues, They do
receive what (withdrawing his visible presence) is His Right, (who should sure
be least despoiled or defrauded,) and Persons they are in the sense before, as
to stand forth and act for a Supposed Corporation, So Having another
Personality to hold forth, in being His receivers, (who though he be everywhere
is yet to us Invisible,) To take up to His honor what is Devoted to His
service, who is the Sovereign Lord believed of All things, JEHOVAH God Almighty.

This is much believed in the world, and has very much affirmance even in our
Civil laws, nor can it (if the thing be thus) but much strengthen and settle
this pillar of property, whereupon as great security as Any must Needs rest for
Enjoyment and Continuance, that Men shall not be put out for Gods sake, nor
from His right They be disturbed, Who receive not from or for themselves, but
as His Deputy-Possessors and Receivers; Vicars all by a substitution from the
Highest, in whose Right taking up what they do, they are the more bound to
dispense in His service to His honor; And who is he will be so bold to turn
the Lords Steward out of doors, if not for his own, for his Masters sake, or
dispossess God and Religion, subtract or withhold any thing from the Eternal
Majesty? Heaven, it is said and believed, interesses it self in this case, the
Powers above have laid their Sacred hands upon these bequests and receipts; What
is so settled by clear Human Law below, has a bond of Religion to tie it on
faster upon Whosoever are the Sea Sir Hens Spelman of Tithes, p 139.
Usufructuaries; The spoil whereof must needs be Then not that of Wrong but
Worse, not of Robbery but Sacrilege, a Divine Theft, the Robbery of Heaven,
like the Giants offense, and of that Kind the Eagle heretofore committed for
love of her young, Not sparing to take the smoking flesh from the Altar,
wherewith the Gods should have been propitiated, B^t there hung thereto a fatal
Coal that set all on fire, and burnt both her nest, her self, and young ones. A
fearful consideration! (if i should be so, for still I argue upon supposition,
delivering forth the tendries of another, my Oracle must bear me out) enough to
awaken the deadest, and startle the wisest, to amaze the boldest, and affright
all sober, and any ways considerate, and advised men, from laying violent and
profane hands upon that God had touched before, or tugging it out by strength
in this Case, least they be not only like that deplorable sort, Against whom
God has a Controversy, Hosea 4. 4. This People is, (Let them alone,) as they
that strive with the Priest; but worse, Shall the Clay exalt it self against
the Petter? Woe be to him, Esaias 45. 9. that striveth with his Maker. Into whose
divine hands the Donations made and following Ratihibitions favor, in
expression, intent of delivery; That what to Religion, was rather Devoted, then
Given; even to Gods Great Majesty, the Donee, Receiver, and intended Detainer,
and Disposer, That so men might not but give forth to his Will what they
receive by his Deputation, being like to be thereby the better Stewards of
those Manifold Gifts of God which they receive upon his account, in his Name,
and from his Right, and upon a second consideration should be the more precise
in dispensing only to his honor, what for a second reason the hand of his
providence dispenses unto them to have so dispensed: and yet farther the
reason of whose proceedings and Justice may seem in equity to expect that they
should not spend merely upon themselves, but use Non quasi suis sed quasi
commendatis, what they receive of his bounty, as His, to be so, and no
otherwise but so used.

But to come to the strength of some Particulars; (not dealing only with the
supple and pliable affections to mould and frame them, but stablishing the
judgment in the thing averred or supposed;) That things devoted to Religion
are not solely and ultimately Man's, but in a further hand; I will not urge the
sayings of Poets, and Orators, Councels, Schoolmen, and Fathers, though these
offer themselves; but the glances of Scripture may be not inconsiderable, at
least to prove the possibility and elsewhere existence of the thing; to which
purpose I awake to remembrance: first, the vow of Jacob, Genesis 28 2^.
Quicquid dederis mihi, ejus Decimam omnino sum daturus Tibi. Whatsoever thou
shall give out to Me, the Tenth I will give back to Thee: which promise he
makes to his God. And of Lands, Vows, Oblations, etc. It Is said, Lev. 27 28.
Every devoted thing is Holy to the Lord: particularly ib. ver 30.
these Tithes, whither of the seed of the land, or fruit of the Trees, (as we
would say, Corn, and Fruit) And accordingly paid in practice, not without
intimation of this Consecration and appropriation; 2 Chro. 31. 6.
They of Judah and Israel brought in, Decimas armenti and gregis, Decimas
sacras, id est, sacratas Jehovae Deo ipsorum, as Tremellius; Their Tithes of
the flock and of the herd, sacred and devoted to Jehovah their God. Who
complained He was defrauded, even he himself, in These? Mal. 3. 8, 9.
Will a man rob his God? (possibly the thing may be done, or else here in vain
questioned:) Yet you have robbed Me: Wherein? In these. Ye are cursed with a
curse, etc. And for the Attournment or making them over to Man to be received
by him, for his good Lord and Masters behoof, Number 18. 21. and compare ver. 23.
and 26.
Behold, I have given the Children of Levi all the Tenth in Israel, (They were
mine, but I have Given them to Them) (...), for their public work of
Ministration, For the service they serve in the Tabernacle of the Congregation.
All this is in Gods Book to prove the possibility of the thing (and abundance
more not found or sought:) But now for what apprehensions Our Laws had of this
thing here, which is to the point indeed, The beginning of the great Charter
was remembered before; Chap. 1.
Concessimus Deo, and hac praesenti Charta confirmavimus, We have given to God
for us and our heirs, that the Church shall have All her Rights and Immunities,
And a part of the Church Rights were then in Tithes, and Jurisdiction to
Command them: (Whereas the Liberties of the Freemen of the Realm were given to
Themselves as 'twere into their own hands immediately.) Were those blind days?
Was King Edward blind also? (8) Leg. Edovar. cap. 8.
(1) De omni annona decima garba Deo debita est, and ideo reddenda, said he,
The Tenth due to God and so to be paid: so preached Augustine, and was granted
by the King, his Baronage, and People. Not Augustine of Hippo, but one was more
near us, and more to be heeded by us, though Nosti quia Dei sunt cuncta quae
percipis, etc. as the word were alleged before, p 74. And a little after,
Quid si diceret Deus, Meus est homo quem feci, Mea est terra quam colis, Mea
sunt and semina quae ^^argis, Mea ammalia quae fatigas, Mei sunt imbres and
pluviae, and ventorum flamina mea sunt. Meus est Solis calor, and cum omnia Mea
sint elementa vivendi, Tu qui manus accommodas, solam decimam merebaris. Sed
quia pie nos pascit omnipotens Deus, amplissimam tribuit minus laboranti
mercedem, sibi tantum decimam vendicans, nobis omnia condonavit. Ingrate
fraudato: ac perfide, divina te voce convenio. Ecce annus jam finitus est,
read Domino pluenti mercedem, etc. Iu a harvest Sermon, de temp. 219. Tom. 10.
p. 370.
that Father spoke fully enough and to this point, to his Africans; but I keep
my promise and home: Wise, prudent, valiant, successful, and exceeding pious,
King Alfred required, Spelm Council. p. 360.
Thine Tything portion give thou to God: and Id. p 377.
in his League with the Danes calls them, Dei Rectitudines: and his father
before him wrote his Catholic Donation Id. p. 349.
at the Altar, offered it there, as to whom? and not having to do with an Eorl
or Earderman, or any upon earth Man-receiver. The Council at Id. p. 517. c. 10.
Enham called them, Jura Deo debita; King Knout in his Id. p 544.
Laws, Quot annis quisque Deo debita Jura justasque redditiones rite
persolvito, Let every one pay yearly to God his due Rights: and King Id, p. 531.
Ethelred before, Nemo auferat Deo quod ad Deum pertinet, and praedecessores
nostri concesserunt, Let no man take from God what belongs to God, and which
our Ancestors gave. What was in King Edwards Law we had but now: which how
much the Common Law remember also, and the following confirmations of that Law
(as many as were) involving this also: and to omit what might be gathered from
our Provincials in Lindwood, and the Decrees at large, step at once to Henry 8.
where 27 H. 8. c. 20.
the Parliament complains to the King for remedy, that, Numbers of ill-disposed
persons having no respect of their Duty to Almighty God, but against Right and
good Conscience, did withold their Tithes, Due to God and holy Church, etc.
They were then reputed and in Parliament Language so to belong: and lastly in
the commonly reputed common Law, Bract. and Fleta are not wanting. No one can
but account, these things, and even in their account a part of the sacred
Revenue, and then Lib. 3. cap. 1. Sect 3 Res vero sacrae, relligiosae, and
sancte in nullius bonis sunt. Quod enim d^vim Iuris est, id in nullius hominis
bonis est, imo in bonis Dei hominum censura. Braction lib. 1. cap. 12. Sect. 8.
f. 8. vid. ff. de^erum divisione, l. ^. Sect. 2. Inst. l. 2. tit 1. Sect.
nullius. Sacrae res sunt quae rite per Pontifices Deo consecratae sunt veluti
aedes sacrae, and Donatia, quae rite ad Ministerium Dei d^d ^ata sunt. Q^ae et
am pernestram constitutionem alienari and oblicari prohibuimus, excepta caula
redemptions captivorum. 16 Sect seq^.
says Fleta: Extra patrimoniu^ sunt Res sacrae, etc. beyond man's Right or
reach: neither are they to be transposed for that reason: for Item donari non
po erit res quae possiderin^n potest, sicut res sacra vel religiosa, vel quasi,
etc. Hujusmodi vero res sacrae a nullo dari possant, nec possideri, quia in
nullius bonis sunt, id est, in bonis alicujus personae singularis, sed tantum
in bonis Dei vel bonis fisci Bract lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 7. f. 14.
no man has them, they are a part of Gods Inventory, says Bracton. They A
Rectory or Parsonage is a Spiritual Living, composed of Land, Tithe, and other
Oblations of the People, separate or dedicate unto God in any Congregation for
the service of his Church there, and for the maintenance of the Governor or
Minister thereof, etc. So three e^ual integral parts, sc. Glebe, Tithe, etc.
Spelman. de non temerand. Eccl. Sect. 1.
and the Glebe are questionless as to this all of a nature: their property,
use, possession, intention, devotion, application, and jurisdiction the same:
and for what Land is given, Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 35. Sect. 4. f. 78. So Fleta.
l. 3. c. 16. Sect. 13. p. 205.
Videtur and verum est, quod primo and principaliter fit Donatio Ecclesiae, and
secundario Rectoribus and personis, says the same Bracton. Which if it be
excepted against as thrown in with the exploded Abbey possessions, elsew here is
showed some difference. It is in Case of Remedy for recovery of Cathedral,
Conuentual, and Parochial Church Lands, by a Writ of Juris utrum, whether an
Assize shall lay of the latter as of the two former? and it is Bracton in
tract. de Assisa utrum. ca. 2. Sect. 8. f. 2 6.
said, it shall not; For though those Lands were given to them In liberam
eleemosynam, yet they were given to Persons, as well as Churches, who in that
regard having leave of remedy, As Other men had, there Quod alicui grat^ose
conceditur, trahi non devert aliis in exemplum. Reg. Iui^s. Can. 74.
needed be no stepping aside out of the way upon no occasion; and the form of
the gift may be known by the Charter; but now for him that has Right by his
Parish Church, it was not so, that any thing was settled upon his person, but
only upon his Corporation, Et quae persona nihil clamare poterit nisi nomine
Ecclesiae, suae, quia in Ecclesiis Parochialibus no fit donatio personae sed
Ecclesiae, secundum quod perpendi poterit per modum donationis. This is
evident, for what Land is given to a Parish Church; the reason is the same of
Tithes, as devoted to beyond this World, and Sir H. Spelman of Tithes, chap.
17. That things offered to God be Holy.

I must first explain what I mean by Holy, and that is, not that they are
divine things, or like those of the Sanctuary, which none might touch save the
anointed Priests: But like the Lands, and Possessions of the Levites mentioned
in Lev. 27. v. 28. 29 that were said to be holy and separate from common use,
and separaie from man, that is, from the injury of Secular persons, and to be
only disp^sed to and for the service of God, Defensum and munitum ab injuria
hominum. ff. de rerum divis. L. Sanctum, as the persons of Emperors and Kings
are said to be sacred. For as the Altar sanctifies the Offering, Matthew. 23.
19. So these things being offered to Go^, are by the very act of Oblation made
holy, and taken so into his own tuition, as they may not be after divorced. p.
82.


sacred, in the same sense that any thing visible is, as separate and laid in
in several from the touch of profane hands, and common vulgar uses, designed
and set aside for God and godliness, ((...), as is Aristot. Polit. l. 6. c. 8.
Aristotle's very fit and apt expression,) only for Heaven. Not for nature or
sin, necessity or sensuality, in the serving of which ends most other things
spend themselves, but merely to set forth Gods honor in this World, as the Ox
or the Lamb brought to the Tabernacle or Temple, or as he reserved many things
to himself in the Levitical Law, but the Levites were his Receivers. He was no
more visible Then then Now, nor the things invisible and of a different nature,
yet to his honor, yea to himself were appointed then, (and he did appoint
them) sundry things to be set aside, which his Levites had and he in them. So
here. As in implication of some like thing whereto believed and received here,
it was spread abroad, and yet remains at the sea coasts, that those followers
of Peter and the other Apostles who maintain theit temporal life by the
painful labor of Fishing, bring the Tenth of their personal gains and lay it
down at the public Minister of sacred things his feet by the name (which they
yet retain) of Christ's share. Why this, but because they intend Him a part of
every Draught? As if never a day or night they lay forth with any success but
somewhat must be laid aside for Heaven, and of their penury some mites be
continually paid in to his Treasury. How? To give them into his Own hands? This
is impossible: He is in Heaven beyond the thick clouds, where we nor can offer,
nor he receive any thing: But he has Servants, and Service, and Ministry, and
Ministers, upon earth, to whom he has said, He that receives you receives
me, into what place soever ye enter Take what ye find, for the Labourer is
worthy of his hire; For them therefore and their sakes, In as much as all the
Types of Christ, as a Priest, have received tithes as du^, and as types; and in
as much as his person and office are eternal, and therefore the annexa; and in
as much as he has no wh^re dispensed with, or denied, or refused, etc. and
lastly, in as much as he has left those are his Ambassadors, in his stead:
for my part I do not see why unto them in the Name and Right of their Master,
those rights should not be due, which were manifestly His in his Types, and of
which Himself has no where in his word declared any revocation, Raynolds. on
Ps. 110. 4 p. 474, 175
in His Right these things are issued forth and brought in, and accordingly
they receive name. If the world were asleep at first when the title was given
and prevailed, It has been awaked at some time since; It Is hard to impose on
the vulgar, or plant any name or titie among them that shall with success
spread and grow, unless it fit in with their preconceived notions and
apprehensions: It seems this did, whence they entertained it generally and
retain it firmly, and by this name they yet express their own minds of what
they give, calling it Christ's share. Upon which account of somewhat beyond
merely Human, and that had a touch of Divine or toward Heavenly, These rights
became triable, and the doubts of them only disputable and determinable in
that Court, by rule and practice, where few of earthly or mere worldly things
were once thought of, and whose natural and first proper essential bound of
Jurisdiction was, Spiritualia and Spiritualibus annexa. There were inquired
into things above this world, and which could not be regulated by common rules
of Civil Justice, as Articles of Religion, Exercise of Discipline,
Ecclesiastical Censures, and generally things being or reputed Sacred: And
Thither Also, as being of kind and kin, did These things throng in, or rather
were both admitted and invited, as Saying by Doing what was, and that they were
not reputed merely of humane consideration, because they were let in and there
had regard and only proper tractation or trial where things Divine and most
nearly belonging to God had or should have had their due inquiries. If the aim
had been only to get in dues, (these Dues,) to determine of Civil property, or
to keep one man alive in a Parish, All Civil Courts of Justice were open where
All such things had their proper inquiries and resolutions, and the Tenth part
needed not to have been separate from the Nine: But it seems somewhat farther
was aimed at, and meant or employed which was the cause why these things were
parted, and the face of things seems to represent that there was an
apprehension and supposition that it was, because they were thought to draw
near the things of God, and were, as far as any, toward Beyond this world, and
Therefore they were sorted with a scene accordingly, and had their trail and
discussion where the things of Religion and Christianity were inquirable only,
sc. in the Court-Christian.

Farther, by only which kind of Supposition the crime can be aggravated of
taking them away to that height it commonly is, and men for purloining be
accounted in the number of more then unjust, Impious and Sacrilegious. For it
seems at least unto me that it is not so much the violation of any Command or
Law humane or Divine, from earth or above heaven if it were possible, can
denominate and specify this sin, (if that Law were as plain as another Divine
Command, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not Steal;) But something
else and growing in the Nature of the sin below that must advance the crime
so high as to change kind and become of Wrong and Injustice, Impiety and
Sacrilege: To rob Heaven must offer violation to Heaven, and that be more then
to offend in transgressing a Law of Heaven. For the Moral Commandments above
come thence and are in force for us, and yet No one says Adultery or Theft are
Sacriledges: Sins they are, but that their full latitude, the Divine Precept
does not new specify the nature of the offense, These or Any. So heretofore,
when Jus divinum undoubted had bounded every ones own, The tribes at least if
not the families were parted by sure and immediate Commission from Heaven, yet
the unjust invasion of any part even then was not counted, I believe, more then
Unjust, Qui rapit pecuniam proximi sui, iniquitatem operatur: qui autem
pecuniam, vel Res Ecclesiae abstulerit, Sacrilegium facit. Cau. 17. qu. 4. c.
18.
Wrong or Injury when any part of the second Table was broken, (whereunto yet
the seal of Divine Authority had been affixed in every part,) No more. Even so
here, to raise this aggravation, and cause this change by new specification of
the nature of this sin from Theft to Sacrilege, seems not to me so properly to
grow from any authority of any sort of power and command above, as here below
from Porro a sacris fures Eorum vel violatores proprie sacrilegi dicti. Pet.
Gregor. Tholos. Syntagom. lib 33 cap. 14. sect. 8.
something in the very heart and nature of the offense, which makes it (...);
Romans 2. 22.
(...), a Sacred Spoliation, not from the Law, but from the Thing: when either
Sacrum de Sacro, or Sacrum de non Sacro, or non Sacru^ de Sacro is taken, still
hovering Here below, and as the Zouch. descript. Iur. Eccles. par. 2. sect. 8.
Pet. Gregor. 1. Tholos. ubi supra.
Lawyer speaks, through whose spectacles we are like to see clearest in this
case. And accordingly the Cujacius in parat. ad legem Iul. Peculatus.
Civilian defined it, Sacrilegium est furtum Rei aut pecuniae Sacrae ex loco,
vel religiosae ex religioso: and they are Sacrilegious, who? Tit. eod. L. 9.
sect. 1.
Qui publica Sacra compilaverunt, that have meddled with somewhat Sacred: still
relating to the Thing from the Command; And the word also imports that way; for
Apud Joan. Calvin. Lexie. Iur. pa. 824.
Sublegere is Furari, says Servius, unde and Sacrilegus dicitur qui Sacra
legit, id est, furatur, so Another. Still dwelling below and conversant about
That Is, Not Who says: as we do not read that Ananias and Sapphira had any
order at all to bring, or sinned against any Prohibition in revoking, and yet
(with Achan) they usually march, (transgressing in what had come under divine
precept no way,) in the head of the Sacrilegious. We have no strict Command for
a Chalice or diverse other Utensils of the Church, nor the Church it self, yet
few I believe will allow but transgressions aggravated by being conversant
about these Things are worse then others, and of Locus facit ut idem vel
furtum, vel Sacrilegium sit, and capite luendum. Claudianus. li. 48. Digest.
tit. 19. L. 16. sect 4.
extraordinary Guilt in this world, and they are Things. I promised not to
meddle with any Theological Discourse, Nor do I here, but as it has dependence
of and derivation from, yea, necessary complication with what was Civil. Our
such Laws say, That Tithes are Given to God, which I say does well infer, their
surreption sacrilege, as on the contrary, they that say, it is sacrilege to
take them, give argument, they think they belong to God, Forasmuch as not so
much Gods Command or Divine Right for dueness makes this sin, as something in,
below, with the Act it self, and indeed Correlatively they infer or remove one
another: for if a thing be bequeathed to Gods hand, (as the Law says plainly
here,) it cannot but be sacrilege, Sacra legere, to take them ( Holy) from
him; as on the contrary if it be sacrilege to take them, They that say so must
first imply and suppose they were made over and given to God.

I have in the prosequution of this point omitted what Epithites or
Paraphrasing Descriptions I find of them given abroad, where they are styled
Res Dominicae, Dominica substantia, Patrimonium Christi, Dos sponsae Christi,
Dei census, and the like, all which must needs advance them high, and join them
near in with better then mere worldly things: In usum pietatis concessae, as is
properly said in the Cause. 16. qu 7. ca 1.
Canon, Or, Decimas Deo dari omnino non negligatur, quas Deus sibi dari
constituit, quia timendum est, ut quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte
Deus per peccatum suum auferat ei necessaria sua, as in the Cited by M. Seldom
Hist. ca. 6. sect. 6.
Council of Mentz: But these are without the Circle of our Own, to which I
promised to confine my self. Much less may I take scope to look abroad into the
profane world, for their Oblations, even of Tithes, and to God, to whom they
vowed and thought they paid. As Agis in Xenophon, and Agesilaus in the same,
who both brought their Tithe to Delphos to their god, and offered it him; which
Agis Delphos profectus est ac decimam Deo obtulit. Xenoph. ac rursum: Hostium
vero ita fruitus agro est, ut duobus annis centum talenta and amplius Deo apud
Delphos decimam dedicaret. Id vid. Baron. ad an. Christi, 57 sect. 74. tom. 1.
col. 607.
Baronius having remembered, and many more, concludes with, At vero non
immorabor diutius in singulis exemplis recensendis: Constat quidem apud omnes
fere gentes, velut quodam jure naturae exigente, decimas Numini devotas ac
redditas: upon his credit, paid all over the world, and as due to God, not to
maintain a man or any sort of men, but in signum universalis dominii, in
thankful gratitude to the Original Donour of All, of whom they did conceive to
have and hold their good Lease, and in acknowledgement of the tenure they
brought him back again something. Fain ( as M. Hooker Eccles. Polit. lib 5
sect. 79 pa. 424.
gravely resolves and concludes, and with him I conclude this point also,)
would we teach our selves to believe, that for worldly goods it suffices
honestly and frugally to use them to our own benefit, without detriment and
hurt of others; or if we go a degree farther, and perhaps convert some small
contemptible portion thereof to charitable use, the whole duty which herein we
owe unto God is fully satisfied. But forasmuch as we cannot rightly honor God,
unless both our souls and bodies be employed sometimes merely in his service;
Again, since we know that Religion requires at our hands the taking away of so
great a part of the time of our lives quite and clean from our own business, and
the bestowing of the same in his; Suppose we that nothing of our wealth and
substance is immediately due to God, but All our own to bestow and spend as our
selves think meet? Are not our riches as well his, as the days of our lives are
his? Wherefore, unless with part we acknowledge his supreme dominion, by whose
benevolence we have the whole, how give we Honor to whom Honor belongs, or
how has God the things that are Gods?

Thus far that grave and judicious man; a piece from whose page does more then
a little adorn Ours: And so now we have seen how Tithes have been intended to
be settled on Heaven: How our Laws say, They were so: How they have been tried
accordingly, and this alone renders their spoliation, sacrilege; Besides what
else abroad to this purpose: Sure then the world has looked upon them as Such:
Sure they have been reputed at least as God's.

It remains for application, How fast and safe they should then be from injury
and spoil, How inviolably not to be subtracted or touched, as things laid up
in Heaven, as what may not be purloined from the footstool of Gods Throne, (if
there they have been deposited;) And Who is he dares put his hand toward that
God has touched before, or lay a finger upon that he has laid his hand, and
would, (to see himself deprived and wronged, or that the wrong should but
redound to him, or touch toward him,) show himself no doubt an Angry Jealous
God! Sure, This must not a little confirm humane Right when a bond of Religion
(or as Religious) shall add what strength it can to that which humane wisdom
by the best contrivance of all its devices had made and settled before for
immovable; and this we find not in some scattered loose sheets, but the
universal, all-ruling, all-giving Law making faith for it; after the
stablishing by Civil sanction, This coming in and saying, These things were
given to God, I know it, I should know and do assure it: Take my word for it, I
have best looked upon them, and never took them for any other. We know, for
natural and equitable reasons as well as Law, No one should be put out of his
own: Possession bears such a sway that it secures multitudes in their Heathen
right, nor are they touched or questioned but from most known injury: And shall
not Gods Minister sit as safe and fast, and faster in that not only the Law
gives him as His, but the same Law tells him and all the world he is in
possession on of for the God of all the world? for the King of Heaven? Ye
cannot wrong me, but ye must Rob Him, defraud Religion, disturb an higher
title, impoverish the Ministry, disable Gods service, starve and choke, (by
diverting those warm showers of bounty had wont to cherish and feed it) the
public practice of Religion at the root, leaving only a possibility, but
never reducible into act, of glorious service, by this that Ananias and
Sapphira have taken what Others gave, to maintain the Ministers of that
service: Do we account it so heinous a thing, (as Justly we do) to remove the
old Landmark, to curtoll the set rule of Right, or to deprive the good people
of the Land of their part in the Great Charter, which as but to a lower hand
neither was never delivered farther then their Own Custody: (Item, We have
given for us and our heirs to all the Freemen of the Realm these Liberties
following:) And shall it not strike higher that reaches to the injury of
Heaven, touching the Imprimis concessimus Deo, that the Church shall have her
Rights? Reaching as it were unto another world, conveighing up to Heaven, and
depositing as it were at the footstool of his Throne the Assurance, making Him
the entrusted Feoffee for others use, or rather the absolute and irrevocable
Donee, and Proprietour estated and endowed to have Right or Wrong by the men of
this world? I will not say the thing is so, fully; I only propose, what the
Law seems to intend; with what an eye that has looked upon it, or under what
form it has represented it; me thinks in terrible form enough of Conscience to
all that believe a Deity, to fright any from meddling that considers, ( if it
Should be so,) Decima DEO debita, Dei Rectitudines, Deo debita Jura, In usum
pietatis concessa, and Concessimus Deo pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, etc.
If this should NOT be so? Some one may say. But say I, What if it should? THESE
may be but the workings of fearful fancies? But, What, say I, if they be Real
and Solid Truths? They do but terrify: But what if they should and ought
instruct? As the Cambdeans Remainces, p. 250.
barefoot Friar heretofore answered the Gallant, who scoffing at his austerity,
asked, Why so? This is not much, quoth the Friar, to him that thinks there is
Hell. But if there be no Hell replied the Gallant, what a Fool art thou then?
But, if there Be, said the other, Who is then the greater Fool? What if thy
sinful soul be sealed up to unbelief, and thy seared conscience will not
render thee dreading the Fire till thou feel it, till thou lie down in it, till
thine own experience be the first credible Preacher thou will believe, when
thou shall find thy self laying down in flames, where the worm dies not, and
the fire NEVER goes out? Doubtless it is best to cast the Worst; most safe to
forecast what May be although it may Not be; the more if it may tend to danger
in the worst, and those everlasting inconveniences and if men be not given over
to a reprobate sense, Romans 1 28.
past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19.
as the Scripture speaks, lulled asleep by the deceitfulness of sin into a dead
Lethargy, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
the god of this world having so blinded their eyes, that they have no regard
of the next, It cannot be but these considerations must breed a pawse at the
least, and with all sober and advised men a deliberation and Doubt whether
these things be so, or no? Whose possibilities are assured by the instances of
Scripture where they were So: Which men have agreed so all abroad to deliver
from the public voice as it were of the Church and of the world: Which are
left inshrined in the sacred monuments of most reverenced and solemn Laws, and
unless most things did agree to deceive us, could not but be True. And if so,
that there be Possession, yea, sacred, and in the sense given Divine
Possession, both Equity and Law, Godliness and Honesty, Religion and Reason,
Piety and Justice call out for Every man to have his due, (especially where a
party may be more then man) and it can be no less then Unrighteousness and
Impiety both together to dispossess and deprive of them. We are bound to love
our Neighbor as our selves: How do we this, if we wrong him? If we undo him?
If we give him cause of grief? Which of us could be contented to be thrust out
of our own possessions or inheritances? a part, much worse from the whole? and
yet much worse then that if the whole laboring Tribe should be left to
uncertainty, and Churches in danger of being vacant? We should love God above
All: How show we this in wronging His Ministers, taking oil from their His
Lamp, and venturing to lay a covetous finger where He is said before to have
laid his hand? The prosperity of Religion is, or should be to every good man
the Joy of his heart, the light of his eyes, the comfort of his soul, the life
of his life: how further we this, when we take, (not only from man, but) from
that Religion we pretend to honor, depriving the labourer of his hire for work
therein, muzling That Ox treading out the 1 Corin. 9. 9. 1 Timoth. 5. 18. or,
treading the mow: So Joseph has left us that law intetpreted, with much
probability. Vid. Iosep. Antiq l. 4 cap. 8. (...): Thou shall not muzzle the
Treading Ox. Deuteronomy. 25. 4. the place the Apostle alleges, as Esai. 42. (...).
Thou shall trample the Mountains.
Corn that he is not able to do his work, and whereas the offering of the
righteous makes the Altar fat, we make it lean (by taking away the fat that
others gave,) and are resolved once more to tempt the Providence of Heaven,
whether it be awake and regard to revenge its own wrong? whether the Gold of
Toulouse shall prosper in our hands, though it were once spread upon the Altar?
or the sacrifice will carry again a fatal coal, which kindled by Heaven, may
not have power to be quenched on Earth?

Will a man rob his God? Will he? His own God? Any? says the Prophet: and will
we be instances in ours? Dare we contend with Him that is Great? are we
mightier then He? Are Gods and Man's rights combined both together? and will not
this double strength hold? a double fence protect from violation? Seneca's
Epistles would sure teach us more honesty, and the Law of the Sacrum Sacrove
commendatum qui dempserit rapseritve, parricida esto. L. 12. tabul.
twelve Tables fright us into better Religion. The Relation To A Deity is me
thinks such a charm as should not but affright any from meddling where it is
inscribed, or entering that circle where the dimmest Characters thereof do
cirtumscribed appear: Sure he that put in some respect into his (...). So the
Septu^gint reads the Text, Exodus 22. 28 interpreted by Joseph of foram Gods:
Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8. and contra Apion. li. 2, near the end. And also by Philo
the Jew. lib. 1. de Monarch.
Law, To God As God, and would have None violated, would least of all excuse us
if we should profane ( Himself,) Our Own.

CHAP. XXXII.
IN Whose right Man has been Long possessed too: through the continuance of
ages and generations: for this is no device of yesterday, like to change to
morrow, but such as has already outlived peace and war, troubles and
conquests; yea, the revolutions of all seasons, of winter and summer, health
and sickness, corruption and reformation; Nor from the darkest remoteness of
any Christian days, does show of any other maintenace appear for Gods family
but this, which has bin the subsistence of his workmen all along that have
labored in his harvest, and bin maintained hereby, without which they could
not have subsisted nor have labored. As if Providence had intended by this
solitary instance to furnish us with one very good argument for Expedience of
continuance, Because the world could yet give example of No other, At least
some cause of doubt there Might be and Reason to fear whether Any other would
do so well, because none at all had yet been tried. For many things smile with
very much content and pleasing flattering delight upon the nimble working
fancies of busy bold undertakers, Who when they have cast and contrived such a
thing should be; give themselves leave to be persuaded presently it shall, and
what has been molded in their working fancies (commonly attended with weak
Judgments) may easily be made out into Existent Realities, for which their
quick wits are soon able to afford them arguments enough: But when they shall
come to reduce their speculations to practice, and give life to their pregnant
and very Happy conceptions (as they think) setting the whole frame of their new
and unexperienced devices to move forward upon all those necessary wheels
their fancies had soon made, and now must be made out to keep their Projects a
going, Many a doubt starts out ex improviso, Many a rub is cast in the way of
their smoothest and evennest most probable designs, Many an incongruity arises
to disturb and cross their promising and most handsomely and universally
complying expectations; Many a sour and unlooked for opposition to make the
plot relish of Humane, whatsoever has been the best fruit of Man's
contrivance, accompanied as it is with manifold Humane infirmities: Whence some
wise men have declined nothing more then Change, accounting it a good part of
their best Wisdom to Vary as little as may be in things of weight, yea to let
things quietly and upon deliberation alone with Some inconveniences if but
Tolerably Well, not only because of the Charge and trouble, but also that
manifold Uncertainty will always follow Change, (as we are able to make it,)
taking that Is, though precisely and purged from all inconveniences None of
the best, and venturing with choice and most satisfaction of reasonable desire
along in the trodden, though somewhat uneven path, because There they can
descry the feet of Sundry Passengers that have Used to go before them.
Experience is among the greatest Securities of Hope; Duly applied it gives as
much toward Assurance as almost any thing, that What Has been shall Be; As on
the contrary dark untrodden ways have Wise men's jealousies always hanging over
them, and perilous innovations been by them both shunned and feared: Forasmuch
then as Christian Public worship has (with us) had little other supportation
then this Hitherto, and Many think No other will hold, This may afford at
least a Topicall argument for Continuance; that What has been May, because of
none other the world has had any of the certainty of Experience.

And this step advances us fitly to the last plea of Prescription, and that
confirmed by what it had its first strength from, such continuance of Time as
does more then manifoldly double and treble that Time of Having, which was
simply necessary to Prescription; (as each pillar before had some additionall
strength:) Which to understand the better, and ground all the firmer, it may be
expedient, as in them, to premise some things of the doctrine of Prescriptions
in general; for this will be the more solid and able to endure examination, if
we shall not fancy to our selves, any thing, but take that meaning thereof
here, that others have both taken and given.

Mos Decret. par. 1. did. 1. c. 4.
est long a Consuetudo de moribus tantummodo tracta, I begin then with that of
Isidore in the Canon: and Ca. sequ.
Consuetudo est jus quoddam moribus institutum, quod pro lege suscipitur cum
lex deficit: Combined, as it were, one in another, and are both in effect,
Usage strengthened into a Law. Of which Law, if there were never a word in this
world, nor Scriptum est had ever dropped from any learned man's pen, or public
vote to bear Umpire or decide doubts, yet if men's forwardness shall take up,
and Use continue, some men go before and others follow in any good way. This
Continuance by degrees grows up into a Law, (especially in England) and what is
warranted hereby is lawful enough; future Travelers may keep that rode
justifiably and without control, because they can urge they see the print of
others footsteps which have usually heretofore gone there before them. I said,
especially in England; for here some peculiar influence is from Custom; Our
law seems much made up of it and more then other, so far that whether it or
law say the same thing is not much material with us as to credit or validity.
Consuetudo vero pro lege observatur, in partibus ubi fuerit pro more utentium
approbata, and vicem legis obtinet: Longaevi enim temporis usus and
consuetudinis non est vilis authoritas, says De divisione rerum, c. 3. sect. 2.
Bracton: It is as strong as Law. And Id c. 1. sect. 2.
before, Cum autem fere in omnibus regionibus utantur legibus and jure scripto,
Sola Anglia usus est in suis finibus jure non scripto, and consuetudine. In ea
quidem ex non scripto jus venit, quod usus It follows there: Sed absurdum non
erit leges Anglicanas (licet non scriptas) leges appellare, cum legis vigorem
habeat, quicquid de consilio and de consensu magnatum and reipublicae communi
sponsione, authoritate regis five principis ptaecedente, just fuerit definitum
and approbatum. Sunt autem in A^glia co^sue^ud^nes plures and diversae secundum
diversitatem locorum: Habent enim Anglict plurima ex consuetudine, quae non
habent ex lege: sicut in diversis Comitatibus, Civitatibus, Burgis and Villis,
ubi semper inquirendum erit, quae sit illius loci consuetudo, and qual^ter
utuntur consuetudine qui consuetudines allegant.
comprobavit. As if some peculiar regard were given to it, here, Vivitur
exemplis, we durst almost venture by track, and it may and must be well what
others have used to do before us. What other ground almost besides this do we
know of many things we see done and allowed? Ask the reason of fines, Herriots,
(or Heregates, for that I take to be the right name, somewhat belonging to an
Army) Relieves, Widows thirds, (in a special manner here) Copyholds, to the
eldest or youngest, and several rules of right yet stinting strife all in
several places; Is not the bottom of most of these, Custom? it has been so?
Men have used to pay, or give, or do so? and This reason enough why it should
Be so. For men are with some difficulty debarred their accustomed way; Late may
not be hindered, what might have been at first prevented. So that if overwise
posterity shall at any time think to awake out of that dream wherein their dull
and patient Ancestors have suffered themselves to be led out of the way for a
long time, as their new wisdom thinks, and champing irefully upon the bit,
resolve to call all to scrutiny that has used to pass, and if it cannot give a
very fair account of it self, discharge it for superfluous, Does not the answer
that heretofore Joseph. de ^ello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Agrippa made to some Medlers, seem especially fit to be served in to their
satisfaction? Intempestivum est nunc libertatem concupiscere, It is now too
late to seek for what they might have desired; Olim ne ea omitteretur certatum
oportuit: Nam servitutis periculum facere durum est, and ne id subeatur,
honesta certatio: At qui semel subactus deficit, non libertatis amans dicendus
est, sed servus contumax: They might have chosen, but now they are bound and
concluded, the yoke is settled on, and must be born, (as Peter told Ananias, Thy
money was at thine own dispose, but now thou have limited thy former liberty.)
And Honestum quidem est pugnare pro liberta^e, sed id olim factum oportuit. At
qui victi semel sunt, et longo tempore paruerunt, si jugum excutiant, faciunt
quod desperatoru^ hominum est, non quod libertatem amantium: Joseph.
Joseph himself, as his wont is, to the same Men, Gravely: It is commendable
indeed to fight for liberty, but this should have been done in time: Those that
have been subdued, and long obeyed, to shake the yoke is rather a desperate
shift, then an advised attempt for liberty. There be many things, it is like
might have been amended at first, and the work of true prudence have cast
things in such a mould at beginning, as might have saved (or prevented) many
after following and continually renewing inconveniences: But when the lot is
cast and the tables shut up, the public has appointed, time settled, and
continuance made next to immovable and natural, Then for every thinking man
to be tampering with avitae consuetudines, to amend all he thinks has been
long amiss, cannot but be the way to much trouble, or is not much removed from
intemperate fury: Because he is very weak that thinks not at least he can mend
somewhat in Sir Tho. Moors Eutopia, or Plato's Commonwealth, and it may be,
Could, but Some evils are better born then their remedies. I confess my self
not very Curious before in keeping my self to that strictly may come under the
word of Prescription, but to that which has the nature of the thing, to create
a title by Possession and TimeEver: And I know what distinction the Civilians
have between it and that ranges also under the same head, of Vsucapio: That
Joan. Calvin. Lexic. Jurid. in vocab. Praescriptio. page 732. and in vocab.
Usucapio: page 959.
One is restrained to land, The other to goods: One for, Longi temporis, the
other for yet larger size; That Id. in vocab. Praescribere. page 731. where is
a purposed, and as the author thinks, first started disquisition of their
difference: Vid. etiam Cujac. in paratit. ad ^od. de praescriptione longi temp.
to take place only in Italy, This also in the Provinces: But chiefly, that
one gives Vid. Gloss. Quod autem praescriptione in Cause. 16. quest. 4. in Rub.
and Cujac. in the place but now.
full right of positive Dominion, for recovery; But the other only Exceptionem
contra actionem, to protect the Possessor against an assaylant, cannot recover
a disseisin: But these niceties are not to be much stood upon by us here in
England, and the rather for that the As may be seen in Jo. Calv. page 732.
cited before.
Civilians themselves stick not fast to them: We mean, as said, the Thing; that
which gains Title by So Cook on Littleton. Inst. 1. fol. 110. b.
Having and Using, Possession and Continuance; and these two, I suppose, as so
many essential parts, do go always to that which is Prescription. Which is
then, says Fol. 113.
Cook, A title taking his substance of Use and Time, allowed by the law;
Praescriptio est titulus ex usu et tempore substantiam capiens ab authoritate
legis. He critically distinguishes again between This founded in a person,
Custom in a place; A man may prescribe, a Manor or Honor breed a Custom:
(but this I insist not on neither.) and the Civil law agrees with ours: ff.
lib. 41. tit 3.. l 3.
Vsucapio est Rectius fortasse, Adeptio dominii: Sic enim ex Ulpiano Duaren. in
loc. and Calvin. in Lexic. Jur. pa. 959.
adjectio dominii per continuationem possessionis temporis lege definiti. But
now what time is requisite to create title, would require somewhat a large
parenthesis.

First, abroad: and Iure civili const^t^tum fuerat, ^t qui bona fide ab eo, qui
dom nus non erat, cum crederet eum dom nu^ esse rem emerit, vel ex donatio^e,
aliave quavis justa causa acceperit, is, eam rem, si mobilis erat, anno ubique
uno: si immobilis, b^ennio tantum in Italico solo usucaperet, nererum dominia
in incerto essent. Et cum hoc placitum erat putan. tibus antiquioribus, dominis
suffice^e ad inquitendas res saas praefata tempora, nobis mel^or fententia
sedit, ne domini maturius suis rebus defraudentur, neque certo loco hoc
beneficium concludatur. Et ^deo Constitutionem super hoc promulgavimus, qua
cautum est, ut res qu^dem mobiles per triennium; immobiles vero per longi
temporis possessionem, id est, inter praesentes decennio, inter absentes
viginti annis usucapiantur: Instit. lib 2. tit 6 in princ.
by the twelve tables one year was enough for movables, two for immoveables:
If a man had possessed bona fide, and ex justo titulo so long. He was in for
continuance. This Justinian altered, (or rather Tribonian,) for three years in
the former, and ten in the later, inter praesentes, but if the owner were
absent he was allowed twenty. This was called Non usucapies nisi sint tibi
tal^a quinque, Recta fides, justus titulus, res non vitiosa, Quodre^ tradatur,
possessio contint^e^ur: Gloss Quod autem, in Cause. 16. qu. 4. in Rub.
praescriptio longi temporis, which yet satisfied not in all: for it was
needful to bring in besides Vid Cu^a^ parat. ad Cod. lib. 7. tit 22.
Praescriptio longissimi temporis, which lengthened the leave to claim within
thirty years, or in some cases within forty; and here with them most things
stayed. Vid. parat. ad tit. 39 de praescriptione triginta vel quad raginta
annorum.


By the feodall law (1) thirty years prescription was good, and He that had no
investiture, and had been in so long and done services stood firm.

So by the Si quis per triginta annos rem aliquam ut feudum posseder^t, and
servitium domino exhibuerit: quamvis de ea^re non sit investitus,
praescriptione tamen triginta annorum se tueri potest: Obertus de Ort^. Fend.
lib. 2 tit. 26, sect. 4.

Et vid Gloss. fin. ad Feud. lib. 1. tit. de us^ Med^olan.


Canon in many things determinable hereby, though for one Church to prescribe
Cause. 16. qu. 4 c. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8. 9. Decretal. Gregor. lib. 2. tit. 26. cap. 3.
Twenty, or ten was enough in some cases The words see after transcribed in page
273 in marg.
Tithes against another require forty years, and in some, Tit. eod c. 6.
Adaures nostras pervenit duas Ecclesias litigasse super decimis, quas una earum
in alterius paroch^a annis quadraginta possedit: and infra. Tuae fraternitati
tenore praesentium innotescat, quod de Iure melior est conditio possidentis;
Quia quadragenalis praescriptio omnem prorsus actionem excludit.
other Cases.

Here at home has been much variety: and we have had no fewer then three sorts
of measures to limit and set out the time of possibility of Recoveries by
without or beyond the bound of Which, no hope. As, against a Church or a
Religious house, tit. eod. c 8 and Cause. 16. qu. 4. c. 16. approving that of
the Code, de Sacrosanct Ecc^es. Authent. Quas Actiones and Novel. 131. cap 6.

B^t to hold Tithes, a Layman prescribes never. Quia cum L^^ci decimas detinere
non possant, cas nulla valent praescribere ratione: Decret. lib. 2. tit. 26.
cap. 7.




1. The yet standing and yet withal For it was by the Common Law, before the
Statutes, says Littleton. Sect 170.
most ancient and natural Rule is by comparing with the The limitation of a
Prescription generally taken is from the time that no man's mind runs to the
contrary. Doct. and Stud. f. 19. as if that had been always. And so in the new
Additiens to that Book. Add. 1. f. 4. Also abroad, Ductus aquae eujus or^go
memoriam excesserit, jure constituti loco habetur. ff de aqua quotld l. 3.
Sect. 4. Ac forte non improbabiliter dici potest, non esse hanc rem in sola
praesumptione positam, sed jure gent^um vo^junta^^o inductam hanc legem, ut
possessi o memoriam excedens, non interrupta, nec provocatione ad arbitrum
interpellata. omnino dominium transferret. Credibile est enim in id concessisse
gentes, cum ad pacem communem id vel maxim interesse^. Grot de Iure Bell. l.
2. c. 4. Sect. 9.
knowledge of present men; if within the reach whereof any thing be seen and to
be said as known and remembered, the Possessour is loose, and may be removed; if
otherwise, Melior est conditio possidentis, He that has is secured his
continuance of having.

2. But because this might flag, or prove uncertain, and is always wavering,
some more certain bounds were thought fit to be enquired after, which as stakes
fixed, at least at one end, migh determine huc usque shall inquiry come, and no
further; precisely laying down what might be expected, as 'twere to a year and
a day. As in Glanvils time, the Claim must be laid in some In tract de de leg.
Ang. l. 13. c. 33, 35, 36.
Cases, since the Kings last Voyage into Normandy; in l^b. eod. ca. 3 5, 6.
other, since his Coronation; in l. 2. cap. 3. and l. 12. c 10
Writs of Right, his Grandfather Henry 1. and if on this side these several
limits, nothing could be showed to molest, etc. beyond was as good as nothing.
In Bractons time, under Henry 3. the widest Writ of Bract. de defaltis, c 5. f.
^73. and tract. de excep^ c. 19. Sect. 1. f. 416.
Right was bounded by Henry 2. time, others narrower, according to the
limitation of the 20 H. 3. c 8.
Statute of Merton. In Fleta l. 4 c. 5. Sect 13 p 224. and l 6 c. 6. Sect 3. p.
401.
Fletaes time, who lived (likely) under vid. Seldeni dissert. ad Flet. c. 10
Sect. 2.
Edward 1. from the days of Richard 1. according to the Made about 3 Ed. 1.
Statute of Westminster 1. cap. 38. And this it seems remained to Littletons
time, about Henry 6. for Sect. 170. f. 113.
he mentions the same to be the Hercules Pillar then, beyond which no Claim
could be laid to any thing.

3. But albeit these times of Limitation were reasonable when they were made (I
make bold here to From Cook in his Instit. 2 on the statute of Merton. c. 8. p.
95.
borrow a little piece) yet in process of time (there being set times appointed
in former Kings Reigns, from which as a Barque from the fixed Land the future
went always further and further) the times of necessity grew too large
whereupon many Suits, Troubles and Inconveniences did arise, and therefore the
makers of the Statute of 32 Henry 8. took another and more direct course (by
setting stakes as it were at both ends of the stage,) Which might endure
forever; and that was to impose diligence and vigilance upon him that was to
bring his Action, so that by one constant Law certain Limitations might serve,
both for the time present, and for all the times to come, viz. That the
Demandant should allege Seisin in a Writ of Right not above sixty years next
before the Test of the Writ, in others thirty, in others forty, in others
fifty. This yet left some difficulty, which was after explained in 1 Mar. c. 5.
Queen Mary's time, and pieced out as to some trifling Suits according to much
Cook Instit. ^od p 96.
desire in 21 Iac. 16.
King James his time, and so do things I think remain with us at this day. Now
from these several Limitations of Prescription abroad and at home, and about
them I cannot but note their general end, which was no doubt to prevent Suits
as much as might be, depending on proof remote and of dark days past, by
limiting to forty, fifty, or sixty years, seldom farther, etc. All which it
was also fit to note (...), or at large, that by seeing what has been, not in
this place or that, but All Abroad, we may the better make estimate of what we
shall find in our Case, by comparing the length, (wherein is also the
strength,) of This prescription, with that has been generally reputed enough,
and to establish a Right elsewhere. I confess the thing it self as to the
equity of it seems not to me at first sight altogether so Not Praescriptionem
esse odiosam. gloss. Praesidium ad novel. 9.
fair and reasonable as that Thereon any thing should be settled, or Therefrom
derived; for it seems as it were many times to settle a Quod initio vitiosum
est non potest tractu temporis convalescere ff. de diversis reg. l. 29.
Right upon a Wrong, a Due upon an Exclusion, (perhaps of Right) and at a
venture such a one shall keep, what by Gift, Succession, Escheat, or otherwise
May in due scanning perhaps belong to another: (Perhaps also to him that has
it, But this is Uncertain, and Justice should never proceed but in a regular,
constant, certain, sure way:) And therefore the prudent Nam de iure naturali
praescriptiones non sunt inductae; nam de jure naturali iniquum est aliquem
ditari cum aliena injuria. gloss. Legis. ad Cause. 16. qu. 4. cap. Praesulum.
gloss upon the Decree scarce allows it to be according to the Laws of Equity
and Nay, it is contra naturalem aequitatem. gloss. vel injuria ad ff. de
negotiis gestis. l. 1.
Nature, which would by no means have any one Au old Rule of Pomponius, Iure
naturae ae. quum est, neminem cum alterius detrimento and injuria fieri
locupletiorem. ff. de diversis reg. juris antiq^. lib. 206. and vid. de
condict. indeb. l 14.
enriched by the spoils of another, as here it often is, always may be. But
then again on the contrary part it would also be considered, That there had
much need to be some Omnes actiones infra certum tempus habent limitari. Flet.
li. 6. c. 16. Sect. 3. Tollit amensurationem (dotis) aliquando diuturnitas
temporis in perpetuum, cum omnis querela and omnis actio injuriarum limitata
fit infia certum tempus. Bracton. de Act. dotis. ca. 17. Sect. 5. f. 314.
end of strife; The negligent is but duly punished if he will not come in in
some reasonable time; He knows written in the very face of the Law his peril
if he do not come in to claim his own, nor is it fit Justice should wait ever;
And if Controversies should be admitted of things whose knowledge is so far
off and out of our reach, that almost all the footsteps are worn out by the
continuance of Time, Our life is so brittle, changes so frequent, Arguments
from what we see not so but probable, and yet so many, and on both sides, But
above all the wit of man so fertile and pregnant the quarrelling way, That
still some color would be found out or other, Why that should not be, that is,
and that in the place thereof, which is not, and so our lives would be spent
with quarrelling, as our means with charge: Wherefore, and Ne dominia rerum
sint semper in incerto, as was the gloss before, it was prudently because
necessarily determined to have some end, wherein if there wanted somewhat of
Justice, there might be amends made in freedom from perpetual trouble and
all-consuming charge; some Hercules Club must be found out to strike the matter
home in certainty one way or other, or rather some Alexanders sword, that what
of the Gordian knot could not be untied, it might cut a^under, so here: when it
grew tedious or rather impossible through the manifold complications of crafty
Contrivances to bring the matter, whose whole stage was at a distance, to a
certain end, for certain yet let some end be; and at a venture settle upon the
Possessour: He May have Right, he has had for a long time the Thing, Possession
is many points of the Law, (because every man is supposed at home, and that to
be a Man's own in which he has dwelled a long time without higher
acknowledgement or any ones control,) and this He has had no one can remember
to the contrary but ever: therefore let him Continue to Prescription and
antiquity of time fortifies most^ Titles, and supposes the best beginning Law
can give, Hobards Reports in Slades Case, page 297.
enjoy, and he that was so lazy as not come in some reasonable time for his
Own, let him now see one have it that will be more careful of it, and perhaps
do more good with it. This may not be well, yet better then what is worse, Not
exactly just, but the Good of Peace compensates the Evil of Injury, and a quiet
sudden loss may prove better to the loser then a gainful eternal
contestation. Bono igitur Publico introducta est usucapio and praescriptio: as
Gaius ^ff. l. 41. tit. 3. L. 1.
spoke, This is now then for every ones good: Vt sit aliquid litium finis, as
Fulbeck part. ult. c. 4. f. 20.
another makes it out; for now there will be quietness what ever there be else
or more. Remembered by Cuiac in paratit. ad Cod. l. 7. tit. 34.
Whence Valentinian made thankful memory of his Predecessor Theodosius, as in
favor of humane peace and tranquillity, setting forth his Edict of this nature,
which Cassiodorus called the great Patroness of mankind; And if it do nothing
else, it keeps the Peace, and where Peace is, either ready there are most
worldly commodities, or Non invita sequentur, they will soon follow.

But this prescription that must be thus the sovereign and enriching
Peacemaker, a virtual fine, (in the rational import of that word, quia ponit
finem litibus,) must Nunc autem dicendum qualiter transferuntur (dominia) sine
titulo, traditione, per usucaptionem, sc. per longam, continuam, and pacificam
possessionem ex diuturno tempore and sine traditione, etc. Bracton de acquir.
rerum dom. c. 22.
have three Conditions, which I but name. It must be, 1. Long: (how long has
been said already.) 2. Continual: that is Quod si per naturalem possessionem
possessio interrupta fuerit, a^ die recuperatae possessionis novi triginta anni
in omnibus praescriptionibus numerabuntur. Gratian. Cause. 16. qu. 4 c. 15.

An abator or disseisor dying s^ised after five years quiet possesssion gains
Right to h^s heir, that the owner shall be put to his action, and if he let it
run to sixty, shall never recover. Bacon. of the use ose of the Law p. 25. For,
Vsucapio inde dicta est, quod per usum aliquid cap^t and aufert. Vsus enim per
lapsum temporis a limit ^es corporales priori domino, and transfert in alium.
Calvin. Lexic Iurid. p. 595.


without interruption, by word or deed, by violence or gentle claim. 3.
Peaceable, by the true Owners patient and dead negligence. For if he stir, the
bone cannot settle to grow awry, the Wind blowing hinders the Water for a time
settling into Ice by coagulation; so strength is here forbidden to grow of the
Adversaries Right, by him that if he strives cannot recover his own. And these
three things observed give a conscionable Vsucapiens plenum jus incipit habere.
ff. de rei vindic. L. 17. in fine. Sicut tempus est modus inducendae and
tollendae obligationis, ita erit modus acqui^endae possessionis. Longa enim
possessio (sicut jus) parit jus possidendi and tollit actionem vero domino,
etc. Bract. ubi sup.
Right, against all but one, was said before; Now against him: for Time though
it can do nothing, yet by it are done many things, and though it work not at
all, yet without it is nothing else wrought. Tempus ex suapte natura vim nullam
effectricem habet; Nihil enim fit a tempore, quanquam nihil non fit in tempore,
as G^^t de Iure Belli, l. 2. cap. 4. Sect 1.
one spoke pithily. And therefore, as it is a means of Vid. Flet. l. 4 cap. 5.
Sect. 12. and Bract. de Action. cap. 2. Sect. 13. f. 100.
dissolving, so it is also of Vid* Flet. ca. eod. Sect. 15. Qui rem suam ab
alio teneri sc^t, nec quicquam contradicit multo tempore, is, nisi causa alia
manifest appareat, non videtur id alio fecisse animo, quam quod rem illam in
sua^um rerum numero esse nollet. Grot. de jure bell. lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 5.
contracting obligations; Settling and unsettling, binding, loosing, doing and
undoing. Indeed every thing is done by Time, and without it is done nothing
that is done. The Crooked grows Straight by it, the wrong, right; Usurpation,
Justice; the Invader, an Owner; And he that naught else has but what Length of
Time can give, has (with that, and possession supposed) enough to answer all
that can be said to disturb him.

Which Sovereign, and almost unreasonable privilege is allowed upon
Praescriptionum aliae sunt introductae odio petentis and favore possidentis,
aliae tantum odio petentis. Qui enim bona fide, and justo titulo rem praesentis
per decennium, absentis vero per vicennium tenuerit, perpetua exceptione tutus
erit, non solum adversus alios, sed etiam adversus creditores quibus res ipsa
obligata fuerat, etiam adversus dominum, and shall regain if he be ejected. Si
autem nullo titulo, bona tamen fide per tricennium rem alienam possederit,
simili gaudebit praesidio, etc. Hae possessiones introductae sunt favore
possidentis, and odio petentis, quia lex favet his, qui bona fide, and justo
titulo, vel bona fide tantum possident: odit autem and punit circa rem suam
negligentes and desides. Quod si mala fide rem alienam quis possidere coeperit
post triginta annos adversus omnem petentem exceptione tutus erit. Gratian. ubi
sup. And yet the intruding possessour is after^ards discountenanced what may
be, and by the least occasion set beside the sad^le or kept from recovering:
But the lazy owner shall least and last be reli^ved.
a double consideration, as well of favor to the possessour, as hatred to the
negligent of his own no^seeker: for if he be possessed upon valuable
consideration, bona fide, and deceived but as an honest wise man might be,
there is so much pity of his wrong that he is kept in in favor and for his
wrongs sake: But if he were a mere invader, and as he entered, continue a mere
Usurper, yet so much does Reason and the Law hate him that is ^lothful in his
own interesse, that rather then he shall have any thing, wrong shall take place
( by right) against right, and rather then Justice shall always wait upon him
that neglects himself, her constant purpose of giving every one his due shall
wax weary, and give him only dismission of suit at last instead of remedy.
Currit tempus contra desidiosos, etc. as was said, and though the Law could
even wish too that He should not have it that has, yet in hatred of his sloth
that should seek, He shall never be put out, nor the right owner in.

All this of visible real things, but so as the same rules hold, mutatis
mutandis, of Rights and Services: Whatsoever (being intractable) is possessed
and Dictum est, qualiter, etc. nunc autem dicendum est qualiter acquirit^r
possessio rei incorporalis, sicut possessio juris viz. alicujus servitutis, per
patieatiam, quae trabitur ad consensum and longum usum and pacificum, sine
constitutione vel expressa voluntate. Patientia vero trahitur ad consensum, and
acquiritur possessio juris per usum; ut si dominus proprietatis liberum habens
fundum, ex patientia permiserit uti vicinum suum, praesens and sciens, in sundo
suo, aliqua servitute, ubi jus utendi non habuerit, sicut in pastu p^^orum,
itinere, vel actu vel aquaeductu vel hujusmodi per longum tempus, pacifice sine
interruptione: this presumes leave and creates right. Bracton ubi sup.
owned by use, a continuance of that use conveighing still so much vigor and
proportionable quickness to the thing it self, that it daily increases in
strength more and more: If it were weak it grows strong, If it were not able to
stand alone, it does now, tractu temporis convalescere, and a man Has that he
Had (...), nor can another Forbid, what he might at first have forbidden. As if
a man shall allow a way, an Aquaeduct, and by like reason liberty to come once
a year and take such a thing, a tree from the Forest, the tenth row when the
Coppice is cut, a sheaf or a tenth sheaf out of the field when it is reaped, or
the like: Ex tali usu and patientia praesumitur de consensu and de voluntate:
and ita acquiritur possessio ex tempore, ita quod taliter u^ens sine brevi and
judicio ejici non poterit, etc. as we may say in the words of Bracton. But then
there must be presence, and science, the use must not be clandestine, nor in
the night, etc. and many other such things there are, de quibus hic non est
narrandi locus; but they do not contradict or contravene these things or our
aim or scope.

This I take to be the doctrine, and general nature of this accident, in part
abroad, but most at home, leading to what prescription is, to our purpose: from
which it cannot but be evident, That such a thing there is, The Law allows it,
There is plea for it and from it; In time it binds the hands that were at
liberty, and creates a right to that was at first but a lazy permission, or
courteous concession, or perhaps violent intrusion: We have seen in what time
this may be done, (more then by our bare conjecture,) any limitation scarce
exceeding sixty years; and that in a Writ of Right (the highest with us) the
possessour need not prescribe farther to bar out any pretender. In some
tender special cases indeed, (I should have said,) 100 years were allowed, as
Vt inter divinum publicumque jus, and privata commoda competens discretio ^it,
sancimus, siquis al^quam reliquerit haereditatem, vel legatum, vel fidei
commissum, vel donationis titulo aliquid dederit, vel vendiderit, sive
sacro-sanctis Ecclesiis sive vene^ abilibus Zenon^bus vel prochotrophiis, vel
monasteriis masculorum, vel virginum, vel orphanotrophiis, vel brephotrophiis,
vel gerontocomiis, nec non juri civitatum, vel donatorum, vel venditorum, vel
relictorum eis sit longaeva exactio, nulla temporum solita praescriptione
coa^ctanda. Sed and si in redemptionem captivorum quaedam pecuniae, vel res
relictae, vel legitimo modo donatae sunt; and earum exactionem longissimam esse
censemus. Et nobis quidem cordi erat nullis temporum metis hujusmodi actiones
circumcludi; sed ne videamur in infinitum hanc extendere, longissimum vitae
hominum tempus eligimus: and non aliter eam actionem finiri concedimus nisi
centum annorum curricula excesserint, tunc enim tan^ummodo hujuscemodi
exactiones evanescere sinimus. Cod. de Sacro* sanct. Ecclesiis, l. 23.
in things given to charitable uses which might be claimed within the Century,
(but this after shortened to Vid. in Authent. Quas actiones, there following,
etc. Vt omnes praescriptiones contra Ecclesias, sint 40 annorum. Novel. 131.
cap. 6.
forty:) and in the ancient Vid. Novel 9. and Authent. Quas actiones, alleged
but now, and Gratian* Cause. 13. quest. 2.
endowments of the Church of Rome, and formerly no Instit. lib. 2. tit. 6. de
usucap. Sect. 9.
prescription could run ever against Res Fisci, or Vniversas terras quae a
colonis vel emphyteuticariis dominici jur^s, reipublicae, vel ju^is Sacrorum
Templorum, in qualibet provincia venditae, vel ullo alio pacto al^enatae sunt,
ab his qui perperam atque contra leges cas detinent, nulla longi temporis
praescriptione officiente jubemus restitu^: ita ut nec pretium quidem iniquis
comparatoribus reposcere liceat. Dat- 5. non. Iul. Constable. eal. A. 4. and
Eutropio Coss. Ced. lib. 7. tit. Ne rei dominicae vel templorum vendicatio,
temporis praescriptione submoveatur. L. 2. The title might never be secured,
no^ the purchase recovered.
things of a Temple, or Vsucaptionem recipient maxim res corporales exceptis
rebus sacris, sanctis, publicis, populi Romani, and Civitatum, item liberis
hominibus. ff. lib. 41. tit. 3. L. 9. agreeable to Instit. 2. tit. 6. Sect. 1.
Sacred or Public, or for Laymen, as Pa. 268. in Margin.
before, to take up Tithes, but where any could run, in common affairs, the
Stage was but sixty years of length, or fifty, or forty; Sometimes but twenty,
or ten, or two; And he that came not in within this space of time served a
Prohibition upon himself, He might not though he would at any time ever after.

Now then for application of this general doctrine: and How can This be Then
but All and throughout a firm and strong argument for that I contend for? Are
these things in the Tables of our sacred Law? And Does Time so much of it self
Alone, destroying one man's right, and setting up another? And shall it be
allowed to do nothing alike in a case reflecting on God and Religion, if the
case be the same? And proved? sc. that for so long time the possession (whereof
enough before) has been continued and lengthened here as may make out that is
reasonably called Prescription. Doubtless the Law is still the Same, and that
good in one man's case, (it ought to be so,) that Was in Another, and Where Vbi
eadem est ratio, ibi ide^ jus. Cook Instit. 1 fol. 56. It is a maxim in the Law
of England, that All cas^s lik^* unto other cases shall be judged after the
same Law as other case she. Doct. and Stud. Dial. 2 c 4.
the Reason is the same, It ought to be: for Right knows no Persons or Things,
and prescription or continuance of time should be reasonably interpreted to
do as much For the Church as Custom or the same continuance does and may
Against it. It remains therefore that this only thing be inquired into,
Whether such a Right has been in the Church? and Time out of mind? Sixty
years? or other due length or space that has used to protect and keep safe the
present possessour by exception to any intended ejectment, (which if the whole
doctrine before is of use by all its strength to create Right and secure
continuance Here, The duly and truly prescribing tenant cannot be outed:) And
this is as evident as Story, Record, Books, Writings, or other Memorials of any
sort that give account of past times can evidence or make good unto Us. For,
Ask the oldest man living. What is his knowledge? Ask him farther, Whether he
ever heard his Father say, or that his great Grandfather should tell Him that
in any of theirs or the next Ages before Tenths were not issuable, and ex jure
demandable to the Church out of All Lands? Impannel a Jury of twice twelve
times twenty of the ablest of that County, and the next, and put them upon the
question, Whether they do not know and believe this Custom to be and have
been? Or, lastly, imitate the Conqueror, and send for twelve men out of every
Shire, legibus patriae optime institutos, and sworn (as He did to Them) Vt
quoad possint recto tramite nec ad dextram nec ad sinistram divertentes, legum
suarum sancita patefaciant, nihil praetermittentes, nil addentes, nil
praevaricando mutantes; and Put to them What are their avitae Consuetudines,
and whether this be not one, Ex omni annona decima garba Deo debita est, and
ideo reddenda, and so for the tenth Colt, Lamb, Fliece, Fish, etc? And see what
they will say. Go to the Lawyer, and let him give his Council from his Books,
Reports, Statutes, Laws, or Charters, etc. Let him turn them, as upon
double-feed diligence, and say, whether it be not obvious in his Rolls,
Records, Customs, Cases, Books of Entries, Natura Brevium, Laws, Ordinances,
etc. still a supposition, and glance enough through all Ages to prove the ^ame:
It Is a question of time, let him give instance to the contrary in This or That,
a former or later, Any Age or Kings Reign. Deal but within the compass of
things known, and Christ worshipped, and I dare trust to his ingenuity, for an
answer punctual, home enough, and agreeable to truth. In Hen. 8. time, Hen. 7.
Rich. 3. Edw. 5. and 4. and so, (lik^ the ^obster,) back, back to darkness, and
almost bare names of Kings and Government, and has he not still as evident
mention (by reflection, and as of things that had their proper scene of action
and agitation elsewhere in another room) of these things in his temporal
affairs as any? I would but the whole Issue were-made up into a Demurrer of
this expectation for satisfaction Alone: There is so much ingenuity and
presumed honesty comes along with that learned Gown, assured, that all the sons
of Phoebus (Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan,) or sacred Ministers of
Jesus Christ would expect doubtless no better sentence of Umpirage (either for
the whole or this part of their right) then what his knowledge could, his
readiness would, his justice must and ought, and his conscience nor wills, nor
dares, nor can but give in according to his evidence. I durst rely upon whom I
never tried: Wayward men may calumniate, and wilful men mistake, and weak men
suspect or revile what they do not, perhaps cannot understand; But there is
with that sort of men (the sworn Servants of Justice, and, as they have been
styled, Fortes^. de Laud^bus leg. Angl. cap 8.
Apprentices of the Law) the Quintessence of sound reason and immovable
honesty, profound judgment and vowed integrity, a love of the truth and
painfully acquired knowledge of what it is, that I doubt not but all just and
honest men would have cause to go away from them satisfied, and rest in their
determinations, as of Lovers of Truth, and Oracles of Sincerity.

Take we one for all the rest, M^ Seldom in hi^ Hist. of of Tithes.
and not to be ^et behind any of the rest, who wrote purposely near half a
prescription space of years since upon this argument, even most learnedly. Put
to him whether or no there have not been time enough to make a prescription,
and a prescription, and twice double as much more since Tithes were settled!
(there may be error in my form of expression, but take the thing Hoc unum
petens, ut non verborum Elegantiam, sed vim rerum expendendam putes. Amb.
Epist. 12.
meant,) and if he do not grant enough to this purpose, and More, let Me have
said Nothing. He more then pretends to sift things to the utmost, and with
Curious Diligence and watchful industry to dig down to the root of the ancient
constitution of things, and so give the face of them as they have been from the
beginning without any fucus or deceitful gloss; and though he rove and
fluctuate as long as any, yet he stays soon enough to have somewhat to spare,
and yet prescribe over and over, and over. From his eight Chapter of Laws,
little can be had, but de Jure, of the right, which has not always taken place
in action; (for good Laws have not always had the good hap to conveigh so much
felicity to the world as they might, by being thoroughly and fully Obeyed:) but
in the following he comes home. Chap. 10. He Page 278.
acknowledges some payment under the Saxons by K. Knouts letter yet extant, or
if not, punishment: Many Churches under the Conqueror are Page 280.
marked with, Ibi decimae, in that most authentic memorial of our Nation, or
perhaps this part of the world, the book of Domus-Dei, as in Sussex, Hampshire,
about Basingstoke, etc. though this neither general, nor common then. Other
Page 282.
evidences of dueness and payment are under Hen. 1 and Hen. 2. and to them, And
now they began to settle: A parochial Right is Page 283.
acknowledged and supposed by Alex. 3. and Hadr. 4. in their Epistles hither
treating of them (they lived about the beginning of Hen. 2.) and it were
somewhat hard to disbelieve in matter of fact, such and so solemn asseverations
and depositions. But about Edw. 1. a parochial right is granted by himself,
evident from the Stat. of Circumspecte agatis, and the writ of Right of
advowson, of that date, where the Esplees are chiefly laid in Tithes: Page 285.
And by the practice of the Kingdom it became clear law (as it remains also at
this day, he says) that Regularly, if no other title or discharge, to be
specially pleaded or showed in the allegation of the defendant might appear,
every Parson had a common right to the Tithes of all annual increase (prediall
and mixed) accruing within the limits of his parish, without showing other title
to them in his Libell. After, giving other things, as of Cornwall, from
Chaucer, etc. He Page 288.
concludes plainly the received and acknowledged Parochial right in the
practice of those times, which has to this day continued: Neither is it
necessary to add more for the uniform continuance of it. Save where a Statute
has discharged, or a Modus decimandi, (which being Discharges, do clearly
presuppose and imply one ration:) And this (being a Lawyer, he says) is
Regularly clear Law. Some curiosities there follow, and judicious, useful,
needful disquisitions, but so as nothing impeaches a full and universal
Parochial Right settled nine half hundred years ago, even by his concession:
And he has been generally taken to be no great favoring friend to what more
then needs he must grant in the Churches behalf, though in this particular I
never held him injurious or undeserving: With his grant taken to be most
sparing, he howsoever grants this, and this to our purpose Enough. He avers
moreover Chap. 11. that Page 362.
after Innoc. 3. time, all lands paid according to the Canons; and therefore no
other title was made by the Archdeacon of Jews to the Tithes of Barrington
then in demand, then that the Land lay infra limits Parochiae suae de
Barenton. and chap. 14. giving the history of their Jurisdiction tripartitely,
into 1. that was before the Norman. 2. to Hen. 2. And 3. since: he has enough
to the same purpose, the mind whereof having been given before, needs not to
be here repeated again. And these things at home are agreeable to what was
abroad, as cut out by the same rule: for as times then were, the Canon sat
over all, which how it discharged it self, was showed Page 167.
before, Chap. 7. for Parochial payment by the obeyed Decretals. Cap. cum
contingat. tit. de lecimis Decret. Gregor. l. 3.
Quia perceptio decimarum ad parochiales Ecclesias de Jure communi pertinet, as
the reason is given in case of new broke grounds: and the action accordingly
was, Jure communi fundata intentio, that is, by common right Tithes praediall
and mixed were due to the Parish Rectour, if they were not by some special
title enjoyed by some other Church, or discharged by Canonical exemption:
sect. 1. for they were not so much given or granted by the Owners as then
supposed, or exacted or expected of or from them by virtue of any act of
theirs, as to concession (of the right at first) or after delivery, As they had
been Reserved by God at first, at the grant of all, in signum universalis
dominii, quasi quodam titulo speciali sibi Domino decimas reservante, as the
Law speaks, Never making the right out of himself that it might return: As a
load of Hay, a Mine of Lead or other Metal belonging to the Lord, is not so
much a due issuable out of that land he has let to his Tenant, as a
reservation to himself at first when the Land was let, and he parted with the
fruit of the ground; or as if the same Lord cuts his wood or timber, and
carries it away from his tenants land, His tenant Pays it not, but gives way to
the taking of that was always excepted and reserved; Or as no Manor or Parish
ever laid out any Kings highway, but the King always kept it for his other
subjects out of the grant from himself So, I say, God reserved (the times
seemed to take things so,) the tenth as his part never parted with, and as his
Own (somewhat like a quitrent) it might be seized on Jure communi without any
order or Act of man, by virtue of primary exception or reservation. And
according to these things, the Rector in his libell, Page 151.
upon the allowed Actio Consessoria, needed propose no more then that the
demanded increase arose within his parish, the rest would follow: Which action,
if Durand disallowed, grounded upon common right supposed, and approved rather
of a Condictio ex canone, by some positive made law, (not by general right but
Statute-Canon-Law, or agreed on Constitution) this is all one to my purpose,
and for an allowed granted right in those days, which is all I seek for. Of
what is behither, (trusting to any that pretends to know,) I need say nothing.

All this from one man, yet living, and worthily of fame enough for learning,
not confined by our own seas, nor scarce Christendom, Neither can ^e but know,
and I believe, will be ready to averr many times more in this case; that if
homage were paid to the earthly Lord, rents or services to the public, or any
thing to any man, this, signum universalis dominii, was still allowed to
Religion, (of more public and nearer, inward concernment then any thing else)
even to Gods house (who is supreme Lord of All) and his public service;
neither may his Ministers but prescribe long enough for it, Numb. 18. 21.
as due, under the notion of equivalent to what was Levi's under the law,
Behold I have given them the tenth in Israel ((...)) for their lot, for their
service which they perform in the tabernacle of the congregation.

But now steps forth Doctor Tildesley: Animadversions on Mr. Seldens Hist. of
Tithes.
whom this large extent satisfies not, and therefore he undertakes the higher
dark times of much further, and would not but that universal right and
possession of these dues has been here Coaevall with the Christian law, and of
the same date for beginning as Baptism and the ten Commandments: He
endeavors to reply to the exception, and answer the plea for the broken
payment till about Hen. 2. As from the secundum Antiquam legem debemus, in K.
Knouts Epistle, and sicut praedecessores nostri concesserunt, an ancient grant
Then; from the grave testimony of Austine our first preachers time, inserted
into K. Edwards so famous law; from a likely fair interpretation of those soant
returns of Tithes in I have retained this word all along in difference from the
usual representation thereof, As well because it seems most reasonable giving
something of the bo^k not usually heeded, sc. that it was kep^ In the Church;
As also because I had information from the most Reverend and Learned L. Primate
of Ireland, that it is the same he has seen in many ancient Manuscripts.
Afterward I found the same also in the Latin preface to the third book of the
L. Cooks Reports. The co-incidence of Both which to mine own conjecture before,
did not a little erect and stablish my wavering and doubting confidence.
Domus-Dei Book, that it might be but according to the opinion of the
Inquisitors prevailing (as to the affirmative or negative) in the question of
Expediency or Duty, Whether it were fit or meant they should be returned, etc?
But I examine not the validity of eithers arguments or answers, and as little
mind the seen possibility of more strength on one part, or reply on the other:
let their arguments fight (their minds being in Charity;) which ever prevail,
I have in the mean time gained a certain doubtfulness of those times under
contention, and as much certainty of enough beside since: on This side over and
over sufficient for prescription; Beyond, that which May yet afford more store,
and this from those were able and are famous for their purposed disquisitions.

Now after this abundance together, it may be no doubt superfluous to look
abroad for more. What is within the reach of common observation could hardly
escape their views, especially His, who had examined that and more: What might
be had from history, pleas, writs, statutes, and other information of best but
common credit, would be but to light a candle before His Sun, or as the
gleaning of a little after full heaps, and therefore may well here be spared:
In short, The clear evidence of Things abroad is such, and the light of Truth
concerning them so common beating in every ones eyes, that no one that is fit to
speak, but must have knowledge enough to say, that for Centuries upon
Centuries, ages and generations, and the repeated revolutions of many hundred
years, to create prescription by continuance of paying and receiving, There
has been time enough, and enough, and enough and spare; and if twice five
times sufficient to raise it in another case may here serve, (set aside the
otherwise sufficient pleas of Donation and Possession) none of this will be
wanting with either greatest assurance or fair probability.

It is said there could be none without possession (whereon it is founded,) and
every one knows where the dues are kept all the year; This was prevented
before: for both a Possession, and through coutinuance of time is for that
Right is made use of but once a year, or when there is occasion: Let the truth
represented in a few more lines of Master Seldom be the Coronis of this part.
He observes, Chap. 6. Sect. 2. p. 72.
that out of any continuance alone of voluntary payment a kind of Parochial
right was then created, (speaking of about the ninth Century) though a
voluntary consecration might do the same; and Pa. 78.
afterward, as this wars the cause of Right to a Church whereto they had been
so conveyed; so, Continual Payment of many years did so settle the
perpetual Right of the Tithes of any Family then, that whither soever it
transplanted it self, it must still send whither it had used; as if this
continuance had for ever so bound it, that it might not pay them otherwise.
This then; and it was about seven or eight hundred years ago; How much more
strength then must an usage that has its force and being from time, and so
according to nature, should, (as it does) tractu temporis convalescere; get
vigor in its age, and be more fat and well liking? How much more strength, I
say, must this use have Now, that how much the older it is, is still always so
much the stronger? And if in some Countries there may be a prescription, De non
decimando, totally, and with us it usually prevails, for a Modus decimandi,
which is against the Church, compared in matter of Right or Wrong to an Orphan
before, How much more reason Merito summa habetur Ratio, quae pro Regione
facit. Hobards Reports in Slades Case, page 295.
is there that the Church, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, should prescribe for
her self, then others against it? that that prevail which tends visibly and
likely to the support of the Gospel, then what may prove the ruin and
suppressing of it? whereby the service of God may be upheld, then whereby it
may cease? Shall Time be of force to say, A Right shall Not be paid, and shall
it not settle more firmly, that A Right shall? It must not, Rather then it
must,? In other things prescription is generally a good Plea, for Rights and
things, and so Doubless it is in This.

CHAP. XXXIII.
JAmque opus exegi, and hope I have not failed in either part of my
undertaking, that if either Title of three, and All good be Good, if either
string of three will hold, and all usually strong enough, I have not fallen
short of the proof of a Civil Right, and that by that Law by which here All
things are possessed. Is that any ones is Given him? We have showed plainly
this Donation. Can this gift be confirmed by confirmation? This has been
offered and largely diffused, all abroad abundantly. Is that I have, Mine?
Sure, it is naturally, and none shall deprive me without wrong for Possessions
sake. Now where is the Possession Here, the World sees. May this Right founded
in God, in Heaven Originally, on Man but derivatively, and by consequent
substitution, fright boldest men from laying on their hands, and scambling with
their Maker? What even the Law has said, in this behalf has been heard and
may be remembered. Ought I still have, what I Have had? I challenge a liberty, a
way, a right, a power to present, merely because I have had, and so used: And
this is not here wanting for Ages and Generations. The result of all
questionless, A CIVIL TITLE, firmly: and by these three distinct ways, by which
men Generally enjoy with us, and they have enough in Any, by All meeting is
here a Conspiration of at least a treble sufficiency. Bless we God, who has
not left the support of his Gospel Here to the Good will of Men, and uncertain,
tottering, voluntary Contributions, but as was said at beginning, has given
habitation to this truth (with us in England) Firm and Stable, and by the
helping seconding acts of favoring state raised and established (as to the
outward frame and support thereof) his Temple on the Mount of the same
materials and under equal shelter of temporal strength and firmness, with the
lower buildings of the valley; The Church is as strong, stands as fast as the
manor house, and even as much Lower Law for the Civil Temporal Right of these
Dues, as any other men's Possessions or Inheritances do lay claim to for their
sufficient supportation. This is the Lords doing and wonderful in our eyes, and
so let it be also gracious, and the occasion of much thankfulness with his
People: Looked upon as no other then a Work of his Very favorable providence
for the safe and long Continuance of his own honor, and one of those comforts
that may be among the Greatest to those that love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity; A means of firm establishment of the Gospels Ministry, and to hold
out that blessed light of the Christians Law to us which may be a Lamp to our
feet, and a Lantern to our paths, to guide us into the ways of peace, in
exclusion of Saturn, Jupiter, Mahomet, Frea, Thor, Woden, or whosoever shall go
about to recover or obtain a place of honor in our Temples, now dedicated to
the honor of the most high God, and his Son Jesus Christ, with the Holy Ghost,
to whom be all honor and glory in Them and through the World for ever and
ever. And all these things made good too by no other then those have been
reputed most proper strengths, The Laws of the Land, No other Language almost
used, no other Books, or but rarely, cited, Among that world of Volumes that
are of other things, and some on this subject, in another way, yet none chosen,
or stuck to, but these and the most of them such, and so classical and
authoritative, that they make the Judgment even of the very Judges. I desire
may here not unseasonably be awaked to present remembrance and due observation
which was laid down before, but had There so much amplification, because it was
to have here its present use and operation, and it is, that This Law is here
below in this World, The only Vmpire of all things, the Rule of Right, the
Judge of Own, the Stinter of Strifes, and the only Didoes Thong that makes out
the Line by which the Limit is drawn, that fences Severals from the Common and
among themselves, the only Donor and Continuer, Preserver, Sustainer and
Establisher of Every man's Due and Own, by which he has to himself What he
has, and No one else has any thing to do with His Right or Inheritance: that
gives the Master more then the Servant, the Gentleman more then his Tenant, the
Nobleman more than his Fermour, or the rich and wealthy Merchant then his
neighbor Mechanic; intitles him to his Land (or Rent) fences in his
Enclosure, pales his park, makes a Thief that enters, and takes, and carries
away, and inables him to ask, and have, and sue, and obtain, and recover
against the most stubborn and unconscionable injustice, Whereby he is so far as
he is, Lord and Master of All things. The Law, I say, The Law it self does this
Alone, apportioning thus to every one certainly and justly, to every
fellow-Commoner His Own (in how much disproportion of Quantity soever, with the
same Equality of Justice,) to one man Delicates, to Another but bread; to One
Silks, to Another Frize; to him Robes, to the other scarce Rags: All this does
one and the self same law ministering to each as it lists, whether a Mite or a
Talent, a Garden or a Field, a Palace or a Cotage: And if Then this Law should
fail, this Rule by any device be Made to warp, and this Strong Spring prove now
too weak (in its full force by all Authority) to bring in known dues to Some,
(who have the same claim with All,) who assures that not to Others also, who
can pretend to expect by no further or stronger? If this Judge should not be
able to make good his sentence, If this bountiful hand should wither, and
prove short to reach out allotted proportions to Whomsoever under equal reason
of Right now, Who distinguishes the Sinews, or can warrant their Office long to
quicken and actuate those fingers must reach to the wealthy Their plenty and
abundance? Or not rather doubt their weakness or strength, quickness or
deadness, life and vigor, or lost power and infirmity may have together and to
All (as proceeding fom the same Cause of liveliness or obstruction) the same
Uniformity? This is the Basis whereon all is settled, the Rock whereon all is
placed, the great Bottom whereon all is imbarqued, that in England we call
Goods and kept a floating; If any should think himself so cunning with his
malice (prompted on by his Covetousness, for it can be nothing else,) that He
thinks he can sink a part, boring a hole at that end where his neighbors Goods
are laid up, (the servants of public holy work their wealth and sustenance is
treasured) (without further regard to the Community within,) Let him take heed
ere long he hear Not the loud and shrill Complaints (with fearful Outcries)
of all his fellow perishing Merchants, who are preserved in and by the same,
and whose property and safety must all by Consequent be in danger to be lost or
gained, sink or swim Together, to satisfy the greedy desires of those that
come plainly enough within the compass of Iam. 4 2, 3.
St. James his Character, Ye covet and quarrel, and ask and yet ye have not
because ye would consume it on your lusts. And let great Possessours Chiefly
look to themselves, for -- etc. -- I was going on to due and nearer
application, but the figure Aposiopesis lays my hand upon my lip, and forbids
to speak meaning well, what may be ill interpreted, and therefore prudently and
silently let this inference be left to the working of every ones own Christian
and reasonable thoughts. Only this I cannot but add, That there are seen great
disproportions in the World, and some have notable advantage thereby, The
Ground of All which is the Law: There are very great heaps, enjoyed with
security, and none dares now touch the property of the rich and wealthy in a
farthing; If this be touched and removed or violated, the bound is going that
keeps All from primitive Community, And Therefore they should think much hereon
who Have much to lose; They should love to keep the Fence whole who would not
have All Common, and the boldness must be extraordinary of those other who in
private condition Dare venture to tamper with the Foundation of all Distances,
meddling with that in Politics does as much as the grace of God in Religion
making one Man to differ from another in wheresoever he does differ: 1 Cor. 4 7*
For what have thou thou have not received hereby? 1 Timothy 6. 17.
and that gives us all things plentifully and ichly, sol ely and only to enjoy.

But now some one May say, These are but Logical Arguments, humane Reasonings,
fallible and liable to Mistake; Whereunto I answer as readily, assuredly Even
so, and there is no doubt of it: None so far out of the way as he that thinks
he cannot err, and incurably too, for as much as this persuasion in his mind
is as bad as poison in his soul, hindering all possibility of healing his
error. If then replied what farther probability, It is not so here, and This
is right? Have Others thought the same? Has any thing been done accordingly?
How have the fruit of such persuasions or Actions been exhibited in view and in
things existent? I answer, Well enough: And this leads inquiry into two things
yet behind fitly, and to this place reserved, and they are, 1. What the
Lawyers have given in as their Opinion upon the former or like Grounds. 2. And
what has been D^ne: What the one have thought, and has been the fruit of the
other seen in the World.

And first, Ask the learned in their profession: It uses to be so, and prudence
thinks it has had especial work in such obeyed directions. To the Physician in
doubt of a disease; To the Artificer in a point of skill; To the Divine in a
Case of Conscience; To the Husbandman or Artist in that their callings or
conversations fit them to direct about: Every one of these is wise in his work,
as the wise man says, and we use to rely on the Practiced and Experienced. Go
then to the Student, Ask the Counselor, Move the Judge, Apply to a whole Jury
of Judges, or the Corporation of Learned Men, dispersed through the Land, There
is never a one will set his hand or his thought to the Contrary, or deny it to
This, That Tithes are as due to their due Receivers as any thing else to
whomsoever it is due: He cannot go against his own light, He must know This,
and he ought and will subscribe and do accordingly. 'Twere strange to find one
of a Kind singular from all the rest: He were a Monster of his profession that
had the protuberation of a strange opinion excessive and swelling out of his
bosom, different from all other of his sort: And as such they would look upon
him at Westminster, that should peep out into the world with this new
discovery, that Tithes are any longer Alms, or a Voluntary Benevolence for the
support of Christian truth, not Duty and a Due by strict retributive Justice.
Have they not councelled? Have they not practiced? Have they not judged? Do
they not Judge, and still commit sentence to execution accordingly? And manage
the whole series of their most honorable studies, and employments Still as
upon such a Supposition? Unwilling men have not Given, but Paid: Could they
ever relieve them? They have complained, Their goods upon this pretense have
been taken from them: Where was their remedy? Their Neighbor Bench had
Ordered, Appointed, Given, It should be so: Whence any Comfort! Nay, They, the
Secular Courts themselves have assisted. For if the Consistory appointed, and
the convicted denied to pay, The sentence of Excommunication was Orderly and
Leisurely but Certainly backed with the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, to take
him that refused as a Rebellious Son of the Church into safe Custody of the
State, as contumacious and refractory to allowed orders, Ridley: View of the
Laws par. 3. chap. 2. sect. 2, 3, 5, 6.
and No relief, but still and more assistance and farther prosequution by
whatsoever Ployden and Littleton could do, that one sword might help another.
Nay, themselves have interposed (some say, Too far; the Statute never meant it)
at the first instance, and drove on the Statute of treble damages for Justice
to Execution in their Court: And were they not Just even when they were,
Judging as the King Ahashuerus desired the Queen should be, Vashti according to
Law? Esth. 1. 15.

But to instance in some particulars. Of which those that offer themselves are
too many, therefore I content to take up my self with a few: Beginning with
that right worshipful and learned Benefactor even to the Learning of an
University, the most deserving of Religion, Virtue, Learning, and all Goodness,
Sir Henry Spelman. He was not indeed a Lawyer; but More: Himself bewails the
mis-guiding of his tender years In praefat* ad Glossar. pa. 1. and in his
Treatise of Tithes, pa. 161.
too soon out of the direct way to graduated and professing in that most
excellent knowledge; But he that shall heed the demonstration he gives the
world of his Sufficiency in those Noble Studies by his Glossary and sundry
other exact pieces extant, will be forced to confess him above even measure for
a Professor, and not unworthy to teach some Masters; As having dug down to
the foundation of our Fundamentals, and not unworthy to sit in the highest
Chair of the Learned. Now he tells us in one piece, (as I remember, for I have
not the Book by me,) that although Tithes and other Rights of the Clergy had
not been primarily due unto God, by the (immediate) rule of his Word, yet Are
they Now His, and separate from us by the voluntary gift and dedication of our
ancient Kings and Predecessors: and who shall violate the will of the dead!
whose impiety shall dare alter, change, invert, divert the streams of their
pious bounty, and heavenly inspired charity, out of those channels their wills
set them in, to move toward and end in the advancement of Gods glory! If it be
but a Man's Testament, Gal. 3. 15.
says Saint Paul, who disannulleth or adds thereto, being once confirmed?
and shall not religious indowments be yet more safe, and from violation, being
Given Legacies, and having all possible humane confirmation! And in a Treatise
published since his death, he is yet more express;;It Is fully and solely of the
Right of Tithes, and (taking the subject at large) He begins, That God will
have a part not only of our Time, but Goods: That Christ released not Levi's
part in them: That there is something in nature for That duenesse and
proportion: That they are due by the Ecclesiastical Laws of Councels, by the
imprinted Laws of Nature, by the written Laws of God, by the received
Ordinances of Nations, and lastly, screwing it up to the equal height of our
proposition to a syllable, That they are due (with us) by the Law of our Land.
Chap. 27. pa. 111 etc.
By what Law? the very Secular, Temporal, All-ruling, All-giving, which settles
all men in their possessions and inheritances; and he alleges for it diverse of
those principles which before (as not borrowing of him) we alleged to this
purpose: (whence also we hope We have not been mistaken, because we find his
vote consenting and strengthening ours.) As K. Edwards Law, K. Aethelstanes Law,
K. Edmonds Law, K. Edgar, Knout, and the Confessor, beside the Conquerours:

Heu tot sancitas per plurima saecula leges

as he exclaims: Shall one man's days change all so many! and the fruit of best
humane wisdom so ripened by time, and grown (as an Oak) by leisurely degrees
to greatest Maturity of strength be pulled down by sudden revocation! If the
things were lawfully conferred, ( as none can doubt but they were so,
lawfully,) Then let us consider, ( says he) how fearful a thing it is to pull
them from God! to rend them from the Church! to violate the dedications of our
Fathers! the Oaths of our Ancestors! the Decrees of so many Parliaments! and
finally, to throw our selves into those horrible curses that the whole Kingdom
has contracted with God ( as Nehemiah and the Jews did, Nehem. 10.) should
fall upon them if they transgress herein! Say then that Tithes were not
Originally due unto God, etc. ye^ are we in the case of Nehemiah and the Jews,
Nehem. 10. 32. They made Statutes by themselves to give every year the third
part of a shekel for the service of the house of God. And ( so) our Fathers
made Laws among themselves, to give a portion of their Land, and the tenth part
of their substance, that is, the Parsonages for the service of the house of
God. Deuteronomy 23. 20.
If they were not due before, they are now due: For, When thou vowest a vow
unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay it, for Jehovah thy God
will surely require it of thee, and ^o it should be sin unto thee. Therefore
see Act. 5. 4. If the King give a gift of his inheritance to his son, Ezekiel. 46.
17.
his son shall have it: If he give it to his servant, his servant shall have
it, ( their times:) If the King then give a gift to his Father, that is, God
Almighty, shall not he have it? or, the servant to his Master and Maker, shall
not he enjoy it? Who has power to take that from God, which was given unto him
(if not by virtue of any command from, yet) according to his word, etc.

Thus far that learned and pious Knight: Which yet I have not transcribed so
fully as I meant, because the words of the Laws alleged by him, in the sense
we do, and for proof of the same conclusion, were represented in words at
length before upon occasion; And yet thus much too was needful to show consent,
that we vent not, nor invent of our own, but of the same words make
construction to the same purpose, and have the same apprehension of things upon
the same grounds he both had and gave: Premises and Conclusion the same from
the same; for singularity either of opinion or proof brings always with it some
suspicion. We see, he says and here proves, that beside Canonical, Natural,
Moral, and as it seems unto him, Divine Law, our Civil Laws have added whatever
of strength they can give to create a Topical and English Political home-right
of Dominion and Power: Jure Soli as they use to speak, as well as Jure Poli, to
settle these Dues where they are. The former may have been our Ancestory
Principles and Rules which guided them at first in settling as they did, (and
with these, many things else,) But now we little need to go so far, (unless ex
abundanti,) for Surplusage of strength; for however it may have been disputable
at first of the Natural or Moral right (as of sundry other things, Manours,
Honors, Inheritances, etc.) which concerns also the Indians yet, or other
Infidel Nations, in state that ours once was of, To be converted, where,
nothing public has been done or passed for them; Yet as when Ananias and
Sapphira had given, the state of things was altered, and their Duty or Danger;
So here the Pactional and Civil having made chains of continual and successive
binding Ordinances to hold, retain, and keep these things fast and thus, Now
the principles may stand by, the inference being justly made, stablished and of
force, and without further inquiry, the Stated Made Right must be here enough,
or None have with us any thing.

This worthy and Worshipful Knight (whose degree gave him not so much title to
those honoring Epithetes, as his Worth and true Worthiness, as we would call
it Worthyship, and who honored his Titles, as much as They Him) was a man
singularly Learned, profoundly Judicious, of most tender conscience, and
lively, quick zeal and love of his God, and Christ, and that his flock which we
call the Church: no way interessed, save to his own prejudice, and by his lay
condition rendered incapable to reap any fruit of this Harvest, he here so
earnestly strives to defend from spoil, nor like to eat a bit of that bread,
he here so zealously defends in behalf of the true owners, ( Memoria justi in
benedictionibus;) yet it pleased God to stir up his heart, and he that touched
the Prophet Esays lips, Es. 6. 7.
with a coal from the Altar, no doubt touched his heart and quickened and
directed his mind to indite, and his pen to write and set down many profound
and unanswerable arguments for truth against sacrilege, kept secret from those
that stand always in the house of the Lord in the Courts of the house of our
God, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 135. 2.
the professed and dedicated servants and Votaries of the Temple; and because
uninteressed to make him the fitter and more likely to be successful Champion
of Justice, Truth, and true Religion, in their outward visible supports, then
those whose known interesses would always have taken of and diminished from the
worth or effect of their sufficient, or never so well-meant undertakings and
performances. Which outward supports let them be stirred when they will, (men
may dream and think they prophecy, but) an ordinary Humane eye can in reason
probably foresee nothing but very soon and too sure the decay of Religion, the
fall of the Church (as to outward frame, order, and support,) and Christian
piety it self (I speak in humane consideration still) ready to fal^flat down to
the ground, or degenerate into Natural. God can sustain it miraculously, and
feed his servants waiting on the Ministry thereof now, as he did his people in
the Wilderness, 1 Kings 17. 6.
or the Prophet Elijah by a Raven, or yet more miraculously without any meat at
all; or perhaps in as equally strange and wonderful way, by the men of this
world their voluntary Benevolence: But speak according to inferior
probabilities as things depend here on their causes, or in humane expectation,
which is to be our lower rule, and thus, He that considers the Course of this
world, the fleight estimation that most have of the best things, the
stony-heartednesse of men to part with what they Once Have, the necessity of
bread for man to live on, and the unlikeliness of enough to come in for this
end any other way, Cannot but conclude (the rather, because some Preachers have
been reported starved of late, One by very likely information I knew,
conformable enough to the times, yea zealous for them,) that there is much
cause to Fear, lest the Light fail with the Candlestick, the Ministry fall
with the Means holding it up, the Gospel be a silent word when there is no
voice of a Preacher, nor will be Preaching much longer then holds out this
Maintenance. Those Laborers of the Lords Harvest fixed in their stations are
not like to be preserved much longer in Being, Health, Order and Number, then
this accustomed food is allowed them which they may Claim as their Own (not
being beholding to Others, or Depending, which is always grievous to ingenuous
natures,) But as they labor so be sure to live. Plenty and delicacy are not
the things stood upon: Religion, though she know how to abound, as well as to
want, and how to dispose of superfluity as well any other, yet she cares not or
stands not much upon Wine and Cates; Let the Epicures and men of this world
hunt after this draugh and sensual contentments whose empty and carnal souls
know no other means of contentment or comfort, Phil. 3. 19.
whose Belly is their God, and Glory their shame, minding the Earth, as the
Apostle speaks, and whose care is only to feed, grow fat, and lie down with
the Swine, it is much to be doubted also to rise with him: But Being and Comfort
are those Blessings which even the Children of God desire to be made partakers
of in this world with submission to the will of their Heavenly Father, To have
to live of their Own, and not be burdensome but rather helpful to others, their
reasonable desire, And that they may find the Scripture true, 1 Cor. 9. 11.
They that sow spiritual, it is no great matter if they reap temporal; and
Gal. 6. 6.
Let the Catechumene (He that is taught) commnnicate unto his Catechist, (or
Teacher) (which how can it be done better then in the way of the Tenth of all?)
(...), in all things necessary, or as it is usually rendered in all his Goods.
This is that men In this world though not of this world, will always stand upon
while they live here below in this scratching and scambling world for honest as
well as necessary ends; O that mine eyes could spy a way, if that which Is,
men's greedy parcimony and stubborn persisting in Unjust as well as Covetous
desires will have no denial but they will be left at liberty to pull away, How
a constant supply should come in (while men have souls,) to support an Army of
near For, near so many distinct Parishes there are in England already, besides
needful Chapels, and seems much requisiteness of more by the overgrown bulk
of Diverse in Sundry laces since the last distribution.
ten thousand able Commanders, who should praeside and govern (decently,
orderly, and as becomes the Ministers of Christ) over so many dispersed
Congregations. The slender endowment of many Vicarages not hitherto at all
increased, The wretched allowance of little more then some Shepherds wages
usual for Cure of souls, and by the bounty of the Parish seldom or very
little augmented, The yet worse way in many other places, where was more
liberty of raising a support by voluntary rate and less expectation according
to Law or Obligation by it, Do give cause of even Trembling fear to think, when
this liberty shall be enlarged to All, and men be bound to pay no more, then
what they can be content to allow themselves to be forced to part with, Whether
then there will be almost any discharge of Cure at all, or the weekly sacrifice
perhaps altogether cease, if the necessary supply of means for the outward
bodily labor, should be suffered to come in in that Experienced scant way,
which has hitherto left the highest and best house in the Parish no better
furnished with a Levite to serve (or rather to starve souls) then were
Jeroboams Priests heretofore, 1 King. 13. 33.
the lowest of the people? O Christian, if thou be, look upon the
Impropriations (as styled) in general, Behold there the Image of Pharaohs lean
kine in the slender slack allowance usual, a next to Beggarly Exhibition of
what would little more then keep a single simple man alive to Read, where
Legal indowment had stated no more, A Faulkoners or some good Journey man's
entertainment exceeding what was usually allowed by the Rectour who received
all the Tenth from the people, And yet worse of my knowledge where the
free-will-offering of the people of a Parish has not for all the Kings Reign,
nor does yet raise above half a good Shepherds wages, about sixescore
shillings yearly for the Shepherd of souls; And then, if thou have any Bowels
of compassion over souls, keep them from earning if thou Can, If thou have
pity or love to Religion or Christian Men, think hereof and judge accordingly.
Experience, the Mistress of Fools may at some times perhaps teach wise men more
wisdom; Let it at least furnish us with Caution, by what has been to make some
estimate what is like to be, What may, or will, or perhaps Must; and to be
wary, look back, and Compare where no stated set allowance has been by Dues to
be sued for, and then judge. I do not speak absolutely: I am no Prophet or the
son of a Prophet, Our foresight of things in their causes is always here but
dim and as of Probabilities; The suffering every man to walk in the ways of his
own heart, in this matter, and to follow the light of his own eyes, May tend I
confess to not the worst prejudice, or by altering but to snuff the light that
it may burn clearer and to more content of those shall both maintain and use
it; yet no man has cause to be offended with my jealousy in the things of my
God, tenderest care and fear of the worst about his Honor, or that in zeal to
the worship of his Name I pour out my soul in devout supplication, God grant
it tend not to put the Light clean out! Heavens vouchsafe this great favor to
Earth that Covetousness triumph not over Religion, and Having away what is thus
Coveted, lead to and end in worse then Popish even Heathenish darkness! For
this I know, Heathendome (as the word was when it went off,) was here before
Tithes were paid, Never effectually expelled but by them (outwardly, the Grace
of God concurring:) The fence and Bulwark they have been that have kept out
both it and other Errors God knows how many; If the fence be removed, whether
the Beasts of the Common will not break in? if the bank be cut, whether
naturally there be not like to be a return of former inundations ridven and
kept out thereby? is left to reasonable judgment; we can but guess, God only
knows. This by the way: to return.

Our next impartial Council we crave leave to take Master Seldom, who seems to
offer himself in his printed Declarations: Learned Council indeed, and being
Lay, and so altogether uninteressed for benifit ever will be presumed to speak
with the more indifferency: and, when truth and the state of things permits, he
comes up and fully home, as can be desired. He fluctuates indeed in time as
long as any, but settles with the more judgment at last, and ask that
chooses and sifteth his Corn has lightly better bread then he that takes what
comes in his way, or out of the full heap: So he that first examines, and then
judges. Crave leave then to ask his opinion, Are Tithes justly civilly due? He
has already declared himself in public in the hearing of all the world. Take
but the sixth part of what he has laid down in his History, and it may be
abundantly enough. Or but Secure the Jurisdiction, and That, as has been often
said, is sufficient, the rest will follow of it self, for which Cast an eye
back to what was said before. Will Possession do, or so much time as may create
Praescription? for this also he has said, and there has been given from him
enough, which may not here procure trouble by tedious repetition. Remember what
he said was Clear Law, and since Edw. 1. time a Parochial Right Universal. It
is not more certain that he wrote, then that in way to his design of, An
History of What Had been, he lets fall enough for Now due and the Right that
is: which bottom the result of his painful disquisitions often settles upon.
These two are the chief, and their testimony given in upon record, more then
public which goes forth to All, and being in Books deserves that of the Psalm,
Their sound is gone out into all Lands, and their words unto the ends of the
world: Perhaps may be read and acknowledged in the Indies. Now after these it
may be superfluous to add the other that offer themselves, and in no less
public way still, the Press, that usually speaks with a thousand voices at
once, and is heard, to any distance, the Echo may remain to all generations;
As, W. C. in his Tything Table, printed in the Queens time, and reprinted
often since, it is in the hands of all men, and rivels out the general Subject
into many particulars: Doctor Sir Tho. Ridley, In his view of the Law, par. 3.
who has labored not unprofitably in the same argument: Master Hughes of
Grays Inn, His Book is called, The Parsons Law: and Judge Dodderidge (or
Bracton the second, for so I would compare and parallel their profound
soliditie) in his, Complete Parson: More there are others, scarce any One man
knows how many, and they all contribute their united and uninteressed vote and
sentence hereto, proving sometimes, but mostly supposing a Right, which is
more, though the two former I chiefly rely upon. Ask the next man met, and if
he know any thing, I know he must know this, and will I believe give it in
Co-attestation with All, Nor can he approve himself an English man that has
brow, (for brains he has little or none, knowledge either of Discourse or
Experience,) that can upon deliberation deny it.

CHAP. XXXIV.
IT remains next, Whether any thing has been Done accordingly? Men have thus
interpreted Laws; but their Sayings how many, or confident, or grave soever,
though bearded with authority, alter not the Nature of Things, The exhibition
whereof in Deed and View is that Real proof men most look upon in the World
and more, beyond the strongest Opinion or best interpretation; and What has
been then seen the effect or Work of these Word and Book-suppositions? I
answer; as much as well can be supposed or imagined; with assurance enough too,
even to the disposition and transposition of the tenth part of the wealth and
Revenue of the land. For among All sorts of persons that had any thing, in All
places, There is never a Parish in the Land, or Person of Cense and Possession,
but the experience hereof has been given yearly in His estate, and submission
to that power, that from one man to another created Right, according to
received and obeyed Law: It was but Ask and Have, Seek and obtain, expect the
season when the Course of Nature brought forth things in kind, and take the
tenth as it arose; None did mutire contra or resist or but obey. The Issue (as
before intimated) was but Commonly either the Bounds, or Certainty of the
Parish; If these two were well proved (whereof only could be doubt) the rest
came in of it self, and the force of these grounds of Law as before, so
interpreted as now, carried the Tenth fleece, the Tenth Lamb, the Tenth Lock,
Heap, or Sheaf, etc. all upon a Supposition All was right, and this as often as
the things grew Due and demanded. Nor needed the Plaintiff (that his quality,
though he might go under another name) to cast out for any Law, a Combination
of Which, and the whole of a sort, united and deeply founded was always in his
behalf Now touching the discharging of tithes themselves, and the pleading them
at the Common Law, It is to be observed, that they are things of Common right,
and do of Right belong unto the Church. And therefore though it be true, that
before the Council of Laterane, there were no parishes nor parishpriests that
could claim them, but a Man might give them to What spiritual person be would,
yet since parishes were erected, they are due to the Parson (except in certain
special regular Cases) or V^car of the parish: and therefore when you have a
prohibition for discuarge, ( of the validity whereof, and when to take place,
he is there speaking) You must consider it is a plea in bar against Common
Right to a demand of Tithes which is a Common Right, though they be in several
Courts, as by a Release either in Deed or Law. Hobarts Reports in Slades Case,
page 296.
supposed: This was put into his Libell, tam de Jure communi and Ecclesiastico,
quam de antiqua, laudabili, legitimeque praescripta consuet udine, jus
percipiendi, recipiendi, and habendi omnes and singulas decimas tam majores,
quam minores mixtas and minutas infra Parochiam de N. provenientes, crescentes,
renovantes, and contingentes, ad Rectorem Rectoriae de N. spectat and pertinet,
etc. and this a set way as in the secular form of pleading upon Briefs, which
were always the same, like the laws of the Medes and Persians, without
alteration; Nor may we well suppose any error to have crept in, or been
admitted or retained Here, in that plea, which was a ventilation or exact
discussion of the tenth part of the profits of the Kingdom. There is much both
law and Constancy in those set forms, it is very hard to suggest or foist in any
error to those known inviolable pieces; to Stat. of West. 2. c. 1, 4, 35, and
41, 13. Edw. 1. Stat. of Merchants, c. 1. Stat. of Quo warranto, 30. Edw. 1
raise or alter a Writ, requires and has had the legislative power of the
Kingdom: Of the like certainty, use, evidence and inviolable firm constancy and
immutability was (no doubt) the way of transacting things here: If we light
upon truth anywhere, we may hope for it in those lines which have been so often
handled and reviewed, and which have themselves handled and disposed of so much
of every man's estate, as in the whole amounts to that part which is the tenth
of every thing. Some of many would have found the fault, if there had been any,
nor could the iniquity have remained unespyed, in that most men had their eye
upon, and suffered by whereas none did Here, Therefore it is very likely to
have been good and Right which All as Such have looked upon, and None been able
to espy therein Error or falsity.

Thus to the Cause have we subjoyned the Effect: To the Law before, interpreted
now, the use and fruit in disposition of men's estates, Their wealth that dearly
beloved of their souls with much patience being suffered to be transposed and
change masters by its power, And sentences were to this purpose as usual as
trials. According whereto followed no doubt execution; who knows any thing
knows this by daily everywhere experience, and as before we might not suppose
forms of practiced law erroneous and deceitful, So here, that they should,
being such, have found so ready and universal obedience, or that a wrongful
sentence should have intruded to take place, especially since to general
prejudice; Draining men's purses of much of every thing, and they (the whole
world) so fast asleep, that no suspicion was stirred up of the legerdemain; Nor
so much as any outcry heard of so spreading and universal wrongful
incroachment. Surely no: There was no such thing; but a Just sentence upon due
proceeding: Both cause and effect, Rule and Order, Law and execution were
according to Right: and as in any other the Kings Courts, these
temporal-spiritual things were orderly and legally disposed of and settled Here,
by that law, which orders, disposes, setleth, and even Gives all things.

Upon all which would follow also one thing more, That if all these things be
Thus, Not Colors but of substanceand reality, If such law have so passed and
ought to be obeyed, and has, And to part with be now by virtue thereof Not to
Give but Pay, Debitum Justitiae, and of Right Ought (to the service of God) not
Debitum Charitatis, a bequest of love and good Will: Hereby is way made, not
only of bringing home these Dues safe and sure to their Right owners the Just
Claimers; but also of bringing home further all those forceable exhortations to
the payment of them in Gospel-dayes* to Gods service, even under those Strong
reasons which were heretofore used by the Prophets and wise good men under the
Temple and Law; And with us may be said, Give and Pay these due Debenturs to
the Christian service as well and upon the same grounds as they heretofore used,
and by which they were then urged to be paid. For they required them but as
Due, Due to God, ( sc. for his service) Due by their Law, Sacred in their
Polity, and which Immediately came from God: Now although we do not so plead
them as strictly (here) due by any divine Law among us given on the Mount, or
written with the finger of Gods hand, yet they are by that Law: and Sacred too,
and apportioning them to God, that is his service too, which, as before giving
them, is ratified and confirmed (as all Just powers and Laws are) by him that
dwells on the Mount, who approves and sets to his seal to be Just and Good,
whatsoever Orders, Ordinances, Laws or devices his people (as so many
additionary, explicatory, or Bylaws for the good, peace and order of the place
where they live, not crossing the Common) shall make for establishing and
perpetuating his honor by means of their own created Justice, and so a kind
of Divine, and certain, though Mediate and consequentiall way of confirmation
they have from the powers above still; At least ground enough to say in the
sense of heretofore, Ecclus. 35. 10.
Give the Lord his Due with a good eye, and Consecrate thy tithes with
gladness; Give (yea Pay) unto the most High according as he has enriched thee,
and as thou have gotten give with a good eye; that Law which is in a sense his
Sacred law has commanded it: For, Levit. 27. 30.
All the tithe of the Land, of the seed of the land, or the fruit of the tree
is the LORDS (Now) Holy to the LORD: And, concerning the tithe of the Heard or
of the flock, whatsoever passes under the Rod, it is now holy to the Lord
likewise: Therefore Deuteronomy. 14, 22.
thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field brings
forth year by year, and Mal. 3. 8.
Bring All into the storehouse, and try whether the Windows of heaven shall not
be opened for recompense. My Tithe into my Storehouse: for Number. 18. 20.
Behold they are given, (If not I have given, I have ratified their gifts who
have given them) to the Levites of the New Testament, for the services they
serve in this tabernacle of the Christian Congregation. Moses said, Exodus 22.
Decimas and primitias non tardabis offerre Domino, as in the Old Latin: And
King Alfred says, Thine Tything-scot, etc. give thou to God, in his translation
and imposition of that law upon us, (which our just government, and by
consequent Our God approves:) K. Ethelbert said, K. Offa said, K. Ethelwlph,
K. Edmund, K. Edward said so (both the elder and younger on this and that side
the Norman turn) beside other, and it has been digested, received, approved
obeyed and practiced by in our Leges Sacratissimae, quae constringunt homjnum
vitas, intelligi ab omnibus debent. Cod. de leg. l. 9.
Sacred Common Law, if I may so speak, that they Must and ought: And so We as
They require Them, in the words of Scripture, the same words as They, and to
the same general end, upon the same ground of a kind of English Sacred-Law.
Pardon that Epithete, and admit a Justification: As such I look upon and May
call all those which being Civil and Common as Sanctions even with us have a
touch as it were and Derivation from God, and so All Sanctity or Sacredness
cannot simply be abstracted from them. As the Wise, and in his memory so much
reverenced Chancellor Fortescue averred and justified to our young Edw. 4. King
Henry the sixth his Son in his banishment, making every Lawyer a kind of
Priest, and so far forth officiating in his Cure, as he duly and reverendly
gives forth the things of this Sacred Justice and Law. It has place where he is
counselling him not to regard Military exercises alone, but to enrich his mind
with noblest indowments of knowledge and piety, setting for his pattern, The
Prince of Israel, who was Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.
councelled to keep always a copy of the Holy law by him, and to read therein
all the days of his life, that he might learn to fear JEHOVAH his God, etc.
Yea, Haec ut audivit Princeps, crecto in senem vultu, sic locutus est. Scio,
Cancellarie, quod liber Deuter. quem tu commomoras, sacrae scriptura vclumen
est; liges quoque and ceremoniae in eo consoriptae etiam sacrae sunt, a domino
edita and per Moysen promulgata: ^uare eas legere sancta contemplationts dula
cedo est. Sed lex ad cujus scientiam me invitas, humana est, ab hominibus
edita, and tractans terrena: quo, licet Moses ad Douter. lecturam Reges Israel
astrinxerit, eum per hoc reges alios, ad consimiliter faciendum in suis
legibus, con^itasse, omnem off^git rationem, eum utriusque lectura non sit
eadem causa. At Cancellarius, Scio, etc. Scire igitur te volo, quod non solum
Deuter. leges, sed and omnes leges humanae facrae sunt, quo lex sub his verbis
definitur: Lex est sanctio sancta, jubons honesta, and prohibens contraria:
Sanctum enim esse oportet, quod esse sanctum definitum est. Ius etiam describi
perhibetur, quod illud est ars boni and aequi, cujus merito quis nos Sacerdotes
appellat. Sacerdos enim quasi Sacra dans. vel Sacra docens, per etymologiam
dicitur, quia ut dicunt Iura, leges sacrae sunt, quo eas ministrantes and
docentes, Sacerdotes appellantur. A Deo etiam sunt omnes leges editae, quae ab
homine promulgantur; Nam, cum dicat Apostolus, quod omnis potestas a Domino Deo
est, leges ab homine conditae, qui ad hoc a domino recipit potestatem, etam a
Deo constituuntur, dicente authore causarum ( Aristotele) Quicquid facit causa
secunda, facit and causa prima, altiori and nobiliori modo. Quare Iosaphat, etc.

Ex quibus erudiris, quod leges, licet humanas, addiscere, est addiscere leges
Sacras and editiones Dei, quo eorum studium non vacat a dulcedine consolationis
Sanctae. Fortesc. de legibus Angl. cap. 2, and 3.


answers the Prince, This well concerned Him, for those Laws had to him
another tincture of Divine authority which to us is wiped of, having none of
that high qualification. No, not so neither (replied he) as to sanctity we are
not without All law unabrogated: for all humane laws are to those, whose they
are, Sacred from the definition. For what is a law it self, but Sanctio Sancta
jubens honesta, prohibens contraria: (which Vid. Gloss. lex est. ad Just. 1. de
Iur. not. and gent sect. 4. and Gloss. non faciendorum. ad ff. de segibus
Senatusque. lib. 1.
he might borrow from the Civilian) A sacred Quomodo leges sanctae, vid. ff. de
rerum divis. and qualitat, l. 9. sect. 3.
sanction, bidding what Good is, forbidding the Contrary? and that must needs
have sanctity in its nature, into whose definition it is wrought and
embroydered: And therefore the Art of administering those laws makes us Priests:
for what is a Priest but he that ministers in Sacred matters, teaching holy
things? We do so, we give out sacred Justice, Therefore we are Priests. And
all Laws are from (...). ff. de leg. Senatusque L. 2.
God, though published by Man: For whereas Romans 13. 1.
the Apostle says, All Power is from God; The Powers that are, are ordained by
Him, Law made by such derived Authority, derives farther, and impresses the
stamp of Authority from the first Cause through All, for as much as, Whatsoever
is the Cause of a Cause, is also a Cause of the thing Caused. Whence 2 Chronicles.
19. 6. God is with you in judgment. So Exodus 18. 19. Do thus and God will be
with thee.
Josaphat to his Judges, Ye do Gods work, Ye judge not for Man, but for the
Lord. So that Every Law is then Holy, Every Statesman may look upon himself as
a kind of Priest, every Magistrate a (...). Romans 13. 4 Dei enim minister est.
And, Ministri Dei sunt. ver 6.
kind of Minister of Holy things, (Their Study gives them such, though their
Trade may be unrighteousness) and no word can better fit a dying Patriot then
these of Eleazar, 2 Mac. 6. (...), to be ready to die for the sacred and
venerable Laws of his Country.

Thus then All Laws are Sacred, as derived from God, and backed with his
authority, though made by man, and so Ours, and so that which is of this fort
in particular: which occasions fit and full application of those Texts of
Scripture in the just import of the words and their full vigor of sense to
have Tithes brought in, as thus Scripture now requires (these Acts of State and
Right supposed, which also are) and they sin against that Sacred Law, yea a
double sacred Law, Man's and Gods, (in Man's or above Man's, having Man's under
it,) who do not Pay. Some question has been hitherto of the Albeit we be be
now free from the Law of Moses, and consequently not thereby bound to the
payment of Tithes; yet because Nature has taught Men to Honor God with their
substance, and Scripture has los^ us an Example of that Particular proportion,
which for Moral Considerations has been thought fittest by him whose wisdom
could best judge; Futhermore, seeing that the Church of Christ has long
sithence entered into Obligation; It seems in these days a Question altogether
vain and superfluous, whether Tithes be a matter of Divine Right, Because,
howsoever at the first it might have been thought doubtful, our Case is
clearly the same now with theirs, unto whom St. Peter sometims spoke, While it
was whole, it was whole Thine, When our Tithes might have probably seemed our
Own, we had Color of liberty to use them as we saw good; but having made them
His whose they Are, let us be warned by other meant example what it is (...), to
wash or clip that Coin has on it the mark of God. Hookers. Eccles. Polit l. 5.
Sect. 79. p. 429.
Jus divinum, whether now Any such be of force to bring in this Revenue of the
Temple among us? and there be that affirm as well as that deny, as they find
light or darkness in the Letter of the Scripture (which, immediately, they rely
on) in their apprehensions: But this strife may now be well stinted, unless for
double strength among us, for as much as in a certain clear, but mediate and
consequent way (the Act of Man having given, and the Authority of God above
confirming what is done below) that divine print reaches through no doubt in
the way has been showed, and cannot but stamp somewhat of heavenly and the
Supreme Power upon the Acts that have passed of Men, and so for the
Commandments sake, yea for that is by derivation, approbation and undoubted
confirmation the Divine Commandments sake, they are now Due and must not but be
paid, as in Israel. Rebus sic stantibus, or as things have passed and now are
and remain, they are (I say) unquestionably Thus due by Divine Right. For the
Magistrate is Gods If an^ one shall prove troublesome and stir Tumults,
Confestim opera ac diligentia famuli Dei (meipsnm dico) poenas suae inscitiae
dabit: says Coustantine the Emperor. Theodor. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 20.
Minister, Every just Law His Ordinance, Vox Legis, Vox Dei, and every syllable
and sound thereof quickened with an additional spirit of divine infusion,
(according to our Scriptures, and as we have from Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. and other
places.) And since then here the Magistrate and the Law have proclaimed for
them, whither they be due as in Moses to Israel, by the Text of Leviticus, or
by virtue of any Gospel, or the Epistle to the Hebrews, seems not so much
material, at least not necessarily considerable, for as much as though this
were considerable at first, yet now they are Here fast enough by what the
Magistrate has done for them by his Vicarious power and substitute authority.
The Powers that are are still ordained of God, as was also said before; He
sticks not to set to his Seal to what has been orderly past in lower Courts,
approving and commanding what they prudently and justly do, and it ought not,
for Gos sake, but be obeyed: so that whether the general take hold or no, or
universal, that Where ever the Gospel is preached this shall be part of its
obedience, and the Labourer is worthy of this hire, by divine Right; We have
here a sure word of Righteousness, enough whereunto we may do well to take
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, and if Not the General Divine
Law, Decima ut Dives fias, or, Non tardabis offerre Deo Decimas, yet the other
General is topical, and directly binding in our Meridian and Clime, sc. that we
must Do justice, That we must Romans 1. 3.
Render to every one his Due for the Lords sake: Phil. 4. 8.
Whatsoever is just as well as whatsoever is Pure, Matthew. 22, 21.
To Caesar the things that are His, and to God the things that are Gods: And
Thus The Law of God, (This Law) is thus brought about as quickening and so
confirming Man's, and the duty hereby to Us moral, even to every English
Christian, because This is sure such and most undoubtedly, Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
That which is just and right, That O Christian shall Thou do. So the thing be
brought about, no great matter which way; As if the Arrow hit the Mark little
inquiry how it came thither; Now Divine Authority backing (of which there is
enough,) and seconding humane Ordinances, The rest is easy, and unless for
double strength (as said) we have not so much need to inquire for a Divine
Letter, because we arrive at the same point safe and sure in the other way of
Humane: for if Man have settled, and God commanded to be paid, He have given,
and the Magistrate, who is Gods Vicar, allow and enjoin payment; Now even for
Conscience sake that may not be omitted, And whether the Scripture or Nature
say any thing in the Case particularly home, They say enough in establishing
humane Ordinances, (which will bring God along with them,) and Man for God must
not but pay what Man has settled for Gods Commandment sake. So in this (new)
way here is Jus Divinum, or Divine Right still Mediate and Consequential, but
sure and certain, which perhaps may not be in Virginia or New England, where
the Gospel may be yet in full vigor, or in Madagascar, or Japan, if the same
holy Rule should there find obedience; The Climate alters, and some particular
things done Here, which (I think,) There have not, and thence indeed This
difference and Our preferment: And suppose they, (that is either those remote
strangers, or our Brethren at home that Rely on Divine Right in scriptis or the
very Letter of the Law,) should lose all with that Letter of Scripture, and
their proofs falling short from Text or Reason, they therewith fall short of
all proof, yet in this Our way we keep enough in derivation of Consequence, and
by Preadvantage of a Civil Title granted and settled, we gain also another of
another sort, Divine but Mediate, accumulate and lasting, even when the
immediate and literal is (in reality or supposition) taken away

In short, we need not doubt of a Divine Right, Here, with Us, while there is a
humane Ordinance prevailing, and a Divine inspired 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Apostle speaking from God, we must Obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lords
sake: The first of which has had attempt of plentiful proof, submitted to
judgment, and of the last no Christian admits doubt. Yet speak I not any of
this last to evacuate or infirm that or their opinion who go another way to
stablish the opinion of Divine Right by their fair and solid Arguments from the
Text, as if I would withdraw men's minds from the love and estimation of their
Gold, pretending here is Silver, and then if this fail after a while they are
wiped of both, and have to trust to Neither: No, these are several, and this
Another, but not a contrary or cross Way pointed to, they do not justle but are
very well and fairly consistent and composeable one with the other, and this
prop of Wood may help, if that pillar of Brass fail (or be misplaced,) This
string may hold, if that chance to break, or perverse men will not be held by
it; And in this additional or supplemental way it may be acceptable also to
those who are more strict for the divine Right immediate, which, be it what it
will I keep promise of within the Circle of mine own Sphere, Be that, or be it
not, This I believe is, and this advantage enough hereby if we have it. To
conclude, let the things be considered as before alleged from the parts of
the Law dispersed, Council interpreting, and (which is most material to
Exposition,) the practice and Seen Force of the Law thereby, and we cannot from
them I think, but conclude, 1. A certainty of Civil Right, and by that bottom
of rooted Law, that gives all things. 2. A probability of Divine Right, mediate
and consequential. At least the first, and with much assurance, Id quod erat
demonstrandum.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IT remains for inference and application to the just conscience, that every
sober and well-meaning Honest man quietly and orderly compose himself then to
his duty in obedience, and if this burden be duly and fitly laid on, and on
Him, to take it up and go away with it as contented, not wrangling or
quarrelling to his due shame and abominable sin, as well as manifest injustice
and dangerously seditious disturbance, But be satified with his own, and give
out to others with willingness what is theirs, He acknowledges and must
acknowledge, and not His. My Lot may be of the Receiving part; If it be, I may
justly expect mine own, and require it, and demand it, and unless my Christian
persuasion be against going to Law for any thing (which has color from 1 Cor.
6. 1, 6, 7.) if it be denied, as for any other Right, sue for it. Or if my lot
be on the paying part here I have both leave and duty, not to Do all things
without murmurings and disputings, that ye may be blameless and harmless, the
Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
among whom ye shine as Lights in the world, holding forth ( thus) the word of
life, that I may have comfort of you in the day of Christ, that I have not run
in vain, nor labored in vain, Phil. 2. 14, 15, 16. See also 1 Cor 10. 10 and
Jude ver. 16. Sure this is a Gospel sin.
murmr or complain, shift or evade, but meekly, gently, and Christianlike do
what belongs to me, reckoning my self no Honest man, unless I have thus much
Honesty to be Content to give every man his Due, yea not as the Ox or the
Slave, merely for fear of the whip, but from forwardness and readiness,
quickened by the inspiration of my Religion, whatsoever I do (as unto the Lord
or unto Men) doing it Heartily and willingly, as knowing I am bound to keep my
rank ( Romans 13. 1, 5.
(...)) not only for wrath but for Conscience sake. For 2 Cor. 6. 7.
God loves a cheerful Giver, and a cheerful Doer, and it is the great
commendation of Christian Religion that it makes or leaves none slow or
indifferent in any good Duty, but adds wings to the weary or heavy doubting
soul, more readily, effectually, and cheerfully to do every thing ought to be
done for the Lords sake? It Is said there are some whose Consciences will not
give them leave to issue forth these Dues, according to legal Obligation and
and all just expectation, even as just as any is in the world; But I ask almost
in the same words, whether their Consciences will give them leave to pay their
Dues? A Just Assesment? Stated Rights? A Quit Rent, a Fine, a Releif, or any
Just Imposition? Set aside Leviticus, Malachi, the Epistle to the Hebrews, yea
the whole Bible: This Rentcharge as it were, is so due by Civil Justice; will
they now be Honest Men? If they answer but Roundly and home to this, I have as
much as I desire. Will their Consciences give them leave to pay their Debts?
what is doomed such? If this be not a Debt to the due Receiver, a yearly profit
issuing out of their Lands to another use by Law, Nothing is due here in
England, and for this is the strength of the whole Treatise going before. Thou
say, I cannot prove Tithes due by the Law of God; I went not about it, but
if I can by the Law of Man, this is enough for thee: thou reply, Leviticus
is abrogated, the Hebrews dark, Abraham's and Jacobs but examples; But will thou
pay a Custom, or Toll, or Tribute, or legal Taxation? Is a Rentcharge due, or
Relief, or Quit-Rent? By what Obligation soever thou shall confess There, by
the same and of equal strength I will make good my Plea here; Where art thou
now? Will thou pay both or none? What but English Sacred Law gives the one? and
the same gives the other: Pay or deny, both or neither, the equity is of equal
measure, strength, and evidence for both together: O Christian, let not the
World deceive thee: Let not the God of this World blind thine eyes: If thy
Covetousness hinder not, thy Conscience may well serve thee to pay thy Dues,
yea, would Constrain thee, that is more then Permit, for true Religion does
more then Give leave, Command, and Enjoin men to be Just and Righteous.

Nor let any one say, These are Trifles, far below the height of Heaven: May
not a man keep a good Christians Conscience to God without troubling himself
with these Levitical Ceremonies? Hearken man, This is a part of our Moral
Righteousness, as things are Now with Us a part of Necessary Justice; A man can
be with Us No more Unrighteous or Unhonest then he can here make light of this
part of his legal Duty. Nor let him say, I have given my name to Heaven, I have
weightier things in consideration, Must I interrupt or pull down my higher
thoughts from devotion faith and Spirituals to these, which when a Pharisee
boasted exact obedience of, he remained but a Pharisee? O Good Man value things
as they are; Thou will not neglect Earth I hope in order to Heaven, or suffer
thy Religion to leave thee Not Honest or Unjust; Must thou not deal Truly in
these lower things before thou art fit to be trusted in higher? Or is Moral
Justice an Heathen virtue, mere stranger to the power of Godliness, and Not
regarded at all by the God of the Christians? Does not thine own Savior say,
(Believe not me, but believe Him, and believe me but as I do with fidelity and
trust dispense the the Truths of, for, and from Him,) that Luc. 16. 10, 11.
He that is faithful in the least is faithful also in much; He that is unjust
in the least is unjust also in much; If therefore ye have not been faithful in
the Unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your Trust the True Riches? Nor let
any further excuse with the pretense of the Nature of Things, He has weaned
himself from these lower to better: Faith, hope, praise and prayer, etc. do so
take him up that meaner things have less regard justly, He is for the Height
of Holiness. And I will believe him as soon, as that, He has climbed the
Pinacles of Solomon's Temple, who is scarce got up the steps of Solomon's Porch,
That he that is Unjust can be Holy, or that Good man fitted to be a Citizen of
the new Jerusalem, a Freeman of the Kingdom of Heaven, Who wants necessary
qualifications to live in an honest, well-governed Commonwealth on Earth. Shall
Heaven be furnished out with Dishonest men? or the legal Members of that City
be Defrauders and Deceivers? Does not the 1 Cor. 6 9.
Apostle say, (What can be plainer? Be not deceived, (Some are apt to think
so,) That the Unjust, Idolaters, thievesor covetous shall ever Inherit the
Kingdom of God. And such were some of you, But ye are now washed, (or else had
no hopes there) but ye are cleansed, but ye are purified, Apoc. 22. 15.
but ye are justified. Without are Dogs and evil Doers. Thou art apt to condemn
a Thief or a Robber, the cry of the whole Country is against Him, What! He
that grows Rich by spoil, takes another Man's Goods! I confess, his crime is
something more, but that a part, and his whole sin, and will thou take the
cross to that of the Apostle, Romans 14. 22.
Blessed is He that condemns not himself in the thing that he allows; Chap.
2. 3.
Thou that Judge another, John 16 9.
Do Thou the same thing? We are bid to make us friends with the Mammon of
Unrighteousness that when need is, we may find Everlasting succor: Sure this
by Just dealing at least, I believe more by unjust or unnecessary Giving. Is
not Unrighteousness sin among Christians? or True dealing, to Give every One
his own, only a superfluous part of Goodness? Welfare then Achab and Judas. 2 Samuel 12. 4, 5.
That Oppressor had too severe a censure in Nathans Parable for taking away
the poor man's Lamb, Luke 23. 42.
and the Thief upon the Cross committed a work of supererogation in repenting
his theft in the way to his Paradise. Phil. 2. 18, 19.
Saint Paul needed not have cared for Onesimus debt, nor the sons of Jacob
excuse the stealing of the Genesis 42. 35.
Plate, (if it had been so:) Luk 19. 8.
Zacheus stood forth, and out of superstitious piety Gave to the poor, and if I
have wronged any, I restore him fourfold. Ono. These vile things of the Earth
have Heaven at one end, We may make us bags that wax not old, Chap. 12. 33.
or lay up treasure in Hell with them as we use or abuse them; Mat. 25. 35. etc.
Christ will pronounce sentence upon Those Dispensations at the last day, and
if we shall be punished for not being merciful, what farther if we be unjust
and injurious! Is the Word our Rule! Brother Christian, Believe thou the
Scriptures? Act. 26. 27.
If thou do, stand fast to thy ground, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Hold fast the form of sound words as they were delivered and thou did
receive them, Make good thy faith also in thy works seen before men, and let
thy life be a justification of thy belief, a counterpart or exemplification of
Thy book of Religion. Be assured of this, there is not held forth any where in
the world a better picture of An honest Just man then in those sacred leaves is
described and painted out to the life, Which every believer is bound to be by
his Religion; Obedience or Exhibition of himself Such must render him (the
Child of God) such a Just Dealer therewith, And thy necessary conformity to
that Law shall make thee A Pattern to all the world for Heathen Honesty. This
is a part of that (...) or Transformation in difference from that Conformity to
the unjustsinful world before, Romans 12. 2. Dress thy self by this glass, and
thou will not count thy self ready without this habit, Adorn thy self by these
directions, and thou must put on this Moral qualification, ('It Is a part of the
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. ult.) nay, shine bright in it, 1
Cor. 15. 58.
abounding in this work of the Lord, or thou art no warrantable Christian.

Shall this be now disputed or doubted? Shall I stain the reputation of
Christian Doctrine by this that it has not as clear as day, that every
Proselyte thereof must give every man his due? or, it may leave me as wild and
conscience less as a Thieving Tartar or wild Arabian that takes what he can
get, and parts not with what he can keep? I may not sit down with, Being just
only, for the power of my faith brings about and should bring in all parts of
Civil Justice by a Stronger Spring then is to be found again in the world, I
must do Right for Conscience sake, I must do No Wrong for fear of Heaven
seeing me, Genesis 39. 9.
( how should I do this Evil, and sin against God? as Joseph;) I must not take
or withhold, or retain, or not give out what belongs to another sub poeua^ignis
gehennae under the most intolerable penalty of assured and believed Hell fire,
Come home yet more near, we pretend to our age of Light: Have we heard so many
Sermons, waited upon God so long in his Ordinances, Sanctified every return of
his holy Sabbath, Wrestled with him as Jacob in daily long Prayers, set aside
so many whole special days for Fasting and Humiliation to seek the Lord while
he may be found, and call upon him while he is not utterly gone to the Indians,
Tartars, or other Nations, that yet know not God, and shall we arrive at the
last with all this pains at this point of persection, that we are now come to
doubt whether we may do right or wrong! Prove. 23. 10. And Therewith c^mpare
what before, pa. 37. and pa. 244.
whether we may equal the injustice of Entering the field of the fatherless,
whose revenger is Mighty! whether we may not invade, covet, take, hold, or
withhold, what has been showed to belong in Right to another! If it Do, we will
yet have it, and hold it, and not part with it, though (if we believe our
Bible,) we know we shall be burned in the soul for it, with a coal of Ignis
fortis, or rather of Ignis inextinguibilis, that fire of Hell will never be
quenched! Do we continue to boast of light from Heaven, the Sun shining clear
in the Firmament by the allowed use of Scripture, and the bright beams thereof
dispersing and darting their full power daily from the Pulpit such a long day
as has outlasted the years of many generations, with so many repeated
impressions and dispersions of Numberless Numbers of English Bibles, that it
has been an amazement to some that live near the wellhead whence those
waters of the Sanctuary flow, and others conjecture the Enemy buys them up to
burn them in private, since in public and for Heretical yet he cannot, And
shall the English fruit of all this promising seed time be, our doubts come out
seriously in any of the scandalous ways before, or our carnal hearts have
admitted no operation to obedience in such clear and undoubted evident matters,
But alas, some part of our Neighbors Due enclosure we would take in and hedge
to our own, though we make bold with the hedge of Gods Law for it, His
corruptible wealth we cover, His silver or gold we take or withhold, (or what
has equal right) His Mammon of unrighteousness, as we account, we tantum non
sacrilegiously seize upon for our selves, and to prevent his idolatry, we put
it into a private place, as it were, that we Our selves may worship it! We love
it, we desire it, we keep it, we cherish it, we will not part with it, though
God himself become intercessor for Justice, and stand as it were at the
Magistrates elbow, backing his command with a higher accessory Authority, Nec
vox hominem sonat, there is somewhat more then merely humane in that loud and
public voice of The allowed Law, at least Aliquid Divini, which God uses to
impart to that substitution of himself and Vicarious power, Romans 13. 2,
which whose resists, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that do so
resist, must look to receive to themselves damnation. What shall we say to
this, if the enemy should lay this to our Charge? (as be we sure God will be
our enemy, and put it home severely unless we repent and amend.) Is this a part
of our Gospel-righteousness! a fruit of our holy Religion! that will consist
with our Justification by Faith, and shall we furnish him with arguments or
sophismes enough against that opinion or the consequents thereof by Such a
Life! John 12 35.
While we have the Light, do we thus walk in the Light? Mat 7 16.
giving him occasion to say, These are the works we see they do, ( By their
fruits shall ye know them,) We know it of them, for we see it: This is the
Harvest has been long a growing, and the fruit they reap among themselves of
their many years use in freedom of their English Bible. Now the Lord rebuke
thee Satan, that thus sit between the lips of seduced benighted men, to
blaspheme the ways of the living God, or the courses or things they do not or
will not understand, not distinguishing between Heavens blessing and Man's
abuse, the fruit of Gods Ordinance and Man's Corruption; and the same God give
his servants grace to carry themselves so inoffensively in word and deed, that
no merit of their misdemeanour may hereafter give occasion of such reproach,
but behaving themselves in all things as the servants of God, 1 Pet. 3 16.
and having a good conscience, whereas men speak evil of them, as of evil
doers, They may be ashamed that falsely accuse their good conversation in
Christ; Chap. 2. 12.
having also honest conversation among the Nations of the world, that they may
by good works they see Done, glorify God in the day of visitation. This sure,
the English Bible is a rule good enough of all righteousness, profitable for
doctrine, reproof, 2 Timothy 3 16, 17.
correction, instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect; the light thereof
shines from above and guides thereto, and the end of its obedience undoubtedly
everlasting life. Which blessed Book since so lighted on again, let us a little
sit still to turn the leaves thereof only, it may fit our close to end with
God, perhaps we may there meet with some Angel of His in the way, with his
sword ready drawn in his hand to stop our Career in stubbornest resolution to
go on in the ways of our own heart; I will suppose clear what proved that the
Ministry has right, (as things stand) right, and their spoliation is wrong;
and then O brother Christian, Go along with me, and see what thou will say to
thine own believed, received, inspired, and that thy self take for Gospel (
So R. Verstegan compounds and derives that word: as if it were God^-spell Spell
(...) a Mystical Speech, or an Oracle, Antiq. pa. 223.
Gods-spel,) thy revererenced Divine Oracles.

And first, does not that Heavenly Law forbid generally All Exo 29 5. Ps. 5.
5.-28. ^-36. 2.-37 1-66. 18. Eccles 3 16. Es. 5. 18.-57. 17. Matthew. 17 23. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Tit. 2 14.
Iniquity, Exodus 20. 21.-23. 9. Psalm. 12 5. Prove 14. 21.-22 16.-28. 3 Ier. 7 6.
Ezekiel. 22 7. Amos 4 1 Mich 2. 2. Zechar. 7. 10 Iam 2 6.
Oppression, Exodus 20. 15. Lev. ^9 11. Deu. 5 19 Pro. 30. 9. Ier. 7 9 Hos. 4.
2. Matthew 15. 19.-19. 8 Mar. 10. 19 L^k. 18. 20. Romans 2. 21. Chap. 13 9* Ephesians. 4.
28 Rev. 9. 21.
Theft, Lev. 19 13. 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4. Mar 10. 19. 1 Cor. 6 8. 2 Cor. 7. 2 Iam. 5
4.
Fraud, Job. 19 7. Ier 22. 3. ^3. 1 Cor. 6* 8 Col. 3. 25.
Injury, Lev. 19. 13 Psa 119 61 Pro. 21. 7.-22 ^2. Will a ^an rob God? yet ye
have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and
Offerings Ye are cursed with a Curse, for ye have robbed me, this whole Nation.
Mal. 3. 8, 9.
Robbery, Exodus 22. 12* Matthew 23 25. 1 Cor. 10. 11.-6. 10.
Surreption, Extortion; and that 1 Thessalonians 4. ^.
No man go beyond and defraud his brother in any (worldly) thing, for God is of
all such things the Revenger most severe, as is everywhere said and testified!
Does not one of the Ten Commandments (which children learn in their
Catechismes) appoint, Thou shall not take what is another, Thou shall not
steal. And may thou then pervert, suppress, withhold, detain, and keep to
thy benefit what belongs to another, and tends to his impoverishment as well as
stealing, perhaps to his starving, certainly to the Wronging both of himself
and family? Is this no sin in thy Christian judgment? -- Does not another of
the same Laws say, Thou shall not Covet ^What? thy Neighbors House, Wife,
Servant, Ox, Ass; and that All? Is it not as well his Sheaf, Lamb, Fliece,
Apple, or Egg? for the reason is the same of both: Or, do thou think God
will be so pinned up in his holy and just intentions against All wrong to some
straitning interpretations of thine, as may leave Thee loop-holes open,
evasions or shelter for in any thing thy wretched Covetousness? Be not
Deceived, God is not mocked; To covet is the sin, not This or That, It Is the
injurious intent not greatness or kind of the object of that injury is
forbidden; And to make all sure, the close winds up all in the largest and
most comprehensive Universality, Not this, nor that, but, Nor Any thing that is
thy Neighbors. Look upon them again: These are two of Moses Commandments, of
Gods Laws, ('it is much in so small an Enchiridion or Summary of duty, the same
should find a double place by prohibition and repetition) engraven on Tables
of Stone, but a transcript from the bosom at first (a true Ectypon of that
Original,) of which our Redeemer and Lawgiver, Matthew. 5. 18.
says, Heaven and Earth may pass but these shall not, and which thou art with
equal strictness bound to keep, as that, Thou shall not ly, Thou shall not
blaspheme, Thou shall not murder, Thou shall not commit adultery. Will thou
not These? Dare thou Those? May thou not murder! Would thou Covet?
Will thou not Ly, and yet Stealest? Romans 2. 22, 23, 24
Or, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest Thou Sacrilege? Thou that boastest
of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God, as well as
disgracest thy self, as it is written, The Name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles thus. As if any of them shall see us breaking our own Law, transgress
our Gods Commandments, trample upon his Precepts, and make no care of the
revelations of his Holy Will, not half so much as of an Ordinance of
Parliament, Will they not blaspheme, traduce, rail, revile, nay, maledicere,
Even Curse and profane our God, that has such untowardly disobedient servants!
Will they think him a God! or think we Think him Such, if we thus misbehave our
selves toward him! Iam. 2* 10, 11.
Does not Saint James say, He that breaks the Law in One point is guilty of
All? and upon this account, because He that says, Do not commit adultery,
says also, Do not Kill, (or Steal, or Covet,) (the image of Authority defaced
is the same) and do Thou break Two and hopest to be innocent? Never justify
thy self that thou swearest not, if thou lie: Or, thou speak truth in
Civil matters, if thou blaspheme: Or, thou do not kill, if thou steal or
covet. He that defaces the image of that authority shining from God upon All
the Law that procures its Reverence, it is not far from his accounting any part
a Common word, forasmuch as the same boldness that has removed respect from
any part, will by like occasion or temptation take off what is no better
fastened nor can be any where: He that dares venture on the Chalice, needs not
or will not scruple at taking the Carpet, or Bible, or Pulpit-cloth. It Is not a
broken collection, but a full and even Decalogue, All are equally Gods
Commands, and backed with his authority engraven and shining in the face of
every one, As was said, Heaven and Earth may pass away, but none of these shall
pass. It is God thou must answer not Man for neglect and transgression here,
Whose Law thou have broken, Not but more then Whom in Temporals thou have
injured and Wronged. In the day when God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ,
remember then thou have been told Both, both that He that breaks the Law in
one point, is guilty of All, and He who wrongs Here, breaks it in two, in
Coveting and Taking.

Heed next what Thy Savior says, and this is at least Gospel-Law; Matthew. 5*
20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed (says He) (Yours, Ours, Anies, that is
his Disciple) the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not
enter into my Kingdom of Heaven: Now what was Their Righteousness? They paid
dues Duly: Questionless they did so, else they had not been Themselves, that
is, Righteous. And for this Particular, by the Providence of God it is so come
to pass, that we have repeated double assurance, and from Christ's own words
again, what was their Righteousness This Way. First, in his Personating a Proud
Boaster amongst them, Luke 18. 12.
that He paid Tithes of all he possessed. Which if He had not, the supposition
had been an untruth, the Man made to speak nothing to the purpose, Nor had he
been brought in truly Commending, but indeed Belying himself, That he should
have done that he did not. Next in that Comparative exprobration, Matthew. 23. 23.
where we have that Exactness that they Paid All to the least, They left none
out to very Mixed Annis and Cummin, which our Savior says, They Ought ( So it
was their Righteousness) to have done, and yet not have left Justice and Mercy
undone. So that no doubt can be but they Paid, they paid duly, they paid of
All, and this was Their Righteousness; and yet Christ to His Disciples, unless
yours shall both Equal and Exceed Theirs and This, ye must not look to come
within my Kingdom. Nor let any one observe here Duty on their part, They were
bound: True they were so, but are we altogether Free? Have we not a Rule of
Righteousness, in some sort as strictly binding as Theirs, to make obedience
duty, not performance Supererogation? and we as well as they are required not
to give but pay? What else are those Laws before alleged many, and yet of
force? Are they not All so many rules of Doing, or directing right forward in
what way we must go, or we go amiss; and so by consequent our Conformity to
them, our being Ruled by them must bring home the imputation to us of Going
right forward or amiss, in the way of Righteousness or Unrighteousness, that We
may be Just or Unjust as they?

We have no Levitical Law perhaps indeed, no Jus Divinum, (at least not within
my circle or which I insist on, though I forsake it not, much less disclaim or
oppose it:) But we have yet without that enough of our own, and to bind fast
enough, a Rule, a Law, Sacred, in force, and binding, as has been showed, and
whereto we ought to take heed as that which in some regard was parallel with
Saint Peter's sure word of Prophecy, and is our light and rule to guide us
through the darkness and uncertainty of this world: the transgression whereof
is also penal and with us ^infull too (for every disorderly liver is likewise
a Sinner to God,) and it Must have the imputation of Righteousness or
Unrighteousness, as We neglect or observe Here this Sacred, National, English
Rule of our Doings. Naught else is the ground of Property, of Any property,
that renders theft possible, or Wrong the Relative to Right; This is the
boundary of Fields and Vineyards, cuts out to All their Lordships and
Inheritances; and to obey or disobey, break or keep This, makes us as Culpable
or Just, Righteous or Unrighteous, as by observing or transgressing his
Judicial Law the Hebrew could have been in Israel. No question but we have Law
the Rule of Righteousness, as binding to us as the Hebrews in their Polity; we
may be as Righteous as they, and yet if we be not more, we fall short of our
High hopes; for verily (says Christ) unless your Righteousness (that are my
Disciples) shall exceed that (parallel) of the Pharisees, ye shall never enter
the Kingdom of God.

Or, likest thou better another Rule of thy Savior? It has in it as much of
wisdom and equity for civil Commerce as I believe is to be found in so many
words in the world again. Old Tobit had given it in the Negative before, Do to
no other what thy self hate. Tobit 4 15.
But Christ changed it to the Affirmative, Matthew. 7. 12.
Therefore All things, whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, Luke 6.
31.
even so do ye unto them, for this is both (Text and Exposition,) Law and
Prophets. A most indifferent Rule, equal restriction, which nature suggests,
Reason approves, Religion inforces, and All Nations, Persuasions and Men, will
I believe say Amen to the Equity of: Thine own Savior has enrolled it into the
Sacred Tables of his Law too, the sum of his Moral Pandects, a short but full
Declaration of needful Duty, and do thou resolve to obey, or refuse? If to
obey, Ask thy self, Whether Thou would be content another should thrust thee
out of thy Rightful Right? If thou had a livelihood to direct and minister
in Gods service, or but to serve thy self eating and drinking, Would Thou
embrace it as acceptable good dealing (any otherwise, then as thou would
submit to persecution) to be turned out into the Highways, and Hedges, to get
what thou could find in the Forest, embracing the Hills for a shelter, and
the Rocks for a covering? If thou were in present by due and honest forms of
Law inducted and possessed A. B. Rector Ecclesiae Parochialis de C. and so tam
de Jure Communi and Ecclesiastico, quam de antiqua, laudabili, legitimeque
praescripta consuetudine jus percipiendi, recipiendi, and habendi omnes and
singulas Decimas tam majores quam minores mixtas and minutas infra Parochiam de
C. provenientes, crescentes, renovantes, and contingentes, did of right belong
unto thee, (as was before in the Libel, and if proved carried the Tenth,)
Would thou, discharging thy duty, and carrying thy self according to Law for
what thou receivest by Law, be willing thy Neighbor should deprive thee of
That Own? and having right to receive the Tenth by the same title He retains
his Nine, and would count him a Thief should take any away, Think well of it
that the great Fish should eat up the little one to make his panch swell, the
Nine should devour thy Tenth, and thou be turned out of the Sweet and Safe of
thy Property to a good allowance, thou have no reason to doubt or fear, thy
good Neighbors will afford (for the labourer is worthy of his hire) in Charity
and Equity? Some Overseers Careful care shall see thy bowels fed, thy nakedness
covered, thy needs supplied, thy poverty relieved, thy whole family sustained?
Put thy self in case of his person Now under doubt of being brought to this
state by thee, Deal impartially between God and thy soul, satisfy thine own
thoughts in the proposition and resolution, and if Thou could accept, perhaps
thy Brother May: If Thou Would be so done to, thou may the rather expect it
of Him: Petimusque damusque vicissim, What thou could be content to undergo,
thou may with more reason impose to have suffered. But if Thou abhorrest the
inconveniences foreseen in this way, Thy Nature (regenerate or unregenerate,
sanctified or profane) hate the lowness or vileness if not baseness that must
be consequent upon such an injury (when thou should not have left what thou
could call Thine Own,) Thou would not by choice part with thy Right any
more then suffer an Extortioner to deprive thee of that thou have, or the
stranger to spoil thy labor; Nay, Thou would defend thy self as against a
foraigner, a Spanyard, an Indian, or a Thief; Then think what thou would put
upon another, State thine own Case in another person, as Nathan taught David
to see his Sin in the supposition of his poor Neighbor, Invade not thy
brother, Put not Him besides his Right, Enter not His Possession, Disturb not
His property: Allow Him the Comfort and Assurance of his His Own, which thou
would rather spend to the utmost farthing, if not Die, rather then suffer thy
self to be put out of, to stand to the Courtesy of Supplied with any
Charitable allowance. Good Christian, Do as thou would be done unto, walk by
thy Rule, Live as thou Believe, or shelter not thy self under Profession with
those of Whom thou art not Thou have no reason to further or put upon one, what
should not upon another, to force on his acceptance what another would decline,
or upon thy ne^ghbour what mainly Thou declinest Thy Self: Thou may think I
have the same affections, desires, needs, necessities, the whole body of
humanity and humane frailties belonging thereto to be supplied or yielded to
that thou have; The same infirmities, diseases, emptiness, nakedness, to be
fed, clothed, relieved, and in all regards worthy consideration as and in the
way thou requirest, If Thou would not trust to Nothing, if Thy self would
not be turned to the shame and misery of penniless bench, If Thy Love of this
world consisting well enough with the Love of God would not be outed of Plenty
and Wealth, stripped of property and left to uncertainty, (...), Be but as just
and reasonable as old Tobit desired his Son, Tobit 4. 15.
Do to None ((...), No not to One) what thou thy self hate. Iam. 1. 22.
Whatsoever thou professest, or receivest, or believe, Be a Doer of the Word,
not a Knower only, Romans 2. 13.
lest thou deceive thy self: for Not These shall be justified before God, Iam.
2. 14.
but Those; And, What does it profit a Man that he say He has faith, and has
not works, shall that faith Save? Ver. 21.
Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, Ver. 26.
when he offered his Son on the Altar? Whence we see, ^by Works was his faith
made perfect: And as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without
Works is dead also. I urge an Apostles words only in His meaning, and that
must sure imply Heterodox in opinion from none that is in Religion truly
Christian. Proceed: Is there any such Thing as The fear of God! Does any Text
of the Old or New Testament mention it clearly to duty? Do thou Believe it?
and that thou have it, or ought to have it? and Can thou then take or
detain that which belongs to another? or lay hold, or keep hold of thy
Neighbors Goods? Do not the Principles of thy Religion improve and heighten
the inbred persuasions of Nature, Teaching, and assuring thee first, That this
is Wrong, yea (...) and so (...) Transgression and Sin, and dare thou Then do
it, when thy Judge looks on! pretend to fear God, and yet do what he Hates,
and yet thou fear him, Ecclus. 34. 21.
and yet thou art confident to disobey him! Or, if thy filial awful fear be
not yet awakened, let me Knock louder with that Thundering threat of thy
Savior, Luke 12. 4, 5. And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them
that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will
forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has
power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, Fear him.

Did not Zacheus, Christ his host, come in with his injuries in his hand, and
before he makes any question of his Salvation, openly professes his
Restitution? Behold, Lord, Luke 19. 8, 9. Discimus ab exemplo quid faciendum
sit iis quos peccatorum poenitet Primum enim quatenus fieri potest, resarcienda
sunt damna aliis pervi^ aut dolum illata, quod ipsa natura dictat: Neque enim
peccare desistit qui alien^ retinet. Grot. in loc. pa 789. Pecc^ tum non
dimittitu^ nisi restituatur ablatum. Reg. Iur. Canon. 4. and Peccati venia non
datur nisi correcto Reg. 5.
says he, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any
thing by false accusation, I restore him fourfold: Then Jesus said unto him
(Comfortably,) Then and not before, This day is salvation come to thy house.
This (whether stranger or home-born,) demonstrated him to be one of the Sons of
Abraham. This is The way back by weeping cross: In the fore-Right of Injury no
end probably foreseen but in Hell. He that Repents, must Amend: He that
Amends, will Restore: For while the injury remains, is no alteration, and
without alteration is no to better state-restitution. In the Scripture still,
Does not the Old and New Testament require and join to call for Justice, Truth,
Fidelity, Honesty? That which is Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
Just and Right shall thou do, and Philip. 4 3.
whatsoever is Just, as well as whatsoever is Holy: and Romans 12. 17. Chap. 1.
18.
Provide things honest in the sight of Man as well as God; And sure the world
counts this Honest, to give every one His own, the very Syllables of Romans 13.
7. Render therefore to All their Dues, whether Tribute, Custom, Fear, or
Honor: And Owe Nothing, but to Love. Or, if we do not, The wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven (even to true Believers,) against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold if it be the Truth, in iniquity. Which, Iniqui
Regnum Dei non possidebunt, 1 Cor. 6. 9. and Know ye not that it is so, It is
Postulatum, a thing grounded among Christians, and with Caution, Be not
deceived: (Some may tell you otherwise;) The unrighteous, and who are They?
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, (...), unfit to be Englished, (good
company! and with them) nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Railers, nor
Extortioners, a good part of them those that meddle with other men's goods
whether by force or fraud, in deed or desire, subtraction or detention, violent
Extortion or clancular Surreption, the sin, because the wrong, is the same, and
Be not deceived, Do ye not know that These shall not Inherit Gods Kingdom!
Should not the Kingdom of his sanctified and just Congregation, (his Church,)
Here, but be cast out by Excommunication with profane Heathens, but shall not
his holy and glorious Church of the firstborn hereafter, where the imputation
of moral Righteousness shall be the lowest qualification, The holiness of
Saints shall be those white and shining glorious Robes without which F^llow
Peace with Al^, and HOLINESS without which No one shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.
14. Blessed are the P^re in heart, for they shall have this advancement. Matthew.
^. 8.
none shall be admitted to that Bride-chamber. Indeed such were some of you
sometimes; but ye were washed (in Baptism) sanctified (from the first
uncleanness) justified (from the other unrighteousness) in the Name of Christ,
and by the (searching) Spirit of our God, and so are now a Ephesians 5. 27.
pure Church not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but walking ver^ 15.
Circumspectly ((...) exactly, precisely,) 1 Thessalonians* ^. 22 Ab omni specie mali.
avoiding the very appearance of Evil, and Iud. ver. 23.
hating the garment that is but spotted with the flesh.

Besides, we Know Love is the fulfilling of the Law; the sum of the Christians
Law; The first, second, and third thing required, All is briefly comprehended
in it, and can this Consist with wrong? Do I love my neighbor when I injure
him, when I oppress him, and will not give him mine own, nor will not give him
His own? Is this Justice? far below Love! Is not Mercy and Pity a strong piece
of humane good Nature? Compassion to one that needs (much more to one that has
Right) the top pinnacle of Christianity? I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice,
says Matthew. 9. 13. chap. 12 7.
Christ Hosea 6. 6.
from the Law, and my Disciples shall be kept alive rather then the Sabbath
sanctified: And do these things Consist with Wolvish Cruelty and wrong? to
spoil a man and his inheritance? to Rob a man of his Right, or not to give him
his Right? Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, says the Prophet, and bow
my self before the High God? Micah. 6. 6, 7, 8.
Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings and calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams? or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil?
My firstborn for my transgression? the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? No: He has showed thee, O man, what is Good, and what does Jehovah
require, but to do Justly, and to love MERCY, and to walk humbly with thy God?
So in another Prophet, To what purpose is the multitude of sacrifices? I am
full of the burnt-offerings of Rams, Esai 1. 11.
and the fat of fed beasts. Bring no more vain Oblations: Incense is an
abomination before me: your new Moons and Sabbaths, (All these God himself
commanded) the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, etc. But what then?
Wash you and make you clean: Put away your evil doings, Seek judgment, Relieve
the oppressed, etc. and then come and let us reason together. And least any
should think these are Old Testament Duties, S. James has left Pure Religion to
consist in Such things, chap. 1. 27. What! has the meek Gospel brought in
Cruelty and hard-heartedness? Does the Christian Law allow us to be
unmercifull, unjust, unrighteous, fierce, savage, barbarous, and no Religion or
Irreligion in the dispensation of wordly Goods or conversant about them, as in
oppression, fraud, injury, putting men out of their own, etc. that a Man may be
a Lion, a Christian, a Tiger, and a Vulture all together? preying upon what he
can catch of his neighbors, and holding it, without any bowels of compassion?
Rev 14. 4.
Is this to follow the Lamb (of God, John 1. 29.
that takes away the sins of the World) whithersoever he goes? 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.
What says S. Peter, Be pitiful, be courteous, rendering to none Evil though
for Evil? What said S. Paul, Put on therefore as the Elect of God, (Holy and
beloved Brethren) bowels of mercies, Col. 3. 12.
kindness, humbleness, meekness, etc. What says both their Master, Matthew. 5 4^.
Be merciful as your heavenly is merciful? Luke 6* 86.
Is this agreeable hereto to oppress and undo without cause? To turn our
Fellows out of those Rights they have as good Titles to as our selves to any
thing? to contribute our small and single power to undoing of Thousands? yea,
thousands of Families, of Choicest Wits, best Education, greatest Hopes,
highest Trust, that have men's Souls committed to them but They, their Persons
and Estates should be left to spoil, themselves bequeathed to the Beggars
inheritance the Wallet and the Scrip, to live of what is Given them; and God
knows, Charity is so cold in our Northern Clime, that many are heard to have
been starved every Winter, and when Summer comes have little more then Chams
allowance to his father, A Mantle to cover nakedness: And belpless too; for
what should they do? They have their due Rights withholden, and cannot Dig, to
beg they are ashamed. Shall they return to their fathers house? Most of
themselves are Parents. Shall they take some commendable course of life? The
Laws are here a hedge of Thorns in their way, or rather a Castle wall furnished
with Artillery, and having store of Ordnance mounted and rammed up with
penalties ready to be poured out, perhaps For the more quiet and virtuous
increase and maintenance of divine Service, the preaching and teaching of the
Word of God, with godlyi and good examp^e giving, etc. Be it enacted, ordained,
etc. That no spiritual person secular or regular, of what degree soever he or
they be, shall from henceforth take to farm to himself, or to any person or
persons so his use of the Lease or Grant of the King our Sovereign Lord, nor of
any other person or persons, by Letters Patents, Indentures, Wri^ings, by word
or otherwise, by any manner of means, any Manours, Lands, Tenements, or other
hereditaments, for term of life, for term of years, or at will, upon pain to
forfeit ten pounds for every month that he or any other to his use shall
occupy any such Farm, by reason of any such Lease or Grant hereafter to be
made. The one half to the King, etc.

And be it also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Spiritual person or
persons, Secular or Regular, of what estate or degree soever they be, shall
from henceforth by himself, nor by any other for him, nor to his use bargain,
and buy to sell again for any lucre, gain, or profit, in any Markets, Fairs, or
other places, any manner of Cattle, Corn, Lead, Tinn, Hides, Leather, Callow,
Fish, Wool, Wood, or any manner or Victual or Merchandise, what kind soever
they be of, upon pain to forfeit treble the value of every thing, by them or by
any to their use, bargained or bought to sell again, contrary to this Act. And
that every such Bargain and Contract hereafter to be made by them* or by any to
their use, contrary to this Act shall be utterly void and of none effect. The
one half to the King etc. as before.

Provided etc. that no Spiritual person or persons, Regular or Secular, of what
estate, degree or condition soever be or they be, from the first of April next
coming shall have, use, or keep by him or themselves, or by any person or
persons to his or their use or commodity, any manner of Can-house or Can-houses
to be used or occupied to his or their use, commodity or behoof: Nor any
Brew House or Brew-houses, to other intent then for their own use, under pain
of the like ten pounds a month. 21 Hen, 8. cap. 13.


ten pounds a month if they shall keep a Malt-house or Brew House, or use a
Farm, and buy or sell, or use honest Merchandise with their Neighbors. Sit
still and want they may, and sterve, and this like to be their desperate
refuge. For it is known how the Statutes have laid perpetual restraint,
disabling or punishing if they make any excursions into other men's bounds, not
dreaming they should be ejected out of their own, and so far, well: for it was
prudently forecast, that every one should tug at his own Oar, and keep his Oar
in his own Boat; that every sort should keep within their own limits, and it is
justly penal if they be extravagant, and further confusion of things by mixing
confusedly employments. But then a man should be allowed his own, and not beat
out of his own doors, and forbid to enter his neighbors: This makes him
desperate with reason, and if that be taken away was the reason of his
Restraint, it is but equity he have leave to return to his Natural first
liberty. How do the Prophets exclaim against cruelty, oppression, wrong, the
iron hand and stony heart? Some are ready Amos 2. 6. chap. 8. 6.
to sell the poor for a pair of shoes: Job 24 2, 3.
others remove the Landmarks and violently take away the flocks: they drive
away the Ass of the fatherless, and take the Widows Ox for a pledge. Others
Micah 3. 2, 3.
tear off the skin, and pull the flesh from off the bones, chopping them in
pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron: and do not the tears
run down the widows cheeks? says Syracides. These are Complaints befitting Gods
Book, of things Religion does naturally abhor, and shall we further any such
injustice as may, under what form soever, occasion them or the like, and yet
have Charity in our Bible, Justice in our Law, Equity over all, and Mercy at
the top of our Religion, above Sacrifice? Consider also one example or two, how
such like injury has thriven and prospered, either with Sacrilege or without
Sacrilege, of these that could not be content with their own, but must
incroach upon their Neighbors, and have it, and they prospered accordingly
with a Vengeance. Ahab had a fair inheritance, 1 Kings 25.
His Ancestors lived well upon it as Kings of Israel, and when Naboth had his
own too, we hear of no complaint or disturbance, but when He that had Much must
have More, He that had Little must lose of that, and the poor man's garment be
taken away to piece the Rich man's skirt, perhaps to cloth his beast, or
provide Hangings for his Lodging chamber, or Dining Room (as I never heard me
thinks a sadder complaint then, that Walls are clothed, while the poor go
naked, Horses well suited and fed while Christians sterved,) Then went all to
wreck, and this incorrigible unreasonableness of one must be a cause to both of
their confusion. A pang of lustful covetousness lays hold upon the rich man's
greedy heart: His neighbors little Cottage and Garden himself falls
desperately sick of, and never can be well till the usual forms of Justice had
been used for murder, fasting and prayer must let out the life-bloud of the
poor man to let in the ungodly King into his Vineyard. and then all as should
be. But shall he prosper? No: To give warning to all unreasonable Mammonists
who cannot be content with that they have, though Nine for one, unless they have
the other one for Nine the Tenth too, Let him covet, and take, possession with
a vengeance: Have thou killed and also gotten possession? Thus says the Lord,
In the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy
blood, even Thine, Chap. 22. 38.
and the Prophet Elijah was sent to tell it him, none of whose words would, or
could, or did fall to the ground. Gehazi 2 Kings. 5.
could not be content with his Own, but must abuse his own Credit, and his
Masters trust, the expectation from a Servant, and interest in a Master both
together, for a Talent of Silver (perhaps some spending money to his former
means,) and two changes of Garments, the superfluities of a Wardrobe, and how
ended the business? The Leprosy of Naaman cleave unto thee and thy posterity
(an hereditary plague,) and he went from the punishers presence a Leper white
as snow. Achan Josh. 7.
could not let the golden wedge and the Babylonish garment go in the Due way
God had appointed, but must be filching for his private use, what had been
publicly Devoted, and the whole Army, yea the whole Nation, yea all Gods
people sped the worse for it. In deed it was a Cherem, Chap. 6. 17. 18 19.
Chap. 7. 1.
Religion had laid her sacred hand upon all that spoil for God, and thence the
severity of worse, then ordinary indignation. Hebr. 10. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, for Chap 12.
29.
Our God is a Cousuming fire. Ananias and Sapphira their offense lay not
altogether beyond the things of this life; they did but take back what of Earth
they had devoted to Heaven, and yet how does the wrath of God fall upon them to
the utmost? We find them gasping and dying at once and presently both; as
terrible Examples of divine severity as we find any where, and yet the meek
Apostle inflicted it by his power from another World, and I hope we believe it
because we pretend to believe the Bible. Generally observe, there and in
Vzzahs, and Vzziahs Case, the poor wood-gatherer, the men of Bethshemesh, or
wheresoever in the least Religion has been touched to be profaned, Gods
Jelousie has been up and his quick hand reached home to revenge with sharpness
of fury any such violation. Nor may we forget the poor man in [7] Nathans
Parable:) 2 Samuel 12.
Alas poor man! he had not much, but one poor Lamb for plenty abroad, and that
the Rich miser must have to spare his own fold, But shall it go so? No, says
David in another Man's case, He shall feel my Angry Hand: By a great oath, his
own life shall expiate an offense with these circumstances, and the lamb he
shall restore fourfold beside, because He did this and had no pity! O pity,
pity! is still a great part of the Bible goodness: Oppression and wrong,
Nothing More, the merits of Hell fire by our Religion: the Law and the
Prophets, the Old and the New Testament join in to have justice to all, and
Mercy to those in need a necessary qualification, No hopes of religion without
them, because their want is a transgression of Religion, and what then of those
who cannot be content with their Own, who will not give other men Theirs, who
having Nine for One already grudge and complain that they may have that One for
Nine also from Gods service, to sacrifice to their own greediness,
covetousness, insatiable bellies, or lusts and voluptuousness. The laws of the
twelve tables or Mahomets Alcoran, the Bannyans The title of the law of s^m^
Easterlings: whose eighth Moral commandment is, Thou shall not steal: Herberts
Travels, page 43.
Shaster, or the Some other Easterlings who call their law by this name. One of
there Moral precepts is, Not to covet what belongs to another man: Id. page 51.
Persees Zundavastaw may teach them or us as much Religion as this: Nay the
tables of the bosom afford it clear and fairly legible, that Every one must
have his Own, or else there is no living, and this is the very outside, (I know
mine own bosom) of that I did intend to contend for: Nor Therefore Throughout
the world Do or can I fear any just man mine enemy.

But I will not now divert: Hitherto we have kept promise, and made our walk
through the Groves of Paradise Only: Gods blessed Book, from the Sacred leaves
of whose Holy and heavenly Oracles have these amplifications been drawn, which
it would be our wisdom to heed, as it is in our Faith to believe, and must be
our Righteousness to Obey; and this directing in what we should do, or what we
should not do, about Civil Justice, by rule or example. Methink somewhat
should stick, I hope it will, I pray it may, and None be the favor of death
unto death, but, (as it will work some way) of life unto life, and that of the
Soul, and Everlasting. All 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Scripture is given of God: S. Paul tells us this ((...), as his word or Breath)
and Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever was there written aforetime was written for our instruction, that
we through patience and comfort thereof might have hope and Light: Now among
the heavenly contents of those Divine inspirations are these Rules given,) 1
Cor. 10. 6. etc.
these examples recorded, (1 That we might not lust as those (then set up for
an Example) lusted; Nor Covet as they Coveted, nor Murmr as they murmured,
Nor yet be destroyed, as they were neither of the destroyer: For these things
happened to them for such Examples, but are written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Thou have, Christian, thine own light
shining in them, which thou beleevest came down from heaven, of the same kind
with that outshined the brightness of the sun, with Acts 9. 3, 4.
Saul, Saul, Take heed, Take heed; Venture not too far, why persecutest thou
me? Believe thou? will thou not obey? If thou will not, He that Rev. 22. 11.
is holy, let him be holy still: and He that is righteous, let him be righteous
still: and He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and He that is filthy
let him be filthy still: He that will Covet, let him Covet still; He that will
have his neighbors Goods, let him at least grasp after it still: But withal
know, Eccl. 11. ult.
That God will bring thee to Judgment: Col. 3. 25.
He that does wrong shall receive for the wrong he has done, and with Him will
be no respect of persons. Iniqui regnum Dei non possidebunt: Psalm 15. 1.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or inhabit in thy holy Hill? Not he
that leads a Corupt life, or does the thing is not right to his Neighbor;
(God 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
is the avenger of all such things, as is every where testified:) but swears,
or gives to him, and disappointeth him not, though it be to his own
hinderance. Remember Him that 2 Pet. 2. 15, 16
loved the wages of iniquity, and Judas Mat. 26. 15.
who sold his innocence for thirty pieces of silver; and Daniel 5.
Belshazzar who must have the Temple-bolls to carouse healths in to his Kings
and Concubines; He would hardly have forborne at the persuasion of a prophet,
though he were Rich before, But the worth of a few talents must be taken from
Gods then Church, which ended fearfully; His Countenance changed, His thoughts
troubled, His back crippled, and His knees smote one against another. And yet
this but the beginning of Sorrows: For All the Psalm 9. 17.
wicked shall once be turned certainly into Hell, Heb. 6. 9.
and All the people that forget God. Sed meliora canamus, I hope better things,
and things that accompany salvation, though I thus speak: That every Christian
will be himself, That every believer will be ruled by his own Rule; that every
son of God will be guided by his father, and give to every one his Due, whether
God or man, as is written down in the draught of his will, the tables of the
Old and New Testament. It has been hitherto but mistake has made men grumble,
That some tyrannous imposition has enforced Tithes, some Statute Rampant in
behalf of the Clergy, perhaps foisted in by themselves in the last age; but now
the truth is cleared up, the heavens shine, it is bright as day that the whole
body of the Just law, has, and has from all times called for them, and made
them due, a necessary part as any of Civil righteousness; Now Men I hope will
then not deliberate nor dally, but walk in the light, while the light shines;
Doing as they would be done by, Giving every one his Own, yea Paying, not
Giving, for that is required of thee, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
if thou be Just, not Bountiful. I my self also, says S. Paul, was sometimes a
Blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, But I obtained mercy because (and as
long as) I did it ignorantly and in unbelief, (No longer.) If I should have
done it afterward, after the truth came clear to my soul, or it shined from
heaven, and I would or could have closed fast mine eyes against it, I might
have overstaid my time, and the light have been taken from me, but I believed
and converted, and then the Lord (that would have on all) had mercy on me,
because I did it, as I did, hitherto in ignorance and unbelief.

Now my last appeal should be ad Populum Christianum, from Several Persons, to
whom hitherto, to the Body of the People of this Nation; High and low, Rich and
poor, One with another, Psalm 49. 2.
as the Psalm speaks, and All Together, for the thing concerns All: And my
desire tends to this, That they would in the name and fear of God take heed
what they do, and not be too forward to set their hands to that they may
beshrew their fingers for all days of their lives after, in shaking I mean or
removing one Stone more out of the building to leave the rest loose; or by
unsetling Levi's Parsonage house, give such example or beginning to shake all
the rest, that No one shall for an age live secure, That His will not next year
fall down about his ears. Remember what before of, Imbarqued All in one
Vessel, standing All on One bough* (Take heed of cutting that) and Beware of
touching that string to any violence that holds All we have together. Gentlemen
and Noblemen look to your selves, ye have (as now things are) fair
inheritances; God bless them to you, and you to them; ye live in Canaan, Long
may ye there live to serve God in Christ in all worldly felicity: But take heed
of venturing too far in untrodden paths that have at least show of danger;
(the earth seems to shake under you already;) Be not overforward to the
unsetling Levi's Portion in this good land the Lord your God has given him
with you, which stands here upon the same foundation of Law, (whether of God or
Man) that yours and others do, For fear if you should, what has but the same
support may totter if not fall (with His) down together: Be sure there is
Justice in heaven, and but too likely means on earth to bring it to pass, that
if your hands should help to conveigh fire to one Corner of the thatch, It may
very soon it spread and run all over the house, beyond the reach of strength or
power of policy and honest art to suppress the flame, before it has burned
both you and yours, your stately and magnificent sumptuous Edifices. Your
mansions are many, the Buildings great and fair, their Turrets high, the
Battlements stately and lifted up, dispersed far and wide over your rich and
ample possessions: Long may you enjoy them to comfort; But if you should
rejoice in iniquity, and not in the truth, furthering or permitting that spoil
is of the nature would ruin your selves and Your own; Take heed the stroke
reach not home to you too soon, leaving you justly ere long neither house nor
land, nor field, nor inheritance. And Good Christian people All whatsoever, Be
not Ye wilful to your own injury; Do not stubbornly persist in a way may go
on to your inconceivable danger. If your Tythingmans due be as your Own right,
if his Glebe be as your Freehold, and his Tenth from your land as your Nine in
it, and the Land it self; take heed how you meddle with the common support, the
foundation and only stay and cement of both together: If his be stirred, and
yours thereby loose; if you take away his, and he put on for yours, (as why may
he not?) if you both thereby fall a scambling, thence a quarrelling, and so a
fighting what can follow hereon but very confusion? A third may as well strive
for both, and then what have you gained? If the fence of strong Law be not able
to keep Him harmless now, How should you expect that the same armor should
defend you, and that spoil and violence should not break in to your
disturbance, perhaps to lay All in Common, to which the breaking of some
enclosures, does more then declare, act and operate to make way for. Let every
one have his Own, and that is an easy and obvious piece of Justice: I say
again, Let every One have his Own, and that's All I contend for, which should
give offense, or show of offense to None but those that would have that which
is Other men's. That is His Own the Law makes so, of which Levi having as Much
as any other Tribe, He must have thereby as much of Property, and thereby Right
and Safety, and Security (He should:) and the troubling or disturbing him
cannot in equity, and the nature of the Thing, but do that which if it should
be prosecuted by the same Principles must needs bring about, and redound
consequentially to the disturbance of all Israel. Justice is all I plead for,
Common-Justice, a low and sordid Heathenish virtue not so much in Christianity,
as I take under it, and thereby in it, as it comprehends under it universally
all sorts of goodness: Suum cuique therefore, good Englishman and Brother, and
this is both Common Law and common Honesty.

As to the Publiqne I have said nothing thereto; Observe it all along, and that
I have so tempered my style, according to my meaning, that I neither have, nor
can my pen be justly interpreted to have said any thing thereof one way or
other. And observe it well: for private malice is often apt to shroud it self
under the Statesmans Gown, making a stalking horse of the Public to come at
self ends, with craft of from the power above, fighting with greater advantage
against weakness below, and then gold and armies may soon overwhelm (by such
misuse) any private innocence. I crave therefore yet once more this notice
heeded, that of the public I neither have, no^ meant, nor I hope have given
occasion it should be thought I have said any thing. The Magistrate is that
(...) or awful power at top; Rom 13.
it may be justly dangerous for any private man to intrude to meddle with, or
whether by censure, direction, caution, counsel, or almost good advice to draw
into his presence, unless there be to Esther her self held out the golden
scepter of clear and evident in this case necessary, Esther 4. 11.
either permission or invitation. With him therefore I have thus soon done,
almost as soon as begun, and craving pardon for but thus looking toward him,
crave leave also humbly to take my leave and depart, the most that I have said
to or of him, being but this, that I would or meant to have said nothing to or
of him at all. A single self is the only fittest object, whether of admonition,
instruction, information, or (if need be) contestation for him who is
deservedly toward the very lowest stair of those that are such; and who yet
trusting in the Righteousness of his cause, and therewith (that which uses not
to be wanting) the assistance of his God, (the honor of Christ being also and
the Being and continuance of the Gospel of Christ somewhat interessed in the
Event) fears not the best and greatest of those that are, in that singularity,
upon the highest. Religion, Reason, Truth, Justice, and the LAW are his great
Patrons; which as He defends, and would not have stirred a bodkin for any
other; so he mutually hopes They will defend Him; and by them, they are so
public, returns that advantage which ere while was declined to have against
him, of public interesse and strength enough on his side: For they never come
in alone, but assisting with the most voices and votes, arms and armies of men
in the world, and if I have not them on my side, I disclaim mine own
engagement, and all my undertaking and performance, presently. For I shall
always account it honest policy, whatever in other matters, to strive Here to
be always on This strongest side, so far that I profess to remove and shift
my sails as their appearance or advantage from them may occasion, that I may
steer my course along with them constantly, nor will I be of that party, (but
rather forsake all, as near as I can my self) that shall in the least degree
give them or what they would have, opposition. If any can show I now am, I am
not only ready to withdraw, but shall at any time hereafter show my willingness
to kiss that hand shall gently endevor to lead me from Error to Truth, from
Wrong to Right, Nay even love that Sober violence that will not suffer me to
plod on securely and without control in an ill way, Though I should be at
first a little drowsy or inapprehensive; But for the bitterness of malice and
rage of fury, which uses to doubly torment, yet do no good, wounding an
adversaries perhaps reputation, perhaps patience, perhaps both, and through the
sides of Truth too, and yet works no correction, nor establishes any thing in
the room of what it destroys, I leave to that Justice is wont to bring about in
foveam quam foderunt, and that the fire shall work only upon that cole that
bred it, but gently warming whom it would, but could not burn. So does malice,
and So let it; only eat into its Own bowels, and fury torment the enraged in
their own flames; for me, if any sparks thereof should fly about, and touching
me somewhat sharply, prevail to a temptation of return of the like, the worst
arrows of Revenge I have presently ready to retort are, Permission, Pity,
Prayers, and Patience, being resolved to entertain the cross with nothing of
more malignity then what I learned from my Savior on the Cross, They may not
understand themselves, Father forgive them.

Which as I have received from and by Gods grace in this my life; so I hope and
pray, (and the rather hope, because I know I unfainedly pray for it) that it
may accompany me to my death, and be mine to the end and in the end; and this
shall set me for ever beyond the smart of Injuries. Good Christian, be Thy
self, Not a Name only as if thou Livedst, but a Christian in Deed, in Love, in
Meekness, in Charity, in Justice, in Mercy, and forgiving as thou would be
forgiven. Love that Justice, Hate All iniquity, give Every man his Due, Prefer
not the world before thy Soul, Honesty, or Religion; Let every one have His
Own, but Love God Above All, and pray that I may be as Thou art, and then no
doubt God which is our Own God shall give us Both His blessing; His blessing of
peace and quiet Innocence Here, with eternal rest in the world to come with
himself;

To whom, One and Three, be all honor and glory For Ever and For Ever and For
Ever. Amen, and Amen, and AMEN.
T THe, t THeou.
A Prayer of the AUTHOR.
O LORD Jesu Christ, which sit at the right hand of thy Father in fullness
of Glory, Since by thy Providence I have had Opportunity, by thy Grace been
Directed, by thy Power Enabled to lay together these things, conducing, I
trust, to Thy Honor and Glory; I give thee humble and most hearty thanks for
the Riches of thy Mercy vouchsafed herein, and Pray, both that Thy Blessing may
go along with this Work of thine own Service, and that the Things may be
successful Thereby for that Great end for which I have intended them. Give
them Prosperity and good Success abroad in the World, and Give thy Servant
always Grace to rest even abundantly and richly contented, satisfied, and
rewarded in having attempted any thing to the Honor of Thy Name: Let thy
Gospel flourish by All means, Prosper All Courses that tend That way, and if
the continuance of these stated Dues be One (so looked upon by the eye of thy
Providence, and requisite in the nature of things,) I cast my self down before
the footstool of thy Throne, Praying and Beseeching, That it may not be in the
Power of Man to withdraw or pervert, disturb or destroy. Though thine
adversaries should be many and rage horribly, yet Thou that dwell on high
art still Mightier; Arise, O God, and let not Man have the upper hand; let
thine enemies be judged in Thy sight, and Put them in fear that they may know
themselves to be but Men. -- Defend also thy servant, who putteh his trust in
Thee: And if he desire before All things Thine Honor, The stability of thy
Gospel has been his chief and only aim, nor has Any line here but been meant
to tend, (as directly as guided by humane frailty it could,) to that point to
end in that Center, O give thou Not Him then over into the Will of his
adversaries, that if any Hate they may obtain Lordship over Him: Make good
Thine Own Cause, in standing by Him that labors for that Cause, Thy Truth
and Thee; Stretch forth the right hand of thy Power evermore mightily to
succor and defend Him, Deliver him from the gathering together of the froward
and from the insurrection of Evil Doers; Let the ungodly or unjust fall into
their own Nets together, but let him ever escape them. Give also, Good Lord,
Merciful and Gracious, unto All that love thy Truth eyes to see it, Hearts to
embrace it, Affections to cherish it, and a good will to Do accordingly: and
vouchsafe likewise Prudence against the subtle Serpent that Any who bear good
will to Sion, may never procure her Hurt, but stablish these due Means on Earth
thy Providence looks upon and has appointed as necessary to accomplish their
just and holy ends, what they meant to establish, by no improvidence ever
disturbing or destroying. Finally, Grant Victory to Truth, Progress to Justice,
Stability to thy Church, Perpetuity to Thy Gospel, and that no Lovers thereof
Here may take up lower then with, That the Light thereof may continue shining
Ever and Over All the world, to All ages and generations. Thus let thy Name be
Hallowed, O our Father which art in Heaven, Let thy Kingdom come O Savior and
Blessed Redeemer, Let thy Will be done Most holy and blessed Spirit, in Earth
as it is in Heaven: Give us, Forgive us, and preserve us from Evil: For Thou
only, O Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the
Father; To which God One and Three be All Honor and Praise for ever and ever.
Amen.

Grace be with all those that Love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity.
POSTSCRIPT.
Courteous Reader,
FOR so I style thee, and hope to find thee, or have need to Make thee, and
the most bountiful dilatation of thy Courtesy drawn forth to Cover or Pardon
those many imperfections this my firstborn has brought with it into the
world. Some doubtless both in matter and form; for Who ever Spoke that Erred
not, Much in More then a little? ( In multiloquio nunquam deerit Vanitas, This
at the least, as the Wise man assured,) from Shortness of Inquiry, Dimness of
Understanding, Weakness of Judgment, Distraction of Business, Inadvertency or
some fruitful Cause of Error or other, Most men being forced to number their
mistakes by their Pages; Only as to purposedly Erroneous, Deceiving or being
Deceived, I Sacredly and Seriously disavow. At the Press also Poor Mephibosheth
caught some mischance: Blemished in his face? nay, crippled in his limbs, lamed
at least in his feet, and complaining often he can hardly go right forth for want
of sense; which bruises require thy Healing Correcting hand; Some of Many are
collected, and annexed, The rest, like our daily slips, almost innumerable.

Thou art to be, 1. Remembered, that In multis labimur omnes, None (below) goes
so sure but he slips sometimes, None so firm and upright but he steps a little
awry, and Thy self wilt, Matthew. 7. 12.
I trust, ask pardon for thy daily failings. 2. Entreated, to Do as thou
would he Done to; Ib ver. 1.
Judge (or Judge not) as thou would (or would not) be judged; Gal. 6. 1.
in the spirit of meekness, Considering Thy self, lest Thou also be tempted.

3. Informed, That a purpose was of attempting satisfaction of those many
whether frivolous or more weighty and substantial doubts that usually occur
about this established Course (the frame whereof was likewise contrived, and
diverse of the materials brought together) As that, This proportion is too much,
The Receivers are Ill Men, Good Men take offense at Both, Exactions throng in
with Suits, and Injuries with Exactions, The bottom of all is in Canaan, some
Jewish Laws, The people shrink under the Heaviness of the Burden, Iure Divino
is declined by Many, (and Here) The Supreme Power may alter all Humane
Constitutions, etc. But, because These would both lead toward the footstool of
the Throne, (whether, save in my Devotions, I constantly decline to look) That
which Is is Much, These might make Too Much, And here are Principles
(especially from the Main of Civil Right made unquestionable, and the Moral
and Indispensable duty of Justice in paying which must needs follow thereon,)
upon which common reason may work out satisfaction to the Most, I therefore
Suppress or Delay, as Accepts of what is here may further encourage or
dissuade. Be requested, 4. and lastly, not to take Causeless exceptions at any
of those things which as they come from us and in our Humane frailty cannot but
afford those that are Material, Real, Weighty, and Substantial enough. I
speak of most things As They Were, and as in the Times When They Were (How else
should I reach home) as Churches, Clergy, Royalties, Rights, Jurisdictions,
Princes, Peers, Powers, Privileges, and Preeminencies, etc. Not that I am
willing to engage for All another may think good to oppose about them, Philip.
3. 13.
Or stand in Defensive of Any thing howsoever since altered: But. ((...), as
the Apostle suggested with much quickness in another case,) One Thing I do,
That I am about I keep to, and so that be Secured, would not willingly
intromix, draw or be drawn in to other accidental by-Quarrels; So I may have
leave to conveigh my Parlee to the World in the language of the World, best
understood by the World, I would not willingly inwrap my self in controversy
about any other of Those Things they yet stiffely enough maintained, and in a
rigid import who took up the words and gave them Us in their first and full
sense; Nor have thou reason to be offended that I balk not the public tone, to
conform to thy Singularity, for the Many are to be regarded in A Multitude, and
the Most in most large by diffusive Communication to All; But if thou remain
obstinate and undeniable in thy expectation or otherwise satisfaction, I
conform to Thy desire: Change what thou will, so thou keep the matter; Retain
the substance and vary the phrase; Hold to the Body, New-shape my outward form
of Expression, conform to thine own will, judgment, or fancy; At thine own
charge I approve, or (if thou will) Suppose the thing Already done.

Thou shall but wrong thine own Discretion to thy judging friends, if thou
quarrel with shadows, or take advantage of that I confess to take license and
scope enough in, a free and plentiful use of Tropes and Figures. Allusions or
Similitudes, thou know, are no good ground of Argument, not should, thou
know as well, of Arguing or Accusation, These sporting excursions of busy
and active fancy have been allowed to accompany and recreate the work of
gravest pens, Of no worse use in consequence then flowers to straw and adorn
the work finished; True Charity, if thou have any, will never make the worst of
any thing is doubtful or may reasonably be interpreted with Candor to a better
sense, Nor can thy Christian Charity, if it be true, but be large enough to
cover a heap of worser sins. I confess already to say many things I would not
stand to in the strictest sense, (Examine Scripture, if thou would be such a
Judge,) much less in Any thy Wit at leisure can affixe, lest in what is
Heterodox to the Established and so like to be Troublesome, or indeed any but
what I use or mean, (And yet hope All may pass with Candid and Ingenuous
Minds:) Think not if I mention a Temple or Oracle, An Altar, Priest, or
Sacrifice, Cross, or Supposed Saint that I am presently at my Adoration, or
love All I mention without any signified dislike: Of most things I speak as
they Have been taken, My eye upon the main, diverts and takes me off from
purposed meddling or giving all I think of the intermediates, and so I come
right to my ways end, what matter if I have been a little out in what tended
thither? So I come safe and sure Home, I will not shun to own mistakes
(involuntary) by the way. I conform my self, (at least I think I do) to the
present state and condition of Things, being no Prophet or the son of a Prophet
to judge of Future, or foretell in the least measure any thing of that which is
to come: And therefore unreasonably shall any expect I come up to that which
Shall be I know not What, or When, or Whether it ever shall be, Antedating
obedience to the Law, (which is a path narrow enough as it is, and hard to keep
in the manifold observances it requires;) But if any thing shall be changed, I
have no doubt ready enough the Lawful obedience of a Christian, as keeping my
self close to that I often glance at, sometimes express, never but mean, that
Religion tends much to peace, Civil peace, and in this world, nor can that is
truly Christian, (being also truly taught and understood) ever tempt or permit
to seditious disturbance in Any Civil State. Howsoever, Till Change be Made,
What is Present is the rule, and should be the defense of any that adhere or
stick close to their known allowed guide, Importing nothing but innocence and
justification till it be altered; Further conformity will come early enough
when the Law is fixed, Till then there is no (...) and should be no (...), Romans
4. 13.
for Where is no Law there can be no Transgression.

There may be whom other courses like better: Learned and pious who stand to
the Good Will of their people, (not like to be any great losers neither if
their own Canons take place, Matthew. 10. 10*
The Labourer is Sure worthy of His reward, The Catechumene with his Catechist,
Luke 10. 7.
the Taught with his Teacher, (...) Communicating in all his Goods, Gal. 6. 6.
they being further but reasonably allowed to interpret their chosen rule, as,
Who but the Priest should give the mind of His Oracle?) And these may think it
Mercenary to make any bargain (as 'twere beforehand) for Certain Wages for
this outward Humane work in bringing in the Lords Harvest, accounting it
Covetousness, Improvidence, Distrust of God, or Undervaluing the Work to
condition or expect any thing state^ beforehand, (as of the Tenth,) They will
rely on what is after Given. May they do so, and also have so; yet so as they
reasonably allow Others to keep Their Own several Way; else they tyrannically
impose who would leave most at liberty; Petimusque damusque, or if not both
Mutually No reason either should enforce or be at Liberty. Peter's faith we know
was strong enough to walk to Jesus upon the Waters; and when he but saw Him on
the other side, John 21. 7, 8.
he forsook all presently, and girding his fishers Coat unto him cast himself
into the Sea, and so came safe to him in a way most others feared, or might
have been drowned by; And Yet John and the other Disciples staid for a little
ship, Their zeal awaited a Convoy, and by such Helps alone as others used They
would come to their Master a land; Whither also Thus with safety they Did come,
and were with equal welcome admitted to be where Peter was: Perpetually
Assuring that though the boldness of the faith of some dare venture on
miraculous wonderful ways (wherein others may have miscarried, or are like to
do) venturing to tread on the Waves which many tremble at, making Their passage
in the Sea, and their foot-path even on the waters as the Psalm speaks, Yet
their fellows may with approbation of acceptance, and assurance of that
approbation enough, expect and require the conduct and help of due and
accustomed usual ordinary means to come unto Christ; and (though they fear to
venture on the waves, trust the slipperiness of mere voluntary stays which
have deceived and sunk many low enough,) These as Those with safety, speed,
success, and sure, and soon enough come Also to their Savior. He that will not
be Certain has no reason to blame Him that Would, Romans 14. 1.
any more then He that is strong ought but to bear the infirmities of the weak,
for the common edifying or support of both, Not pleasing himself alone. If That
may do Well, This Better, and is Likelier, if not yet Surer, and Full as
Lawful.

And yet for These neither have I done more then I undertook, or attempted any
thing for their Jure divino, which as it was without my bounds, so would I not
incur the blame of Transgression by meddling with either way. Sometimes I must
have touched upon it, for it was upon the very borders, situate in the
Confines of mine own walk, yet have I done it with that Wariness as not to
intromix. Which it might be also needful to note with so often repeated
Declaration, least any should interpret doubtful insinuations to a perverse
sense, or that I do, what I often say I do not disclaim or oppose it. By no
means, and under this very solemn protestation, submonition, and concluding
Asseveration; The most likely that way being in a fair and rational
construction otherwise I think interpretable; ^n the end of Chap. 29.
and what has most Color retaining yet a Salvo being warily read, to redeem it
to constancy and from holding contradiction to firm purpose and All the rest.
Nay so far were things minded and condescended to This way, and in favor that
upon His motion, who perused, approved, liked well, and after many other
encouragements Honored All with acceptance of a Dedication, somewhat of Divine
Right Should have been added and annexed (by another Pen) and in me it lay not
that it was hindered, and came not forth. None of that which is, it is hoped,
can be offen^ive to any to whom Justice, Truth, and Law create not a scandal;
While our Records and Those Laws are preserved; to what other end could I think
them kept and declared for, but that they might, when occasion is, be produced
and alleged? Nor can I prejudge any, bearing the Name of a Christian, of so
vicious a tenderness, as that the evidence they give to Truth and Righteousness
any where or here can offer him any the least occasion of displeasure or
dislike.

For those are interessed (deeply) for the profit, especeially the Reverend and
Learned, my Fathers and Brethren of most Sacred and Divine Profession, of Them
have only to crave, (I must and ought) exceeding Pardon, Psalm. 135. 2.
( Vos qui statis in domo Jehovae, in atriis domus Dei nostri) that I have so
weakly, ^amely, and in many regards insufficiently performed, by bold attempt
of single solitary industry, what might have well required the best of Their
Conjoined furtherance, Humbly acknowledging that a Work of this Difficulty in
it self, and high Concernment unto Truth and Them, might fittingly have awaited
the Conjunction of many heads, and been more happy by falling into the hands of
many cooperating Advancers, who might have both made out performance somewhat
answerable to desert, and added also the Countenance of Authority, which the
privacy of my Condition or unequal abilities Could neither expect or promise my
self or Others: But then withal when I considered and They shall please to
reflect on; The darkness and untroddenness of the way, wherein I have been
forced to go, mostly Alone, and (looking downward) in Their only Service, The
number and distance of the flowers from which this honey, as little of it as it
is, must needs have been gathered, ( without any help,) The Labor of the Work;
The difficulty of the whole, And so little encouragement for any part, that (in
such stormy Times, when men's greedy affections are also checked, their lusts
crossed, and their tender ruptions touched to danger of offense) Impunity is
toward the highest of Hopes, They will Then, it is hoped, if not for any desert
abroad, at least from the Innate Candor and Ingenuity of which the World
acknowledges such store within their own bosoms, Vouchsafe it this humbly
craved and much desired and needed Pardon, or perhaps yet a little farther and
more favorably accept this pledge of Love and Evidence of Good will, none can
but see was meant (in way to the glory of God and establishing his Book) to end
(as to here below) Chiefly (for his Own is inconsiderable) in Their Profit,
Advantage, and Benefit: It is left to their better skill, and united endeavors
if they may be had, to smooth up by degrees unto the highest Requisite of all
necessary perfection what I have, I hope, not altogether unluckily begun (for
this is but the drawing of my Ruder Coal,) and to add the Exactness of Art,
Proportion of Lineaments, Symmetry of parts, Life of Colors, and all other
Imbellishments of Ornament, Circumstance, or Substance, (very needful in so
very needful a Work) to the degree of How, What, and As they Please,

In the great variety that is in the World, and some opposition of Judgments,
it remains hard if not impossible to please All; While One desires This,
Another That, One is for Antiquity, Another for Novelty, Such Laws please Some,
The Contrary Others, and Some like None at all, Stubbornness making it out to a
Prodigality of life often in Defense of bare Opinion: In which Case what should
now the Speaker Do or say? What, but even sit down in the Conscience of his
Integrity? Acquiesce in that he meant to offer His Sacrifice of Service to None
but God and Truth; and if a few Sober and Grave either Approve or Pardon, to
Account This (or but even the Last) a full accomplishment of Desire; Taking
assurance it is very unlikely to meet with any thing but Contradiction from
Those Many, who Agree chiefly to Contradict and cross each other: When All Men
are of a Mind, then may it be hoped One Thing will please All; But This not
like, till the same Gale of Wind fits several men's Voyages, who have their
distinct and opposite ways to All points of the Compass.

Now sit down and Consider, Judge, Differ, and Be Charitable, O Christian!
Remember much That thy Great Name of a CHRISTIAN, implying nothing More then To
Be, to Be nothing more then Good and Virtuous, to be Good and Virtuous scarce
in Any thing So Much as those necessary accomplishments of a Christian, Ephesians.
4. 2, 3.
in Meekness, Mercy, Tender-heartedness, Grace, Peace, and Love; endeavoring
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in that Bond of Peace, as the Apostle counsels,
(...), etc. with all Humbleness, Lowliness, Gentleness, and Long-suffering,
Bearing and Forbearing; As knowing that Rage is Brutish, Col. 3. 12, 13.
Cruelty Inhumane, Fierceness Heathenish, and Thou art thy Thy Self Nothing
more then in Readiness to Give and Forgive, Phil. 4. 7.
Him that offends, even Purposely, till Seven times, and Seventy times Seven.
So Put on Therefore (as the Elect of God, Holy and beloved of Him) Bowels of
Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Forbearing,
and Forgiving; even as God for Christ his sake forgave both Us; And then the
Peace of God, (...), that passes all Thought shall no doubt dwell in thy Heart
by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Imprimatur,

Febr. 4. 1649. JOHN DOVVNAM.

FINIS.

