NEW OBSERVATIONS Upon the CREED. OR, The FIRST of the FOUR Parts OF THE
Doctrine of Christianity. PREACHED Upon the CATECHISM of the French Churches.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED, The Use of the LORDS PRAYER Maintained,

By JOHN DESPAGNE, Minister of the holy Gospel.

Translated out of French into English.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth, for Thomas Whitaker, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

To the Right Honorable THE HOUSE OF PEERS Of the Kingdom of ENGLAND, ASSEMBLED
IN PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable Lords,
HE that presents this Piece, is a stranger unto you: but certainly these
Doctrines are not strangers; for they are the same which you profess and
protect. I have taken unto me the boldness to cause them to appear under the
splendor of your Name. I believed that I ought so to do; forasmuch as they
have already appeared in an Auditory which some of this august Senate have
honored with their presence; forasmuch also as they have been hatched under
the wing of the Thrice-illustrious Earl of Pembrook, one of the stars of your
Firmament: and finally, forasmuch as the envy of mine enemies having brought
their calumniation even to the feet of your supreme Tribunal some years since,
you permitted me to plead mine own cause and the bright luster of your Justice
dissipated those Phantasms which enforced themselves to annihilate that Ministry
which has pleased God to impose upon me. Be pleased, my Lords, that the Truth
and my self render this testimony of our Gratitude to the Justice, Wisdom and
Piety which animateth the Body of your so renowned Assembly; the which may it
please the most High eternally to cover under the shadow of his Protection.

READER,
ONe of the greatest cheats of this Age, is the multitude of Books which are
written concerning matters of Religion: For the most part, either they contain
abundance of Leaves, and little fruit; or else they express nothing but what
has been written a thousand and a thousand times before. In vain it is
alleged, that nothing can be said but what has been said already: For either
this Maxim is true or false. If it be true, To what purpose is it to write
what is not new? If it be false, as certainly it is, there is so much the less
reason to write that which is old, and known of all; there being so many worthy
subjects as yet not handled.

Now I well know that I expose my self to the censure of many. One will tax the
Title as proud and arrogant: To whom I content my self to answer, That the same
is found affixed to the Frontispice of other Writings by their Authors, whose
modesty is sufficiently known.

Another will say, That, contrary to my Protestation, I speak sometimes that
which some other has already spoken. But if I mention it, this is only by
accident, and to fill up what others have left empty. For the rest, if it be
found (which I know not) that some one has prevented me in any passage, I
shall always quit the right of Eldership to whomsoever it appertains. And in
every one of these Observations, what is mine may be easily discerned from that
which may have been another.

Another, quite contrary, will blame them for their Novelty. And of a truth,
those that write nothing but what they borrow of others, have an advantage
which I have not: For either they pass without contradiction, or at a need
they have for their defenders the same Authors from whom they have begged
their Writings; whereas I remain solely responsible for mine. But by how much
the more these Observations shall be new to any one, so much the more ought he
to bring advisednesse and circumspection to the censure of them.

Another will say, That they serve not to Edification, That they are
Subtilties. But it cannot be said with less then Blasphemy, That divine Truths
serve not to Edification. Those that I publish here, shall be sufficiently
upheld, as built upon the Rock. And in case there should be found some one not
yet well digested, the entire Body of the Work ought not to be rejected as
deformed, no more then the face for a little Wart. Over and above, I do not
thrust my self in to turn over the leaves of the Book of Life; nor have I
searched into Questions heightened above that which the Scripture has rasolved,
to affect the commendation of a sublime spirit. On the the contrary, I have
chosen the most common subject, the ^udiments of Religion.

Another will object, That these matters are too high for a Catechism. But is
there any thing more high then the Mystery of the Trinity? And nevertheless it
is handled in the Catechism. Those to whom I preached these Observations, know
that in uttering them I rendered them sufficiently popular and intelligible.

For the rest, after this Treatise upon the CREED, I hope to publish
successively that which I have also noted upon the DECALOGUE, upon the PRAYER,
and upon the Doctrine of the SACRAMENTS; and in these four Treatises to
comprehend all the New Observations which I have made upon the Catechism.

Now the God of Truth grant unto us, that we may not always be children, but
that we may finally attain to the measure of the stature of Christ.

NEW OBSERVATIONS Upon the CREED.
Of the Knowledge of God.
Why a man that should be perfect, may always increase in Knowledge, but not in
Goodness.
WE read that Jesus Christ, as man, had his progression in Knowledge and
Experience, Luke 2.40. Heb. 5.8. but not that he grew in Sanctity; for nothing
could be added to the perfection of his innocence. Goodness has some limits
which it cannot pass, when it is arrived to a certain point or degree where
there is the accomplishment of its fullness: but Knowledge has no bounds, but
may go forward in infinitum. If at this day there were found upon the earth a
man perfectly holy, yet he would have need every day to learn. Goodness has
its stature or growth limited; so that a man cannot ever increase in it: but he
may and ought every day to increase in Knowledge.

To love God without knowing him, is the most irregular of all affections.
Many men have blind affections, as well toward God as toward men. Toward men,
forasmuch as they are ignorant of their defaults: Toward God, forasmuch as they
are ignorant of his perfections or his intentions. The Superstitious have
oftentimes more love toward God then those that are Orthodox: but this love is
without Knowledge, and consequently irregular, Romans 10.2, 3. It is also
enormous in the effects of it: for no follies nor excesses have been equal to
those which have been committed for the love of God, that is to say, for
Religion, guided by principles of ignorance.

Why the wisest Nations have had more paltry or horrible Gods then those that
were barbarous.
The Nations that have been the most civilized and more learned, have been
always the greatest fools in matter of Religion. Those to whom they gave the
name of Barbarians, adored the Sun and the Moon: this was the most specious
Idolatry of any. But the Egyptians, who were the first teachers of Sciences,
had an Ox for their god. The Grecians, that far excelled them, placed Fevers
and humane Passions among the deities. And the Romans, that surmounted them
all in Wisdom, have followed them in the like horrors, worshipping even the
Furies of Hell. At this day, the poor Americans adore the Thunder: but the
Chinois, so sharp-sighted in every thing else, adore the devil.

Certainly the Justice of God has been willing to punish the ingratitude of
Nations. Those that had the most light to know God, did not glorify him as
God: by reas^n whereof, he has left them to the vanity of their sense,
permitting, that the wiser they were, they should become the greater fools. And
this is a thing very ordinary, that if a worldly wise man has in him the
spirit of Superstition, he becomes more superstitious then the vulgar.

Quest. Whether it be a sufficient reason for adhering to a Religion, to
allege that in it may be sound salvation.
All the enquiry which many men make, when a Religion is in dispute, is only
to ask if in it a man may be saved. It is of no importance that there are
falsehoods in their Religion, provided, say they, that they may work out their
salvation. I speak not here, whether they have any good ground for their
opinion, to think to be saved in a Religion in which themselves know that there
are falsehoods. But supposing that such a crime hinders not their salvation,
surely it is incompatible with the honor and love which we owe to the Author
of salvation, who abhors whatsoever is false in matter of his service. It is
an horrible contempt of God, and a mad ingratitude, to be well contented that
God be dishonored, and that by our selves, provided that we may be saved.
Again, is there none other way to go to heaven? God shows me the truth, which
leads to salvation: Why then should I choose rather to be saved in the
profession of a lie, (if this might be) then in the profession of the truth? To
refuse the truth, because salvation may be also found in a lie, of it self
rendereth a man incapable of salvation.

Such as a man is in his own nature, such he imagines that God is. Strange
horrid conceits of the spirit of man concerning this subject.
There is not a man, if you consider him only under the dictate of his own
nature, which does not figure God unto himself quite other then he is. All men
conceive a God like unto themselves, that is to say, conformable to their
humors and inclinations, or imagine that he ought to be so. One (as he is a
Libertine) by no means will believe that God is so severe as he declares
himself to be; but attributes to him an unreasonable indulgencie. Another
fancieth to himself a god harsh and difficile. Another, who is afflicted by
God, complains of the excess of his Justice. Behold yet an horrible thing!
The most infamous wicked man makes himself to believe that God is like unto
him. God has said unto the wicked, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such
an one as thy self, Psalm. 50.21. Hardly could we believe that man could be
capable of so prodigious a madness, if God himself had not spoken it. Many
will object against this, that they are far from it, that such thoughts never
entered into their hearts. But though these cogitations come not to their full
shape or form, yet they are formed in part: And howsoever a man choketh them in
their conception, yet there still remains some bud or other of them in the
heart of man. I pass by them who commit unlawful actions, thinking that God
also will take them as indifferent, and that in this he resembles them. The
first man, from whom we inherit this disease of spirit, imagined that God
envied him, that he was an enemy of his happiness, and by consequence,
malignant. To know God well, it behooves us first to divert this secret
inclination, which moves us to look upon him through the glass of our own
humors.

Of all the Attributes of God, which is that which we see first? And which is
that which we see least?
The most visible of all, and that which presents it self first to our eyes,
is his Power: For howsoever all his Attributes are written in his works, yet
some are read before others. And in the contemplation of this great mass of
the Universe, the first thing that comes into our thought, is the Power and
Greatness of the Maker. In the order therefore of the lessons which the
Apostle affirms to be contained in the works of God, his Power is first
named; as that which presents it self to be seen before all other his
Attributes, Romans 1.20.

On the other side, that which we see last, and know least, is his Wisdom. This
proceeds from many causes. One of the courses which the Wisdom of God takes,
is to conceal his Wisdom. It works oftentimes by means ridiculous and abject:
it employeth means quite contrary to what it intends to produce: it
permits disorder and confusion in the world: it gives the upper hand to
them that blaspheme against it: it builds up, and throws down: yea, it has
chosen the folly of the world for one of its principal agents, 1 Cor. 1.27. In
all this, the Wisdom of God is so much the greater, by how much the less it
appears: But since to us it is very hardly to be perceived in the greater
part of these actions, it is very hard to know God by his Wisdom. Naturally
men may know him by his Power, because it is seen as it were to the eye: but in
the Wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. Now in
effect, this is not to know God, if a man know not his Wisdom. Hence it comes,
that many fall into Atheism: For if on the one side they see a Sovereign Power
supporting all things, on the other part they see a confused multitude of
events which seem not to be governed by a Sovereign Wisdom. But one of the
Attributes of God cannot be without the other. It is impossible that he which
is perfectly Powerful, should not be perfectly Wise, though his Wisdom be not
so visible unto us as his Power.

The two greatest points of Religion.
The one, is the Love of God toward man; the other, is the Love of man toward
God. The one is the greatest point of the Gospel; the other of the Law. As all
Religion is reduced to the Law and the Gospel; so the Law and the Gospel are
referred to these two heads. For as the first and greatest Commandment of the
Law is, that we love God; so the first and greatest Article of the Gospel is,
that God-loveth us. About these two Poles do move all the Luminaries of
Religion.

Which are more culpable, those who distrust the Power of God, or those that
doubt of his Mercy toward them?
The Power of God is universal; but the effects of his saving Mercy are not
universally communicated unto all: For, he has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens, because it is requisite that his Justice
should appear as well as his Mercy. The Israelites, who believed not that it
was in the power of God to provide them bread and flesh in the wilderness (
Psalm. 78.19, 20, 21.) were more culpable in that particular, then Cain and
Judas, who believed not that God would pardon them. It is ever certain that God
can do all that is possible; but it is not always evident what he will do.

Of the holy Trinity.
The extent of Faith, and the diversity of the objects of it.
OF the objects which present themselves to the eye of our Faith, some are
without beginning and ending; they have been always, they shall be for ever, as
the Deity, the Three Persons. Others have had beginning and ending, as the
Creation, the Sufferings of Christ. Others have had beginning, but none ending;
as the Sitting of our Lord at the right hand of God, the Church, Life
everlasting. Others have not as yet been, but are to have beginning and ending;
as the Resurrection, and the Day of the last Judgment. Thus our Faith
begins her course at the Eternity of God; from thence traverseth the ages,
assembling that which is past, and that which is to come, together with what is
present; yea, rendering present, what is already past, and what is yet to come:
And at last concludes with eternal Life, where that Article closes up the
Creed.

Three degrees of language of God in the Creation.
The Scripture represents God speaking, when he made the world, but in three
several sorts.

When he would give being to those creatures which as yet were not, or
distinguish those that were insensible, or bring forth those kinds which he
intended to produce, he spoke not directly to them, to command them to be, or
to serve his design or purpose: but he he said, Let there be light; Let there
be a firmament; Let the waters be gathered together in one place; Let the earth
bring forth, etc. But after he had made living creatures, as fishes and fowls,
he addressed his speech to them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters, Genesis 1.22. But when the creation of man comes to be spoken of, God
spoke to himself, Let us make man in our own image. Terms which express, as
every one knows, the Unity of the Divine Essence, and the Plurality of the
Persons. This shall serve as a preparative to the following question.

Why God never speaks of himself in the Plural number, nor is ever brought in
as consulting, but where it concerns man.
In certain occurrences, God has spoken as holding a Council, and proceeding
with deliberation. The Scripture has marked out eight, in which God has
consulted about several subjects.

1. About the creation of man, as we have already spoken according to all
Expositors.

2. About his marriage; For Adam, there was not found an help meet for him: God
said, It is not good that the man should be alone. The result of this
consultation is expressed; I will make him an help meet for him.

3. About the banishment of him, after his fall: And the Lord God said, Behold,
the man is become as one of us, knowing good and evil: And now lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and live for ever, etc. Genesis
3.22.

4. About the Deluge: The Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with
man; for he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years,
Genesis 6.3.

5. About the Tower of Babel: And the Lord came down to see the city and the
tower which the children of men had built: And the Lord said, Behold, this
people is one, and they have all one language, and this they begin to do, and
now nothing will be restrained from them which they have intended to do. Go to,
let us go down, and confound their language, that they may not understand one
another speech, Genesis 11.5, 6, 7.

6. About the way which the Israelites were to take when they went out of
Egypt: And it came to pass, that when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God
led them not through the land of the Philistines, though that were near: for God
said, Lest peradventure the people repent, when they see war, and they return
to Egypt. But God led the people about through the wilderness of the Red Sea,
Exodus 13.17, 18.

7. About the means to ruin Ahab: And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab,
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? 1 Kings 22.20.

8. About sending a Prophet to the Jews: Also I heard the voice of the Lord,
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Isai. 6.8.

In many of these passages, God speaks of himself in the plural number: Let
us make man. The man is become as one of us. Let us go down. Who shall go for
us? But never does he use this style, nor yet ever does he speak in the phrase
of one consulting, but when he deals concerning man, whether it be to give
him his being or his well-being, or to guide him, or to preserve him, or to
destroy him, or to admonish him. What may be the reason of this? It is, Not
only because man is a subject of greater importance then any other that is in
the world; rather, Forasmuch as among all corporeal creatures, man only is
capable of counsel, only capable of deliberating. For the holy Spirit would
show us, that God has particular influence upon man, to give him the power of
consulting. Moreover, it is to admonish man, that he work with counsel, where
the business requires it. Furthermore, it is to assure us, that where our
counsel is unprofitable, as where we are incapable of consulting, God himself
consulteth for us. Finally, because man oftentimes opposes his Counsel to the
Decrees of God, God would show us, that he has a counsel which prevails
above ours. For these reasons, he never enters into counsel, but when the
question concerns man.

Of the Creation.
The diversity of habitation which God has given to two kinds of creatures
which bear his image; that is, to Angels and Men.
GOd has placed all his works in their proper places, with order and
proportion: witness, among an infinite number of examples, that the earth has
not so great living creatures as the sea, nor in the like number, nor so
fruitful in multiplying: And this to avoid too great a waste of food which
would be consumed, to the prejudice of man, by the beasts of the Land, if they
equalled those of the Sea either in number or greatness of body.

But that which is a point more sublime, there being two kinds of creatures
made after the likeness of God, to wit, the Angelical and Humane nature; yet
they are seated in places mainly different, and very far distant the one from
the other; the one in heaven, the other on the earth. God would have his image
placed in the two extremities of the world, as in two several Tables. He has
placed the one in the highest story of the Universe, the other in the lowest;
the one at the center, the other in the circumference: To the end that on what
part soever our soul casts the eye, be it on heaven or on earth, we may
contemplate God himself in the one or the other of these two kinds of
creatures which bear his image.

What ought to be gathered from this, That God imposed names upon the day, the
night, the heavens, the earth, the sea; yet has given no general name to
signify the whole world.
God has given particular names to all the great pieces of the Universe, Genesis
1.5, 8, 10. but has not given a name to all of it together. Likewise the
Hebrew Tongue, in which God pronounced his first Oracles, never names the
world in one only word, but expresses always either the heaven or the earth,
or both of them together, when it would say the world.

I pass by the question, Why in the Creation God has not given a word which
should universally signify this whole bulk, in which is comprehended the
entire assembly of all his works. But we are to learn by his example still to
make a difference between heaven and earth: The earth, in which man was made;
the heaven, for which he was made. Without this distinction, it is impossible
to know what is the world.

Whence comes it, that the spirit of man is pleased with variety?
Not only the Spirit, but also the Senses, the Sight especially, and the
Taste, love variety. This instinct proceeds from a secret intelligence. The
wisdom of God could not well be taken notice of, but in a great diversity of
works, of matters and forms, different, unlike, yea, often times contrary in
qualities, motions and circumstances. Hence it is that it has brought forth so
many kinds of food, so many of savours, so many of colors, and generally so
great a variety of objects, as well for the Senses as the Spirit. Now to the
end that man should study them, to know the perfections of their author, God
has given that curiosity, to invite him to pass from one object to another,
as by change of Lecture, which ought to render him more knowing.

Of the Providence of God.
Why the Scripture oftener names the Hand or the Arm of God, then the Heart of
God.
WE see better the works of his hand, then the intentions of his heart. His
works and actions are perceptible to our eyes: but the reasons are, for the
most part, hidden from our souls, and enclosed in the breast of that great
Worker: For, Who has known the mind of the Lord? Hence it comes, that
himself speaking unto us, oftener mentions his Hand, of which we see the
effects, then his Heart, of which we know not the secrets.

Of the fundamental Law of the Creation, and of the excellent instructions
which issue from it.
In the Creation, God has formed the principles of all Laws; yea, the Creation
is a Law visible and speaking. If it were well considered, many questions would
be cleared, which remain undecided; and many opinions against which we dispute,
would not ^eed any other confutation then what is found written in this
primitive Law. I speak not of that which is well known unto all, to wit, That
by this Law it is forbidden to pervert the order established from the
beginning, to separate what God has joined, or join together what God has
separated. Hence it comes to pass that the Scripture condemns Polygamie,
because God created but one wife for Adam. Hence also proceeds the
superiority of the man over the woman, because he was first created of them, 1 Timothy 2.

By this Law of the Creation, it is forbidden to multiply the number of species
which God has created at the beginning, or to confound them one with another.
Hence it comes, that the Scripture has noted with infamy him that first
invented the procreation of mules, a bastard kind which God created not, Genesis
36.24.

By the same Law, it is forbidden to destroy a whole species, of what creature
soever, even of those that are most contrary to man. It was in the power of
Noah, when he had within the Ark Tigers, Vipers, and other pernicious
creatures, to destroy them, to cause the whole breed to be lost; for then there
were no more of them in the world: But it was not permitted to him; rather to
the contrary, he had order to preserve them. It is lawful for us to destroy the
particular of such kinds, but not to proceed to a suppression of the whole
kind, though it lay in our power: for this were to tear out a leaf of that
great Book which contains the catalogue of the works of the Creation.

By the same Law, it is impossible to reduce any creature to nothing, that is
to say, to make it simply nothing. One matter may be changed into another, as a
living body is resolved into dust; but it never comes to be nothing. The
Church of Rome does not formally say that the bread and wine are annihilated in
the Eucharist, but it says that they vanish, without withdrawing themselves to
some other place, without entering into the body of Christ, without being
turned into any other matter. Now according to these suppositions, it is
necessary that the bread and wine be annihilated and come to nothing: But this
pretended annihilation, is contrary to the fundamental Law of the Creation. It
is impossible and unlawful. It is impossible: for as God alone had the power to
create all things out of nothing; so he alone can reduce any thing to nothing.
It is unlawful: for God himself, though he can, yet never did annihilate any of
his creatures, no not the devils.

O Eternal God, all thy works subsist by thee. If thou withdrawest thine hand,
they will fall into nothing: but if thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they shall
be as of new created.

How many times the general order of the world has been interrupted since the
Creation.
Three times it has had an interruption, to wit, twice in heaven, once on the
earth. In heaven, when the Sun and the Moon were stayed, in the time of Joshua;
and again, when the Sun went backward, in the days of Hezekiah. For these two
wonders changed the measures of the day and night, prolonging the light in one
half of the world, and the darkness in the other beyond their times. In the
earth also, when the waters of the Deluge made it not habitable for the space
of a whole year; and in the six later months of that year, there was neither
born nor died any humane creature, nor any beast of the earth, nor fowl of the
air; God having for a time suspended both birth and death. For no creature
either was born or died within the Ark.

An example of instructions wherewith the Providence of God has furnished man,
by creatures most contemptible.
Jonas attended with impatience the destruction of Nineveh. God disputed
against him by four things of no value. By a plant which lasted no more then
one day; by the worm that gnawed it; by a little wind; and, by the shadow of
that plant, Jon. 4. Though there be nothing more vi^e then a shrub that lasts
but a night, nor any thing more paltry then a little worm, nor any thing less
sordid then the wind, nor any thing more vain then the shadow of a leaf; yet
of these four things God composed an excellent lesson for Jonas, where the
conclusion expresses the care which God had not only of man, but of the poor
beasts.

Whence comes it, that in diverse disputes and dialogues which we read to have
passed between God and man, it seems (without blasphemy be it spoken) that
man reasons better then God himself.
Let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou may be
justified in thy sayings, and clear in thy judgments. But such is the
blindness of our spirit, that our thoughts dare welnigh ascribe more reason to
man then God. We read, Genesis 20, the plea of Abimelech. This Prince would have
taken in Marriage her whom he believed to have been the sister of Abraham, and
who her self said that she was so: He proceeded with a good faith, and in
integrity of conscience; God himself has given him this testimony.
Nevertheless upon this occasion, all the family of Ab^melech were struck with
divine punishment, and himself is threatened with death. He replieth, that in
case himself were guilty, yet it behoved not that the innocents should suffer
the penalty, especially that of the last punishment, death. At the hearing,
these reasons seem invincible. But that which makes us so judge, is, because
being men, we well comprehend the reasons of man, but we comprehend not at all
the reasons of God. It behooves us here diligently to observe a point very
necessary. When God shows us a reason, we never see it fully entire, or in
its full extent, but only in some little parcels, as it were half broken:
Hence it comes that we cannot see the perfection of it. If the reasons of God
were visible in all their dimensions, we should find, that in respect of them,
all the best reasons of man were brutish and unreasonable. Moses, Exodus 5,
could not comprehend what reason the wisdom of God had to have sent him to
Pharaoh in favor of the Hebrews, to whom this Embassage served only to
redouble their misery. But that reason, which was wrapped up in apparences
contrary to reason, unfolded it self by little and little, and manifested that
great piece of work wherein God had labored with so much art. O man, who art
thou, that dispu^est against God? Have thou seen the measure or the square
which he held in his hand when he framed the world? Have thou sounded the depth
of the Sea, or have thou walked to the bottom of the Abyss? Have thou seen the
gates of the shadow of death? Know thou which way to go to the spring of the
light? Have thou entered into the magazines of hail and snow? And finally,
whence have thou any wisdom, or any spirit, but from the Spirit of God?

Notable examples of the Providence of God, in the Fatalities of Times, of
Places, and other circumstances.
Two Dreams occasioned the captivity of Joseph; two other Dreams occasioned his
deliverance; and two other Dreams were the occasion of his greatness: For his
brethren sold him into slavery, by reason of two Dreams which he rehearsed to
them. And the two Dreams which he interpreted in the Prison to the two Officers
of Pharaoh his house, served for a preparatory to his liberty. Finally, he was
promoted to the Government of all Egypt, by the occasion of two Dreams which he
expounded to the King.

The measures of Times appertain to this Sovereign Providence. See here an
example worthy admiration. Before the Captivity of Babylon, the Israelites had
possessed the land of Canaan the space of 840 years: The ten Tribes were
carried away a little before the end of this term; but the Tribe of Judah
continued the full time. For after the year in which they had finished the
conquest of the land, which was the sixth year of the Government of Joshua, to
the first year of the Captivity, you find precisely the number of 840 years,
which make 12 times 70 years; so many seventies of years, as there was of
shares when they divided the land, according to the number of the twelve
Tribes. And the Captivity of Babylon lasted 70 years, the twelfth part of the
time which they or their fathers had possessed the land of promise.

Among the vicissitudes which we call fatal, this is considerable. The
Israelites going out of the desert, entered in arms into the land of Canaan, to
make themselves masters of it. The war lasted six years, and in the seventh
year they obtained peaceable possession. Now having held it about 1500 years,
comprehending in that time some interruptions, even that which happened at the
destruction of Jerusalem under Vespasian; finally, the time being come in which
they were to be dispossessed for ever, the Romans, under the Empire of Adrian,
chased them fully out by the sword. This War lasted six years, according to the
Jews own report, who since that time never were able to make a body of an
Estate, nor the body of an Army: So that as by a War of six years they were
established in the Land of Canaan, by a War also of six years they were cast
out of it.

Among the Provinces of that Country, Galilee, so famous in the holy History,
presented to our sight an admirable circle of fatal events. Galilee was the
first that forsook the service of the true God, to receive Paganism. After
that, it was the first that God chastised, when he sent the Assyrians to
destroy the kingdom of Israel. Afterward, it was the first to which Jesus
Christ preached the Gospel; as it had been foretold, that in the land of
Zebulun and Naphtali, Galilee of the Gentiles, a light should spring up, Matthew.
4. Finally, it was the first that the Romans plundered, before the destruction
of the second Temple: for before they besieged Jerusalem, they began the War in
Galilee, and brought it back under their yoke. Surely, so great a concurrence
of revolutions in the same place, as if it were marked out by the finger of God
himself, could not proceed from any casual adventure.

We have seen something alike in our days. In the precedent age, the light of
Reformation appeared first in Germany, from thence it spread it self in France;
and after that, in this Island. That age passed, the Civil Wars, by which God
would chastise our ingratitude, first afflicted the Churches of Germany,
afterward them of France, and in the end this scourge is come as far as us. The
same order which God has kept in the dispensation of his graces, has appeared
in the distribution of his judgments: For they whom his mercy first visited,
have been the first that have been visited by his justice; and in succession
others, according to the date of the time of their enlightening.

Of many kinds of scourges equally dreadful and unavoidable, which ought to be
chosen, if God should leave the choice to us? or, which is more to be desired?
I speak not of those three scourges of which God gave the choice to David, to
wit, Plague, War, and Famine. The question is cleared, 2 Samuel 24. But there are
an infinite number of other scourges, general and particular, where oft-times
we are constrained to choose the one, that we may escape the other, or at least,
we desire the one rather then the other; it concerns us that our desire be
lawful. We set aside that which depends not at all on our choice, or of which
there can be no dispute but in vain, as, which is worse to be born deaf, or to
be born blind? Or which is more grievous, Leprosy, or perpetual Infamy? But
for example, A man guilty of a capital offense who is permitted to choose the
kind and fashion of his punishment; or a dangerous labor of a woman, where
the life of the mother cannot be saved with that of the child; and many other
occurrences or different afflictions that encounter one another in the front,
and reduce us to a necessity of choosing one: I conceive that it behooves to
choose that in which God is less offended. The choice of David was judicious,
preferring the Pestilence before the other two scourges, not only for the
reason by him expressed, but also because in War and Famine there are committed
more sins, and more enormous, then in a Pestilence. War ordinarily is a torrent
of villainies, and Famine produces unnatural horrors, so far, as to induce a
mother to eat her own child. Now concerning other kinds of adversities in
which it is requisite that we make a choice, we ought to look well upon every
one with their circumstances, to take notice of that which affords the least
occasion ^o offend God.

Whence comes it that among public scourges, those that pass the hand of
men, are more frequent, more universal, and of longer durance, then those which
come immediately from God?
For one Famine that you read in Histories, you shall find ten Wars: and
Famine also it self, for the most part, comes from a preceding War. Now War
proceeds immediately from man. Neither Famine, nor Pestilence, have ever been
so universal, nor of so long continuance as diverse Wars. The Providence of God
would make men know, that they procure to themselves more mischief then heaven
has sent upon them.

It makes for the glory of God, that there be more wicked then good men.
I am not here to show why it is necessary that there should be wicked men.
God, who has made nothing in vain, has made all things for himself, even the
wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. Neither am I to declare how it is
necessary that God should suffer them: If his Justice should extirpate all the
wicked, the greater part of the earth would become a desert; and in stead of
being peopled with men, would be peopled with savage beasts; and this would
redound to the prejudice of them that are good, who from thence would receive a
thousand discommodities. This was the reason why God would not destroy all at
one blow the inhabitants of Canaan, for fear left the Country should fall to
be a wilderness, and should be replenished with cruel beasts, which would have
given more trouble to the Israelites, Exodus 23.

But how can it serve to the glory of God, that the number of the wicked should
surpass the number of the good? On the contrary, does it not seem that the
glory of God would be more illustrious, and of a greater extent, if the good
were in greater number then the wicked? If it were so, the subsistence of
humane society, and the policy by which it is maintained, would seem rather to
depend upon the goodness of men, then upon the Providence of God. But this is
a wonder, that there being far more wicked men then good, nevertheless there
is a Providence which hinders the wicked from doing all the evil that they
might do. For whence comes it, that being in a far greater number, they do not
altogether ruin the good? Certainly, it is the work of God, who maintains a
handful of men in the midst of a world of wicked.

The greatest good that God has done to the world, is come to pass by means
of the greatest crime that men could commit.
The greatest sin that men ever committed, was to crucify the Prince of glory.
It was impossible to perpetrate one more enormous. Yet nevertheless from this
crime, managed by the wisdom of God, has been brought forth the greatest good
which men have received from heaven, to wit, the benefit of Redemption. This is
wonderful, that God has taken the advantage of the greatest sin that the world
could commit, to cause to issue from it the greatest good that the world could
receive.

Nature it self has restrained the forces and ability of man, to the end to
bound his desires, and the effects of his malice.
All the cares of man cannot add one cubit to his stature. If this could be
brought to pass, we should see prodigious bodies, every one striving to attain
to an unmeasured height. The same Providence which has limited the stature of
man, has denied him that which it has granted to the birds, to wit, the
liberty of going to and fro in the air. He sees those creatures passing
swiftly through that element over his head, while he cannot lift himself above
the earth. This is to the end that he may not extend his violence so far, nor
so easily, nor so generally: For howsoever violence traverseth the sea, and
climbeth up to the top of the highest mountains, it would yet be more
formidable, and more pernicious, if it had the wings of an Eagle; and
innocence, which often finds refuge in places inaccessible, would have no
more a sanctuary in the world.

Of the mavelous Providence of God permitting that the righteous die by the
hand of the wicked.
The first righteous man of the Old Testament (to wit, Abel) and the first
righteous of the New (to wit, John the Baptist) were both thrust out of the
world by the hand of wicked men. God would that the first fruits of the just in
both Testaments, should fall down under the hand of wicked men.

Furthermore; the last man that is named in Scripture, is a just man; to wit,
Antipas, Apol. 2. And this just man was put to death by the wicked. So that the
first and the last of the righteous, lost their lives by the fury of those that
were perverse. The Scripture begins the catalogue of good men in their
blood, and ends it in their blood. The beginning and the closure teach us,
that the most bloody adversaries of the children of God, are not dispensed but
by his order.

Among the resemblances between Moses and Christ (the one of which gave the
Law, the other brought the Gospel) there is one notable likeness: that is,
that the birth of both of them was made memorable by the death of innocents.
That of Moses, by the cruelty of the Egyptians, who drowned in the water the
children of the Hebrews. That of Christ, by the barbarousnesse of Herod, who
caused the cutting of the throats of the children of Bethlehem.

Why in War the people of God have been often beaten by their enemies; and why
a good cause has been overthrown.
Run through the holy History: All the times that the people of God have been
overcome in War, you shall find that this has come to pass through their own
fault; to wit, either because they have undertaken a War without cause; as
Josiah, who quarrelled with the King of Egypt: Or because they have concluded
upon a War without enquiring at the mouth of God; as the Israelites against the
Tribe of Benjamin: Or that they have fought against the express prohibition of
God; as the Hebrews that set upon the Amalekites encamped on the mountain,
Numb. 14. Or because they have abused a precedent Victory; as the children of
Israel, who having purloined of the accursed thing of Jericho, were presently
after beaten by the inhabitants of Ai: Or for having consulted with the enemy
of God; as Saul, who had recourse to a Sorceresse, to learn what success the
battle should have: Or for having broken the faith given to the enemy; as
Zedekiah, who brake the agreements past between him and Nebuchadnezzar: Or in
sum, by putting themselves out of the protection of God; as the Israelites in
the days of Eli the Priest; to whom the contempt of Religion caused the loss
of that lamentable Battle in which the Ark of God it self was taken, and
carried in triumph by the Philistines.

In most of these examples, we may see that a good cause has been vanquished;
but with reason. The justice of the cause has come to nothing, through the
injustice of them that managed it, or through the injustice of the proceedings.

Sometimes also, two parties that make War together, may both have a just cause
in part, although one of them may have the less right of the two. The Wars
which the Christians have moved against Mahomet, have had for their cause the
honor of the Name of Christ. On the other side, Mahomet declares that he has
taken arms to avenge the honor of God, defiled by the Idolatries of
Christians. This cause, which is but too true in regard of many men, has given
him so many Victories over Christendom.

Why God never sent above one Angel, or two at most, when he intended to
destroy men; and has often sent many, when he intended to preserve one man.
Three Angels came to Abraham, to promise him the birth of Isaac; but there
were but two which went to destroy Sodom. To protect one Elisha, an army of
Angels appeared, in the likeness of charets of fire; but to put to death one
hundred fourscore and five thousand men in one night, in the camp of
Sennacherib; to cause to die of the Pestilence seventy thousand in three days,
by reason of the sin of David, who had numbered the people; to destroy all the
firstborn of Egypt in an hour, God employed not above one Angel. Whence comes
it, that to protect one man alone, God sends sometimes whole legions of
Angels; and to destroy thousands of men, yea, whole Nations, he sends but one
Angel? Surely the Angels were created for the preservation of men, not for
their destruction. And although God uses them for the execution of his
judgments, nevertheless, to show that this is as by accident, and beyond the
scope of their creation, he never employeth above one or two when the business
is to destroy man; where on the contrary he employeth many when it is to save.
The Psalmist was not ignorant of this Divinity: For when he prays against his
enemies, he desires that the Angel of God (the Angel in the singular number)
might persecute them, Psalm. 35. But when he promises to the faithful the
protection of God, He shall give, says he, his Angels charge over thee. We
know that in another place he speaks, in the singular, of the Angel that
encampeth about them that fear him, and that often God is content to send only
one Angel to defend a great number of men: But withal he has often used the
service of many Angels to this effect; whereas to destroy man, he never would
employ in any occasion, above only one Angel, or two at the most.

If man had persevered in original justice, there had never been Miracles, but
only of one kind.
Miracles have been wrought to convince the incredulity of man; and therefore
they had not been at all necessary, if man had not first become incredulous.
Besides, Miracles have been wrought to teach men that which all Nature together
knew not how to teach them, to wit, the benefit of Redemption, which
presupposes the fall of man.

Certainly, if man had remained in his first integrity, he had never seen the
waters of the deluge, nor Lot's wife turned into a statue of Salt, nor any of
all those wonders which have served to chastise man: Neither had he seen those
miraculous healings, nor the dead raised: for neither death nor diseases, which
have furnished the subject of these Miracles, had had any place in the state of
innocence.

The only kind of Miracle which God would have showed unto man, if he had
still persisted in his integrity, had been, according to all probability, to
transport him at the last from earth to heaven, without passing through death.
And this is a notable point, that after the Creation, God wrought no Miracle
till the translation of Enoch, who was carried up from earth to heaven. God
began his Miracles with that kind of Miracle which only ought to have had
place, if man had still continued righteous.

Of JESUS CHRIST.
A consideration of the diverse Names and Titles of our Savior: And the
differences that ought to be observed in expressing them.
When we name him, sometimes we call him only Jesus; sometimes we say, Jesus
Christ; sometimes we say only Christ; sometimes we call him Our Lord;
sometimes we join all these names together, Our Lord Jesus Christ; sometimes we
say, The Son of God. Now it seems indifferent by which of these Names we call
him; and we pronounce the first that comes in our mouth: But howsoever all
these names design the same Person, nevertheless every one of these does not
mark out to us all the qualities and relations which we consider in that
person; rather, one signifies him in one regard, and another has to it self
also a particular meaning: So that these Names ought not to be used confusedly,
or without choice; but we are to pronounce that or those among them which have
relation more to the subject of which we treat. If we speak of him who has
saved us, the name of Jesus is appropriate to him. If the question be of the
means by which he has saved us, they are comprised under the name of Christ.
If we mention his Commandment, we should say, This is the Ordinance of the
Lord. If we consider him as author of the communion which we have with his
Father, there presents it self to us the title of the Son of God. There are
also other subjects, to every one of which there may be referred one or more of
these titles.

It will be said upon this, The Scripture it self does not observe these
distinctions, uses these names indifferently, upon every occasion. Now I
confess that in so great a multitude of passages of the New Testament, in
which these names are repeated, it is impossible to say why one is rather
expressed then the other. Yet there are some reasons: And then when all these
names, or the greater part of them are found joined together, it is to express
the plenitude and perfection of him to whom all these titles appertain.

In the History of the Gospel, he is almost everywhere called Jesus, without
other epithet or attribute; because this was the only name which men gave him,
while he conversed in the world: The man whom they call Jesus, said the man
that was born blind, Joh. 9.11. Sometimes, the Apostles themselves call him
Jesus of Nazareth: but this is when they speak to the Jews, who called him so.
This language would not be so convenient at this day.

I pass by a question which might be moved, Why the Apostle ( Philip. 2.)
says that every knee shall bow at the name of Jesus: And why he does not say
at the name of Jesus Christ, nor at the name of the Lord Jesus. A reason might
be given: But for the rest, We adore not the syllables, but him that is
represented by that name. And the Name of Christ, or the Name of the Son of
God, are no less venerable then then the Name of Jesus.

But I am to make an observation against the ordinary practice of Christians,
and of the greater part of Preachers themselves. When they pronounce the name
of Christ alone, this is either by way of abbreviation, or else by way of
custom, without thinking whether it be to purpose to say only Christ, or to
say Jesus Christ, or Our Lord Jesus Christ. It is therefore to be noted, that
when the Scriptures speak of his sufferings and his death, ordinarily they give
him none other then the only name of Christ. Christ is dead; Christ has
suffered; It was necessary that Christ should suffer; The sufferings of Christ,
etc. This may be, forasmuch as the name of Christ includes that of Priest,
which is the quality in which Christ offered himself to death. The Apostle (
Romans 6.8, 11.) says that we are dead with Christ, but living in Jesus Christ
our Lord. I know that there may be opposed some exceptions, yet in every one of
them there is a particular cause why one of those Names is rather used then
another.

I will produce one example. There is no man that thinks he speaks amiss,
when he says, The Supper of Christ, or, The Supper of Jesus Christ. And of a
truth, this is not an heresy, but nevertheless it is an impropriety: For if
we will speak according to the Scripture, we should say, The Supper of the
Lord, not The Supper of Jesus Christ. This is a particularity remarkable, that
in the whole description of the Supper, exhibited by the Apostle (1 Cor. 11.)
and in all the discourse which he makes of this subject and the author of it,
he never gives other name then that of The Lord. The Supper of the Lord; I
have received of the Lord that which also I have delivered unto you; The Lord,
in the right in the which he was betrayed, took bread; You show the Lords death;
The cup of the Lord; The body and blood of the Lord; Not discerning the body of
the Lord. I forbear to speak why in all this deduction the name of Christ is
not once mentioned, and that of the Lord is continually expressed. But this
example teaches us that we ought to use discretion even then when we pronounce
the titles of him to whom God has given a name above every name.

Wherefore Jesus, who received the Sacraments as well of the one as the other
Testament, had not that external Anointing which was given to Prophets, Priests
and Kings.
He received the Sacraments common to the whole Church, to show, among many
other reasons, the communion which we have with him. And for other causes he
would not have that material Unction which was particular to certain persons:
Not the Royal anointing, which was a mark of a temporal dominion; whereas the
Kingdom of Christ is of another nature: Not the Priestly, that was for Aaron;
for the Priesthood of Christ is not of that order, but according to the Order
of Melchizedek: Not the Prophetical: for when one Prophet anointed any other to
be a Prophet, by this action he declared him his successor: So El^sha was
anointed to succeed Elijah. But our Sovereign Prophet, who preceded all the
Prophets, succeeded none of them, and therefore ought not to receive their
Unction.

Whence comes it that diverse discourses uttered by Jesus Christ, seem to be
without method? And an admirable secret, which ought to be observed.
The History of the Gospel recites unto us diverse Sermons and other excellent
discourses which Jesus Christ made when he conversed among men. Now we may
observe that in the same discourse Jesus Christ passes oftentimes from one
matter to another which is very far distant, and seems to be quite beside the
subject. It seems to us to see pieces brought from several places, ill
joined, and without any dependence or tie one with another. Expositours labor
hard to find the contexture thereof: but their ordinary Logic which they
bring, with all their Analyzes, can never attain it.

I pass by, that Jesus Christ preaching had the perfection of Divinity. We
have but the shreds of this Science, a little scantling of this great piece,
and some few drops of that Ocean; but in Christ are enclosed all the treasures
of wisdom. Now he had the entire body, and we have but a few parcels; so his
style has other rules and other measures then ours.

But behold the secret which we ought here to consider. Jesus Christ saw the
thoughts and the hearts of those to whom he spoke. If an Orator had this
advantage to see the thoughts of them that hear him, he would apply himself to
them, rather then to the ordinary rules of his Rhetoric, which knows not
this method. This desultory style which we see in the discourses of Jesus
Christ, has been often occasioned by the thoughts of his hearers: According as
these were formed in them, he addressed himself to them; and according as
others thoughts were bred in them, he turned his discourse on that side. The
ways of this method are transcendent, and appertain to none but him who can
read in our hearts.

A conjecture of what our Lord wrote, when the Pharisees demanded his judgment
touching the punishment of the adulteress, Joh. 8.
Once only we find that he read, and once only we find that he wrote. That
which he read, is recited Luke 4. but that which he wrote is not expressed. The
holy History says, that upon the demand made to him by the Pharisees, stooping
down, he wrote with his finger upon the ground, two several times. Some of our
most eminent Divines think that they were not characters that bare any
signification, but that they were lines only or marks drawn without any other
meaning or design, but to divert the importunity of the Pharisees, and to make
them know that they were unworthy of any other answer. But to take it so, this
action does not seem sufficiently grave and serious, nor, which is more,
sufficiently worthy of the wisdom of the Son of God. It is therefore more
credible that this writing was significative. Now though it be hard to find
what was contained in it, since the History has passed it over in silence,
nevertheless many Expositours, ancient and modern, have brought their
conjectures. Let it be permitted to me to express mine.

The Law ( Numb. 5.) ordained that a woman suspected of adultery should appear
before the Priest; who, among diverse other ceremonies, took of the dust which
was on the floor of the Tabernacle, and mingled it with water in an earthen
vessel: afterward, having put the woman to her oath, he wrote in a note those
curses to which she had submitted; and finally blotted out the writing in the
water, which he gave her to drink; having first declared that if she were
innocent, that drink, which contained the blottings of this writing mingled
with the dust, should not be hurtful to her.

Now between this Law and the proceeding of our Savior toward the Pharisees,
there are found diverse resemblances. The business is concerning a woman, an
adulteress. The Pharisees allege the Law of Moses. Our Lord would that they
should examine themselves. He writes in the dust on the floor of the Temple,
where this action passed; as if he should say, You your selves, are you
innocent? Could you drink this dust which bears the writing of the oath of
execration? Let him among you that is without sin, cast the first stone at her.

Why God sent for the forerunner of his Son, a Prophet rather then a King: And
why there was no Christian King for the space of three hundred years after the
nativity of Jesus Christ.
God could have raised a King, in stead of a man clothed with Camels hair, to
prepare the way before the Messiah: But it would have seemed that the
foundations of the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this world, had been laid
through the strength of the arm of man. The Divine calling also has appeared
more evidently in the sending of a Prophet: for men can make a King, but none
but God can make a Prophet.

For the same cause, the wisdom of God would that the Gospel should be spread
thorowout the world, long time before any King or Emperor embraced the
Christian Religion: for it is not easy to find in History any Prince which
made profession of it before Constantine the Great. Now the Gospel had been
before preached for the space of two hundred and eighty years. To declare that
it was not at all planted under the shadow of humane greatness.

Of the humane nature of JESUS CHRIST.
An excellent gradation in the four Evangelists describing the Genealogi^ of
Jesus Christ.
ALl the Evangelists exhibit unto us the Savior, but every one of them in his
particular method. Saint Mark describes not at all the Genealogy of Jesus
Christ, but begins his History at his Baptism. Saint Matthew searched out
his original from Abraham (chap. 1.) Saint Luke follows it backward as far as
Adam (chap. 3.) Saint John passes further upward, even to the eternal
generation of this Word that was made flesh ( chap. 1.) So they lead us to
Christ, mounting up four several steps in the which he is represented to us.

In the one, we see him only among the men of his own time, then when he
conversed with them.

In the second, he is seen in the tent of Abraham.

In the third, he is yet higher, to wit, in Adam.

And finally, having traversed all ages, through so many generations, we come to
contemplate him in the beginning, in the bosom of the Father, in that Eternity
in which he was with God.

Beyond this general harmony resulting from the agreement of all the
Evangelists together, there is another particular which I shall by and by
observe.

Why the Scripture gives the name of Antichrist to him that denies the
Humanity of our Savior, rather then to him that denies his Divinity.
This is Antichrist, which denies that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
says Saint John in his first Epistle, chap. 4. This Heresy is marked as the
most capital, and as the greatest opposition to Christianity. To deny the
Humanity of Jesus Christ, is to deny his death, and consequently his
resurrection, and all the dispensation of salvation. The Humanity of Christ is
more near unto us, and more perceptible by us, then his Divinity. So that it is
an inexcusable crime in man, not to acknowledge the Man Jesus Christ.

Why Jesus Christ, after his resurrection, called himself no more the Son of
man, as before-times.
Jesus Christ, before his resurrection, is oftener called the Son of man, then
the Son of God: But after he was risen, when he speaks of himself, he is no
more called the Son of Man. Surely, the resurrection has not brought to
nothing his Humanity: but this name of the Son of Man includes the weakness
and sufferings to which he had rendered himself subject as man. Now after being
delivered out of this abasement, and being declared the Son of God by the
resurrection from the dead, he has changed his style, and is no more called
the Son of Man, which was the name by which he called himself ordinarily before
his resurrection. After this, he spoke diverse times to his disciples, calling
to their remembrance the necessity of his death, of which he had before
advertised them: But he no more expressed the name of the Son of Man. When he
was yet mortal, It behooves (says he) that the Son of man suffer: But being
raised from the dead, Ought not Christ (says he) to have suffered?

Why the most glorious miracles which our Lord wrought, were often preceded by
some action which witnessed those weaknesses to which his humane nature was
made subject.
In the same time that our Lord went to display his divine power, by some
extraordinary miracle, he often begins with some act of humane weakness. If
he appease the tempest, it is after he has been overcome with sleep. If he
give hearing to the deaf, it is after having fetched a deep sigh. If he cure
him that was born blind, it is after having made clay of his spittle. If he
cause the figtree to be dried up, the occasion of it is the hunger that
pressed. If he raise Lazarus from death, it is after having groned and wept.
Finally, if he cause the earth to tremble, if he rend the rocks, if he open the
sepulchers, it is after having given up the ghost. In the most glorious
demonstrations of his Deity, and even before he brings them forth, he would
have us to see that he was truly Man.

Of an admirable harmony which is found between the three periods of the three
fourteens numbered in the first chapter of Saint Matthew.
The Evangelist begins at those generations that descended from Abraham to
Christ; and at first presents to our sight a long rank of Patriarchs and
Kings, which enrich the frontispice of the New Testament, as so many speaking
statues, so many precious stones set in the brestplate, or so many stars that
went before the coming of the Sun of righteousness. All these generations are
divided into three fourteens; every one of which ends in some remarkable
change: For we know that Saint Matthew reckons from Abraham to David fourteen
generations; from David to the Captivity, fourteen generations; from the
Captivity unto Christ, fourteen generations. The first fourteen therefore ended
in David, in whom began the Kingdom of Judah, the Tribe from whence our Lord
sprang. The second ended at the Captivity of Babylon, which overthrew the
Throne of David. The third and last ended in Jesus Christ himself, who
reestablished that Kingdom, and concludes the Genealogies. So these three
periods have three limits, which are 1. David. 2. The Captivity of Babylon. 3.
Jesus Christ.


Now that which I have to note here, is, that the life of David, who ends the
first fourteen, was of seventy years. The Captivity of Babylon, in which was
accomplished the second fourteen, was of seventy years. And the time current
from the nativity of Christ, who boundeth the last fourteen, and all the
Genealogies, to the ruin of Jerusalem, in which perished the registers and
catalogues of the families of the Jews, was seventy years: For the most exact
Chronology places the destruction of Jerusalem presently after the seventieth
year of Jesus Christ. So that the divine providence has measured Seventy years
for the life of David, from whom Christ was to descend. Seventy years for the
Captivity of Babylon. Seventy years after the birth of Jesus Christ, for the
verification of his genealogy, in the registers of the Jews.


An admirable conformity; which shows among so many lights all of them
celestial, that never other spirit then that of God, could have dictated the
Scriptures.

Two notable preludiums of the birth of Jesus Christ; and the agreement of the
one with the other.
Two women brought forth children beyond their age of childbearing, and beyond
likelihood: The one, in the Old Testament, to wit, Sarah; the other in the New,
to wit, Elizabeth: The one, the wife of him who first used Circumcision; the
other, the mother of him who first administered Baptism, which succeeded
Circumcision. God would that Isaac and John the Baptist should be born of
mothers who were past the years of having children: This was to prepare the
souls of men to attend yet a greater miracle, to wit, a man born of a Virgin.
The shadow then of this mystery passed first by the Old Testament, in Isaac;
afterward to the New, in the person of John the Baptist, whose birth was
immediately followed by that of Jesus Christ.

God has never published by miracles the birth of any person, except that of
Jesus Christ.
Some few (to wit, Ishmael, Isaac, Samson, John Baptist) have had this honor
that their birth has been foretold and promised by the mouth of Angels: but
when they have been come into the world, none Angel has published their
nativity. This glory was reserved for the Savior of the world, whose birth
being come to pass, as it had also been promised by the Angels; so beyond
that, it has been published and solemnized by them, with applause and great
expressions of joy, Luke 2.

This happy birth has been also followed by another sign from heaven, by the
apparition of that star which carried the news as far as the East, and served
as a guide to the wise men. Never the nativity of any other has been
proclaimed or celebrated by miracles. This also has been particular to Jesus
Christ.

Wherefore has not the Scripture set down the day of the Nativity of Jesus
Christ?
It is not mine aim here to report the diverse opinions of them who have
searched in what season of the year, in what month and in what day our Savior
was born. Some place his birth, according to the common opinion, at the
Winter-Solstice; others in the Autumnal Equinoctial; others in that of the
Spring; and all have nothing but conjectures, more ingenuous then concluding:
For the History of the Gospel, by its silence, has left this point in question.

Now this is it which I will at this present consider, to wit, Why none of the
Evangelists, nor other of the sacred Writers, have set down a day so
remarkable; the day, I say, of the Nativity of our Savior.

This is so much the more strange, because the Scripture shows us the days of
diverse occurrences which are of less consideration. It marketh the month and
the Day on which the Deluge began: the Day on which the Ark rested upon the
mountains of Armenia; the Day on which the waters were dried from the earth;
the day on which Noah began to set foot again on the earth: afterward; the Day
on which the Israelites went up out of Egypt; the Day of the deliverance of the
Jews, in the Book of Esther; the Day on which the Temple was burned by the
Babylonians. Wherefore has it not also set down the day on which Jesus Christ
was born?

It might also be asked, why the holy History mentions the time of the year
and the Day of the death of Christ, that of his resurrection, that of his
ascension; and never mentions either the Day or the season of the year of his
nativity.

To say that the Evangelists were ignorant of it, or that they had forgotten
it, or that they were silent through inadvertency, or that they neglected it as
being not at all considerable, this would be to run into a thousand
absurdities, easy to be confuted. There must therefore be other reasons of
this silence, and something that is mysterious. Now I vaunt not my self to have
found out the depth; only I will touch the superficies.

We are therefore to note as a Maxim, that the Scripture never sets down
the Birthday of any Person. It speaks of the Birth of many, it rehearses
their genealogies, it reckons their years, and other particularities; but
never speaks on what Day they were born.

We find that in speaking of some, it expresses the Day of their death; as we
see in the history of the ten sons of Haman, Esth. 9. but of whomsoever it
speaks, be they Patriarchs, or Kings, or private men, or good, or bad, it
never expresses the Day of their Nativity, though such a date may seem to
import greatly the sacred Chronology.

Now wherefore the Scripture never names the Day of the Birth of the children
of Adam, no, nor one of them, there is without doubt some reason, though to us
it be obscure. But whatsoever that reason be, the Birth Day of Jesus Christ is
clouded in the same silence. Wherefore? Surely, to the end that among other
things which are common to him with the other children of Adam, he might also
be comprised among them in this point, not to have his Birthday expressed in
the holy History. But what does it concern us that this day is not expressed,
more then that of other men? As much as it does concern us that Jesus Christ
has been reckoned among sinners, even from his Birth. Neither does it serve
for an Objection, that he has been put into their rank more evidently, when he
was circumcised, and when he underwent that purification which the Law imposed
upon the firstborn: for this truth excludes not others that second it, though
they be not founded upon express words of Scripture. It is enough that they
are implied. This is out of doubt, that the Scripture never said on what day a
man was born. It is also out of doubt, that Jesus Christ is comprised in this
universal rule. The question is, Wherefore? If I have not found the true reason,
I have at the least pointed out a principle upon which it may be searched.

Add to this, that in stead of the Birth Day of Jesus Christ, the Scriptures
express that of his death. That is, among diverse other reasons because he died
on the same day on which Adam was created, to wit, the sixth day of the week.
The creation of the first Adam, and the death of the second, met in the same
day. The impurity of our birth, which we have from the first, had not been
purged but by the death of the second.

Of the service which the Angels have done to the Son of God, from his
manifestation in the flesh, until his Ascension.
Ten times they have served him in this space of time.

1. They carried the message of his miraculous conception to the Virgin.

2. They advertised Joseph, whom the ignorance of this mystery had held
perplexed.

3. They published his birth unto the shepherds.

4. They gave order to carry him into Egypt, to avoid the fury of Herod.

5. They had care to cause him to be brought back into Judea, after the death
of the tyrant.

6. They accompanied him and ministered unto him, after his temptation in the
wilderness.

7. They comforted him in his agony, in the garden.

8. They rolled back the stone from the door of the sepulcher wherein he had
been enclosed.

9. They declared his resurrection.

10. They instructed his disciples, who looked up after him ascending into
heaven, that one day he would return.

Never did the Angels serve any person so often, nor in so great a number of
occurrences, nor in so high charges, nor through such diversity of means, as
they served the Son of God. This also ought to be reckoned among the marks of
the preeminence of our Lord.

Of the Miracles which our Lord wrought, so long as he conversed in the world.
Of the advantage of the New Testament above the Old, in regard of the number
of persons which have had the gift of Miracles.
IN all the extent of the Old Testament, there are not above seven men to whom
God gave the power of working Miracles.

Moses and his brother Aaron, famous for the wonders wrought by them in Egypt,
in the Red Sea and in the wilderness.

Joshua, who stayed the Sun and Moon in their course.

Samuel, who changed the whole face of the air in an instant, affrighting
Israel by thunders and miraculous rain, 1 Samuel 12.

A Prophet (mentioned 1 King. 13.) who rent, by his word alone, the Altar set
up against the Ordinance of God, and scattered the ashes. The same Prophet also
healed the hand of Jeroboam, which was dried up.

Elijah, who shut and opened heaven, caused fire to come down, raised from
death the son of the widow, etc.

And lastly, Elesha, famous for diverse great Miracles.

There have been none but these seven men, upon whom this power has been
conferred. The other Miracles which are recited in the Old Testament, or which
have gone before the coming of the Son of God, have been wrought without the
intervention of men.

There may be, to speak this by the way, some allusion or reference of the
seven Angels of the Revelation, working upon the Sun and upon all the elements,
to these seven men which have heretofore exercised this miraculous power. But
this matter concerns not the present subject.

That which I have here to say, is this; That the New Testament has been
furnished with a greater number of persons endued with the power of Miraeles,
then the Old was; yea, with a very far greater number. At one only time, the
Lord ordained seventy men, with power to heal the sick, to cleanse the lepers,
to raise the dead, to cast out devils, to tread upon serpents and scorpions,
and upon all the force of the enemy: And this, without reckoning the twelve
principal disciples, who were also provided of the same gift: and those which
afterward had it, as Saint Paul and others. I account this point among the
advantages of the New Testament, that in it the miraculous power of God has
raised so great a number of instruments, in comparison of them which it
employed for the Old Testament.

Wherefore till the coming of the Son of God, there have passed many ages
without that any person has had the gift of Miracles.
The last of all those which wrought Miracles before the coming of our Lord,
was Elisha. Now from Elisha till that time when the Son of God began to
manifest his glory by Miracles, there passed welnigh eight hundred years. In so
long an interval of years, there was not found a person that had the gift of
Miracles, although many had that of Prophecy.

Certainly, the wisdom of God would that this great length of time should serve
to make them desire that which had not been seen after so many ages, to wit,
Miracles wrought by the hand of man; as afterward, those that were spectatours
glorified God, that had done this honor unto men in giving them this power,
Matthew. 9.8. That it should dispose their spirits to the expectation of the
Messiah, who was to come with miraculous works. That it should serve to make
them the better to weigh the importance of his Miracles, after so long a
surcease of the gift of Miracles. And lastly, that which is the principal, that
it should serve to distinguish him from other men.

To see how, behold this that ought to be considered. We say, and it is true,
that the Miracles of our Lord have demonstrated that he is the Christ. This
proof seems not sufficient: for Elijah, Joshua, Moses, and the others which
we have mentioned, wrought Miracles also, and yet no man ever thought that any
of them was the Christ. But this was because none of them came at the time
which had been set down for the coming of the Messiah, but all preceded it very
far. The Divine Providence did purposely interpose a long distance of ages
between them and the time which was destined for the coming of Christ, to the
end to show that none of them could be the Christ. If then when the coming of
Christ approached, some other had appeared with the gift of Miracles, he might
have been taken for the Messiah himself, considering the concurrence of time:
but this inconvenience has been prevented. The following question is referred
also to this.

Why none of them from whom Christ is descended according to the flesh, has
had the gift of Miracles.
This is remarkable, that of so many ancestors of whom Christ is issued, there
is not one that has wrought a Miracle: Neither Enoch, nor Abraham, nor David,
nor so great a number of other famous men, have been honored with this gift.
And it is especially to be considered, that none of the Tribe of Judah wrought
Miracles, till our Lord came.

This Tribe had been designed among all others, to be that of which Christ
ought to be born. It was important then that none of this race should work any
Miracle before our Lord, to the end that none other might be taken for the
Messiah. Of all those which have wrought Miracles, there was not one of the
Tribe of Judah. Not Moses nor Aaron, who were of the Tribe of Levi. Not Joshua,
who was of Ephraim. Not Elijah nor the others, the Tribe of whom is either
different or uncertain. Our Lord is the first of the lineage of Judah, that
wrought Miracles. And before him, God would never grant that power to any
person of that Tribe.

Why John the Baptist had not the gift of Miracles.
The birth of so great a man, who was more then a Prophet, was truly preceded
by Miracles, but himself never wrought any Miracle. This is also, in part, for
the same cause which I have already spoken, to the end that it might not be
thought that he was the Christ, whereas he was none other then his forerunner.
And indeed, already eyes were cast upon him as if he had been the Messiah. But
there is also another reason which ought here to be considered.

The first that wrought Miracles under the Old Testament, was the same man that
gave the Law, to wit, Moses. The first also that wrought Miracles in the New
Testament, was the same that brought the Gospel, to wit, Jesus Christ. This
prerogative appertained to him, to be the first which should seal the New
Testament by Miracles, as Moses had been the first that sealed the Old. This
could not be agreeable to John the Baptist.

Of the diverse degrees or steps by which our Lord displayed his miraculous
power toward the bodies of men.
The Son of God began his Miracles at the nourishments of the body of man, when
he changed the water into wine. Afterward he manifested his power in healing
the sick. And lastly, continuing still to do good unto the living, he proceeded
so far as to raise the dead.

Sometimes he has brought forth one great Miracle, to be the forerunner of a
greater Miracle. Having healed the servant of the Centurion, who was near unto
death, on the morrow he raised him who was perfectly dead, to wit, the young
man of Naim, Luke 7. Having healed her who had been sick twelve years, the same
day he raised her that had been dead, being of the age of twelve years, Mark 5.

It behooves here to note the diverse ages of sicknesses and infirmities of
those which he healed. Some had been afflicted since twelve years; as the woman
already spoken of. Others, since eighteen years; as the woman bowed together,
Luke 13.11. Others, since eight and thirty years, Joh. 5.5. Others, from their
infancy; as the Lunatic, Mark 9.21. Others, from their birth; as he that was
born blind, Joh. 9.1. So that the Son of God, be it in healing the bodies of
men, or raising them from the dead, has extended his power from their cradle
to their grave.

Of the diverse actions which Jesus Christ has done in the Temple of Jerusalem.
He entered into the Temple diverse times, in diverse qualities, and for diverse
functions.

1. He entered as a private person, and a member of the Commonwealth of
Israel; when he was presented to the Lord, forty days after his nativity, Luke
2.22.

2. He did the act of a Disciple, at the age of twelve years, hearing the
Doctors, and asking them questions.

3. He did the act of a Doctor, when he preached and taught.

4. He did the act of a Redeemer, when he pardoned the adulteress.

5. He did the act of the Lord and Master of the Temple, when he chased out the
buyers and sellers that profaned it.

6. He performed also the act of a Sovereign, in the Miracles which he wrought.
And this furnishes us with the Consideration following.

Why no man ever wrought Miracle within the Temple of God, except the Son of
God. An observation upon this subject.
We are not of the opinion that this came to pass casually, or for want of
occasion, or without cause worthy to be considered, that our Lord was the alone
man that has exercised the power of Miracles within the house of his Father:
This is one of the marks of his preeminence, and of the jurisdiction which he
had in that place. Many men have wrought Miracles in diverse parts, but none of
them wrought them within the compass of the Temple. It was promised ( Malach.
3.) that the Lord, which is the Messiah, should come into his Temple. Now Jesus
Christ willing to show that it was himself that was to come, caused himself to
be taken notice of within the Temple it self, by the Miracles which there he
produced; there, I say, where none other had that power.

It may be observed here, that there have been two persons that have been
struck with miraculous plagues in the Temple; a King, and a Priest; to wit,
Uzziah, and Zacharias the father of John the Baptist. The one became leprous,
and the other dumb; 2 Chronicles. 26. Luke 1. But never any sick or impotent were
miraculously healed in the Temple, till the coming of the Son of God, who
there healed the blind and the lame, Matthew. 21.14.

Why Jesus Christ, when he was hungry, or thirsty, or weary with travel, never
helped himself by his miraculous power, to give himself refreshment.
When others wanted drink, he turned water into wine: But when himself was
thirsty, he desired water of the Samaritan woman. When others were hungry, he
multiplied the loaves, and satisfied thousands of men: But when himself was
pressed with hunger, and had addressed himself to the fig tree which had no
fruit, he caused none to be brought forth, though he could have done it
forthwith. So he endured the weariness of the way, ( Joh. 4.6.) although he
might have caused himself to have been carried by Angels, or lifted up by the
Spirit, as Philip afterward was, Acts 8.39, 40. In sum, he never used Miracles
for his own refreshment.

As he came for others, so all his Miracles have been for others. And this is
one part of his annihilation of himself, that using his miraculous power for
the refreshment of others, he never used it for his own.

Why the Son of God, after he was raised from the dead, ceased from healing the
sick.
Our Lord being in the world, healed corporal maladies, so long as he himself
was burdened with our infirmities, that is to say, before his Resurrection.
After that he was raised from death, he remained upon the earth forty days,
conversed with men, wrought diverse Miracles, but healed not any that was sick.
This is not because his power was impaired, since it was become more glorious;
nor that he had less charity then afore-time; nor that there wanted those that
were sick in Israel: But that he healed no more, was because he had
appropriated that kind of Miracles to the time of his humiliation. Wherefore
the Scripture ( Matthew. 8.17.) rehearsing his curing of diverse sick men, says,
that by such acts was verified that Prophecy that says that he took our
infirmities, and bare ^ur sicknesses: For that place sets them down as terms
equivalent, as far as concerns bodily infirmities, to have undergone them in
his person, or to have healed them in others; for he never wrought these
miraculous cures, but so long as himself was capable of infirmity.

Of the Tears of Christ in the days of his Flesh.
WE read not that he wept, till within a few days before his death: and it
seems that he became every day more sensible of our miseries, according as he
tried them by experience more and more. The Scripture spares not to say, that
he learned obedience by those things which he suffered, Heb. 5.8.

Thrice we read that he wept. The first time, for one man; the second, for one
nation; and the third, for all Mankind. For one man, when he wept over the
Sepulcher of Lazarus: for one nation, when he wept over Jerusalem, foreseeing
the ruin of it, and the desolation of the whole people of the Jews: for all
mankind, then when he offered up with strong crying and tears, prayers and
supplications to him who could save him from death, Heb. 5.7.

Christ condemned by Pilate.
A Consideration why the names of diverse wicked men are set down in the history
of the Passion of Christ.
SOmetimes the Scripture expresses the name of a man who seems to be of
little importance, and sometimes it suppresseth the name of another which
should be more considerable. It tells us the name of the robber whom the Jews
preferred before Jesus Christ, when Pilate gave them the choice to release to
them one of the two: Yet it names not the thief which was converted, although
that it should seem that his name ought rather to be mentioned then that of the
other. Now setting aside the reasons of this silence, we will retain this, that
when the Scripture expresses the name of a wicked man, this is not always
only to set down the circumstances of the History, but often for other causes.

Among all the wicked men which are comprised in the History of the Passion,
there are seven marked by their names: Judas, Annas and Caiaphas, Malchus,
Herod, Barabbas, and Pontius Pilate. Now it seems that the Scripture, which
recites how all sorts of men contributed to the death of Christ, would also
name one of every condition: One of the household of Christ; One High Priest,
and another inferior; One servant; One King; One Judge; yea, one thief. This
does not exclude the particular reasons for which every one of these men
aforesaid has his name in this History. It imports that Malchus, who was
none other then a servant, was named as well as Caiaphas; and Barabbas, as well
as Pilate, though the one be more considerable then the other.

The name of the Roman Empire has intervened both in the birth and death of
Christ.
The Edict of Caesar, who caused the inrolment mentioned Luke 2, served to
prepare the place where Christ ought to be born: and the authority of Caesar
served to procure the death which Christ ought to die. It was requisite that
all the mysteries of the Redemption should be fulfilled in that time in which
this great Monarchy commanded in Judea; yea, it was requisite that it should be
one of the instruments, even in acts quite contrary. It lodged Christ coming
into the world, and afterward caused him to go out of the world. It provided a
Cradle for his Birth, and afterward the Cross for his Death.

The Death and Burial of CHRIST.
Four glorious occurrences, distant many ages one from the other, and coming to
pass on the like day.
THe calling of Abraham, when God drew him from Ur of the Caldeans: The going
of the Israelites out of Egypt, after having kept the Passover: The Decree of
the restoration of Jerusalem, mentioned by the Angel to Daniel, chap. 9.25.
And finally, the death of Christ, are four points of an high consideration, and
admirable in their correspondencies.

Now although they are separated the one from the other, by diverse so long
distances in regard of years, yet they all meet together in the same day. The
History teaches us that the Israelites went out of Egypt within that proper
day and the same night in which came to be expired the four hundred and thirty
years which had past after the calling of Abraham. That calling then came to
pass on the same day, Exodus 12. The day also of the death of Christ, which is
that of the Passover, does concur with the other: and the same day, according
to the best computation, ended the seventy weeks of Daniel; whence it follows
that they began on the same day, the day on which went forth the Decree to
rebuild the holy City.

This wonderful concurrence presents to our eyes Jesus Christ dying on the
same day on which Abraham departed out of Caldea, that Israel went out of
Egypt, and that the Decree was pronounced to raise again the walls of
Jerusalem. Thus the death of Christ extends it self as far as those ages that
have past long before it, and his Day is found also within the fairest days of
the Patriarchs.

An advertisement touching the Name of Altar improperly ascribed to the Cross.
I repeat now what I have said in another Treatise. There is nothing more
ordinary in this subject, then to hear named The Alter of the Cross; under the
pretext that Jesus Christ was offered on the Cross. But it follows not that
the Cross had the place or quality of an Altar in this Oblation. Neither does
the Scripture ever call it so, although it speaks so often of the Cross and
of the Sacrifice of Christ.

Let it not displease so many learned men who have authorized this vulgar
phrase, That Christ was offered on the Altar of the Cross. The Cross was not
the Altar of this incomparable Sacrifice. The name of Altar is of greater
importance then many men consider. This is an irrefragable Maxim, That the
Altar is greater then the Offering in as much as it is the Altar which
sanctifies the Offering, Matthew. 23.19. Whence would follow, that which none
should dare to think, that the Cross should be more excellent then the Body of
Jesus Christ, yea, that it had sanctified it.

All that can be said, when the name of Altar is given to the Cross, is this,
that it is not understood so in effect, but only by way of similitude or
allusion. But such a similitude transferreth to the Cross a title which
appertains to none but Christ; for on the Cross himself was the Altar, the
Sacrifice, and the Priest altogether. Under the Law, these were different
things, because one of these figures alone could not represent Christ in all
these three qualities; but in him they are found united, and no creature has
had part in this honor. Why then should we communicate it to the wood of the
Cross? Either this phrase has helped toward the adoration of the Cross; or
it has proceeded from that Superstition; or howsoever it be, it has been
unwisely introduced, without taking heed to the consequences which it draws
after it.

Why the Scripture speaks of what matter the Cross was made, yet expresses
not the form of it.
It concerns us to know that it was of wood. This particularity should seem
little considerable, if the Apostle had not opened the mystery, showing that
Christ has delivered us from the curse, insomuch as he was hanged on the tree;
because this kind of death was cursed by the Law, Deuteronomy. 20.23. Gal. 3.13. But
for the structure of it, of how many pieces it was composed, how they were
placed, and in sum, what figure it had, this is that which the Scripture
passes under silence, as not necessary. The form which is commonly given to
the Cross, is contradicted by the learned, which represent it quite another.

We shall observe from hence, that supposing we had the true figure of the
Cross, and that it were an object of adoration, as the Church of Rome
teaches, this honor would not appertain to any but Crosses of wood; for Jesus
Christ was not crucified on a Cross of stone, or silver. Nevertheless they
make Crosses of all things; but this is to falsify that of Christ, under
pretext to represent it.

None has wrought Miracles at his death, except the Son of God.
This is remarkable against the Jews. Diverse great servants of God have wrought
Miracles in their life, but never in their death. Was there ever man at whose
death appeared such wonders as at the death of Christ? Whence comes it that
neither Moses, nor Joshua, nor Samuel, nor Prophet, nor King, nor Patriarch,
has wrought any Miracle dying? And whence comes it that this crucified having
given up the Ghost, rendeth the Veil of the Temple, darkeneth the Sun, cleaves
the Rocks, shakes the Earth, and opened the Sepulchers? The exploit of Samson
dying, howsoever prodigious, yet it was not miraculous, to speak properly; nor
does it approach any thing near to those great wonders which our Lord wrought
in his death. Wherefore is Jesus Christ the only man among all men, whose
death has been honored with visible miracles, if not to distinguish him from
all other men, by a mark so illustrious? So, as I have observed before, as well
the Birth as the death of Christ have been signalized by miracles; and never
any man whatsoever has had the like honor.

Three signs from heaven, exhibited in three several passages, by the which
Jesus Christ has been declared publicly to be the Messiah.
In the course of the life of Jesus Christ, in the days of his humiliation, we
consider his Nativity, his Baptism, and his Death. His Nativity, in which he
began to appear in the world. His Baptism, by which he entered into the
functions of his Office. And his Death, by which he finished the work of the
Redemption.

Every one of these mystries was immediately followed and overtaken by a sign
from Heaven, and that way showed unto the world.

His Birth, by the Star which carried the news as far as the East, preceded by
the acclamation of Angels publishing this happy Nativity.

His Baptism, by the opening of the Heavens, and the descent of the holy Ghost
in the shape of a dove, accompanied by the voice of God.

His Death, by the miraculous darkning of the Sun, which filled all the earth
with darkness.

When the Jews demanded that Jesus Christ should authorize his calling by some
sign from Heaven, they should have learned that which passed at his Birth and
his Baptism; and afterward, they ought to have considered that which happened
at his death. They had then seen his calling attested by three signs from
Heaven.

Why the High Priest, who represented Jesus Christ, never came near to the
dead; and yet Jesus Christ did the contrary.
The Law forbade the High Priest to touch a dead corpse, yea to enter into any
house in which there was one deceased, yea to show any sign of grief, were it
for his own father or mother, Levit. 21.10, 11. Whence it appears, that if he
found himself in any place where any person was at the point of death, it
behoved him to depart from thence immediately; his presence being incompatible
with that of a dead body.

But on the contrary, Jesus Christ entered into the house where lay the dead
body of the daughter of Jairus: Himself took her by the hand: He touched the
Coffin of the young man of Naim, that was carrying to the grave: He shed tears
over Lazarus already putrified. These particuiars are more important then they
seem to be.

Certainly, the defiling which the Law finds in dead bodies, might bear a
reflection upon the Priest, because he was not capable of removing the
corruption of death. But he which is able to give life unto the dead, is above
this Law, and the reach of this infection. Here is seen a notable difference:
The Mosaical Priesthood abandoneth the dead, and leaves them in their
uncle^nnesse, because it cannot remedy it: But the true and eternal Priest,
because he raises the dead, has conversed with them, and his touch has
restored their life. He comes to search us, yea, within our graves, yea, he
guardeth our bones.

Why the fear of death was more excusable in the Saints of the Old Testament,
then it is now: And why we ought not to imitate them in all that which have
spoken concerning this subject.
We should find it strange that the apprehension of a natural death should
make a Christian to speak so as Hezekiah spoke, when he believed he should die,
Isai. 38; or as David, Psalm. 6. It is a matter of astonishment that these great
men have been so exceeding fearful of their departure out of this world. Here I
pass by the particular causes from whence proceeded this weakness. But in
general, before that Jesus Christ died, death was more dreadful then it has
been since; for as yet death was not swallowed up in Victory; and the faithful
of the Old Testament had not the example of Jesus Christ dead, as we have. The
fear of death therefore was more just in them, then it can be in us: From
whence it follows, that it is not still permitted to us to speak as they did
when we are menaced with death. It would be very hard to approve that a
Christian should complain of this, that he should no more behold God in the
land of the living, and that he is deprived of the conversation of this world;
or to allege, that he might not die, that the dead praise not God. These
complaints and the like discourses which the Fathers of the Old Testament have
uttered upon this subject, have no more place since that Christ died and rose
again; as I shall speak more particularly upon the Article of the Resurrection.

The descent of CHRIST into Hell.
An observation upon the words of the Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7. forbidding to ask
who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend into the abyss?
AMong so many men signalized by extraordinary events, there are two
remarkable; one of which ascended into heaven, and descended; the other
descended into the deep, and reascended. The first is Elijah, who was carried
up into heaven, and afterward came back to the earth, to accompany the Son of
God in his Transfiguration. The other is Jonah, who went into the bottom of the
gulfs, and returned living. But the one and the other were but a shadow of
Christ, to whom all these passages and returns agree more particularly: For not
only he descended into the Abyss and returned, but he is also ascended into
heaven yet once more to come down.

Now I go not about to examine in what sense he said, even before his
Ascension, that already he had ascended into heaven, and already had descended
from heaven, Joh. 3.13. But concerning his descent into the deep, the Apostle
explaineth it openly, when he opposes those two one to the other, To descend
into the deep, and To be brought back from the de^d. For from thence follows,
that to be brought back from the dead, is to reascend from the Abyss. And this
also presupposes, that to descend into the Abyss, is none other thing then to
be reduced to the estate of the dead. As for the name of the Abyss, it is
known that Jesus Christ calls his Sepulcher the heart of the earth, comparing
it to the place where Jonah had been in the Abyss, Matthew. 12.40. From hence it
comes, that many understand by the descent of Christ into hell, that after his
burial he was yet farther humbled so far as to sojourn in the estate of the
dead, that is to say, within his Sepulcher, from whence he was raised by his
Resurrection.

Why Christ being on the Cross, pronounced the first words of the 22 Psalm.
These words express the complaint which he made of being forsaken of God. And
many Orthodox men take that extreme humiliation of Christ for his descent into
hell. Now why he did use the words of this Psalm, a reason is given. There is
not a passage in all the Old Testament which better represents the estate of
Christ upon the Cross. There is seen the parting of his garments, the casting
of lots for his coat, his hands and feet pierced, his enemies wagging the head,
and vomitout their mockeries. He therefore used this Psalm, as having been
dictated for him.

But to this reason, which is notorious to every one, I will add another,
which I ground upon an hypothesis maintained by some interpreters. The first
action, say they, that the Priests and the Levites daily did in the Temple,
into which they entered at break of day, was to sing this two and twentieth
Psalm; the which, upon this occasion, bears for the title, A Psalm of the
dawning of the day, and begins, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I
observe from hence, that the first words with which the Priests began the first
hour and the first act of their Functions, are the same which Christ uttered in
the last hour and the last act of the Redemption: For having been already three
hours upon the Cross, upon the point of rendering up his spirit into the hands
of his Father, and of declaring that all was finished, he cried out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? He ended where the Priests began, to show that
all the ancient Priesthood, and all the service of the Temple, from their
beginning, then expired and finished in him, who is the end and closure of the
Law.

The fruits of the death of CHRIST.
Why the Son of God deserred so long time to come and expiate the sins of the
world.
THis question, which the ignorant will blame of rashness, is suggested unto
us by the Scripture it self, which has set down the solution of it. It is not
enough to say, according to the fashion of the ignorant, that Jesus Christ came
not sooner, because God would not have it so. We are to know why he would it
not, since himself has showed us the causes, in the which are seen the rays of
his wonderful wisdom.

About four thousand years passed after the fall of Adam, before the Son of God
came: Sin multiplied with the multiplication of mankind: Death destroyed one
generation after another: All ages groaned for the Deliverer; but he appeared
not till after so long a time.

Now setting aside the mavelous Economy by which God measured and divided
the times which preceded the coming of Christ, in which is seen an infinity of
steps and proportions, as so many stars which marched before the Sun; we will
only say, That it was important for the glory of God, and to render so much
the more glorious the benefit of Redemption, that sin and death should reign a
long time, and devour a long rank of generations, before the Savior should
show himself: For that long durance of sin and death, extending it self through
so many ages, and enfolding all the successions of people born the one after
the other, has caused to be seen how great was the misery of mankind, and the
necessity of the remedy; and how great is the virtue of Christ who has healed
an evil so universal, and so inveterate, Romans 5.14.

That for these ends, and to show the abundance of Grace, God permitted that
sin should abound; and that it might abound, the Law intervened, Romans 5.20. It
behoved therefore first that there should pass a long time before the Law
should begin her reign, and a long time before she should yield place unto
Christ.

That the sin of Adam lost those that came after him; but the death of Christ
has saved both them that went before and came after it. As therefore the first
Adam has caused to die those which were born many ages after him; so the
second Adam has quickened them which were dead many ages before him. And this
has been one of the causes of the retarding of his coming, to wit, that he
would show his power working backward to the foregoing ages.

And finally, That it was convenient, before Christ died, to make it known to
the world that the expiation of sins could not be wrought any other way. To
this effect, God proposed first the blood of beasts in Sacrifices; afterward,
the blood of man in Circumcision; afterward, an infinite number of washings,
with all the works of the Law; as if he would that men should assay all the
means which could be imagined for the expiation of sins. But this was to the
end that they should acknowledge their impotency, and should cast their eyes
upon the future Sacrifice of Christ. Now it was requisite that a good part of
the age of the world should pass in the study of these rudiments, before God
should send his Son, Gal. 4.1, etc.

An admirable concurrence of the time of Redemption with the times of the most
famous Ceremonies of the Law. An observation upon this subject.
It concerns us that we know the Year, the Season, the Days, yea the Hours,
in the which Christ perfected the work of the Redemption. The Law has marked
certain Times as notable among all others. Among Years, that of Jubilee, which
returned from fifty to fifty years, in the which servants were set at liberty,
and lands alienated returned to their first owners. Among the annual Feasts,
that of the Passover, which was the first and principal of all the solemnities
of the year. Among the Days, the Sabbath, of which the preeminencies are
sufficiently notorious. Among the Hours of the day, that between the two
vespers, which we reckon the third after noon; in which every day was offered
the evening Sacrifice, which was the conclusion of all daily Ceremonies, Exodus
29.39. and in which also was slain the Paschal Lamb, when his yeer-day was
come, Exodus 12.6.

Now the Redemption met in all these times; in the Year of Jubilee, in the
Passover, in the Hour of the Evening Sacrifice, and in the Sabbath. In the
Year of Jubilee, according to the most exact Chronology, which reckoning every
fiftieth year after the division of the Land of promise to the year in which
Christ died, finds that he suffered in the year of Jubilee: in the Passover,
as it is evident by the History of the Passion: in the Hour of the Evening
Sacrifice, which the Jews called the ninth hour, in the which Jesus Christ gave
up the Ghost: And finally, in the Sabbath, our Savior all that day resting in
the Sepulcher. I know that many, long time agone, have considered all these
particularities, but in parcels, every one separately. That which I here
observe, is the general concurrence of all the times the most famous in the
Law, with the time of the Redemption, which comprised and determined all.

To all this I will add this Observation. The year of Jubilee began the tenth
day after the Equinoctial of September, Levit. 15.9. and Jesus Christ died a
few days after the Equinoctial of the Spring following: Whence it appears
that he died in the midst of the year of Jubilee, between the six first months
and the six last: But the last six months which his death anticipated, have
been disjoined from the precedent, as appertaining no more to the year of
Jubilee, which has been cut asunder in the middle, that it might be rendered
wholly dead.

A mysterious reason of the name which the Apostle gives to the Sacrifice of
Christ, calling it A Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
Many read these terms of the Apostle, without knowing the importance, nor
seeing at what they aim. The common Expositours will be contented to tell us,
that the Sacrifice of Christ is of a good smell, that is to say, pleasing to
God. We know that this is true: but to know it well, we ought to learn from
whence the Apostle fetched this phrase, and what it is at which he looks back.

It behooves therefore to observe that there were two kinds of Oblations under
the Law. One sort was accompanied with a perfume of Incense which was burned
with them; and for this cause they are called Offerings of a sweet savor,
Levit. 2.2.9. The others, howsoever approved by the Law, bare not the name of
Oblations of a sweet savor, because they were without perfume, Levit. 2.12.
And particularly it is to be noted, that it was forbidden to burn any perfume
upon the Oblations which were presented for sins, Levit. 5.11. in which the
Lawgiver gave to understand, that the memory of sin, yea the Sacrifices which
mentioned them, were not of a sweet savor, Numb 5.15.

Upon this, we are to consider why the Law declared that that which was offered
for sins, could not be of a sweet savor, seeing that Christ was offered for
sins, and yet his Oblation was of a sweet savor to God his Father. The reason
is, that the Legal Oblations removed not at all the infection of the sin which
they represented, rather themselves remained burdened with it: But Christ
bearing our sins upon him, vanquished and carried away this corruption. This
point furnishes us with an invincible argument against the Jews. By the own
sentence of the Law, all the Expiatory Offerings which it prescribed, failed of
a sweet favor, and could not content the justice of God. From whence it
follows (otherwise we are for ever miserable) that there is another kind of
Offering, another Sacrifice of Expiation, quite other then those of the Law,
which abolisheth the stench of our crimes. And this quality cannot appertain
but to the body of Christ, Isai. 53 5, 6.

The Resurrection of CHRIST.
Nine examples of the Resurrection of the dead, which have gone before or
followed the Resurrection of Christ. An Harmony between those that were raised
under the Old Testament, and those that were raised by the Son of God, while
himself was yet mortal.
THe Wisdom of God has showed the Resurrection of the dead in diverse examples,
which it has distributed with order and proportion.

Three before the coming of Jesus Christ, Three by Jesus Christ himself before
his death, And, Three after the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Before the coming of Christ, God raised the son of the widow of Sarephta, the
son of the Shunamite, and one dead man that had been cast into the Sepulcher of
Elisha, 1 King. 17. 2 King. 4 and 13.

Jesus Christ, before his death, raised the son of the widow of Naim, the
daughter of Jairus, and Lazarus, Luke 7.15. Matthew. 9. Joh. 11.

After the Resurrection of Christ, God has first caused to be seen that of
many Saints which were raised out of the dust, Matthew. 27.52, 53. Afterward,
that of Tabitha, Acts 9.40. And for the third example, that of the young man
Eutychus, Act. 20.9, 10, 11, 12.

There are notable resemblances between the three that were raised under the
Old Testament, and the three which Jesus Christ raised before his death. The
first raised from the dead in the Old Testament, was the only son of a widow;
and the first raised ^n the New Testament, was the only son of a widow. The
one in Sarephta, the other in Naim. In both the Testaments, God began the
Resurrection of the dead by the demonstration of his Mercy, as well as that of
his Power. Moreover, the last of the three raised before the coming of Christ,
was already entered into the grave, where he touched the bones of the Prophet
Elisha; and the last of the three raised by Christ, to wit, Lazarus, had
already stayed four days within the Sepulcher.

Why Christ rose not again the day after his death; but suffered the whole
Sabbath day to pass over, before he returned to life.
I pass by the ordinary reasons which are brought concerning this, and will
only observe a Maxim which I find in this matter, to wit, That never any
dead man was raised again on the Sabbath day. The Son of God has healed many
sick on the Sabbath day, but ye read not that on that day he raised any dead.
And in sum, none of all those which were returned to life, as well under the
one as the other Testament, and of whom we have considered the catalogue and
the order according to which they are ranked, has been raised on the Sabbath
day. I shall verify this, when I shall come to expound the fourth Commandment
of the Decalogue. For the present question, we may say that Jesus Christ, who
is the Head of the Resurrection, would show the communion which is between him
and others that are raised, in whom we have a preludium of the general
Resurrection. And forasmuch as none of them recovered life on the Sabbath day,
he also, not to seem to disjoyn himself from them, would not that his
Resurrection should fall on that day. This excludes not the other reasons of
the time of his stay among the dead.

A comparison of the time which God employed in the Creation, with that which
he employed in the Redemption: And of the days of the one and the other.
The time of the Creation was six Days; that of the Redemption was but of three
Days, which is the less by one half. But the Wisdom of God has divided the
time of the Creation in two equal parts, each of three days; the first three
being distinguished from the three following, by a most evident mark.

The first three days of the world, with their nights, had neither Sun, nor
Moon, nor Stars, but preceded the being of all these lights; in which they have
been different from all other days that since have come. As therefore the
Creation has had three days extraordinary, so the Redemption in the which the
world has been as created anew, has had these three mavelous days in the
which Christ continued among the dead; It is to be observed, that himself
speaking of the three days of his stay within the bowels of the earth ( Matthew.
12.) which ought not to be understood of three entire days, had regard to the
history of the Creation, which reckons the Evening and the Morning for a Day,
a part for the whole, Genesis 1.5, 8.

The first and nearest cause of the three days detaining of Jonah in the whales
belly.
The intention of God indeed was to present unto men in Jonah a type of the
Resurrection of Christ, as every one knows. But there was first another
reason for which the Prophet was not delivered before the third day.

The chastisement of the sinner oftentimes answers to the fault, even to
circumstances. This happened to Jonah. His History tells us that Nineveh was
a City of three days journey, chap. 3.3. For having refused to take this walk
of three days in Nineveh, he was condemned to keep prison three days, within
the whale. The three days which he would not pass over in a great City among
men, it was necessary for him to pass in the intrails of a fish, out of the
sight of men and sun. From this historical consideration, we come to that of
this great mystery which is enclosed in the detention and deliverance of Jonah.

The Resurrection of Christ figured in Hezekiah, by a double resemblance.
It is sufficiently known that this Resurrection, as touching the circumstance
of the Third Day, has been prefigured in Isaac, in Jonah, in Hezekiah: A
Patriarch, a Prophet, a King, have been the types. Isaac destined to be offered
an whole-burnt-offering, and remaining as dead in the breast of his father, is
as returned to life on the third day, Genesis 22. Heb. 11.19. And this, for the
more ample correspondence, happened very near the same place where Christ
afterward was buried, and where he rose from the dead. Jonah issuing from the
depth of the sea, gives the term of forty days to the Ninevites: And this
figure which marketh out the Resurrection of Christ on the third day, extends
also all along the forty days which Christ gave unto the world after his
Resurrection, before he left the earth. The healing also of Hezekiah is
considered as a type. He was held in the rank of the dead, and his bed was to
him a grave. He was raised up miraculously on the Third Day, as it were
surviving himself, 2 Kings 20.5.

But that which I observe concerning this last, and which I add to the
observations of those which have gone before me, is another correspondence
which is found between the wonders that befell in this subject; the one in the
sickness of Hezekiah, and the other in the death of Christ. In both these
there was a Miracle in the Sun: For the Eclipse of this Luminary, which
happened at the death of Christ, was supernatural, as well as the going back in
the sickness of Hezekiah. So that this type meets with Christ dead and
raised from the dead by a double resemblance. But the shadow which returned ten
degrees backward, to foreshew the return of Hezekiah to the course of his life,
was not so miraculous as the return of Christ from among the dead, verified by
ten Appatitions, by which, as by so many degrees, he showed himself living
again upon the earth, before he ascended into heaven.

Why none ever was raised again the third day after his death, but only Christ.
Of all those whom God has caused to return into the world after they were
dead, there is not one whom the Scripture says to have been raised on the
Third Day. If there had been any one, this circumstance had not been omitted in
History. All have been raised either before or after the Third Day after their
decease, but none on that day. The son of the widow of Sarephta, the daughter
of Jairus, Eutychus, were certainly raised again the very day of their death.
The son of the Shunamite, he of Naim, Tabitha, and the man which was raised
from death in the Sepulcher of Elisha, most probably had not yet reached to
their Third Day among the dead, when they returned to life: As on the contrary,
many others have been raised after their third day, to wit, Lazarus, and the
Saints that rose from the dust, when Christ rose again.

This circumstance of the Third Day for the Resurrection, has been
appropriated to Christ, and marked out for him in the Calender of the Prophets,
to the end that among other signs which distinguish him from all others that
were raised, he might be known also by this, as particular to him, to wit, that
his Resurrection befell on the Third Day, according to the Scriptures.

When Lazarus was dead, our Lord let pass the Third Day, before he raised him,
and stayed till the Fourth, Joh. 11.39. Among diverse reasons of this delay, I
reckon this. The Son of God would not raise Lazarus the same day of his
decease, nor before he entered into the Sepulcher, because he had already
raised two dead which had not as yet been put into the earth, to wit, the young
man of Naim, and the daughter of Jairus which was deceased but a few hours
before. Now his intention was to extend his power yet farther, to wit, as far
as within the grave; as he did, when from thence he fetched Lazarus. But this
dead man had not his Resurrection on the Third Day, our Lord having deferred if
till the Fourth, and hindering the concurrence of it with his own, in regard of
this circumstance.

Three miraculous Sepulchers in the holy History.
The Scripture mentions three famous Sepulchers, in the which God has given
life to the dead, to wit,

That of Elisha, whose corpse served to raise another dead, though himself
returned not to life.

That of Lazarus, which was raised from the dead, but not by himself.

That of Christ, who rose himself, and at the same time raised many others,
whose graves he had opened at his own death, Matthew. 27.52, 53.

The two first were preparatories to the wonders of the third. The Son of God
raised others, before he raised himself; and again, in coming out of the
sepulcher, he carried his power into the graves of others, who were raised
after him.

Four men that raised the dead, before and after the coming of Christ.
The gift of Miracles was conferred upon diverse, who notwithstanding received
not the power to restore life to the dead; this kind of Miracle being reserved
to a small number of them. The Scripture names but four who exercised this
power; two under the Old Testament, and two in the New. The two first are
Elijah and his successor Elisha: The one raised the son of the widow of
Sarephta, the other the son of the Shunamite. The two other are Saint Peter and
Saint Paul: The one raised Dorcas; the other, Eutychus. So God raised two
instruments of the Resurrection, before the coming of his Son, and after he was
gone out of the world. Christ appeared between the two first and the two last,
as the Sun among the Planets, spreading his quickening power over the dead of
the one and the other Testament.

The continuation of the Article of the Resurrection of CHRIST. His Ascension
into Heaven: His Sitting at the right hand of God.
Christ has verified his Resurrection by all the proofs which could be given.
BEing come back from the dead, he has made himself known to be living, Not to
one person alone, but to many, men and women, yea, to above five hundred
together: Not at one only time, but at many and diverse times: Not for a little
time, but for the space of forty days: Not in one only place, but in many and
diverse, in the city, in the fields, within the houses, and upon the mountains:
Not afar off, but in the same chamber, in a close place: Not by one means, but
by an infinite number of testimonies. By the Hearing, he causes his voice to
be known: By Sight, his lineaments and stature: By the Touch, the wounds of his
hands, his feet, and his side: By his Actions, going, coming, and eating with
his disciples, he showed that he was truly alive: And beside all this, by all
the Scriptures, beginning at Moses, and going through all the Prophets, he
proved the necessity and verity of his Resurrection.

Why God never raised any person of note, to converse among men, except the
Messiah.
Of all the dead which have returned into the world to sojourn there some space
of time, and frequent the company of men, there has not been, except our Lord,
any Prophet, nor any person otherwise famous. Those whom God raised, either
were children, (as he of Sarephta, and the son of the Shunamite) or young
people, (as he of Naim, the daughter of Jairus, and Eutychus) or without any
mark of eminent quality in the Church (as he that came living out of the grave
of Elisha, Lazarus, and Tabitha.) For as for the Saints which appeared on the
day of the Resurrection of Christ, they did no more then pass by, and having
showed themselves, stayed not at all among mortals; neither are their names
mentioned in the History. Whereupon it may be asked, Why being raised from the
dead, they stayed no longer time in the world, that there might have been some
time to converse with them? And in sum, Why none of the Patriarchs or of the
Prophets have been called back from the dead, to sojourn a while among men, as
Lazarus or Eutychus? But without speaking of the Fathers of the Old Testament,
I will yet make this question; Why did not our Lord raise John the Baptist, who
had been his forerunner and his contemporary in the days of his flesh? Was it
not to the purpose that that excellent Prophet, so great a light of the Church,
and who had suffered death for the Truth, should be returned unto life, as well
as the daughter of Jairus, or the young man of Naim?

It is easy to conjecture why this was not done. If Abraham, or David, or any
one of the Prophets, or any one of them who wrought Miracles in their life
time, had returned to the world there to make their abode, there had never
wanted those who would have honored them excessively. If Superstition made
Idols of the dead bodies of Saints, how much more would it have ido^ized the
very bodies themselves living after their death? This is one of the causes for
which God liked better to raise an ordinary man, who had touched the bones of
Elisha, then to raise Elisha himself: For such a Prophet, that had been so
famous in Miracles, had been adored by men, if he had returned from the grave
to be among them.

There was also another particular reason concerning John the Paptist. It is
known how high his reputation had been. After his death, that was ascribed unto
him which was not: For when the Son of God caused himself to be known by his
miraculous actions, diverse notwithstanding took him for John the Baptist, whom
they imagined to be raised from the dead, and to be the author of those
marvels that then were wrought, Matthew. 14.2. and 16.13, 14. This error had
passed further, if that Prophet had in effect been raised: But it was requisite
that that light should give place to a greater Luminary, since he came not but
only to bring men unto Christ. To conclude, Christ is the only Prophet that
made any stay after his death, to the end that he might be adored by them. All
the rest that returned from the dead, either have been persons that had nothing
extraordinary in their life, or have not stayed alive some few moments of time
upon the earth; but Christ stayed forty days, and conversed with many, at
several times, in several places, and in several occurrences.

Of all those that have been raised from the dead, none is introduced in
Scripture speaking, except Jesus Christ.
We need not demand whether we would be curious to see a man that had returned
from the dead, or whether we would desire to speak with him. How many questions
should we ask him? We should demand of him what remembrance he had, what being
his soul had out of the body, in what place it lodged, in what condition it
found it self, what it saw or understood, and what it did. When Lazarus was
raised, great troops of the Jews ran to see him: Without doubt, they had as
much curiosity as we have, to ask and to hear him discourse. And surely they
whom God restored to life, recovered also their speech; yet the Scripture
reports not any thing which has been spoken by them: And even when Eutychus
was raised, ( Acts 20.9.) which happened in the presence of many spectatours,
he put himself again into the assembly, to hear Saint Paul; nor did they
forsake the preaching of the Apostle, to ask or hearken to one that was
returned from the dead. We read indeed that Moses and Elias being returned to
the world, spoke with the Son of God in his Transfiguration; and the subject,
of their discourse was of the decease which the Redeemer was to accomplish in
Jerusalem, Luke 9. But for the rest, all the dead which have been raised, keep
silence in the History; for it recites not any one word which they uttered,
although it observes other particularities which seem less considerable. And
this is true of all those whose resurrection it has described, there being not
one of them who is represented unto us speaking. Hereupon it is to be
considered why the Scripture never rehearses what they have said: For an
omission so notable and universal cannot be without cause. We find therefore
that this is an honor reserved to Christ, to be the only man, among them that
were raised from the dead, whose words should be registered; the only one which
speaks in the Scripture; the only one from among the dead, whom we can hear.
Wherefore the holy History expresses very amply the words which the Son of God
uttered after his Resurrection, to diverse persons, and upon diverse subjects:
but for the rest which returned from the dead, it mentions not so much as one
word of all that they have spoken.

Three several Fourties of Days, in the time that our Savior stayed in this
world. Observations upon this circumstance.
Forty days passed after the birth of Christ, till the first entry he made
into the Temple, to be presented according to the Law, Levit. 12. Luke 2.22.
Forty days after his Baptism, till the day he began to enter upon the
functions of his charge, having miraculously fasted all that time: And forty
days after his Resurrection, before he entered into heaven. In the first Forty,
he appeared as a common man, as all the rest of the firstborn of Israel, which
they carried to the Temple to consecrate them to God. In the second, he
appeared as a miraculous man, as Moses and Elijah, by an abstinence
extraordinary. In the third, he appeared as the Son of God, being declared to
be so by his Resurrection, Romans 1.4.

Many memorable periods have begun and ended by Fourties of days or years. The
Deluge began by a rain of Forty days; and Noah opened the window of the Ark
Forty days after the waters were withdrawn from covering the tops of the
highest mountains.

The slavery of the Hebrews in Egypt, and the peregrinations of their Fathers,
lasted ten times Forty years, ( Genesis 15.13.) to wit, till their going out of
Egypt; and were followed by another Forty years of their sojourning in the
desert. Moreover, after their going up out of Egypt, to the year in which
Solomon laid the foundations of the Temple, which is a date of a great
consideration in the sacred History, there passed twelve times Forty years, 1
King. 6.1.

Why the Son of God entered no more into the Temple, after his Resurrection.
And the difference in this regard between Him and those which were his
principal types.
Hezekiah having been menaced with death, had a promise that on the third day
he should ascend into the house of God, as a man newly raised from death. Jonah
being brought back to the light of the living, would see the Temple of God;
chap. 2.5. And Isaac, another figure of the Resurrection of Christ, was
delivered from death in the same place where the Temple was afterward built.
Now the Son of God being raised from the dead, entered indeed into the City of
Jerusalem, and revisited diverse places which he had frequented before his
death, but he returned no more into the Temple, which at other times he had so
often honored with his presence: For it was not convenient that this great and
Eternal Priest having consummated the Sacrifice which disannulled all those of
the Temple, of which he had rent the vail, and being to make his entrance into
the Sanctuary of heaven, should return into that which was none other then a
figure of the heavenly, Heb. 9.24.

Of those which have seen the Son of God being in heaven.
We know that he has been seen in all the three degrees of his Exaltation. He
was seen after his Resurrection, by more then five hundred persons at one time.
He was seen ascending into heaven, by the eleven principal disciples. And
finally, he has been seen at the right hand of God, by Saint Steven and by
Saint Paul. These two witnesses sufficed for the publishing the third degree of
his Exaltation, the first and the second being attested by so great a number of
persons.

It is a thing considerable that the Wisdom of God has chosen the first of the
Martyrs and the last of the Apostles, to be eyewitnesses of the glory of his
Son: The one being in the hands of the executioners, died in this confession,
That he saw the heavens open, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Acts
7.55, 56. The other having been a sworn enemy of the Name of Christ and of
those that believed in him, has confessed that he saw him in glory after his
Ascension, 1 Cor. 9.1. and 15.8. The one is the first that sealed this truth
with his blood: The other is the last who had charge to publish it as having
seen it after he had persecuted it. All the other disciples saw Christ
conversant on earth, but these two only have seen him reigning in heaven.

All the miraculous prerogatives which have been severally in diverse Saints are
found united in one only Christ i^ a sovereign degree.
Among the Saints, diverse have beet rendered famous, Either by their miraculous
birth; as Isaac and John the Baptist: Or by the Miracles which themselves
wrought; as Moses, Elijah, Elisha, etc. Or by the gift of Prophecy; as Samuel,
Daniel, etc. Or by their Resurrection from the dead; as Lazarus, etc. Or for
having ascended into heaven; as Enoch and Elijah. But never had any man all
these prerogatives together, except the Son of God. Some have had a miraculous
birth, or else have been Prophets, which have not had the gift of Miracles.
Others have wrought Miracles, so far as to raise the dead, but themselves have
not been raised. Others have been raised from the dead, but their bodies have
not ascended into heaven, but were returned once more unto the grave. Others
are ascended into heaven, but they have no power to work upon them that are on
the earth. On the contrary, one alone and the same Christ was conceived
miraculously, exercised the power of Miracles and that of a Prophet, came back
from the dead, is ascended bodily into heaven; and, that which appertains to
none other, from above governs the whole Church. The same Christ surpasses
infinitely all the others in every one of those miraculous preeminencies which
they have had. Some were born of mothers which had passed the age of
childbearing; but Christ was born of a Virgin. Some have been Prophets; but
Christ received not the Spirit by measure Some have had the gift of Miracles in
certain occasions; but Christ at all times had that power. Some have been
raised from death by some other; but Christ raised himself. Some have been
lifted up into heaven; but Christ was carried thither by his own power And
finally, as he holds the fir^^ place in all things, he alone is set dow^ at
the Right Hand of God.

Of the last Judgment.
Why does the holy History never say the God descended, but only where the
b^sinesse has been to do justice, or to establish it, and protect the innocent?
Whenever God has descended, it has been, Either to publish Laws; as those
which he gave (...) old to Israel, Exodus 19.18. and 34.5. Or to appoint Judges;
as were read in Numb. 11.17. Or to proceed against the guilty; as the builders
of Babel, and the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 11.5, 6, 7. and 18.21. Or
to give protection to Jacob going into Egypt, Genesis 46.4. Or to do justice to
the Hebrews, which were oppressed by the Egyptians, Exodus 3.8.

Certainly the Scripture intended not to say that God descended locally; yet so
it is that he will one day really descend, in the person of his Son. Now
forasmuch as he will not descend but to execute judgment, all the other
Descents which the Scripture attributes to him, meet in the same scope: For it
never represents God coming from above, but either to do Justice, or to
preserve it.

An observation upon the f^ur general Judgments mentioned in the Scriptures.
All the Judgments which God has showed or yet does show upon any parts of
mankind, are but particulars. There are four which have concerned or do
concern all the generality. The three first have already appeared, and the
fourth is at the door.

The first Judgment is that which God pronounced against Adam and his wife,
who represented all their posterity. The second is that which caused all the
inhabitants of the world, except eight, to perish by the waters of the Deluge.
The third is that which divided the society of men, by the confusion of
Tongues, in Babel. The fourth is that of the last Day.

The first Judgment deprived men of immortality, and declared them subject to
death, which, by power of it, is come upon them successively. The second caused
all mankind to die at one time, reserving a very small number of persons. The
third brake off the communion which was among men, bereaving them of their
universal language, and hindering them from understanding one another.

Now there are diverse resemblances and differences between these three first
Judgments which are past already, and the fourth, which is yet to come. But we
have only to consider, that in the first three, God has judged the living;
but at the last he shall judge both the living and the dead. Upon this subject,
I am to propound the following Observation.

A wonderful Mystery which is seen in the several goings out of the three first
men which God took out of the world.
The life of man has two different issues: Some going out of the world by a
violent death, others by a natural. But those which shall be found alive when
our Lord shall come to the last Judgment, shall pass neither by the one nor
the other of these two ways, but by a third, which shall be a sudden
transmutation of their bodies, by the which they shall become incorruptible, 1
Cor. 15.52. So then there are three several kinds of issues ordained to men,
to dislodge out of this world, some by one, some by another; to wit, Violent
death, Natural death, And the transmutation of them that shall be found alive
at the day of Judgment.


Of these three ways, the two first have been open to this day, and are the
ordinary passage of mortals. The third is reserved for the last inhabitants of
the world.

All these three several issues have been visibly marked out in the three first
men that have parted out of this life: for the first that dislodged, was Abel;
the second was Adam; the third was Enoch.

The first went out of the world by a violent death, The second, by a natural
death. The third, by a change supernatural and miraculous.
These three went in this order, and the one followed the other immediately,
among them whose departure is mentioned in the Scripture. But they went by
different ways, which represented all those by which men were to pass after
them: For all those which shall go out of the world after these three first, or
who shall go out hereafter, by which soever of these three ways, go but in the
footsteps of some one of these three forerunners, who are (in this regard) an
abridgement of all mankind, divided as in three bands. And particularly, as
those who ought to pass by that abovenamed change, to be translated from this
life without seeing death, shall be the last that dislodge; so Enoch, who
represented them, parted from this world the last of the three; being preceded
by Abel, who died a violent death; and by Adam, who departed by a natural
death. We are here to admire the dispensation of this great God, and the Wisdom
of his Spirit which dictated the Scriptures. These three men whom God first
withdrew from the world, the diversity which is seen in their going out, and
the order held in it, were a sample or epitome of that great piece which he
would unfold all along the ages, and which was to be extended as far as the
last men that shall be found living upon the earth.

Why God, who has foretold and set down the measures of certain particular
times, has not revealed how long the world should endure, or when the day of
Judgment should be.
God at other times foretold, How many veers space it should be before the
Deluge, Genesis 6.3. How many years the slavery of the Hebrews should endure, Genesis
15.13. How many years there should be of plenty and famine, in the days of
Joseph, Genesis 41.29.30. How many years the Jews should remain in the Captivity
of Babylon, Jer. 25.12. and 29.10. Dan. 9.2. How many years should pass to the
death of Christ, Dan. 9.24. We know that some of these predictions have been
given four hundred, yea four hundred and ninety years before their time
expired. Now there might be all the way computed, from day to day, how many
years yet remained to the end of the time limited by those oracles. Yea, God
has not only given an account of years, but sometimes has punctually set
down the very day on which a deliverance or other event should come to pass,
Dan. 12.11, 12.

But neither the Day of the last Judgment, nor the Year, nor yet the Age which
is to make an end of all the rest, was ever set down in any Prophecy,
whatsoever the curious can say against it. Now among the causes of this
silence, we are to consider this. When God has foretold that such or such a
notable event, where the time could not be foreseen by any humane wisdom,
should come to pass in such a Year or on such a Day, the principal scope of
these predictions has been to confirm the faith of them which should see them
accomplished, ( Joh. 13.19.) For they that lived until that time, and saw the
Prophecy effected precisely at the day named, even against all appearance, had
so much the more reason to believe in God for the time to come, in so manifest
an experience of his infallible truth: and the same also was a means to convert
unbelievers. But at the last Day it will not be the work to make provision any
more for faith in regard of things to come; not will there be any more place
for the conversion of miscreants. So that a revelation of that Day could not
serve for those ends and uses for the which God had revealed diverse other Days
remarkable. The Wisdom of God does not give us superfluous predictions. It is
necessary to know that there shall be a last Day, but not to know precisely
when it shall be.

Of the holy Ghost.
Four remarkable productions which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit of
God; to wit, two in the Creation, two in the Redemption.
AMong so many great and diverse effects of the Spirit of God, the Scripture
mentions particularly these four productions:

1. That of all the species which were enclosed in the mass of the elements,
in the beginning of the world: for, to cause them to bring forth, the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1.2.

2. That of the Soul: For the breath of God, which made man a living soul, was
the Spirit of the Almighty, Genesis 2.7. Job 33.4.

3. That of the body of Christ, which alone among all men was conceived by the
holy Ghost, Luke 1.35.

4. That of the new man: For, to become such, it behooves to be born again of
the Spirit, Joh. 3.5, 6.

Why the Scripture represents the holy Ghost, and his effects, under the
names of Water, of Fire, of Anointing with Oil, and of Sprinkling of Blood. The
true interpretation of these terms, contained in diverse passages.
The Scripture speaks of Water and the Spirit, by which we are to be born
again: Of the holy Ghost and of Fire, with which we are to be baptized: Of the
Unction which we have from the holy One, which is an effect of the same Spirit:
Of the Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ, which is wrought also by the
holy Ghost, Joh. 3.5. Matthew. 3.11. 1 John 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.2. So that the names
of Water, of Fire, of Anointing with Oil, and of Sprinkling of Blood, are used
to denote either the holy Ghost, or those acts which he works in us. Now it
is very easy for one of the vulgar to speak to this, and to say they are
similitudes. Many Commentatours and ordinary Preachers content themselves to
allege to us some resemblances between Water and the holy Ghost; and likewise
some conformities and analogies between the Fire, which purifieth and
consumes, and the holy Ghost, which produces the like effects. But there are
other depths to sound.

It is requisite therefore to know that all the Purifications of the Law, which
were figures of that Purification which we have by the holy Ghost, were wrought
either by Water, or by Fire, or by Oil, or by Blood. All things which had need
of cleansing, were purified by one of these four means.

1. By Water: as it was practiced in diverse occasions: For we know that
washings with Water were very frequent under the Law. It is not necessary to
produce examples.

2. By Fire: as when God commanded to purify the spoil which they had taken
from the Midianites, he ordained that all that which could endure the Fire, (to
wit, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin, Lead) should be cleansed by Fire, Number.
31.22, 23.

3. By Oil: as it was observed in the Unction of the Priests, and that of the
leprous, Lev. 14.16, 17, 18.

4. By Blood: as it is notorious, and we shall see by and by, that almost all
things according to the Law are purged by Blood, Heb. 9.22.

Now to show that all that which is required to a true Purification, all that
which the Law prescribed to those ends, is found universally in the power of
the holy Ghost; the Scripture represents it, with its effects, under the name
of the matters and all the acts which served to the Legal Purifications. I
might speak of other things concerning this subject; but they will come better
to purpose in the doctrine of Baptism, for which I reserve them.

A catalogue of those actions which were celebrated with Aspersion of Blood in
the time of the Law.
All the Law was written in Blood. The Priest, the people, went not but through
blood. Now to comprehend these so many different actions in which Blood
intervened, it will be to the purpose to distinguish them, and reduce them into
ranks or categories. We find therefore that there are seven kinds of actions
solemnized by the Aspersion of Blood.

1. The first Passover; In which the Israelites dipped a bunch of hysop in the
blood of the lamb, and marked their doors, to serve for their safeguard.

2. The Covenant treated between God and the people: For after that Moses had
rehearsed the Articles, he took the blood of the Sacrifice offered to that
effect, and sprinkled one half on the Altar, and the rest upon the people,
saying unto them, This is the blood of the Covenant.

3. The Consecration of the Tabernacle and of the Priests. In this ceremony,
Moses sprinkled with blood the Tabernacle and all the vessels of the service:
Besides, he took of the blood from off the Altar, and made an aspersion upon
Aaron, upon his sons, and upon their garments.

4. The Sacrifices, as well Eucharistical as Expiatory: For in all Sacrifices
the blood was poured all about the Altar of burnt-Offerings: In some of them it
was also put upon the Altar of Incense: In others there was made an aspersion
before the Vail of the Sanctuary.

5. The general Expiation, which was celebrated once a year. In this Solemnity,
the High Priest made an aspersion of blood, seven times, before the Mercy-seat,
afterward within the Vail, afterward also upon the Altar of Incense.

6. The purification of the unclean. The High Priest took of the blood of an
heifer slain for this purpose, and sprinkled it before the Tabernacle;
afterward, the Sacrifice being burned with its blood, and the ashes reserved,
they were mingled with water, to sprinkle the tents, the vessels and the
persons tainted with any uncleanness. This mystery is opened by the Apostle,
Heb. 9.13, 14.

7. The ceremonial cleansing of the leprous, as well of houses as of persons. A
sparrow was killed, and with his blood the man was sprinkled that was newly
healed of the leprosy. Besides, they took the blood of a lamb, with which was
marked the right ear of the leper, and his hand and his foot. Likewise, if the
leprosy had taken hold of the walls of an house, the Priest sprinkled them
with the blood of a sparrow, after that the infection was gone.

Thus all this multitude of actions performed by sprinkling of blood, is
reduced to the seven kinds here mentioned. This distinction may serve not
only for the memory to retain them but also for the understanding, to know
well their differences, and the mysteries enclosed in this diversity. It shall
suffice as for the present, to observe the power of the holy Ghost, represented
by the number of seven, which is a mark of perfection; to show, tha^ by it we
have an entire application o^ the blood of Christ.

Blood has no propriety of making while Why then is it said (Apocal. 7.14.)
tha^ the Saints have made white then robes in the blood of the Lamb?
Many, according to the custom o^ the vulgar, stay themselves at a similitude,
taking whiteness for an embleme^^ of cleanness or of glory: But the
similitude fails them then, when they should find this whiteness in blood,
which naturally defiles in stead of cleansing, and takes away whiteness in
stead of giving it.

Some learned Interpreters say very well, that this passage bears an allusion
to the habit of the Priests of the Law, who entered not into the Temple but in
white robes. The sense then is, that those that are here spoken of, which are
come out of great tribulation, are made Priests unto God, whom they serve day
and night in his Temple, verse. 15. For this Priesthood with which they are
honored, is expressed under the name of the vestment which the ancient Priests
wore when they did the service.

But the question yet remains, How these robes are made white in blood. I
think therefore that this expression denotes a resemblance between the
consecration of Levitical Priests, and that of Christians. When Aaron and his
sons were called to this charge, there were given them Priestly gaaments, among
the which was the linen robe: but it was not permitted them to approach to the
Altar, or to exercise any Office in the Tabernacle, till they were first
sprinkled with blood, both they and their garments, Exodus 29.21. Levit. 8.30.
As therefore the ancient Priests were consecrated by blood, and made capable to
wear the Priestly habit in the house of God; so in the virtue of the blood of
Christ, we are reinvested of the quality of Priests, represented by the white
garment. And this is summarily what I had to say concerning this passage, which
it behooves to expound rather by a metonymie then by a single metaphor.

Of the Church, and the Communion of Saints.
Why Moses is more prolix and more exact in the description of the Tabernacle,
then in that of the whole world.
Whosoever shall compare the two first Chapters of Genesis, with the sixteen
last of Exodus, except the two and thirtieth and the two following, shall find
a great difference between Moses describing the frame of the Universe, and
Moses describing the fabric of the Tabernacle. In the one, he is very general
and succinct: in the other, he is very copious, and sets down even to the
smallest particulars. The description of this great building of the World
seemed truly to require more words then that of a little pavillion, which was
but an atome in comparison of this vast extent of the heavens and of the earth:
But quite contrarily, the Spirit of God having shut up and reduced into a
little table the whole mass of the world, displayeth unto us the structure of
the Tabernacle in a long and large picture. Now it is very certain that the
style of the Scripture has its measures compassed by the circles of a
sovereign wisdom. Behold then that which we here consider, setting apart many
other reasons which we might bring upon this subject.

The world was not built but for the Church, to the end that in it God might be
served. The Tabernacle was both a figure of the Church, and the ensign under
which it was assembled. God therefore willing to show that his Church, in which
his service is performed, is more precious to him and more considerable then
all the rest of the world, has spoken of the Tabernacle more amply and more
particularly then of all the Elements, yea, then of all the world together.

The number of persons that make up the body of the universal Church is not
only presixed and definite, but also regulated by measures and proportions.
God is not tied to Numbers, yet nevertheless he does and disposes his works
by number, weight, and measure. It is observed that after the going up out of
Egypt, God caused to be numbered all the Israelites from the age of twenty years
and upward ( Exodus 38.26.) and there were found six hundred three thousand five
hundred and fifty men. The year following, God commanded to make a second
review of the people ( Numb. 1.46.) but without comprising the Levites which
had been numbered the first time with the other Tribes. Notwithstanding this
substraction, and the casualties which might have changed the number of the
people, since the year foregoing, it is found that their number was yet justly
and precisely six hundred three thousand five hundred and fifty men. In which
is seen a proportion which God held in the multiplication of that people. There
is also observed a mystery in the exact number of the two and twenty thousand
Levites which were then reckoned ( Numb. 3.39) For the rest, I contest not
against the common opinion, touching the hundred forty and four thousand of
the seventh of the Revelation, that they ought to be taken for an indefinite
number, as well as the seven thousand which had not bowed the knee to Baal: But
it ought to be considered why the holy Ghost, who speaks nothing superfluous,
is not contented to have named the total sum of them that were sealed in
Israel, but also divides it in twelve times twelve thousand, distributed by
equal portions among the twelve Tribes, every one of which is mentioned the one
after the other, with the expression of its particular number: For this shows
that the number of the Elect and the multitude of Believers, are measured by
certain proportions, which are known to him who is the Author. Certainly, the
resemblance of the seventy Disciples of Christ, to the seventy Judges which
were substituted to Moses, and to the seventy children which Jacob had when he
went down into Egypt, is a line of this admirable symmetrie with the which God
has limited and proportioned the body of the Church.

Now this fortifieth that Maxim, That the number of the Elect cannot suffer
addition nor diminution: And, That Election proceeds not from the will of the
Elect, but that of God which prevented them. For can it be said that all the
Elect, from the beginning of the world to the end, have agreed together to make
a company composed precisely of a number certain and regular?

Of the small number of believers, in the three several comings of the Son of
God. Resemblances on this subject.
When the Son of God came in the Spirit, before the Deluge, to preach to the
men of that time, the Church was found reduced into the sole family of Noah, 1
Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. When the Son of God came in the Flesh, being made man, there
were but a few persons that were disposed to receive him. And when he shall
come finally in Glory, shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18.8.

As there were in the Ark seven creatures of every clean kind, so also there
were not above seven that were clean in heart: For of the eight which were
preserved from the Deluge, there was one which was impure to wit, Cham. The
number of the faithful was somewhat greater, when Jesus Christ was born:
Nevertheless the Scripture names but seven, as the most notable, to wit,
Joseph and the Virgin, Simeon and Anna the Prophetess, Zacharias, and
Elizabeth his wife, and John the Baptist their son, who was born a little
before.

Three several states of the Church in three several times, and three several
titles of it.
Before the Law, the Church was to use this term, Oeconomical.

Under the Law, it was National.

And under the Gospel, it is become Catholic, or, Universal.

It is known that God extended it by degrees. At the beginning it consisted
only of families, which were those of the Patriarchs, and continued so till
after the death of Joseph and his brethren. Afterward, these families being
multiplied so far as to surpass the number of the Egyptians, it began to make
the Body of a Nation; and God imposed upon it Laws and Rules, afterward gave it
a Country where it might live apart. Finally, the Gospel being gone forth from
thence, and published through all the earth, the Church has been no more
bounded within an enclosure of one people, but of National which it was, it is
become Universal.

A difference between the Church of the Old Testament and that of the New, i^
regard of the Communion of th^se things which were ordained to sanctity.
The Law, as it is sufficiently known, distinguishes the things that were
only holy or sanctified, from those which were most holy, that is to say,
which served also to sanctify others. For example; the aromatical confection
which was used for the anointing of the Priests; Item, all Expiatory
sacrifices; certain kinds of Oblations; and the Altar, which sanctified the
Sacrifices; all these things were called thrice holy, Lev. 2.3. and 6.14. Number.
18.9. Exodus 28. Now it is to be observed that the Priests only had the right
of touching those things that were most holy: This was a privilege of their
Office. The people never touched the Altar, never might use an ointment like
that of the Priests, nor might ever taste of any Sacrifice of Expiation, as we
shall see when we come to treat of the Supper of the Lord. In sum, it is a
Maxim, That every thing which had the quality of most holy, was interdicted to
the people; which, in this regard, had no communion with the Priests. We go not
about here to sound the depth of this mystery: It suffices us to observe that
the New Testament has taken away this difference. All Christians at this day
are Priests, all have received the Priestly Unction, all have right to eat that
which is most holy, and which has the power to sanctify, to wit, the
Expiatory Sacrifice, that is, the Body of Christ. Thus the Communion of Saints
is now more complete and more universal then it was under the Law.

Four several buildings of which God has been the Archit^ct, representing
severally the estate of the Church.
We find four buildings of which God himself has set down and ordered the
structure.

The first is the Ark, in which he preserved Noah during the Deluge.

The second is the Tabernacle, which was built in the Desert, about the which
were encamped the Tribes.

The third is the Temple, built upon a mountain, where was held the general
assembly of the people of God.

The fourth is the heavenly Jerusal^m, described Rev. 21.

But there is a great difference between these four buildings.

The first, that is the Ark, had no oother foundation then the waters upon
which it floated.

The second, to wit, the Taberna^le, was truly placed upon the earth, but it
was ambulatory, having no resting place, as being composed of pieces that were
taken down and transported from one place to another.

The third, to wit, the Temple, was fixed, founded upon a rock, of strong
matter, that promised a long continuance: But it was combustible, and subject
to be demolished: As in effect, it was twice overthrown from the top to the
bottom.

But the fourth, which is Jerusalem above, builded by Gods own hand, without
any workman, possesses a firmness without shaking, and a continuance without
end.

This fourth building is the scope and perfection of the three foregoing, the
which having successively represented the Church in several degrees of
weakness, determine in this estate unmovable in which it shall be, being
placed in heaven.

Why the most notable periods of the Church, and many famous mysteries, had
their beginning in a Desert.
The first time that Angels spoke to men, was in a Desert: For Hagar the first
person to whom Angels spoke, was in a Desert, when the voice of the Angel was
directed to her, Genesis 16.7.

The first time that God spoke to Moses, was in a Desert, in that famous vision
of the burning bush, Exodus 3.

The Law was given in a Desert.

The Tabernacle was built in a Desert.

The most illustrious figures of Christ, Manna, the Rock from whence issued
water, the miracle of the Brazen Serpent, were brought forth in a Desert.

The miraculous fast of Moses, that of Elijah, and of Christ, passed in a
Desert.

The preaching of the Gospel began in a Desert, Matthew. 2.1.

Baptism, the first Sacrament of the New Testament, began in a Desert, and
Jesus Christ himself received it in a Desert.

The first and the last piece of Scripture, to wit, the Books of Moses, and
that of the Revelation, were delivered in a Desert.

The Christian Church, gathered from among the Jews, after the Ascension of the
Son of God, withdrew it self into a Desert, before the destruction of
Jerusalem, and sojourned there three years and six months, Rev. 12.14.

Many excellent considerations might be brought upon this subject: But
principally the Wisdom of God would show in the most notable beginnings, as
well of the Israelitish as the Christian Church, that his Church is a Body
distinguished from all other societies that are in the world, formed upon other
principles, of an original quite different; and that it was not founded upon
any terrestrial Empire.

It is worth the noting, that as the Church of Israel remained forty years in
a Desert, before it was established in the land of Canaan; so the Christian
Church remained after its beginning, to wit, after that the Son of God was
ascended into heaven, seven times forty years in a continual persecution,
which reduced it into solitudes and deserts: For after the Ascension of our
Lord, till the three hundred and fifteenth of his Nativity, when Constantine
called back the Christians, and caused them to build Churches, there passed two
hundred and eighty years, seven times as many years as the Israelites had
passed in the Desert.

All the Church was never gathered together in one place, except then wh^^ it
was in the Ark.
After the family of Adam, in which for that time was included the Body of the
Church, it is not found that the believe^s, which make up the Church Militant,
have been all gathered together in one place, save when they were all enclosed
in that Vessel which preserved them from the Deluge. The Israelites, when they
went forth out of Egypt, and when they remained in the Desert, were all
assembled in the same place: but yet it could not be said for certain that all
the Church was there: for we know that God had children among other Nations,
far distant from that of Israel; witness Job and his friends, who all
acknowledged the true-God. It is a vanity most vain, when Decrees are
represented under the name of the Universal Church, as if it had been assembled
in one place; for even the Councels which are called General, are not such in
effect, nor can it be said that they represent the Church Universal: For never
was there a Convocation made by the suffrages of all the Churches in the world.

The Remission of Sins.
A difference between the Remission which the Law presented of old to sinners,
and that which is offered unto them by the Gospel.
BEhold a point remarkable against the Jews, who believe to find their
salvation in the Sacrifices and other Ceremonies of the Law, under pretense
that it says that it shall be pardoned unto him who brings such or such an
Oblation for his sin. I pass by that which is notorious to all Christians,
that those Legal Expiations had none other quality then that of figures: But
that which I observe beyond this, is, that the Law it self never presents an
universal Remission to the sinner. This is a Maxim, That the Law had not any
Sacrifice which did universally expiate all the sins of a man. All the
Expiations of which it speaks, were but of certain sins, not of all entirely;
and therefore they promised a plentary Remission, but still left the sinner
indebted to the Justice of God.

Against this may be objected the Expiation general which was performed every
year on the tenth day of the seventh month, according to the ordinance
contained in Levit. 16. For that bears expressly that this ceremony did
expiate all the iniquities and trespasses of the children of Israel. But we
must consider that this Expiation was made but once every year, and only on
one day; and it was for sins precedent, that is to say, which had been
committed till then. The offenses which were committed after that day, were not
expiated till a year after, on the same day. So that by the space of a whole
year, men remained burdened with an infinite number of crimes which came upon
them after the precedent Expiation, and there needed another, which came not
till the year was come about. Now how many persons died before the revolution
of the year, without being able to attain to the day of Expiation? All those
therefore which were prevented by death before that day fell, departed without
having obtained an entire Remission, since there remained a number of sins
which could not as yet be expiated according to the Law.

Surely the Law it self showed the impotency of its Expiations, by which there
never could be a coming to a total Remission. But the Remission which we have
by Christ, blotteth out universally all the sins of a man that accepts this
pardon. Neither yet is it restrained to any circumstance of place or time.
Therefore whereas the Law presented Remission of sins but one only time in a
whole year, the Gospel presents it unto us every day.

Which is most injurious and repugnant to God, Either ^ Despair, or Presumption?
He that despaireth, offends the Mercy of God: But the presumptuous, that
believes himself to be capable of giving satisfaction to God, offends his
Justice and his Mercy both together. His Justice, in requiring that it should
approve a payment that is none. His Mercy, in presuming to content his Justice.
For whosoever imagines that he is able to satisfy the Justice of God,
believes not that he has need of his Mercy.

A believer having committed some sin very enormous, is it credible, although he
have repented and obtained pardon, that God will love him altogether as much as
he loved him before the offense committed?
God loves the righteous; but if the righteous happen to commit some great
crime, it is impossible but God should resent it. Nevertheless the gate of his
Mercy is always open to the penitent. But is there any likelihood that God
having been grievously offended by a man whom he loved, will yet love him with
so great an affection as he loved him before? For he may pardon him, and yet
nevertheless abate of his former good will. We pardon oftentimes such an one
as has rendered himself unworthy of the friendship which we bare to him, and we
may yet have abundance of affection toward him; but it is hard that our
affection should return to the same degree in which it was before the offense
came between, howsoever he testifies his being displeased for it.

Concerning this question, we may say, That there is more joy in heaven, and
consequently more affection, in some regard, for one sinner coming to
repentance, then for ninety and nine righteous, that have no need of particular
repentance: That the love of God toward his children is not measured according
to the proportion of the good which they do, but proceeds purely from his own
goodness: That even there where sin has abounded, God causes that his grace
superaboundeth: That he to whom God has pardoned the greater sins, is often he
that more loves God, and consequently is the more beloved of God, Luke 7.47.
That the father of the Prodigal (whose Parable tends to our matter)
testifies that he had still as much of love for that his son, after all his
debauchednesse, as he had before, Luke 15. That the Remission of sins is
represented under the name of Amnestie or Oblivion, when God promises that he
will have no remembrance of our transgressions, but account them as not having
been; whence it follows, that their memory shall not diminish the love which
God bare unto us from the beginning, Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.12. and 10.17. And
lastly, that many Saints have committed diverse notable crimes, and being fallen
from the rank which they had in the Church of God, have not only obtained
Remission but also have been reestablished in all their dignities and
preeminences, as we shall see presently.

Examples of diverse great sinners reestablished in their first estate.
We find four famous among all others, whom God has fully restored, to wit, a
High Priest, a Prophet, a King, and one of the first Apostles. These four are,
Aaron, Jonah, Manasseh, and Saint Peter. Aaron, who being named of God to the
Priesthood, after being become an instrument of the idolatry of the golden
calf, was nevertheless again exalted to the Priestly dignity. Jonah, who
having deserted the office of a Prophet, was notwithstanding yet honored with
that charge the second time. Manasseh, who after having filled all the City of
Jerusalem with innocent blood, and erected an Empire for the devil, for which
crimes he was despoiled of his Royalty, found nevertheless favor with God,
who caused him to reascend his Throne. Saint Peter, who had weakly denied his
Master, was notwithstanding restored to his Apostolate; yea, by three clauses
expressed in his commission, to blot out the three denials which had issued
from his mouth, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.

There might be produced other examples: but these are the most express. The
goodness of God would reestablish those sinners represented in those four
different conditions, the highest of all; to wit, the Priesthood, the office of
a Prophet, the state of a King, and the Apostolate; to show that there is no
fall so foul from which a child of God may not be lifted up, yea, so far as to
return to a higher degree, to be nearer to God.

The Resurrection of the Flesh.
Why is Abraham so highly commended for having believed that God could raise
the dead? Heb. 11.19.
IS this any marvel that so great a Patriarch had this belief, seeing so many
Christians have it, and so many Israelites had it as well as he? Why is this
faith honored with a greater elogium in him then in them? We must consider
that before the days of Abraham, and also a long time after, God had not as yet
raised any dead. This kind of Miracle was not seen till the end of many ages
after the decease of Abraham: Neither he nor they that had gone before him had
ever seen or heard, that one that was dead had been raised again. As therefore
this Miracle was without example, so much the more of faith was needful to
believe that God was able to effect it. But as for us, we have many examples of
the Resurrection of the dead, in diverse persons to whom God restored life. Upon
which I am to produce these observations following.

An admirable gradation in those which have been raised from the dead.
The particular Resurrection of Lazarus, and of the others which we read in the
History, is an image of the general Resurrection which is to come. In the
estate of those dead bodies which God has raised at several times, there are
diverse degrees.

Some have been raised incontinently after having given up the Ghost, there
having not been above some few minutes between their death and their
resurrection; as Acts 20.9, 10.

Others had been already fully cold, before they were raised; as the son of the
Shunamite, as it appears by the circumstances related 2 King. 4.20, etc.

Others had been already washed and prepared to the burial; as Tabitha, Acts
9.37.

Others had been already on the way to the grave; as the son of the widow of
Naim, which was carried out of the Town to be interred, Luke 7.12.

Others were already entered into the grave; as he which rose again by the touch
of Elisha's bones, 2 King. 13.21.

Others had not only been in the grave, but also had stayed there, yea, they
had been putrified; as Lazarus, Joh. 11.39.

Others had been reduced to dust; as those that rose with Christ, Matthew. 27.52.

Thus God shows unto us the Resurrection in all the conditions of the dead,
from them that went no further then expiration, even to them of which there
remained no more then dust. His power which gives life, has gone through all
the passages through which dead bodies do descend to the lowest degree of their
annihilation.

The same shall come to pass in the general Resurrection: For when the Son of
God shall call up the dead, there will be found those that have been deceased
only some few hours since, or but a few days; others, that shall be already
putrified; others, that shall have been five or six thousand years in the
grave, of which there will remain no more but the ashes.

Why there have been more young people raised from the dead then old.
God has raised from the dead those of both sexes, and of different ages; as,
the daughter of Fairus, and Tabitha; but the greatest part have been of young
people. The son of the widow of Sarephta, and the son of the Shunamite, were as
yet in their childhood. The son of the widow of Naim, was but a youth. The
daughter of Jairus was but twelve years old. Eutychus was a young man: And it
is probable that Lazarus was so. The number and age of the Saints which came
out of their graves when Christ arose, is not mentioned in the History: So much
is certain, that among all them whom it names, the number of young people
raised from the dead is greater then that of aged persons, of whom we have none
but Tobitha, and it may be him that was raised in the grave of Elisha.

Now this also is a short table or pattern of the great Resurrection which is to
be at the last Day: For that shall raise far more young people then old. This
needs no demonstration. The number of them that die young, has still
surpassed the number of them that die old. How many human creatures die in
their childhood, or in their growth, or in the flower of their age? Those that
go beyond all those first seasons of their life, and arrive as far as the last,
are very few in comparison of them whom death intercepteth in the way. As
therefore the number of the younger sort is the greater among the dead, so also
it shall be the greater in the Resurrection of the dead. And to represent this
to us, God would, by a mysterious Preludium, raise more of young people then of
old.

Of the first Resurrection, and of the second death, mentioned Revel. 20. And
from whence those terms are extracted.
THis passage has diverse difficulties: For it speaks of a term of a thousand
years, during which the Saints must reign with Christ. It is also said, that
the rest of the dead are not to rise till those thousand years be accomplished;
and this is the first Resurrection. Concerning which the Expositours both
ancient and modern have very different opinions: And many, renewing the opinion
of the Millenaries, figure to themselves a bodily Resurrection of the faithful,
which they believe must precede by many ages the Resurrection of other men.

Now I will not contradict the common exposition which bears that by the
first Resurrection is meant the Regeneration, by which we rise again into
newness of life; And by the second Death, that which is otherwise called
eternal. But that which I have to observe here, is, that these terms (the first
Resurrection, the second death) carry with them an excellent allusion which is
not considered, though it be very visible, and that it gives abundance of
light in the obscurity of this text.

This therefore is to be noted, that according to the literal construction of
these words, there are two Resurrections. The one, which is or already has
been performed in this world; the other, which is to be at the last day. The
one is particular, the other is universal. Now this is true historically and
really: For Lazarus, Eutychus, Tabitha, and diverse others mentioned in
Scripture, have been already raised once, (this is the first Resurrection) and
shall yet be raised once more, to wit, in the end of the world, with the rest
of the dead. So that they have two Resurrections, having already passed through
the first.

This allusion is extended yet farther. It is said touching them that have part
in this first Resurrection, that the second death has no power over them. Upon
which, it is to be considered that it is never said that Lazarus, or any of all
them which were raised from the dead, died the second time. It is very true
that they died again: for Christ is the first of them that rose to immortality.
Nevertheless the Scripture, which is so exact to set down all that which is
worthy of consideration, never relates the second death of them which have
been raised, no not of one of them. It did import, as it should seem, to know
so much the consequents and the effects of the divine power which restored them
to life, that we should know whether they lived any long time after they were
raised from the dead. Yet their second death is not read in the Scripture. A
silence so constant and universal, as well in the one as the other Testament,
is not without some great ground.

I think therefore that this omission is mysterious, as diverse others which are
seen in the Scripture. There is no doubt but that Melchizedek died, as well as
other men: Yet, as every one knows, he is said to be without end of life,
Heb. 7.3. That is to say, in as much as he is presented as such in the holy
History, the which recites not either the birth or the decease of this person,
but rather produces him as a man eternal. Accordingly, howsoever those that
have been raised, have been returned to the grave, yet this is not expressed.
The Scripture after having raised them, leaves them as living for ever,
without ever saying that they died afterward: So that their second death is not
found. Where therefore it is spoken, Revel. 20. of those which have part in the
first Resurrection, that the second death has no power over them; it is
evident that this expression is drawn from the history of them whom we read to
have been raised from the dead, which is the first Resurrection; but we read
not that they died the second time.

Thus the Spirit of God draws matters Historical, to frame the images of
future events which it sets to view in Prophecies. This Book of the
Revelation is all composed of such pictures, whereof the stuff and colors are
borrowed of that which has come to pass really according to the letter, but
animated with a spiritual and mystical sense: For it does not follow that that
which is literally in History, ought to be understood literally in Prophecy:
On the contrary, it represents one thing by another quite different, though
there be a resemblance of one to the other. These Prophetic terms, that the
second death has no power over them which have a part in the first
Resurrection, express formally the history of Lazarus and the rest which
already have had one Resurrection, which we read not to have been followed by a
second death. Shall we therefore yet expect that some shall be raised before
the last Day, yea a thousand years before? By the same reason, it will be
requisite that we expect two men which shall have power to shut up heaven, to
hinder that it rain not, to turn waters into blood, to smite the earth with all
plagues, to consume their enemies with fire coming forth of their mouth, Revel.
11.5, 6. But this, if we take it literally, is as absurd as if we would make
Moses and Elias to come again; for this Prophecy is molded upon their
history. By the same reason, we must imagine Jaspers, Amethysts, and Emeralds
in the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21. where the magnificence of it is represented
under the figure of those precious stones which were set in the brestplate of
the High Priest, Exodus 28. And by the same reason, we must rebuild the Altar
and Temple of Jerusalem, which represent the Christian Church, Revel. 11.

Everlasting life.
The first and the last of all Miracles.
THe first Miracle that came to pass after the Creation, is, as I have already
said, the translation of Enoch. And the last Miracle which shall be wrought in
the world, shall be the translation of the faithful, which at the last Day
shall be carried up to heaven. All the Miracles, from the first to the last,
tend to carry man to heaven. And by their beginning, God would show what should
be their conclusion.

Why Adam was not carried bodily to heaven as well as Enoch.
The translation of Enoch was a preludium of ours, which we expect, and a
testimony of eternal life, where we shall be gathered together in body and
soul. But it is worth the enquiring, Why God wrought not this Miracle in the
person of the first man, but deferred it until the seventh generation. Behold
then what may be said concerning it.

If Adam, who represented all mankind, had been carried up to heaven as Enoch
afterward was, there would not have wanted some that would conclude that heaven
appertained naturally unto men, as children and heirs of Adam. Now to prevent
this error, and to teach us that heavenly beatitude is given by Grace, and not
by Nature, the Wisdom of God found it not good that the common father of men
should ascend corporally to heaven, but would that he should die, and that his
body should remain in the earth. Besides, that which is most worthy of
observation, God would not translate Enoch till such time as Adam was dead; and
yet Enoch had already lived above three hundred years before the decease of
Adam. But after that Adam was dead, Enoch was the first Patriarch that went out
of the world. For great reasons, the going forth of Enoch was preceded by that
of his grandfather. In that of Adam, who died, God did show what it is that men
hold of their Nature, to wit, death: In that of Enoch, who was carried up
without dying, God has showed what it is that the righteous ought to expect
from Grace, to wit, immortality. In that of Adam, the father of all, is seen
the condition of all men, to whom it is appointed once to die: In that of Enoch
is seen the privilege of Believers, who shall be carried to heaven. And as the
death of Adam went before the rapture of Enoch, so it behooves that we die i^
Adam, before we can be carried up with Enoch.

Why God has showed the glory of heaven to some that were yet upon the earth,
and yet never showed hell to any person while he was in this world.
Saint Steven being as yet here below, the heavens were opened unto him, and
he saw the glory of God. Saint Paul being as yet mortal, was in the third
heaven, and heard unspeakable words that there were uttered. But none, whether
Elect, or Reprobate, ever saw hell, but after his death. Why has not that
place of torment been shown unto mortals, as well as Paradise?

The cause for which God has caused the joys of heaven to be seen, has been
to the end to comfort his children, and to encourage them to those sufferings
which should be followed by such a glory. The sight of hell makes not for this
purpose: Nor is it enough to say that it might serve for the conversion of
unbelievers: For if a wicked man had seen hell, he would no more amend then the
brethren of the wicked rich man would have done upon the word of one dead that
had come back from the bosom of Abraham, Luke 16.31.

Why Saint Paul being come back from the third heaven, speaks not of having
Seen, but only of having Heard, 2 Cor. 14.4.
It may be that in effect he was transported thither rather to Hear then to
See. And this, Either because being yet mortal, God revealed himself to him as
to Moses; not by the sight of his face, of which every man living is incapable,
but by the words of his mouth, Exodus 33.18, etc. Or because being to descend
yet from heaven hither below, to instruct others, he had need to receive
instructions, and by consequence, it was more necessary for him to Hear then to
See, more profitable both to him and to those that were afterward taught by
him. For howsoever the words which he had heard, were unspeakable, yet they
furnished him with great lights, the which he forgot not, but brought them from
above, to enlighten both himself and others.

Of Faith. The Conclusion of this Treatise.
Two only things at which Jesus Christ as man wondered.
THe one was the Unbelief of his countrymen the Galileans, Mark 6.6. The other
was the Faith of a stranger, to wit, the Centurion, Matthew. 8.10. We read not
that Jesus Christ, in the days of his humiliation, ever admired any thing but
these two. It is truly a thing to be admired, that many are unbelievers in a
greater light, and that many have a great faith, being enlightened but by a
little spark.

Of a strange method by which God obliges men to believe.
It were an impertinency and folly for one man to say to another, I command
thee to believe this: for Belief is not formed by Commandment, but by
Persuasion. None is master of the Belief of another, no not of his own: For a
man cannot Believe all that he would, yea, he is often constrained to believe
that which he would not; as the devils believe, against their will, that there
is a God. The object of Belief is not Imperative, but Indicative; nor is it
proposed in form of a Commandment, but in that of a Narration.

Nevertheless, God does not only invite us to Believe, in presenting to us
the Truths which are the objects of our Faith, but himself commands us: This
is his Commandment, that we should Believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
1 John 3.23. Upon which we ought to consider, that in commanding to believe, he
can cause us to believe. His words, when it pleases him to animate them with
his Spirit, plant Faith in the heart of man. Nor does it import that they be
narrative or prohibitive, or otherwise conceived: For their efficacy depends
not upon the form of the expressions, but upon the secret virtue of their
Author. It were a great impropriety every way, if a man should command me to
believe; for with all his commandments he cannot cause me to believe, as long
as my spirit persuades me to the contrary. But God, who is the Father and the
Master of spirits, can speak in the terms of Commanding; because in commanding
to Believe, in effect he gives the grace to Believe. So that language, which
were absurd in the mouth of man, is admirable in the mouth of God.

Of those that promise to Believe, if the truth be shown unto them.
There is nothing more ordinary among them which dispute against the true
Religion, then these words, Prove me that which ye say, and I will believe it.
But these people speak as if Faith only depended upon themselves. They promise
that which is not in their power. This is as if a blind man should promise to
know colors, provided they be showed unto him. The Truth, what evidence soever
it brings with it, is not perceptible but to him that has eyes capable of
discerning it. Now this visive faculty is not given to all; although all
presume that they have it.

I will not here speak of them who imagine that if they saw some Miracle, they
should undoubtedly believe: Nor of them who think they have a great Faith,
because they never doubted of any point of Religion: Nor of the learned, why
they are more subject to doubts then the common sort of Christians: Nor of
other matters appertaining to this subject, which I have touched in my Treatise
of Popular Errors.

I will therefore pass to the second part, which is the doctrine of Works,
contained in the Decalogue.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
Of the Knowledge of God.
WHy a man that should be perfect, may always increase in Knowledge, but not in
Goodness. Page 1. To love God without knowing him, is the most irregular of
all affections. p. 2. Why the wisest Nations have had more paltry or horrible
gods then those that were barbarous. p. 3. Quest. Whether it be a sufficient
reason for adhering to a Religion, to allege that in it may be found
salvation. p. 5. Such as a man is in his own nature, such he imagines that God
is. Strange horrid conceits of the spirit of man concerning this subject. p. 6.
Of all the Attributes of God, which is that which we see first? And which is
that which we see least? p. 8. The two greatest points of Religion. p. 10.
Which are more culpable, those who distrust the Power of God, or those that
doubt of his Mercy toward them? p. 11.
Of the holy Trinity.
THe extent of Faith, and the diversity of the objects of it. p. 12. Three
degrees of language of God in the Creation. p. 13. Why God never speaks of
himself in the Plural number, nor is ever brought in as consulting, but where
it concerns man. p. 14.
Of the Creation.
THe diversity of habitation which God has given to two kinds of Creatures
which bear his image; that is, to Angels and Men. p. 18. What ought to be
gathered fron this, That God imposed names upon the day, the night, the
heavens, the earth, the sea; yet has given no general name to signify the
whole world. p. 20. Whence comes it, that the spirit of man is pleased with
variety? p. 21.
Of the Providence of God.
Why the Scripture oftener names the Hand or the Arm of God, then the Heart
of God. p. 22. Of the fundamental Law of the Creation, and of the excellent
instructions which issue from it. p. 23. How many times the general order of
the world has been interrupted since the Creation. p. 26. An example of
instructions wherewith the Providence of God has furnished man, by creatures
most contemptible. p 27. Whence comes it, that in diverse disputes and
dialogues which we read to have passed between God and man, it seems (without
blasphemy be it spoken) that man reasons better then God himself? p. 28.
Notable examples of the Providence of God, in the Fatalities of Times, of
Places, and other circumstances. p 30. Of many kinds of scourges equally
dreadful and unavoidable, which ought to be chosen, if God should leave the
choice to us? or, which is more to be desired? p. 35. Whence comes it that
among public scourges, those that pass the hand of men, are more frequent,
more universal, and of longer continuance, then those which come immediately
from God? p. 37. It makes for the glory of God, that there be more wicked then
good men. Ibid. The greatest good that God has done to the world, is come to
pass by means of the greatest crime that men could commit. p. 39. Nature it
self has restrained the forces and ability of man, to the end to bound his
desires, and the effects of his malice. p. 40. Of the mavelous Providence of
God permitting that the righteous die by the hand of the wicked. p. 41. Why in
War the people of God have been often beaten by their enemies; and why a good
cause has been overthrown. p. 43. Why God never sent above one Angel, or two
at most, when he intended to destroy men; and has so often sent many, when he
intended to preserve one man. p. 45. If man had persevered in original justice,
there had never been Miracles, but only of one kind. p. 47.
Of JESUS CHRIST.
AConsideration of the diverse Names and Titles of our Savior: And the
differences that ought to be observed in expressing them. p. 49. Wherefore
Jesus, who received the Sacraments as well of the one as the other Testament,
had not that external Anointing which was given to Prophets, Priests and Kings.
p. 54. Whence comes it that diverse discourses uttered by Jesus Christ, seem to
be without method: An admirable secret, which ought to be observed. p. 55. A
conjecture of what our Lord wrote, when the Pharisees demanded his judgment
touching the punishment of the adulteress, Joh. 8. p. 57. Why God sent for the
forerunner of his Son, a Prophet rather then a King: And why there was no
Christian King for the space of three hundred years after the Nativity of Jesus
Christ. p. 60.
Of the Humane nature of JESUS CHRIST.
AN excellent gradation in the four Evangelists describing the Genealogy of
Jesus Christ. p. 62. Why the Scripture gives the name of Antichrist to him
that denies the Humanity of our Savior, rather then to him that denies his
Divinity. p. 63. Why Jesus Christ, after his resurrection, called himself no
more the Son of man, as before times. p. 64. Why the most glorious miracles
which our Lord wrought, were often preceded by some action which witnessed
those weaknesses to which his humane nature was made subject. p. 65. Of an
admirable harmony which is found between the three periods of the three
fourteens numbered in the first chapter of Saint Matthew. p. 67. Two notable
preludiums of the birth of Jesus Christ; and the agreement of the one with the
other. p. 69 God has never published by Miracles the birth of any person,
except that of Jesus Christ. p. 70. Wherefore has not the Scripture set down
the day of the Nativity of Jesus Christ? p. 72. Of the service which the Angels
have done to the Son of God, from his manifestation in the flesh, until his
Ascension. p. 77.
Of the Miracles which our Lord wrought, so long as he conversed in the world.
OF the advantage of the New Testament above the Old, in regard of the number
of persons which have had the gift of Miracies. p. 79. Wherefore till the
coming of the Son of God, there have passed many ages without that any person
has had the gift of Miracles. p. 82. Why none of them from whom Christ is
descended according to the flesh, has had the gift of Miracles. p. 84. Why
John the Baptist had not the gift of Miracles. p. 85. Of the diverse degrees or
steps by which our Lord displayed his miraculous power toward the bodies of
men. p. 86. Of the diverse actions which Jesus Christ has done in the Temple of
Jerusalem. p. 88. Why no man ever wrought Miracle within the Temple of God,
except the Son of God. An observation upon this subject. p. 89. Why Jesus
Christ, when he was hungry, or thirsty, or weary with travel, never helped
himself by his miraculous power, to give himself refreshment. p. 91. Why the
Son of God, after he was raised from the dead, ceased from healing the sick. p.
92.
Of the Tears of Christ in the days of his Flesh. p. 93.

Christ condemned by Pilate.
AConsideration why the names of dive^^ wicked men are set down in the hist^^
of the Passion of Christ. p. 9^ The name of the Roman Empire has is tervened
both in the birth and death of Christ p. 97.
The Death and Burial of CHRIST.
FOur glorious occurrences, distant many ages one from the other, and coming ^^
pass on the like day. p. 98. An advertisement touching the Name of Altar
improperly ascribed to the Cross. p. 100. Why the Scripture speaks of what
matter the Cross was made, yet expresses not the form of it. p. 102. None
has wrought Miracles at his death, except the Son of God. p. 103. Three signs
from heaven, exhibited in three several passages, by the which Jesus Christ
has been declared publicly to be the Messiah. p. 104. Why the High Priest,
who represented Jesus Christ, never came near to the dead; and yet Jesus Christ
did the contrary. p. 106. Why the fear of death was more excusable in the
Saints of the Old Testament, then it is now: And why we ought not to imitate
them in all that which they have spoken concerning this subject. p. 108.
The descent of CHRIST into Hell.
AN observation upon the words of the Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7. forbidding to ask
who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend into the abyss? p. 110. Why
Christ being on the Cross, pronounced the first words of the 22 Psalm. p. 112.
The fruits of the death of CHRIST.
Why the Son of God deferred so long time to come and expiate the sins of the
world. p. 114. An admirable concurrence of the time of Redemption with the
times of the most famous Ceremonies of the Law. An observation upon this
subject. p. 118. A mysterious reason of the name which the Apostle gives to
the Sacrifice of Christ, calling it A Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor,
Ephesians. 5.2. p. 120.
The Resurrection of CHRIST.
NIne examples of the Resurrection of the dead, which have gone before or
followed the Resurrection of Christ. An Harmony between those that were raised
under the Old Testament, and those that were raised by the Son of God, while
himself was yet mortal. p. 123. Why Christ rose not again the day after his
death, but suffered the whole Sabbath day to pass over, before he returned to
life. p. 125. A comparison of the time which God employed in the Creation, with
that which he employed in the Redemption: And of the days of the one and the
other. p. 127. The first and nearest cause of the three days detaining of Jonah
in the whales belly. p. 128. The Resurrection of Christ figured in Hezekiah, by
a double resemblance. p. 129. Why none ever was raised again the third day
after his death, but only Christ. p. 131. Three miraculous Sepulchers in the
holy History. p. 134. Four men that raised the dead, before and after the
coming of Christ. p. 135.
The continuation of the Article of the Resurrection of CHRIST. His Ascension
into Heaven: His Sitting at the right hand of God.
CHrist has verified his Resurrection by all the proofs which could be given.
p. 136. Why God never raised any person of note, to converse among men, except
the Messiah. p. 137. Of all those that have been raised from the dead, none is
introduced in Scripture speaking, except Jesus Christ. p. 141. Three several
Fourties of Days, in the time that our Savior stayed in this world.
Observations upon this circumstance. p. 143. Why the Son of God entered no more
into the Temple, after his Resurrection. And the difference in this regard
between Him and those which were his principal types. p. 145. Of those which
have seen the Son of God being in heaven. p. 146. All the miraculous
prerogatives which have been severally in diverse Saints, are found united in
one only Christ in a sovereign degree. p. 148.
Of the last Judgment.
Why does the holy History never say that God descended, but only where the
business has been to do justice, or to establish it, and protect the
innocent? p. 150. An observation upon the four general Judgments mentioned in
the Scriptures. p. 151. A wonderful Mystery which is seen in the several goings
out of the three first men which God took out of the world. p. 153. Why God,
who has foretold and set down the measures of certain particular times, has
not revealed how long the world should endure, or when the day of Judgment
should be. p. 156.
Of the holy Ghost.
FOur remarkable productions which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit of
God; to wit, two in the Creation, two in the Redemption. p. 159. Why the
Scripture represents the holy Ghost, and his effects, under the names of
Water, of Fire, of Anointing with Oil, and of Sprinkling of Blood. The true
interpretation of these terms, contained in diverse passages. p. 160. A
catalogue of those actions which were celebrated with Aspersion of Blood in the
time of the Law. p. 163. Blood has no propriety of making white. Why then is
it said (Apocal. 7.14.) that the Saints have made white their robes in the
blood of the Lamb? p. 166.
Of the Church, and the Communion of Saints.
WHy Moses is more prolix and more exact in the description of the Tabernacle,
then in that of the whole world. p. 169. The number of persons that make up the
body of the universal Church is not only prefixed and definite, but also
regulated by measures and proportions. p. 171. Of the small number of
believers, in the three several comings of the Son of God. Resemblances on this
subject. p. 174. Three several states of the Church in three several times, and
three several titles of it. p. 175. A difference between the Church of the Old
Testament and that of the New, in regard of the Communion of those things which
were ordained to sanctity. p. 176. Four several buildings of which God has
been the Architect, representing severally the estate of the Church. p. 178.
Why the most notable periods of the Church, and many famous mysteries, had
their beginning in a Desert. p. 180. All the Church was never gathered together
in one place, except then when it was in the Ark. p. 182.
The Remission of Sins.
A Difference between the Remission which the Law presented of old to sinners,
and that which is offered unto them by the Gospel. p. 184. Which is most
injurious and repugnant to God, Either Despair, or Presumption? p. 187. A
believer having committed some sin very enormous, is it credible, although he
have repented and obtained pardon, that God will love him altogether as much as
he loved him before the offense committed? Ibid. Examples of diverse great
sinners reestablished in their first estate. p. 190.
The Resurrection of the Flesh.
WHy is Abraham so highly commended for having believed that God could raise
the dead? Heb. 11.19. p. 192. An admirable gradation in those which have heen
raised from the dead. p. 193. Why there have been more young people raised from
the dead then old. p. 195.
Of the first Resurrection, and of the second death, mentioned Revel. 20. And
from whence those terms are extracted. p. 197.
Everlasting life. THe first and the last of all Miracles. p. 203. Why Adam was
not carried bodily to heaven as well as Enoch. p. 204. Why God has showed the
glory of heaven to some that were yet upon the earth, and yet never showed hell
to any person while he was in this world. p. 206. Why Saint Paul being come
back from the third heaven, speaks not of having Seen, but only of having
Heard, 2 Cor. 14.4. p. 207.
Of Faith. The Conclusion of this Treatise.
TWo only things at which Jesus Christ as man wondered. p. 208. Of a strange
method by which God obliges men to Believe. p. 209. Of those that promise to
Believe, if the truth be shown unto them. p. 110.
FINIS.



