A Worthy SPEECH Spoken by His Excellence The Earl of Essex. In the Head of
his Army, before his Arrival at Worcester, on Saturday last, being the 24. of
September, 1642. Wherein is declared every particular Order and Duty which his
Excellence expects to be performed both by his Commanders and Soldiers. With a
Royal Protestation taken by his Excellence, and by him prescribed to be taken
throughont the Army.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Sept. 29. 1642.

A Worthy Speech, spoken by his Excellence the Earl of Essex.
GEntlemen and fellow Soldiers, which are at this time assembled for the
defense of his majesty, and the maintenance of the true protestant Religion
under my command, I shall desire you to take notice what I that am your
General shall by my Honor promise to perform toward you, and what I shall be
forced to expect that you should perform toward me.

I do promise in the sight of Almighty God, that I shall undertake nothing, but
what shall tend to the advancement of the true protestant Religion, the
securing of his Majesty's Royal Person, the maintenance of the just privilege
of Parliament, and the liberty and property of the Subject, neither will I
engage any of you into any danger but (though for many reasons I might
forbear) I will in my own person run an equal hazard with you, and either
bring you off with Honor, or (if God have so decreed) fall with you, and
willingly become a sacrafice for the preservation of my Country.

Likewise I do promise that my ear shall be open to hear the complaint of
the poorest of my Soldiers, though against the chiefest of my Officers,
neither shall his greatness (if justly taxed) gain any privilege, but I
shall be ready to execute Justice against all from the greatest to the least.

Your pay shall be constantly delivered to your Commanders, and if default be
made by any Officer, give me timely notice, and you shall find speedy redress.

This being performed on my part, I shall now declare what is your duty toward
me, which I must likewise expect to be carefully performed by you.

1. I shall desire All and every Officer to endeavor by love and affable
carriage to command his Soldiers, since what is done for fear, is done
unwillingly, and what is unwillingly attempted can never prosper.

Likewise it is my request that you be very careful in the excercising of your
men, and bring them to use their Arms readily and expertly, and not to bussy
them in practizing the cerimonious forms of Military discipline, only let
them be well instructed in the necessary rudiments of War, that they may know
to fall on with discretion, and retreat with care, how to maintain their
Order, and make good their ground.

Also I do expect that all those which volluntarily engaged themselves in this
Service, should answer my expectation in the performance of these ensuing
Artickles.

1. That you willingly and cheerfully obey such as (by your own election) you
have made Commanders over you.

2. That you take special care to keep your Arms at all times fit for
Service, that upon all occasions you may be ready when the signal shall be
given by the sound of Drum or Trumpet to repair to your Colors, and so to
march upon any Service where, and when occasion shall require.

3. That you bear your selves like Soldiers, without doing any spoil to the
inhabitants of the Country, so doing you shall gain love and friendship, where
otherwise you will be hated, and complained off, and I that should protect you,
shall be forced to punish you according to the severity of Law

4. That you accept and rest satisfied with such quarters as shall fall to your
Lot, or be appointed you by your quartermaster.

5. That you shall (if appointed for Centries or Per-dues) faithfully discharge
that duty, for upon fail hereof, you are sure to undergo a very severe
censure.

6. You shall forbear to profane the Saboth, either by being drunk, or by
unlawful games for whosoever shall be found faulty must not expect to pass
unpunished.

7. Whosoever shall be known to neglect the feeding of his Horse with
necessary Provender, to the end that his Horse be disabled or unfit for
Service, the party for the party for the said default, shall suffer a month's
imprisonment, and afterward be cashiered as unworthy the name of a Soldier.

8. That no Trooper or other of our soldiers shall suffer his Paddee to feed
his Horse in the Corn, or to steal men's hay, but shall pay every man for Hay
6. d. day and night, and for Oats 2. s. the Bushel.

Lastly, that you avoid cruelty; for it is my desire rather to save the life of
thousands, then to kill one, so that it may be done without prejudice.

These things faithfully performed, and the justice of our cause truly
considered let us advance with a religions courage, and willingly adventure our
lives in the defense of the King and Parliament.

FINIS.

