TWO LETTERS: The one from His Excellency, Robert Earl of Essex, To Anthony
Nicoll, Esquire, a Member of the House of Commons. The other from
VVARVVICK-CASTLE, To Sir Samuel Luke at his Quarters: Concerning the state of
the City of Gloucester.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that these Letters be forthwith printed:
H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edward Husbands, Sept. 1. 1643.

To my much respected Friend, ANTHONY NICOLL, Esquire.
SIR,
THe cause of our lying still to day was, that the Clothes and Arms might be
disposed, but principally, that Col: Harvey might not be too far engaged, who
is marching after with the Associated Forces, and I hope, will be near us to
morrow night; and then I doubt not, but we shall march without stop or stay. By
the enclosed, you will see what I hear from Warwick.

Your assured Friend, ESSEX.

For the HONORABLE, Sir Samuel Luke, AT HIS QuARTERS.
Honorable Sir,
I Sent an answer to yours of the 26. this morning, and in obedience to his
Excellencies commands presently dispatched away a Messenger to Gloucester;
since which time (i.) this day about Twelve of the clock, came hither Two
substantial Men from the Town; by whom I perceived, none of those Messengers I
formerly sent, came into the Town; yet they assured me, the Town was in a very
good condition, and full of courage, having every day put the Enemy to much
loss. Yesterday morning upon an outfall they killed Sir Jacob Astley (as the
Soldiers report) I heard by a prisoner, that A Man of principal respect was
killed: It was agreed between them and the Governor, at their coming away,
That in case Relief were coming, they should this Night, about Twelve of the
clock, make Fires upon Bredon-hill; which the Town was to answer, by doing the
like upon the Colledge-Steeple; whereupon I showing them your Letter for their
satisfaction, accommodated them with Horses, and sent them speedily away, to
put their Design in execution.

Sir, I find, the Kings Foot there are few, and those in very ill condition,
so that whenever the town makes a sally, the quarter they fall upon, runs
without striking a blow; The Town has not lost above Ten persons, of Men,
Women, and Children, slain.

If in any thing I have a capacity to serve you, if you please to honor me with
your commands, you shall find ready and cheerful obedience from

Sir, Your affectionate humble Servant, Jo: BRIDGES.
Warwick-Castle, 28. Aug. about 9. at night.
FINIS.

