MOST HAPY AND WELCOME NEWS FROM HIS EXCELLENCY The Earl of Essex: WHEREIN
IS DECLARed the true and full Relation, of two famous Victories obtained by the
Parliament Forces.

THE FIRST, FOUGHT BY the Lord of ROCHFORD at Twyford, Ian. 15. where with 700.
men, he routed all the KINGS Army, consisting of about 1500. who came to burn
the said Town.

THE SECOND, FOUGHT BY COLlonell Chomley at Hurst, Ian. 17. near Reading,
where with 300. men he gave battle, to 2000. of the KINGS Forces, which sallied
out of Reading, with a resolution to take and pillage Hurst of all their Corn
and Hay.

DECLARING THE MANNER OF THEIR FIRST meeting, and how after 4. or 5. hours
fight, they fored them to retreat, killing 300. of the Cavaliers and taking 60.
horse. with the loss of twenty three men.

London, Printed for T. Rider. 1643.

THE Proceedings of the Earl of Essexs Forces, near Reading:
FRom Twyford, near READING, it is informed by a true and real Relation, That
the Lord of ROCHFORD, and Colonel CHOMLEY, lying there with their forces,
consisting of about seven hundred men; Colonel AVSTON, a great and notorious
Papist, and commander in chief over the KINGS Forces, which are quartered in
READING; issued out of the town, and gave an Alarm against TWYFORD, upon
Sunday last being the eight of of this instant month of JANVARY: Their Forces
that gave the Alarm were commanded by Captain FAWCET, and Captain AVSTON,
cozen to the aforenamed Colonel, and came up all in a breast, within half a
mile of the town of TWYFORD; where they assaulted the same, with
three-hundered and twenty men, thinking at that time to have gained the town,
and to have cut off all the PARLIAMENT Forces that lay therein; But their hopes
were sone frustrated, and their expectation quite dissolved; for the Lord of
ROCHFORD, and Colonel CHOMLEY, being there quartered wirh about seven hundred
men; issued out of the town, and drove their forces up to TWYFORD green,
where they had planted two small Drakes, and raised a good Bre^^-work, and
there they set their men in Batailia Array, where Colonel CHOMLEY behavied
himself very valiently, and after an hour spent in consultation upon the
bussinesse; Colonel CHOMLEY gave Order, that Captain TVRNER should move
forwards, and advance toward the enemy, which he did accordingly; and
according to the Commission that he raceived from his Colonel.

He set upon the enemy with a hundred and twelve men, doing great execution;
and after an hours fight, Colonel CHOMLEY marched down to assist him.

And the Lord of ROCHFORD his forces wheeeled about, and assaulted them upon
the left wing; which proved very advantageous to them, and very prejudicall to
the other party.

Thus they being by the great wisdom and policy, drew close to the enemy both
in the front and left wing, they fell to Battall, where after three hours
fight, they obtained the Victory, killing about an hundred and thirty of the
CAVALIERS, and utterly routed the enemies left wing; And put all the rest to
flight. Making them retreat to their forces at READING.

All which through the assistance of Almighty GOD was performed, with the loss
of about twenty men: For which Victory all good Christians send up their
prayers to the great GOD of Battle for the same.

Colonel SKIPPON, Colonel of a Regiment of Red-coates; and Sergeant Major
General of the whole Army, is resolved to advance from MAIDEN-HEADE, where
they now lay quartered, and to march toward READING, where he intends to
assault the same, and to beat the Cavaliers out of the town; they give
continual alarums to each other and it is thought the Kings Army in Reading is
not able to subsist long.

This is the true and perfect Relation of the last Skirmish, betwixt the two
Armies near Reading, and by the next post (courteous reader) thou shall have a
more full Relation of all the proceedings.

From TWYFORD, JAN. 16. 1643 Sent in a Letter from that worthy Commander, N. N.
Upon Tuesday night last, about 4. of the clock in the afternoon Colonel
Chomley having drawn about 200. of his men, over a place called (...) about 2
miles from Reading, the enemy sallied out of the town, with about 1100. men,
and there gave our men a charge at their very works; insomuch that at the
first beginning of the battle our men had the worst of it; and were much
daunted, seeing such a strong Army come against them Whereupon Colonel Chomley
for the encouragement of all his men, put on his armor, and stood in the front
of the battle at least an hour, doing great execution with his sword and
halfe-pike, and after some three hours and a halfes fight, the Cavaliers
retreated, leaving behind them of their Dammee Brethren at least 200. and 25.
where our men with 200. obtained the victory, taking about 60. and odd of the
enemies horse, with the loss of about 23. men.

FINIS.

