NEW Observations UPON THE DECALOGUE: OR The Second of the Four Parts OF
Christian Doctrine, Preached upon the CATECHISM.

By JOHN DESPAGNE Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Newcomb, for Joshuah Kirton, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Kings Arms in Pauls-Church-yard. 1652.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE and THRICE-ILLUSTRIOUS PHILIP Earl of PEMBROKE and
MONTCOMERY, Baron of SHURLAND, Lord of CARDIFFE, PARR, ROS and KENDAL, MARMYON
and S. QUINTIN; Knight of the order of the GARTER, and Chancellor of the
University of OXFORD.
My LORD,
I Present you here with a handful of fruits gathered out of your own Field,
which I humbly desire may be acceptable to you, as I am accountable to you; so
I will endeavor continually to please God and your self: this auditory among
whom you have been pleased to give me a place, and whether so many noble
persons do resort, shall be an everlasting monument of your Charitable piety.
My Lord, our souls bless you, and our bowels which are refreshed with the
shadow of your name, shall carry the acknowledgment thereof up to Heaven. In
these days full of horror and confusion, the foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air have nests; but the son of God has not, in regard of us, where he may
rest his head, if you had not lodged him amongst us: even so may you lodge with
him in his highest habitation. But my Lord live here first many ages, and in
the end live eternally.

To the READER.
Reader;
IN the Preface of my Observations on the Creed, I have prevented the most of
those accusations which might be made against that Treatise, or these that
follow: I could overwhelm them with reasons, who yet demand, for what serve
these things that I have uttered, to salvation? Now concerning Orthodoxal
points, in which you may see so many Looking-glasses of Gods wisdom; points I
say cleared by innumerable celestial lights; conduce they nothing to salvation:
but these people who speak so Magisterially, imagine that nothing conduces to
salvation, but what they find in their common places: and as all their learning
consists in that vulgar kind of study, so they think all Divinity is locked
up within such bounds.

I need not answer those who complain, that all here is of too high a taste,
and that I give them nothing but salt or spices; but it is free for them to
take hereof as much as will season the ordinary food of their minds: and yet
the acrimony which they find there, proceeds from their tenderness, but in
accustoming themselves, they will find there the relish, salubrity and
nutritive virtue of Manna.

Many for want of the knowledge of the very principle, meet with many rubs and
stumbling stones in the plainest ways that may be: if I should say that Enoch
is the third of those who went out of the world; none having gone before but
Abel and Adam, this were imperceptible to those who cannot consider the 5
chapter of Genesis; but I do not undertake to teach the rudiments I presuppose,
them, and I believe I speak to those who understand them.

There be some who wish I had been somewhat more large in these observations,
but these men complain that they are conducted the shorter way; I could furnish
them with words enough, but is not this for their advantage, that they have in
few words the whole substance of a Subject within this brevity, which I have
expressly studied for, they shall find still stuff of a large breadth, if they
will unfold it from one end to the other.

I have the approbation of diverse men eminent for learning, even of some to
whom I am otherways unknown; one of these under the name of the Genius of
Cambridge, having seen the English translation of my Observations on the Creed
honored me with an excellent Latin Epistle, encouraging me to publish these
other tractats, which I promised. I know well that the Elogies which he gave me
are too high to belong to me, but doubtless in exalting me, he would afford me
matter of humiliation. Whosoever thou art, if ever these lines shall come into
thy hands, and if thou will be pleased to cast thine eyes upon them; I beseech
thee by these many brave virtues, the sparkles whereof I find shining in thy
letters, and by that sympathy and communion of thoughts which God has put in
us; do not conceal thy name from me, it shall be precious, and precious also
shall thy counsels be to me. O quis daret te ut fratrem mihi!

The Contents.
The NATURAL MAN, and HIS QUALITIES.
Diverse sorts of good men in the Worlds opinion, and but only one indeed. p.
1. Wherefore God was pleased that the Heathen should outgo the Saints in many
virtuous actions. p. 4. A consideration upon the two last sinners immediately
converted by Christ, viz. the Thief and St. Paul. p. 8. Whence comes it to
pass, that all men naturally believe that they must be justified by Works? p.
9.
Touching the pretended merit of WORKS.
That the causes of our salvation are in heaven, the marks of it on earth. p.
11 Wherefore is it that our Lord, speaking of works according to which he will
judge men at the last day, mentions none but works of mercy? Mat. 25.3. p.
12. Why God has chosen Faith rather then any other Virtue to be the instrument
of our Justification: The difference between a miraculous Faith and a
justifying. p. 14. Those that now adays seek to be justified by works are more
inexcusable then those that had this pretense before the death of Christ. p.
16.
Good WORKS the Effects of FAITH.
The strange reasons by which the Scripture inviteth us to good works, with the
method that it teaches to make us capable of graces. p. 17. Why the common
people love rather to hear speak of Charity then Faith; of the Law then the
Gospel. p. 20.
Of Repentance and Obedience.
Wherefore is it never said that God repented him of any thing, saving that
which concerned men? p. 22. Wherefore has God commanded diverse things contrary
unto common Principles. p. 24. A Question touching David and Solomon accepting
the choice that God gave them. p. 26. Why is Superstition in things
indifferent, held so heinous? p. 27.
Touching the TABLES of the LAW in general.
A comparing of the two miraculous Writings that are reported in the holy
History. p. 29. How long the Tables of the Law endured, and a Consideration
upon that matter. p. 30. The reason why the Scipture shows which is the
greatest Commandment, and never which is the least. p. 32. How one may judge of
two diverse Commandments, to know which is greater then the other. p. 33: Why
by the Law it was pollution to touch the dead corpse of a godly man that had
been murdered, and nevertheless it was not pollution to touch the living
Murderer. p. 34.
The Preface of the Decalogue, Hearken, Israel, etc.
Degrees amongst Nations, in regard of the love or hate that God bare to them.
p. 35. Wherefore is Nathaneel called an Israelite, or child of Israel, rather
then the child of Jacob, Joh. 1.47. p. 36. God never works a Miracle to witness
or prove that which a man may know naturally. But why then did he cause so many
miracles to intervene at the publication of the Law, seeing it is naturally
known to men? p. 38.
The I. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall have no other gods, etc.
A consideration of the times wherein Athisme and Superstition have generally
reigned. p. 41. By the Example of the Pharisees and Sadduces, is showed, that
God rather pardons the superstitious, then the profane. p. 42. The true
Religion, the easiest. The folly of the Pagans affecting plurality of Gods. p.
43. A consideration upon the worship of Angels. p. 44. Touching a kind of
Idolatry very subtle and usual. p. 45. Wherefore is it, that a man that has
false gods, leaves them not so easily, as another forsakes the true? p. 47.
The II. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.
Who is more wicked, he that adds to the Ordinances of God, or he that detracts
from them? p. 49. Of the nature of painting that represents the History of the
Bible. p. 51. None ever made any image of God, except God himself. p. 52. Why
was it that God, who often appeared in a visible shape, would not manifest
himself after this manner when he published the Law? p. 53. If we had the true
pourtrait and very resemblance of our Savior Christ, taken from his own body;
what account ought we to make of it? p. 55. A notable difference betwixt one of
the figures which represented Christ, and those that represented the Angels.
And a consideration upon the matter. p. 56. Whence is it, that in the
Apocalypse, Jesus Christ (being man) is decypher'd only in parabolical Figures,
rather then in the natural form of his own body? p. 57. What Is the reason,
that amongst all the wonders that God has wrought, he never made an Image to
speak? p. 58. Two sorts of sinners at which God mocks. p. 59. The admirable
proportion, that God holds in the despensation of his judgments. p. 60. Of whom
are descended those Nations that go naked? p. 66. The number of Generations
named in the Promise. p. 67. Strange Examples of diverse Subjects, in which God
has manifested both his Mercy and Justice. p. 69. Why did God sometimes take
such particular care of the Patriarchs and their children, even of these that
were wicked, and at this day he makes no such addresses as he did then to them?
p. 71. Why God spent but six days in Creating the World, and empleyed seven to
overthrow the walls of Jerico? p. 73.
The II. COMNANDMENT. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord, etc.
Why God pronounces the same word twice to the same purpose, against idle
oaths? p. 75. Although in some things God has dispensed with his law, yet he
has never dispensed with faith; also of the stability of Gods oaths. p. 79.
The IV. COMMANDMENT. Remember the Sabbath day, etc.
Why God never wrought any miracle on the Sabbath day, before the coming of
Christ. p. 81. Seven Sabbath days which Christ honored by his miracles. p. 84.
In what things our Savior is to be immitated. p. 86. Whence it is that in the
History of the New Testament, we do not read that ever the Sadduces appeared on
the Sabbath day? p. 87. Why the Law uses such an excellent subject. viz. God's
Rest, as a reason for the beasts to rest? p. 90. Why none of the dead have been
raised on the Sabbath day? p. 92.
The V. COMMANDMENT. Honor thy Father and Mother, etc.
Whence comes it as they say commonly, That Love and Affection uses to
descend: Difference between Faith and Charity: The words of Mal. 4.5.
discussed. p. 97. Why the Law expresses the Childrens duty to Parents by the
word Honor, rather then by the word Love. p. 99. Wherefore the Law commanded
Children to fear those that brought them into the world, namely, the Mother
before the Father. p. 100.
The Promise annexed to the fifth Commandment.
Examples, of that proportion which is found sometimes between good works, and
the recompense which they receive in this life. p. 102. Why fifteen years were
added to the life of Ezechias. p. 104. The age of the Israelites when they
passed out of the Wilderness into the Land of Promise. p. 107. The measure and
proportion of man's life from time to time, since the first ages. p. 109. None
of the Kings of Juda exceeded the age of seventy years. p. 111. Difference
between the faithful of the Old Testament, and those of the New, concerning
their desire of long life: another difference about the reckoning of the yeas
of their life. p. 112. Three causes, why men are loath to leave this life,
represented in him who died first. p. 113. A moral observation upon the days
of Lazarus raised from the dead. p. 114.
The VI. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not kill.
Why God in his titles does rather call Himself our Buckler, then our Sword.
p. 116. Since Moses there have been but three men, who received power to kill
any miraculously; and the same who have miraculously inflicted death on the
living, have also given life to the dead. Reasons of the one and the other. p.
117. The plot of the Priests in consulting to put Lazarus to death, John 12.10.
p. 119. A question: If the punishment of a criminal being interrupted by some
extraordinary accident intervening, after the execution is begun, is it just to
discharge him, of the punishment to which he was condemmed. p. 120. An allusion
in the Apostles words, who ordains that the Sun go not down upon our anger,
Ephesians. 4.26. p. 122.
The VII. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Why God though he approves not Poligamy nor unlawful divorces, which were
freequent in the old Testament, yet never forbad them, but by the last of all
the Prophets? p. 124. Why men are more subject to be ashamed in the Act of any
sin, rather then in that of pride; and why more in Luxury, then in any other
sin? p. 127. What may be inferred upon this, that the Holy Ghost describing
under diverse similitudes the spiritual beauty of the Church, makes no mention
of painting? p. 128. A moral observation upon Sampson's loosing of his strength
and sight, and how he recovered the one, but not the other. p. 129.
The VIII COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not steal.
Why Christ used the example of thieves to induce us to search for the Kingdom
of Heaven. p. 132. An observation upon this, that among Christ's Disciples,
there is but one noted for avarice, but all are taxed for ambition. p. 135. To
one man only God by divine means did show the way to become rich p. 136. A
conjecture upon the Jewish opinion, touching the just price of things vendible.
p. 138. A Question: if he that has made restitution of the goods unjustly
detained, as also of all the profits and interests, and recompensed all the
losses, has he sufficiently discharged his conscience? p. 140. Sacrilege the
first crime committed in the Church of Israel, after they entered into Canaan.
And the first in the Christian Church. p. 142.
The IX. COMMADMENT. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.
Whether it be more injurious to call our neighbor fool, or knave? And why a
man glories rather to be esteemed good then wise? p. 144. An Oservation upon
this; That in the Scripture God is oftener angry with man's wickedness, then he
uses to laugh at their folly. p. 146. Is it lawful to divulge false news, if
it may serve for the public good? p. 148. Why it is lawful sometimes to make
show of evil, but never lawful to make show of good. p. 149. We may know a
wicked man; but it is impossible to know a good man. p. 151. When the Scripture
speaks of any man in Hell, it never names the man; and when it does name him,
it never expresses the name of Hell; an observation upon this matter. p. 152.
The X. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not covet, etc.
A sin committed by rule and order is more enormous, then that which is done in
disorder and confusion. p. 55. The diversity of conflicts in man against
himself. p. 156. Why some see more easily the defects of the memory, and of
other faculties of the soul, then the defects of their judgment? p. 159.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
The correspondency that is between the two Tables of the Law. p. 161. There is
love in God but not Faith and Hope. p. 162. Whether it is a greater defect, to
want Faith or Charity? p. 163. In all the History of that time which was before
the law, the love of God was never mentioned in express terms, but only the
fear of God. p. 165. Of them who excuse their faults on this: That God has not
given them more understanding and judgment. p. 168. In the duties of man
toward God, forgetfullness is more culpable then ignorance. p. 169.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.
Whence comes it, that contrary to all other affections, this which man carries
to himself, has no bounds; and why this never fails, nor is subject to
diminution? p. 171. Why the older we grow, the more we love our selves? p. 173.
Why we do not envy another man's goodness? p. 175.
Diverse Duties of the Law. A Conclusion of this Treatise.
Why Moses who wrought so great and many miracles, never raised any from the
dead? p. 167. The Law continued from Moses, who had an impediment in his
speech, till John the son of Zachary, which Zachary was speechless, Luke 16.16.
p 168. Why God in speaking to man, uses more words, then when he is
represented speaking to the creatures which want understanding; and why he
uses so many words and repetitions to effect man's conversation, seeing he can
convert him, with one word only. p. 170. Why the Scripture speaking of Virtue
and Vice, does command or prohibit one oftener then another. p. 172.
THE NATURAL MAN, and HIS QUALITIES.
Diverse sorts of good men in the World's opinion, and but only one indeed.
MAny men are honest, Either for fear of men, awed by the severitie of the
laws; Or for the good that may come to them of it: as he that is right and
square that he may keep his dealings afoot: Or for reputation; as it may fall
out, that the only desire of glory may carry a man to give all he has to the
poor; yea, to expose his body to the flames, 1 Cor. 13.3. Or for the
apprehension of hell; For many would be out of measure wicked, w^e^e it not
that this fear holds them in. Or for the joys of heaven; as he that asked of
our Savior, what he should do to have eternal life. Or to satisfy their own
conscience, that presses and soliciteth them to some virtuous action. Or out
of a mere desire they have to virtue it self; as there are generous
dispositions, that seem to go with no other spring.

Now in very deed, of all these sorts of good men, there is none that is truly
so. This assertion generally taken, may seem to be very unjust: For one will
happily grant, that he who is not godly but out of fear, or some interest he
pretends either in this world or that to come, has no real goodness, but
that he has a servile or mercenary soul. But you will think it strange, to say
that he that works not but out of conscience, and the sole love he has to
virtue, should not be a good man! for what is it to be an honest man, if this
be not? and what is further needful to have this quality?

It seems true, that our actions cannot have a nobler principle then this, viz.
to satisfy conscience, and to love Virtue for its own sake: Yet this is not
enough to be a right honest man. We must then presuppose, that to speak
properly, and according to the language of God, There is no good work, but that
which is done in consideration, and out of love of the sovereign Good, which is
God himself. For is it beleevable, that God may approve of a work in which
himself is no way considered? Or that he may take him for good that
neglects, or is ignorant of the chief Goodness, and has no affection to it?
This granted, it is evident why the only love of Conscience, or of Virtue,
makes not an honest man; for neither Conscience nor Virtue are God: they are
amiable by reason of him that is the highest Goodness; but whosoever loves
them without him, knows not so much as what good is: Such was the goodness
of many the Pagans, and even such is the goodness of many now adays.

Wherefore God was pleased that the Heathen should outgo the Saints in many
virtuous actions.
It is certain that in the Heathen Histories we have more examples of Heroic
Virtues then what are read in the Bible it self. Let Us mention but some of
them. We praise the continency of Joseph: but that of Alexander and Scipio
came not short of it. We talk of the Midwives which refused to obey Pharaohs
command, by which they were enjoined to stifle the Hebrew male-children as soon
as born: but among infidels there have been slaves that rather chose to be
wracked in pieces, then to let fall word that might have prejudiced their
Masters. We commend the faithful amity that was between David and Jonathan: But
how many examples of Pagans, that would have died for their friends? We have
in esteem the zeal of Phineas, that punished the Adultery of the Israelite with
the Madianitish woman; but is this act comparable to the justice of that
Prince, who had rather that one of his own eyes should be put out, and another
of his own son that had committed that Adultery, then to baffle the Law that
ordained to put out both the eyes of him that should be found guilty of that
filth. We extol the generosity of Moses, who refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and gave over the sway he bore in the Court of Egypt: but
how many Monarchs have voluntarily laid aside their Diadems, and renounced the
majesty of the Scepter, to reduce themselves to the obscurity of a private
life? We celebrate the abstinence of David, who refused to drink the water that
some of his valiant Worthies had fetched him with danger of their lives, 2 Samuel
23. But diverse Generals of Armies mortally wounded, would not have the blood of
their wounds stanched, nor permit the drawing out of the dart wherewith they
were clean shot through, before in the first place they had taken order for the
safety of their Soldiers. We further commend David, who (beholding that the
plague wherewith the people were smitten was occasioned through him) offered
himself to punishment, that he might deliver his Commonwealth: But some
Pagans have made away themselves, rather then they would be engaged to fight
against their Country, that had unjustly banished and confiscated them. We
proclaim the kindness of Joseph, that was the nourisher of his Father: but
they speak of such a Son, who to save his Father, cast himself into the midst
of the fire. We admire diverse other examples of Virtue which are famous in the
Scripture; but the Heathen have showed actions far beyond.

Yet has there always been more goodness and more virtue (without comparison)
in the Saints then in Infidels. Diverse of the Pagans actions have been greater,
verily, and more vigorous; but they were not enlivened from the true principle
of virtue, which is faith in God, and had not his glory for their aim: So many
creatures surpass man in diverse acts of foresight, natural affection,
courage, temperance, fidelity, grati^ude, and yet they have but the
resemblances of Virtues; neither can one say that there is in them any moral
goodness.

But see here our question: Whatever virtuous actions the heathen have
performed, proceeded from God himself, which gave them the inclinations to
them. Now wherefore did he enable them to do such notable actions, and yet
accepted not their persons? for it is impossible to please him without faith,
Hebr. 11.6. And why would he that even their works (in the sense I have named)
should outstrip those of the Saints? He would verily teach us, that works,
even the very best, have not merit enough to bring us near to him: For if many
that have been transcendent in diverse virtuous acts, notwithstanding have not
obtained grace; And on the contrary, many that have been inferior in works,
are counted amongst the friends of God; follows it not, that if we be
pleasing unto him, it is not because of our works?

A consideration upon the two last sinners immediately converted by Christ,
viz. the Thief and S. Paul.
One was converted by our Savivour on the Cross; the other by him in heaven:
one entered Paradise the same day that Christ entered, being dead: The other was
raped up thither before ever he died. One repented not but at the last hour of
his life, amidst his very punishment; the other found not his heart till he was
cast down with affrightment, by voices and vision from heaven. One and the
other ( viz. the thief and Saul, afterward Paul) were (especially this last)
far enough from having any inclination to Christ, then when his grace surprised
them. Many suppose in a carnal a man power whereby he contributes to his own
conversion. but Saul's example witnesses the contrary; he was in the very heat
of his madness, when he was called from above; was he in a posture to turn
himself to Christ, then when he went against Christ?

Whence comes it to pass, that all men naturally believe that they must be
justified by Works?
It is sufficiently known, that this opinion is natural to every man. All of us
harbor this prejudice within us. Thence it comes to pass, that all Religions
except the Christian, generally teach it; the Pagan, the Mahumetan, the Jew,
yea, and many that profess Christianity, agree all in this point, and sing all
the same song. But how comes this to be false and abusive, seeing it is
dictated by Nature it self? We must remember, that by the law of the Creation,
it is ordained that man should be justified by his works, and that by them he
should live for ever. This principle was ingraved in the mind of man, who
verily had had righteousness and life by his works, had he stood in his
primitive innocence; but his fall has bruised his bones, making him incapable
of accomplishing this condition. But he yet retains this ancient principle
which has been left him, to the end he should remember whence he is fallen;
not to make him believe that he can do that now, which he could in the state of
innocence.

Touching the pretended merit of WORKS.
That the Causes of our salvation are in heaven, the Marks of it on earth.
IN the search of these two points, we must take two contrary ways. For the
Book of life wherein we are enrolled to salvation, and the mercy of God which
calls us to it, and his grace that dispenses it, and the Savior that has
purchased it, must be sought in heaven. On the other side; as we have on earth
the instruments of salvation, viz. the Gospel, the Sacraments, Faith; so
likewise the same faith, the testimony of the holy Ghost, the peace of our
consciences, and our works themselves are here on earth the marks of our
salvation. Diverse overturn this method; supposing to be saved by virtue of
their works: and on the other side, teaching that none can be saved if he be
not one of Gods closet: In the one, they place on earth the Causes of our
salvation; in the other, they seek the Marks of it in heaven; and in both the
two they are as wide of the mark, as heaven is from earth.

Wherefore is it that our Lord, speaking of works according to which he will
judge men at the last day, mentions none but works of mercy? Matthew. 25.35.
This passage presents unto us the sentence that shall be given upon men at
that great day: where it speaks of nothing save feeding those that hungered,
receiving strangers, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and those in prison:
And on the contrary, of not having performed such deeds of benevolence. But are
there no works but these worthy to be remembered before Christ's Tribunal, and
that are able to declare us just? or are there no other sins except the
omission of such duties? no other crime that deserves damnation? Yes, there are
works that excel these: he that spends his blood and life for Christ's sake,
does a deed far surpassing him that gives clothes and food to the poor; to be a
prisoner for the Gospel, is more then to visit prisoners. How is it then that
this sentence expresses naught save the works of mercy, although that there be
many other kinds of works?

Let us consider, That at the day of judgment all will certainly crave mercy.
When all the kindreds of the earth shall lament before this Sovereign Judge,
what shall we hear men call for but mercy? As then all men will crave that
mercy may be showed them, God will judge them according to the mercy they have
shown or neglected: Judgment that the wicked themselves shall be forced to
approve; For it is just that he should be denied mercy that would use no mercy,
James 2.13. Saint Paul reckoning up the charitable offices Onesiphorus had done
him in prison, wishes that he may find mercy in that day, 2 Timothy 1. that is
to say, he has showed mercy toward me, the Lord show it to him: whereupon it
is to be observed, against the opinion of merit, that even our mercy has need
of mercy.

Why God has chosen Faith rather then any other Virtue to be the instrument of
our Justification: The difference between a miraculous Faith and a justifying.
There is no Virtue whereof man takes not occasion to vant himself, except
Faith: Man oftentimes boasts of his Charity, Patience, Justice, yea, which is
ridiculous, many wax proud of their Humility. But as touching justifying Faith,
none can brag of that: Why? This Fath has for its object the mercy of God,
which presupposes man's misery; and his misery lies in that he is culpable;
whereof it is impossible that he should ever vant himself: On the contrary,
this Faith overthrows the pride of man.

There is indeed a sort of Faith, from which men oftentimes have drawn matter
of ostentation; that is the faith of Miracles, as they call it. Diverse have
turned the gift of tongues to vanity; as likewise the other miraculous effects
which God wrought by their hands, as is evident by the Apostles discourse, 1
Cor. 13.14. We must mark here, That the faith of miracles has for its formal
object, the power of God, which sometimes imployes man to be either the subject
or instrument of his Marvels. Now it may easily come to pass, that man may
abuse this honor: But he cannot deal so by justifying Faith, whose object is
Gods mercy, which excludes all man's vanting, Romans 3.26.

Those that now adays seek to be justified by works, are more inexcusable then
those that had this pretense before the death of Christ.
Although the doctrine that maintains that a sinner is justified by his works,
has ever been vain and abusive; yet is it become more odious since the blood
of Christ (on which our justification is grounded) was shed for our sins. For
as long as yet there was no payment made for the sin of men, it was not so
strange that many endeavored to give satisfaction therein, every man for
himself: But after that Christ has made actual satisfaction therein, we
cannot undertake to pay without accusing him of insufficiency, and charge our
selves with an ingratitude more heinous then that of the old Pharisaisme.

Good WORKS the Effects of FAITH.
The strange reasons by which the Scripture inviteth us to good works, with the
method that it teaches to make us capable of graces.
THe Vulgar think they are in the right, whenas in stead of mysteries of Faith,
they cry out, that Ministers ought to speak to the conscience, preach good
works, and control vice. These people by prejudice, that proceeds from common
ignorance, make void the first and chiefest part of Christianity, and maintain
many capital errors. An error to imagine, that good life consists not but in
works; as if to well living were not requisite right believing. An error, to
say, that the hearing the mysterious points of Religion which are merely
speculative, is of no force at all to make a man better. So much say the Jews,
when they speak of the Gospel; for they demand to what purpose it is to be a
good man to know that Jesus Christ has suffered under Pontius Pilate, that he
was crucified, dead and buried? An error to think that the conscience has not
need of matters that are directed only to the understanding, as well as of
those that only concern the affections: as if a man should not have need of
his eyes as well as his hands. An error, to believe that Virtues must be taught
only by their proper descriptions and express precepts, after the fashion of
Moralists; for that is to plant the tree by tops of the boughs, in stead of
planting it by the root.

Let us hence consider the motives which God himself makes use of, when he
preaches us good works. The Scripture inviteth us to the practice of Virtues,
and hate of sins; Forasmuch (says it) as ye have been baptized into the death
of Christ, and buried with him: forasmuch as he that is our passover is
offered up: forasmuch as Christ is raised; forasmuch as death has no more
dominion over him, etc. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Romans 6.4. What kind of arguments are
these to induce us to good works? he invites us to them by the Articles of our
faith, by matters very wide from the subject. There is more yet: For he
summoneth us to the doing them by reasons which even seem to persuade the clean
contrary. Is this a reason that may put a man in fear to turn him from sin,
when one tells him that he is not under the law but under grace, and that God
has ordained to save him? Romans 6.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8, 9. This believing, seems it
not more fit (as some falsely have thought) to bring in Libertinisme then the
fear of sin?

But we must consider that which is seen even in Nature it self, the root and
the fruit for the most part are not alike, neither in shape, color nor taste;
yea, many times the fruit comes of a root altogether contrary in quality. Let
Ignorance judge of it as it will, let the mysteries by which Faith is planted
and watered seem to them unprofitable. This Faith is the root of graces;
through it our works are purified, and without it it is impossible to bring
forth good fruit.

Why the common people love rather to hear speak of Charity then Faith; of the
Law then the Gospel.
It is well enough known, that the common people are more satisfied with an
Exhortation, or a Discourse upon Alms, or brotherly friendship, or Temperance,
or some other Morality, then with any rare observation on a Point of the
Gospel. Now see the reason of it. The things of the Law are naturally written
in our hearts, at least in part; so that they are familiar, and intelligible to
us, as domestic: Besides, they are conformable to natural Reason, which is
the noblest faculty of man. But the matters of Faith, which Nature knows not,
and which come from far, and which are transmitted by another way then that of
humane Reason, are strangers to our understandings; so that they are not
received with so much welcome.

Thence it comes to pass, that so many souls are found out of their element,
when one speaks to them of some mystery on which they never thought. The Law
(truly) and ordinary Tenants ought to be preached; but it is a brutish
ingratitude, under that pretense, to refuse to learn the secrets whereof the
goodness of God vouchsafes to make us an overture. I will not here stand to
examine the common saying, which I have elsewhere observed, amongst those of
the Vulgars, viz. That the Doctrine of Works is the principal in Religion.
They that say so, know not the importance of what they say. For the Doctrine of
the Mercy of God, of the Redemption accomplished by Jesus Christ, and of his
other saving Works, is that less considerable then that which treats of men's
works, or is the Law more then the Gospel?

Of Repentance and Obedience.
Wherefore is it never said that God repented him of any thing, saving that
which concerned men?
ACcording to the Scripture terms, which we ought to take in a sense that
derogateth not from the Divine Wisdom, we find, among diverse passages which
touch this matter, three things whereof God repented: First, That he had made
man, Genesis 6.6. Secondly, That he had chose Saul King, 1 Samuel 15.11. Thirdly,
That he had pronounced the ruin of Ninive, Jonah 3.10. But why is it never
said, That God repented that he had made the Angels which became Devils? Has
he not as much cause to be sorry that he gave them being? Or why likewise did
he never repent that he had made the Serpent, which served for an instrument to
the imposture of that wicked Spirit?

The Scripture never attributes any repentance to God, but when he is to deal
about man. The reason of it is, that by this expression he might bring man to
repentance. Repentance (to speak properly) is not at all in God; but God
attributes it to himself, to show that it ought to be in man. Jerem. 18.8. If
the Nation against whom I shall have spoken, turn from the evil it has
committed, I will also repent me of the evil that I thought to do unto it.
Amongst the creatures, only man is capable of Repentance; that is the reason it
is never said, God repents, except when there is somewhat about man.

Wherefore has God commanded diverse things contrary unto common Principles.
We find, that God has given commandments contrary to cleanness, contrary to
shamefac'dnesse, contrary to humanity, contrary to nature, to all appearance,
and common sense.

Against cleanness, he commanded Ezekiel to sees his bread with man's
excrements, Ezekiel. 4.12. Against shame, he ordained circumcision, and honored
it with the name of his covenant. Against humanity, he would have all the young
children in Jericho massacred. Against nature, he gave order to Abraham to
turn out of doors his son Ishmael. Against all appearance of a cause, he made
an Ark to be built, therein to shut Noah and the creatures, which with more
likelihood he might have lodged upon some mountain. Against common sense, a
Prophet following the word of the Lord, said unto another man, Smite me: This
man refusing to smite him, is condemned to be slain by a Lion, and that for not
obeying the word of the Lord, 1 King. 20.35, 36. a strange command, and which
seemed rather to come from the mouth of a mad man, then from the wisdom of God.

But why has God commanded things that seem so absurd? To let us understand,
that there is a principle more high and more noble then our common reason, then
ordinary decency, then humanity, then nature it self. All that we call just,
beseeming, humane, reasonable, bears not this name but in respect of God, which
has given it to it, and has there imprinted his mark: And when it pleases
him, he can give the same titles, and in effect the same qualities, to actions
that have a name quite contrary. Then that which was impure, shameful,
ridiculous, cruel, and unreasonable, becomes holy, venerable, full of reason
and justice. Moreover, by such commands, God has been pleased to show, that he
would be obeyed, not so much for the goodness or splendour of the action, as
for the authority of him that enjoined it.

A Question touching David and Solomon accepting the choice that God gave them.
To the one God gave leave to choose such a judgment as he liked, out of the
three that he propounded him: To the other he gave the choice of such a favor
as he would ask. Both accepted of the offer. One chose the Pestilence, the
other made his choice of Wisdom. But it seems, they had done better to have
permitted the choice to God himself only out of respect, and to have entreated
him to send them what he thought fittest for them: So one would have thought.
But it is not permitted us to disobey out of modesty. If God commands me to
choose, he will that I look to it that I choose well. Wherefore then shall I
frustrate his intention, in deluding his Ordinance.

Why is Superstition in things indifferent, held so heinous?
He that out of conscience abstains from that which is not forbidden, or
enthrals himself to that which is left unto his liberty, seems not to offend
but through obedience; is this then so great a crime?

I let alone the wrong this Superstition does to God; but otherwise it sins
against nature. There are actions to which God has made man subject; there are
also actions that God has made subject to man: those we call Necessary, these
Indifferent. Now when man makes his conscience subject unto those very things
that are subject unto him, by such a disorder he degrades himself, and abandons
the rank in the which God and Nature has placed him. How are they to blame
then, that teach the making scruple almost of every thing? that put thorns
every where? that frighten consciences with apparitions and vain scarcrows?
that fetter and load them with a thousand unprofitable burdens.

Touching the TABLES of the LAW in general.
A comparing of the two miraculous Writings that are reported in the holy
History.
THese two Writings that were made without the hand of man, are, first that
which God formed upon the Tables of stone, containing the Decalogue. Afterward,
that which he drew upon the wall of the Hall of Baltshazzar, expressing the
approaching ruin of that Monarchy, Dan. 5. The one was made presently after
the People of Isreal's going forth out of the Egyptian bondage: the other, upon
the time that they were to go forth of the Babylonish Captivity. It is notable,
that the Babylonians had caused the first Writing to be lost, then when the
Temple was burnt, where were the Tables of the Law kept in the Ark. But for
that afterward they lifted up themselves against the Author of this Writing,
God made them see another, that contained the decree of their ruin, Dan. 5.23,
24.

How long the Tables of the Law endured, and a Consideration upon that matter.
I ask not what is become of that precious Writing, whose characters were the
handy work of God. These Tables were never seen after the burning of the first
Temple, in the which it is believed that they perished, as well as the Ark in
which they were enclosed.

Now, from the time that they were given by Moses, until that time they ceased
(that is to say, the destruction of the Temple) passed nine hundred years, and
something above: Certain Chronologers reckon therein nine hundred and six:
others, nine hundred and fifteen: others, nine hundred twenty seven: others go
to nine hundred and thirty. Whereupon we may note, that according to the
exactest supputations, the durance of the Tables of the Law past not the number
of Adams years, who having first received the Law written in the tables of his
heart, lived the age of nine hundred and thirty years. At the least it is
certain, and seems very worthy of note, That neither the durance of the Tables
of the Law, nor the life of any man have never attained the age of a thousand
years. The Law said, Whosoever fulfilled it, should live for ever: but for want
of fulfilling it, the life of man never reached a thousand years. And God in
like manner would not that the Tables wherein he had renewed this Law that
offered life, should last a thousand years.

The reason why the Scripture shows which is the greatest Commandment, and
never which is the least.
Although there be a difference of degrees and weight between the
Commandments; and that the Lawgiver has marked that which is the chiefest,
yea and the second likewise, to which all the other are referred; yet would he
never say which was the least of them all, in the one or other Table. His will
is, (notwithstanding the inequality which is betwixt them) that we consider
them all as great, seeing that in the Law there is nothing that is not great in
effect. Besides, it is necessary to know which is the greatest Commandment in
each of the two Tables, because all the other are (as it were) inchaff'd into
the greater: But to know which is the least, is in no wise necessary.

How one may judge of two diverse Commandments, to know which is greater then
the other.
Those that concern God, and touch him nearest, or that render man most like
God, those are the greatest. Greater (for example) is that Commandment which
immediately respects the service of God, then that which has other ends,
although subordinate: So Mary had chosen the better part. Greater is the
spiritual service of God then the external; because it has more
correspondence with God, who is a Spirit. Charity is greater then Faith or
Hope; because Love is in God, yea God himself is Love; but neither Faith nor
Hope can be in him: For what should God either believe or hope for? Greater is
his work that saves a man's life, then his that buries him dead; because the
living bears the image of God. Upon this last example I will make a Digression,
yet not far from the matter.

Why by the Law it was pollution to touch the dead corpse of a godly man that
had been murdered, and nevertheless it was not pollution to touch the living
Murderer.
We know, that whosoever touched a dead body (even for to bury it) the Law
declared him defiled. So a godly man being slain, all that touched him after
his death, fell into this ceremonial irregularity. But if they touched the
murderer, though his hands as yet all gored in his blood, they endangered no
uncleanness. This Law is strange, and it seems hard to find a reason of it.
We may answer notwithstanding, That as there were diverse causes of pollution,
that of a dead man's body proceeded from that he had lost the image of God, the
lineaments of which consist properly in the soul. Now a living man, though a
murderer, carries notwithstanding, in regard of the substance of his
reasonable soul, this image, which the dead man has no longer.

The Preface of the Decalogue. Hearken, Israel, etc.
Degrees amongst Nations, in regard of the love or hate that God bare to them.
TWo Nations have of old been famous for two contrary reasons. One, as being
the most beloved of God, to wit, Israel: the other, the most hated, viz. Amalek.

Amongst the people that God held in hatred, the Idumean and Egyptian were
less hated then the Moabite and Ammonite, and these less then the Amalekite.
The Idumean and Egyptian were excluded the Congregation of the Lord to the
third generation: the Moabite and Ammonite entered not in thither till the
tenth: the Amalekite was not only shut out thence for ever, but also condemned
to be totally rooted out from under heaven. It Is that only Nation against whom
God has denounced immortal War; that alone that ever he commanded wholly to
suppress. The causes of the difference that God put between these infidel
people, are touched in Deuteronomie, chap. 23. v. 1. etc. and 25. v. 17, etc.

Wherefore is Nathaneel called an Israelite, or child of Israel, rather then
the child of Jacob, Joh. 1.47.
It Is known, that Israel and Jacob was but the same man, and that his Posterity
are sometimes called the children of Jacob, and sometime of Israel: Not that it
is indifferent to call them by the one or the other name. For there be reasons
and circumstances, for which they ought to be called rather by the one then the
other name. But passing over what the Learned have heretofore observed
thereupon, I have one observation to produce hence.

The high Prophet speaking of Nathaneel, says, that he was verily an
Israelite in whom there was no guile. This man then is praised as sincere, and
that knew not what it was to circumvent any man: In this quality he was none of
Jacob's child, that had supplanted his brother, stealing away his blessing by
a false supposition. Jacob had sometime been fraudulent; but Israel was always
sound. For being as yet but Jacob, he deceives both brother and father too: but
after he was honored with the name of Israel, his actions were ever without
deceit. On good reason then the name of Israelite is rather given to Nathaneel,
then the name of a child of Jacob. And here, as through the whole Scripture is
seen the admirable style of the Divine Wisdom, to whom only it belongs to
appropriate names unto their true natures.

God never works a Miracle to witness or prove that which a man may know
naturally. But why then did he cause so many Miracles to intervene at the
publication of the Law, seeing it is naturlaly known to men?
God does nothing superfluous: that is the reason he never raised up Prophet, or
sent Angel to foretell Eclipses, or other events that may be foreseen by
ordinary ways. Was it necessary then that God should come down from heaven to
earth, with such a miraculous demonstration of his glory, to come tell men,
that they must honor Father and Mother? to give them to understand that they
must not kill, nor bear false witness?

I forbear to say, that this Law that was published in Sinai, contains points
which a man cannot understand but by supernatural revelation; for we had never
known how many days God bestowed in creating the whole Universe, if himself
had not revealed this secret, which he expresses in the fourth Commandment of
the Decalogue: Yea moreover, what the Law carries in its very frontispiece, (I
am the Lord thy God) could not be known by any natural means.

To clear this, we must again remember, that God never names himself the God of
those he hates. The revelation comprehended in these words (I am thy God) is an
expression of benevolence and graciousnesse: Now this his saving benevolence
could not be known by any voice of Nature. We say further, that here are two
points to be distinguished: one, that there is a God; the other, that he is our
God. The first, that there is a God, is written naturally in our hearts: which
is the reason that never yet Angel descended from heaven to come and tell men
that there is a God. But to make them know that God is their God, to ensure
them of his loving-kindnesse, to bring them injunctions from him; and in brief,
to attest and confirm that which they could not learn from any natural
principle, God has wrought miracles, has caused Angels to speak, yea has
spoke himself.

The I. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall have no other gods, etc.
A consideration of the times wherein Atheism and Superstition have generally
reigned.
TWo crimes are forbidden in this first Commandment of the Law: One, not to
have a God; the other, to have more then one. These two sins are very ancient
in the world: yet it seems that Atheism was the first, or at least
Profaneness, which comes very near to Atheism. We read not, that before the
Flood there was any Idolatry amongst men: The holy History ( Genesis 6.) marking
out the cause of their destruction, seems rather to accuse them for having had
no God at all, then for having had many. After the Flood, though Atheism was
on foot still in the world, yet was Idolatry far more general. But as the
corruption of mankind began by Atheism or Profaneness, it makes as though it
would return thither again. The first Ages have been Atheists, the following
ages Idolaters, and the last, into which we are fallen, is already wholly
disposed unto Atheism. And when the Son of man comes, he shall not find faith
upon the earth.

By the example of the Pharisees and Sadduces, is showed, that God rather
pardons the Superstitious, then the Profane.
The Pharisee was superstitious, but the Sadduce inclined to Atheism, seeing
that he believed not the immortality of the soul, neither the resurrection of
the body, nor the life to come. Now we find, that diverse Pharisees
(notwithstanding the envy and ill will with which they were fore-stalled)
became capable of the Faith, and received the Gospel. One of the most eminent
of this Sect, viz. Nicodemus, spent both his cost and his pains in the burial
of Christ. But never read we of any Sadduce that was converted to
Christianity. Not that God has been wanting either in goodness or power to
their conversion: but (as it seems) he would have it seen, that (in disdaining
to make them his Disciples) he more detesteth the profane, then the
superstitious. Such a Pharisee that had even persecuted the Church, was
promoted as high as unto an Apostleship: But never any Sadduce came so much as
to the quality of a Disciple.

The true Religion, the easiest. The folly of the Pagans affecting plurality of
gods.
False Religions have a thousand objects, a thousand troublesome windings, and
every of them trails the mind of man now into one danger, by and by into
another. But true Religion has but one God, one Mediator, one Sacrifice
expiatorie, one justifying Faith, one Baptism, one mystical Body, and one
only Spirit. How much the more we multiply this Union, so much the less have
we of Religion.

But the poor Pagans took it clean contrary; for they that had the greatest
number of gods, counted themselves most religious. It was the wisdom of the
Greeks and Romans to seek all the gods they heard tell of, yea all they could
imagine; thinking, that to have many gods, was to have much Religion.

A consideration upon the Worship of Angels.
The most specious and fair seeming Idolatry was the adoration of Angels,
creatures so noble, and so far above us. These celestial spirits have
sometimes come and spoke to men; but their communication was ever short; they
did, as it were, but pass by, without ever permitting any to know them. Now it
seems, that the Wisdom of God would that every of their apparitions should be
but of small continuance, not to give time to the curiosity and feebleness of
man, that inclines to Superstition, to ask them questions from the matter, or
to idolatrize their presence. Of all mortal men that the Angels have longest
held in discourse at one time, Saint John the Divine was He; who suffered
himself to be carried away with an excess of submission toward them, Apocalypse
19.22. And since that time, Angels have forborne to speak and commune with men.

Touching a kind of Idolatry very subtle and usual.
Many common people say, that they put their confidence in the true Religion,
in their prayers, and in the justice of their cause, which is the same with
Gods own. It will seem to them very strange, if one tell them that they deceive
themselves; and that one must trust neither in Religion, although true; nor in
any of its duties; neither in our just right, though God himself be concerned
in it.

But they ought to consider, that we cannot nor ought not to put our confidence
but in God alone. Religion is not God: Religion is the service that one renders
to God, but it is not God. Even the very Ark of God that held the Tables of the
Law, is called the might of God, and his glory; and yet it suffices, that it
was taken, and carried about in triumph by his enemies, Psalm. 78.61. Our faith
is not rested upon a quality that God gives unto a Cause, nor in the interest
that he takes in it; but it is fastened and stayed on God himself, who is its
proper object. This distinction, that many will judge unprofitable, and of
little solidity, is notwithstanding necessary: and for want of taking heed to
it, we fall into an imperceivable Idolatry, and which is very common.

Wherefore is it, that a man that has false gods, leaves them not so easily,
as another forsakes the true?
The Israelites were sometimes less constant in the service of the true God,
then the Pagans in the worship of their Idols. This is cast in their their
teeth, Jerem. chap. 2. Go through the Isles of Kittim, and behold, etc. is there
any Nation that has changed their gods, which notwithstanding are not gods?
But my people has changed their glory into that which is nothing worth.

This is natural, and an effect of the weakness of humane judgment. Natural
men desire to have a god that may have some proportion with themselves, and who
may not be too far above the reach of their understanding: Thence it comes,
that if a man will make choice of a deity, he will rather choose any God then
the true. The true God is infinitely exalted above us; and between his nature
and ours there is an immeasurable distance. But all other Deity that a man can
imagine to himself, is found fitted unto man's capacity, and within some
kenning; which is the reason that he the more easily fasteneth upon it, more
willingly sets up his rest there, and more hardly forgoes it. And on the other
side, it is more difficult for him to adhere to a God that is so far both from
our senses and understandings.

The.II. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.
Who is more wicked, he that adds to the Ordinances of God, or he that detracts
from them?
ALl the corruptions that happen in Religion come by one of these ways; viz.
either of addition, or substraction: Both are noted and censured within the
perclose of the Bible, Apoc. 22.18, 19. Notwithstanding, it seems that one is
more dangerous and abominable then the other: One leads to Superstition, the
other to Atheism. He that adds to the rules God has prescribed, becomes
superstitious; and he that takes thence, becoms a Libertine. One loads himself
with superfluous burdens; the other shakes off the necessary yoke that God had
imposed upon him. Now if a man takes away once one point of Religion, and takes
away yet another, and continues always taking away, at the end no Religion is
left him: So that we see that these cuttings off and diminutions end at length
in Atheism, which is far worse then Superstition.

These two Sects, so famous in the History of the New Testament, viz.
Pharisaisme and Saddueeisme, lodged in these two extremities: The Pharisee
sewed his Traditions to the Scripture, and annexed to it an infinite of
ordinances. The Sadduce suppressed a main part of the Scripture, yea all the
Prophets except Moses: he annulled the Resurrection of the dead, denied the
being of Angels and all Spirits, and in diverse manners mangled the Religion,
turning it almost into Atheism.

Sometime it falls out that the Scripture is gelded in favor of Superstition;
the Church of Rome takes out of the Decalogue this second Commandment, or
confounds it with the first, or withdraws it from the eyes and ears of the
people.

Of the nature of painting that represents the History of the Bible.
There are many things are more clearly set forth in a picture then in a
discourse. The fabric of the Tabernacle, the architecture of the Temple; the
dimensions, stories, and diverse rooms of Noah's Ark, are more perceptible by us
in a painting to the eye, then is the verbal description the Scripture gives us
of it. A man verily may behold the situation and length of the Land of Canaan
better in a Chorographick Map, then in the History of Josuah:

But that which is the more evident and easy, is not nevertheless the more
excellent. These paintings are not divine, as are the words of the Scripture. A
visible representation of Solomon's Temple is merely a humane figure; but the
verbal representation of the same Temple exhibited in Scripture terms is a
divine work. The picture of a man crucified, is it as divine as the words of
the Scripture describing the passion of Christ? or rather, is it comparable to
a Sermon, in which Jesus Christ is drawn out before our eyes, and crucified
among us? Gal. 3.1. Where is it authorized by God to plant Faith in our hearts?
In many narrations a picture verily may serve for an help to the understanding
of the History: but it can never be either instrument or object of our Faith.

None ever made any image of God, except God himself.
There is none but God can make the image of God: Only man, among all the
visible creatures, is this Image: but he cannot shape it in another matter;
no, not in another man. A Father does not so much as propagate it to his
children: for though they also bear this image, yet they receive it not from
him, but immediately from God, who alone imprints in them his resemblance. The
Scripture marks out this distinction, where it says, that God made man after
the likeness of God: but that Adam begat Seth after his own likeness, Genesis
5.1, 3. Man brings forth his children after the image of man; but God only
fashions them to the image of God. So the Soul, in which properly consists the
lines and lineaments of this divine Image, is not the work of man.

Why was it that God, who often appeared in a visible shape, would not manifest
himself after this manner when he published the Law?
He caused himself to be seen by the Ancients of Israel, and under his feet
there was (as it were) a paved work of Saphir stone, Exodus 24.10. He appeared
unto Daniel in the shape of an old man, Dan. 7. He manifested himself yet other
times in a visible shape. But when he came down to pronounce the Law, although
he gave many illustrious tokens of his presence, yet would he not appear in the
figure of man, or do any other thing which might seem to represent him. Why not
then, as well as in his other occurrences?

The Wisdom of God held it not fit to manifest himself under any resemblance
then, when he forbad to make any resemblance of himself: For seeing he never
permitted his representation (no not in the shapes like to those he had
appeared under) it was not to the purpose to let one be seen then, when he
forbade himself to be represented under any. If he had appeared in any visible
form, one might have thought, that it was lawful to represent him, at least in
the shape he showed himself in then, seeing that it was at the publishing of
the Law, which was given to learn men what they should do. God himself tells us
why in this action he forbore to be seen after the sort that he had manifested
himself in other revelations; Deuteronomy. 4.11, 15, 16. Ye heard a Voice speaking,
but ye saw not any likeness, etc. Ye have not seen any likeness in the day
that the Lord spoke unto thee in Horeb out of the middle of the fire; for fear
thou should corrupt thy self, and should make thee any carved image or
resemblance, which may represent any thing unto thee, etc.

If we had the true pourtrait and very resemblance of our Savior Christ,
taken from his own body; what account ought we to make of it?
Had I such a picture, I would keep it as most precious, not only above all
other painting; but as one of the most worthy objects of man's sight: But I
would ever make more account of the least Christian then of such a Picture: For
a Christian represents Christ a great deal better then any paint. A true humane
body animated not only with a reasonable soul, but also with the spirit of
Christ, does it not more resemble Christ then a dead Crucifix, or a shape that
expresses nothing but some superficial lineaments? I say more; That if one
would abuse this Picture, and idolatrize it, I would do by it as Hezekiah did
by the brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18.14.

A notable difference betwixt one of the figures which represented Christ, and
those that represented the Angels. And a consideration upon the matter.
In the Old Testament Christ was figured by the image of a Serpent set upon a
pole, without the Tabernacle, in an open place: But the Angels were figured by
the faces of men, having wings, placed over the Ark it self, in the most holy
of Holies. If we consider these figures, and their placing, that of Christ's was
greatly inferior unto that of the Angels: And if the true image of Christ did
consist in outward lineaments, an humane shape had been fitter there then that
of a Serpent.

Whence is it, that in the Apocalypse, Jesus Christ (being man) is decyphered
only in parabolicall Figures, rather then in the natural form of his own body?
We see him appear with seven Stars in his right hand, and a twoedged Sword
going forth of his mouth: We see him clad with a robe dipped in blood, and
mounted upon a white horse: We see him in the shape of a Lamb slain, having
seven eyes and seven horns. But we never see him there, or in any other place
of the holy History, in the figure of his own natural visage: To teach us,
That we ought rather to seek him in the description of his graces, then in the
Idea of the feature of his visage.

What Is the reason, that amongst all the wonders that God has wrought, he
never made an Image to speak?
God has showed forth an infinite of Miracles of all sorts, but never did he
cause an Image to speak. There were Cherubins within the Tabernacle, and in the
Temple, and God caused his voice to be heard from under the mercy-seat, over
which these Statues were placed; but we read not that ever they spoke word.
The Son of God likewise never wrought any such miracle, nor his Disciples. God
(without doubt) would not that men should have this pretense to color their
Idolatry. For if any image had spoken, they had easily believed that there had
been some divine virtue enclosed in such a statue. And that is the reason the
Devil did that which God would not: for he has often spoke in diverse Idols,
the betto oblige men to consult with, and serve them. In the 13 of the Revelat.
verse. 15. this Mystery is counted amongst those that the second beast wrought,
that he made an Image speak. Besides, although God should have made any speak,
(as many suppose) yet should it be no more adorable then Balaams Ass, if it
were again in the world.

Two sorts of sinners at which God mocks.
All sinners are worthy of Gods anger; but there are two are worthy of
derision, as well as his indignation: One is the proud; the other, the
Idolater: and we read, that God mocks at both. At the proud; Psalm 2. He that
sits in the heavens shall laugh at them, the Lord shall have them in
derision. Esa. 14. he jears the King of Babylon, whose pride began to be
followed with ruin. It seems also, that God mocked at the pretensions of our
great Grandfather, when he said, See, Man is become as one of us. He mocks
likewise at the Idolaters, Superstitious, and those that resort to Wizzards. So
said he to the Israelites, whom he had chastened for their Idolatries, Cry to
the gods ye have chosen, that they may deliver you, Judge. 10.14. Jer. 2.28. So
the Prophet Elijah laughing at the Prophets of Baal, bid them cry very loud,
that that Idol might hear them.

The admirable proportions that God holds in the dispensation of his judgments.
Here is a point mavelous dark, and a matter whose bottom it is impossible to
sound. Our understanding cannot conceive why God chasteneth one more then
another; why with such a kind of punishment; why sooner or later; why in such
measure; why so long time, or so short; and other reasons of such diversities
as therein are marked. Yet this Sovereign Wisdom does nothing that is not
perfectly regular, although his operations seem to us so out of order.

Sometime God looks to the nature and quality of the crime. When we are in
affliction, it is not enough for us to know or say in general, that it is
fallen upon us for our sins: There are always certain misdeeds amongst others,
that are the particular cause of such and such judgments. So the Nations that
God threatened by Amos, Chapt. 1. and 2. were guilty of many enormous sins; but
there was one amongst the rest in every of them for which they were condemned.
Damascus, for having broken Galaad with harrows of iron: Gaza and Tire, for
having delivered over the Jews into Captivity: Edom, for having pursued his
Brother with the sword: Moah, for having burned the bones of the King of Edom,
etc.

Sometimes God marks them that give the first example of evil, and handles
them more harshly: So Jericho, because it was the first Town that shut the
gates against Israel, was exposed unto unmercifulness: So Amalek, for being the
first that made war upon the people of God, was condemned to a final
destruction: So Nadab and Abihu, because they were the first breakers of the
Ceremonial Law, after the establishment of Aarons Priesthood, were devoured by
fire: So Ananias and Sapphira, the first that belied God in the beginnings of
the Christian Church, were miraculously punished.

Sometimes God has regard unto the number of sins; seldom does he punish a
man, or a people for one fault: When he adjudged the Israelites, from twenty
years old and upward, to die all in the wilderness, that was by reason of a
tenth National sin that they had committed; for God already complained that
they had tempted him ten times, Numb. 14. v. 22.

Sometimes God looks to the continuance and measure of sins, and forbears to
punish them til they be come to a certain growth: He would not put Abraham into
the possession of the promised Land, because that the iniquity of the Amorites
was not yet full, Genesis 15.16.

Sometime God has an eye to some circumstance that concerns the crime: For the
forty days that the Israelites had employed to discover the Land of Canaan,
they were condemned to an exile of forty years in the Desert, in detestation of
their murmuring, Numb. 14.34. For having neglected the Sabbath of the Land,
which they ought to have let rest once every seven years, they were captives
out of their Land seventy years, 2 Chronicles. 36.21. King Hozias, for having
presumed to enter into the holy place, and there taking upon him to execute the
Office which appertained not but to the Priests, was stricken with a disease,
the judgment whereof belonged only unto the Priests, viz. a Leprosy: and was
driven not only out of the Temple, but out of the society of men.

Sometime God imployes one evil doer to punish another, that has committed
the like offense. There is even a secret analogy and conveniencie in such
judgments. The Serpent had enticed man to despise the fruits that God had
given him, and had drawn him to covet one that God had forbidden him. The
Israelites despise the Manna, the ordinary food that God had given them, and
coveted the fruits of Egypt, that God had taken from them. Their sin, like that
of the Serpent, was punished by the biting of serpents that were sent against
them, Numb. 21.5, 6.

Sometime God practices the law of retaliation, or otherwise he sends
punishments answering the form or nature of the crime; we have an example in
Adonibezek, Jud. 1.7. and infinite more both in Scripture and experience.

Sometimes God looks upon the number of offenders, and of just men, and on the
proportions which he finds between the offenses of the one, and virtues of the
other: had there been ten just men in Sodom, it had not been destroyed.

Sometimes sinners are handled according to the measure of knowledge they have
received; by this rule judgment begins at the house of God, and Jerosalem was
destroyed before the Pagan Nations. 1 Pet. 4.17. Ier. 25.18. etc.

Sometimes God looks upon the persons of our Ancestors from whom he takes
occasion to punish the children, chiefly when they fill up the measure of their
Fathers, Mat. 23.32.

Finally, though God punishes sinners, yet he punishes them not always for
their sins, but sometimes for other causes, John 9.2, 3.

Of whom are descended those Nations that go aked?
It is known there be many Nations among whom nakedness is accounted no
disgrace, a great part of the Inhabitants of Affris, and the Natives of the
West- Indies walk without any other covering then their skins, and it is
remarkable that the people there, (at least the Affricans) are come of Cham,
one of Noah's three Sons. For the History of Genesis chap. 10. describing the
peopling of the World shortly after the Flood, makes it appear that the
Posterity of Cham did for the most part settle themselves in Egypt, Lybia, and
other neighboring Countries, whence doubtless they spread themselves through
all the continent of Affric, and the adjoining Islands, and at last moved
Westward: the brutish behavior that is found at this day among these Nations,
void of all shame, seems to have continued among them as a mark of their
Grandfathers impudence, who discovered his fathers nakedness: Genesis 9.22. and
this is wonderful, that after so many ages, such multitudes of people do yet
express the turpitude of an Ancester removed so many degrees.

The number of Generations named in this Promise.
Many brethren are accounted but for one Generation, because they are all
within one degree of descent; so the 12. sons of Jacob together were but one
Generation, and which is remarkable the 12th. born after the deluge: for in the
Genealogy of Gods people we find after Arphaxad (the first that was born from
the Flood) 12. Generations, till the 12. sons of Jacob: to wit. 1. Arphaxad. 2.
Scela. 3. Heber. 4. Peleg. 5. Rehu. 6. Serug. 7. Nacor. 8. Thera. 9. Abraham.
10. Isaac. 11. Jacob. 12. the twelve Patriarchs. viz. Rubin, Simeon, etc.

Now taking the Generations in this sense, and reckoning them for so many
degrees, we find, that from the Creation till this present time, there have
not been a thousand Generations as yet; and indeed it is impossible there
should have been so many: For though every man that has been since the
Creation, should have been a father at the age of ten years, in a continual
succession, yet there cannot be six hundred Generations, complete seeing the
World has not lasted six thousand years as yet: but indeed the number of
Generations since Adam is far from a thousand. Jesus Christ, who was born a
little before the four thousand year of the World, was but the seventy fifth
Generation from Adam; as may be seen in his Genealogy; Luke 3.23, etc. by all
which we may judge that the race from Adam will never reach till the thousand
Generation; or else the World must necessarily continue longer then hitherto it
has done, which is against all probability.

But why then is it that God promises to show mercy unto the thousand
Generation, seeing that has not yet been, nor (likely) shall ever be? The
meaning is, that though the race of the faithful should extend it self to the
thousand Generation, yet Gods mercies would extend it self as far.

Strange Exmples of diverse Subjects, in which God has manifested both his
Mercy and Instice.
God has show in both these attributes of his jointly, and yet severally, at
the same time, and in the same respect. They have been displayed in heaven in
Adams Family, in the Ark; in Abraham's Tent; in that of Isaac; in the Kingdom of
Israel; among the Apostles; and in the punishment of evil doers in every one of
these places God has manifested notable examples, both of his justice and
mercy: in heaven the good Angels were elected, and the evil spirits driven
thence; In Adams Family, we have Abel and Cain; God regarded the Oblation of
the one, and rejected that of the other; in Noah's Family we have Shem and Cham,
the one is blessed, the other accursed; in the house of Abraham we find Isaac
and Ishmael; Gal. 4. the one the child of promise. the other after the flesh;
in that of Isaac we have Jacob and Esau, the one beloved of God, the other
hated of him; among the Kings of Israel there are David and Saul; the one
according to Gods heart, the other rejected by God; among the Apostles St.
Peter and Judas; the one was received into mercy, the other perished in
despair; on the very Cross the two thieves, that were crucified with Christ,
one of them obtained grace, the other died in impenitence; the like we read in
the Parable of the Publican and Pharisee in the Temple, the one returning to
his house justified, the other was left in his pride; so in the last day two
shall be in the same bed, the one shall be received, and the other shall be
forsaken.

Why did God sometimes take such particular care of the Patriarchs and their
children, even of those that were wicked, and at this day h^ m^kes no such
addresses as he did th^n to them?
Surely the same affection that was in Hagar, when she thought her son would
die, may bef^l diverse other mothers, to whom notwithstanding God will send no
Angels to assure their childrens lives, or their future prosperity; Genesis 21.15.
etc. many women also may be paired with Rebecca, when they carry twins as she
did, and yet God will not send them an Oracle to let them know what shall befall
their children, Genesis 25.22. Now among diverse reasons of this extraordinary care
which God had toward these persons we must know, that in them were
comprehended whole Nations, which Rebecca bore in her womb; Genesis 25.23. we must
not think it then strange, for God to testify a particular care of those whom
he had appointed to be the fathers of Nations: Besides, those twins must be
considered in another quality, to wit, as God would make them examples and
types of the great mystery of Election and reprobation, as the Apostle shows,
Romans 9. v. 10. etc. So Hagar and Ismael were marked by the hand of God to be
figures of another Mystery handled by the same Apostle, Gal. 4.24. the nativity
and conditions of these persons, and most of the actions which seemed
contemptible and ridiculous, were full of mysteries, for which cause God did
extraordinarily preserve and guide them.

Why God spent but six days in Creating the World, and employed seven to
overthrow the walls of Jerico?
This City which was the first the Israelites took in after their passing over
Jordan, was delivered to them without stroke. The walls whereof were beaten
down, not by Engines, nor overthrown by springing of Mines, but only by the
presence of the Ark of God, accompanied with seven Priests sounding Trumpets of
Rams horns, and compassing the City, by which means the whole walls fell down:
But this procession continued seven days; for first they went about Ierico for
the space of six days, every day once; after this on the seventh day the Town
was encompassed seven times; and at the seventh time, when the horns sounded,
and the people gave a shout for joy, the whole circuit of the walls fell down,
so that the Town was wholly dismantled, Joshua 6.

Now among the most remarkable passages of this overthrow, it may be wondered,
why God, who in a moment with the breath of his mouth can beat down the
strongest rampires and fortifications, would employ so many days, and so long
a train of reiterated formalities, before the demolition of this place: and
withal why this was not done till the seventh day, whereas the whole world was
finished in the space of six days. Must there be more time to destroy one
Town, then to make the Universe? Surely in this example, as in infinite more,
God would show that his hand is slower in demolishing, then in establishing in
defacing the least of his work, then in forming the greatest thereof: and so
that his justice reaches no farther then the third or fourth Generation,
whereas his mercy is extended to the thousand Generation.

The II. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord, etc.
Why God pronounces the same word twice to the same purpose, against idle
oaths?
WE find that when God speaks to man he sometimes doubleth his words. In
men's speeches those repetitions serve only to make the discourse more
emphatical, or to make a greater impression on the mind and memory of the
hearer: but in Gods language they are of another importance; when God utters
one and the same speech twice, as it were with one continued thread, he shows
it is irrevocable, and no ways to be altered. We know that sometimes God has
repealed, and annihilated his declaratory sentences, as that which was uttered
against Ninivie, which he threatened after 40. days to destroy, yet he spared
her a long time after this: but when God utters a speech twice together, he
never revokes it: The Psalmist willing to express the immutable stability of an
Oracle: says: God has spoken twice, I have heard the same twice, Psalm. 62.12.
that miraculous writing containing the ruin of Balthazer and his Kingdom,
began with Mean, Mean, it is numbered, it is numbered; as if it would say, the
reckoning is perfected, nothing remains to be accounted for, Dan. 5.25. We read
also that sometimes God having expressed the same thing, by two different
representations; this doubling thereof did signify that the decree was
irrevocable, Pharaoh's two distinct dreams were but one thing in substance; for
the Kine in the one, and the Ears of corn in the other, did signify the same
thing, notwithstanding this repetition of the same matter, although expressed
under different figures, made Joseph say, that whereas the dream was doubled
twice, the thing was established by God. Genesis 41.32.

Now it seems that Christ has touched the same Mystery, when he commands that
our speech should be yea, yea, nay, nay, Mat. 5.37. as if he would enjoin us to
be content with a double affirmation, or a double negation, in liew of
superfluous oaths, as being sufficient to express the stability of our
speeches, after the example of Almighty God, who never repeals what he has
twice pronounced together.

Although in some things God has dispensed with his law, yet he has never
dispensed with faith; also of the stability of Gods oaths.
Against the General Law, God commanded Abraham to kill his own son, against
the same Law God authorized the Israelites to retain the jewels and Garments
which they borrowed of the Egyptians, Exodus 12.35, 36. but he never commanded
or permitted, either to speak or believe a falsehood, chiefly in Religion, the
Commandments which forbad him are undispensable, and these frauds which they
call pious, are the more Criminal; for there is no thing more repugnant to
Religion, then to support her with lies, as it is also a horrid thing to
violate faith under the shadow of faith, that is to say of Religion.

In brief, if any has power and authority to dispense with an oath, surely it
is God, but this he never did, for when he swares a thing, he never revokes it:
The Lord has sworn and will not repent: if there God never dispense with an
oath, why should any man dare to take upon him this power of dispensation
either in himself or toward others.

The IV. COMMANDMENT. Remember the Sabbath day, etc.
Why God never wrought any miracle an the Sabbath day, before the coming of
Christ.
THE Old Testament is full of Miracles, diverse whereof were done among the
Patriarchs, in Egypt, in the desert, in the land of Israel, and even in the
Captivity of Babylon; yet we do not read, that any of them were wrought upon
the Sabbath day: but on the contrary we find that the miracle of the Manna
which lasted forty years, was interrupted and suspended every Sabbath; for the
food which fell the six first days of the week ceased on the seventh, so that
upon that day this miracle failed: It is true, that the consequences and
effects of a miracle has sometimes passed on the Sabbath; as the fastings of
Moses and Eliah which lasted forty days, in which time there were many
Sabbaths; but this long abstinence, was only the effect of a supernatural
virtue which God had bestowed on them; now this gift in which consisted the
miracle, was not found to be given on the Sabbath day; otherwise in all
probability, the sacred History would not have omitted this cicumstance in
brief, it is impossible to they, that under the Old Testament any ^^^^cle has
been wrought on the ^^bbath day, whereas the new T^s^ament observes that this
day wa^ famous for many miracles. If Moses, or Eliah, or any of the Prophets
had done any miracle upon the Sabbath, the Pharisees had not so boldly
condemned the Son of God for violating the Sabbath, seeing he wrought miracles
on that day; and he had not failed in this point to have produced examples, if
there had been any; but he indeed was the first that ever did any miracle on
the Sabbath.

This then that seemed to serve as a pretext for their reproof of Christ, was
rather a means to oblige them to admire him so much the more; for this was an
extraordinary miracle, and a mark of dignity far surpassing that of all the
Prophets, by making that to be seen which none of them ever did; viz. To
produce miracles on the Sabbath day; In a word, this was one of the
prerogatives which God had reserved for his Son, and one of the works by which
God would have it known, that he was Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8. To this I
will add the ensuing observation.

Seven Sabbath days which Christ honored by his miracles.
I will not speak of that which is known to all; namely, that without reckoning
the Sabbath of every seventh day, there were besides seven days yearly, in
diverse seasons, on which all servile work was forbid by the Law, these were the
first and last of the feast of unleavened bread, that of the first fruits, that
of the feast of Trumpets, the first and eighth of the feast of Tabernacles, and
that of Expiation: all these universary days are mentioned in the 23. chapters
of Leviticus; we know also that in the feasts of Easter and Pentecost there
were seven days of rest.

But as the actions and sufferings of Christ are the perfection of all those
things which are contained in the Old Testament, this seems to me worthy of
admiration, that among the Sabbath days which our Savior honored whilst he
conversed in this world, the History of the Gospel has marked out seven, which
Christ made famous by miracles; I will set them down according to the order of
time, in which they fell out.

The first of these seven days of Sabbath was sanctified by the cure of a
Demoniac, of St. Peter's mother in law, and of some other infirm persons, Mat.
1.21. Luke 4.31.

The second by a wonderful cure of the Paralitic, who had been diseased thirty
eight years, Joh. 5.

The third by the healing of him who had a whithered hand, Luke 6.6.

The fourth by the curing of diverse sick persons, notwithstanding the
incredulity of the Galileans, Mark 6.1.

The sift by an unheard of miracle til then; a man born blind, who received his
sight, John 9.

The sixth by another strange miracle of a woman that was bowed downward
eighteen years, and cured of this infirmity, Luke 13.10.

The seventh by the cure of an Hydropic, Luke 14.1.

So in Christ we have the accomplishment of the Sabbath, sanctified by those
actions, which before were never seen upon that day.

In what things our Savior is to be immitated.
God does bind us to the observation of the Sabbath by his own example,
because he rested himself on that day: but must we immitate God in all his
actions; there be virtues in him which we cannot immitate without sin or
madness: to immitate his power, were not a virtue, but an insufferable pride,
as that of Salmonius, or the King of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.2. They that endeavor to
fast forty days after the example of the Son of God, ought to consider that
this fast was one of the effects of his power, which we ought to admire, for we
cannot imitate it: and here let us observe, that among all the perfections in
God, there is not any one of them proposed for our imitation, but his goodness;
he never commanded us to follow his example, but in this one virtue; Be ye
holy, as I am holy; Be merciful, as your Heavenly Father is merciful; Be
perfect (to wit, in goodness) as your Father is perfect, Lev. 11. Luke 6.
Matthew. 5. and 6. So the sanctification of the Sabbath consists chiefly in the
action of goodness and holiness.

Whence it is that in the History of the New Testament, we do not read that
ever the Sadduces appeared on the Sabbath day?
There is nothing more frequent in the Gospel, then the proceedings of the
Pharisees, chiefly on the Sabbath days: for on that day they are seen in the
Temple, in the Synagogues, even in the fields, Mat. 12.1.2. on that day they
are heard to censure the works of the Son of God, John 9.14.15. Luke 6.7. On
that day they visited and feasted each other. Luke 14.1, etc. But for the
Sadduces that other famous sect, the sacred History makes no mention of them,
when it speaks of any thing that past on the Sabbath day; it relates what they
spoke or did in many occurrences upon diverse days, but it never speaks of any
appearance they made that day; so that although sometimes the Pharisees and
Sadduces have been found together in the same place, yet this was never on the
Sabbath; for we do not read that upon this day they ever met, nor that then the
Sadduces disputed with Christ, or censured ^is actions, or that they came i^to
the fields to calumniate them, as i^compatible with the Sabbath, which the
Pharisees were wont to do; and which is strange in the whole History of the
Gospel, we do not ^^nde that the Sadduces were ever ^oun^ in the Temple or
Syn^^^^ (...).

Now to know the reason hereof we must presuppose that w^^^^ some have gathered
out of the Rabbis, that the Sadduces held among other of their errors, this,
that it was not lawful to go out of their houses on the Sabbath day into any
place whatsoever: this opinion was grounded on a false exposition of that
passage in the Law, which ordained that none should go out of his house on the
seventh day, Exodus 16.29. The Sadduces inferred upon this, that if any did but
step out from the door of his house on that day, he broke the Sabbath: The
Pharisees on the other side proved, that upon the 7th day, they were bound to
repair to the Temple and Synagogues; because God commanded that on the Sabbath
day the people should assemble together, Levit. 23.3. Yet notwithstanding, the
Sadduces upon that day would not go out of their houses; whence it is that in
all the sacred Story, we do not find that ever they showed themselves on the
Sabbath day.

In brief, under pretense of observing punctually the Sabbath, they profaned it
impudently, in an irreligious idleness, and impious Hypocrisy.

Why the Law uses such an excellent subject. viz. God's Rest, as a reason for
the beasts to rest?
The same reason why God will have man to rest on the seventh day, obliges him
to suffer his ox and his ass, and all his cattle to rest then: viz. because
upon that day God rested; but why will Almighty God bring his own example, as a
reason for the rest of beasts, a subject so mean? Indeed humanity may induce us
to give rest to the poor beasts that travel for us; but does this base subject
of the beasts rest, deserve so noble and excellent a reason, as the rest of God
himself?

We must observe here, one thread of the Lawgivers wisdom. The Law of God
contains many points, which would be contemptible, because of their meanness,
if there were not some provision against this: now to prevent this slighting of
them, God has authorized them by the highest reasons that can be, by the
severest comminations against those that infringe them, and by the richest
promises to those that observe them: this is the reason why such grievous
punishments are set down against him that shall taste leavened bread within the
seven days of Easter; this is the reason why that he who finds a birds nest
must content himself with the young ones, and let the dam fly away, has the
promise of length of days, which is the same that is annexed to one of the
great Commandments of the Law, for those who honor their Father and Mother,
Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7. This is the reason why God forbids the eating of the flesh of
creeping things, and backs this prohibition with a reason taken from his own
example, Be you (...)) holy, because I am holy, Lev. (...) This is also the
cause why ^e inte^poseth his own example, in commanding the rest of beasts, for
this ordinance being made in the favor of so mean a subject, is the more
considerable, in that it is annexed to such an high and excellent matter, to
wit, the rest that God took after the Creation.

Why none of the dead have been raised on the Sabbath day?
In my observations on the Creed, upon the Articles of Christ's Resurrection, I
promised to handle this question: I must first then verify the Hypothesis. I
say that on the Sabbath day our Savior cured many diseases, but never upon
that day raised any that were dead, neither in the Old nor New Testament do we
read of any such resuscitation upon that day. Not the Sunaimtes son, that was
raised by Elisha, for the History says expressly, that it was not the Sabbath
day, and the journey of Elisha and Gehazi, which they made, to raise the dead
child, was against the rest of this day; 2 Kings 4.23. etc. neither he who was
laid in the grave of the same Prophet, nor the sons of the Widow of Nain, which
were carrying to be buried, for they raised them there when they went to inter
them: now the sanctity of the Sabbath debarred them from burying on that day, 2
Kings 13.21. Luke 7.15. Not Lazarus of Bethany, for when he was raised, many
Jews were come to his grave, which the holiness of the Sabbath would not have
permitted. Those pious women who had prepared spices to embalm our Savior's
body, being prevented by the Sabbath, rested all that day, and went not to the
Sepulcher till the next morning, which was the 3rd day after his death: not
that those were raised with Christ, and appeared in the holy City, for these
miracles fell not out, till the day after the Sabbath: not the daughter of
Iairus, nor Tabitha, for then they were raised, when their Friends were
performing their Funeral Ceremonies for them: Now these actions, such as are
the burying of their dead, the washing and embalming of them, yea, the entering
into an house where a dead corpse lay, all these were prohibited on the Sabbath,
as being incompatible with its sanctity, Matthew. 92.3. etc. Acts 9.37. Not the
Widow of Sarepta's son, whose resurrection is mentioned without naming the day,
which had not been omitted, if it had been on the Sabbath; not Eutychus, who
was raised by St. Paul, for this was on the first day of the week, the Sabbath
being already past; and here it is remarkable, that this young man, the last of
those that were raised, recovered life the same day that Christ returned from
the dead. viz. on the Sunday.

Now why God never raised any on the Sabbath day, two reasons may be given.

The first is, because Christ himself, who is the first born among the dead,
and the chief of those that were raised, was not resuscitated on the Sabbath,
but he suffered this day to pass before he would come out of his grave;
besides, (as I observed on the Creed) Christ was not raised on the Sabbath to
show the union between him and others that were raised, of all which, none
received life this day.

The other reason may be this, viz. This life is a time of travel, and the
Sabbath was the time of rest, the wisdom of God would not that on the day which
was ordained for the repose and rest of the living, the dead should be taken
from their ease, and called back again to travel.

The V. COMMANDMENT. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.
Whence comes it as they say commonly, That Love and Affection uses to
descend: Difference between Faith and Charity: The words of Mal. 4.5. discussed.
WE know why God the Lawgiver has ordained the duties of Children toward
their Fathers, but has not expressed the duty of Fathers toward their
Children; the reason is, because the affections of Parents toward their
Children is naturally greater, and needs fewer incitements then that of
Children toward their Parents; this is the meaning of that common saying; that
the Parents affection descends toward the Children, but the love of Children
toward their Parents does not so easily ascend.

Now we demand, how comes it that love rather descends then ascends? The reason
is, because Love had its beginning in Heaven; God is the first that loved. I
say Love had its original in Heaven, and came down into the Earth; and in this
it differs from Faith, which had its beginning on Earth, and terminates in
Heaven. By a secret instinct and natural affection, which is found in
paternity, imitates that of God, which is Father of all, and who loved us
before we loved him; as in affection the Father prevents the Child; so the Love
of God toward us, does infinitely surpass that which we bear toward him.

The Prophet in that passage which I quoted, speaking of the reuniting of
disagreeing Families, says, That the heart of the Fathers shall be converted
toward their Children, and the heart of the Children toward their Fathers. In
the order of these words, the conversion of the Father toward the Child
proceeds the conversion of the Child toward the Father; for we must
presuppose, that as the Paternal affection is the first and strongest, so the
heart of the Father is more easily reconciled, and sooner appeased then that of
the Child.

Why the Law expresses the Childrens duty to Parents by the word Honor,
rather then by the word Love.
Surely the Honor which is commanded to be rendered to them, does not exclude
the Love which is due to them: But whereas unreasonable Creatures Love their
little ones, and are beloved of them: The Lawgiver wills that this natural
affection, which ought to be in Man, should be clothed with a more noble
quality, then that which is found among beasts; for these are capable of
natural affections, but man alone is capable of Honor; as well to give Honor,
as to receive it.

Another reason why this Commandment speaks of Honor rather then of Love, in
some regard a man owes more affection to his wife and children, then to his
father and mother; for he must forsake father and mother, and cleave to his
wife; but in matter of Honor, the Parents have always the pre-eminence; in
our affections many times they have the second place, but in Honor and
reverence they should still be first.

Wherefore the Law commanded Children to fear those that brought them into the
world, namely, the Mother before the Father.
The Decalogue says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; but in the 19. of
Leviticus ver. 3. it is said that every one should fear his Mother and his
Father; here the Mother is first named: We must observe that in this passage
the Law giver speaks of the fear which the children should have toward those
that are the Authors of their Generation. The love which they carry to the
child, causes sometimes that he fears them not, therefore God commands him to
fear them. Now because the Mother has the greatest part of this natural
affection toward the child, and consequently is less feared; God has enforced
this obligation of the child toward the Mother, naming her first, before the
Father in this commandment, which injoyneth to fear them both: So this duty
toward the Mother, being more subject to be infringed, is made so much
considerable, in that it is put in the first place.

The Promise annexed to the fifth Commandment.
Examples, of that propertion which is found sometimes between good works, and
the recompense which they receive in this life.
IT is well known why God in this Commandment, has rather promised life, then
any other blessing. From our Parents we have received our life, hence it is
that life is promised to him, that shall Honor those of whom he has received
it; for as the punishment sometime answers the offense, by the Law of
retaliation, even so many times God remunerates a good work, by some favor
answering the same in some similitude: So Abraham offered his only son, and
God promised him thousands of children, Genesis 22.16, 17. So Jacob, who had fed
Joseph by the space of seventeen years, was reciprocally fed by Joseph in Egypt
the space of seventeen years: So Abraham and Lot for their Hospitality to men,
had the honor to entertain Angels: So Rachab having preserved the Spies in her
house, was her self preserved with her house: So the house of Obed Edom was
blessed for having received the Ark of God: so Ezechias having reigned 14 years
religiously, received from God an addition of fifteen years, a term longer
then the former: So Daniel and his fellows refusing to desile themselves with
the King of Babylons meat, though they were fed only with pulse and water, yet
they fared better then those that were fed with the Kings allowance: So she
that was blamed for pouring out a precious ointment on our Saviors head, is
praised at this day, where ever the Gospel is preached: So many for humbling
themselves have been exalted. 'Its true we find not always this proportion
between the work and the reward: but though God does not still pay in the same
kind, yet he gives that which is equivalent, yea, infinitely better; if he does
not bestow long life upon Earth, he gives that which is eternal in Heaven. Now
why he gives to some a longer, to others a shorter life, there be other
reasons. but secret, I will observe some examples.

Why fifteen years were added to the life of Ezechias.
He that could see the particular causes why God abridges and prolongs our life
till such a minute of time, will find the effects of a marvailous
dispensation. The number of the years of the Patriarchs, and many others famous
in the Old Testament, is full of such Mysteries. take one which is notable. We
know that God having caused the sentence of death to be pronounced against
Ezechias, did notwithstanding add fifteen years to his life: The common sort,
who see no farther then the superficies of the History, perceive not of what
importance, this term of years was, which God bestowed on this Prince; this
number of years was fignificative, and carries a meaning that reaches far.

We must observe that a little before Ezechias sickness, the Kingdom of Juda
was drawing toward its end; it had been invaded by the Assyrians, and as yet
stood in aw of them; for this cause God promises to Ezechias, not only the
prolongation of his life, but also the continuance of his Kingdom; for at the
same time that he assured his life for fifteen years, he added, that he would
deliver him from the hands of the Assyrians, and would defend Jerusalem the
capital City; so the fifteen years that were promised to Ezechias did express
also the continuance and establishment of his Kingdom.

We must observe then that Ezechias was the fifteenth King that reigned in
Judea, in which the true religion was preserved; for from Saul, who was the
first King, till Ezechias inclusively are reckoned fifteen Kings of Judah; to
wit, 1. Saul. 2. David. 3. Solomon. 4. Roboam, who was forsaken by the twelve
Tribes, and retained only that of Judah, with a part of Benjamin. 5. Abija. 6.
Asa. 7. Iosophat. 8. Ioram. 9. Achaziah, otherways called Hozias, whom his
mother Athalia followed, but because she usurped the Kingdom, her unlawful
ragin is not counted among the true Kings. 10. Ioas. 11. Amaziah. 12. Hazaria.
13. Iotham. 14. Achaz. 15. Ezechias.

As then the reign of Ezechias was the fifteenth in order of succession, so God
would give him fifteen years, including as it were in this epitome, all the
former raigns, and recapitulating them by the like number of years in the
fifteenth King; this was to confirm al together both the life and reign of
Ezechias, both which having been upon the point of expiration; so that the life
of this Prince being prolonged fifteen years, was a pledge of the subsistence
of that throne which had supported fifteen Kings.

The age of the Israelites when they passed out of the Wilderness into the Land
of Promise.
This I observe here as an Historical circumstance only. None of those who
entered into Canaan after the death of Moses, had as yet attained the age of
sixty years, except Calib and Joshua, whom God reserved as two ancient witnesses
of the wonders he wrought in Egypt. This may be easily verified; for two years
after the Israelites departure from Egypt, they were all condemned to die in
the desert, except such as were then twenty years old and under, Numb. 14.29,
30. since this sentence of condemnation there passed thirty eight years, in
which the sentence was performed, and about the end of this term, the
survivers entered Canaan; now if we add the twenty years of their life, when God
uttered this sentence, to the thirty eight years of their wandering in the
desert, it will appear that all those who entered the Land of Canaan under the
conduct of Caleb and Joshua were under sixty years; so that there was none who
was decrepit with age.

The measure and proportion of man's life from time to time, since the first
ages.
There are six degrees by which the life of man has been altered since our
first Parents.

First, before the Flood the number of man's years was at most nine hundred, or
nine hundred and sixty, as we may see in Iered and Methusala, Genesis 5.

Secondly, After the Flood immediately, God altered the third part of that age,
for Sem the most famous of Noah's Sons, lived in all but six hundred years.

Thirdly, In the first Generations of those who were born after the Flood, the
life of man was abridged one moiety: for Arphaxad, Scelas, Heber lived but four
hundred thirty eight, or four hundred sixty four years, whereas their first
progenitors had lived twice as long.

Fourthly, this half was cut in two about the time of the Tower of Babel; so
that man's life was abridged to the fourth part of the ordinary age of the first
men: for Peleg who was born at that time lived 239. year, which was but the
fourth part of the years of Jered and Methusala.

Fifthly, afterward the life of man was yet much more shortened, and still
declining through many generations, reached but to the eighth part of the age
of our first Parents. This was in the time of Moses, who lived one hundred and
twenty years, which is but the eighth part of nine hundred and sixty: By the
way we may observe, that when God was to send the Flood, he gave to men but the
term of one hundred and twenty years, which was the eighth part of the
ordinary age of men in those times, to which it seems answers the number of
eight persons saved in the Ark.

Sixthly and lastly, the life of man grew every day shorter and shorter, till it
was reduced to the twelf part of the first measure; for eighty years, which is
the age that few at this day do exceed, is but the twelf part of nine hundred
and sixty; which was then the ordinary age before the Flood, and that which was
then, their youthful age, is now our greatest old age.

So then the life of man was first reduced to two thirds, then to the half,
then to the fourth, then to the eighth part, and in the end to the twelfth.

None of the Kings of Juda exceeded the age of seventy years.
This is but an Historical observation, yet remarkable, that these very Kings
which God had appointed over his people, have been all short lived: he that
lived longest was David; he was thirty years old when he was set on his throne,
and he reigned forty years and six months; so that he did not much exceed
seventy years, but none of his successors from Solomon till Zedechias, did ever
attain to that age; which may be easily proved by the sacred Chronology.

Difference between the faithful of the Old Testament, and those of the New,
concerning their desire of long life: another difference about the reckoning of
the years of their life.
Under the Old Testament many of the faithful desired long life, but since the
coming of Christ, we do not read of any who have desired it: on the contrary,
when Simeon had seen Christ the Lord, he was content to die: after that the
Author of eternal life appeared, the faithful have not had such desire to stay
long in this transitory life; and so much the less, in that our Savior did not
sojourn long in this world, having continued but few years.

We may observe also, that the Old Testament speaking of many of the faithful,
recites how many years they lived: but since the coming of our Lord, who
conversed so short a time upon the Earth, the sacred story makes no mention at
all, of the total sum of any man's years in all the New Testament, the daughter
of Iairus is the only person whose age is observed when she died, but this was
because she was restored again to life the same day, her departure having
immediately followed upon her resurrection.

Three causes, why men are loath to leave this life, represented in him who
died first.
The trouble that men have upon the apprehension of death, is increased upon
the concurrence of these causes.

First, if one die young; for he has more reason to desire life, then he who
is full and satisfied with days.

Secondly, if he die a violent death, for we are best content with that which
is natural.

Thirdly, if he die without issue; for death should be more supportable to
those who survive themselves in the persons of their children.

Now that we may in good time learn, that neither the shortness of this life,
nor violent death, nor want of posterity, should make our departure grievous to
us, God would have these three accidents to meet in him, who was both a just
man and the first that died, to wit, Abel.

For first, he died young in regard of the age of men in those days.

Secondly, he dies a violent death; and which was most grievous, by the hand of
his own brother.

Thirdly, he died without issue.

A moral observation upon the days of Lazarus raised from the dead.
The number of days makes not a long life; many who think they are alive, are
dead in effect, 1 Timothy 5.6. the days we pass in ignorance or in malice, should
be abated from the count of our years. The four days of Lazarus his abode
among the dead; must not be reckoned among the days of his life; and whereas
he was raised again, he had reason to reckon from the day of his resurrection,
rather then from the day of his nativity.

The VI. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not kill.
Why God in his titles does rather call Himself our Buckler, then our Sword.
WHEN the Scripture expresses Gods protection, opposing his arms to our
enemies, it represents them rather defensive then offensive; sometimes he is
called the Rock and Tower of his people, sometimes also our, Buckler; this was
the first title that God assumed to himself, after the first war we read was in
the world, Genesis 14. for thus he vouchsafes to speak to Abraham, I am thy
Buckler; and afterward he has been many times honored by this title, in that
he would be called the Buckler of his people; but he would never be named their
sword, but once, and after that he was named their Buckler, Deuteronomy 33.29. this is
to show that the children of God are not properly quarrellers, and if at any
time they take arms, it is rather to defend then to hurt.

Since Moses there have been but three men, who received power to kill any
miraculously; and the same who have miraculously inflicted death on the living,
have also given life to the dead. Reasons of the one and the other.
Among the miracles that God has displayed by his servants, we read that
sometimes they have put some persons to death, so Elijah made fire come down
from heaven, which consumed two Companies of fifty men a piece, with their
Captains; so Elisha caused Bears to come out of the Forest, which tore many
of the Children of Bethel; so St. Peter by his word only smote with death
Ananias and Sapphira. These Executions could not be but just, being done by a
supernatural power; notwithstanding God did not bestow this, but on very few;
for since Moses, though many have had the gift of miracles, yet none have
received this power of destroying men by miracles, but these three, Elijah,
Elisha, and St. Peter; neither would God have those, in whom he had placed this
miraculous power, to make use thereof but very seldom: therefore Christ did
justly reprove the Apostles, who would have imitated this Act of Elijah, Luke
9.54, 55. Moreover, those whom God had employed to inflict death upon some, he
gave them power to bestow life upon others; as Elijah on the Widows son of
Sarepta; Elisha on the Shunamites son, and St. Peter on Tabitha, as being an
Act more glorious to bestow life on the dead, then to take it from the living;
he would also show, that for the more full authorizing of the calling of these
great personages, they were employed as well to give life, as to destroy;
otherwise, wicked men would have had some pretense in saying, that their God
had power to kill the living, but not to restore the dead; which blasphemy was
prevented by the wisdom of God.

The plot of the Priests in consulting to put Lazarus to death, Joh. 12.10.
Murder is more or less enormous in diverse respects, now though the example
which I set down here be extraordinary, it will serve nevertheless to show how
far the furious spirit of murder extends it self. The son of God had raised
one that was dead, the Priests endeavored to bury this miracle, willing to
send back to the grave a man that had been thence taken out, this was to commit
a double murder upon the same person; as God had given twice life to Lazarus,
(the one at his nativity, the other at his resurrection) so this was as it were
to make him die twice, in taking from him the second life, which he had
reestablished in the first.

A question: If the punishment of a criminal being interrupted by some
extraordinary accident intervening, after the execution is begun, is it just to
discharge him, of the punishment to which he was condemmed.
It has happened sometimes, that malefactors have fallen down from the Gibet
upon the breaking of the rope, some have been taken down as dead, who yet have
lived a good while after; some upon the Scaffold have had diverse blows in the
neck by the sword, and yet the head not cut off. St. Ierem in his Epistle to
Innocent mentions a strange example; and in the former age, one of our Martyrs
being set upon the pile, where they thought to have burnt him alive, he died a
natural and quiet death, before the fire was kindled.

But if it happen that a Malefactor who has passed through all the sorts of a
mortal execution should be yet found alive by some means not thought on, or
foreseen by men; ought he be again exposed to punishment? The providence of God
who has rescued him, seems to have given him letters of pardon: Justice also
which did not condemn him to die twice seems to have received the satisfaction,
which it required of him, seeing he has undergone, if not death it self, yet
at least the impression of death.

In this case, which may furnish matter for a fair debate, I distingish thus:
there be some crimes so enormous, that they deserve more deaths then one, if a
man could die oftener then once; so murderers, sorcerers, and others guilty of
such heinous wickedness, should be carried back again to punishment, though
they had been rescued by some interruption which might seem miraculous; it is
to be presumed that the justice of God, did stay the course of execution to
increase rather the pain of death, then to remit the punishment; but as for
lesser faults, chiefly those which Gods law has not declared capital, and yet
are such by the civil law, as theft, it seems that the Malefactor has
sufficiently suffered pain, if he has tasted the half of death.

An allusion in the Apostles words, who ordains that the Sun go not down upon
our anger, Ephesians. 4.26.
The law commands that the Malefactors body put to death, be buried the same
day; it is expressly forbid to let it hang all night on the Gallows Deuteronomy. 21.23.
therefore as the Sun must not go down upon such a spectacle, though it be the
body of a Malefactor justly punished by death, and whose punishment should
serve for an example: Even so, our anger, though it proceed from a just resent
of some injury done to us, yet it should never sleep with us; to this it seems
the Apostles words do allude.

The VII. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Why God though he approves not Poligamy nor unlawful diverces, which were
freequent in the old Testament, yet never forbad them, but by the last of all
the Prophets?
THE question is not why God tolerated these sins among the Israelites. We know
that the hardness of their hearts, did as it were extort this license, Mat.
19.8. and for the same cause God did for a long time wink at this disorder,
which was so common: For we do not read that he ever reproved any of those who
had plurality of wives, or who put them away without just cause: only in
Malachi 2. v. 14, etc. He censureth their Poligamy, and unlawful divorces. But
why this custom which had been allowed by so long silence, and prescription of
so many ages, was condemned at last? Or why did he delay to censure this
custom, till the last of the Prophets; for Malachi was the last of them all.

The purpose of God was, that the Kingdom of Christ should be famous; amongst
other preheminences for its exact policy, far exceeding that which went before;
for this end he suffered that of Moses to give way to some disorders, such as
were Poligamy and Divorces, to make it known, that the government of Christ
which cut off this tolleration, is more perfect then that of Moses: So that
this politic Law of Israel, served to declare and advance that piece of
holiness in Christ, and to show the perfection of his government, then, when he
came to suppress the abuse which that ancient indulgence had supported.

Now as the time of his coming, and of this reformation did approach, God would
prepare the hearts of men: and whereas he was to put a period to the old
Testament, and meant not to send any more Prophets, it was needful that the
last of them should make this preparation: So as for Poligamy and unjust
Divorces, God did not prohibit them sooner, until the Commonwealth of Moses,
which was to give a luster to that of Christ, should have its period; and so
likewise he would not put an end to the Old Testament until he had disposed men
to that reformation, which was to follow the coming of the Messiah; for after
God was manifest in the Flesh, men have been tied to a more exact purity; to
this Christians are more bound, then the Israelites or Patriarhs were.

Why men are more subject to be ashamed in the Act of any sin, rather then in
that of pride; and why more in Luxury, then in any other sin?
There is no sin of which man is not ashamed in the act thereof, or whilst he
is committing it. So many blush when they lie or steal, or when they show
themselves sordid and close fisted, or when they play the Gluttons, and so in
any other vicious act, although there be none to witness it. Only the proud
man sins still without shame; never was shame found in the act of pride. The
reason hereof is, because the glory which a proud man affects or presumes to
have in any action, is formally repugnant to shame: For it is impossible a man
should be ashamed of that, which he esteems tends to his glory.

As for the other question, we may say, that the more bestial a sin is, it is
the more subject to secret shame: for the sin that reduces a man to beast-like
conditions, seems to check him for the indignity and disgrace he offers to
himself: Now as venereal Luxury is the most brutish of all sins, so man is most
naturally ashamed of it; as for such as have no shame, they are either
innocents or beasts: innocence is in infants, beastiality in savages, and such
as have lost their understanding, and in those also that are impudent in their
turpitude, such as the Cyniks were.

What may be inferred upon this, that the Holy Ghost describing under diverse
similitudes the spiritual beauty of the Church, makes no mention of painting?
The ornaments of the Spouse are mistically represented in diverse passages of
Scripture, as Psalm. 45. In the Canticles; In Ezekiel. 16. v. 10, 11, 12, 13. There
she is set out in her chief apparel, both in regard of the stuff, and the
fashion. Silk, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Pendants from the ears, Chains,
Bracelets, the Dressings, and all things which serve for advantaging a natural
beauty, may be read among the ornaments of the Church: but painting which was
invented for imbellishing of the face, is never named in any of those
descriptions; it seems that God has rejected this kind of disguise, in that he
makes no mention of it among these ornaments which serve to represent the
beauties of his Church: Yea, this artifice is reckoned among those of Jesabel
only, 2 King. 9.30.

A moral observation upon Sampson's loosing of his strength and sight, and how
he recovered the one, but not the other.
This strong man having betrayed the honor of his Nazarites profession, on,
the badg whereof consisted in his hairs, lost this prodigious strength, which
he kept till then, and so was overcome by the Philistims, who put out his eyes;
after some time that his hairs were grown again, his strength returned, but not
his sight, for he died blind: It may be demanded why God would restore him to
his strength which was supernatural, but not to his sight also. We might speak
much upon this question, if here there were the place to handle what is literal
in the History. But it will suffice to observe this only. Sampsons eyes were
the cause of his fall; for hitherto his unchaste looks many times carried him
into enormous faults, Judge. 16.1. into which he might have fallen again, had he
recovered his sight with his strength. Which strength was restored to him
again, that he might once more chastise the Philistims, and that he might die
with them: but his eyes which might have guided him out of prison, and
conducted him hither and thither as before, and would have been yet ready, to
make his heart wander again after lascivious objects, were not at all restored
to him.

The VIII. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not steal.
Why Christ used the example of thieves to induce us to search for the Kingdom
of Heaven.
HE alleges him who having discovered a treasure in another man's ground, did
not therewith acquaint the owner, but bought the field without giving him any
share of his treasure, Matthew. 13.44. this is a thing disputable; but he
proposes also to us the open injustice of the Steward who cousned his Lord,
Luke 16.1, etc. and after his example he exhorts to provide for our salvation.
Now we know well that these similitudes tend only to recommend wisdom to us;
but not to approve of injustice: But I ask, is there no other wisdom but that
of the thief, which might serve us for an example to walk to heaven by? chiefly
seeing there are so many lawful actions among men, which wisdom might use for
examples, without alleging these which countenance injustice?

The intention of our Savior in these similitudes, is to show, that to attain
heaven we must have a singular care, and use extraordinary industry; the
greatness of this spiritual wisdom, could notshew it self more, then by the
actions of the greatest prudence, which can be found in the children of this
world. Now among men there is commonly more prudence, spirit, and vivacity, and
in a higher degree to be found in unlawful actions, then in those which are
either good, or indifferent: this is by reason that lawful actions consist
always in a certain rectitude, whereas others are full of obliquity which
requires more nimbleness and dexterity. Now whereas this sinful prudence makes
use of all sorts of means lawful and unlawful, in a more spacious field, where
it can extend, and put it self into all postures, more then the wisdom of good
men can, which is shut up within the bounds of virtue, by reason man is
naturally more ingenious to evil; but above all things, if we would see
examples of extraordinary and transcendent subtilities, we shall find them
among thieves; we knowthere is nothing more inventive, then one given to this
vice; for many will rob with such dexterity, that the admiration they make by
their industry, surmounts the dislike we should have of there iniquity;
therefore the Scripture makes use of that subuject, in which it finds most
worldly subtilty, to make us see how great the prudence of good men should be.

An observation upon this, that among Christ's Disciples, there is but one
noted for avarice, but all are taxed for ambition.
Only Judas is marked out by name, and by his acts of covetousness, John 12.6.
but all the rest are showed to be ambitious; for many times they strove for
superiority, Luke 9.46. even at that time when their Master was waiting for his
own death, Luke 22.24. two of them made jealousy among all the rest, when they
demanded to sit the one at Christ's right hand, the other at his left.

It seems that as yet ambition was more universal then avarice; for although
both these are rooted in the hearts of all men, yet the one has a more general
command then the other: so ambition is more ancient then avarice; for sin began
at Adam's ambition; and in Scripture we read of many examples of ambition,
which appeared in the first ages of the world, before we find any examples of
avarice.

In brief, though both these be crimes, yet of the two avarice is the most
unbeseeming man.

To one man only God by divine means did show the way to become rich
It is God who still gives riches, and the lawful means to become rich. It is
he also that gives industry, but yet he does not furnish us with these, except
by humane and natural means, which are understanding, diligence, experience,
and other qualities; he never used extraordinary revelations for men to enrich
themselves, except to one man only: this was Jacob, to whom God sent an Angel
expressly from Heaven, to bestow on him the invention to make himself rich, Genesis
31.10, 11, 12. This is the only example in all the Scripture; except we will
add that of the Israelites, to whom God showed the means to enrich themselves
by the Egyptian jewels, Exodus 12.35, 36.

Now it is a thing remarkable, that God has not been sparing of his oracles,
when there has been question about providing for the necessities of his
servants, or for giving them advice of things requisite to their preservation,
but to show them the way to enrich themselves, his revelations in this point
have been very rare; which notwithstanding in other cases he has not been
sparing of, as when he provides for the security of his children; so he forbid
Laban to wrong Jacob; or for their honor, so he advertiseth Abimelech not to
meddle with Abraham's Wife; or for their quietness, so many times he comfort
Jacob in his afflictions; or for confirming and encouraging them in their
vocations; so sometimes he has spoken to Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, and others; or
for giving them victory over their enemies, so he showed the way to the
Israelites how to surprise Hai; and to David, how he might entrap the
Philistims; o^ for preventing some inconvenience, so he advertiseth Isaac, not
to go down into Egypt; and on the contrary he gave order to Joseph the Husband
of Mary the Virgin, to carry Christ thither, that was newly born, to avoid the
fury of Herod: But to teach men by oracle how to enrich themselves, God never
used, except one time only, and for a special cause. So the Saints have
sometimes desired revelations in case of necessity, but never for superfluity.

A conjecture upon the Jewish opinion, touching the just price of things
vendible.
The Rabbis teach, that he who sells a Commodity in gross, ought not to gain
above the fifth part, that is to say, if the commodity has cost five, he may
sell it for six, and not above.

Now I know not upon what rule or example they ground this proportion; it may
be they have taken it from that action of Pharaoh, who having purchased the
property of all the Lands of Egypt contented himself with the fifth of their
yearly rent, then when he made restitution to his subjects, Genesis 47.24. it may
be also, and with more probability, that they ground this upon that law which
is contented, that he who injustly detaines his neighbors goods, should
restore them with the addition of the fifth part over and aabove, Lev. 6.5. Number.
5.7.

But these reasons are not concluding, to prescribe an universal price or tax;
the justice of valuations consists not precisely in an A^ome, but in a
certain latitude, either more or less according, to circumstances.

A Question: if he that has made restitution of the goods unjustly detained,
as also of all the profits and interests, and recompensed all the losses, has
he sufficiently discharged his conscience?
Zacheus was not content to restore fourfold for all that he had stolen, but
also he bestows on the poor the half of what remained of his goods lawfully
gotten, Luke 19.8. Now though this example does not serve as a rule in all its
measures, yet it is founded on a rule, in respect of its matter and substance.

He that has done evil is bound by the law of true repentance, to do good
also; but this is not properly to do good, when one repairs only the evil
which he has done; he therefore that restores only what is not his own,
cannot be said by this action to have don good to his neighbor; for after
restitution of that which he detained from another, he is bound also to give of
his own where charity requires: the greatness also of his bounty must answer in
some fit proportion, to the greatness of the robbery committed by him; for he
that has done much evil, is obliged to do also much good; not to pay the
interest of Gods justice, which no man can satisfy, but to express the fruits
of repentance, which cannot be sincere, if it endeavors not to exceed the
greatness of the evil, by the greatness of the good. So he that has restored
all, has not as yet cleared his conscience, because for detaining another man's
goods, he must give some of his own, according to the greatness and extent of
the evil he had done him. He that makes restitution of ill gotten goods remains
yet charged with great obligations.

Sacrilege the first crime committed in the Church of Israel, after they
entered into Canaan. And the first in the Christian Church.
To rob God is a more heinous sin, then to rob man; yet it is held a thing
indifferent even among those, who are conscientious in all other things: yea,
many there are who think it a point of the true Religion, to suppress and
annihilate all that their predecessors have consecrated to the service of God;
as though one could not be sufficiently reformed except he commit Sacrilege:
this was the first sin that the Israelites perpetrated in the land o^ Promise,
and in the first City they Conquered, to wit, in Ierico, Josh 7.1, etc. And
this was also the first sin that appeared in the Christian Church, committed by
Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.1, etc. This fata^ sin of the Church has been
punished in both these beginnings, as well that of the Israelites, as that of
the Christians, by miraculous and exemplary Judgments, to show how excreable
this crime is in the eyes of Almighty God.

The IX. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.
Whether it be more injurious to call our neighbor fool, or knave? And why a
man glories rather to be esteemed good then wise?
IT is not only a reproach to ascribe wickedness to our neighbor, but also to
accuse him of folly unjustly. Now which of these two kinds of calumniation be
most criminal, is a disputable question; yet a man is more sensible, (chiefly
he that is of any spirit) if he be called a fool, then a wicked man. For
although that outwardly, and in regard of inconveniences, men are more troubled
if they be called wicked, yet inwardly, and in their secret, thoughts, they are
more offended, if they be reputed fools: The reason is, because every one
naturally desires to be thought a man, that is a reasonable creature, of which
degree he thinks himself degraded, if he be taxed of folly, which is the want
of judgment or reason, and indeed essential to man. So divine justice
condemns him to greater punishments, who calls his brother fool, then him
that is angry without cause, Mat. 5.22.

But then, how comes it, that no man (except he be a fool indeed) dare take
upon him the title of wise; and yet every one dare call himself good, the cause
also is plain; for though every man believes himself to be reasonable, and is
offended at the name of fool, yet he knows that the name of wise, includes
qualities not common to all, and which are not in the power of every one, for
to have a good natural understandding, a quick apprehension, a good judgment,
are perfections which every one cannot have, though he would never so fain; but
to be good, that is to have moral goodness, consisting in civil conversation
only, there are none who think not themselves capable thereof: therefore, as
every one believes he may be a good man if he will, so every one dares call
himself good, and that boldly, because he knows that common belief gives him
power to be so: but as for wisdom, which we know depends not on the will of any
person, none dare so boldly and openly assume this title.

An Oservation upon this; That in the Scripture God is oftener angry with man's
wickedness, then he uses to laugh at their folly.
We may speak the truth irronically, God himself uses sometimes this figure,
namely, then, when he mocks Idolaters, and such as trust in Soothsayers, he
invites them to try if their gods and Astrologers can deliver them, Judge.
10.14. Ier. 8.28. Isa. 47.13. and then also when he mocks those who trust to
the wisdom or power of Kings, Hos. 13.10. truly man's folly deserves as much to
be mocked, as his malice is worthy of our indignation: yet there is oftentimes
more cause to be angry with the wickedness of the world, then to laugh at its
vanity. So the Scripture sets out to us, how God is oftener angry with the
wickedness of men, then he uses to laugh at their folly, and even then when he
does mock them, he is most incensed against them. Psalm 2.4, 5.

Is it lawful to divulge false news, if it may serve for the public good?
For example, to appease a discontented people, or to encourage them when they
are afraid; or to disperse a tumultuous conspiracy; or to divert the plots of
an Enemy; Politicians make no scruple among other of their inventions to spread
a false report, when they think it may produce some good effect: this seems to
be countenanced by that of the Prophet Elisha, who led the Syrians into
Samaria, making them believe, that he would conduct them elsewhere, 2 Kings 6.
but to leave the opinions of Expositors upon that extraordinary example; the
general rule of truth is still firm, for if it be not lawful to lie even for
the glory of God, how much less for other causes; for is it reason that any
estate, or weal public should be of greater consideration with us, then God
himself.

Why it is lawful sometimes to make show of evil, but never lawful to make
show of good.
There is great odds between a formal lie, and a simple fiction, or
resemblance; for the one is altogether vicious, the other sometimes lawful, but
with a distinction: We do not call him an Hypocrite who makes show of evil,
which he has not, but him who makes show of the good he has not; the first is
sometimes lawful, the other is never allowable; it is lawful for a good man to
counterfeit the naughty man, as Solomon made show to dispatch the poor infant,
1 Kings cap. 3. but it were cousnage if a wicked man should counterfeit a good
man; its lawful for a learned man to play the ignorant, but it were ridiculous
presumption in an ignorant to make show of learning; its lawful for a wise man
to play the fool, as David did in the Court of Achis, but but its a trancendant
folly for a fool to counterfeit the wise man; its lawful for a mild man to
make show of rigor, as Joseph did outwardly to his brethren, but there is
nothing more detestable, then for a cruel man to make show of mildness; and
lastly, it is lawful for a friend to counterfeit the enemy, but for an enemy to
play the friend, is horrible treachery.

Counterfeiting therefore is lawful in the one, but not in the other; good and
evil in respect of their essence lodge within man, not according to outward
appearance; the inside may be good, though it does not always appear outwardly
so, but the outside can never be good, if there be not goodness within: hence
it is that sometimes good under the shape of evil is lawful, but evil is never
lawful under the shape of good.

We may know a wicked man; but it is impossible to know a good man.
If I find a man doing wickedly, I am not deceived, if I hold him for a wicked
man; but when a man does all the good he can, yet this is no infallible mark to
assure me that he is a good man; for many do good things, either out of
Hypocrisy, or some interest; such will give all they have to the poor, yea,
will suffer willingly Martyrdom, who notwithstanding are void of Charity, 1
Cor. 13.3. the works they do have truly a superficial goodness, but abusive,
because the inside is naught. As true goodness then lodges within the heart,
which to us is unknown, so we cannot know if such a man is truly good.

But then how shall we know him to be wicked, seeing wickedness as well as
goodness has its abode within the heart? The reason of this difference is
plain; an evil action never proceeds from a good heart, but an action that is
outwardly good may proceed from an evil heart.

When the Scripture speaks of any man in Hell, it never names the man; and when
it does name him, it never expresses the name of Hell; an observation upon
this matter.
The Parable in St. Luke chap. 16. names him who is in Abraham's bosom, to
wit, Lazarus, but gives no name to him that is in Hell! Only in general, calls
him a rich man. I will omit the reasons which some allege for this, and will
only say, that the Scripture never nominates those whom it mentions to be in
Hell torments; and for this cause it is, that the rich man's name is past over
in silence, whereas Lazarus is called by his name; so it speaks of diverse
spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. that is to say, in Hell, but mentions none of
them by name.

On the other side, when it names any that is dead in perdition, yet it never
says punctually, that he is in Hell; after Judas the Traitor had hanged
himself, the Holy Ghost who inspired the Apostles, was not ignorant where the
soul of that wicked wretch was; yet he says nothing else, but that he was gone
into his place, Acts 1.25.

Now if God himself who knows the names of those which are in Hell, does still
forbear to utter them; how much more careful should we be, to refrain our
selves in our verdicts, when we speak of the state and condition of those who
are dead; although that his end may in some sort induce us to judge
sinistrously: How rash then are they who dare insert into a Catalogue the names
of those who are damned.

The X. COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not covet, etc.
A sin committed by rule and order is more enormous, then that which is done in
disorder and confusion.
A Sin that is committed with judgment, order, and formality, is so much the
more detestible: He that kills in cold blood, at leisure, and with Ceremony, is
more blamable, then he that kills raishly, and without formality: the reason
is, because in the one, the understanding which is man's Counselor acts with
complacency; but in him who is transported with passion, it has small power:
as then man is not man without understanding, so it seems that he who offends
without the concurrence of the intellect, should not have his offense in so
high a degree imputed to him: hence it is that we excuse mad men, when in their
frantic fits they commit any outrage. Briefly, the more understanding there is
in any crime, the more enormous it is, and a sin done orderly, is the more
irregular.

The diversity of conflicts in man against himself.
That which I am to speak here is known sufficiently, touching the diverse
conflicts that be within man: but after the descriptions which have been given
by diverse, and will be material to reduce them into a brief summary; now the
chief combats we are to speak of, be these.

Between one Passion and another; as sometimes fear is opposite to
covetousness, and so one vice is encountered by another, as ambition is
sometimes restrained by avarice, or pleasure.

Between reason and the passions, as we have a thousand examples for this.

Between reason and natural sense; so some will be content to lose an arm for
the preservation of the whole body; so David abstained from drinking the water
of Bethlem, although he was pinched with great heat and thurst, 2 Samuel 23.16,
17.

Between the conscience and the will, as oftentimes the one of these two
resists the other.

Between the memory and the will, as sometimes we remember that which troubles
us, and which we would willingly forget.

Between reason and reason it self, that is, one reason against another, as St.
Paul, was enclosed on both sides, having causes which obliged him to desire a
continuance of his life, and other reasons which made him willing to forsake
the world, and to be dissolved, Phil 1.22, etc.

Between sense and faith; as David having judged of things according to
appearance, concluded that in vain he had wasted his heart; but faith made him
retract his words, and use a language quite contrary, Psalm. 73.13, etc.

Between natural sense and godliness, as the Martyrs which naturally abhor
death, yet they received it with much alacrity; and as our Savior expressing
this reluctance, says to St. Peter, They will lead thee whither thou would
not, John 21.18.

Between the conscience and faith; the one casts us down by setting our sins
before us, the other raises us up, by the consideration of Gods mercy.

And lastly, between the flesh and the spirit; that is, between corrupted
nature and grace, which do strive against each other in all the faculties of
the soul; as truth and falsehood, justice and injustice, purity and impurity.
This, this is that intestine war, which sets at variance the understanding,
will, and affections, and indeed the whole man against himself, Romans 7.15, etc.

Why some see more easily the defects of the memory, and of other faculties of
the soul, then the defects of their judgment?
All unlawful desire presupposes a corruption of judgment: if reason which is
the eye of the soul were clear, all the other faculties would be pure, Matthew
6.22. but its hard for man to know when his judgment destroys him, or when it
is deceived; if our memory fail in any point, we presently take notice of this
defect, and likewise if our affections be faulty: but if our judgment miscarry,
it is a hard matter to find it. The reason of this difference is, because it is
with the judgment as with the eye, which seeeth all things except it self; our
judgment judges of the defects which be in the other faculties of the soul;
this is it which sees and discerns them; but it sees not its own defects
except by a kind of reflection, which is very weak and feeble; so that it can
with facility judge of the other powers and qualities which are with it in man,
but it can hardly judge of it self; whence it comes that a fool sees not his
folly, though he sees the other faults that are in him.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
The correspondency that is between the two Tables of the Law.
THE first begins with the honor due to God, from whom we have our being.

The second begins at the honor due to our parents, by whom God has given us
being.

The first forbids to make any image of God.

The second forbids to deface the image of God, that is, to kill men.

The first prohibits spiritual adultry, saying that God is jealous.

The second inhibits corporal adultery.

The first forbids to take Gods name in vain.

The second to bear false witness.

The first commands us to labor six days, that we may live only upon our own.

The second prohibits to take the goods of another.

The first commands a Sabbath or corporal rest for our selves, servants, and
cattle.

The second commands a rest and contentment of spirit, forbidding us to covet
our neighbors house, servants, and cattle.

And lastly, the scope of the first is that we love God:

Of the second that we love our neighbor.

All these correspondencies proceed from that which is between God and man;
whence arise those relations and resemblances which we find between the
Commandments of the first and second Tables.

There is love in God but not Faith and Hope.
Amongst the Prerogatives of love, above these other two; the Logical virtues,
this is considerable, that God loves, but he does not believe nor hope; for to
believe is an act of Faith, which is of things unseen. But what is there that
God sees not? and besides, what can be wanting to him, that he should stand in
need of hope; these two virtues are imcompatible with an infinite perfection.
This is then one of the preheminences of love, in that it is found in God; yea,
God himself is called Love, 1 John 4.16. and in this respect it is greater then
Faith and Hope.

Whether it is a greater defect, to want Faith or Charity?
This question depends upon another, viz. which of these two is the most
difficult, to wit Faith or Charity? For though both the one and the other be
the gifts of God, yet the one may be more hard and difficult to us, then the
other. Now though these two virtues are still together, (seeing it is
impossible for the one to be without the other) yet they are not always equal,
and in the same degree; the more common act of these two is charity; for we see
more examples of love then of faith: many Christians love God earnestly, who
notwithstanding have much difficulty to assure themselves of his promises.

One cause that makes the motions of love, more easy then those of faith is,
for that the objects of love are more intelligible and perceptible to our
understanding; for love has for its object the goodness of God, but faith has
for its object, his truth: now it is more easy for us to conceive that God is
good, then to understand how he is true, in all points which appear not to us;
and yet we are commanded to believe. As then the motion of faith is more
difficult then that of love; so he that wants the acts of charity is more
blameable, then he who is deficient in the acts of faith.

In all the History of that time which was before the law, the love of God was
never mentioned in express terms, but only the fear of God.
From the Creation till the Law, are reckoned twenty five thousand years, in
which great interval of ages, were many Patriarchs, and other persons famous
for piety; to whom God spoke many times, and in diverse manners. The sacred
story marks out their virtues, and names the fear of God, as the most
excellent amongst them, but never expresses their love toward God; its true,
that this fear or reverence was not without a true divine love, yet they are
distinct qualities; the one of which is named, but we never read of the other.
Abraham being in Palestin, said, That in that place the fear of God was not.
Genesis 20.11. Jacob swore by the fear of Isaac his father, that is to say, by the
name of the same God whom Isaac feared, Genesis 31.53. Joseph confessed he feared
God, Genesis 42.18. the midwives of Egypt are commended for fearing God, Exodus
1.17.21. In brief, before the Law was published, Religion and Piety was
expressed by the name of the Fear of God, and not by that of the Love of God;
and it is observable that the action of Abraham in offering his son for a burnt
sacrifice, whereby he did so highly witness his love to God, this action, I
say, is ascribed to his fear of God, without mentioning the love which he had
showed to him, Genesis 22.12. the first time that ever the Scripture did
express this phrase, of the Love of God, was after the repetition of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 6.5.

Now why the name of this great virtue was not uttered but after a long time,
and frequent mention of the fear of God? Seems to proceed from this, that among
the perfections of God, the first which he manifested to man, (as I observed
upon the Creed) was his power and greatness, Romans 1.20. So when our
understanding desires to know what the Divinity is, by this word, it conceives
a power eminent above all others: this is the first thought we have of this
subject; whence it follows, that the first impression it makes in man, after
he has begun to know God, is the fear which this supreme power gives to the
soul; and because this fear is the first motive by which man is induced to
submit himself to God; hence it is, that in the holy song, all religious
affections have been comprised under the name of the fear of God; and for this
cause this Fear was for a long time named, without mentioning expressly or
particularly, the Love of God; but when the wisdom of God had given large
instructions under the Law, it afterward expressed the commandment of loving
God, distinguishing the same Love from Fear, Deuteronomy 10.12. What is it that
the Lord thy God requires, but that thou Fear him, and Love him.

Of them who excuse their faults on this: That God has not given them more
understanding and judgment.
These men willing to excuse themselves, accuse God, as if their faults were to
be imputed to him: whereas on the contrary, the whole fault is in themselves;
the Law wills that we love God with all our mind; thou alleges, thou have but
little mind; but how little soever it be, have thou employed it all in the
service and love of God? Truly, there is no man that has lived according to
the measure and proportion of that understanding and judgment God has given
him. In brief, if a fool excuse himself on this, that God has not given him
more understanding; a wicked man will excuse himself on this, that God has not
given him more goodness: for this is a gift of God, as well as understanding.

In the duties of man toward God, forgetfullness is more culpable then
ignorance.
When we speak of divine things, many complain that they cannot retain them in
their memory, the defect whereof they accuse; but they think not how
forgetfullness is a sin, seeing the love of God requires a concurrence of all
the faculties of our souls, among which memory is one: the defect of which is
not a simple infirmity, as the vulgar people uses to qualify it; but such a
defect, as should be reckoned among the sins of omission, then when it imports
a remembrance of a considerable point, though it be not necessary, nor possible
to retain all the syllables in which it has been pronounced or written. As he
who forgets God is more criminal, then he that never knew God; even so he who
loses a lesson which has been taught him, is more culpable then he that
never learned it.

Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Whence comes it, that contrary to all other affections, this which man carries
to himself, has no bounds; and why this never fails, nor is subject to
diminution?
In the affections we have toward another, we feel and know even to what
degree we love him, more or less; but no man can tell to what hight he loves
himself; for this love has no bounds but runs in infinitum. Moreover the
affection that one bears to another, may be lessened or interrupted, or quite
annihilated, yet turned into hatred; but the love he bears to himself is never
blotted out, nor is it diminished, though never so little.

Among the reasons of this diversity, we may produce this: between every one of
us and another, there are differences of proximity: our affections move within
these intervals which have their measures and degrees. Now within these
distances many causes of diversion or aversion may intervene, which intercept
or turn aside the affections; but as there is no distance between a man and
himself, even so the love which a man bears to himself, it immediately fastens
to its object; so that between the one and the other, there is no place that
can admit the interposition of any contrary cause, the affection we bear to
another moves out of it self, but that which each man has to himself, moves
as it were in a circle continually round about it self.

Why the older we grow, the more we love our selves?
It is hard to believe that this natural love wh^^^ every one bears to himself,
and (...) born with us can receive any ^^^^ment, it is already great, and of a
high stature, even when we are as yet in the Cradle: some will say then, that
nothing can be added to such an affection, seeing it is so great in its very
beginning: But on the other side, it seems that it increases still, and
gathers strength and vigor, as man increases in years: in witness whereof, we
may allege that ordinarily a father does more love those children which are
born to him in his old age, then those he had before; as Jacob was more tender
over Benjamin, then over the rest of his children: I know other reasons may be
given for this increase of affection; but perhaps they proceed also from this
cause: Though all the children of one father are his flesh and blood, yet
notwithstanding the fathers affection toward himself being greater in his old
age, then before; this descends also in a greater measure, toward those
children which he begets in that age.

But there is another probability that shows the increase of men's affections
to themselves with the increase of their age; as long familiarity increases
the love that is between two persons; so that man, that has been long
conversant with himself, and has had long experience of his own fidelity, and
confident in his own directions, has reason to love himself more then before,
seeing he was not then so well acquainted with himself.

Why we do not envy another man's goodness?
He that loves his neighbor as himself, will never envy him: for this vice is
incompatible with love, 1 Cor. 13.4. It may be asked then, why men do envy the
greatness, riches, knowledge, ingenuity, courage, and other qualities of their
neighbors, but are never envious of their goodness, and piety? for some will
envy a man because he is in honor, or because he is rich, or valiant, or
eloquent; but they will never envy a man because he is good.

This proceeds from diverse reasons, either from the small esteem that men have
of goodness, in comparison of other things; or from this, that every one
persuades himself, that he can when he pleases be as good as another; or from
this, that goodness is so opposite to envy formally, that it cannot be envies
object, being so contrary to it; we cannot envy that in another, which we
cannot desire for our selves.

Diverse Duties of the Law.
A Conclusion of this Treatise.
Why Moses who wrought so great and many miracles, never raised any from the
dead?
HE that turned the waters into blood, who made fire and storms fall upon
Egypt, who divided the sea, and drew water out of the rocks; who wrought so
many miracles upon all the Elements, yet never restored any dead to life. If
one ask the reason, why this kind of miracle was not found among these other
supernatural acts, which made the Lawgiver so famous? It will be answered by
some, that this question is either unanswerable or unprofitable, notwithstanding
it is considerable, and the solution is sufficiently clear: for this answers
the quality of the law, which was given by Moses.

The Law considered without Christ, is a letter that kills; and the ministry
of Moses, is the ministry of death. 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. his office was not to give
life, but on the contrary to take it a way; in testimony of which, and to show
that the life and resurection is to be sought for elsewhere, then in the
Mosaical Law; Moses never received power to raise any from the dead, although
there wanted not occasions, which seemed to invite him to produce this miracle.

The Law continued from Moses, who had an impediment in his speech, till John
the son of Zachary, which Zachary was speechless, Luke 16.16.
It were needless to speak of that again which is so well known, to wit, in
what regard the Law was abolished, and in what respect it yet continues? The
Economy of the Old Testament, chiefly since Moses required the observation of
the Law, as a means to obtain justice and life by, if men did fulfill it; and
notwithstanding it made them understand, that by reason of their sins, the Law
could not pronounce them just, being in this regard impotent, and having its
mouth stopped, Romans 8.3.

This seems to have been mystically intimated, as well in the beginning, as
toward the end of that legal Economy; to introduce the Law, God made use of a
man, who had an impediment in his speech; for when Moses was enjoined to go to
Pharaoh, he excuses himself, by reason of his defect of speech, Exodus 4.10.
And to signify the abolition of the Law, then when its time was almost
expired, to make way for a more perfect Covenant, God made the legal Priests,
dumb, who last his speech in the very Temple, and at the time he should have
pronounced the blessing on the people, Luke 1.20, 21.22. thus the Law as well
at its entry, as at its departure, has showed, that it cannot bring us that
great benefit of justification with a full mouth.

Why God in speaking to man, uses more words, then when he is represented
speaking to the creatures which want understanding; and why he uses so many
words and repetitions to effect man's conversation, seeing he can convert him,
with one word only.
God has sometimes spoken, or caused speeches to be utterred to the creatures,
which want either understanding or ears: He commanded the Sun and Moon to stand
still, the Sea and Winds to be quiet, the Whale that it should disgorge Jonas,
and the Fevers that they should be gone; to obtain obedience from them, he
spoke to them but one word, and the effect was as ready as the command, for
Heaven, Earth, Elements, Plants, and the beasts know the voice of their
Sovereign Lord, and submit themselves to it without contradiction; but whereas
man is naturally refractory, and opposes himself to the will of God, he is not
content to speak to him in few words what his pleasure is, but incourageth him
with reasons, which he clears and inculcateth, and withal adjoyneth promises
and menaces.

Surely God could effect by one word only, that for which he uses such long
remonstrances; he makes himself to be obeyed sometimes, in saying only fellow
me; but to make men know how far they are departed from him, and how difficult
their conversion is; ordinarily he does not make them draw nigh to him, but by
degrees slowly, and after many summons.

Why the Scripture speaking of Virtue and Vice, does command or prohibit one
oftener then another.
For Example; it speaks oftener against avarice, then against prodigality,
though it condemns both. So against excessive care oftener then against
negligence; and so likewise it oftener recommends to us liberality then
frugality, though it mention both; the reason is plain enough, because avarice
is more general then prodigality; and on the other side there be more frugal
then liberal men: therefore the more common a vice is, the oftener it should be
cried down: on the contrary, a virtue which is found but seldom; ought to be
the oftener recommended.

We could produce many other passages upon these Subjects of Virtue and Vice;
but seeing we have undertaken only these observations which concern the
Decalogue in general, in each one of the Commandments; I pass to these which I
am to handle upon the Subject of Prayer.

FINIS.

