A LETTER From His Excellency, Robert Earl of Essex, To The Honorable House of
Commons: CONCERNING The sending of a Commission forthwith To Sir William Waller:

Wherein His Excellency declares himself to be confirmed in the justness of
the Cause, so long as he has one drop of Blood in his Veins.

Published by Authority.

Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. January 13. 1644.

A LETTER From His Excellency ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, To the Honorable House of
Commons:
SIR,
I Received an Order the last night, to desire me forthwith to send a
Commission to Sir William Waller, to command the Forces of Kent, Surrey, Sussex
and Hampshire, according to an Ordinance of both Houses; I am so ready for the
advancement of the present service he is now engaged in, and my will to
satisfy the desire of the Honorable House of Commons, as that I have sent down
a Commission accordingly: But finding expressions in that Order that might
intimate a neglect in me, and being confident of mine own Integrity to serve
both Houses, and to preserve the good opinion of the house of Commons, I shall
acquaint you that I sent a Commission by Mr. Nicolls, which he kept some days,
and then wrote earnestly to me for another more ample; I wondering why he
should keep it so long, and then send for another, deferred my Resolution,
until I came up; But this Order intervening, prevented me of asking the
reason: It is true, the Commission was not according as I usually grant them
(but it gave him full Authority for the present service.)

For the Reasons of my Limitations in the former Commission, I forbear to give
them; But whenever the Houses shall command me, I shall be ready to make it
appear, I did no more then I ought to do, having received so great a Trust from
the Parliament, in the discharge of my duty, and then to submit to their
further pleasures.

Sir, I shall desire you to believe, it shall be my greatest care, so to carry my
self, as that I may give a real account of my Actions, whenever it shall
please the Parliament to require it.

The charge I took, was not by my seeking (I knowing my own imperfections) but
not in the least way of Fidelity and constancy, and it was a great
encouragement to me, the noble and free offers of both Houses, To live and dye
with me; which has put a great confidence in me, that I shall never want your
just Protection and Assistance; And that you will take care of that Army that
has showed so much Faithfulness and Resolution in your services, and that God
has been pleased of his infinite goodness so to protect; And for my own part,
I am every day so confirmed in the justness of the Cause, that let the
strength I have be never so weak, I shall never desert the Cause, as long as I
have any Blood in my Veins, until this Kingdom may be made happy by a blessed
Peace (which is all honest men's Prayers) or to have an end by the Sword, which
is the intention of

Your assured Friend, ESSEX.
Essex-house, this 2. of Jan. 1643.
FINIS.

