Enchyridion PHYSICAE RESTITUTAE; OR, The Summary of Physics Recovered.

Wherein the true Harmony of NATURE is explained, and many Errors of the
Ancient PHILOSOPHERS, by Canons and certain Demonstrations, are clearly
evidenced and evinced.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley, and are to be sold by W. Sheares at the Bible,
and Robert Tutchein at the Phoenix, in the New-Rents in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1651.

The Authors Epistle.
TO THE HONOURERS OF Natural Light.
AFter I had lately withdrawn my self from public employments, and reprieved
my Soul from the dangerous attendants of a COURTIER's life, and had now ancor'd
my thoughts in a blessed retirement, I always had resounding the Echo of that
poetical passage in mine ears: Here is the Freedom the Soul gains,
Enfranchiz'd from her golden Chains.
Now began I to feel those thoughts of Natural Philosophy, always fostered by
me, though till now, as it were ill attended, to give a fresh and sprightly
Spring in my Soul. I could not but upon their return, give them a wonted and
merited Well-come, that I might by the gain of this inward and natural Light,
repair my voluntary ressignment of that outward and deceitful splendor:
Besides, by this course, I had hopes to wipe off a public guilt, for now did I
apprehend the charge of a desertour of public employments, and of the Laws of
my Country likely to fall upon me, therefore lest this might issue a deep
censure, I fled to that Sanctuary, the Study of the Occult, and almost
unsearchable Laws and Customs of Nature in the Universe, the common Country
of all, hoping a security in this study, and a protection from this Policy.
For certainly civil Constitutions will not decree any remarkable Amercement
upon him, who laying down the burden of those Troubles, does retire himself to
the general service of the World.

Now was my Soul rolling within it self thought concerning the Sovereigntie,
Laws, Order, Government, Harmony, Effects, Causes, yea, the unconceiveable
Riches of Nature; now indeed was I lost in admiration of these, which
astonishment, though it be an evidence of ignorance, yet it is also an
incentive to knowledge, for it causes the Soul to soar above, by which it is
enkindled with a burning desire to know what it is, as yet ignorant of, though
affected to.

My Soul being thus enflamed, brought several philosophical Constitutions to a
severe Text, and upon the touch, assented not to their Verity, because Nature
did seem to dart some weak and waining Light, as it were breaking forth upon
the confine and border of a scarcely discerned Truth, till at length, the Light
began so to rise, as to break through the encompassing Fogs, and to break into
my Soul, whereby it was not only made more resplendent, but also more
confident, not only to view the ground, but also to dig for the Treasure.

The first Errors of the Ancients, and which are the worst and radical
Errors that came into my thoughts, were those concerning the Principles of
Nature, concerning the first Matter and that Universal Form, from which all
things flow, concerning the Number of the Elements, their Qualities, their
Opposition, Situation, Reciprocation; when I had seriously turned these within
my thoughts, I laid hold of an Opinion different from the Current; neither was
the authority of ancient Philosophers, nor their ingenious, but
unsatisfactorie reasonings, able to divert my mind from that perpetual
devotion, in which it stood to the light of Nature. So now what I first
admired, I now affected, yea, that Love, which has no weapons but fiery
rays, struck my soul into a flame, to enter into the most secret and sacred
rooms of Nature.

But I was long in a suspensive Dispute with my self, whether it were my duty
to communicate to you, the Students of Philosophy, those secrets I have found,
suspicious lest it might prove a disgust to you, a danger to my self; for I
found Experience the best Counselor to give me warning to be wise by the
folly of others, and to learn to stand by their falls; for I always was musing
how many had wrackt their credit by scribbling, how our modern Wits are close in
their commendations, but lavish enough in their detraction of other men's
labors, how attempting their souls are in fancying and fostering follies, how
obstinate in the retaining a conceived Truth; yea, I considered it was not
only a project of difficulty, but also of danger, to pull up a received and
an acknowledged Opinion, and to implant a new and diverse.

But in this Conflict, (Ye most ingenious Assertours of Natural Light) the
victory fell upon the love of you, and of Truth, so that I was determined,
that since those had been the Motives to the Disquisition of these Truths, they
should also be the Incentives to their publication. Yet let me have this Boon
granted, that if you will be competent or just Judges, let not the swollen names
of Plato, Aristotle, and of any other prime Philosophers, be summoned as
convicting witnesses; or empannell'd as a condemning Jury, but lay aside their
nominal, though seemingly real authority, and bind not your souls to a
continued credulity of their positions; but preserve your Souls free to your
selves.

In the reading of the learned Monuments of former Ages, let not the popular
fancy of their general Applause, bewitch you into a blind Belief of all their
Notions. Far be it from me to stain their Credit, or detract from their
Learning, who always had exhibited by me almost a Divine Adoration, there is
no earthly glory competible to theirs: they were the Men that first took infant
Philosophy into their arms, and nourished it up to so incredible a strength
and stature, that those lofty souls seemed to have cut off from succeeding
Ages, the hope of an Addition to their Labors, and to an advancement of
Learning.

Yet as for the deep search of the winding creeks of Nature, and for the
exquisite knowledge of her concealed Mysteries, the growing Age of Philosophy,
even in its own judgment, did not comprehend them, these were brought forth by
the fertile Brains of future Times, they brought to light Obscurities, they
polished rough-hewn principles, they propt up perplexities. So did Knowledge
get its accomplishment by Age, and Truth its perfection by Time, which
demonstrates the vigor of our present years, and that the number of things we
know, is far less than of those of which we are ignorant.

Philosophy is not like a Garment, as that age should wear it or worse it, and
they that pretend a gray head to their errors, by this seek not so much to
patronize it, as to discredit it.

Forbear I beseech you, by an unadvised censure, to condemn me without plea, if
I shall seem to unsettle the boundaries of Philosophy, be not angry, and accuse
me as sacrilegious, but consider whether I do not aim at their settlement
rather than otherwise? whether I do not rather confirm than weaken her
privileges? whether I do not rather honor than impayr her Royalty? upon which
grounds I hope She will, as by way of requital, not deny me her assistance, as
a buckler against the delusions of Sophisters, and a breast plate against the
environed darts of either Envy or Ignorance. These Beasts will bark, the first
pining at another good, the second raging in its own clouds, both break into
the cultivated Gardens of Knowledge, and the delightful paradise of
Philosophy, and either snip or blast the endeavors of a more fortunate Genius.
These to no purpose strive to stop my course by their frights, I am seated
above their highest reach; as long as I can see the Deity of Truth, under her
patronage I walk, I work secure. Only be you pleased to accept these
sprinklings of my retirement, with the same soul it is presented, if any thing
seem in it to disrellish, deal so gently as that you may seem rather not to
comply, than wholly to refuse. I shall in the interim reach my end, if my pains
shall cause you to fall upon greater attempts with better success.

Enchyridion Physicae Restitutae. OR, A Summary of the Physics Recovered.
THE FIRST RULE.
GOd is an Eternal Being, an infinite Oneness, the radical Principle of all
things, whose Essence is an incomprehensible Light; his Power, Omnipotency;
whose beck is an absolute act. He that dives deeper, is swallowed up in a
trance and silence, and is lost in the abyss of unfathomed glory.

2. Most of the Ancients conceived the world from eternity to have been figured
in its Archetype, and Original, which is God, who is all Light: before the
Creation of the Universe he was a book rowld up in himself, giving light only
to himself; but, as it were, travailing with the birth of the world, he
unfolded himself, and that work which lay hid in the womb of his own mind, was
manifested by extending it to view, and so brought forth the Idaeal-world, as
it were in the transcript of that divine Original, into an actual and material
world. This is hinted by Trisgmegist, In Pimand.
when he says, That God changed his form, and that all things were in a sudden
revealed and brought to light. For the world is nothing else but the disclosed
image of an occult Deity. This beginning of the world the Ancients seem to have
denoted by the birth of their Pallas, out of the brain of their Jupiter, by the
Mid-wiffery of Vulcan, that is, by the help of divine fire or light.

3. The eternal Parent of all things, not less wise in governing, than
powerful in creating, did so orderly dispose the whole organical frame of the
world, that the highest are so intermixed with the lowest, and the lowest
interchangeably and inconfusedly with the highest, and have an Analogical
likeness, so that the extremes of the whole work by a secret bond, have a fast
coherence between themselves through insensible mediums, and all ^^^^gs do
freely combine in an obedience to their Supreme Ruler, and to the benefit of
the inferior Nature, only being subject to a dissolution at the will of him
who gave them their constitution. Wherefore it is well said of Hermes, In
Smarag. Tab
That whatsoever is below, has an assimulation to somewhat above.

He that transfers the sovereign order of the Universe to any Nature diverse
from the Nature of God, denies a God. For it cannot be just to conceive any
other uncreated Deity of Nature, as the Cause of the production or conservation
of the seve^al Individuals of this large frame of ^he world, besides that
spirit of the ^ivine Worker, which lay upon those first waters, and brought
forth the seeds of all things, confusedly rowld ^n the first Chaos, from their
power into act, and wheeling them by (...) perpetual alteration, does manage
them Geometrically by composition and resolution.

5. He that knows not the soul o^ the world to be that Spirit, the Creator and
Governor of the World, by its cont^^^ed infusion, o^ its breathing upon the
works of nature, and by its enlarged diffusio^ through all things, giving to
al^ things a set, but secret motion according to their kind: he is wholly an
Ignaro of the laws of the Universe for he that created, cannot but assume the
power of ruling what is created, and it must be acknowledged, that all things
have their creation, generation and conservation by the same Spirit.

6. Notwithstanding this, he thi^ shall grant Nature the honor of being the
second universal Cause attending on the first, and as it were an instrument
moved by it, and (...) giving, according to a material order, an immediate
motion to ever^ thing in the world, will not spe^^ what disagrees with the
opinion (...) Philosophers or Divines, who (...) that Natura naturans: i.
Nature giving nature: this, Natura naturata, Nature made nature.

7. He that is verst in the secrets of Nature, will acknowledge this second
Nature the attendant of the first, to be the spirit of the Universe, or the
quickening virtue of that light created in the beginning, and contracted into
the body of the Sun, and endowed with an hidden faecundity. Zoroaster and
Heraclit called this The Spirit of Fire, the invisible Fire, the Soul of the
world.

8. The order of Nature is nothing else than a large Roll of the eternal Laws,
which being Enacted by the highest Sovereign, and Recorded and written in
various leaves to innumerable people of a various nature, by the auspicious
power of which Laws, the frame of the Universe does accomplish its motions,
life and death always atttending on the margins of the last Volume, and the
other spaces being taken up by alternal motions.

9. The world is as it were a Smithswork made orbicular, the links of the chain
enclasping it, each the other, are the parts of the world, Nature as it were
deputed to sit in the middle, always present, and ever working, continually
repairs the changes and motions of all things.

10. The whole world, as it has its constitution from a threefold Nature, so
has it its distinction into a threefold Region, viz. The Super-celestial, the
Celestial, the Sub-celestial. The Super-celestial is that which is otherwise
termed the Intelligible, it is altogether spiritual and immortal, having the
nearest approach to the Divine Majesty. The Celestial is seated in the middle,
which having allotted to her the portion of the most perfect bodies, and being
replenished with spirits, does pour out by the conveyance of spiritual
channels, numberless efficacies and vital breathings, not enduring a
corruption, only having attained its period subject to change. Lastly, the
Sub-celestial, or Elementary Region, has its assignment in the lowest portion
of the world. This being wholly of a corporeal nature, does enjoy spiritual
gifts and benefits, (the chief of which is in life) by loan only, and upon
request, being as it were to repay Heaven for it. In the bosom of this Region
there is no generation without corruption, no birth without death.

11. It is enacted and settled by the Laws of the Creation, that the lowest
things should immediately be subservient to the middle, the middle to those
above, these to the Subpream Rulers beck. This is the Symmetry, the order of
the whole Universe.

12. It is the excepted privilege alone of the Creator, as he created all
things according as he pleased out of nothing, so to reduce what he has
created into nothing: for whatsoever being or substance has an impress from
him, cannot deny subjection to him, but is prohibited by Natures law, to return
to a Nonentity. Therefore Trismegist did truly assert, That nothing in the
world does die, but pass into a change, for mixed bodies have their composition
from the Elements, which by natures rotation are again resolved into the
Elements.

Lucret. nu. 2.
Hence is this sequel, that by Natures cost
All Is clothed with what is its own, nothing is lost.
13. The Philosphers did believe a first matter to be of an elder birth to the
Elements, but this as it was* but scarce apprehended by them, so was it as
briefly, and as it were in the clouds, and obscurely handled by them, they made
it void of qualities and accidents, yet the first subject of them without
quantity, yet by which all things have their dimensions, endowed with
simplicity, yet capable of contraries, without the reach of sensible knowledge,
yet the basis of sensible, drawn out through all places, yet unperceiveable
covetous of all forms, tenacious of none, the root of all bodies, yet not
sensible but conceiveable, only by an act of the intellect: lastly, nothing in
act, all things in aptitude. So have they laid a fancy for the foundation of
nature.

14. Aristotle more wary, though he believed the eternity of the world, yet
hinted a certain first and universal matter. In the discussion of this he used
sobriety and ambiguity, always avoiding its creeks and perplexities, so that
he opined it better to conceive Cap. 5. l. 3. de ort. and interitu.
one inseparable matter of all things, which yet has a respective difference,
from which, the first bodies with the rest, which are under sense, have their
subsistence; that this is the first principle of them, and not to be separated
from them, Cap. 1 and 2. de ort. and interitu
but always joined with a repugnancie, always subject to contraries, from which
the Elements are produced.

15. The Philosopher had been righter, if he had asserted that first matter
free from the conflict of Contraries, and disengaged from that pretended
repugnancy, since there is no contrariety inherent in the very Elements, but
what is the result of the intention of their qualities, as we are informed by
the daily experience of fire and water, in which, whatsoever opposition there
is, arises from the heightening of their qualities. But in the proper and true
Elements, which couple in the generation of mixed bodies, those qualities which
are in a remiss degree in them, are not repugnant each to other: for their
temperature does not admit a contrariety.

16. Thales, De Sariis Philo's Sopinion.
Heraclitus, and Hesiodus accounted water the first matter of all things, to
whose opinion the Writer of the holy Genesis seems to consent: This they call
an Abyss and Water, by which I guess they understood not our ordinary water,
but a kind of sum, or moist and dark vapor, roaving here and there, and
driven in an uncertain motion without any certain order.

17. I am not at present able to lay down any positive determination concerning
that first Principle of things, since it being created in the dark, could never
by man's invention be brought to light, therefore whatsoever the troup of
Philosophers and Divines do opine, whether these things are so or no, the
Author of Nature alone knows, therefore pardon is to be allowed to him that in
dark Doctrines hits what is most likely.

18. Some of the Rabbines agreeing, conceived an ancient, but obscure and
inexpressible principle, the matter of all improperly called Hyl^, which is
more properly termed not so much a body, as a large shadow, not a thing, but a
dusky image of a thing, or the smoaky appearance of an Entity, a most dark
night, a covert of clouds, actually all nothing, potentially all things which
cannot be found but in fancy, and understood in a dream. Our imagination
cannot exhibit to us this doubtful principle, this depth of darkness, no more
than our talk can through the ears imprint the knowledge of the Sun into a man
that was born blind.

19. The same men had an opinion that God brought forth and created the nearest
approaching matter of the Elements and the World, to wit, that dark, formless,
and indigested Abyss out of that farthest Principle: the Scripture calls this
Mass sometimes Earth void and empty, sometimes Waters, although actually it
were neither, yet potentially and by way of assignment, it was both: we may
give a propable guess that it was not unlike to a dark smoke or vapor* in
which was closed a stupifying spirit of cold and darkness.

20. The division of the higher waters from the lower, expressed in Genesis,
seems to be done by the severing the subtle from the thick, and as it were a
thin spirit from that smoaky body; there was needful therefore of that
lightsom spirit proceeding from the Word of God. For light, which is a fiery
spirit, by separating things of a diverse nature, did drive down the thicker
darkness from the nearest and highest Region, and uniting the matter of one and
the same kind, being of a thin and a more spiritual substance, inflamed it as
an unquencheable oil, to burn before the Throne of the Divine Majesty. This is
the Empyraean Heaven, seated between the Intellectual and Material heaven, as
the Horizon and Finitor of each, receiving spiritual endowments from that
above, and deriving them down to the inferior adjoining middle heaven.

21. Reason required that this dark Abyss, or next matter of the World, should
be watery and moist, that it be the better subject to be attenuated, and that by
this flux of the matter by attenuation, the whole frame of the Heavens and of
the rest of the Fabric, might issue forth, and might be laid out in a
continuous body. For it is the property of moisture to flow, and the continuity
of every body is the effect of the moisture of it. For moisture is the glue and
joyncture of Elements and bodies. But fire acting upon moisture by heat, does
rarifie, for heat is the instrument of fire, by which it does act two opposite
works by one and the same labor, separating the moist nature from the earthy,
and by rarifying that, condenseth this: So that by the separation of the things
of a diverse, proceeds a congregation of things of the same nature. By this
first principle of Chemistry, the uncreated spirit, the artifex of the world,
did distinguish the confused natures of things.

22. The Architectonique Spirit of the world began the work of Creation from
two universal principles; the one formal, the other material, for otherwise
what is the meaning of the words of the Prophet, Genesis 1. God created the Heaven
and the Earth? etc. unless that in the beginning of the information of the
matter, he distinguished it into two chief principles, a formal and a material
Heaven and Earth; by the word Earth, is to be understood that dark, and as yet
unshaped mass of the waters and Abyss, as is apparent by the subsequent words,
(The Earth was void and without form, and darkness was upon the face of the
depth, etc.) which the Creator did shut in and comprise within the highest, to
wit, the Empyrean Heaven, which is Natures first formal, though farthest
principle.

23. For the Spirit of God, which is the brightness of the Deity, being poured
out upon the Waters, that is, upon the moist and large surface of the depths,
in the very moment of creation, light presently broke up, which in the
twinkling of the eye, surprised the highest and more subtle part of the
matter, and encompassed it as it were with a fringe, and border of light, as
that lightening is which is darted from the East to the West, or like a flame
which fires the smoke. So was the birth of the first day, but the lower portion
of darkness devoid of light, continued night, and so the darkness had its
division into day and night.

24. Concerning that first Heaven, that formal Principle, it is not declared to
have been void, empty, and wrapped in darkness, which is a sufficient evidence,
that that Heaven which was first spread out, was forthwith severed by the light
from the subjacent dark Mass, by reason of the nearness of the Glory and
Majesty of God, and the presence of that lightsom Spirit flowing from it.

25. There was therefore in the beginning two Principles of all things created,
one full of light, and bordering upon the spiritual Nature, the other wholly
corporeal and dark; the first, that it might be the Principle of motion, light,
and heat; the second, of a drowsy, dark, and cold being: the first active and
masculine, the other the passive and feminine Principle. On the part of the
former comes a motion in the Elementary world to Generation, from whence
proceeds life; from the other part comes the motion to corruption, the
principle of death. So that is the double fringe or border of the lower world.

26. But because Love is extensive, and acts without from it self, the Divine
Nature impatient of its solitude, and taken with its own beauty in the light
already created, as in a Mirror, and earnestly desirous to enlarge it, and to
multiply his image, commanded that light to be extended and propagated. Then
the light, the fiery spirit issuing from the Divine understanding, and rolling
it self in a Circulation, began to work upon the nearest darkness, and having
prevailed upon it, and sunk it down toward the Center, and there sprung forth
the second day, and there was seen the second mansion of light, or the second
Heaven, comprizing all the airy Region, in whose higher Region are so many
Torches kindled and scattered: In the lower are seated the seven wandering
Stars according to their order, that they might, as so many Presidents and
Rulers, give orders by their light, motion and influence to the subjacent
Nature.

27. And least any thing should be defective in this great work, already drawn
out in the mind of God, the same Spirit by his glittering and fiery sword beat
off the banded darkness, and that shade that lay under him, and thrust it down
into the Center of the Abyss, so the lowest part of the Heavens was
enlightened, which we rightly term Air, or the lowest Heavens: Then was the
third day. But the darkness which at first did overcast the whole face of the
Abyss, being thrust down by the supervening light into the lowest Region, was
so thickened by reason of the straitness of the room, and the binding force of
the Cold, that it passed into a huge mass of a watery Nature, the Kernel and
Center of the whole workmanship, as it were a dale and heap of darkness, being
poised in the midst of the waters, and bound up of the dregs and thick matter
of the Abyss, into a firm and dark body of earth. After this, upon the driving
of the Spirit, the waters fled from the surface of the earth, casting
themselves about the borders of it, and there appeared dry land, that it might
produce almost an infinite number of several sorts of Plants, and receive as
guests so many kinds of creatures, especially Man the lord of all, and provide
to them food, and to man a plentiful sufficiency of all conveniences. The
Earth therefore and the Water made one Globe, by reason of whose thickness, the
shadow, the image of the dark Abyss, does continually beset the whole Region of
the Air bordering upon it, and opposite to the Sun, for it shuns and flies the
assayling light, and so in the assault is upon a continual retreat.

28. That Light, The creation of the Sun
which upon the conquest and destruction of the darkness, had seized upon and
spread it self upon the parts of the Abyss, it seemed best to the great
Creator to contract into that most resplendent and illustrious for quantity
and quality, for bigness and beauty, that Globe of the Sun, that as the Light
was more narrowly pent, so it might be more efficaciously powerful, and might
dart its beams with more vigor, as also that the created Light, the nearest
approaching nature to the divine glory, proceeding from an uncreated unity,
might through its unity be poured out upon the creatures.

29. From this glorious lamp of the world do all the other bodies borrow light;
for that dark shade which we sensibly perceive in the Globe of the Moon, by
reason of the neighboring earth, and the extension of her shadow, we may
credibly guess the like to be in the other globous bodies, though not
perceivable by reason of their distance. Indeed the prime and most principal
nature of sensibles, the fountain of light, ought to be one, from which these
things below might receive the breath of life. Whence is that true saying of
the Philosopher, The Sun and man beget man.

30. It was not an improbable assertion of some of the Philosophers, That the
soul of the World was in the Sun, and the Sun in the Center of the whole. For
the consideration of equity and nature seem to require, that the body of the
Sun should have an equal distance from the fountain and rise of created Light,
to wit, the Empyrean Heaven, and from the dark Center the Earth, which are the
extremes of the whole Fabric, whereby this lamp of the world, as a middle
Nature and Joyner of both Extremes, might have its site in the middle, that it
may the more commodiously receive the rich treasuries of all powers from the
chief Spring, and upon a like distance convey them to things below.

31. Before the Contraction of this light into the body of the Sun, the earth
spent an idle time in its solitude, looking for a male, that being impregnated
by his copulation, it might bring forth all sorts of creatures, for as yet it
had been delivered only of abortives and Embryoes, to wit, of Vegetables
only. For the weak and faint heat of that scattered light, could not get the
conquest of that moist and cold matter, nor put forth its virtue in any higher
actings.

32. From the light therefore the Elements, as well as the first matter, had
their information, and so attained a joint nature of light, and by kindred a
fast friendship betwixt themselves, not according to the vulgar opinion, an
hatred and quarrel; they embrace each the other with a common bond of
friendship, that they may join themselves to the making up of several mixed
bodies, according to their several kinds. But the light of the Sun being of a
far greater power than this former, is the Form of all forms, or the Universal
form which does convey all natural forms in the work of generation, into the
disposed matter and seeds of things. For every particular nature has within it
a spark of light, whose beams do in a secret manner attend with an active and
motive power.

33. It was necessary that the entire portion of the first matter, allotted to
this lower Region, as well as the Elements who did flow from it, should be
seasoned from the beginning with a light tincture of that first Light, whereby
they might be the better fitted to receive that greater and more powerful
light in the information of mixed bodies. So fire with fire, water with water,
light with light being homogeneous bodies, have a perfect union.

34. From the sight and efficacy of the Sun, we may infer that he is in the
stead of an heart to the Universe, for from him is life derived to all parts,
for light is the Chariot of life, yea, the fountain and next cause, and the
souls of creatures are the beams of that heavenly light, which do breath life
into them, exempting only the soul of man, which is a ray of the
Super-celestial and uncreated Light.

35. God has imprinted in the Sun a threefold image of his Divinity, the first
in his unity, for Nature cannot away with a multiplicity of Suns, no more than
the Deity can with a plurality of Gods, that so one may be the spring of all.
Secondly, in its Trinity, or his threefold office. For the Sun, as Gods
Vicegerent, does dispense all the benefits of Nature by light, motion, and
heat: from hence is life, which is the supreme and most accomplished act of
Nature in this world, beyond which cannot go, unless backward. But from Light
and Motion issues heat, as the third in the Trinity proceeds from the first and
the second Person. Lastly God, who is the Eternal Light, Infinite,
Incomprehensible, could express and demonstrate himself to the world only by
light. Let none therefore wonder, why the Eternal Sun did beautify that most
excellent draught of himself, which was his own making, that heavenly Sun with
so great endowments, for in him has he pitched his pavilion.

36. The Sun is a transparent Mirror of the Divine Glory, which being seated
above the sense and strength of material creatures, did frame this glass, by
whose resplendency the beams of his Eternal Light might be communicated by
reflection to all his works, and so should by this reflection be rendered
discernable. For it is beyond the capacity of any mortal to have any immediate
view of that Divine Light. This is the Royal eye of the Divinity which does
confer by his presence, life, and liberty to his suppliants.

37. The last work of this Great Worker, and as it were the corolary and
shutting of all, man enters (...) Summary of the Worlds Fabric, (...) small
draught of the Divine Nature. The Creator deferred his making to a part of the
sixth Light, and the last of all his working, that ^he rich Furniture of
Nature, and ^ll endowments of things both above and below, might bring their
confluence to the humane nature as to another Pandora. Thus the things of the
world being ordered, man wanted only to be annexed as the perfection of all;
whereby nature, being now strengthened by a various light, might bring into his
perfect temperature more refined Elements, and that there might be the best
Clay for the forming of so exquisite a Vessel. Yea, the lower Globe and the
inhabitants of it did require such a Governor, lest otherwise they might
refuse his Rule.

38 Upon the sixth day from the Creation, the third day of the Suns rising, did
man rise out of the Earth: by the time of his production, and the number of the
days is shadowed forth a great mystery. For as upon the fourth day of the
Creation the whole light of the Heaven was gathered into the single body of
the Sun, and on the third day from the making of the Sun, which was the sixth
day from the beginning of the Creation, the Clay of the Earth received the
breath of life, and was formed into a living man the image of God: So on the
fourth Millenary day from the beginning of the world the uncreated Sun, viz.
the Divine Nature, infinite and never before comprehended within any bounds,
was willing to be comprised, and in a manner shut into the cage of an humane
body. Upon the third day or millenarie (for a thousand years with God are but
as one day) after the first rising of that Sun, and about the end of the sixth
day, to wit, of the millenarie from the Creation, shall fall out the glorious
Resurrection of the Humane Nature in the second coming of that supreme Judge,
which was also praesignified to us by his blessed Resurrection on the third
day. So did the Prophet in his Genesis roll up the secret age and destiny of
the world.

39 Although the Almighty, according to his pleasure, created the World, yet
could have brought it out of darkness into light (if his will had so been) in a
moment, and by a beck: for he said, and it was so. Yet the order of Creation of
principles, and successively of the natures according to their times, was set
in the mind of God, which order, rather than the work it self of Creation, that
sacred Philosopher seems to describe in his Genesis.

40 There seems to have been in the beginning a threefold way of the
information of the first matter. For in what portion of the matter there was an
irrational lightsom form, and without proportion above the rest, as in the
Empyrean heaven, where the light first seized upon the matter, then the form
having as it were an infinite virtue, did swallow up its matter, and translated
it into a nature almost spiritual and free from any accident.

41 But where the virtues of the form and matter did meet in an equal poyz and
a just equallitie, according to which, the aetherial heaven, and the celestial
bodies are informed, there the action of the light, whose force in acting is of
greatest power, did proceed so far, that it did rescue its matter from all
original blemishes, as also from the loathsome infection of corruption after a
wonderful sort, by illumination and attenuation, and this is to be accounted
as a truly perfect information.

42 The third way of informing the matter is, in which a weaker form remains,
as it often happens, though after diverse ways in this our Elementarie region,
in which the appetite of the matter, which is an evidence of weakness and
imperfection, luxuriating, and lavishly springing in its basis and root, cannot
be sufficiently satisfied, by the reason of its remotion and distance from its
former principle, neither can this weakness be cured. Hence the matter not
being fully informed according to its desire, languisheth under the desire of a
new form, which having attained, it does bring to it, as to its husband, the
dowry, a large wardrobe of corruption and faults. This sullen, perverse
wrangling and inconstant matter, does always burn for new beds, greedily wooing
all forms which it longs for if absent, hates, if present.

43 By which it is evident, that the leaven of alteration and corruption, and
at length the fatal venom of death do happen, not from the repugnancie of
qualities, but from an infected Matrix, and from the menstruous poison of a
dark matter, and this causes it so to fall out both in elements and in the
mixed bodies of this lower region: because the form weakened and insufficient by
its defilement and imperfection, and being not of a just poiz and assize, could
not purge it out in its first and radical union. This is confirmed by holy
Writ, in which we may observe our first Parent was not created according to his
matter immortal, but that he might be guarded from the tincture and corruption
of the matter, and therefore God set in Paradise a Tree abounding with the
fruit of Life which he might make use of as his assertour and guardian from the
frailty of his matter, and the bondage of death, from the presence and use of
this he was sequestrated after his fatal fall, and final sentence.

44 Two there were therefore first principles of Nature, before which were
none, after which all, to wit the first matter, and its universal form, by the
copulation of which issued the Elements as second principles, which are nothing
else but the first matter diversely informed; out of the mixture of this is made
the second matter, which is the nearest subject of accidents, and does receive
the various turns of Generation and Corruption. These are the degrees, this the
order of the Principles of Nature.

45. Those who annex to the Matter and Form, a third Principle, viz. Privation,
do blast Nature with a Calumny, far from whose purpose it is to admit a
Principle that shall go counter to her intention, but her end in Generation
being to obtain a Form, to which Privation is adverse, certainly this cannot be
part of Natures aim: They had spoken more to the purpose, if they had made Love
a principle of Nature, for the matter being widowed in its form, covets eagerly
the embracing of a new. But Privation is the mere absence of a form, upon which
ground the honorable title of being a principle of Nature, is no way due to
it, but rather to Love, which is a mediator betwixt that which desires, and
that which is desired, betwixt what is beautiful, and what is deformed,
betwixt matter and form.

46. Corruption is far nearer than Privation to the principle of Generation,
since that is a motion disposing the matter to generation by successive degrees
of alteration; but Privation acts nothing, is of no work in generation, but
Corruption does both promove and prepare the matter, that it may be put in a
capacity of receiving the form, and as it were a mediatrix, does act
Pander-like, that the matter may the more easily get a satisfaction for its
lust, and by his help may the sooner obtain the copulation of a form:
Corruption therefore is the instrumental and necessary cause of Generation. But
Privation is nothing else but a mere vacancy of an active and formal principle:
and darkness was upon the face of the depths, to wit, of the uninformed and
dark matter.

47. The harmony of the Universe consists in the diverse and gradual
information of the matter. For from the poized mixture of the first matter and
its form, flows both the difference of the Elements, and of the Region of the
world, which is briefly, but truly set out by Hermes, when he said, That
whatsoever is below, has an assimulation with somewhat above. For things above
and below, were made of the same matter and form, differencing only in respect
of their mixture, site and perfection, in which the distinction of the parts
of the world, and the latitude of all Natures, are handled.

48. We must believe that the first matter, after it had received information
from the light, and was distinguished by it into several things, did go wholly
out of it self, and was transmitted into the Elements, and that which was
compounded by them, and was wholly exhausted in the consummation of the work of
the Universe, so that those things which were closed in her, being brought
forth, and exposed to view, she began wholly to lie hid in them, and we must
acknowledge it is not to be found in a separation from them.

49. Nature has left us a shadow of that ancient confused Mass, or first
matter in dry water, not wetting, which rising out of those impostumes of the
earth or Lakes, does spring forth big with a manifold seed, being also volatile
by reason of its lightness through its heat, from which being coupled with its
male, he that can take out and separate, and join again ingeniously the
intrinsecal Elements, he may well boast that he has gained the most precious
secret of Art and Nature; yea, a Compendium or brief of the Heavenly Essence.

50. He that searches for the simple elements of bodies, separated from all
mixture, takes a labor in vain, for they are unknown to the most piercing
judgments of men, for our common elements are not the simple element, yea,
they are inseparably mixed one with another. The Earth, Water, and Air, may be
more truly called the Parts that perfect and complete the Universe, rather than
Elements, yet they may be rightly termed the Matrix's of them.

51. The bodies of Earth, Water, and Air, which are sensibly distinguished by
their spears, are different from the elements which Nature makes use of in
the work of Generation, and which make up mixed bodies, for these in their
mixture in respect of their thinness, are not discernable, but are barred from
the senses, until they conjoyn in a condensed matter and body.

Lucret. lib. 2.
There never has a creature been,
Whose principles were to be seen:
But those things which fill up the inferior Globe of the Universe, as too
thick, impure, and indigested, are debarred from the right of perfect
generation, for they are rather the shadows and figures of elements, than true
Elements.

52. Those Elements which forming Nature makes use of in her mixtions, and in
making bodies, although they are not to be found out before mixtion, yet in the
finished work, and in the completely mixed body, because their parts have a
correspondence proportionable with the parts of the world, and have a kind of
Analogy with them, we may call them by the same names, the more solid parts,
Earth; the moister, Water; the more spiritual, Air; the inborn heat, Nature's
fire; the hidden and essential virtues; a man may safely term Heavenly and
Astral Natures, or the Quint-Essence, and so every mixed body may by this
Analogy triumph in the title of Micro-cosme.

53. He that did appoint the first Elements for the generation of bodies, alone
knows how out of them to make all particulars, and to resolve them, being made,
into them again.

54. Let not them therefore refuse the Light, who working about the Elements of
Nature, either in the production of some body from them, or the resolution of
some into them, create their own trouble, since these Elements are only
subject to the dominion of Nature, and delivered to her only from their
beginning, altogether unknown to all our art, and not compassible by our
endeavors.

55. The Element of Nature may be termed the most simple portion of the first
matter, distinguished by its peculiar difference and qualities, constituting a
part of the essence in the material composition of mixed bodies.

56. By the Elements of Nature, are denoted the material principles, of which
some have a greater purity and perfection than others, according to the greater
Power and Virtue of that form that gives the compleatment. They are for the
most part distinguished according to their rarity or density, so that those
that are more thin, and approach nearer to a spiritual substance, are therefore
the more pure and light, and so are the more fit for motion and action.

57. Upon this ground it was that reverend Antiquity did seign, that the whole
Empire of the world was divided between the three Brothers, the Sons of Saturn
as coheirs, because it acknowledged only three Elementary Natures, or rather
three parts of the Universe. For by Jupiter, the Omnipotent, who shared heaven
as his portion, armed with his treble-darted Thunderbolt, superior to the
rest of the brothers, what did those professors of mysteries understand, but
that the Heavens, being the Region of heavenly bodies, do assume a privilege
of Sovereignty over these inferior beings. But they placed Juno, wife to
Jupiter, to praeside over the lowest Region of the Heaven, or our Air, because
this Region troubled with vapors, being moist and cold is as it were in a
manner defiled and impure, and nearest approaching to a female temperament, as
also because it is subjected to the orders of the higher Regions, receive their
effects, and communicates them to us, twisting it self with more condensed
natures, and stooping them to the bent of Heaven. But because male and female
differ only in sex, not in kind, therefore would they not have the Air, or the
lower Heaven to be distinct in its essence and kind, as another Element from
the higher Heaven, but only diversified in place and by accidents. To Neptune
the god of the Sea, they attributed a dominion over the waters. By Pluto, the
lord of the lower parts, abounding in wealth, they denoted the Globe of the
Earth replenished with riches, with the desire of which the minds of men being
inflamed, are bitterly tormented. So that those wise men admitted of three
parts of the Universe, or if you please, of three Elements, because under the
Nature of Heaven they comprised the name of Fire, and therefore did they draw
Jupiter armed with his Thunder.

58. We are Scholars to experience in this, that all the bodies of mixed
beings, have their analysis and resolution into dry and moist, and that all
the excrements of creatures, are terminated by the same differences; from
whence it is clearly evident, that their bodies are made up only of two
sensible Elements, in which notwithstanding the other are virtually and
effectually. But Air, or the Element of the lower Heaven, is not the object of
our sense, because in respect of us it is a kind of spiritual being. The fire
of Nature, because it is the formal principle, cannot be wrought to any
separation or comprehension by any destruction by way of resolution, nor by any
art or artifice of man. For the nature of Forms is not subjected to the censure
of the Senses, because of its spiritual being.

59. The Earth is the thickest body of the Universe, therefore is it accounted
the heaviest and the center of it, we must assert its nature contrary to the
received opinion, to be accidentally dry, because it does retain most of the
close and dark nature of the first matter, but a shade and darkness are the
coverts of cold, from whence they fly the light, and are diametrically
opposite to it, but the Earth, in respect of its extreme density, is the mother
of shade and darkness, hardly passable by light and heat, therefore roughly
knit by an heightened cold. And for this reason black choler is to be esteemed
the coldest humor of all, because it is under the power of the Earth, the
Earth under Saturns, who is accounted the Author of a cold and melancholic
temperature. Further, those things that are ingendered in the bowels of the
Earth, of the substance of the Earth, as Marble and Stones are of a cold
nature, although we must otherwise conceive of metals, because they are rather
of an airy nature, and have in them sparkles of the Fire of Nature, and a
spirit of Sulphur congealing their moist and cold matter. Yet Mercury
surpassing the rest in moisture and cold, is beholding to the Earth for his
coldness, and to the Water for his moisture. It is otherwise with those things
that are produced in the Sea, as in Amber and Coral, and many other things that
have their beings from the Sea and fresh Waters, which as it is apparent, are
of a hot temper, so that we have this instruction both from reason and
experience, that the greatest coldness is to be attributed to the Earth, not to
the Water.

60. But dryness does agree to the Earth accidentally only, and in a remiss
degree; for it was created in the midst of the Waters, and the order of
beings required, that in respect of its gravity, being sunk in the Waters, it
should never separate from them; but the Creator using his Prerogative, having
removed the Waters, gave to it an open surface, that so there might be room
made both for the creation of mixed Beings, and for their habitation. The Earth
therefore was enfranchiz'd from its natural yoke of bondage and subjection to
the Waters, not by any order of Nature, but by a privilege of favor, that so
having its face wipt, it might lift up a dry visage to the view of the Heavens,
and might partake of the welcome light of the world.

61. Every cold and dry is averse from the faculty of Generation, unless it be
helped out by some eternal helps; therefore it was the will of the Supreme
Author of Nature, to heat the cold womb of the Earth with an heavenly fire,
and adjoined to the dry globe of the Earth the moist nature of Water, that so
by the mixture of two generative causes, moist, and hot, the sterility of the
Earth might be helped, and that by the mediation of the concourse and mixture
of all the Elements, the Earth might be made a natural Vessel for fruitful
Generation. Therefore all Elements, and all qualities are in the Earth.

62. The body of the Earth was rightly created by the great God of a spongeous
nature, that so there might be a receptacle for Air, Showers, and heavenly
Influences, and also that the moist vapors being expelled by the force of
inward heat, from the Center to the Superficies, through the porous passages of
the Earth, might by a mean putrefaction corrupt the seeds of things, and so
prepare for generation; these being thus disposed, receive that enlivening and
heavenly heat. For Nature has sunk in the depths a magnetic love, by the
actings of which they draw down, and suck out the efficacy and virtue of things
above, which do increase the strength of the information, and hasten the
sweetness of vital Air.

63. The heat that comes from the inwards of the Earth, is moist and impure,
and does corrupt by reason of the tainted mixture of Earth and Water; But the
most pure and heavenly does generate by excitation, dilatation, and furthering
the inbred heat to life, even that inbred heat which is hidden in the seeds of
things, and as Natures secret closed in their center. But because both these
heats are of the same kind, they have a joint and amicable operation in the act
of generation, and are inseparably united, until they are brought forth to life
and large vegetation.

64. Water is of a middle nature, betwixt what is thick and what is of a thin
nature, betwixt the Earth and the Air; Natures menstruum, a volatile body,
flying and not enduring fire, drawn forth by a moderate heat into a vapor,
assuming multiplied shapes, more unstable than Proteus.

65. The moist Element is Mercury, which sometimes assuming the nature of a
body, sometimes of a spirit, does attract to himself by his revolutions, the
virtues of superior and inferior Beings, and as it were receiving their
instructions, does trade in commerce as their agent or factor, amongst the
remotest natures of the Universe, neither will he leave his trafficquing till
all the Elements of the corruptible Nature receive their fixation and purgation
by fire, and there issue upon it an Universal Sabbath.

66. Water, being the nearest in nature to the first matter, does easily
receive her impress. The Chaos, the ancient Parent of all things, was a kind of
subtle and dark vapor, a kind of a moist dark substance, like a thin smoke,
from whose most subtle part the Heavens are drawn forth into order, which a
threefold difference divides into a threefold province; to wit, the Supreme,
which is the noblest, the middle which assumes the second place of dignity and
honor, the lowest is inferior to the other two both in site and honor. The
thicker substance of the matter went to the making of that watery heap, which is
a middle nature. The thickest part, which is as it were the dregs of the whole
Mass sat down to the bottom, and was settled for the globe of the Earth. The
extremities of this artifice, to wit, the Heaven and the Earth, did recede more
from the first state of their matter, and from their ancient shape; the Heaven
in regard of its great rarity and levity, the Earth in respect of its great
density and gravity. But the Water, which was a mean betwixt them, continued a
nature more like the first formless Abyss from whence it proceeds, so that with
ease it turns it self by rarefaction into smoke or vapor, which is the image
of the ancient Hyle, or first Matter.

67. Moisture is more proper to Water than Coldness, because Water is of a
greater rarity, and more lightsom than Earth, but those things which
communicate most of light are farthest off from cold; the mor^rarity there is
in any thing, the nearer vicinity there is to light. Wate^ retained the symbol
of moisture from the first matter the Abyss, as the Earth coldness. For the
Architect Spirit of the World divided the more thick parts into those two
nearly-allied Natures.

68. Coldness wooes Dryness, and invests it self with it where it is vigorously
predominant by the constriction of moist beings, and by the desiccation of
them, as is evident in Snow, Ice, and Hayl. For it is the work of Nature to
bind and dry the Water, than which nothing is more humid by the proper
instrument of Cold; yea, the principal and common subject of Heat and Cold, is
humidity, by both which it is so strongly assailed, till it be conquered: from
whence it falls out, that in Autumn so many dry leaves fall at the first cold,
that the stalks of feeble Plants upon the strength of Winter, in the height of
Drought, are void of moisture, and dry away: The cold penetrating does so
scorch, and makes so furious an assult upon the vital humors: hence proceeds
flaggy and withered age, at length death comes and cuts down all with his
well-set sickle, and sweeps you into his general Granary. How then can any one
conceive Cold to be friendly to Moisture, and to be its inherent property?
Since Nature suffers not the Elements to act against each other, lest they
should destroy and oppose each the others powers, but an intense Cold quickly
would bring under a remiss and weak moisture, and would swallow it up all by a
violent constriction: so that by this means one of the Elements being lost,
there would necessarily follow an imperfection in the work of the rest, and a
deficiency in the generation of all things. It is therefore not suitable to the
Law of Nature, to invest Water with the property of being cold in the highest
degree.

69. Out of these solider Natures of Earth and Water, does Nature extract her
Elements, by which she compacts Vessels and corporeal Organs: for out of the
commixture of both is made a clay, which is the next matter of things in
generation: for it is in stead of the Chaos, In which virtually and confusedly
are all Elements. Out of this clay was the first Father of mankind created, and
after all Generation issued from it. In the Generation of creatures, is a clay
made of the seed and the menstruum, from whence proceeds the living Creature.
In the production of Vegetables, the seeds do first fall into a subtle clay by
putrefaction, and then are wrought up to a vegetable body. In the generation of
Metals, there comes forth a clay from the perfect mixture of Sulphur and
Mercury, and their resolution in a fat Water, by which means the mettallick
bodies are indurated by a long decoction. In the Philosophical resolving of
metals, and in the creation of that Philosophical Secret, first is brought
forth a clay out of the seed of both parents purged and mixed.

70. Water is the base and root of all moistures, yea, it is moisture it self:
from which all moist things receive their denomination, therefore Water may be
rightly defined the Fountain of the moist Element, or the Spring of moisture,
whose property it is to wet by its liquour. But those things are termed humid,
which do in themselves according to a less or greater degree, contain a
moisture, or a watery liquor. Moisture is receivable of all qualities, so blood
and yellow choler are humors, endued with their own heat, although they have
their foundation in the Element of Water. Aquafortis and the like are
empowered with a burning and a fiery nature. The burning Water, and many other
essences which are extracted from oils and water, do abound in heat, although
the root of them, which is Water, be cold, because Nature does first imprint in
a moist eleme^t various resemblances and signatures of its powers, and does in
it en-root and infuse its principal and choice qualities. Moisture is the first
subject of Nature, upon which her prime care is bestowed, her first charge
laid out, by whose liquour it does dilute and mingle various colors, and
indelible tinctures: To it first do the spiritual qualities communicate
themselves, in it first do they take up their being and actings.

71. The lower Waters being divided into two, do occupy a double seat, for one
part of them brimming the Earth, does lean on it as it were as its proper Base,
and with the Earth makes but one Globe: the other part flying upward, does
range up and down the Region of the neighbor Air, and there making to it self
many masqued fancies of bodies, and various figures of several phantasms does
reave hither and thither, over-hanging the lower Region.

72. Always there is a great part of the Waters that keep above, and being
driven to and fro by the Caroach of the Wind, does post over diverse parts of
the Air, which was in this manner ordered from the Day of the Creation, by the
enacting of the Wisdom of GOD, that so the uncumbered and plain face of the
Earth, might be unmasked and fited for the generation of things. For the
Channels of the Sea and Rivers were not sufficient to receive the whole Waters,
but if all should break the confining Bars of the Heavens, and come tumbling
down, it would not only cover the plain face of the Earth, but it may be,
overtop the highest Mountains. Such an enloosening of the Cataracts of Heaven,
we may guess, did occasion the old Cataclysm or Deluge.

73. Water is not only sublimated into a vapor by heat alone, neither is it
only bound up in a cloud by cold, but to both the virtues of the Sun and the
Stars do contribute their aids, not only by multiplying the vigours of the
Elements, but also by a kind of Magnetic virtue, attracting and retaining a
moisture much or less, according to their different position, and the diverse
figure of Heaven: from whence we observe the various ordering of years and
times; for indeed that Mass of Waters is not kept in, so poized only by the
solidation of Cold or the Air, but by the powerful order and regiment of
superior bodies.

74. Lest there might seem to Divine Justice a want of judgments for the
execution of his wrath, he made that Ocean which is poized over our heads, to
be volatile or flying, and withal brought into his Armoury those fiery darts,
his Thunderbolts, that so the presumptuous sinners that cannot be won by love,
might be wrought about by fear.

75. They are much out of the way, who do attribute to Air moisture in the
highest degree, upon this ground, because it is easily kept in within the
bounds of another, but hardly within its own; for this is the property of light
and liquid bodies, not of moist, and so does better agree with fire and Heaven,
which natures are more rarefied, than with Water and Air: for bodies that are
rarefied, because they of their own will flow every where, cannot be comprised
within their own bounds, and therefore stand in need of another. Only firm and
solid bodies are kept in within their own compass and superficies, which cannot
be done by those things that are of a subtle nature, because by reason of
their thinness they melt and are fluid, and so less consistent. From whence
this flows that the Air is a body of greater rarity, but not of greater
humidity.

76. The Air from it self has no quality intense and in the highest degree,
but sometimes has them upon loan elsewhere. The nature of Air is a middle
nature betwixt things below and above, and so does with ease assume the
qualities of those that border upon it, from whence it happens that its
inferior Region, according to the diversity of times, has a variety of
temper, which inconstancy is occasioned by the changes of the neighboring and
thicker bodies of Water and Earth, whose state is easily altered by heat and
cold.

77. The whole Air is the Heaven, the floor of the World, Natures sieve,
through which the virtues and influences of other bodies are transmitted: a
middle nature it is that knits all the scattered natures of the Universe
together: a most thin smoke kindled by the fire of Heaven, into a light, as it
were an immortal flame: the subject of light, and shade of day and night,
impatient of vacuity: the principal transparent: the easiest receiver of almost
all qualities and effects, yet the constant retainer of none: a borderer upon
the spiritual nature, therefore in the Tracts concerning the Mysteries of
Philosophers, it is called by the name of a Spirit.

78. The lower Region of the Air is like unto the neck or higher part of an
Alembick, for through it the Vapors climbing up, and being brought to the top,
receive their condensation from Cold, and being resolved into water, fall down
by reason of their own weight. So Nature through continued distillations by
sublimation of the Water, by cohobation, or by often drawing off the liquour
being often poured on, the body does rectify and abound it. In these
operations of Nature, the Earth is the vessel receiving. Therefore the Region
of the Air that is nearer to us, being bounded by the Region of Clouds, as by a
vaulted Chamber, is of a greater thickness and impurity than those Regions
above.

79. The middle Region of the Air is not that, in which is the gathering of the
Clouds, from whence are Lightenings and Thunders, which is only the higher
part of the lower Region, and the border of it: but that which is above the
Clouds is to be styled The Middle Region, whither the watery Being, by reason of
its gravity, cannot reach, yet whither sulphurous exhalations, disburthened of
the load of their Vapors, do climb up, and there by a motion, either of their
own, or another, being kindled, burn. Such are the flaming Meteors of diverse
sorts, which are viewed in the middle Region, whence we may guess, that it
abounds with a hot and moist, though not a watery, yet a fat Being, which is the
food of fire. In this Region is much peace and a good temperature, because it
is not hurryed with the tempests of any wind, and only the lighter excrements
of the inferior Nature are sucked up hither.

80. The higher Region near the Moon is all airy, not fiery, as it has been
taken up, though falsely, in the Schools. There is the peaceable habitation of
the purest Air, and as it borders upon the Heavenly Region, so it approaches it
in nature, for it is not defiled with the least ^mut of the lower Abyss. There
is a temperature in the highest, a purity but little inferior to that of the
neighboring Heaven. In this place to fancy a sphere of fire, is the shame of a
Philosopher, which breaking the Laws of Nature, would have long ere this ruined
the Fabric of the Universe.

81. The Fire, as a fourth Element of Nature, was placed in the highest Region
of the Air, as in its proper sphere, by the chief Philosophers, being led by an
argument, from order and by conjecture, rather than truth. For let no man fancy
any other fire of Nature than the celestial Light, therefore the blessed
Philosopher in his Genesis, makes no mention of fire, because he had before
told of the creation of the Light upon the first day, which is the genuine fire
of Nature, and truly he would else not have omitted Fire, if it had been a
principle of Nature, having specified Earth, Water, and the Fowls of the
Heavens.

82. Let not any therefore fancy, unless sleeping, a Region of Fire burning
next the Moon, for the whole Air would not be able to bear so great an
abundance of intense fire, but it had long ago fed upon, and ruined the whole
Fabric of the World, for whatsoever it falls upon it feeds upon and devours,
being the designed ruin of the World and Nature.

83. Such a Devourer of Nature is not lodged as an Element of Nature, neither
above the Air, nor below the Earth. Only he does tyrannize in the kingdom of
Nature, either in the height of the Air, or the depths of the Earth, or else
being kindled, upon the superficies of the Earth. Therefore Lullius, a man of a
raised wit, did justly account it amongst the Giants and Tyrants of the World.
It may also be termed to be an Enemy to Nature, because whatsoever is
destructive to Nature, is an adversary of Nature.

84. Our common Fire is partly natural, partly artificial. It may be man
borrowed it for the accommodation of life, and for his necessity, from the
Celestial, by an unition of the beams of it, and a multiplication of its
vigor, or else by attrition or the collision of two bodies, the Spirit of God
suggesting the project to man.

85. The Sovereign Creator of all things, did place the fiery spirit of a
kindly heat in the Globe of the Sun to inspire light, and an enlivening heat to
the rest of the bodies in the Universe, wherefore many have thought him to be
the heart of the whole Fabric, for from him springs the principle of all
generation and life. He that searches for any other Element of fire in the
world, does shut his own eyes against the Sun.

86. The source therefore of the Fire of Nature, is seated in the Sun, whose
heat is always of an equality, and temperate in it self, though it be felt by
us either greater or less, according to his appropinquation or distance, or
according to his direct or oblique beams, or according to the situation or
nature of places. The Sun has been elevated by most Philosophers, as the Soul
of the World, breathing in motion, and a faculty of generation to Nature.

87. The Sun is not the Eye of the World, as some Ancients termed it, but is
the Eye of the Creator of the World, by which he does sensibly view his
sensible creatures, by which he conveys to them the sweetly-affecting beams of
his love, by which he renders himself viewable to them: For scarcely could a
sensible Nature have comprehended an insensible Creator, therefore he formed
for himself, and us so noble a body roab'd in his own glory, whose rays, that
nearest approach Divinity, are Spirit and Life.

88. From that universal Principle of life, all the inbred heat of Elements or
mixed Beings is derived, which has gotten to be called by the name of Fire,
for wheresoever a free heat, a natural motion or life lodges, there Nature has
hidden Fire, as the principle of them, and the first mover of the Elements, by
which the sensible Elements, or the Portions of the World are elementated, and
receive their animations, yet does it cleave close to the womb of the Earth,
being bound up by the Earths density and coldness, exciting an Antiperistasis.

89. That Fire of Nature which is seated in mixed bodies, has chosen the
radical moisture, as its proper seat, the principal residence of which is in
the heart (although it be diffused through all the parts of the body) as in the
prime organ of life, and the center of this little world, whence that Prince of
Nature, as commanding from its Castle, does move concordantly all the
faculties, and the rest of the organs, and does in-breathe life to the humors
of the mixed Being, to the spirits, and finally to the whole Elementary Mass.
And being the Sun, and Vicegerent of the Sun does act all in this little, that
the Sun does in that large World.

90. As the Sun, being in the midst of the rest of the Planets, does
enlighten them with his light, replenish them with his influential virtues,
beget an harmony of life by his enlivening spirit, so does the solar spirit in
the middle of the Elementary Nature, gives it an influential light, and
gathers the Elements together in the work of Generation and does unite and
enliven them.

91. The first Agent in the World is the Fire of Nature, which being seated in
the Globe of the Sun, does diffuse that vivifical heat by means of his rays,
through all the dominions of Nature, working in the seeds a power of activity,
and settling in them the principle of motion and action, at the removal of which
all motion cease, and also the faculty of life and action.

92. The heat of Nature, and the light of Nature, are really one and the same,
for they have a continual and uniform effluence from the same Fountain, i. the
Sun, but are distinguished by their office, for the heat is to penetrate into
the most inward parts of Nature, but light is to manifest, and open the outward
parts: the office of heat is to move the occult Natures of things, that of
light, to set before the eyes sensible accidents: both of these is wrought by
the rays of the Sun. The Sun therefore is the first Organ of Nature, by whose
approach or distance, all the operations of Nature are variously governed,
intended, or remitted, by means of light and heat.

93. The second universal Agent is that same light; not so immediately issuing
from the Fountain, but reflected from solid bodies, enlightened by it as the
heavenly, yea, the Earth it self: for the light of the Sun beating upon those
bodies, gives a motion to their dispositions and faculties, and alters them,
and diffuseth their several and different virtues by the reflection of his
rays, through the whole frame of Heaven and of our Air: for by those rays, as
by so many conveyances, are the various effects of several bodies dispersed
every where for the benefit and harmony of Nature, which are called by us
Influences. These are the true and first Elements of Nature, which because they
are spiritual, do communicate themselves to us under some airy, or also some
watery Nature, to whose good act, as to the roots of the Elements, we are
beholding for the gift of every birth, and of all life.

94. Love, styled by Plato the Eldest of the gods, was breathed into nature,
begotten by the Divine Spirit, and has the place of a Genius in her
dispositions. In the first Division of the World, betwixt the first brothers,
she gave the judgment for the partitions of their families, and after had
always the Praefecture in Generation.

95. The God of Nature did fix the first bond of Love in the things of Nature,
between the first Matter and the universal Form, the Heaven and the Earth,
Light and Darkness, Plenty and Poverty, Beauty and Deformity. The second degree
of Love from the first couple, which is as it were the loving embraces of the
Parents, issued into the Elements, which having a fraternal tie to bind them,
have divided betwixt them the whole right of Nature. The third and last degree,
is completed in mixed bodies, which excites them by the in-born and inbred
sparkles of love, to a propagation and multiplication of their like. The Divine
Love has appointed this treble Love-knot, as a kind of Magical tie, that it
might deliver it self by traduction into all and every part of his workmanship.
Love is the Base of the Universe, the Cube of Nature, and the fastening bond of
things above and below.

96. Let those avaunt therefore, who do attribute the concordant motions of
Nature to Discord; for Nature is peaceable and pleasant in all her workings,
yea, she is delightfully tickled in her actings. The very Elements of things in
their coition are wholly lost in love, that they may knit themselves together
by their mutual embraces, and of many be made one.

97. Let the Academies stand up, and tell us how the first Matter can be the
first subject of contraries, and how Love can lie amongst the brawlings and
jarres of Enmity! or that eager appetite, which the Prince of Philosophers
acknowledges residing in the heart of this Matter, Cap. 9. l. 1. De Mat.
whereby it does as earnestly lust for its form, as a man for a woman? Will not
those enemies, constituting the seeds of Beings and the mixed bodies, by their
eternal food, at length force Love and Concord to yield to their ruin.

98. They that placed a lust between the Matter and the Form, and yet an hatred
and repugnancy in the Matter it self, and in the Elements, in making these
contraries, have made themselves so: for according to the dictates of their
School, the Soul in all things generated (only man excepted) is brought forth
out of the power and privy virtue of the Matter: But how can this be without
love? If the Matter radically does lie under the dissentions of contraries,
must not the Form, which springs from her very root, feel the same portion?
Nay, would it not be stifled by them in its first birth and cradle? What man
therefore that stood right in his wits, would acknowledge the rule of these
bandetties, to be chief in the nuptials of Love and Nature, in the very
juncture of the mixture of the Elements, and of the information of the Matter?
Yea, who would expect an uniform, and not a monstrous issue from the
heterogeneous seed of opposite parents?

99. Let therefore the Philosopher surcease to place the cause of the
alteration of Elements, of the corruption and failing of mixed beings in the
repugnancy of the Elements, but rather lay the fault upon the penurious
weakness of the first matter. For in the first Chaos. 'Twixt moist and dry
there was no battle fought,
Nor any enmity 'twixt cold and hot.
It is indeed the Vulgar conceit that there was, whereas only two, no way
contrary, of those four qualities, to wit, Cold and Moisture, agreed to the
female, and the matter, and were in it: The other two, which are Heat and
Drought, which are masculine and formal qualities, came forth out of the part
of the informing light. And the Earth was not called Dry Land before the
drawing off the Waters, and the coming on of the light Being, which was first
moist and covered with Waters.

100. Therefore certainly reason it self does evidence, that those four
qualities, which by the Vulgar are accounted repugnant, are not extant in the
first matter, unless after information. And lest she might endure some
contrariety in its solitude, she had other diseases, to wit, Darkness,
Confusion, Deformity, Coldness, and an indigested Moisture, with an impotency,
which are all evidences of a diseased and languishing body: Therefore being
infected from its creation with that corruption, it derived it down to its
posterity, lodged in this lowest and weakest Region of the elements. Therefore
it is not set down in Genesis of that Abyss of Darkness, that it was very good,
but reserved that graceful Elogie for the Light, and for the rest that were
created.

101. But who is there that has the least dram of knowledge, will conceive
that this contentious repugnancy did flow from the form into the matter, after
the union of the four qualities in the matter being informed? Since it is
essential to and the intent of the form, to add a perfection to the matter,
and completely to perfect it into an harmony and consent, and a temperament
according to its ability.

102. The first contraries through opposing qualities, were Light and Darkness;
Light has two qualities Heat and Drougth; Darkness as many, Cold and Moisture,
wholly opposite each to other, because of their intention. But after those two
aged principles of Nature came together, and the dark material and female
principle was informed by the lightsom, formal and masculine principle, and
impregnated by the light, the whole matter of the Universe; and all the Regions
thereof received this privilege of light, though distinct in the degrees and
differences: for that fiery tincture of the Spirit of light left nothing
unpierced, and the four qualities also at first being in their highest degree,
were brought down to a remission in the informed matter, and so closing
sweetly, contracted a fast friendship, and consented to a temperature: and so
being made friendly, they were entered into the homogeneous family of the
Elements, that so there might nothing of repugnancy or enmity lurk in the
generation of mixed bodies, whereby the pleasing motion of Nature might be
disturbed.

103. Neither in nature are those four qualities contrary one to another, but
only diverse and unlike one to another, neither do they ruin, but unite into a
firm league one with another: So Heat and Cold in a remiss degree, do amicably
agree and commix in one and the same subject, that a middle and temperate
quality, to wit, a lukewarness might be produced. But if in the intense degree
they couple not without a fight and combat, this proceeds from the excess and
tyranny of the intension, which cannot endure two qualities equally heightened
and adverse, to be partners and sharers of one and the same Sovereignty, but
there will fall out a tumult. But indeed Nature casts out intense qualities,
as bastards and strangers.

104. Let not therefore any fancy that Nature admits fire intense into the
family of her Elements, for such a fire would be fit for destruction, not
generation, would not be according to, but against Nature, which avoids violent
things, and delights in a temperature, in which is no fighting, no contrariety.
For the Rule of Nature cannot away with the rage of a scorching heat, or a
wasting cold, or the distemper of moist and dry, but does pleasingly lie down
in a composed temperature. Let not any therefore search for the intense
qualities in the Elements of things; he will find them in them either less or
more remitted.

105. He is deceived therefore who says that hot and cold, moist and dry, are
simple contraries. For the Earth, which by Aristotle is laid down as dry in
the highest, should always quarrel with the Air, which is said by him to be
moist in the highest: Also Water that is cold in the highest, according to his
opinion, should be opposite to Fire, that is hot in the highest: and this
repugnancy would enclose by force every one of the common Elements, or every
Region of the World within the verge of its sphere, and by reason of this
antipathie, would destroy all hospitality betwixt them. But we are convinced of
the contrary, both by reason and experience. For ditches and all hollow places
under the Earth, yea, the very bowels and pores of the Earth are replenished
with Air, and the intrinsical moisture of the Earth, by which, as with their
mothers milk, all Vegetables are nourished, is nothing else but an hot and
moist Air, cleaving close to the Earth, and handing it as a nursive and
nourishing faculty: the pores of the Earth are the dugs, and the airy moisture
the milk, by which, she, the Mother and Nurse of things, does nourish her
offsprings, and give them growth.

106. They, who settle four Elements in as many humors, do grant, that Nature
being moist, is receiveable, yea, is the subject of four Elementary qualities:
how then can they hold a contrariety in them, which they place in one and the
same subject? For though those four humors are distinguished by their
respective differences, yet have they but one base, one common root to all, to
wit, Humor: for yellow choler which resembles fire, is no less an humor than
phlegm, which resembles water: and the same may be said of adust Choler and
Blood, although they do not absolutely, but comparatively confound the four
Elements in a moist Being.

107. If there were any repugnancy in the qualities and elements of Nature, the
greatest would be betwixt hot and cold, and so betwixt Water and Fire, but the
nature of these are not adversary, many generations which are under the Waters,
do evidence: for wheresoever there is any generation or life, there must be
fire, as the nearest intrinsical, efficient, moving and altering cause of the
matter for generation: Aeneid. 6.
Hence Men, Beasts, and the Fowls their Being have,
And ghastly Monsters rolling on a wave;
A fiery vigor to their seeds is given,
The homage for their birth is due to Heaven.


108. There fore certainly he will be in the right, who shall acknowledge those
four first qualities, inborn and essential to the things themselves, and to
their Elements, to be apt to a mixture by the direction of Nature, and not
contrary, for they are as it were four Organs or instruments which Nature makes
use of in the perfecting of her alterations and generations.

109. Nature sets up a Potters trade, for she is wholly taken with making her
matter circular, these four qualities are as the wheels, by which she does by
degrees and wisely inform her works through a circular and slow motion.

110. Of those four Wheels, two, viz, those of Moist and Dry, are most
agreeable to the matter, because Nature does turn and work the matter between
these two: those two qualities are nearest the matter, because more subject to
be passive, and to a change. But the other two, to wit, of Hot and Cold, are
more of action, because by their turns they alter and change the former; these
are passive, those active, and are as it were the active instruments of Nature,
working upon her passive matter.

111. Let us therefore cast off that tenent of Contraries, as contrary to
natures concord, and dash out it with a pen of iron, with the good leave of
learning, from the depraved table of Philosophy, and let us in the room of it,
inscribe the Symbol of Concord, which Nature does acknowledge of the same
standing with her self, by whose help the delightful copulation of actives
with passives is procured in every Generation.

112. Those, who according to the flying opinion do stand for four Elements
contrary each to other, do necessarily introduce a fifth, as the knot or
bond-tye of concord, as the Peacemaker, otherwise they could not receive any
perfect mixture, or any temperature in the work of generation, but without a
rudder or a ruler would float a drift through the vast Ocean of Nature, never
able to reach a port, or bring forth a birth: and so would they cheat the
common Genius of Nature of her proper end.

113. For these four being acknowledged by reason of their repugnant qualities
to keep up an eternal war betwixt themselves, cannot be united or appeased in
the generation of mixed Beings, but rather with their mutual conflict rushing
in, will procure an Abort, than a birth in Nature, unless their contrary
actings be composed to a peaceable love by the part of some fifth heavenly and
tempering Nature, which may introduce a temperature void of Hot and Cold, Dry
and Moist.

114. That fifth Element, as they call it, or heavenly and incorruptible
Spirit, springing from the light, motion, and virtue of the heavenly bodies
upon these lower Beings, and preparing the Elements for motion and life, and
stopping from ruin particular individuals, as far as their setledness will
permit, has merited the name of the salt Nature, the tie of the Elements, the
Spirit of the world, to be given it by the searchers of occult Philosophy.

115. If there were any contrariety between the principles of things, certainly
it was between Light and Darkness, by reason of their opposite qualities, but
those qualities were tempered by the coition of both principles, and from the
extremes became a middle temper, and such were they when they dislodged from
the first, and went into the second principles or Elements.

116 The extremes are contrary each to other, only by reason of the intension
of their opposite qualities, but those things that spring from the mixture of
these extremes are not ^dverse, because they are of a middle nature, and the
^fflux of the union of the two extremes, to wit, of Light and Darkness.

117. That out of the mixture of Contraries, to wit, of Light and Darkness, do
not come contraries forth but in a temperature, is plain by that of the Kingly
Prophet, breaking forth into these words of the Eternal Light, Psalm. 18.
He bowed the Heavens and came down, and Darkness was under his feet, etc. He
made Darkness his Covert, his Pavilion in the midst of it, etc. The very
fountain of Eternal Light, that he might exhibit the brightness of his infinite
glory to mortal eyes, did wrap it up in a cloud and dark mask, and brought the
Darkness to the Light, that he might make of the two Extremes a moderate light,
and so allay the splendor of so great a light, as was not to be gazed on
without the ruin of the Spectatour; yea, Philosophers do affirm, the Rainbow
that was given by God as a sign and token of a Covenant made with man, to be
produced out of a mixture of Light and Darkness, that so that Symbol of the
temperature of Gods wrath, existing out of contraries, might be tempered of
various coherent and friendly colors.

118. Those that have delivered that the Earth, Water, Air and Fire, in their
spears are distinct Elements of the World, and are turned each into other, by
mutual reciprocation, did but slightly look into the depths of Nature; for it
is more safe to call them the completing parts of Nature, or the Shops of the
Elements: for the Elements of the world do not lie under our view or senses, as
separated in their proper Regions, but do lie hid and keep close in their
wombs, till they come together in the generation of mixed bodies, and make up a
body. But those parts of the World, as so far mutually different, can never
have a conversion in them, neither can that one common quality, whereby those
natures are linked together, beget such a change, that out of things of a
diverse, should be formed a like nature, yea, that they should be turned into
the same.

119. If those four Elements asserted by them, do change and barter their
rooms, natures and offices, all the compact frame of the World, devoted to a
chance and motion, would be in a perpetual fluctuation, which we know is
established by God in a certain and constant order and site, and distinction
of parts: For Earth will quickly be made Water, Water Air, Air Fire, and so
backward, and by this the Center shall run out to Circumference, and the
Circumference run into the Center, the farthest and the middle parts of the
World, shall of their own accord remove out of their places, that so after a
long time the order of Nature shall be inverted, whilst the top and the
bottom, and the bottom and the top change places, and clash together. He who
does fancy this so fair composure of a World, does not deserve to have so fine
a piece termed a World, but a Chaos, an Abyss, which Nature, a friend to Order,
does absolutely detest.

120. They which do say that those extreme bodies of the lower World, Earth and
Fire, (supposing, not granting a sphere of Fire) are turned into each other, do
wrong themselves and truth too. For their distant and repugnant natures do
disagree from such a change, for the heightened cold, thickness, and gravity of
the Earth are so opposite to the same degree or heat, subtility, and levity in
Fire, that they can never be brought to change. Besides, the Earth, a fixed
body, will not yield to fire, but slighteth its virtue, if we may believe the
opinions of Chemists and common experience, neither does any thing fly out
from it, but a fat and warry humor, both of them not natural to the Earth: but
if any thing is to be turned into elementary Fire, it must necessarily be light
and volatile, that it may be translated into its Orb and Nature. The Earth
therefore being most weighty, and so the Center of all, being most fixed, and so
least volatile, how can it be turned into Fire, and be carried up into the
Sphere of Fire, or how can Fre, the highest and lightest of all, be beaten down
to be essentially united with the Earth, contrary to the laws of Nature? It
were a more easy conversion of Water and Fire, because they are nearer by one
degree than Earth and Fire.

121 They that believed, the exhalations from the region of the earth drawn up
into the Air, and because kindled there, to be earthie, and converted into the
Element of Fire, are far out of the way of truth, for they are not earthie, but
rather airie natures: for our Air being moist, through the contagion of water
lying in the dry bosom of the Earth, gather a fatness, and by the consortship
of the Earth, does temper the moist with the dry, but when it exhales through
the pores and crevises of the Earth being drawn by heat, or else the abundance
of the matter forcing out, it breaks not forth out of its prison without a
noise and crack, whence proceed earthquakes and openings not without much
ruin; that exhalation, got loose, does fly up into the region proper to light
bodies, and there is set on fire, being digested by its errant motion and heat,
more fully into a sulphurous matter. Therefore that matter is not truly
earthie, since it is neither ponderous nor cold, but because it is made fat and
combustible by the concourse of hot, dry, and moist; it may more properly be
called the accidental food of fire, than the Fire of Nature, or the Elementarie
Fire. That is a bastard, a spurious generation, which for that very reason
ought not to have been placed amongst the natures, or been called by the names
of Elements; therefore these Firings are rightly called by Aristotle,
imperfectly-mixed things. The same we must conceive of the smoke of
combustibles: For Smoke being unctious, does quickly take fire, which is
nothing else but smoke kindled.

122 Fire feeds upon fat and unctious matter, but the fat moisture of the Air
is contempered with drought, whence we often may see a sulfureous matter,
extrinsecally dry and terminated with drought, as our ordinary sulfur,
gunpowder, and the like; which though they seem to be outwardly dry, do close
within them a fat moisture, and upon the firing are resolved into it.

123 And truly they slip to purpose, that have taken an opinion, seeing stones
and heavy bodies sometimes generated in the Air, and shot down thence by
lightnings, thunders, and breaking of the clouds, that the Fire turns to a
stone, or is converted into earth, or have a conceit, that the Earth is carried
up thither. This is done far otherwise; for that hardened matter was never fire
or earth, nor proceeded from the Orb of Fire (if there be any) or from the
body of the earth, but an unctious and viscous humor, in a manner clayish,
shut up in a cloud as in a furnace, is so hardened and decocted, as an earthen
vessel by the heat of the burning exhalations, that it turns a stone: Hence
proceed those darted Thunderbolts. Such meteors as these are the wens,
weaknesses, and diseases of Nature, not Elements. In the same, though after a
slower manner, is the stone generated in the body out of phlegm in the reins or
bladder. For the Microcosm has also his meteors.

124 The fire of nature is far different from our artificial or accidental
fire. The fire of nature is double, either Universal and Particular, or
Individual. The Universal is diffused through all the parts of the Universe,
does sweetly excite and move the propensive virtues of the celestial bodies,
does impregnate and supply with engendering seed this Globe of ours, designed
for the generation of things; does infuse virtues into the seeds; does untwist
the entangled power of nature; mingles the Elements; informs the Matter; and
finally does unlock the secret of Nature: but the fountain of it is in the Sun,
who as the Heart of the World does stream forth his enlivening heat as his love
through all regions. But the particular Fire of Nature, is in-born and inbred
in every mixed body, and individual, which flows as a rivulet from that
General, and does work all things in this Microcosm or little World MAN,
according to an Analogy with the Sun in the Macrocosm or greater World. But
who is there that would not style our common fire, being an opposite of all
generation, living only upon prey, subsisting upon the ruins of other Beings,
the destruction of life, deputing all things to ashes, rather a foe than a
friend to nature, its enemy, not its inmate; and rather the ruin than the
raising of Life? But those fires that are bred in the Airie region, are rather
engendered by chance, than by any intention of Nature.

125 Neither are those two bodies of the Earth and Water, situated next one to
the other, convertible each into the other, but only by reason of their
neighborhood are mingled together; so that the Water washes the Earth, and
the Earth thickens the Water; and hence is made Clay, being a body of neither,
but a middle betwixt both; which if resolved by the force of fire, will
separate it self into both these natures. The water flying out, the earth
settles: neither will there be any conversion of each into the other, for that
cannot be effected by that single common quality of cold, since the dryness
and moisture are not less powerful to resist, than the mutual consent of cold
can bring them to a conversion. Besides the dryness and fixation of the Earth,
are quite opposite to the moist and volatile nature of the Water, so there is
but one quality agreeing to an alteration, and many disagreeings, which will
prevail in the combat. Besides, here is the help of nature always ready to
conserve it self, and does never incline, unless upon force and conquest to its
ruin or change.

126 We may guess the whole Globe of the Earth, not to be of a less settled
nature than the Heaven, the Moon, or the Stars; for it, if it be the center of
the World, as it is generally received, then certainly the constancy is not
less necessary to it than to the rest of the bodies of the World. Besides the
earth is the same without any essential immutation of what it was from the
beginning, and what it will be to the end of ages. But if it did suffer any
notable detriment by the universal deluge in the general, or any accidental in
particular, as by some chasme, or by the breakings in of rivers, or the Sea;
this falls out by the supreme order of him that does change at list, the laws
of the whole and every region: or by the discordant harmony of the World, or
by some disease of some distempered nature, rather than by any propensiveness
or viciousness of the Earth. For all the bodies of the Universe do lie under
their burdens and diseases, although they be diversified according to the
disagreement of Nature, and difference of perfection, yet the accidents do not
change the nature and constancy of them in respect of the whole. Absolute
constancy and impassibilitie do only suit to God alone: but the Heaven,
Water, Earth, and the rest of the bodies of the Universe shall stand firm, in
regard of their essence to the designed period of their age.

127 If any one of those four natures have a propensitie to conversion, it will
be strongest in the mean qualities; for Water and Air are joined in greater
affinity between themselves than with the rest, or the others amongst
themselves. For they seem not to differ so much in their qualities, as in the
intension and remission of them, not so much naturally as accidentally. For
since Water does by a right of nature challenge to it self moisture and
coldness, it does also communicate them to the lower region of the Air by way
of commerce, (for Air obtains no proper quality almost besides the highest
tenuitie, yet capable of receiving the rest, therefore is it of an heavenly
nature, being of it self most temperate, and not addict to any proper quality,
does readily receive and-despence the dispositions, influences, and virtues of
the heavenly bodies.) Densitie and raritie, which in a remiss degree are of
kin, seem to make the principal difference between Water and our Air; for which
reason God is said in Genesis, to have separated the Waters from the Waters; as
if by reason of the unity of their nature, it seemed more truly to be a
division of their situation, than a mutation in respect of their essence.

128 Yet these bordering natures, do not entertain any true and essential
reciprocation, but only according to some respect, not altogether changed, but
after some manner* and this change is acted in the lower region of the Air,
which is bound in by the cover of the clouds, and reaches not the middle, much
less the highest region. Water being rarefied into a vapor flies up, and is
rather raised then turned into Air; and that vapor condensed does resolve, and
fall down again. The ancients, being led by the legerdemain of sense, more than
the light of reason, conceived this circulation, and returning into it self of
one and the same nature, to be the turning of nature into another: but it is
found to be otherwise by those that have and use a sharp insight into the
depths of Nature. He is also deceived that shall call the Air simply a thin
Vapor, because a Vapor is a middle and imperfect body betwixt the two
Waters, those above, and these below, betwixt our Water and Air, yet it is
neither of them, because although it rarifie, yet will it never be heightened
to the great degree of the nobility of the Air. It may be made a spurious but
never a pure Air: neither will the refined nature of the Air be so depressed
and fall from its purity* as to thicken into a vapor, cloud, or Water. For
the right of Nature never got that first separation of the Waters, which was
really and actually done by that Architect spirit, and that the established
bounds of the parts of the World, which God has sealed with an indelible
signature, should either be blurred or removed by any new confusion.

129 But those that dive deeper into things, will acknowledge the Earth to be
the womb of the World, the vessel of Generation, the mother of a multiplied,
and almost numberless issue, which being rescued in the beginning of the
Creation from the power of the covering Waters, and privileged to it self, was
made and remained dry land; and her body being condensed, sunk to the
foundation and the center of the whole, and spread out her lap as a Parent to
all vegetables, and all other creatures; yet did she want moisture, whereby she
might be made apt for a fruitful generation. Gods providence set out a remedy
for this exigence: Therefore from the beginning was the water made volatile,
that so it might be carried up in vapors, which being frozen by cold in this
cloud, might by heat be thawed again into Waters. By this masterpiece of
Divine providence, was this exigence of the Earth supplied, and that dryness,
which threatened barrenness, was tempered with a large moisture, and the womb
of our mother conceived. Therefore only Water has the circulation, to the
intent that it might moisten the bosom of the Earth, or more truly it is
distilled in the lower region of the Air as in its Alembick; that so by often
pouring in, and reiterated distillations, it being abounded, and having gotten
virtues both from above and below, and endued with that celestial Nectar, it
might more effectually soften the bosom of the Earth, and endue it with a
prolifical virtue. The chief worker of all, who makes use of the art of
Nature, has added nothing superfluous to his work, nor left any thing
defective in it.

130 But the Water being the menstruum of the World, does cherish and contain
in it the seeds of things and their elements; but she having this circulation,
the true and genuine Elements of things which are in the Earth, as in the
matrix and vessel of Generation; and in the Water, as in the menstruum, are
also whirled about. In the vapor therefore, are the Elements of the Earth, the
Water, and the Air, and have their sublimation, and exuberation with it. They
are not the bodies of Earth, Water, and Air, which have their proper spears,
and constitute the several Regions of the World, but they are the very
spiritual Elements of Nature, which lie hid and inhabit in them, out of which
many bodies, as stones may be generated and excocted in the Air. For where all
the Elements well mixed, do meet, as they do in a vapor, there bodies may be
generated; but when they find not a convenient matrix, as in the Air, there are
ingendered imperfect mixtures, not by reason of any fault in the mixture, but
in the Matrix.

131. The Water being seated as middle, betwixt the Earth and the Air, does
trouble both it by its flowing, and always moving inconstancy, infesting the
Air with a black soote, and noisome vapors, and often drowning the Earth by
floods; causing tempests in the Air, ruins to the Earth, and corruption to
both; and it does assault the Region of the one with its levity, and of the
other with its gravity; and does cross the order of Nature, and the nature of
Times by its defect or excess, yea, does shake all her borderers with her
terrible claps and tumultuous ragings. Her nature being altogether female* the
supreme Creator seems to have bestowed her on the World in the nature of a
Woman, or a necessary Evil, even so does she arrogate all things as subject to
her, and turns those things that were given her for a general good, to a
public ruin. Finally, it is the scourge of divine Justice, revenging Nemeses,
which being designed to the vengeance of sin, does break out to punish, and
sets the hopes and wealth of many the very roots of pride, under several shapes
of judgments, the scoff and blast of the world.

132. The universal Natures, the more thick they are, the more impure, the more
endued with tenuity; the more purity. The Earth, because more thick than Water,
therefore is less noble, and so Water than Air; and Air than Heaven: and so the
highest Region of the Heavens is the most noble, because it is most subtle.
For it is an undoubted truth, that spiritual Natures are more excellent than
corporeal, and the more bordering upon the spiritual Natures, the more they
draw nigh to perfection.

133. The foundation of Generation and Corruption is in Moisture, for in both
the travails of Nature, Moisture, of all the Elements, is the first patient,
receiving the first seal of the form. The natural Spirits are easily united
with it, because flowing from it, do lightly return to it, because the root of
them, in that, and by that, are the rest of the Elements mixed. The moist
Element has its circulation no less in mixed and individual bodies, than in
the World, both in the work of Generation and of Nutrition, for it was Natures
pleasure, that both these works should be performed by the same instruments of
condensation and rarefaction, and by the same means, to wit, Spirits.

134. The Earth is the Vessel of Generation, Water the menstruum of Nature,
containing in it the formal and seminal virtues, which it borrows from the Sun,
the male and the formal universal Principle; from him is derived into all
things the influence of the fire of Nature, and of formal Spirits, in which are
all things necessary for generation, the inbred heat being wrapped up in the
moist: Therefore Hippocrates did rightly affirm, That these two Elements, Lib.
1. de Diaeia.
Fire and Water, could do all, contained all things in them: For from them do
issue two masculine qualities of Hot and Dry, from the other two more of Cold
and Moist, being the female qualities, which so concurring and mixing, perfect
the generation of mixed bodies. Over those two principal Elements, the two
greater Lights were set, the Sun the author of Fire, and the Moon the Lady of
Moisture.

135. Nature perfects the circulation of the volatile Element, by a threefold
action or instrument, by Sublimation, Demission or Refusion, and by Decoction,
which stand in need of a diverse temperament. So does the rightly ordered
intention of Nature, wandering through various motions, directs her
interrupted actions to their designed end, and attaineth the same mark, though
it trades through diverse ways.

136 Sublimation is the conversion of a moist and a ponderous nature, into a
light, or the exhalation of it into a vapor. The end and benefit of it is
threefold: First, that a gross and impure body might be mundefied by
attenuation, and might by degrees be drawn off the dregs; then that by
sublimation it might gain the higher virtues, which continually flow down.
Lastly, that by such an evacuation the Earth might be disburthened of its
superfluous and loading humors, which seizing upon its passages, do hinder the
action of the heat, and the free pass of the natural spirits, yea, do violently
choke them. This drawing away of the superfluous moisture, takes away the cause
of obstructions, and gives ease to the squeazy stomach of the Earth, and makes
it more fit for digestion.

137. But the Moisture is sublimated by the impulsive operation of heat. For
Nature uses her fire as its proper instrument for rarefaction of moist bodies.
Therefore the Vapors that generates Clouds and Rain, are most frequently drawn
up in the Fall and Spring, because then the womb of the Earth does more abound
with hot and moist; now Moisture is the material, and Heat the efficient cause
of exhalations. Nature does show a kind of intense heat in sublimation, whilst
it is bound in within the terms and latitude of temperature.

138. Demission is the second wheel of Nature; in the work of Circulation is
the returning of the spirituous Vapor into a gross and watery body: or the
Refusion of a rarefied and sublimated humor, being again condensed, and its
descent into Earth, that it may dilute it of its exuberant liquour, and suck it
up by a sweet and celestial draught.

139. Nature does intend three things by irrigation. First, that it might not
pour out, but by degrees distill its abundant humor, lest there fall out a
gulf, and by the abundance of water, the passage for the vivifical spirit in
the bowels of the earth be dammed up, and the intrinsecal heat of the Earth be
extinguished, for that wise and righteous Governess does dispense all her
benefits in number, weight and measure. Secondly, that it might distribute the
humor by diverse drops, and by a various manner, to wit, a Rain sometimes
larger, sometimes less, sometimes a dew, sometimes a hoar frost, sometimes
pouring out a greater, sometimes a less plenty, that so it might water the
Earth according to its appetite or necessity, thirsting for more or less.
Thirdly, that these irrigations or waterings may be not continual, but by turns
and betwixt other works; for the Sun does in its course succeed the Showers,
and the Showers in theirs the Sun, the day the night, and the night the day.

140. The lightest Cold or the departing Heat, does unloose and make fit to
fall those vapors that are brought up into the middle Region, and there
frozen. For an immoderate heat does dissipate and hinders their condensation,
and an intense heat does so knit and freeze them, that they cannot produce a
humor that may be fit to fall down.

141. The last wheel or action of the Circulation of Nature, is Decoction,
which is nothing else but the digestion, ripening, and conversion into aliment
of a crude humor instilled on the bosom of the Earth. This seems to be the
end and the scope of the others, because it is the release of their labor, and
a receiving of the food, attained by the former labors. For that crude humor,
by force of that internal heat, is chewed, concocted, and digested by it, being
as it were without motion and in a trance, silently and without noise, moving
that secret fire as the proper instrument of Nature, that it may turn that
crude liquour tempered with dryness into a food. This is the complete circle of
Nature, which she rowls round by various degrees of labor and heat.

142 These three operations of Nature are so knit together, and have such a
relation each to the other, that the beginning of the one is the end of the
other, and according to Natures intention, they do in a necessary order succeed
one another by turns. And the orders of these vicistitudes, are so interwoven
and linkt together, as that combining to the good of the whole, they do in
their operations prove serviceable each to other.

143 Yet Nature is forcedly sometimes drawn out of her bounds and verges, and
ranges in an uncertain path, especially in the guidance of the moist Element,
whose orders being interrupted do deceive, and they do easily as well as suffer
wrong, by reason of the inconstancy of its volatile and flitting nature, as
also by reason of the various disposition of the superior bodies, which do
bend these things below, especially Moisture, and draw them from their settled
track, according to the beck of the Sovereign Moderatour, who does use them as
Organs and Instruments to the motion of the frame of the Universe. Hence is
raised the deceitful and inconstant temperature of this our Mansion, and the
changed seasons of the year. So does the womb of the Earth, being diversely
affected, bring forth either more plentifully or more sparingly, generous or
castling births. So does the bordering Air being either pure or impure, produce
either health or sickness, the moist Nature rolling and tossing all things
amongst us.

144 The Rule of our Heavens is uncertain and deceitful to us, because things
below receive their orders from things above, whose natures and affections are
for the most part unknown to us, yet let the Philosopher set always before his
eyes the intention rather than the action of Nature, the order rather than the
disturbance of the order.

145 We may observe the volubility or flittingness of the moist Nature, not
only in the general harmony of the World, but also in the particular of mixed
Beings. For they are generated by the revolution of Moisture, they are
nourished and grow by drying, moistening, and digesting; wherefore those three
operations of nature are resembled to food, drink, and sleep, because meat
answers to dryness, drink to moisture, and sleep to concoction.

146 Lest man should dream fancies to himself, glory in diverse privileges,
assume to himself as proper only to him the name of Microcosm, or the Worlds
lesser draught, because there are discernable in his material workmanship, an
Analogy of all the natural motions of the Microcosm, or the larger Volume of
the World, let him consider that every creature, even a worm, that every plant,
even the weed of the Sea, is a lesser world, having in it an epitome of the
greater. Therefore let man seek for a world out of himself, and he shall find
it every where, for there is one and the same first Copy of all creatures, out
of which were made infinite worlds of the same matter, yet in form differenced.
Let therefore man share humility and lowliness of spirit, and attribute to God
glory and honor.

147 The inferior natures are leavened by the superior: But the Water not
enduring delay, does have to meet the operations of the Heavens, for the Air,
giving way to the vapor that flies up to it, receives it to lodge in the
Region of the Clouds, as in a large Hall, but ere it comes thither, its body
being in a manner spiritualized, the moist Being is divested of its ponderous
nature, that so it might by this addition of agility, the sooner compass its
desire, and enjoy the privilege of an ambiguous nature.

148 In the mean time the Sun, the Prince of the celestial Quire, and the rest
of the superior Natures, taking care of the inferior, do instill by continual
breathings enlivening spirits, as so many trilling rivulets from their most
clear and pure Fountains: But the Vapors being thin, and so swimming in the
Air, or else bound up into a Cloud, do most eagerly suck in in that spiritual
Nectar, and attract it to them by a Magnetic virtue, and having received it,
they grow big, and being impregnated and quickened with that ingendering seed,
as being delivered of their burden, do freely fall down back into the lap of
the Earth in some Dew, hoar Frost, Rain, or some other nature; and this Mother
of the Elements does receive into her womb the returning moisture, and being
quickened by this Heavenly seed, sends forth in her due time innumerable
issues, according to diverse degrees, more or less generous, according to the
goodness of the seed, or the disposition of the womb: and the inferior Waters
also are made partakers of the benevolence of the Superior and Celestial,
because she goes with the Earth to the making up of one and the same Globe, and
so they receive joint and common benefits. But by the nature of Water is the
fermentation of the rest of the Elements.

149 But this ferment or leaven is a vivifical spirit, flowing down from the
superior Natures upon these inferior, without which the Earth would be again
void and empty. For it is the seed of Life, without which neither man, nor any
creature, nor any growing thing could enjoy the benefit of a generation or
life; for man lives not by bread alone, but especially by that Heavenly food by
Air, to wit, by such a spirit so breathed in, and fermented.

150 The three material Elements being remote in the composition of things, do
only obey God and Nature, and come not under the laws of Art, or of humane
Invention: but there are three others that issue from the copulation of these,
which being extracted by resolution, do sufficiently show that they are the
nearest in the composition of mixed Beings, to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
And so it is manifested, That there is a Trinity of Elements, and a Signature
of the universal NATURE.

151 These three last Elements are the issue of a threefold copulation of the
three former, Mercury of the mixture of Earth and Water, Sulphur of the
copulation of Earth and Air, Salt produced out of the condensation of Air and
Water, and there can be no more combinations of them named. The Fire of Nature
is in all of them as their formal principle, the virtue of the celestial bodies
contributing their influence and cooperation.

152 Neither are these latter produced out of any copulation of the former
bodies, for Mercury comes forth of an unctious Earth and clear Water well
diluted and mixed. Sulphur is generated of the most subtle and driest Earth
coupled with the moist Air; Finally Salt is congealed of salt and thick Water,
and crude Air.

153 It may be lawful to affirm that Democritus his opinion, That all bodies
were composed out of Atoms, is not far distant from truth: for both reason and
experience do vindicate him from biting tongues, for the knowing Philosopher
would not wholly conceal, but would unfold in an obscure and dark term, the
mixture of the Elements, which that it might be agreeable to the intention of
Nature, must necessarily be done by the smallest, and by actually indivisible
Beings: other wise the Elements could not combine into a continuous and natural
body. Experience teaches us in the artifical resolution and composition of
mixed Beings, which are tried by distillations, that the perfect mixtion of two
or more bodies, is not done but in a subtle vapor. But Nature does make her
mixtions far more subtle, and as it were spiritual, which we may safely
believe was the opinion of Democritus: for the grosseness of bodies is an
impediment to Mixtion, therefore the more any thing is attenuated, the more apt
and fitted it is for mixtion.

154 The threefold degree of Existence in mixed Beings, does offer to us three
supreme kinds of mixed Beings, to wit, of Minerals, Vegetables, and of Animal
Beings. Natures law has appointed a Being for Minerals in the Earth, for
Vegetables in the Earth and the Water, for Animals in the Earth, Water, and
Air; yet to all the Air is the principal food and foster of life.

155 Minerals, are thought simply not to have an existence or a life, although
Metals from Minerals may be said to be endowed with a principal life, both
because in their generation there is a kind of a copulation, and a commixiton
of a double seed, male and female, viz. Sulphur and Mercury, which two, by a
long and multiplied circulation, are turned and purged, and being seasoned with
the salt of Nature, and fermented by it, and being perfectly mixed in a most
subtle vapor, are formed into a clay or soft mass, the spirit of Sulphur by
degrees closing in the Mercury, at length that Mass does grow hard, and is
confirmed to a metallic body.

156 As also, because perfect Metals, especially do contain in them a
principle of life, to wit, in-set fire infused from heaven, which being dulled
by being bound in with the hard outside of the Metal, lies hid as void of
motion, and as an enchanted treasure, till getting liberty by philosophical
solution, and the subtle artifice of the workman, it does powerfully display
its refined spirit and celestial soul, by a motion of vegetation, and in the
issue, heightened to the sudden perfection of art and nature

157 Vegetables also are invested with a vegetative soul or spirit, they grow
by a vegetative motion, and multiply^, yet want an animal sense and motion.
Their seeds are of an Hermaphroditical nature, for every particular grain does
contain in it a fruitful seed without copulation or mixture of a double seed,
although in every kind, almost, of Vegetables, experience shows, there are
both sexes to be found.

158 God also has wrapped up in the seeds of Vegetables, a secret spirit, the
author of generation ennobled with a special character, which is wholly
celestial, and a ray of the heavenly light, void of corruption, in which is
preserved the specifical form under the body of every individual subsistence,
which being through corruption resolved and lost, that immortal spirit being
called out by the vivifical and homogeneal heat of the Sun, does rise up in a
new stalk, and does bring into it the form of the fo^mer.

159 Animals, besides their existence and faculty of vegetation, do exceed in a
sensitive soul, which is in them the principle of life and motion. Therefore an
Animal, seated in the highest degree of things below, does complete the work of
Nature in her Elementary kingdom, does live properly, generate properly, and in
it has Nature truly distinguished each Sex, that from two, a third, to wit,
their issue might be produced. So in the more perfect Beings the most perfect
Symbol of the Trinity is most apparent.

160 Man, the Prince of all creatures, and of the lower World, is accounted the
Summary of Universal Nature: For his Soul is an immortal ray of the Divine
Light, his Body is a beautified Composure of the Elements. The inward and
unperceiveable faculties of the Sense, by which man does comprehend all things
obvious, are altogether celestial, and as it were Stars, giving the influence
of knowledge of things; the motions and perturbations of the mind, are as it
were the Winds and Tempests, Lightenings and Thunders; the Meteors, which break
forth in the Aerial Region of the Spirit, do trouble the heart and the blood.
Therefore was man deservedly called a Microcosm, and the accomplished Draught of
the Universe.

161 But not only man, but even every living creature, yea, every Plant is a
Microcosm. So is every Grain or Seed a Chaos, in which are the seeds of the
whole World compendiously bound up, out of which in its season a little World
will spring.

162 Whatsoever Beings of Natnre have a perfect mixture and life, they have a
body, spirit, and soul. The body is made of clay, in which are all things
necessary for the matter of generation, for it is most agreeable to reason,
that Bodies should be made of two corporeal Elements especially, viz. Earth and
Water.

163 The Spirit is a small portion of the purest Air, or the Heaven, a middle
nature betwixt the Body and the Soul, the knot and bond of both, the case of
the Soul, and the conduit of the more subtle and spiritual parts of the body.

164 The soul or form of a mixed body, is a spark of the Fire of Nature, an
undiscernable Ray of Celestial Light, brought into act from the power of the
seed, by the motion of generation, bound to an Elementary body by the mediation
of the Spirit, giving its individual Being to the mixed body, the nearest
principle and the efficient cause of life. It acts according to the disposed
matter, and the qualities of the Organs.

165 The nature or from of the Soul, because it is altogether full of light in
living creatures especially, has so great a distance from the dark and earthy
matter of bodies, that this is wholly irrational in respect of that, and this
unproportionably more noble, and therefore is fastened by that strictest tie
which Nature makes use of in her works to the body, by reason of the
disconveniency and distance, unless the conjunction and knot had been made by
the virtue and efficacy of a peculiar and powerful mean, therefore did the
provident Creator assign a subtle mean, which is the Aetherial spirit, which
receives and retains the begotten from, and is the tie of it to the body,
communicating in its nature with both. These things are to be conceived to be
spoken of the celestial Soul of Natural things, not of the Super-celestial and
divine Soul of man, which notwithstanding is according to the good pleasure of
the Creator, brought into a consortship with the body of man by natural
mediums.

166 The specifical forms from the first day of the Creation, were imprinted in
the first individual and particular persons, by the character of the Idaeal
copy, and that diviue and indelible impress was according to the direction of
the Creator, by the way of generation traduced to posterity, that so by the
perpetual succession of particular individual natures, the privilege of
immortality might be continued in the kind.

167 It cannot, nor must be conceived, that Forms do generate in the matter
their like, for to generate is the alone property of bodies, but by an
harmonious motion of their Organs, they do by them dispose the seminal matter
for generation, and shut up in it a ray of Light, or a secret spark of life, as
a treasure: This is the office and privilege of the Form, as also to imprint
its own specifical character on that vivifical spirit, wrapped up close in the
seed, which in its set season, does in the work of generation by the
engendering heat, display it self into a soul, whether Vegetative or Animal, so
that what was a formal and hidden spirit in the seed, is now a Form in the mixed
body. So that occult thing that was closed in the bosom of Nature, is now made
manifest, and brought forth from a power to an act.

168 The Form issues not forth only out of the power and virtue of the seed,
because there is an influence of celestial virtues in the generations of
Beings, which do heighten the efficacies of the matter, do multiply them, and
as it were midwife it to groaning Nature, yea, they do get into, and mix
themselves with, and bring in auxiliary strength to the formal and seminal
spirit that is in the matter, which is also by its original, celestial.

169 There do not only meet in the generation of every mixed Being, the
corporeal Elements, but also all the Virtues, all the Powers of Nature in
general, and these do contribute something of their own; so are the parts of
the Universe bound up together, that they have an unanimous combination for
life, and couple by a mutual affection.

170 The natural Forms of things though they are potentially in the seeds, yet
are they neither of, nor generated by the substance of the lower Elements, for
they have their rise from a more noble spring, their original is from Heaven,
for their father is the Sun, the heavenly Nature the bond whereby these matters
are knit together.

171 The specifical Forms of mixed Beings have within themselves closed a dark
kind of knowledge of their original, and are carried up by their own strength,
and by a secret motion, like unto Waters, to the height of their Fountain head.
So the Soul of man being derived from the divine Spring of the uncreated Light,
is reflected to the same by the sharp sight of his mind, and by the soaring
contemplations of his soul, but the forms of other living creatures being taken
out of the privy Treasury of the Heavens and the Sun, do by the instinct of
Nature, and by a weak kind of reminiscency, glance back thither. Hence we may
observe the frequent Prognostics of several creatures concerning the courses
of the Sun, and the changes of the Heavens. But the forms of Vegetables, being
for the most part airy and inspired from the lowest Region of our Air,
therefore they are not able to extend or reach forth their power, or faculties
beyond it, they do, according to their ability, lift up their heads into the
Air, as willing to visit their Country, but they are stopped so, as that they
are not able to pass the narrow confines of their bodies, wanting the sense and
life of a Soul, because there is so little of the Suns virtue in them, as will
not carry them above the motion of a Vegetation. For in the order of creation,
the Vegetables were first before the Sun, wherefore creatures are not equally
indebted to him for their originals, and the aged principles of their life, but
must acknowledge them received from the lightsom Air, as a nearer Agent. For
the disposition of their matter was adjudged by Nature as too weak to receive
so sublime a form.

172 But for Stones, since they are not so much generated out of a true mixture
of the Elements, as from a concourse of Earth and Water, by an external force
of Heat and Cold, they are decocted as an earthen Work or vessel, therefore
they are altogether senseless, having borrowed a feeble form from the dark and
cold nature of the Earth and Water.

173 Concerning precious Stones and Gems, we must conceive otherwise, for they
derive their forms from the Crystal Fouutains of the Heavens and the Sun, and
their bodies are the purest drops of a refined dew, engendered by celestial
influences, and as it were the congealed tears of of Heaven, whence they
possess and contain many sublime virtues.

174 But the matter of Metals, because it is watery and earthy, and most
compacted, by reason of the principal and subtle commixtion of weighty
Elements, is therefore heavy and exceedingly ponderous, and of it self capable
of no motion: but because it is sublimated and mundefied by the wonderful
artifice of Nature, in an earthy and stony Matrix, as in a Limbick, and its
mixture is completed in a most thin vapor, by reiterated distillations, that
by reason of its exceeding subtility and exuberancy, the influential helps of
the Sun and the Heavens, get in and mix with it, especially in the generation
of perfect metals; for this cause, though they fetch their bodies from Water
and Earth, yet Nature performing the office of workman, does so ingeniously
make up the bodies, especially of a perfect metal, that it delivers them to
the heavenly Deities, as those that deserve to be informed with the most
eminent form. It is a work of long travail, but an absolute one, and heightened
to the utmost of Natures actings, in which Heaven and Earth seem rather to
copulate, than to consent. But the formal spirits of metals being bound up in
a hard cover, do stick immovable, till released of their bands by
Philosophical Fire, they do produce by their heavenly Seed in their matter,
that noble son of the Sun, and at length that Quint-essence of admirable
Virtue, in which the Heavens seem to lodge with, and come down to us.

175 It was provided by the Decree of the supreme Creator, that a Nature more
noble should not degenerate into one less noble, or that one more eminent, into
a nature that is more base, or that it should, abjuring its native privilege
of birthright, come under a servile vassalage. Superior Beings are coupled
with these below, and those of greater power do communicate themselves with
those of a less, that they may inform and complete them by their emissary
spirits, which notwithstanding in this do no way derogate from their stock or
kind. Nay, when they work themselves into the seeds of things, or also into
mixed Beings, they subject not themselves to a bondage, but do attain a new
honor and privileged power. For every mixed Being of whatsoever kind it is, is
a kind of an Empire, yea the whole world, who has a spiritual form of her own
to rule her, whose office it is to have dominion over the organs and faculties
of Nature, yea over the whole frame, so that that, which being void and without
distinction, did drift it rolling hither and thither in the vast Ocean of
Nature, is now called to an Empire.

176 The formal act of the first matter, as also of the Elements, does inform
nothing besides the very principles of Nature, therefore the specifical form
does constitute a perfect mixed Being, neither is it to be thought to contain
any more forms, since the very Elements in their mixtion, have the charge of
the fashioning, not of the informing of the body.

177 It is most probable, that the virtue of multiplication, which lies in the
seeds of Beings, does not flow from the Elementary matter as its efficient
cause, but from a celestial form: for to multiply, is the most natural and
proper action of light, for from one ray are almost an infinite number darted
forth; from whence it proceeds, that the Sun, who is the Fountain of immortal
Light, is also in nature the first efficient cause of generation and
multiplication: that therefore every form receives a natural power of
multiplication from the celestial light, is proved by this weighty Argument,
because it is lightfull and furnished with its native endowments, Ergo
multiplying; It is lightfull, because it does enlighten with its rays the
sensitive and imaginative faculties in creatures, that so out of that double
faculty, springs a double apprehension and knowledge of things; an external by
the senses, an internal by imagination; but all knowledge is a light, as all
ignorance is a darkness: but there peeps up some enlightening and lightsomness,
when there is an apprehension of the images of things, and when that, which lay
unknown in the dark, is now manifested by a light of knowledge, for it is only
by the good office of light, that obscure things receive a revelation. God did
add to man a third light, to wit, his Understanding, by the help of which he
attains by their causes, a far more perfect way of knowledge. All these things
are produced by the operation of light, and of a perspicuity flowing out of an
enlightened Soul. This last action of light is only proper to man, the two
former are shared with beasts as well as by him, for their souls are also
partakers of celestial light. Therefore reason does convince, that the virtue
of multiplication in the individual Beings of Animals and Vegetables, does
proceed from the Souls multiplication of light, and that some rays of it are
included in the seed with the Aetherial spirit, until at length they are set
upon the rising of the Sun of Life.

178 Light and Darkness are the principles of Life and Death, for the rays of
Light are the forms of mixed Beings, their bodies a dark Abyss. By Light all
things live, yea Light is life; but those that loose their life, loose their
light, and are hurried into their former darkness, in which they lay close and
hidden, before they were drawn to light by the fatal wheel of Predestination.

179 The specifical forms of Animals, as also of Vegetables, are rational,
though not after the manner of men, but after a property of their own,
according to the virtues and impress of their nature. For they have their vital
endowments, their cognizances, knowledge, and their predestinations. The vital
endowments of Vegetables, are an endeavor of generating the like, the
multiplying virtues, nutritive, augmenting, motive and sensitive, and the like.
But their knowledge is experienced by their wise foreknowledge of times, their
strict observation of change, as of the orders of Nature, in a variety
agreeable to the motion of the Sun and Heaven, in the fastening the Roots, the
erecting the Stalk, spreading the Branches, in the opening the Leaves and the
Flowers, in the forming the Fruit, in their beautifying, in their ripening, in
the transmutations of Elements into aliments, in the inspiring of a vivifical
virtue into the Seeds; lastly, in constituting a various difference of Nature
and parts, according to the benign or malign concurrence of the Sun or Soil.

180 That the souls of Bruits are endowed with knowledge, is sufficiently, by
their copulations and generations upon set times, their just distributions in
the forming and nourishing of the parts of the individual Beings, the distinct
offices of those parts free from any confusion, the various motions of their
souls, the nimble faculties of their senses, the secret spirits, harmoniously
moving the members as organs, their proneness to discipline, their obsequious
reverence to their Masters, the presaging instinct of things to come; in most a
devout worship, an art in getting their provision, in choice of their raunges,
providing their fence, their prudence in the avoiding dangers, and the rest
actions so agreeable to knowledge and reason, bestowed upon them by Nature. But
Nature in every individual, is nothing else but the form it self, which is the
principle of motion, and rest of action, and life to it, in which it is, to
which is committed the charge, direction and conservation of its body, as a
Ship to a Pilot.

181 But who will deny the certain predestination of Times for the birth of
things, unless he fancy a confusion and disorder in the Nature of the Universe,
for she draws forth all those things out of her bosom, according to settled and
fore-appointed order, for she had a prescript from her Maker for the Law of
Order, and the times of production; their quickening, birth, life and death
have their set times, and do fulfill their designed seasons; those things that
either this or that year receive their Being, or return to darkness, are
pre-ordained to it, which pre ordination, Nature, Gods Vicegerent in the rule
of the Universe, does foreknow by the suggestion of the Divine Spirit, that
she might be ministerial to the compassing of it; neither do those things
casually fall out, but they have a necessary, though unknown cause, yet the
Grand Ruler of all is not comprised within the Law of Necessity, but appoints
all things, and changes them according to his own will. He it is that decrees
concerning all, even the least things, whose Decrees want neither certainty nor
order. Therefore that Order, that runs through the series and succession of
things and times, has the law of its necessity from the divine Decrees.

182 As all things which afterward were actually produced and separated, in
respect of their matter were potentially in the Chaos, so all individuals
before they come to light, are in the World in their matter and potentiality,
and will in their time and order come forth and break into act, but when they
fail and die, they return as Rivers into the Sea, into that general Mass from
whence they came, every Nature recovering its proper Region, and being to be
brought again and again into Natures shop* are wrought into new Beings upon her
Anvile. It may be this was that opinion of the Pythagoreans, therefore
exploded, because not comprehended concerning their Tenet of Transanimation.

183 When the mixed body is dissolved, and the corruption of the frail Elements
come to a loss, the Aetherial nature returns to its native home, and there is
nothing left in the carcass but a perturbation and confusion of the Elements,
having lost their Governor, then there reigns nothing but corruption, death,
and darkness in the widowed matter, until she through corruption be made fit
for generation, and the virtue of Heaven do again flow down into the matter
thus disposed, and gathering and mingling the wandering Elements, do rekindle
the weak light of a new form, which at length breaks forth, the forces of the
Elements being corroborated, and so compleats the new mixture.

184 In that corruption which tends to generation, which is a corruption in the
mean, and is done with the conservation of the specifical form potentially
inherent in the seed or matter, that sublime spirit departs not, but being weak
and impotent, is excited by external heat, and begins to move, and withal give
motion to the matter, till at length it works more vigorously, and gives
information to the perfectly mixed body.

185 The Elements as well as the Aliments of Nature, do begin their generation
and nutrition, which are in most respects the same from Corruption. For both
must necessarily be putrified, and by putrefaction be resolved into a moist,
and as it were a first matter, then is there made a Chaos, in which are all
things necessary for generation and nutrition. So does the birth and repair of
every Microcosm bear with an Analogical resemblance with the creation and
conservation of the Macrocosm.

186 The insensible seeds of things, and those mixed bodies which are begot
from them, do consist of a threefold Nature, of a Celestial, Elementary, and
Mixed Nature. The Celestial is a ray of the Light of the Sun, endued with all
heavenly vigor, the principle of action, motion, generation and life, by whose
help the seeds, by their renewed vigor, do resemble the constant permanency of
the Stars, and being in a manner as so many immortal grafts of celestial
plants, ingrafted upon corruptible nature, as upon a strange stock, do by a
kind of an eternal succession, vindicate it from death: The Elementary,
corporeal and sensible portion, which in creatures is called the Sperm, is the
Case and keeper of the seed, which putrifies and is corrupted, and generates an
invisible seed. The Radical Moisture, or the Ferment of Nature, in which lies
the spirit, is a middle substance, coupling the Celestial and Elementary, in
the material part answering the Elements; in the spiritual, the Form. Like the
Daybreak, whose cheek being covered with a duskie light, does knit together
the two extremes of Light and Darkness, and being neither, does hold forth a
mixture of both.

187 Life is an harmonical act, proceeding from the copulation of the Matter
and the Form, constituting the perfect Being of an individual nature. Death is
the term or end of this act, the separation of the matter and form, and a
resolution of the mixed body.

188 These mixed bodies have the roots of their generation and life in Heaven,
from whence springs their Causes and Principles, whence also as inverted Trees,
they do suck their juice and aliment. Neither is it suitable for the
Understanding, to be envassaled to the Rule of the Senses, which comprehend
nothing but what is sensible. But the mind rangeth far abroad beyond the
Cloisters of the Senses, and searches to a greater height, for the hunting out
of the bounds of Nature. The bodies are as it were the barks, the grosser parts
of the Elements the accidents of things, under which lie hid the pure and
sprightly Essences, which acknowledge not the subjection and censure of the
Senses, and which it was a necessity to cloth under a dark Cloud, that they
might pass from their heavenly, to their earthly province of the corporeal
Beings. The supreme Creator of Nature enacted this copulation of spirituals
with corporeals, whereby his uncreated spirit communicating it self, first to
the more spiritual and simple Natures, might be conveyed through them, as by so
many conduits, to corporeal Beings, and in this manner diffusing it self
gradually and orderly, through all the Regions of the World, through all and
every Being, does sustain all things by the Divine presence, as also that by a
sensible creature, the insensible CREATOR might be apprehended through
corporeal and sensible resemblances.

189 Whatsoever lives either an Animal or Vegetable life, stands in need of
food, that the natural spirits might be recruited, which do continually slide
forth through the pores, and that so the loss of Nature might have a successive
repair. For the nourishing juice is made by the more succulent substance of the
meat, whereby the parts and humors of the body are reinforced. The radical
Moisture is renewed out of the purer portion of the humors, especially of the
blood, the celestial influence intermingling it self by respiration with it.

190 Living things have a twofold nourishment, to wit, a Corporeal and a
Spiritual, the former being of small avail to life without the latter. For
Vegetables do evidently refer the benefit of their increase and nourishment
no less to the Air and Heaven, than to the Earth: yea the Earth it self, unless
suckled with the milk of Heaven, would quickly find her own breast to flag
dry, this that holy Diver into Natures secrets, when he blessed Joseph, Deuteronomy.
cap. 33.
does thus express: Blessed be the Lord for his Earth, for the apples of Heaven,
for the Dew, and for the Deep that coucheth beneath, for the pleasant apples of
the Sun and of the Moon, for the top of the everlasting Mountains, for the
fruits of the eternal Hills, etc. By which mystical speech, the Prophet
fore-ensureth the Earths plenty, by the abundant influence of the Sun, Moon,
and of the rest of the celestial bodies.

191 That spiritual Diet, as far as it conduces to the life of creatures, is
acknowledged by every vulgar capacity, that sees the renewed respiration, and
the frequent sucking in of the external Air. For not only according to the
opinion of ordinary Physicians, has Nature so workmanlike framed those
bellows, bordering upon the heart to cool it, but also that by their continued
fanning, they might breath in an ethereal Air, and hand to it celestial
spirits, that so by their recruits the vital spirits may be kept in repair, and
be always multiplied.

192 Philosophers do not only call those spiritual Natures, which being
created without matter, are only comprehended by the Understanding, as the
intelligencies, Angels* and Devils are accounted to be: but also those that,
which although they have their original from matter, yet in respect of their
great tenuity and nobility, do not subject themselves to the search of the
Senses, and nearer approaching to spiritual Beings, are rather under stood by
reason, than found by sense Such is the pure part of the Air, such are the
influencies of heavenly bodies, such the in-set fire and seminal virtues, such
the vegetable spirits, such the animal, and the vital, and the like, in which
consists the very nature of Beings, than in grosser bodies. Such like natures
spring from Heaven, and in relation to sensibles, do assume to themselves the
name and right of spirits.

193 It is suitable that we should give the Fire of Nature a place amongst the
spiritual Beings, for in it self it is not perceivable by any sense, but
discovers it self only in bodies, by heat and other effects and accidents.
This is apparent in living creatures, into which by this unperceiveable fire,
is infused a sensible heat, and that Fire with the life stealing away, the
Elementary body or the carcass, yet the mixed being dissolved, remains sound
and unhurt. In Vegetables, because this Fire is weaker, it does elude the
sense, and is not to be perceived by any heat.

194 Reason also convinces, that our common Fire is to be sorted amongst the
spiritual, rather than corporeal Beings. For if it were corporeal, it should
have from it self a peculiar and inseparable body, no less than Earth, Water,
or Air, and the rest of the sensible Natures, which do consist and are bounded
within their proper bodies, which do exist in them and by them, which do act
according to their virtues, and produce them to the Senses. But Fire has not a
peculiar and sensible body, lodges only in another, for a Coal is not Fire,
but Wood fired, neither is the flame Fire, but smoke inflamed; finally, that
Robber only feeds upon what is not his own, lives upon the prey, and is
extinguished when this fails, having nothing in it self to feed it. Besides, a
body super-added to another body, does augment the quantity of it, but this not
found in fire put into wood or smoke, for the smoke or wood is no way increased
by the accession of fire in their quantities, from which it is evident, that a
fiery spirit rather than a body, does invade the wood or smoke. A sword melted,
the scabbard being untouched, the bones shattered by the fiery bolt of Thunder,
and yet the flesh unhurt, do sufficiently argue the spiritual nature, even of
that thundering fire. Yet we must know that Fire is not wholly immaterial, for
it has a matter, though a very subtle and light one, whereby it cleaves to
the encompassing air, whereby it may be kept in by a more gross body. Yet does
it rather deserve the name of a spirit, than of a body, because it has not a
sensible quantity, neither can it be comprehended, but when it is arrayed in
another body.

195 For Light the original of it does evince, that it ought to be seated
amongst those things that are truly spiritual. There was no light but in God
before the informing of the first matter, and the birth of the world. But when
Nature received her Being, then began there a spiritual light to issue forth
from the fiery spirit of God upon the matter, and there to settle as in its
lamp, and this was the creation and original of Light: that was the first act
of the Deity upon the matter; the first copulation of the Creator with the
creature, of a spirit with a body. Therefore the first informing Light, was a
mere Spirit, which did kindle with its fiery virtue, as with heat, the nearest
matter, being exceedingly rarefied by its spiritual Light, and so were the
darkness converted to light. The Heaven, being distinguished by the first
light, although it be not material and fiery, yet is nevertheless invisible,
because in respect of the matter, it is brought to the highest degree of
tenuity, and in respect of its form, is endowed with spirituality. But the
Light that was scattered in the middle Heaven, being bounded into a narrower
compass, was cast into the Globe of the Sun, which was necessarily to be formed
into a kind of a thick body, as it were into a smoke fit to be kindled, yet not
combustible, that so it might be settled, being kindled by that immortal Light,
and be in the room of the general Lamp of Nature, or as a fiery Mass. The light
of the Sun therefore is nothing else but a lightsome spirit, deriving its rise
from the Spirit of eternal Light, gathered in, and inseparably cleaving to the
body of the Sun, and made sensible by reason of the thickness of the body,
communicating to all the natures of the Universe, light, and a manifold virtue:
constituting the spirit of the World by its non-intermitted influence: and
bound up in a body for the good and welfare of the corporeal Nature.

196 Yet the Sunbeams that are perceivable by our eyes, are not pure spirits,
for issuing continually from the Sun, have their progress, being clothed with
the encompassing Air. They are therefore nothing else but a continued flowing
forth of the spirit of Light, which springing forth as so many rivulets from
their Eternal Fountain, and working themselves into the aetherial Nature, as a
flame into a most thin smoke, do overspread the whole face of the Universal
World with their light.

197 It is natural to Light to flow continually from its Fountain. We call
those Rays issuing forth, and mixing themselves with the airy nature, and they
are the first actings of light in the Sun, and the conveyance of it from the
Sun. For it is the property of a lightfull body, to act by it rays, and to send
forth heat and light, and that might spread its light abroad by a darting
forth, and multiplying of its beams. We do by light signify both the first act
of the lightsom body, as also a secondary lightsomness which flows out from
the former.

198 The Lamp being out, either for want of matter, or blown out by the wind,
the fiery and lightsom spirit that kindled the Lamp does not perish, neither is
it extinguished, as it commonly seems, but only loosing what it feeds on, and
being stripped from it, is scattered in and vanishes to Air, which is the Abyss
and universal Receptacle of all lights and spiritual natures of the material
World: from whence we may learn, that the nature of this Lightsomness is
spiritual, and is derived from the spiritual Fountain, not otherwise than
natural forms from their Matrix, which is the spirit of the Universe,
perpetually flowing from the Sun, as from an eternal and immortal Spring. For
as the bodies of mixed Beings in their making, do rise from the first matter,
and the Elements, and do gradually at their departure, slide into the same
again, so the natural forms of individuals in their approach, do flow from the
universal form (which in the manner of a Form of forms, does inspire a formal
virtue into the seeds) and in their recess do again return into it. But that
form is the Spirit of the light of the Universe, to which, as to their
principle, and as to a nature of the same kind, do all single forms and sparks
of light got loose from their ties, return. So are all mixed Beings resolved
into their first principles, but these principles do return to that Eternal
Spring of Nature, as to their proper center and peculiar country.

199 But that Spirit of the Universe is from the Sun, yet not the very light of
the Sun, conspicuous to us by reason of the presence of its body; but that
invisible spirit, which is continually dispersed by the beams of the Sun,
through the universal Region of the Air, and does extend it self perpetually by
communication through our Heaven, yea, even to the center of the Earth, and
that in the absence of the Sun, and in the darkest night, pouring out all gifts
for generation and life, through all the bodies of the Universe.

200 The divine Love was not able to contain it self within it self, but did
wholly go out of it self in the creation, by multiplication of it self, and
pouring out himself wholly also in the conservation of creatures in themselves.
Light also, which is the exactest Copy of the Deity, does also imitate the
divine Love: for it is not able to be comprised within its own lightsom body,
but is diffused far and near for the good of other Beings, by a strong
multiplication of its beams, being not so much born for it self as for others,
being as it were the token of Divine Love, communicating it self to its power,
and reaching forth into the most remote places, unless it meet with a stop from
a thick body.

201 Light also does hold forth to us the infinite Nature of God; for the small
light of a lamp or candle cannot, as long as it is fed, by all its continued
effluence of rays, and by its infinite communication of its flames, be
exhausted or diminished. As many beams so many streams flow from it. Yet though
it gives, though it diffuseth it self, although much be taken from it, yet is
it not brought to nothing, neither receives loss, which is the alone property
of a spiritual nature, and is altogether unappliable to a corporeal. So the
intellectual endowments, as the understanding and knowledge of things, which
are justly esteemed spiritual lights, are of the same kind, that though always
bestowed abroad, yet are preserved entire at home. Therefore must we confess
that there is something divine in Light.

202 The beams of a lightsom body, although they be of a spiritual nature, yet
are they stopped by a thick body, because their conveyance is by means of the
Air, without which they are not perceivable by us, by which copulation also
they are in a manner made corporeal, and therefore cannot pierce or enter into
the bodies that are not porous. So spiritual things do act with us by some
sensible mean, that so we may perceive them to act. But the lightsom body being
absent, the beams also depart, neither do they part from his presence, because
they immediately flow from him.

203 But the Air is without enlightened, not only by the presence of a body of
light, and of the beams from it, but also the body being gone, and the beams
withdrawn, by a lightsom spirit flowing from them: as is clear in the darkest
Eclipse, or the Heavens over-cast with the blackest clouds, or wrapped up in the
mask of night, yea, the Sun being sunk under the Horizon: for that act of
present light cannot proceed from the body of light, and its beams being
absent, but from the access and presence of a spiritual light.

204 A transparent body as glass, being pointed with the Sun beams, does gather
them, and receives in it the image of the Sun, and is made lightsom, and as it
were a brief draught of the Sun, which sends forth its beams on the farthest
side opposite to the Sun, from which the beams of the Sun being refracted, by
the concourse of the glass, seem to pass through the glass, which yet indeed
they do not, for the rays by reason of the Air that cleaves to them, are settled
about the glass, the spirit of light only passing forward, but by the beams
which are darted out on the other side, are the beams of the Sun, or of the
glass being kindled by the Sunbeams into a lightsom body.

205 Every transparent body, especially glass, is a medium of light, because it
receives light into it, and having received it, does communicate it to the Air
that is beyond it, not by the sending forth of lightsom Air about it, which is
repugnant to Nature, but by another double way. First, because a transparent
body yields to, and lets pass the spirit of light, and does send it forth
abroad being received by it, which sent forth, gets into the adjoining Air,
hence springs that plentiful light; and besides, because that transparent
Medium is made by the benefit of the light, it receives not only light in it
self, but lightsom to others, and by the spirit of Light, which is in love with
transparent bodies, becomes as it were a lighted lamp. But now every lightsom
body has the privilege and power to scatter its light, which is not granted
to thick and dark bodies, unless by reflection.

206 Those which are the pure natures of mixed Beings, are mearly spiritual, the
bodies are as it were the Barks and Vessels, in which they are contained and
kept. And not otherwise could those sublime Natures, unless tied to the
corporeal Elements, and so bound in by their weight, pass this lower Sea, and
lodge in the Center of this Abyss. They come subject to sense by their bodies,
the bodies are moved and acted by them, so do they do interchangeable offices.
This that secret of Homers Juno, whom Jupiter let down with a weight at her
heels.

207 Since the whole frame of the Universe is but one only body, one only
universal Nature, consisting of many natures and bodies, bound together by
their proper Mediums and bonds, it should not be wondered at, that such parts
and members are knit together by a strong, but secret tie, and do give a mutual
assistance each to other, for they have not only a mutual relation to, but
also a communication with one the other, and these various natures do exercise
a kind of a commerce, the extremes by the middle, the middle by the nearest.
But this communication is performed by spirits sent forth: for all the parts of
the world, all the individual natures of the world do abound in spirits; many
of which flowing forth, leave room and give way for those that flow in, and so
is there by the continual ebbing out and flowing in of spirits, a continual
reparation of the world, and of the natures thereof. This is the scale of
general Nature presented in a vision to the Patriarch Jacob, these are
Mercuries wings, by whose help being mistically termed by the Ancients, the
Messenger of the Gods, he was thought frequently to visit the coasts of the
Earth, and the courts of Heaven.

208 The active principles of every kind of Vegetables or Animals are
spiritual, their bodies are the passive organs of the spirits, by which they
exercise the faculties of the senses, and do by various actings put forth their
powers, as the authors of actions, so that in the general life may be termed a
concent of actions, or a continued act diversified by the multiplicitie of
actions, flowing from a spiritual fountain, and brought forth by corporeal
organs.

209 It is the property of the spiritual nature to act, of the corporeal to be
passive, where therefore there is a concourse of both, as in mixed bodies, that
as the more noble does act and rule this as passive does obey. For the power of
act is the privilege of ruling, but the burden of being passive is the mark of
being servile; so the in-set fire in the seed, is the principle of generation
and life, the highest operating spirit, the Archaeus of Nature, the orderer in
the preparing and forming the matter in the mixtion and distribution of the
Elements. So does the Form in the mixed Being exercise its rule at his will, as
the fountain of all actions. So do the virtues of the heavenly Beings dispose
and seal all inferior Elements and corporeal matter.

210 Natural bodies which have an active vigor, and an occult cause of acting,
do not, as is commonly thought, act alone by their qualities, but by secret
spirits. For the fire does not heat and burn by the single quality of heat,
but by the continual flux of spirits and rays. Neither do the Earth and Water
refrigerate or moisten by the alone qualities of cold and moist, but by their
vapors and in-nate spirits sent forth, do affect the sense from without.
Neither do poisons only by cold or hot qualities, but by malignant spirits
bring death or infection sooner or later. Concerning Plants or Herbs, we must
judge alike, because their active virtues do not lie hid in their qualities,
but in their essence, which Nature has made abundant in spirits, whose basis
and principle powers are concerning spirituals, for the bodies are as the
shadows or the investments of things, under which the invisible Nature is
hidden, but since qualities are the accidents of things, are not therefore able
to constitute their essence, nor show forth in their actings those wonderful
virtues, but are only as the in set instruments of actions and passions, which
the working spirits, that are the workers of all actions make use of in their
actings, but yet Nature indures them not as principles and efficient causes of
actions.

211 The natural tinctures, odours and tastes of things are special and
spiritual gifts of Nature, with which it has suitably enriched her Beings, and
which do not only contribute to their ornament, or only are inherent in them,
as extrinsecal accidents, but also have an in-set and radical cause, and are
not so much to be termed accidents, as demonstrative tokens of inward virtues,
by which the occult and formal signatures of things discover themselves.

212 Rarefaction and condensation are the two instruments of Nature, by which
spirits are converted into bodies, and bodies into spirits, or also by which
corporeal Elements are changed into spiritual Beings, and spiritual into
corporeal; for Elements do suffer these changes in mixed bodies. So the Earth
does minister spiritual food to the roots of vegetables, which being fed upon,
does go into the stalk, the bark, the boughs, the branches, the flowrs, and
into the corporeal substance. The same is done by Nature in Animals. For the
meat and drink, which they diet on, or at least the better part, is terminated
into humors, and at length into spirits, which getting through the pores, and
knit to the flesh, nerves, bones, and the rest of the parts of the body, do
nourish and augment them, and do by the never-tired work of supply, repair
decaying nature. So the spiritual and the portion of the purer substance, is
curdled to the frothie body of seed. Art the Ape of Nature, does experience
the like in her resolutions and compositions.

213 The life of individuals is in a rational and strict union of the matter
and form: but the knot of both natures, their tie and base lies hid in the
fortified embraces of the innate heat and fire, and the radical moisture. For
that formal fire is an heavenly ray, which is united with the radical moisture,
which is the purest and best digested portion of the matter, and as it were an
oil defaecated, exuberated, and turned as it were into a spiritual nature, by
the organs of Nature, as by so many Alembicks.

214 There is much of the radical moisture in the seed of things, in which, as
in its food, is kept a celestial Spark, which does act all things necessary to
generation in a convenient matrix. But wheresoever there is a constant
principle of heat, there is conceived to be a fire, because the natural
principle of heat is his in which it is,

215 A man may observe something immortal in the radical moisture, which does
neither vanish by death, nor consume by the force of the most violent fire, but
remains unvanquished in the carkases and ashes of bodies burnt.

216 There is a double moisture lies in every mixed Being, to wit, an
Elementarie and a Radical. The Elementarie, being partly of an aeriall, parley
of a watrie nature, yields not to fire, but flies away into a vapor or smoke,
which being drawn forth, the body is resolved into ashes; for by it, as by a
glue, the Elements in their mixture are knit together. But the radical moisture
scorns the tyrannical assaults of common fire, but it neither dies in the
martyrdom, nor flies away in the combat, but surviving the mixed body, does
stubbornly stick to its ashes, which is an evidence of its exact purity.

217 The experience of this radical moisture, hidden in the ashes, did teach a
secret to the glas-makers, being ignorant of the nature of things, for by
bringing Glass out of Ashes by the sharp point of their casting flames, they
have made a hidden thing evident, beyond which, neither the strength of fire or
art are able to stretch it. But the ashes must necessarily run, that there
might be a continued quantity, and a solid body made as glass is, which could
not be otherwise, for there can be no flowing of any thing without moisture.
Therefore that moisture being inseparable from its matter, is at length brought
to terminate into that noble and as it were aetherial transparent body.

218 The extraction of Salts out of Ashes, in which is the chief virtue of mixed
Beings, the fertility of ground increased by the burning of stubble, and by
ashes, does evidence, that that moisture preserved free from fire, is the
radical principal of generation, and the root of nature. Although this virtue
lies hid, solitary and idle, till being received by the Earth, the common
matrix of Natures principles, yet show forth a hidden faculty convenient for
generation and multiplication, as it is also accustomable in the seed of things.

219 That Radical Balsame, is Natures ferment or leaven, infecting the whole
mass of the body. It is an indelible and multiplying tincture, for it pierces
and tingeth even the more loathsome excrements, which is evident by the
frequent, although imperfect generation, that is made from out of them, as also
by the frequent dunging of ground, which is known by the most unskilful
husbandmen, that so the languishing land may be set forward to pay its due, and
that with an advantage to the expecting labourer.

220 We may guess, that that root of Nature, which survives the ruin of the
mixed body, is a foot-step, and the purest and immortal portion of the first
matter informed, and signed with the divine character of Light. For that
ancient matrimony betwixt the first Matter and its Form, is not to be untied,
from which copulation the other bodies drew their original. Moreover, it was
necessary that this incorruptible base of corruptible things, and as it were
the cube-root of them should lie hid, always remaining and immortal in the
depth of bodies, that it might be constantly and perpetually a material
Principle, having a potentiality and aptitude to life, about which, as about an
immovable Axle-tree, there might be a continual turning of the Elements and
things. And if we may have the liberty in dark things, to guess at what is most
likely truth, that immortal Substance is the foundation of the material World,
and the Ferment of its immortality, which the Eternal Measurer of all things
has fore-established to survive the day of the conflagration of all things,
when the Elements shall be purified by that refining fire, that so he might
renew and repair out of this pure and ever-remaining Matter, his work
vindicated from original sin, and the taint of corruption.

221 That this radical Basis is not of the kind of special forms, is evident,
because every individual has its individual and singular form, which does
depart the body upon the dissolution of the mixed Being, yet that radical
principle remaining unextinguished, although it abide much weakened, and of
little efficacy, by reason of the absence of the form, yet do those vital
sparkles remain apt for the production of more debased and imperfect births,
which production belongs not so much to Nature, as to the matter in its birth;
this attempteth, but is not able to generate without a companion, by reason of
the absence of the formal and specifical virtue. So the carcass of a man or an
horse, by reason of the defect of seed is not capable for the generation of a
man or an horse, but of loathed worms and other insects, from whence we may
guess, that that feeble principle of life proceeds from the scarcity of the
first matter, and rather to be of the family of the lower Elements, than of the
higher and celestial, yet that there is in it some of that tincture of light.

222 For certainly that slight spark of that former light, which did in the
beginning inform the dark matter of the lower Abyss, may be sufficient for the
generation of insects: for it does work the matter by a confused and disordered
motion, that it might bring forth the power into a feeble act, but the matter
warmed by this spark, and as it were languishing, being corrupted rather by the
fancy than the copulation of a male, does rush into the lustful act, and being
unable to bring forth a just issue of Nature, does form loathsome phantasms, as
Worms, Hornets, Beetles, and the like, in the filthy excrements. Therefore that
radical Moisture is the nearest and never-ceasing subject of generation and
life, in which is first kindled the fire of Nature, and the formal act in a
well disposed and prepared matter. But in a confused and ill ordered matter,
where that humor does act the part of the male, it begets spurious and bastard
births of Nature, for that generation which is made without specifical seed,
seems to be made rather by chance and default, than by the intention of Nature,
although in it seems to be a dark and confused kind of copulation of actives
with passives, which is required also to the production of every, though
imperfect, Being.

223 That radical Ferment constantly abiding in the depth of mixed Bodies, seem
to be the Band, Seat and Tie of that matrimony contracted between Light and
Darkness, between the first Matter and the universal Form, finally of all the
Contraries: otherwise the Matter and Form, by reason of their repugnant
natures, would not be knit together. But that dark unbridledness of the first
matter and its averseness from light was tamed, and its hatred turned into
love, by the good office of that lightsom tincture, which does reconcile things
repugnant.

224 The inbred Heat and the radical Moisture are of a diverse kind, for that is
wholly spiritual and of the Sun, this of a middle nature, betwixt a spiritual
and a corporeal, both participating of an ethereal and elementary Nature; that
is of the degree of things above, this of things below, in which was celebrated
the first marriage of Heaven and Earth, by which also Heaven has its abode in
the very Center of the Earth. They are therefore deceived, that do confound the
inbred heat and the radical Moisture, for they differ no less than smoke and
flame, the light of the Sun and the Air, Sulphur and Mercury: In mixed Beings,
the radical Moisture is the seat and food of the inbred and celestial Fire, its
bond with the Elementary body: but that power of Fire is the Form and Soul of
mixed Beings. In seeds, that moisture is the immediate Keeper and Case of that
Spirit of Fire enclosed in the seed, till it be set on to generation in a
disposed Matrix, by an adventitious heat. Finally, that radical Substance is
Vulcan's Shop in every mixed Being, the Chimney in which is kept that immortal
Fire, which is the first mover of all the faculties in an individual nature.

225 That radical Moisture is the Catholical Balsam, the most precious Elixar
of Nature, the Mercury of Life, having a perfect sublimation by Nature, a dose
of which is administered to every individual of her family, weighed to a just
quantity by plenteous Nature. They that have attained the happiness to fetch
out this hidden Treasure of Nature, wrapped up close in the heart, and in the
closets of Natures birth, and can get it out of those close coverts of the
Elements, let him boast that he has attained the chiefest staff and help of
life, and a most precious Treasure,

226 The order of Reason and of Creation does require, that the first Copies of
things, being first of all concealed in the celestial Natures, were transmitted
into inferior Beings: but in the first they are of a far greater perfection,
both because of their greater tenuity and dignity, as also because of their
neighboring seats to the Eternal Being: but with us they are much meaner,
because carved in a grosser and less valuable matter, and more distant from
their eternal Principle. There is nothing therefore printed in this lower
Margin of the World, which was not at first copied in the heavenly Being:
neither is there any particular kind of Being of the inferior natures, which
does not acknowledge the dominion of one Superior agreeable to it, and which
it has not the secret seal and signature of it. So do things below depend on
things above.

227 The World is a creature of an ambiguous nature, for it is of both Sexes,
the higher part, to wit, the celestial, is active and masculine; the lower
Elementary nature, is the passive and feminine nature. The Globe of the Earth
is the womb, in which the engendering seed of Heaven is received and kept. From
the masculine part proceed life and strength; from the female part corruption
and death do issue.

228 Since superior and inferior bodies have their original from the same
Principles, as from their parts, yet are they not such as have their equal lot:
it is equal, that those things that have the honor of being nobler substances,
and advanced to higher offices, should distribute to their brethren of a lower
degree, being poor and in want, some of their wealth, and so provide for their
life and conversation. For it was provided by the foresight of the Deity, that
since there was a necessity that the World should be made up of unequal
natures, the more powerful Natures should aid the weaker, and hand help to the
fainting Natures. So Love is the indissoluble knot of the parts of the Universe.

229 In this sublunary Region, diseased Nature sickens out of a defect of the
proportion and temperament of the Elements, either by reason of the quantity,
or of the qualities, either out of a too great intension or remission, and so
is there a dissonancy in Natures music, and a distemper in her bodies.
Therefore the consonancy of the Elements, which rises from a proportion, and
constitutes their temperament, being gone, the matter and form of the whole
mixed Being has a bad coherence; Nature is troubled and staggers with a
perplexed confusion, and hence do first diseases, and then death assault
disordering and falling Nature.

230 That discord of those Principles, have either an intrinsecal and radical
cause, as from a vicious seed, an evil generation, or age; or an intrinsecal
and accidental, as from a too great repletion or emptiness, from whence either
an excess or defect in humors and spirits; or from putrefaction, mortal
poison, infection, grief, hurt, or some other impediment brought upon the
Organs of life with the like, which do hurt Nature.

231 The four radical Qualities of the Elements, are as so many harmonious
Tones of Nature, not contrary but diverse, and distant each from other by
certain pauses, from whose rational difference, intension and remission, is
made a perfect consent of Nature, perceivable by the understanding, bearing an
Analogy to that vocal Music which is heard by the Senses. Sharp and Flat in
Music, though they are extremes, yet are not Contraries in Music, they are
the terms of those means, which lie betwixt them, and are composed and tempered
after a diverse manner by these two extremes. So Heat and Cold, Dryness and
Moisture, are the extreme Qualities in Nature, yet not therefore contrary, but
only the bounds of the middle and interjacent Qualities, from whose mixture
and temperament, do the middle proceed.

232 The motion of Nature is continual and not tired, no less in every part
than in the whole. For she always acts, never idle, so that if she were but out
of action for a moment, it would ruin the whole frame of the Universe, which
is addicted to a decree of a perpetual motion. For neither does the settled
Earth, the calm Sea, the quiet Air, therefore altogether rest, because they are
not seen to be moved, they rest no more than a sleeping man: that rest is a
remission of action, not an omission or cessation. Nature acts within, neither
does it ever desist its action or motion of the Organs. Even a very carcass
has a motion, to wit, of corruption: but living Beings, though they are not
acted by a local, yet are they by an organical motion.

233 Nature does move the frame of the Universe in a uniform and orderly
motion, yet so that wheels things unequal and unlike, by an unequal unlike
motion. This unequality of the motion is required by a Geometrical equity, and
so all the motions of all the heavenly bodies, may be Geometrically termed
equal, considering the difference of the magnitude, distance, and nature of
them.

234 Nature being no less powerful than wise, in the informing and governing
of her Works, does attain her certain end by many wanderings and windings,
which is most evident in the births of the Earth, for she handling the Elements
in an unequal temper, does, especially in the Winter, replenish the womb of the
Earth with a fruitful seed, in the Spring brings forth an easy birth, in the
Summer ripens the fruit, and in the Autumn all fall.

235 This diversity does especially proceed from the approach and recess of the
Sun, appointed to this end by the Creator: For he has destinated the Sun to
the Rule of the Elements, that by his various distance, inflection and
reflection, they may have a diverse and various temperament, and so there might
be some help for Nature, working diverse things by diverse means, and that she
might perfect her changes, by the various changes of Times. This variety of
Nature is worth the exactest thoughts of the most acute Philosophers.

236 The heavenly bodies, though not subject to that stain of alteration, do
notwithstanding introduce manifold changes in the Elementary Region, and do
inspire various affections by their diverse propension, and the various motions
of the planetick bodies, which do alter their site and distance between
themselves, and also the figure of the Heavens, which actions do diversely form
and incline the pliable natures of the Elements, and they never cease to
ferment them by their continual influence.

237 The whole substance of the Heaven, has parts continuous, though not
contiguous; let not any therefore fancy the World to be the works of Art,
which is the work of Nature, which cannot endure any section into Spears and
Circles; for they that first divided the aetherial region into many orbs and
circles, did propose to themselves rather the easy teaching by it, than to
show the truth of the thing. For the divine nature being an unity, is desirous
of and endeavors unity, and so avoideth multiplicitie: wherefore we must
conceive she created not many Heavens, separated by their matter and
superficies, when one body, in respect of the continuitie of the matter,
though distinct in the dignity and virtue of the parts, might suffice. Neither
is this taken off by the motions of the Stars in their courses and customs,
which because we know not, we therefore make a fancied Astrology, and do too
boldly bring the power of God under the weakness of man, though the continuitie
of the Heaven hinder not the motion of the Stars, and there might be some help
for man's reason to find out their orders,

238 That there should be a first moveable above the Heavens, by whose hurrying
motion the lower Heavens are turned about, is not an invention of the wisdom of
God, but only a fancied help for man's ignorance: for if we assign the
principle of motion to that first mover, why do we deny it to the globe of
heaven? why should we fancy an external cause of motion, which may be all this
time intrinsecal?

239 As this lowest province of the World is subject to the rule of the middle,
so is the middle, viz. the aetherial to the highest and supercelestial for its
privileges and deputieship. For the Empyrean heaven, and the quire of the
intelligible Beings, do inspire into the celestial orb those virtues, which
they receive from the Archetype, in order of succession, and do move those
natures that lie nearest them, not without a concent, as the first organs of
the material world: by which motion the inferior bodies, being also moved, do
exercise their turns, as so many dances to a set pace, and do borrow whatsoever
is excellent from the superior bodies.

240 But Intelligences are illuminated at hand, according to their orders from
the mind of God, as from the spring of eternal light, by which illumination
they are fed, as with an immortal food, and in it, as in a glass, do they read,
receive the commands and will of the Divine Majesty, and by it are enkindled
to an honorable obedience. This is the manner and union of the threefold
nature of the Universe, the knot and Herculean bond of this union is the love
of God. So in a ternarie is completed the whole state of the World, whose
Creator is by no means part of it, no otherwise than Unity is neither a
Number, nor the part of a Number, although it constitutes all number, but is
the principle and measure of Number, neither is the Musician or Lutonist a
part, but the author of the Concent.

241 They which believe that an almost innumerable multitude of heavenly
bodies, were created for the commodity of the globe of the Earth, and for her
inhabitants, as to their proper end, are deceived, for reason will deny, that
natures, so far more noble and transcendent, were enslaved to the service of
more vile and low-born Beings. Is it not rather more likely, that every Globe
does rather of it self make a peculiar world, and that so many worlds as
feodaries to the eternal Empire of a God, are diffused through the vast range
of the heaven, and there do hang as bound each to the other by that common bond
of the heaven, and that the whole large Universe does consist of those manifold
natures? These, though so far severed in nature and place, yet do join in a
mutual love, so as to make up a perfect harmony in the Universe, The heaven is
the common place of all, yet is it more pure about those more perfect Beings,
therefore it is of great tenuitie and almost spiritual, and so fills up the
places between, that so it may the better receive the various affections of so
many natures, and the secret virtues continually issuing from them, and having
received them, it might swiftly communicate them to others, though far distant.
For the heaven is Natures conveyance, by the mediation of which, all the Cities
of Nature do traffic one with another, and are made partakers of each the
others wealth and store. So are they linked together by a most powerful bond
of friendship and nearness, as it were by some magnetic virtue.

242 What hinders, but that we may reckon the Globe of the Earth, as well as
the Moon amongst the Stars? For both are naturally dark bodies, both do borrow
light from the Sun, both are solid bodies, and reflect the beams of the Sun,
both send forth spirits and virtues, both hang in their heaven or their air.
But the doubt is, whether it moves or no. But to what end is her motion
needful? why may not she also stand fixed amongst so many fixed bodies? And it
may be the Moon has her inhabitants, for it is not credible, that Orbs of so
immense and vast a compass, should be idle and useless, not inhabited by any
creatures; that their motions, actions, and travels should only tend to the
good of this lowest and most despicable Globe: since God himself, not liking
Solitude, did go out of himself in the Creation, and poured out himself upon
the creatures, and gave them a Law for Multiplication. Is it not more for Gods
glory, to assert the entire Fabric of the whole Universe to be like a great
Empire, graced with the various natures of many worlds, as with so many
Provinces or Cities? and that the Worlds themselves are as so many habitations
and tenements for innumerable Citizens of diverse kinds, and all created to set
forth the superlative glory of the great Creator.

243 And who will not admire the Sun as an immortal Lamp, hanging up in the
middle of the hall of the Great Lord, and enlightening all the corners and
recesses of it, or else as the Vicegerent of the Divine Majesty, infusing
light, spirit and life into all the creatures of the World? For it was fit that
God, being altogether immaterial, should rule and order his material works by
an organ, which should be of a middle and most excellent material Being, which
also ought to be full of vivifical spirits, and so to set over sensible things,
a sensible Monarch.

244 This Doctrine of many Worlds is not repugnant to Scripture, which does
only relate to us the Creation of our World, describing all things concerning
the others in a mystical, rather than an open and clear way, only touching at
them, that so men's feeble souls, that had already fallen, as too curious of
knowledge, might rather sit and admire, than rise and understand. The clouding
of this truth, this darkness of man's soul, was part of the punishment of sin,
by which he fell from the pleasures of Paradise, the delights of knowledge, the
knowledge of Nature and heavenly things, that so he that would stretch himself
to a sinful desire of a forbidden knowledge, might be nipt by a just
deprivement of what was given: and so he having brought in a multiplication and
confusion of knowledge, might be punished with the loss of that true Knowledge,
which was one of all things. That is the Cherub, the guardian of the Garden, he
that has his flaming faulcheon, striking blind the guilty souls of men with
the brightness of his light, and forcing us off from the secrets of Nature, and
the truth of the Universe.

245 The Divine nature, although it be a most perfect unity, yet seems to
consist of, and to be perfected by two things, viz. Understanding and Will. By
his Understanding, he knows all things from eternity; by his Will, he acts
all; and both he does most absolutely. His Knowledge and Wisdom belong to his
Understanding: but his Goodness, Mercy, Justice and the rest of those virtues,
which are accounted Moral with us, belong to his Will; yea so does also Gods
Omnipotency, which is nothing else but his Omnipotent Will. The Intelligible
natures, viz. the Angelical nature, and the Soul of Man, which are small
draughts of the Divine nature, have also these two faculties, according to
their weight and measure. For in them the understanding is the organ of
Knowledge, the will of Working, and beyond these can they not act.

FINIS.

