AN ELEGIACAL POEM, Humbly suffered to the memory of the most Reverend Father
in God, GILBERT, Late Archbishop of CANTERBVRY, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan, one of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, etc. Who died
the 9th of this instant November 1677.
NOw that the Court with spreading Triumphs swells,
And the Town eccho's with rejoicing Bells;
Whilst Princely Nuptials, and a Princes Birth
Fills dullest souls with Ecstasies of Mirth,
And active Love makes London rival Rome,
To mint fair Conqu'rors for the Age to come:
Lest surfeiting Delights should us destroy,
Kind Fate thinks fit to cast in an Alloy,
Grave Sheldon's Death: Sheldon! in whom the Great
Was twisted with the Good, as Light and Heat.
The dolesome news our gayest Joys over powers,
Like April Sunshine dashed with sudden showers.
Ah wretched state of sublunary things!
Which flutter thus with Party colored wings.
Yet let us not mourn -- He the good fight had fought,
And, like a trusty Pilot, safely brought
The Church over Billows of divided Rage,
And Hurricanes of the last tempestuous Age;
In which he stood, Religious Rock, not mixed
With the Times Torrent, but still bravely fixed
On humble Basis of true Piety,
And what that did inspire, strict Loyalty.
As gentle Oil upon the streams does glide,
Not mingling with it, though it smooths the tide.
Now having settled her in happy Calm,
And healed her wounds with Moderations Balm,
His work, finished, as the descending Sun,
Withdraws his Luster when his Race is run,
And sets more radiant than he first begun.
Death, to complete his never-dying story,
Translates His Grace unto a state of Glory:
Yet he that thinks him dead, most grossly errs;
Can Virtue die? No, but as brightest Stars
Seem not to shine when near the Sun, he thus
Is not extinct, only lies hid to us.
And now my straggling Verse would fain prepare
To imp her duller wings with Fire and Air,
Impregnated with strange Magnetic force,
To follow him in his Seraphick Course;
But must forbear that Theme, denied to men
Of Common Souls, or a Lay groveling Pen.
It is enough, if our unhallowed Lays
May coast along the Ocean of His Praise.
A Prelate, such as stem'd the Heathen Flood,
And watered first the Gospel with their Blood,
E're haughty Rome or pert Geneva tried
The Churches seamless Garment to divide,
And make Truth how to th'interests of a Side.
Learned, devout, discreet, every way fit
To feed the Flock, and also govern it.
With judgment he the awful Crosier swayed;
Mildly he Ruled, and Christianly Obeyed:
An humble gracious Grandeur, and as free
From Beckets Pride, as Bonners Cruelty;
Still labored to exclude whatever sin
By Time or Carelessness had entered in;
Winnow'd the Chaff from Wheat, but yet was loath
A purblinde Zeal should come and burn them both;
And thought their Charity or Sense but small,
Who to save often Blotting, would Blot All;
And to that riddling squeamishness are grown,
As to think Organs sin, but Faction none.
One Maxim all his Politics enrouls,
To serve his God, his Prince, and Peoples Souls.
So mild was Moses Countenance when he prayed
For those whose Satanism his Power gainsaid;
And such his Gravity, when all God's Band
Received his Word (through him) at second-hand.
But we disturb his modest dust --
He now on Angels wings salutes the seats
Of Glory, where he still (methinks) entreats
God to vouchsafe as much Light as is fit
Unto his Flock, and grant Content with it:
To give such Teachers as love not to vent
Their private Fancies, but maintain Consent
Of hearts, if not of tongues; and melt away,
By powerful fire, Adulterate Allay
Of mixed Dissentions: that Christ's Spouse may be
Linked and united in sweet Harmony,
Breathe all alike, and being free from strife,
To Heaven make good their Faith, to Earth their Life.
FINIS.
London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

With Allowance.

To. L'Estrange.


