An ESSAY how to raise above One Million Sterling per Ann. by an equal and easy
Tax.
IN order to which it is proposed, That all Neat, Calf and Slink Hydes, Sheep
and Lamb Skins in the Raw, be appropriated to the Use of the Government.

Which Hides and Skins will raise the above Sum is demonstrated thus, viz. l,
s. d, That in this Kingdom there was computed 1175951 Houses which paid to the
Chimny Money (besides Almshouses and Poor which were excepted), and compute
but one Beef to be eaten in one Year by each Family that paid to the said Tax
one with another, the Hides of which are sold from 5 s. to 20 s. but at 10 s.
per Hide, they produce 587975 10 0 Four Sheep to be eaten in each House in one
Year, the Skins of which are sold from 8 d. to 5 s. but at 18 d. per Skin they
produce 352785 06 0 One Calf to be eaten in each House in one Year, the Skins
of which are sold from 8 d. to 3 s. but 18 d per Hide they produce 88196 06 6
One Lamb to be eaten in each House in one Year, the Skins of which are sold
from 4 d. to 18 d. but at 6 d. per Skin they produce 29398 15 6 The Beef killed
for Sea Service, and all fresh Meat eaten by our Seamen and Foreigners when in
Harbor, and what they take for victualling their home and foreign Voyages,
may be computed one tenth Part of the above Account, which produces 105935 00 9
Sum Total 1164290 18 9

The Hides and Skins of the aforesaid Cattle that may dye, are not included in
the above Account.

Other CALCULATIONS.
There is computed seven Millions of People in England and Wales, and allowing
four Millions of them eat 2 d. each Day in Beef, Mutton, Veal or Lamb, which is
3 l. per Annum for each Person, which is twelve Millions Sterling, and compute
the Hide and Skin to be 2 s. in the Pound Value of the Carcass amounts to
1200000 l. 1175951 Houses, and compute eats 4 Beefs a Year. eats 2 Beefs a
Year. 6/8 eats half a Beef. 8/8 eats 9 Beefs a Year.

The Advantages of this TAX.
First, That a great Sum will come in Weekly, and the whole Year's Revenue
answered into the Exchequer in a few Days after the Year is expired, whereby a
great deal of Interest will be saved.

Secondly, That the collecting it will be with less Charge than any other Duty
which answers so great a Fund, by reason it is not liable to such Frauds and
Concealments as some other Revenues are.

Thirdly, It will be most equal, for Tradesmen and Foreigners will pay as much
as Gentlemen, proportionable to what they spend; and Equality and Ease ought to
be considered in all Taxes.

Fourthly, It can be no Prejudice to Land, for the Butcher will be content with
the same Profit then as now, and will give the same Price to the Breeder or
Grazier (for it is only the Consumer that pays); and one Farthing per Pound
Advance on the Carcass will make the Butcher Amends for Loss of the Hide and
Skin, and the Number of Butchers will oblige them to sell at reasonable Profit,
what they deal in being so hazardous to keep.

Fifthly, A Gentleman of 800 l. per Annum paid or ought to have paid to the
Land Tax of 4 s. per Pound 160 l. but in this he pays but for his Eatables of
Beef, Mutton, Veal and Lamb, which four Kinds proportionable to a Family
Expense is not above One-eighth Part of the whole: So instead of paying for 800
l. he pays but for 100 l. And the Hide and Skin not exceeding 2 s. in the Pound
Value of the Carcass, he pays but 10 l. per Annum to this Tax. And by limitting
the Government to sell the Hides and Skins at a certain Price per Pound will
reduce the Leather Manufacture to easy Terms, and save considerable in the Year
by Leather Harness and other Leather Wearables, and encourage the Exportation
of the same.


