THE Man of Mode, OR, SR Fopling Flutter. A COMEDY.

Acted at the Duke's Theater.

By George Etherege Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1676.

LICENSED,

June 3. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

TO HER Royal Highness THE DUCHESS.
Madam,
POets however they may be modest otherwise, have always too good an opinion of
what they write. The World when it sees this Play Dedicated to Your Royal
Highness, will conclude, I have more than my share of that Vanity. But I hope
the honor I have of belonging to You, will excuse my presumption. It Is the
first thing I have produced in Your Service, and my Duty obliges me to what my
Choice durst not else have aspired.

I am very sensible, Madam, how much it is beholding to Your Indulgence, for
the success it had in the Acting, and Your Protection will be no less fortunate
to it in the Printing; for all are so ambitious of making their Court to You,
that none can be severe to what you are pleased to favor.

This universal submission and respect is due to the greatness of Your Rank and
Birth; but You have other Illustrious Qualities, which are much more engaging.
Those would but dazzle, did not these really charm the Eyes and Understandings
of all who have the Happiness to approach You.

Authors on these occasions are never wanting to publish a particular of their
Patrons Virtues and Perfections; but Your Royal Highness's are so eminently
known, that did I follow their Examples, I should but paint those wonders here
of which every one already has the Idea in his mind. Besides, I do not think it
proper to aim at that in Prose, which is so glorious a subject for Verse; in
which hereafter if I show more zeal than skill, it will not grieve me much,
since I less passionately desire to be esteemed a Poet, than to be thought,

Madam, Your Royal Highness's Most humble, most obedient, and most faithful
Servant, George Etherege.

Prologue.
By Sir Car Scroope Baronet.
LIke Dancers on the Ropes poor Poets fare,
Most perish young, the rest in danger are;
This (one would think) should make our Authors wary,
But Gamester like the Giddy Fools miscarry.
A lucky hand or two so tempts 'em on,
They cannot leave off Play till they are undone.
With modest Fears a Muse does first begin,
Like a young Wench newly enticed to Sin:
But tickled once with praise by her good Will,
The Wanton Fool would never more lie still.
It Is an old Mrs. you will meet here to night,
Whose charms you once have looked on with delight.
But now of late such dirty Drabs have known ye,
A Muse of the better sort's ashamed to own you.
Nature well drawn and Wit must now give place
To gaudy Nonsense and to dull Grimace;
Nor is it strange that you should like so much
That kind of Wit, for most of yours is such.
But I Am afraid that while to France we go,
To bring you home Fine Dresses, Dance, and Show;
The Stage like you will but more Foppish grow.
Of Foreign Wares why should we fetch the scum,
When we can be so richly served at home?
For Heaven be thankt it is not so wise an Age,
But your own Follies may supply the Stage.
Though often plowed, there is no great Fear the soil
Should Barren grow by the too frequent toil;
While at your Doors are to be daily found,
Such loads of Dunghill to manure the ground.
It Is by your Follies that we Players thrive,
As the Physicians by Diseases live.
And as each year some new distemper Reigns,
Whose friendly poison helps to increase their gains:
So among you, there starts up every day,
Some new unheard of Fool for us to Play.
Then for your own sakes be not too severe,
Nor what you all admire at home, Damn here.
Since each is fond of his own ugly Face,
Why should you, when we hold it, break the Glass?
Dramatis Personae.
Mr Dorimant, Gentlemen. Mr Medley, Gentlemen. Old Bellair, Gentlemen. Young
Bellair, Gentlemen. Sir Fopling Flutter, Gentlemen. Lady Townley, Gentlewomen.
Emilia, Gentlewomen. Mrs. Loveit, Gentlewomen. Bellinda, Gentlewomen. Lady
Woodvil, and Harriet her Daughter, Gentlewomen. Pert, and Busy, Waiting Women.
A Shoemaker. An Orange-woman. Three Slovenly Bullies. Two Chair-men. Mr Smirk,
a Parson. Handy, a Valet de Chamber. Pages, Footmen, etc.
THE Man of Mode, OR, SR Fopling Flutter.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Dressing Room, a Table Covered with a Toilet, Clothes laid ready. Enter
Dorimant in his Gown and Slippers, with a Note in his hand made up, repeating
Verses. Dor. NOW for some Ages had the pride of Spain,
Made the Sun shine on half the World in vain.
Then looking on the Note. For Mrs. Loveit. What a dull insipid thing is a
Billet doux written in
Cold blood, after the heat of the business is over?
It is a Tax upon good nature which I have
Here been laboring to pay, and have done it,
But with as much regret, as ever Fanatic paid
The Royal Aid, or Church Duties; 'Twill
Have the same fate I know that all my notes
To her have had of late, 'Twill not be thought
Kind enough. Faith Women are in the right
When they jealously examine our Letters, for in them
We always first discover our decay of passion. --
Hay! -- Who waits! --

Enter Handy. Handy. Sir. --

Dor. Call a Footman.

Handy. None of 'em are come yet.

Dor. Dogs! will they ever lie snoring a Bed till Noon.

Handy. It Is all one, Sir: if they are up, you indulge 'em so;
They Are ever poaching after Whores all the Morning.

Dor. Take notice henceforward who is wanting in his duty,
The next Clap he gets, he shall rot for an example.
What Vermin are those Chattering without?

Handy. Foggy Nan the Orange Woman,
And swearing Tom the Shoemaker.

Dor. Go; call in that overgrown Jade with the Flasket
Of Guts before her, fruit is refreshing in a Morning.
Exit Handy. It is not that I love you less
Than when before your feet I lay.
Enter Or. Wom. How now double Tripe, what news do you bring?

Or. Wom. News! Here Is the best Fruit has come to Town
T'year, Gad I was up before Four a Clock this
Morning, and bought all the Choice in the Market.

Dor. The nasty refuse of your Shop.

Or. Wom. You need not make mouths at it, I assure you
It Is all culled ware.

Dor. The Citizens buy better on a Holiday in their
Walk to Totnam.

Or. Wom. Good or bad it is all one, I never knew you
Commend any thing, Lord would the Ladies had
Heard you talk of 'em as I have done: here
Bid your Man give me an Angel. Sets down the Fruit.

Dor. Give the Bawd her Fruit again.

Or. Wom. Well, on my Conscience, there never was the
Like of you. God's my life, I had almost forgot
To tell you, there is a young Gentlewoman
Lately come to Town with her Mother, that is
So taken with you*

Dor. Is she handsome?

Or. Wom. Nay, Gad there are few finer Women I tell you
But so, and a hugeous fortune they say. Here
Eat this Peach, it comes from the Stone, it is
Better than any Newington you have tasted.

Dor. This fine Woman I Will lay my life taking the Peach.
Is some awkward ill fashioned Country Toad, who
Not having above Four Dozen of black hairs
On her head, had adorned her baldness with
A large white Fruz, that she may look sparkishly
In the Fore Front of the Kings Box, at an old Play.

Or. Wom. Gad you would change your note quickly if you
Did but see her.

Dor. How came she to know me?

Or. Wom. She saw you yesterday at the Change, she told
Me you came and fooled with the Woman
At the next Shop.

Dor. I remember there was a Mask observed me indeed.
Fooled did she say?

Or. Wom. Ay, I vow she told me Twenty things you said
Too, and acted with head and with her body
So like you --

Enter Medley. Medley. Dorimant my Life, my Joy, my darling-Sin; how
Do thou.

Or. Wom. Lord what a filthy trick these men have got of
Kissing one another! She spits.

Med. Why do you suffer this Cart-load of Scandal to
Come near you, and make your Neighbors
Think you so improvident to need a Bawd?

Or. Wom. Good now, we shall have it, you did but want
Him to help you; come pay me for my Fruit.

Med. Make us thankful for it Huswife, Bawds are
As much out of fashion as Gentlemen Ushers;
None but old Formal Ladies use the one, and
None but Foppish old Stagers employ the other,
Go you are an insignificant Brandy Bottle.

Dor. Nay, there you wrong her, three Quarts of Canary
Is her business.

Or. Wom. What you please Gentlemen.

Dor. To him, give him as good as he brings.

Or. Wom. Hang him, there is not such another Heathen
In the Town again, except it be the Shomaker without.

Med. I shall see you hold up your hand at the Bar
Next Sessions for Murder, Huswife; that
Shomaker can take his Oath you are in Fee
With the Doctors to sell green Fruit to the
Gentry, that the Crudities may breed Diseases.

Or. Wom. Pray give me my Money.

Dor. Not a penny, when you bring the Gentlewoman
Hither you spoke of, you shall be paid.

Or. Wom. The Gentlewoman! the Gentlewoman may be
As honest as your Sisters for ought as I know.
Pray pay me Mr. Dorimant, and do not
Abuse me so, I have an honester way of living,
You know it.

Med. Was there ever such a resty Bawd?

Dor. Some Jades tricks she has, but she makes amends
When she is in good humor: Come, tell me the
Ladies name, and Handy shall pay you.

Or. Wom. I must not, she forbid me.

Dor. That Is a sure sign she would have you.

Med. Where does she live?

Or. Wom. They lodge at my House.

Med. Nay, then she is in a hopeful way.

Or. Wom. Good Mr. Medley say your pleasure of me, but
Take heed how you affront my House,
God's my life, in a hopeful way!

Dor. Prithee peace, what kind of Woman's the Mother?

Or. Wom. A goodly grave Gentlewoman, Lord how
She talks against the wild young men of the
Town; as for your part she thinks you an
Arrant Devil, should she see you, on my Conscience
She would look if you had not a Cloven foot.

Dor. Does she know me?

Or. Wom. Only by hearsay, a Thousand horrid Stories
Have been told her of you, and she
Believes 'em all.

Med. I'v the Character, this should be the Famous
Lady Woodvill, and her Daughter Harriet.

Or. Wom. The Devil's in him for guessing I think.

Dor. Do you know 'em.

Med. Both very well, the Mother's a great admirer of the
Forms and Civility of the last Age.

Dor. An antiquated beauty may be allowed to
Be out of humor at the freedoms of the present.
This is a good account of the Mother, Pray
What is the Daughter?

Med. Why, first she is an Heiress vastly rich.

Dor. And handsome?

Med. What alteration a Twelvemonth may have
Bred in her I know not, but a year ago
She was the beautifullest Creature I ever saw;
A fine, easy, clean shape, light brown
Hair in abundance; her Features regular, her
Complexion clear and lively, large wanton Eyes,
But above all a mouth that has made
Me kiss it a thousand times in imagination,
Teeth white and even, and pretty pouting
Lips, with a little moisture ever hanging on them
That look like the Province Rose
Fresh on the Bush, 'ere the Morning Sun has quite
Drawn up the dew.

Dor. Rapture, mere Rapture!

Or. Wom. Nay, Gad he tells you true,
She Is a delicate Creature.

Dor. Has she Wit?

Med. More than is usual in her Sex, and as much malice.
Then she is as wild as you would wish her,
And has a demureness in her looks that makes
It so surprising.

Dor. Flesh and blood cannot hear this,
And not long to know her.

Med. I wonder what makes her Mother bring her
Up to Town, an old doting Keeper cannot
Be more jealous of his Mistress.

Or. Wom. She made me laugh yesterday, there was
A Judge came to visit 'em, and the old man
She told me did so stare upon her, and when he
Saluted her smack'd so heartily; who would think
It of 'em?

Med. God a mercy Judge.

Dor. Do 'em right, the Gentlemen of the long Robe
Have not been wanting by their good Examples
To countenance the crying sin of the Nation.

Med. Come, on with your Trappings, it is later than
You imagine.

Dor. Call in the Shomaker Handy.

Or. Wom. Good Mr. Dorimant pay me, Gad I had
Rather give you my Fruit than stay to be
Abused by that foul-mouthed Rogue;
What you Gentlemen say it matters not
Much, but such a dirty Fellow does one more disgrace.

Dor. Give her Ten shillings, and be sure you tell
The young Gentlewoman I must be
Acquainted with her.

Or. Wom. Now do you long to be tempting this pretty
Creature. Well, Heavens mend you.

Med. Farewell Bogg. -- Exit. Or. Woman and Handy.
Dorimant, when did you see your
Pis aller as you call her, Mrs. Loveit?

Dor. Not these two days.

Med. And how stand affairs between you?

Dor. There has been great patching of late, much
Ado we make a shift to hang together.

Med. I wonder how her mighty Spirit bears it.

Dor. Ill enough on all Conscience, I never knew so
Violent a Creature.

Med. She Is the most passionate in her Love, and
The most extravagant in her Jealousy of
Any Woman I ever heard of. What Note is that?

Dor. An excuse I am going to send her for the
Neglect I am guilty of.

Med. Prithe read it.

Dor. No, but if you will take the pains you may.

Medley reads. Med. I never was a Lover of business, but now I have a just
Reason to hate it, since it has kept me these two days
From seeing you. I intend to wait upon you in the
Afternoon, and in the pleasure of your Conversation,
Forget all I have suffered during this tedious absence.
This business of yours Dorimant has been
With a Vizard at the Playhouse, I have
Had an Eye on you. If some malicious body
Should betray you, this kind note would hardly
Make your peace with her.

Dor. I desire no better.

Med. Why, would her knowledge of it oblige you?

Dor. Most infinitely; next to the coming to a good
Understanding with a new Mistress,
I love a quarrel with an old one, but the
Devils in it, there has been such a calm in
My affairs of late, I have not had the pleasure
Of making a Woman so much as break
Her Fan, to be sullen, or forswear her self
These three days.

Med. A very great Misfortune, let me see, I love
Mischief well enough, to forward this business
My self I Will about it presently, and though I
Know the truth of what you have done, will set her
A raving, I Will heighten it a little with Invention,
Leave her in a fit of the Mother, and be here
Again before you are ready.

Dor. Pray stay, you may spare your self the Labor,
The business is undertaken already by
One who will manage it with as much address, and
I think with a little more Malice than you can.

Med. Who in the Devils name can this be!

Dor. Why the Vizard, that very Vizard you saw
Me with.

Med. Does she love mischief so well, as to betray
Her self to spite another?

Dor. Not so neither, Medley, I will make you comprehend
The mystery; this Masque for a farther
Confirmation of what I have been these two days
Swearing to her, made me yesterday at the Playhouse
Make her a promise before her face, utterly to break off
With Loveit, and because she tenders my reputation,
And would not have me do a barbarous thing, has
Contrived a way to give me a handsome occasion.

Med. Very good.

Dor. She intends about an hour before me, this
Afternoon, to make Loveit a visit, and (having
The privilege by reason of a professed Friendship
Between 'em to talk of her Concerns)

Med. Is she a Friend?

Dor. Oh, an intimate Friend!

Med. Better and better, pray proceed.

Dor. She means insensibly to insinuate a
Discourse of me, and artificially raise her Jealousy
To such a height, that transported with the
First motions of her passion, she shall fly
Upon me with all the Fury imaginable,
As soon as ever I enter; the Quarrel being
Thus happily begun; I am to play my part,
Confess and justify all my Roguery,
Swear her impertinence and ill humor makes
Her intolerable, tax her with the next Fop
That comes into my head, and in a huff
March away, slight her and leave her
To be taken by whosoever thinks it worth
His time to lie down before her.

Med. This Vizard is a spark, and has a Genius that
Makes her worthy of your self, Dorimant.

Enter Handy, Shoemaker, and Footman. Dor. You Rogue there, who sneak like a
Dog that
Has flung down a Dish, if you do not mend
Your waiting i will uncase you, and turn you
Loose to the Wheel of Fortune. Handy,
Seal this and let him run with it presently.

Exit. Handy and Footman. Med. Since you are resolved on a Quarrel, why do
You send her this kind note?

Dor. To keep her at home in order to the business.
How now you drunken Sot.? To the Shoemaker.

Shoom. 'Zbud, you have no reason to talk, I have
Not had a Bottle of Sack of yours in my Belly
This Fortnight.

Med. The Orange Woman says, your Neighbors take
Notice what a Heathen you are, and
Design to inform the Bishop, and have you burned
For an Atheist.

Shoom. Damn her, Dunghill, if her Husband does
Not remove her, she stinks so, the Parish
Intend to indite him for a Nuisance.

Med. I advise you like a Friend, reform your
Life, you have brought the envy of the World
Upon you, by living above your self.
Whoring and Swearing are Vices too gentile
For a Shoemaker.

Shoom. 'Zbud, I think you men of quality will grow
As unreasonable as the Women; you would
Ingross the sins of the Nation; poor Folks
Can no sooner be wicked, but the are railed
At by their Betters.

Dor. Sirrah, I Will have you stand in the Pillory
For this Libel.

Shoom. Some of you deserve it, I Am sure, there
Are so many of 'em, that our Journeymen now adays
Instead of harmless Ballads, sing nothing
But your damned Lampoons.

Dor. Our Lampoons you Rogue?

Shoom. Nay, Good Master, why should not you
Write your own Commentaries as well as Caesar?

Med. The Raskal's read, I perceive.

Shoom. You know the old Proverb, Ale and History.

Dor. Draw on my Shoes, Sirrah.

Shoom. Here Is a Shoe.

Dor. Sits with more wrinkles than there are
In an Angry Bullies Forehead.

Shoom. 'Zbud, as smooth as your Mistresses skin
Does upon her, so, strike your foot in home.
'Zbud if e're a Monsieur of 'em all
Make more fashionable Ware, I Will be content
To have my Ears whipped off with my own
Paring Knife.

Med. And served up in a Ragoust, instead of
Coxcombs to a Company of French Shoomakers
For a Collation.

Shoom. Hold, hold, damn 'em Catterpillars, let 'em
Feed upon Cabbidge; Come Master, your health
This Morning next my heart now.

Dor. Go, get you home, and govern your Family better;
Do not let your Wife follow you to the
Alehouse, beat your Whore, and lead you
Home in Triumph.

Shoom. 'Zbud, there is never a man in the Town lives more like
A Gentleman, with his Wife, than I do.
I never mind her motions, she never inquires
Into mine, we speak to one another Civilly,
Hate one another heartily, and because it is vulgar
To lie and soak together, we have each of us
Our several Settle-bed.

Dor. Give him half a Crown.

Med. Not without he will promise to be bloody drunk.

Shoom. Tope's the word in the Eye of the World for my
Masters honor Robin.

Dor. Do not debauch my Servants, Sirrah.

Shoom. I only tip him the wink, he knows an
Alehouse from a Hovil. Exit Shoemaker.

Dor. My Clothes quickly.

Med. Where shall we dine to day? Enter Bellair.

Dor. Where you will; here comes a good
Third man.

Bell. Your Servant Gentlemen.

Med. Gentle Sir; how will you answer this
Visit to your honorable Mistress? it is not
Her interest you should keep Company
With men of sense, who will be talking reason.

Bell. I do not fear her pardon, do you but
Grant me yours, for my neglect of late.

Med. Though you have made us miserable by the
Want of your good Company; to show you
I am free from all resentment, may the
Beautiful cause of our misfortune,
Give you all the Joys happy Lovers
Have shared ever since the World began.

Bell. You wish me in Heaven, but you believe
Me on my Journey to Hell.

Med. You have a good strong Faith, and that may contribute
Much toward your Salvation. I confess I am
But of an untoward constitution, apt to have
Doubts and scruples, and in Love they are no less
Distracting than in Religion; were I so near
Marriage, I should cry out by Fits as I ride
In my Coach, Cuckold, Cuckold, with no less fury than
The mad Fanatic does Glory in Bethlem.

Bell. Because Religion makes some run mad,
Must I live an Atheist?

Med. Is it not great indiscretion for a man
Of Credit, who may have money enough on
His Word, to go and deal with Jews; who for
Little sums make men enter into Bonds,
And give Judgments?

Bell. Preach no more on this Text, I am
Determined, and there is no hope of my Conversion.

Dor. Leave your unnecessary fidling; a Wasp
That Is buzzing about a Man's Nose at
Dinner, is not more troublesome than thou art.

To Handy who is fidling about him. Hand. You love to have your Clothes hang
just, Sir.

Dor. I love to be well dressed Sir: and think it
No scandal to my understanding.

Hand. Will you use the Essence or Orange Flower Water?

Dor. I will smell as I do to day, no offense
To the Ladies Noses.

Hand. Your pleasure Sir.

Dor. That a man's excellency should lie in
Neatly tying of a Ribbond, or a Crevat! how
Careful's nature in furnishing the World
With necessary Coxcombs!

Bell. That Is a mighty pretty Suit of yours Dorimant.

Dor. I am glad 't has your approbation.

Bell. No man in Town has a better fancy in
His Clothes than you have.

Dor. You will make me have an opinion of my Genius.

Med. There is a great Critic I hear in these matters
Lately arrived piping hot from Paris.

Bell. Sir Fopling Flutter you mean.

Med. The same.

Bell. He thinks himself the Pattern of modern
Gallantry.

Dor. He is indeed the pattern of modern Foppery.

Med. He was Yesterday at the Play, with a pair of Gloves
Up to his Elbows, and a Periwig more exactly Curled
Then a Ladies head newly dressed for a Ball.

Bell. What a pretty lisp he has!

Dor. Ho that he affects in imitation of the people of
Quality of France.

Med. His head stands for the most part on one side,
And his looks are more languishing than
A Ladys when she loll's at stretch in her
Coach, or leans her head carelessly against the
Side of a Box in the Playhouse.

Dor. He is a person indeed of great acquired Follies.

Med. He is like many others, beholding to his
Education for making him so eminent a
Coxcomb; many a Fool had been lost
To the World, had their indulgent Parents
Wisely bestowed neither Learning nor
Good breeding on 'em.

Bell. He has been, as the sparkish word is, Brisk
Upon the Ladies already, he was yesterday
At my Aunt Townleys, and gave Mrs.
Loveit a Catalogue of his good Qualities,
Under the Character of a Complete Gentleman,
Who according to Sir Fopling, ought to dress well,
Dance well, Fence well, have a genius for Love Letters,
An agreeable voice for a Chamber,
Be very Amorous, something discreet,
But not over Constant.

Med. Pretty Ingredients to make an accomplished
Person.

Dor. I am glad he pitched upon Loveit.

Bell. How so?

Dor. I wanted a Fop to lay to her Charge, and this
Is as pat as may be.

Bell. I am confident she loves
No man but you.

Dor. The good fortune were enough to make me vain,
But that I am in my nature modest.

Bell. Hark you Dorimant, with your leave Mr. Medley,
It Is only a secret concerning a fair Lady.

Med. Your good breeding Sir gives you too much trouble,
You might have whispered without all this
Ceremony.

Bell. How stand your affairs with Bellinda of late?

To Dorimant. Dor. She Is a little Jilting Baggage.

Bell. Nay, I believe her false enough, but
She Is never the worse for your purpose; she was
With you yesterday in a disguise at the Play.

Dor. There we fell out, and resolved never to speak
To one another more.

Bell. The Occasion?

Dor. Want of Courage to meet me at the place appointed.
These young Women apprehend loving, as much
As the young men do fighting at first;
But once entered, like them too, they all
Turn Bullies straight. Enter Handy to Bellair.

Handy. Sir: Your man without desires to speak with you.

Bell. Gentlemen, i will return immediately. Exit Bellair.

Med. A very pretty Fellow this.

Dor. He Is Handsome, well bred, and by much the most
Tolerable of all the young men that do not abound in wit.

Med. Ever well dressed, always complaisant, and
Seldom impertinent; you and he are grown
Very intimate I see.

Dor. It is our mutual interest to be so; it
Makes the Women think the better of his
Understanding, and judge more favorably of my
Reputation; it makes him pass upon some for
A man of very good sense, and I upon others for a
Very civil person.

Med. What was that whisper?

Dor. A thing which he would fain have known,
But I did not think it fit to tell him;
It might have frighted him from his honorable
Intentions of Marrying.

Med. Emilia, give her her due, has the best reputation
Of any young Woman about the Town; who
Has beauty enough to provoke detraction; her Carriage
Is unaffected, her discourse modest, not at all censorious,
Nor pretending like the Counterfeits of the Age.

Dor. She Is a discreet Maid, and I believe nothing can
Corrupt her but a Husband.

Med. A Husband?

Dor. Yes, a Husband; I have known many Women make
A difficulty of losing a Maidenhead, who
Have afterward made none of making a Cuckold.

Med. This prudent consideration I am apt to think
Has made you confirm poor Bellair in the
Desperate resolution he has taken.

Dor. Indeed the little hope I found there was of her, in
The state she was in, has made me by my
Advice, contribute something toward the
Changing of her condition. Enter Bellair.
Dear Bellair, by Heavens
I thought we had lost thee; men in love
Are never to be reckoned on when we would
Form a Company.

Bell. Dorimant, I am undone, my man has brought
The most surprising news in the World.

Dor. Some strange misfortune is befaln your love.

Bell. My Father came to Town last night, and
Lodges in the very House where Emilia lies.

Med. Does he know it is with her you are in love?

Bell. He knows I love, but knows not whom, without
Some officious Sot has betrayed me.

Dor. Your Aunt Townly is your Confidant, and favors
The business.

Bell. I do not apprehend any ill office from her*
I have received a Letter, in which I am commanded
By my Father to meet him at my Aunts this Afternoon;
He tells me farther he has made a match for me, and bids
Me resolve to be obedient to his Will, or expect to
Be disinherited.

Med. Now Is your Time, Bellair, never had Lover such
An opportunity of giving a generous proof of his passion.

Bell. As how I pray?

Med. Why hang an Estate, marry Emilia out of hand,
And provoke your Father to do what he threatens;
It Is but despising a Coach, humbling your self
To a pair of Goloshoes, being out of countenance
When you meet your Friends, pointed at and pityed
Wherever you go by all the Amorous Fops
That know you, and your fame will be immortal.

Bell. I could find in my heart to resolve not to marry at all.

Dor. Fie, fie, that would spoil a good jest, and disappoint
The well-natur'd Town of an occasion of laughing at you.

Bell. The storm I have so long expected, hangs
Ore my head, and begins to pour down upon me;
I am on the Rack, and can have no rest till I Am
Satisfied in what I fear; where do you dine?

Dor. At Longs, or Lockets.

Med. At Longs let it be.

Bell. I Will run and see Emilia, and inform my self
How matters stand; if my misfortunes are not
So great as to make me unfit for Company,
I Will be with you. Exit Bellair.

Enter a Footman with a Letter. Footm. Here Is a Letter Sir. To Dorimant.

Dor. The Superscription's right; For Mr. Dorimant.

Med. Let Us see the very scrawl and spelling of a
True bred Whore.

Dor. I know the hand, the style is admirable I assure you.

Med. Prithee read it.

Dor. Reads. I told a you you dud not love me, if you dud,
You would have seen me again e're now; I
Have no money and am very Mallicolly;
Pray send me a Guynie to see the Operies.
Your Servant to Command, Molly.





Med. Pray let the Whore have a favorable
Answer, that she may spark it in a Box,
And do honor to her profession.

Dor. She shall; and perk up in the face of quality.
Is the Coach at Door?

Hand. You did not bid me send for it.

Dor. Eternal Blockhead! Handy offers to go
Hay Sot. --

Hand. Did you call me, Sir?

Dor. I hope you have no just exception to the name, Sir?

Hand. I have sense, Sir.

Dor. Not so much as a Fly in Winter: --
How did you come Medly?

Med. In a Chair!

Footm. You may have a Hackney Coach if you please, Sir.

Dor. I may ride the Elephant if I please, Sir;
Call another Chair, and let my Coach follow to Longs.
Be calm ye great Parents, etc. Ex. Singing.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter my Lady Townly, and Emilia. Lady Townly. I Was afraid Emilia, all had
been discovered.

Emil. I tremble with the Apprehension still.

Town. That my Brother should take Lodgings in the
Very House where you lie.

Emil. 'Twas lucky, we had timely notice to warn the
People to be secret, he seems to be a mighty good
Humored old man.

Town* He ever had a notable smerking way with him.

Emil. He calls me Rogue, tells me he cannot abide me;
And does so bepat me.

Town. On my word you are much in his favor then.

Emil. He has been very inquisitive I am told about my
Family, my reputation, and my Fortune.

Town. I am confident he does not in the least suspect
You are the Woman his Son's in Love with.

Emil. What should make him then inform himself so
Particularly of me?

Town. He was always of a very Loving Temper himself;
It may be he has a doting Fit upon him, who knows.

Emil. It cannot be. Enter Young Bellair.

Town. Here comes my Nephew. Where did
You leave your Father?

Y. Bell. Writing a Note within, Emilia, this early visit
Looks as if some kind Jealousy would not let you
Rest at home.

Emil. The knowledge I have of my Rival,
Gives me a little cause to fear your Constancy.

Y. Bell. My Constancy! I vow --

Emil. Do not vow -- Our love is frail as is our life, and
Full as little in our power, and are you sure you shall
Outlive this day?

Y. Bell. I am not, but when we are in perfect health, 'twere
An idle thing to fright our selves with the thoughts of
Sudden death.

Town. Pray what has passed between you and your Father
In The Garden.

Y. Bell. He Is firm in his resolution,
Tells me I must marry Mrs. Harriet,
Or swears he will marry himself,
And disinherit me, when I saw I could not
Prevail with him to be more indulgent, I dissembled
An Obedience to his Will, which has composed his passion,
And will give us time, and I hope opportunity to
Deceive him. Enter Old Bellair, with a Note in his hand.

Town. Peace, here he comes.

Old Bell. Harry, take this, and let your man carry it for me
To Mr. Fourbes Chamber, my Lawyer in the Temple.
Neighbor, a Dod I am glad to see thee here, To Emilia.
Make much of her Sister, she is one
Of the best of your acquaintance; I like her
Countenance and her behavior well, she has
A Modesty that is not Common i'this Age, a Dod,
She has.

Town. I know her value Brother, and esteem her accordingly.

Old Bell. Advise her to wear a little more mirth in her
Face, a Dod she is too serious.

Town. The fault is very excusable in a young Woman.

Old Bell. Nay, a Dod, I like her never the worse, a
Melancholy Beauty has her Charms, I
Love a pretty sadness in a Face which varies
Now and Then, like changeable Colors, into a smile.

Town. Methinks you speak very feelingly Brother.

Old Bell. I am but Five and Fifty Sister you know, an
Age not altogether unsensible! cheer up sweet To Emilia.
Heart; I have a secret to tell thee may
Chance to make thee merry, we three will make
Collation together anon, in the mean time
Mum, I cannot abide you, go I cannot
Abide you -- Harry, Come you Enter Young Bellair.
Must along with me to my Lady Woodvills.
I am going to slip the Boy at a Mistress.

Y. Bell. At a Wife Sir, you would say.

Old Bell. You need not look so glum, Sir, a
Wife is no Curse when she brings the blessing
Of a good Estate with her, but an idle Town
Flurt, with a painted Face, a rotten Reputation,
And a crasie Fortune, a Dod is the Devil and all,
And such a one I hear you are in League with.

Y. Bell. I cannot help detraction, Sir.

Old Bell. Out, a pise of their Breeches, there are
Keeping Fools enough for such flaunting
Baggages, and they are e'ne too good for 'em.
Remember Night, go y' are a Rogue, you are a To Emilia.
Rogue; fare you well, fare you well; come, come,
Come along, Sir. Ex. Old and Y. Bellair.

Town. On my Word the old man comes on apace;
I Will lay my life he is smitten.

Emilia. This is nothing but the pleasantness of his humor.

Town. I know him better than you, let it work,
It may prove lucky. Enter a Page.

Page. Madam, Mr. Medley has sent to know
Whether a Visit will not be Troublesome
This Afternoon?

Town. Send him word his visits never are so.

Emilia. He Is a very pleasant man.

Town. He Is a very necessary man among us Women;
He Is not scandalous in the least, perpetually
Contriving to bring good Company together,
And always ready to stop up a gap at Ombre,
Then he knows all the little news of the Town.

Emilia. I love to hear him talk of the Intrigues,
Let 'em be never so dull in themselves, he will
Make 'em pleasant in the relation.

Town. But he improves things so much one can take no
Measure of the Truth from him.
Mr. Dorimant swears a Flea or a Maggot, is
Not made more monstrous by a magnifying
Glass, than a story is by his telling it.

Emilia. Hold, here he comes. Enter Medley.

Town. Mr. Medley.

Med. Your Servant Madam.

Town. You have made your self a Stranger of late.

Emilia. I believe you took a furfeit of Ombre
Last time you were here.

Med. Indeed I had my Belly full of that Tarmagant
Lady Dealer; there never was so unsatiable
A Carder, an old Gleeker never loved to sit
To It like her; I have played with her now at
Least a dozen times, till she'as worn out all
Her fine Complexion, and her Tour would
Keep in Curl no longer.

Town. Blame her not poor Woman, she loves nothing
So well as a black Ace.

Med. The pleasure I have seen her in when she has had hope
In drawing for a Matadore.

Emilia. It Is as pretty sport to her, as persuading
Masks off is to you to make discoveries.

Town. Pray where is your Friend, Mr. Dorimant?

Med. Soliciting his affairs, he is a man of great
Employment, has more Mistresses now depending
Than the most eminent Lawyer in England
Has Causes.

Emilia. Here has been Mrs. Loveit, so uneasy and
Out of humor these two days.

Town. How strangely love and Jealousy rage
In that poor Woman!

Med. She could not have picked out a Devil
Upon Earth so proper to Torment her,
Has made her break a dozen or two of
Fans already, tare half a score Points in pieces,
And destroy Hoods and Knots without number.

Town. We heard of a pleasant Serenade he gave
Her the other Night.

Med. A Danish Serenade with Kettle Drums, and Trumpets.

Emilia. Oh Barbarous!

Med. What, you are of the number of the Ladies whose
Ears are grown so delicate since our
Operas, you can be charmed with nothing
But Flute doux, and French Hoboys.

Emilia. Leave your raillery, and tell us, is there any
New Wit come forth, Songs or Novels?

Med. A very pretty piece of gallantry, by an
Eminent Author, called, the diversions of
Bruxells, very necessary to be read by all
Old Ladies who are desirous to improve themselves
At Questions and Commands, Blindmans buff,
And the like fashionable recreations.

Emilia. Oh Ridiculous!

Med. Then there is the Art of affectation, written
By a late beauty of Quality, teaching you how
To draw up your Breasts, stretch up your neck,
To thrust out your Breech, to play with your Head,
To toss up your Nose, to bite your Lips, to turn
Up your Eyes, to speak in a silly soft tone of a
Voice, and use all the Foolish French Words
That will infallibly make your person and
Conversation charming, with a short apology
At the latter end, in the behalf of young Ladies,
Who notoriously wash, and paint, though they
Have naturally good Complexions.

Emilia. What a deal of stuff you tell us?

Med. Such as the Town affords Madam.
The Russians hearing the great respect we
Have for Foreign Dancing, have lately sent
Over some of their best Balladins, who are
Now practicing a famous Ballat which will
Be suddenly danced at the Bear-Garden.

Town. Pray forbear your idle stories, and give us
An account of the state of Love, as it now stands.

Med. Truly there has been some revolutions in those
Affairs, great chopping and changing among the
Old, and some new Lovers, whom malice,
Indiscretion, and misfortune, have luckily
Brought into play.

Town. What think you of walking into the next Room,
And sitting down before you engage in this business?

Med. I wait upon you, and I hope (though Women
Are commonly unreasonable) by the plenty of
Scandal I shall discover, to give you very good
Content Ladies.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. Loveit and Pert. Mrs. Loveit putting up a Letter, then pulling out
her pocket Glass, and looking in it. Loveit. Pert.

Pert. Madam.

Loveit. I hate my self, I look so ill to day.

Pert. Hate the wicked cause on it, that base man
Mr. Dorimant, who makes you torment and
Vex your self continually.

Loveit. He is to blame indeed.

Pert. To blame to be two days without sending,
Writing, or coming near you, contrary to
His Oath and Covenant; 'Twas to much
Purpose to make him swear; I Will lay my
Life there is not an Article but he has Broken,
Talked to the Vizards in the Pit, waited upon the
Ladies from the Boxes to their Coaches; gone behind
The Scenes, and fawned upon those little insignificant
Creatures, the Players; it is impossible for a man
Of his inconstant temper to forbear I Am sure.

Lov. I know he is a Devil, but he has something of the
Angel yet undefac'd in him, which
Makes him so charming and agreeable, that I
Must love him be he never so wicked.

Pert. I little thought Madam to see your spirit
Taim'd to this degree, who banished poor
Mr. Lackwit but for taking up another Ladies
Fan in your presence.

Loveit. My knowing of such odious Fools, contributes to the
Making of me Love Dorimrnt the better.

Pert. Your knowing of Mr. Dorimant, in my mind, should
Rather make you hate all mankind.

Loveit. So it does, besides himself.

Pert. Pray, what excuse does he make in his Letter?

Loveit. He has had business.

Pert. Business in general terms would not have
Been a current excuse for another;
A Modish Man is always very busy
When he is in pursuit of a new Mistress.

Loveit. Some Fop has bribed you to rail at him;
He had business, I will believe it, and will forgive him.

Pert. You may forgive him any thing, but I shall never
Forgive him his turning me into Ridicule,
As I hear he does.

Loveit. I perceive you are of the number of those
Fools his Wit had made his Enemies.

Pert. I am of the number of those he is pleased
To railly, Madam; and if we may believe
Mr. Wagsan, and Mr. Caperwell, he sometimes
Makes m^rry with your self too, among
His Laughing Companions.

Loveit. Blockheads are as malicious to witty men,
As ugly Women are to the handsome; it is
Their Interest, and they make it their business
To defame 'em.

Pert. I wish Mr. Dorimant would not make
It his business to defame you.

Loveit. Should he, I had rather be made infamous
By him, than owe my reputation to the dull
Discretion of those Fops you talk off.
Bellinda! running to her.

Enter Bellinda. Bell. My Dear.

Loveit. You have been unkind of late.

Bell. Do not say unkind, say unhappy!

Loveit. I could chide you,
Where have you been these two days?

Bell. Pity me rather my dear, where I have been
So tired with two or three Country Gentlewomen,
Whose conversation has been more
Unsufferable than a Country Fiddle.

Loveit. Are they Relations?

Bell. No, Welsh acquaintance I made when I was last year
At St. Winefreds, they have asked me a thousand
Questions of the Modes and Intrigues of the Town,
And I have told 'em almost as many things for news
That hardly were so, when their Gowns were in Fashion.

Loveit. Provoking Creatures, how could you endure them?

Bell. Now to carry on my Plot, nothing but love
Could make me capable of so much falsehood; Aside.
It Is time to begin, lest Dorimant should
Come before her Jealousy has stung her;
Laughs and then speaks on. I was yesterday at a Play with 'em,
Where I was fain to show 'em the living, as the
Man at Westminster does the dead; that is
Mrs. such a one admired for her Beauty,
This is Mr. such a one cried up for a Wit;
That is sparkish Mr. such a one who
Keeps reverend Mrs. such a one, and there
Sits fine Mrs. such a one who was lately
Cast off by my Lord such a one.

Loveit. Did you see Dorimant there?

Bell. I did, and imagine you were there with him,
And have no mind to own it.

Loveit. What should make you think so?

Bell. A Lady masked in a pretty dishabillie
Whom Dorimant entertained with more
Respect, than the Gallants do a Common Vizard.

Loveit. Dorimant at the Play entertaining a Mask,
Oh Heaven's! Aside.

Bell. Good. Aside.

Loveit. Did he stay all the while?

Bell. 'Till the Play was done, and then led her
Out, which confirms me it was you!

Loveit. Traitor!

Pert. Now you may believe he had business, and
You may forgive him too.

Loveit. Ungrateful perjured man!

Bell. You seem so much concerned my Dear,
I fear I have told you unawares what I
Had better have concealed for your Quiet.

Loveit. What manner of shape had she?

Bell. Tall and slender, her motions were very gentile,
Certainly she must be some person of condition.

Loveit. Shame and confusion be ever in her face
When she shows it.

Bell. I should blame your discretion for loving that
Wild man my Dear, but they say he has a way
So bewitching, that few can defend their hearts
Who know him.

Loveit. I will tear him from mine, or die in the attempt.

Bell. Be more moderate.

Lov. Would I had Daggers, Darts, or poisoned Arrows in my
Breast, so I could but remove the thoughts
Of him from thence.

Bell. Fie, fie, your transports are too Violent, my Dear.
This may be but an accidental Gallantry,
And it is likely ended at her Coach.

Pert. Should it proceed farther, let your comfort be,
The Conduct Mr. Dorimant affects, will
Quickly make you know your Rival, ten to one
Let you see her ruined, her reputation exposed
To the Town, a happiness none will envy her
But your self Madam.

Loveit. Who e're she be, all the harm I wish her, is, may
She love him as well as I do, and may he give her
As much cause to hate him.

Pert. Never doubt the latter end of your Curse Madam!

Loveit. May all the passions that are raised by neglected
Love, Jealousy, Indignation, Spite, and Thirst of
Revenge, eternally rage in her Soul, as they do
Now in mine. Walks up and down with a distracted air.

Enter a Page. Page. Madam, Mr. Dorimant --

Loveit. I will not see him.

Page. I told him you were within, Madam.

Loveit. Say you ly'd, say I Am busy, shut the door;
Say any thing.

Page. He Is here Madam. Enter Dorimant.

Dor. They taste of death who do at Heaven arrive,
But we this Paradise approach alive.
What dancing the Galloping Nag without a Fiddle?
To Loveit. Offers to catch her by the hand, she flings away and walks on. I
fear this restlessness of the body, Madam, pursuing her.
Proceeds from an unquietness of the mind.
What unlucky accident puts you out of
Humor; a Point ill-wash'd, Knots spoiled in the
Making up, Hair shaded awry, or some
Other little mistake insetting you in order?

Pert. A trifle in my opinion, Sir, more inconsiderable
Than any you mention.

Dor. Oh Mrs. Pert, I never knew you sullen enough
To be silent, come let me know the business.

Pert. The business, Sir, is the business that has taken you
Up these two days; how have I seen you
Laugh at men of business, and now to become a man
Of business your self!

Dor. We are not Masters of our own affections, our
Inclinations daily alter; now we love pleasure, and
Anon we shall dote on business; humane
Frailty will have it so, and who can help it;

Loveit. Faithless, inhumane, barbarous man --

Dor. Good, now the Alarm strikes --

Loveit. Without sense of Love, of Honor, or of Gratitude,
Tell me, for I will know, what Devil masked
She was, you were with at the Play yesterday?

Dor. Faith I resolved as much as you, but the
Devil was obstinate, and would not tell me.

Loveit. False in this as in your Vows to me, you do know!

Dor. The truth is I did all I could to know.

Loveit. And dare you own it to my Face;
Hell and Furies! Tears her Fan in pieces.

Dor. Spare your Fan, Madam, you are growing hot,
And will want it to cool you.

Loveit. Horror and distraction seize you, Sorrow and
Remorse gnaw your Soul, and punish all your
Perjuries to me -- Weeps.

Dor. So Thunder breaks the Cloud in Twain,
And makes a passage for the Rain. Turning to Bellinda.
Bellinda, you are the Devil that have raised
This storm; you were at the Play yesterday, To Bellinda.
And have been making discoveries to your Dear.

Bell. You Are the most mistaken Man in the World.

Dor. It must be so, and here I vow revenge; resolve
To pursue, and persecute you more impertinently
Than ever any Loving Fop did his Mistress, hunt
You in the Park, trace you in the Mail, Dog
You in every visit you make, haunt you at
The Plays, and in the Drawing Room, hang my
Nose in your neck, and talk to you whether
You will or no, and ever look upon you with such
Dying Eyes, till your Friends grow Jealous of me,
Send you out of Town, and the World suspect
Your reputation. In a lower voice.
At my He looks kindly on Bellinda.
Lady Townley's when we go from hence.

Bell. I Will meet you there.

Dor. Enough.

Loveit. Stand off, you sha' not stare upon her so.

Pushing Dorimant away. Dor. Good! There Is one made Jealous already.

Loveit. Is this the constancy you vowed?

Dor. Constancy at my years! it is not a Virtue in
Season, you might as well expect the Fruit the
Autumn ripens in the Spring.

Loveit. Monstrous Principle!

Dor. Youth has a long Journey to go, Madam, should
I have set up my rest at the first Inn I lodged at,
I should never have arrived at the happiness I now enjoy.

Loveit. Dissembler, damned Dissembler!

Dor. I am so I confess, good nature, and good manners
Corrupt me. I am honest in my inclinations, and
Would not, were not to avoid offense, make a
Lady a little in years believe I think her young, wilfully
Mistake Art for Nature; and seem as fond of a thing
I am weary off, as when I doated on it in earnest.

Loveit. False Man.

Dor. True Woman.

Loveit. Now you begin to show your self!

Dor. Love gilds us over, and makes us show fine things
To one another for a time, but soon the Gold
Wears off, and then again the native brass appears.

Loveit. Think on your Oaths, your Vows and Protestations.
Perjured Man.

Dor. I made 'em when I was in love.

Loveit. And therefore ought they not to bind?
Oh Impious!

Dor. What we swear at such a time may be a certain proof
Of a present passion, but to say truth, in Love there is
No security to be given for the future.

Loveit. Horrid and ungrateful, begone,
And never see me more.

Dor. I am not one of those troublesome Coxcombs, who
Because they were once well received, take the
Privilege to plague a Woman with their Love ever
After; I shall obey you, Madam, though I do my
Self some violence. He offers to go, and Loveit pulls him back.

Loveit. Come back, you sha' not go.
Could you have the ill nature to offer it?

Dor. When love grows diseased the best thing we can do
Is to put it to a Violent Death; I cannot
Endure the torture of a lingering and
Consumptive passion.

Loveit. Can you think mine sickly?

Dor. Oh, it is desperately Ill! what worse symptoms
Are there than your being always uneasy when
I visit you, your picking quarrels with me on
Slight occasions, and in my absence kindly listening
To the impertinences of every fashionable Fool
That talks to you?

Loveit. What fashionable Fool can you lay to my charge?

Dor. Why the very Cock-fool of all those Fools, Sir
Fopling Flutter.

Loveit. I never saw him in my life but once.

Dor. The worse Woman you at first sight to put on
All your charms, to entertain him with that softness
In your voice, and all that wanton kindness in your
Eyes, you so notoriously affect, when you design
A Conquest.

Loveit. So damned a lie did never malice yet invent;
Who told you this?

Dor. No matter; that ever I should love a Woman that
Can dote on a senceless Caper, a Tawdry French
Riband, and a Formal Cravat.

Loveit. You make me mad.

Dor. A guilty Conscience may do much,
Go on, be the Game-Mistress of the Town, and
Enter all our young Fops, as fast as they come
From travail.

Loveit. Base and Scurrilous!

Dor. A fine mortifying reputation 'twill be for a
Woman of your Pride, Wit, and Quality!

Loveit. This Jealousy's a mere pretense, a cursed trick
Of your own devising; I know you.

Dor. Believe it and all the ill of me you can, I would
Not have a Woman have the least good thought
Of me, that can think well of Fopling; farewell,
Fall too, and much good may do you with your Coxcomb.

Loveit. Stay, oh stay, and I will tell you all.

Dor. I have been told too much already. Ex. Dorimant.

Loveit. Call him again.

Pert. E'ne let him go, a fair riddance.

Loveit. Run I say, call him again, I will have him called.

Pert. The Devil should carry him away first,
Were it my concern. Ex. Pert.

Bell. H'as frighted me from the very thoughts of
Loving men; for Heavens sake, my dear,
Do not discover what I told you; I dread his tongue
As much as you ought to have done his Friendship.

Pert. He Is gone, Madam. Enter Pert.

Loveit. Lightning blast him.

Pert. When I told him you desired him to come back,
He smiled, made a mouth at me, flung into his
Coach, and said --

Loveit. What did he say?

Pert. Drive away, and then repeated Verses.

Loveit. Would I had made a Contract to be a Witch
When first I entertained this greater Devil,
Monster, Barbarian; I could tear my self in pieces.
Revenge, nothing but Revenge can ease me; Plague,
War, Famine, Fire, all that can bring universal ruin
And misery on mankind, with Joy I Would perish to
Have you in my power but this moment. Ex. Loveit.

Pert. Follow Madam, leave her not in this outrageous passion.

Pert gathers up the things. Bell. H'as given me the proof which I desired of
His love, but it is a proof of his ill nature too;
I wish I had not seen him use her so.
I sigh to think that Dorimant may be,
One day as faithless, and unkind to me.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE Lady Woodvils Lodgings. Enter Harriet, and Busy her Woman. Busy. DEar
Madam!
Let me set that Curl in order.

Har. Let me alone, I will shake 'em all out of order.

Busy. Will you never leave this Wildness?

Har. Torment me not.

Busy. Look! there is a Knot falling off.

Har. Let it drop.

Busy. But one pin, dear Madam.

Har. How do I daily suffer under thy Officious Fingers?

Busy. Ah the difference that is between
You and my Lady Dapper? how uneasy she is
If the least thing be amiss about her?

Har. She is indeed most exact! nothing is ever wanting
To make her ugliness remarkable!

Busy. Jeering people say so!

Har. Her powdering, painting, and her patching never fail in
Public to draw the tongues and Eyes of all the men upon her.

Busy. She is indeed a little too pretending.

Har. That Women should set up for beauty as much in spite
Of nature, as some men have done for Wit.

Busy. I hope without offense one may endeavor
To make ones self agreeable.

Har. Not, when it is impossible. Women then
Ought to be no more fond of dressing than Fools
Should be of talking; Hoods and Modesty,
Masks and Silence, things that shadow and conceal;
They should think of nothing else.

Busy. Jesu! Madam, what will your Mother think is
Become of you? for Heavens sake go in again.

Har. I will not!

Busy. This is the Extravagant'st thing that ever
You did in your life, to leave her and a Gentleman
Who is to be your Husband.

Har. My Husband!
Have thou so little wit to think I spoke what I meant
When I overjoyed her in the Country, with a low Courtsy,
And what you please, Madam, I shall ever be obedient.

Busy. Nay, I know not, you have so many fetches.

Har. And this was one, to get her up to London!
Nothing else I assure thee.

Busy. Well, the man, in my mind, is a fine man!

Har. The man indeed wears his Clothes fashionably, and
Has a pretty negligent way with him, very Courtly,
And much affected; he bows, and talks, and smiles
So agreeably as he thinks.

Busy. I never saw any thing so gentile!

Har. Varnished over with good breeding, many a
Blockhead makes a tolerable show.

Busy. I wonder you do not like him.

Har. I think I might be brought to endure him, and that is
All a reasonable Woman should expect in a Husband, but
There is duty in the case -- and like the haughty Merab, I
Find much aversion in my stubborn mind,
Is bred by-being promised and designed.

Busy. I wish you do not design your own ruin! I partly
Guess your inclinations Madam -- that Mr. Dorimant --

Har. Leave your prating, and sing some foolish Song or other.

Busy. I will, the Song you love so well ever since you saw
Mr. Dorimant.
SONG.
When first Amyntas charmed my heart,
My heedless Sheep began to stray;
The Wolves soon stole the greatest part,
And all will now be made a prey.
Ah, let not love your thoughts possess,
It Is fatal to a Shepherdess;
The dangerous passion you must shun,
Or else like me be quite undone.

Har. Shall I be paid down by a covetous Parent for a purchase?
I need no Land; no, i will lay my self out all in love.
It is decreed --

Enter Y. Bellair. Y. Bell. What generous
Resolution are you making Madam?

Har. Only to be disobedient, Sir.

Y. Bell. Let me join hands with you in that --

Har. With all my heart, I never thought I should have given
You mine so willingly. Here I Harriet --

Y. Bell. And I Harry --

Har. Do solemnly protest --

Y. Bell. And vow --

Har. That I with you --

Y. Bell. And I with you --

Both. Will never marry --

Har. A match!

Y. Bell. And no match!
How do you like this indifference now?

Har. You expect I should take it ill I see!

Y. Bell. It Is not unnatural for you Women to be a little
Angry, you miss a Conquest, though you would slight the
Poor man were he in your power.

Har. There are some it may be have an Eye like Bart'lomew,
Big enough for the whole Fair, but I am not of the
Number, and you may keep your Ginger-bread.
'Twill be more acceptable to the Lady,
Whose dear Image it wears Sir.

Y. Bell. I must confess Madam, you came a day after the Fair.

Har. You own then you are in love --

Y. Bell. I do.

Har. The confidence is generous, and in return I could almost
Find in my heart to let you know my inclinations.

Y. Bell. Are you in Love?

Har. Yes, with this dear Town, to that
Degree, I can scarce endure
The Country in Landskapes and in Hangings.

Y. Bell. What a dreadful thing 'twould be
To be hurried back to Hampshire!

Har. Ah -- name it not! --

Y. Bell. As for us, I find we shall agree well enough! would
We could do something to deceive the grave people!

Har. Could we delay their quick proceeding, 'twere well,
A reprieve is a good step toward the getting of a pardon.

Y. Bell. If we give over the Game, we are undone!
What think you of playing it on booty?

Har. What do you mean?

Y. Bell. Pretend to be in love with one another! 'twill make
Some dilatory excuses we may feign, pass the better.

Har. Let us do it, if it be but for the dear
Pleasure of dissembling.

Y. Bell. Can you play your part?

Har. I know not what it is to love, but I have made
Pretty remarks by being now and then where Lovers meet.
Where did you leave their Gravities?

Y. Bell. In The next Room! your Mother was
Censuring our modern Gallant.

Enter Old Bellair, and Lady Woodvil. Har. Peace! Here they come, I will lean
against this Wall,
And look bashfully down upon my Fan, while
You like an Amorous spark modishly entertain me.

L. Woodv. Never go about to excuse 'em, come, come,
It was not so when I was a young Woman.

O. Bell. A Dod, they are something disrespectful --

L. Wood. Quality was then considered,
And not rallied by every fleering Fellow.

O. Bell. Youth will have it is Jest, a Dod it will.

L. Wood. It Is good breeding now to be civil to none but
Players and Exchange Women, they are treated by 'em as much
Above their Condition, as others are below theirs.

O. Bell. Out a pise on 'em, talk no more, the
Rogues have got an ill habit of preferring Beauty,
No matter where they find it.

L. Wood. See your Son, and my Daughter, they have
Improved their acquaintance since they were within.

O. Bell. A Dod methinks they have!
Let Us keep back and observe.

Y. Bell. Now for a look and gestures that may persuade 'em
I am saying all the passionate things imaginable --

Har. Your Head a little more on one side, ease your self
On your left Leg, and play with your right hand.

Y. Bell. Thus, is it not?

Har. Now set your right leg firm on the ground, adjust
Your Belt, then look about you.

Y. Bell. A little exercising will make me perfect.

Har. Smile and turn to me again very sparkish!

Y. Bell. Will you take your turn and be instructed?

Har. With all my heart.

Y. Bell. At one motion play your Fan, roll your Eyes,
And then settle a kind look upon me.

Har. So.

Y. Bell. Now spread your Fan, look down upon it,
And tell the Sticks with a Finger.

Har. Very Modish.

Y. Bell. Clap your hand up to your bosom,
Hold down your Gown.
Shrug a little, draw up your Breasts, and let 'em fall
Again, gently, with a sigh or two, etc.

Har. By the good instructions you give, I suspect you for one
Of those malicious Observers who watch peoples Eyes,
And from innocent looks, make scandalous conclusions.

Y. Bell. I know some indeed who out of mere love
To mischief are as vigilant as Jealousy it self,
And will give you an account of every Glance
That passes at a Play, and in the Circle!

Har. 'Twill not be amiss now to seem a little pleasant.

Y. Ball. Clap your Fan then in both your hands, snatch it
To your Mouth, smile, and with a lively motion fling your
Body a little forwards. So -- now spread it; fall back on
The sudden, Cover your Face with it, and break out
Into a loud Laughter -- take up! look
Grave, and fall a fanning of your self --
Admirably well acted.

Har. I think I am pretty apt at these matters!

O. Bell. A Dod I like this well.

L. Wood. This promises something.

O. Bell. Come! there is Love in the case, a dod there is,
Or will be; what say you young Lady?

Har. All in good time Sir, you expect we should fall to,
And Love as game-Cocks fight, as soon as we are set
Together, a Dod you are unreasonable!

O. Bell. A Dod sirrah, I like thy wit well. Enter a Servant.

Servant. The Coach is at the Door Madam.

O. Bell. Go, get you and take the Air together.

L. Wood. Will not you go with us?

O. Bell. Out a pize: A Dod I have business and cannot.
We shall meet at night at my Sister Townleys.

Y. Bell. He Is going to Emilia. Aside.
I overheard him talk of a Collation. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter L. Townley, Emilia, and Mr. Medley. L. Town. I pity the young lovers,
we last talked of,
Though to say truth their conduct has been so indiscreet,
They deserve to be unfortunate.

Medley. Y' have had an exact account, from the great Lady
In The Box down to the little Orange wench.

Emil. Y' are a living Libel, a breathing Lampoon; I
Wonder you are not torn in pieces.

Med. What think you of setting up an Office of Intelligence
For these matters? the project may get Money.

L. Tow. You would have great dealings with country Ladies.

Med. More than Muddiman has Enter Bellinda.
With their husbands.

L. Town. Bellinda, what has been become of you! we
Have not seen you here of late
With your friend Mrs Lovit.

Bellin. Dear creature, I left her but now so sadly afflicted.

L. Town. With her old distemper Jealousy!

Med. Dorimant has played her some new prank.

Bell. Well, that Dorimant is certainly the worst
Man breathing.

Emil. I once thought so.

Bell. And do you not think so still?

Emil. No indeed!

Bell. Oh Jesu!

Emil. The Town does him a great deal of Injury, and I
Will never believe what it says of a man I do
Not know again for his sake!

Bell. You make me wonder!

L. Town. He Is a very well bred man.

Bell. But strangely ill-natured.

Emil. Then he is a very Witty man!

Bell. But a man of no principles.

Med. Your man of Principles is a very fine thing indeed.

Bell. To be preferred to men of parts by Women who have
Regard to their Reputation and quiet. Well were I minded
To play the Fool, he should be the last man I Would think of.

Med. He has been the first in many Ladies favors, though
You are so severe, Madam.

L. Town. What he may be for a Lover I know not, but
He Is a very pleasant acquaintance I am sure.

Bell. Had you seen him use Mrs Loveit as I have done,
You would never endure him more --

Emil. What he has quarreled with her again!

Bell. Upon the slightest occasion, he is Jealous
Of Sir Fopling.

L. Town. She never saw him in her life but
Yesterday, and that was here.

Emil. On my Conscience! he is the only man in Town
That Is her aversion, how horribly out of humor
She was all the while he talked to her!

Bell. And some body has wickedly told him --

Emil. Here he comes. Enter Dorimant.

Med. Dorimant! you are luckily come to justify
Your self -- here is a Lady --

Bell. Has a word or two to say to you from a
Disconsolate person.

Dor. You tender your Reputation too much I know Madam,
To whisper with me before this good Company.

Bell. To serve Mrs. Loveit, I Will make a bold venture.

Dor. Here Is Medley the very Spirit of Scandal.

Bell. No matter!

Emil. It Is something you are unwilling to
Hear, Mr. Dorimant.

L. Town. Tell him Bellinda whether he will or no!

Bell. Mrs. Loveit! aloud.

Dor. Softly, these are laughers, you do not know 'em.

Bell. In a Word you have made me hate you. To Dor. apart.
Which I thought you never could have done.

Dor. In obeying your Commands.

Bell. 'Twas a cruel part you played! how could you act it?

Dor. Nothing is cruel to a man who could kill himself
To please you; remember Five a Clock to morrow Morning.

Bell. I tremble when you name it.

Dor. Be sure you come.

Bell. I shall not.

Dor. Swear you will!

Bell. I dare not.

Dor. Swear I say.

Bell. By my life! by all the happiness I hope for --

Dor. You will.

Bell. I will.

Dor. Kind.

Bell. I am glad i have sworn, I vow I think I should have
Failed you else!

Dor. Surprisingly kind! in what temper did
You leave Loveit?

Bell. Her raving was prettily over, and she began to be
In a brave way of defying you, and all your works.
Where have you been since you went from thence?

Dor. I looked in at the Play.

Bell. I have promised and must return to her again.

Dor. Persuade her to walk in the Mail this evening

Bell. She hates the place and will not come.

Dor. Do all you can to prevail with her.

Bell. For what purpose?

Dor. Sir Fopling will be here anon, I Will prepare him
To set upon her there before me.

Bell. You persecute her too much, but I Will do all you will have me.

Dor. Tell her plainly, it is grown so dull a business aloud.
I can drudge on no longer.

Emil. There are afflictions in Love Mr. Dorimant.

Dor. You Women make 'em, who are commonly as
Unreasonable in that as you are at Play; without
The Advantage be on your side, a man can never
Quietly give over when he is weary?

Med. If you would play without being obliged to
Complaisance Dorimant, you should play in
Public places.

Dor. Ordinaries were a very good thing for that,
But Gentlemen do not of late frequent 'em; the
Deep play is now in private Houses.

Bellinda offering to steal away. L. Town. Bellinda, are you leaving us so soon?

Bell. I am to go to the Park with Mrs. Loveit,
Madam -- Ex. Bellinda.

L. Town. This confidence will go nigh to spoil this
Young Creature.

Med. 'Twill do her good Madam. Young men who
Are brought up under practicing Lawyers prove
The abler Council when they come to be called
To the Bar themselves --

Dor. The Town has been very favorable to you
This afternoon, my Lady Townley, you use to have
An Ambara's of Chaires and Coaches at your Door,
An uproar of Footmen in your Hall, and a noise
Of Fools above here.

L. Town. Indeed my House is the general rendevouze,
And next to the Playhouse is the Common
Refuge of all the Young idle people.

Emil. Company is a very good thing, Madam, but I
Wonder you do not love it a little more Chosen.

L. Town. It Is good to have an universal taste, we
Should love Wit, but for Variety, be able to divert
Our selves with the Extravagancies of those who want it.

Med. Fools will make you laugh.

Emil. For once or twice! but the repetition of their
Folly after a visit or two grows tedious and unsufferable.

L. Town. You are a little too delicate Emilia.

Enter a Page. Page. Sir Fopling Flutter, Madam, desires to know if
You are to be seen.

L. Town. Here Is the freshest Fool in Town, and one
Who has not cloyed you yet. Page!

Page. Madam!

L. Town. Desire him to walk up.

Dor. Do not you fall on him, Medley, and snub him.
Sooth him up in his extravagance! he will show the better.

Med. You know I have a natural indulgence for Fools,
And need not this caution, Sir!

Enter Sir Fopling Flutter, with his Page after him. Sr. Fop. Page! Wait
without. Madam, I To L. Townly.
Kiss your Hands, I see Yesterday was nothing of Chance,
The belles assembles form themselves here every day.
Lady your servant; Dorimant, let me embrace To Emilia.
Thee, without lying I have not met with any of my
Acquaintance, who retain so much of Paris as
Thou do, the very air thou had when the
Marquise mistook thee in the Tuilleries, and cried
Hey Chevalier, and then begged thy pardon.

Dor. I would fain wear in Fashion as long as I can, Sir,
It Is a thing to be valued in men as well as Bawbles.

Sir Fop. Thou art a man of Wit, and understands
The Town: prithee let thee and I be intimate,
There is no living without making some good
Man the confident of our pleasures.

Dor. It Is true! but there is no man so improper
For such a business as I am.

Sir Fop. Prithee! why have thou so modest an
Opinion of thy self?

Dor. Why first, I could never keep a secret in my life,
And then there is no charm so infallibly makes me
Fall in love with a Woman as my knowing a
Friend loves her. I deal honestly with you.

Sir Fop. Thy humour's very gallant or let me perish,
I knew a French Count so like thee.

L. Town. Wi^ I perceive has more power over you
Than Beauty, Sir Fopling, else you would not have
Let this Lady stand so long neglected.

Sir Fop. A thousand pardons Madam, some To Emilia.
Civilities due of course upon the meeting a long absent
Friend. The Eclat of so much beauty I confess ought
To have charmed me sooner.

Emil. The brillian of so much good language Sir has much
More power than the little beauty I can boast.

Sir Fop. I never saw any thing prettier than this high
Work on your Point D'espaigne --

Emil. It Is not so rich as Point De Venice --

Sir Fop. Not altogether, but looks cooler, and is more
Proper for the season. Dorimant, is not that Medley?

Dor. The same, Sir.

Sir Fop. Forgive me Sir in this Ambaras of Civilities,
I could not come to have you in my Arms sooner.
You understand and Equipage the best of
Any Man in Town I hear.

Med. By my own you would not guess it.

Sir Fop. There are Critics who do not write Sir.

Med. Our peevish Poets will scarce allow it.

Sir Fop. Dam'em, they will allow no Man Wit, who does not
Play the fool like themselves and show it! Have you
Taken notice of the Gallesh I brought over?

Med. O yes! 't has quite another Air, than the English makes*

Sir Fop. It Is as easily known from an English Tumbril,
As an Inns of Court-man is from one of us.

Dor. Truly there is a bell-air in Galleshes as well as men.

Med. But there are few so delicate to observe it.

Sir Fop. The world is generally very grossier here indeed.

L. Town. He Is very fine.

Emil. Extreme proper.

Sir Fop. A slight suit I made to appear in at my first arrival,
Not worthy your consideration Ladies.

Dor. The Pantaloon is very well mounted.

Sir Fop. The Tassels are new and pretty.

Med. I never saw a Coat better cut.

Sir Fop. It makes me show long-wasted, and I think slender.

Dor. That Is the shape our Ladies dote on.

Med. Your breech though is a handful too high in my
Eye Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. Peace Medley, I have wished it lower a thousand
Times, but a Pox on it 'twill not be.

L. Town. His Gloves are well fringed, large and graceful.

Sir Fop. I was always eminent for being bien gante.

Emil. He wears nothing but what are Originals of the
Most Famous hands in Paris.

Sir Fop. You are in the right Madam.

L. Town. The Suit.

Sir Fop. Barroy.

Emilia. The Garniture.

Sir Fop. Le Gras --

Med. The Shoes!

Sir Fop. Piccar!

Dor. The Perriwig!

Sir Fop. Chedreux.

Town. and Emilia. The Gloves!

Sir Fop. Orangerii! You know the smell Ladies!
Dorimant, I could find in my heart for an amusement
To have a Gallantry with some of our English Ladies.

Dor. It Is a thing no less necessary to confirm the
Reputation of your Wit, than a Duel will be
To satisfy the Town of your Courage.

Sir Fop. Here was a Woman yesterday --

Dor. Mistress Loveit.

Sir Fop. You have named her!

Dor. You cannot pitch on a better for your purpose.

Sir Fop. Prithee! what is she?

Dor. A person of Quality, and one who has a rest of
Reputation enough to make the Conquest considerable:
Besides I hear she likes you too!

Sir Fop. Methoughts she seemed though very reserved,
And uneasy all the time I entertained her.

Dor. Grimace and affectation: You will see
Her in the Mail to night.

Sir Fop. Prithee, let thee and I take the Air together.

Dor. I am engaged to Medley, but I Will meet you at
Saint James's, and give you some information, upon the
Which you may regulate your proceedings.

Sir Fop. All the World will be in the Part to night: Ladies,
'Twere pity to keep so much Beauty longer within doors,
And rob the Ring of all those Charms
That should adorn it -- Hey Page.
Enter Page, and goes out again. See that all my People be ready.
Dorimant a Revoir.

Med. A fine mettl'd Coxcomb.

Dor. Brisk and Insipid --

Med. Pert and dull.

Emil. However you despise him Gentlemen, I Will lay my
Life he passes for a Wit with many.

Dor. That may very well be, Nature has her cheats, stum's
A brain, and puts sophisticate dullness often on the tastless
Multitude for true wit and good humor. Medley, Come.

Med. I must go a little way, I will meet you in the Mail.

Dor. I Will walk through the Garden thither, we shall meet
Anon and bow. To the Women.

L. Town. Not to night! we are engaged about a business,
The knowledge of which may make you laugh hereafter.

Med. Your servant Ladies.

Dor. A Revoir, as Sir Fopling says -- Ex. Med. and Dor.

L. Town. The Old Man will be here immediately.

Emil. Let Us expect him in the Garden --

L. Town. Go, you are a Rogue.

Emil. I cannot abide you.

Exeunt. SCENE III. The Mail.
Enter Harriet, Y. Bellair, she pulling him. Har. Come along.

Y. Bell. And leave your Mother.

Har. Busy will be sent with a Hue and Cry after us;
But that is no matter.

Y Bell. 'Twill look strangely in me.

Har. She Will believe it a freak of mine, and never blame
Your manners.

Y. Bell. What reverend acquaintance is that she has met?

Har. A fellow-beauty of the last Kings time, though by the
Ruins you would hardly guess it.

Exeunt. Enter Dorimant and crosses the Stage. Enter Y. Bellair, and Harriet.
Y. Bell. By this time your Mother is in a fine taking.

Har. If your Friend Mr. Dorimant were but here now,
That she might find me talking with him.

Y. Bell. She does not know him but dreads him I hear of
All Mankind.

Har. She concludes if he does but speak to a
Woman she is undone, is on her knees every day to
Pray Heaven defend me from him.

Y. Bell. You do not apprehend him so much as she does.

Har. I never saw any thing in him that was frightful.

Y. Bell. On the contrary, have you not observed something
Extreme delightful in his Wit and Person?

Har. He Is agreeable and pleasant I must own, but he
Does so much affect being so, he displeases me.

Y. Bell. Lord Madam, all he does and says, is so easy,
And so natural.

Har. Some Men's Verses seem so to the unskilful,
But labor in the one, and affectation in the other
To the Judicious plainly appear.

Y. Bell. I never heard him accused of affectation before.

Enter Dorimant and stares upon her. Har. It passes on the easy Town, who are
favorably
Pleased in him to call it humor. Ex. Y. Bellair and Harriet.

Dor. It Is she! it must be she, that lovely hair, that
Easy shape, those wanton Eyes, and all those melting
Charms about her mouth, which Medley spoke of;
I Will follow the Lottery, and put in for a
Prize with my friend Bellair.
Ex. Dor. repeating. In love the Victors from the vanquished fly;
They fly that Wound, and they pursue that die.

Enter Y. Bellair, and Harriet, and after them Dorimant standing at a distance.
Y. Bell. Most people prefer High Park to this place.

Har. It has the better Reputation I confess: but I
Abominate the dull diversions there, the formal bows,
The Affected smiles, the silly by-Words, and
Amorous Tweers, in passing; here one meets with
A little conversation now and then.

Y. Bell. These conversations have been fatal
To some of your Sex, Madam.

Har. It may be so, because some who want temper
Have been undone by gaming, must others who have it
Wholly deny themselves the pleasure of Play?

Dor. Trust me, it were unreasonable Madam.

Coming up gently, and bowing to her. Har. Lord! who is this? She Starts and
looks grave.

Y. Bell. Dorimant.

Dor. Is this the Woman your Father would
Have you marry?

Y. Bell. It is.

Dor. Her name?

Y. Bell. Harriet.

Dor. I am not mistaken, she is handsome.

Y. Bell. Talk to her, her Wit is better than her face;
We were wishing for you but now.

Dor. Overcast with seriousness of the sudden! To Harriet.
A thousand smiles were shining in that Face but now;
I never saw so quick a change of Weather.

Har. I feel as great a change within; Aside.
But he shall never know it.

Dor. You were talking of Play, Madam, Pray
What may be your stint?

Har. A little harmless discourse in public walks,
Or at most an appointment in a Box barefaced
At the Playhouse; you are for Masks, and
Private meetings; where Women engage
For all they are worth I hear.

Dor. I have been used to deep Play, but I can make one
At small Game, when I like my Gamester well.

Har. And be so unconcerned you will have no pleasure in it.

Dor. Where there is a considerable sum to be won, the
Hope of drawing people in, makes every trifle considerable.

Har. The sordidness of men's natures I know makes 'em
Willing to flatter and comply with the Rich, though they
Are sure never to be the better for 'em.

Dor. It Is in their power to do us good, and we despair
Not but at some time or other they may be willing.

Har. To men who have fared in this Town like you,
'Twould be a great Mortification to live on hope;
Could you keep a Lent for a Mistress?

Dor. In expectation of a happy Easter, and though time
Be very precious, think forty days well lost, to gain your
Favor.

Har. Mr. Bellair! let us walk, it is time to leave him,
Men grow dull when they begin to be particular.

Dor. You Are mistaken, flattery will not ensue, though I know
You Are greedy of the praises of the whole Mail.

Har. You do me wrong.

Dor. I do not, as I followed you, I observed how you
Were pleased when the Fops cried she is handsome, very
Handsome, by God she is, and whispered aloud your name,
The thousand several forms you put your face into; then,
To make your self more agreeable, how wantonly you played
With your head, flung back your locks, and looked smilingly
Over your shoulder at 'em.

Har. I do not go begging the men's as you do
The Ladies Good liking with a sly softness in
Your looks, and a gentle slowness in your bows,
As you pass by 'em -- as thus Sir -- Acts him.
Is not this like you?

Enter Lady Woodvil and Busy. Y. Bell. Your Mother Madam. Pulls Har. She
composes her self

L. Wood. Ah my Dear child Harriet.

Busy. Now is she so pleased with finding her again
She cannot chide her.

L. Wood. Come away!

Dor. It Is now but high Mail Madam, the most entertaining
Time of all the Evening.

Har. I would fain see that Dorimant Mother, you so
Cry out of, for a monster, he is in the Mail
I hear.

L. Wood. Come away then! the plague is here and you
Should dread the infection.

Y. Bell. You may be misinformed of the gentleman?

L. Wood. Oh no! I hope you do not know him.
He is the Prince of all the Devils in the Town,
Delights in nothing but in Rapes and Riots.

Dor. If you did but hear him speak Madam!

L. Wood. Oh! he has a Tongue they say would tempt the
Angels to a second fall.

Enter Sir Fopling with his Equipage, six Footmen, and a Page. Sir Fop. Hey,
Champaine, Norman, La Rose, la Fleur,
La Tour, La Verdure. Dorimant --

L. Wood. Here, here he is among this Rout, he
Names him; come away Harriet, come away.

Ex. L. Wood. Harr. Busy and Y. Bell. Dor. This fool's coming has spoiled all,
she is gone,
But she has left a pleasing Image of her self
Behind that wanders in my Soul --
It must not settle there.

Sir Fop. What resverie is this! speak man.

Dor. Snatched from my self how far behind
Already I behold the shore!

Enter Medley. Med. Dorimant, a discovery! I met with Bellair.

Dor. You can tell me no news Sir, I know all.

Med. How do you like the Daughter?

Dorim. You never came so near truth in your life,
As you did in her description.

Med. What think you of the Mother?

Dor. What ever I think of her, she thinks
Very well of me I find.

Med. Did she know you?

Dor. She did not, whether she does now or no I know not.
Here was a pleasant Scene toward, when in came Sir
Fopling, mustering up his Equipage, and at the
Latter end named me, and frighted her away.

Med. Loveit and Bellinda are not far off, I saw 'em
Alight at St. James's.

Dor. Sir Fopling hark you, a word or two, Whispers.
Look you do not want assurance.

Sir Fop. I never do on these occasions.

Dor. Walk on, we must not be seen together, make your
Advantage of what I have told you, the next turn
You will meet the Lady.

Sir Fop. Hey -- Follow me all. Ex. Sir Fopl. and his Equipage.

Dor. Medly, you shall see good sport anon between
Loveit and this Fopling.

Med. I thought there was something toward by that whisper.

Dor. You know a worthy principle of hers?

Med. Not to be so much as civil to a man who speaks to her
In the presence of him she professes to love.

Dor. I have encouraged Fopling to talk to her to night.

Med. Now you are here she will go nigh to beat him.

Dor. In the humor she is in, her love will make her do some
Very extravagant thing doubtless.

Med. What was Bellindas business with you at my
Lady Townleys?

Dor. To get me to meet Loveit here in order to an
Eclercisment; I made some difficulty of it, and have prepared
This rancounter to make good my Jealousy.

Med. Here they come! Enter Lov. Bell. and Pert.

Dor. I Will meet her and provoke her with a deal of dumb
Civility in passing by, then turn short and be behind
Her, when Sir Fopling sets upon her --
See how unregarded now
That piece of Beauty passes -- Ex. Dor. and Med.

Bell. How wonderful respectfully he bowed!

Pert. He Is always over-mannerly when
He has done a mischief.

Bell. Methoughts indeed at the same time he had a
Strange despising Countenance.

Pert. The unlucky look he thinks becomes him.

Bell. I was afraid you would have spoke to him my Dear.

Loveit. I would have di'd first; he shall no more find me
The loving fool he has done.

Bell. You love him still!

Loveit. No.

Pert. I wish you did not.

Loveit. I do not, and I will have you think so: What made
You hale me to this odious place Bellinda?

Bell. I hate to be hulch'd up in a Coach;
Walking is much better.

Loveit. Would we could meet Sir Fopling now.

Bell. Lord! would you not avoid him?

Loveit. I would make him all the advances that may be.

Bell. That would confirm Dorimants suspicion, my Dear.

Loveit. He is not jealous; but I will make him so, and be
Revenged a way he little thinks on.

Bellin. aside. If she should make him jealous, that may make
Him fond of her again: I must dissuade her from it. Lord!
My Dear, this will certainly make him hate you.

Loveit. 'Twill make him uneasy though he does not care
For me; I know the effects of jealousy on men of his
Proud temper.

Bell. It Is a fantastic remedy, its operations are
Dangerous and uncertain.

Loveit. It Is the stongest Cordial we can give to dying Love,
It often brings it back when there is no sign of life remaining:
But I design not so much the reviving his; as my revenge.

Enter Sir Fopling and his Equipage. Sir Fop. Hey! bid the Coachman send home
four of his
Horses, and bring the Coach to White Hall, I Will walk
Over the Park -- Madam, the honor of kissing your
Fair hands is a happiness I missed this afternoon at my
Lady Townleys!

Loveit. You were very obliging, Sir Fopling, the last
Time I saw you there.

Sir Fop. The presence was due to your wit and beauty.
Madam, your Servant, there never was so sweet an Evening.

Bell. 'Thas drawn all the rabble of the Town hither.

Sir Fop. It Is pity there is not an order made, that none but
The Beau Monde should walk here.

Loveit. 'Twould add much to the beauty of the place:
See what a sort of nasty Fellows are coming.

Enter four ill-fashion'd Fellows singing, It Is not for kisses alone, etc.
Loveit. Fo! Their Perriwigs are scented with
Tobacco so strong --

Sir Fop. It overcomes our pulvilio --
Methinks I smell the Coffee-house they come from.

1 Man. Dorimant's convenient, Madam Loveit.

2 Man. I like the oily -- Buttock with her*

3 Man. What spruce prig is that?

1 Man. A Caravan, lately come from Paris.

2 Man. Peace, they smoke.

There Is something else to be done, etc. All of them Coughing. Ex. Singing.
Enter Dorimant and Medley. Dor. They Are engaged --

Med. She entertains him as if she liked him.

Dor. Let us go forward -- seem earnest in discourse and
Show our selves. Then you shall see how she will use him.

Bell. Yonder Is Dorimant my Dear.

Loveit. I see him, he comes insulting; but I will disappoint
Him in his expectation. Aside.
To Sir Fopling. I like this pretty nice humor of yours
Sir Fopling: With what a loathing eye he looked upon
Those Fellows!

Sir Fop. I sat near one of 'em at a Play to day, and was almost
Poisoned with a pair of Cordivant Gloves he wears --

Loveit. Oh! filthy Cordivant,
How I hate the smell! Laughs in a loud affected way.

Sir Fop. Did you observe, Madam, how their Crevats
Hung loose an inch from their Neck, and what
A frightful Air it gave 'em.

Loveit. Oh I took particular notice of one that is always
Spruc'd up with a deal of dirty Sky-colour'd Ribband.

Bell. That Is one of the walking Flajolets who
Haunt the Mail o'nights --

Loveit. Oh! I remember him! H' has a hollow Tooth
Enough to spoil the sweetness of an Evening.

Sir Fop. I have seen the tallest walk the streets
With a dainty pair of Boxes, neatly buckl'd on.

Loveit. And a little Footboy at his Heels Pocket-high,
With a Flat-cap -- a durty Face.

Sir Fop. And a Snotty Nose --

Loveit. Oh -- odious, there is many of my own sex with
That Holborn Equipage trigg to Grey's Inn-Walks;
And now and then Travail hither on a Sunday.

Med. She takes no notice of you.

Dor. Damn her! I am jealous of a Counter-plot!

Loveit. Your Liveries are the finest, Sir Fopling --
Oh that Page! that Page is the prettily'st dressed --
They are all Frenchmen.

Sir Fop. There Is one damned English blockhead
Among 'em, you may know him by his Meine.

Loveit. Oh! that is he, that is he, what do you call him?

Sir Fop. Hey -- I know not what to call him --

Loveit. What Is your name?

Footm. John Trott, Madam!

Sir Fop. O unsufferable! Trott, Trott, Trott! there is
Nothing so barbarous as the names of our English Servants.
What Countryman are you Sirrah?

Footm. Hampshire, Sir?

Sir Fop. Then Hampshire be your name. Hey, Hampshire!

Loveit. O That sound, that sound becomes the
Mouth of a man of Quality!

Med. Dorimant you look a little bashful on the matter!

Dor. She dissembles better than I thought
She could have done.

Med. You have tempted her with too luscious a bait.
She bites at the Coxcomb.

Dor. She cannot fall from loving me to that?

Med. You begin to be jealous in earnest.

Dor. Of one I do not love --

Med. You did love her.

Dor. The fit has long been over --

Med. But I have known men fall into dangerous relapses
When they have found a Woman inclining to another.

Dor. He guesses the secret of my Heart! I am concerned,
But dare not show it, lest Bellinda should mistrust all I
Have done to gain her. to himself.

Bell. [Aside.] I have watched his look, and find no
Alteration there. Did he love her some signs of
Jealousy would have appeared?

Dor. I hope this happy Evening, Madam, has.
Reconciled you to the Scandalous Mail, we
Shall have you now hankering here again --

Loveit. Sir Fopling will you walk --

Sir Fop. I am all obedience Madam --

Loveit. Come along then -- and let us agree to be
Malicious on all the ill fashioned things we meet.

Sir Fop. We Will make a Critic on the
Whole Mail Madam.

Loveit. Bellinda you shall engage --

Bell. To the reserve of our friends my Dear.

Lov. No! No! Exceptions --

Sir Fop. We Will sacrifice all to our diversion --

Loveit. All -- all --

Sir Fop. All.

Bell. All? Then let it be.

Ex. Sir Fopling, Loveit, Bellinda, and Pert. laughing. Med. Would you had
brought some more of your
Friends, Dorimant, to have been Witnesses of Sir
Foplings disgrace and your Triumph --

Dor. 'Twere unreasonable to desire you not to
Laugh at me; but pray do not expose me
To the Town this day or two.

Med. By that time you hope to have regained your Credit.

Dor. I know she hates Fopling, and only makes use of
Him in hope to work me on again; had it not been
For some powerful Considerations which will be
Removed to morrow morning, I had made her pluck off
This mask, and show the passion that lies
Panting under.

Enter a Footman. Med. Here comes a man from Bellair, with news of
Your last adventure.

Dor. I am glad he sent him. I long to know
The consequence of our parting.

Footm. Sir, my Master desires you to come to my Lady
Townleys presently, and bring Mr. Medley with you.
My Lady Woodvill and her Daughter are there.

Med. Then all is well Dorimant --

Footm. They have sent for the Fiddles and
Mean to Dance! He bid me tell you, Sir, the
Old Lady does not know you, and would have
You own your self to be Mr. Courtage. They
Are all prepared to receive you by that name.

Dor. That foppish admirer of Quality, who flatters the
Very meat at honorable Tables, and never offers love
To a Woman below a Lady-Grandmother.

Med. You know the Character you are to act I see!

Dor. This is Harriets contrivance --
Wild, witty, lovesome, beautiful and young --
Come along Medley --

Med. This new Woman would well supply the loss of Loveit.

Dor. That business must not end so, before to morrow
Sun is set, I will revenge and clear it.
And you and Loveit to her cost shall find,
I fathom all the depths of Woman kind.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
The Scene opens with the Fiddles playing a Country dance. Enter Dorimant, L.
Woodvill, Young Bellair, and Mrs. Harriet, Old Bellair, and Emilia, Mr. Medley
and Lady Townley; as having just ended the dance. Old Bell. SO, so, so! a smart
bout, a very smart bout a Dod!

L. Town. How do you like Emilia's
Dancing Brother.

O. Bell. Not at all! not at all.

L. Town. You speak not what you think I am sure.

O. Bell. No matter for that, go, bid her dance no more, it
Don't become her, it don't become her, tell her I
Say so; [a Dod I love her. Aside.

Dor. All people mingle now a days To L. Woodvill.
Madam. And in public places Women of Quality
Have the least respect showed 'em.

L. Wood. I protest you say the truth, Mr. Courtage.

Dor. Forms and Ceremonies, the only things that
Uphold Quality and greatness, are now shamefully
Laid aside and neglected.

L. Wood. Well! this is not the Women's Age, let 'em
Think what they will, Lewdness is the business now,
Love was the business in my Time.

Dor. The Women indeed are little beholding to the young
Men of this Age, they are generally only dull admirers
Of themselves, and make their Court to nothing but their
Perriwigs and their Crevats, and would be more
Concerned for the disordering of 'em, though on a good
Occasion, than a young Maid would be for the tumbling
Of her head or Handkercher.

L. Wood. I protest you hit 'em.

Dor. They are very assiduous to show themselves at Court
Well dress't to the Women of Quality, but their business
Is with the stale Mistresses of the Town, who are
Prepared to receive their Lazy addresses by industrious
Old Lovers, who have cast 'em off, and made 'em easy.

Har. He fits my Mothers humor so well, a little more and
She Will dance a Kissing dance with him anon.

Med. Dutifully observed Madam.

Dor. They pretend to be great Critics in Beauty, by their
Talk you would think they liked no face, and yet can
Dote on an ill one, if it belong to a Landress or a Tailors
Daughter: they cry a Woman's past her prime at 20,
Decayed at four and 20, old and unsufferable at 30.

L. Wood. Unsufferable at 30! That they are in the wrong,
Mr. Courtage, at five and 30, there are living proofs
Enough to convince 'em.

Dor. Ay Madam! there is Mrs. Setlooks, Mrs. Droplip,
And my Lady Loud! show me among all our opening
Puds, a face that promises so much Beauty as
The remains of theirs.

L. Wood. The depraved appetite of this Vicious Age
Tast's nothing but green Fruit, and loathes it when
It Is kindly ripened.

Dor. Else so many deserving Women, Madam, would
Not be so untimely neglected.

L. Wood. I protest Mr. Courtage, a dozen such good men
As you, would be enough to atone for that wicked
Dorimant, and all the under debauchees of the Town.
What Is the matter there? Har. Emil. Young Bell. Med. Lady Town. break out into
a laughter.

Med. A pleasant mistake, Madam, that a Lady
Has made, occasions a little laughter.

O. Bell. Come, come, you keep 'em idle! they are
Impatient till the Fiddles play again.

Dor. You are not weary, Madam?

L. Wood. One Dance more!
I cannot refuse you Mr. Courtage. They Dance.

Emil. You are very active, Sir.

After the Dance, O. Bellair, singing and dancing up to Emilia. O. Bell. A Dod
Sirrah; when I was a young
Fellow I could have caper'd up to my
Woman's Gorget.

Dor. You are willing to rest your self Madam --

L. Town. We Will walk into my Chamber and sit down.

Med. Leave us Mr. Courtage, he is a Dancer, and the
Young Ladies are not weary yet.

L. Wood. We Will send him out again.

Har. If you do not quickly, I know
Where to send for Mr. Dorimant.

L. Wood. This Girls head, Mr. Courtage, is ever
Running on that wild fellow.

Dor. It Is well you have got her a good husband
Madam, that will settle it.

Ex. L. Town. Wood. and Dorimant. O. Bell. to Emilia. A Dod sweetheart be
advised, and do
Not throw thy self away on a young idle fellow.
Emil. I have no such intention Sir.

O. Bell. Have a little patience! Thou shall have the man
I spoke of. A Dod he loves thee, and will make a good
Husband, but no words --

Emil. But Sir --

O. Bell. No answer -- out a pize! peace! and think on it.

Enter Dorimant. Dorim. Your company is desired within Sir.

O. Bell. I go! I go! good Mr. Courtage -- fare you well!
Go! I Will see you no more. to Emil.

Emil. What have I done Sir?

O. Bell. You are ugly, you are ugly!
Is she not Mr. Courtage?

Emil. Better words or I shall not abide you.

O. Bell. Out a pize -- a Dod, what does she say!
Hit her a pat for me there. Exit Old Bellair.

Med. You have charms for the whole family.

Dor. You Will spoil all with some unseasonable jest, Medly.

Med. You see I confine my Tongue, and am content to be a
Bare spectator, much contrary to my nature.

Emil. Methinks, Mr. Dorimant, my Lady Woodvil
Is a little fond of you.

Dor. Would her daughter were.

Med. It may be you may find her so! try her,
You have an opportunity.

Dor. And I will not lose it! Bellair, here is
A Lady has something to say to you.

Y. Bell. I wait upon her. Mr Medley we have both
Business with you.

Dor. Get you all together then.
[To Harriat] That demure curt'sy is not amiss in jest,
But do not think in earnest it becomes you.

Har. Affectation is catching I find; from your
Grave bow I got it.

Dor. Where had you all that scorn, and coldness
In your look?

Har. From nature Sir, pardon my want of art:
I have not learnt those softnesses and languishings
Which now in faces are so much in fashion.

Dor. You need 'em not, you have a sweetness of your own.
If you would but calm your frowns and let it settle.

Har. My Eyes are wild and wandering like my passions,
And cannot yet be tied to Rules of charming.

Dor. Women indeed have commonly a method of
Managing those messengers of Love! now they
Will look as if they would kill, and anon they
Will look as if they were dying. They point and rebate
Their glances, the better to invite us.

Har. I like this variety well enough; but hate the set face
That always looks as it would say Come love me.
A woman, who at Plays makes the Deux yeux to a
Whole Audience, and at home cannot forbear 'em
To her Monkey.

Dor. Put on a gentle smile and let me see, how well
It will become you.

Har. I am sorry my face does not please you as it is,
But I shall not be complaisant and change it.

Dor. Though you are obstinate, I know it is capable of
Improvement, and shall do you Justice Madam, if I chance
To be at Court, when the Critiques of the Circle pass
Their judgment; for thither you must come.

Har. And expect to be taken in pieces, have all my
Features examined, every motion censured, and on the
Whole be condemned to be but pretty, or a Beauty of
The lowest rate. What think you?

Dor. The Women, nay the very lovers who belong to the
Drawing Room will maliciously allow you more
Than that; they always grant what is apparent,
That they may the better be believed when
They name concealed faults they cannot
Easily be disproved in.

Har. Beauty runs as great a risque exposed at Court
As wit does on the Stage, where the ugly and the
Foolish, all are free to censure.

Dor. aside. I love her, and dare not let her know it,
I fear she has an ascendant over me and may revenge the
Wrongs I have done her sex.
Think of making a party Madam, love will engage. To her.

Har. You make me start! I did not think to have
Heard of Love from you.

Dor. I never knew what 'twas to have a settled Ague
Yet, but now and then have had irregular fitts.

Har. Take heed, sickness after long health is
Commonly more violent and dangerous.

Dor. I have took the infection from her, and feel the
Disease now spreading in me -- Aside.
Is the name of love so frightful that
You dare not stand it? To her.

Har. 'Twill do little execution out of your mouth
On me I am sure.

Dor. It has been fatal --

Har. To some easy Women, but we are not all
Born to one destiny, I was informed you use to
Laugh at Love, and not make it.

Dor. The time has been, but now I must speak --

Har. If it be on that Idle subject, I will put on
My serious look, turn my head carelessly from you,
Drop my lip, let my Eyelids fall, and hang
Half over my Eyes -- Thus while you buz a speech
Of an hour long in my ear, and I answer
Never a word! why do you not begin?

Dor. That the company may take notice how passionately I
Make advances of Love! and how disdainfully you receive 'em.

Har. When your Love's grown strong enough to make
You bear being laughed at, I Will give you leave to
Trouble me with it. Till when pray forbear, Sir.

Enter Sir Fopling and others in Masks. Dor. What Is here Masquerades?

Har. I thought that foppery had been left off, and
People might have been in private with a Fiddle.

Dor. It Is endeavored to be kept on foot still by
Some who find themselves the more acceptable,
The less they are known.

Y. Bell. This must be Sir Fopling.

Med. That extraordinary habit shows it.

Y. Bell What are the rest?

Med. A company of French Rascals whom he picked
Up in Paris and has brought over to be his dancing
Equipage on these occasions! make him own
Himself; a Fool is very troublesome when he
Presumes he is Incognito.

Sir Fop. Do you know me? To Harriet.

Har. Ten to one but I guess at you?

Sir Fop. Are you women as fond of a Vizard as we men are?

Har. I am very fond of a Vizard that covers a
Face I do not like, Sir.

Y. Bell. Here are no Masks you see, Sir, but
Those which came with you, this was intended a
Private meeting, but because you look like a
Gentleman, if you will discover your self and we
Know you to be such, you shall be welcome.

Sir Fop. Dear Bellair. Pulling of his Mask.

Med. Sir Fopling.! how came you hither?

Sir Fop. Faith as I was coming late from White Hall,
After the Kings Couchee, one of my people told me
He had heard Fiddles at my Lady Townleys, and --

Dor. You need not say any more, Sir.

Sir Fop. Dorimant, let me kiss thee.

Dor. Hark you Sir Fopling? Whispers.

Sir Fop. Enough, enough, Courtage.
A pretty kind of young Woman that, Medley, I observed
Her in the Mail more Evilie than our English
Women commonly are, prithee what is she?

Med. The most noted Conquette in Town; beware of her.

Sir Fop. Let her be what she will, I know how to take my
Measures, in Paris the Mode is to flatter the Prude,
Laugh at the Faux-proude, make serious love to
The Demi-proude, and only railly with the Conquette.
Medley, what think you?

Med. That for all this smattering of the Mathematics,
You may be out in your Judgment at Tennis

Sir Fop. What a Coque a Lasne is this? I talk of
Women and thou answer'st Tennis.

Med. Mistakes will be for want of apprehension.

Sir Fop. I am very glad of the acquaintance
I have with this Family.

Med. My Lady truly is a good Woman.

Sir. Fop. Ah! Dorimant, Courtage I would say,
Would thou had spent the last Winter in Paris
With me. When thou were there La corneus and
Sallyes were the only habitudes we had, a Comedian
Would have been a bone fortune. No stranger ever
Passed his time so well as I did some months before
I came over. I was well received in a dozen
Families, where all the Women of quality used to
Visit, I have intrigues to tell thee, more pleasant,
Than ever thou read'st in a Novel.

Har. Write 'em, Sir, and oblige us Women! our
Language wants such little stories.

Sir Fop. Writing Madam's a Mechanic part of Wit!
A Gentleman should never go beyond a Song or a Billet.

Har. Bussie was a Gentleman.

Sir Fop. Who D'Ambois?

Med. Was there ever such a brisk blockead?

Har. Not D'Ambois, Sir, but Rubutin. He who
Writ the Loves of France.

Sir Fop. That may be, Madam! many Gentlemen do
Things that are below 'em. Damn your Authors,
Courtage, Women are the prettiest things we
Can fool away our time with.

Har. I hope ye have weari'd your self to night at Court,
Sir, and will not think of fooling with any body here.

Sir Fop. I cannot complain of my Fortune there, Madam --
Dorimant --

Dor. Again!

Sir Fop. Courtage, a pox on it, I have something to tell thee.
When I had made my Court within, I came out
And flung my self upon the Matt under the state
In The outward room, in the midst of half a dozen
Beauties who were withdrawn to jeer among
Themselves, as they called it.

Dor. Did you know 'em?

Sir Fop. Not one of 'em by Heavens! not I.
But they were all your friends.

Dor. How are you sure of that?

Sir Fop. Why we laughed at all the Town; spared
No body but your self, they found me a man
For their purpose.

Dor. I know you are malicious to your power.

Sir Fop. And faith! I had occasion to show it, for I never
Saw more gaping fools at a Ball or on a Birthday.

Dor. You learned who the women were.

Sir Fop. No matter! they frequent the Drawing Room.

Dor. And entertain themselves pleasantly at the expense
Of all the Fops who come there.

Sir Fop. That Is their business, faith I sifted 'em and find
They have a sort of wit among them --
Ah filthy. Pinches a Tallow Candle.

Dor. Look he has heen pinching the Tallow Candle.

Sir Fop. How can you breath in a Room where there is
Grease frying! Dorimant thou art intimate with
My Lady, advise her for her own sake and the good
Company that comes hither to burn Wax lights.

Har. What are these Masquerades who stand so
Obsequiously at a distance?

Sir Fop. A set of Bulladins, whom I picked out of the best
In France and brought over, with a Flutes deux or two,
My Servants; they shall entertain you.

Har. I had rather see you dance your self Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. And I had rather do it -- all the company
Knows it -- but Madam --

Med. Come, come! no excuses Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. By Heavens Medley --

Med. Like a woman I find you must be struggled with
Before one brings you what you desire,

Har. Can he dance? Aside.

Emil. And fence and sing too, if you will believe him.

Dor. He has no more excellence in his heels than in
His head. He went to Paris a plain bashful English Blockhead,
And is returned a fine undertaking French Fopp.

Med. I cannot prevail.

Sir Fop. Do not think it want of Complaisance, Madam.

Har. You are too well bred to want that, Sir Fopling.
I believe it want of power.

Sir Fop. By Heavens and so it is.
I have sat up so Damned late and drunk so cursed hard
Since I came to this lewd Town, that I am fit for
Nothing but low dancing now, a Corant, a Boree,
Or a Minnuet: but St. Andre tells me, if I
Will but be regular in one Month I shall rise again.
Pox on this Debauchery. Endeavors at a Caper.

Emil. I have heard your dancing much commended,

Sir Fop. It had the good Fortune to please in Paris.
I was judged to rise within an inch as high as the
Basque in an Entry I danced there.

Har. I am mightily taken with this Fool, let us sit:
Here Is a seat Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. At your feet, Madam;
I can be no where so much at ease: by your leave
Gown.

Har. and Emil. Ah! you will spoil it.

Sir Fop. No matter, my Clothes are my Creatures.
I make 'em to make my Court to you Ladies, Hey -- Dance
Quon Comence to an English Dancer English motions. I was
Forced to entertain this Fellow, one of my set miscarrying --
Oh horrid! leave your damned manner of dancing,
And put on the French Air: have you not a
Pattern before you --
Pretty well! imitation in time may bring him to something.

After the Dance enter Old Bellair, L. Woodvil and L. Townley. O. Bell. Hey a
Dod! what have we here, a mumming?

L. Wood. Where Is my Daughter -- Harriet.

Dor. Here, here, Madam!
I know not but under these disguises there may be
Dangerous sparks, I gave the young Lady Warning!

L. Wood. Lord! I am so obliged to you, Mr. Courtage.

Har. Lord! how you admire this man!

L. Wood. What have you to except against him?

Har. He Is a Fopp.

L. Wood. He Is not a Dorimant, a wild extravagant
Fellow of the Times.

Har. He Is a man made up of forms and common places,
Sucked out of the remaining Lees of the last age.

L. Wood. He Is so good a man that were you not engaged --

L. Town. You Will have but little night to sleep in.

L. Wood. Lord! it is perfect day --

Dor. The hour is almost come, I appointed Bellinda,
And I am not so foppishly in love here to forget; Aside.
I am flesh and blood yet.

L. Town. I am very sensible, Madam.

L. Wood. Lord, Madam!

Har. Look in what a struggle is my poor Mother yonder?

Y. Bell. She has much ado to bring out the Complement?

Dor. She strains hard for it.

Har. See, see! her head tottering, her Eyes stairing,
And her under-lip trembling --

Dor. Now, now, she is in the very convulsions of her
Civility. [aside.] 'Sdeath I shall lose Bellinda: I must
Fright her hence! she will be an hour in
This fit of good Manners else
[To L. Wood.] Do you not know, Sir Fopling, Madam?

L. Wood. I have seen that Face -- Oh heaven,
It Is the same we met in the Mail, how came he here?

Dor. A Fiddle in this Town is a kind of Fop-call;
No sooner it strikes up, but the house is besieged
With an Army of Masquerades straight.

L. Wood. Lord! I tremble Mr. Courtage! for certain
Dorimant is in the company.

Dor. I cannot confidently say he is not,
You had best begone. I will wait upon you; your
Daughter is in the hands of Mr. Bellair.

L. Wood. I Will see her before me. Harriet, come away.

Y. Bell. Lights! Lights!

L. Town. Light down there.

O. Bell. A Dod it needs not --

Dor. Call my Lady Woodvills Coach to the Door quickly.

O. Bell. Stay Mr. Medley, let the young Fellows do
That duty; we will drink a Glass of Wine together.
It Is good after dancing! what Mumming spark is that?

Med. He is not to be comprehended in few words.

Sir Fop. Hey! La Tower.

Med. Whither away Sir Fopling?

Sir Fop. I have business with Courtage --

Med. He Will but put the Ladies into their Coach and
Come up again.

O. Bell. In the mean time i will call for a Bottle. Ex. Old Bell.

Enter Young Bellair. Med. Where Is Dorimant?

Y. Bell. Stolen home! he has had business waiting for
Him there all this night, I believe, by an
Impatience I observed in him.

Med. Very likely, it is dut dissembling Drunkenness,
Railing at his friends, and the kind
Soul will embrace the blessing, and forget
The tedious expectation.

Sir Fop. I must speak with him before I sleep!

Y. Bell. Emilia and I are resolved on that business.

Med. Peace here is your Father.

Enter Old Bellair, and Buttler with a Bottle of Wine. O. Bell. The Women are
all gone to bed.
Fill Boy! Mr. Medley begin a health.

Med. To Emilia. whispers.

O. Bell. Out a pize! she is a rogue and i will not pledge you.

Med. I know you well.

O. Bell. A Dod drink it then.

Sir Fop. Let us have the new Bachique.

O. Bell. A Dod that is a hard word!
What does it mean Sir?

Med. A Catch or drinking Song.

O. Bell. Let us have it then.

Sir Fop. Fill the Glasses round, and
Draw up in a Body. Hey! Music!

They Sing. The pleasures of love and the Joys of good Wine,
To perfect our happiness wisely we join.
We to Beauty all day
Give the Sovereign sway,
And her favorite Nymphs devoutly obey.
At the Plays we are constantly making our Court
And when they are ended we follow the sport.
To the Mall and the Park
Where we love till it is dark;
Then sparkling Champaigne
Puts an end to their reign;
It quickly recovers
Poor languishing Lovers,
Makes us frolic and gay, and drowns all our Sorrow.
But alas! we relapse again on the Morrow.
Let every man stand
With his glass in his hand.
And briskly discharge at the word of Command.
Here Is a health to all those
Whom to night we depose.
Wine and beauty by turns great souls should inspire.
Present all together; and now boys give fire --

O. Bell. A Dod a pretty business and very merry.

Sir Fop. Hark you Medley, let you and I take the
Fiddles and go waken Dorimant.

Med. We shall do him a courtesy, if it be as I guess.
For after the fatigue of this night, he will quickly
Have his belly full: and be glad of an occasion
To cry, take away Handy.

Y. Bell. I Will go with you, and there we'll consult
About affairs Medly.

O. Bell. looks on his Watch A Dod, it is six a Clock.

Sir Fop. Let Us away then.

O. Bell. Mr. Medley, my Sister tells me you are an
Honest man. And a Dod I love you.
Few words and hearty, that is the way
With old Harry, old Harry.

Sir Fop. Light your Flambeux. Hey.

O. Bell. What does the man mean?

Med. It Is day Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. No matter.
Our Serenade will look the greater.

Ex. Omnes. SCENE II.
Dorimants Lodging, a Table, a Candle, a Toilet, etc. Handy tying up Linen.
Enter Dorimant in his Gown and Bellinda. Dor. Why will you be gone so soon?

Bell. Why did you stay out so late?

Dor. Call a Chair, Handy! what makes you tremble so?

Bell. I have a Thousand fears about me:
Have I not been seen think you?

Dor. By no body but my self and trusty Handy.

Bell. Where are all your people?

Dor. I have dispersed 'em on sleeveless Errants.
What does that sigh mean?

Bell. Can you be so unkind to ask me? -- well -- Sighs.
Were it to do again --

Dor. We should do it, should we not?

Bell. I think we should: the wickeder man you to make
Me love so well -- will you be discreet now?

Dor. I will --

Bell. You cannot.

Dor. Never doubt it.

Bell. I will not expect it.

Dor. You do me wrong.

Bell. You have no more power to keep the secret,
Than I had not to trust you with it.

Dor. By all the Joys I have had, and those you
Keep in store --

Bell. You Will do for my sake what you never did before --

Dor. By that truth thou have spoken, a wife shall
Sooner betray her self to her husband --

Bell. Yet I had rather you should be false in this
Than in an other thing you promised me.

Dor. What Is that?

Bell. That you would never see Loveit more but in
Public places, in the Park, at Court and Plays.

Dor. It Is not likely a man should be fond of seeing a
Damned old Play when there is a new one acted.

Bell. I dare not trust your promise.

Dor. You may --

Bell. This does not satisfy me.
You shall swear you never will see her more.

Dor. I will! a Thousand oaths -- by all --

Bell. Hold -- you shall not, now I think on it better.

Dor. I will swear --

Bell. I shall grow jealous of the Oath, and think
I owe your truth to that, not to your love.

Dor. Then, by my love! no other Oath i will swear.

Enter Handy. Hand. Here Is a Chair.

Bell. Let me go.

Dor. I cannot.

Bell. Too willingly I fear.

Dor. Too unkindly feared.
When will you promise me again?

Bell. Not this fortnight.

Dor. You will be better than your word.

Bell. I think I shall.
Will it not make you love me less? Starting.
Hark! what Fiddles are these? Fiddles without.

Dor. Look out, Handy! Ex. Handy and returns.

Hand. Mr. Medley, Mr. Bellair, and Sir Fopling,
They are coming up.

Dor. How got they in?

Hand. The door was open for the Chair.

Bell. Lord! let me fly --

Dor. Here, here, down the back stairs.
I Will see you into your Chair.

Bell. No, No! stay and receive 'em. And be sure you
Keep your word and never see Loveit more.
Let it be a proof of your kindness.

Dor. It shall -- Handy direct her.
Everlasting love go along with thee. Kissing her hand.

Ex. Bellinda and Handy. Enter Young Bellair, Medly, and Sir Fopling. Y. Bell.
Not a bed yet!

Med. You have had an irregular fit Dorimant.

Dor. I have.

Y. Bell. And is it off already?

Dor. Nature has done her part Gentlemen,
When she falls kindly to work, great Cures
Are effected in little time, you know.

Sir Fop. We thought there was a Wench in the Case by
The Chair that waited. Prithee make us a Confidance.

Dor. Excuse me.

Sir Fop. Le sage Dorimant -- was she pretty?

Dor. So pretty she may come to keep her Coach and pay
Parish Duties if the good humor of the age continue.

Med. And be of the number of the Ladies kept by
Public spirited men for the good of the whole Town.

Sir Fop. Well said Medley.

Sir Fopling dancing by himself. Y. Bell. See Sir Fopling dancing.

Dor. You are practicing and have a mind to recover I see.

Sir. Fop. Prithee Dorimant! why have not thou a glass
Hung up here? a Room is the dullest thing without one!

Y. Bell. Here is Company to entertain you.

Sir Fop. But I mean in case of being alone.
In a glass a man may entertain himself --

Dor. The shadow of himself indeed.

Sir. For. Correct the Errors of his motions and
His dress.

Med. I find Sir Fopling in your Solitude, you remember
The saying of the wise man, and study your self.

Sir Fop. It Is the best diversion in our retirements.
Dorimant thou art a pretty fellow and wear'st thy clothes
Well, but I never saw thee have a handsome Crevat.
Were they made up like mine, they would give another
Air to thy face. Prithee let me send my man
To dress thee but one day. By Heavens an
English man cannot tie a Ribbon.

Dor. They are something clumsy fisted --

Sir Fop. I have brought over the prettiest fellow that
Ever spread a Toilet, he served some time under
Merille the greatest Genie in the world for a
Valet d' Chamber.

Dor. What he who formerly belonged to the
Duke of Candale?

Sir Fop. The same, and got him his immortal reputation.

Dor. You Have a very fine Brandenburgh on Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. It serves to wrap me up, after the Fatigue of a Ball.

Med. I See you often in it, with your Periwig tied up.

Sir Fop. We should not always be in a set dress it is more
En Cavalier to appear now and then in a dissabillee.

Med. Pray how goes your busness with Loveit?

Sir Fop. You might have answered your self in the Mail
Last night. Dorimant! did you not see the advances
She made me? I have been endeavoring at a song!

Dor. Already!

Sir Fop. It Is my Coup'd Essay in English,
I would fain have thy opinion of it.

Dor. Let Us see it.

Sir Fop. Hey Page give me my song -- Bellair,
Here thou have a pretty voice sing it.

Y. Bell. Sing it your self Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. Excuse me.

Y. Bell. You learnt to sing in Paris.

Sir Fop. I did of Lambert the greatest master
In the world: but I have his own fault, a weak voice,
And care not to sing out of a ruel.

Dor. A ruel is a pretty Cage for a singing Fop indeed.

Y. Bellair reads the Song. How Charming Phillis is, how fair!
Ah that she were as willing,
To ease my wounded heart of Care
And make her Eyes less killing.
I sigh! I sigh! I languish now,
And Love will not let me rest,
I drive about the Park, and bow
Still as I meet my dearest.

Sir Fop. Sing it, sing it man, it goes to a pretty new
Tune which I am confident was made by Baptist.

Med. Sing it your self Sir Fopling, he does not know the
Tune.

Sir Fop. I Will venture. Sir Fopling sings.

Dor. Ay marry! now it is something. I shall not
Flatter you, Sir Fopling, there is not much thought in it.
But it is passionate and well turned.

Med. After the French way.

Sir Fop. That I aimed at -- does it not give
You a lively image of the thing?
Slap down goes the Glass, and thus we are at it.

Dor. It does indeed, I perceive, Sir Fopling,
You Will be the very head of the Sparks, who are lucky
In Compositions of this nature.

Enter Sir Foplings Footman. Sir Fop. La Tower, is the Bath ready?

Footm. Yes Sir.

Sir Fop. Adieu don Mes cheres. Ex. Sir Fopling.

Med. When have you your revenge on Loveit, Dorimant?

Dor. I will but change my Linen and about it.

Med. The powerful considerations which hindered
Have bin removed then.

Dor. Most luckily this morning, you must along
With me, my reputation lies at stake there.

Med. I am engaged to Bellair.

Dor. What Is your business.

Med. Ma-tri-mony an't like you.

Dor. It does not, Sir.

Y. Bell. It may in time Dorimant, what
Think you of Mrs. Harriet?

Dor. What does she think of me?

Y. Bell. I am confident she loves you.

Dor. How does it appear?

Y. Bell. Why she is never well but when she is talking
Of you, but then she finds all the faul^s in you she can.
She laughs at all who commend you, but
Then she speaks ill of all who do not.

Dor. Women of her temper betray themselves by
Their over cunning. I had once a growing love with a
Lady, who would always quarrel with me when
I came to see her, and yet was never quiet if
I stayed a day from her.

Y. Bell. My Father is in love with Emilia.

Dor. That is a good warrant for your proceedings,
Go on and prosper, I must to Loveit.
Medley I am sorry you cannot be a witness.

Med. Make her meet Sir Fopling again in the same place,
And use him ill before me.

Dor. That may be brought about I think.
I Will be at your Aunts anon and give you Joy Mr. Bellair.

Y. Bell. You had not best think of Mrs. Harriet too much,
Without Church security there is no taking up there.

Dor. I may fall into the Snare too. But --
The wise will find a difference in our Fate,
You wed a Woman, I a good Estate. Exeunt.

SCENE III.
Enter the Chair with Bellinda, the men set it down and open it. Bellinda
starting. Bellinda surpised. Lord! where am I? in the Mail!
Whither have you brought me?

1 Chairm. You gave us no directions, Madam?

Bell. The fright I was in made me forget it. Aside.

1 Chairm. We use to carry a Lady from the Squires hither.

Bell. This is Loveit, I am undone if she sees me. Aside.
Quickly carry me away.

1 Chairm. Whither an't like your honor?

Bell. Ask no questions --

Enter Loveits Footman. Footm. Have you seen my Lady, Madam?

Bell. I am just come to wait upon her --

Footm. She will be glad to see you, Madam.
She sent me to you this morning to desire your Company,
And I was told you went out by five a Clock.

Bell. More and more unlucky! Aside.

Footm. Will you walk in Madam?

Bell. I Will discharge my Chair and follow, Ex. Footm.
Tell your Mrs. I am here. Gives the Chairmen Money.
Take this! and if ever you should be examined, be sure you
Say, you took me up in the Strand over against the
Exchange* as you will answer it to Mr. Dorimant.

Chairmen. We will an't like your Honor. Ex. Chairmen.

Bell. Now to come off, I must on --
In Confidence and lies some hope is left;
Twere hard to be found out in the first theft.

Exit. ACT V.
Enter Mistress Loveit and Pert her Woman, Pert. WELL! in my eyes Sir Fopling is
no such
Despicable person.

Lov. You are an excellent Judge.

Pert. He Is as handsome a man as Mr. Dorimant,
And as great a Gallant.

Lov. Intolerable! is it not enough I submit to his
Impertinences, but must I be plagued with yours too?

Pert. Indeed Madam --

Lov. It Is false, mercenary malice -- Enter her footman.

Footm. Mrs. Bellinda Madam --

Lov. What of her?

Footm. She Is below.

Lov. How came she?

Footm. In a Chair, ambling Harry brought her.

Lov. He bring her! His Chair stands near Dorimants
Door and always brings me from thence -- run and
Ask him where he took her up; go, there is no truth
In friendship neither. Women, as well as men,
All are false, or all are so to me at least.

Pert. You are jealous of her too?

Lov. You had best tell her I am.
'Twill become the
Liberty you take of late. This fellows bringing of her,
Her going out by five a Clock --
I know not what to think.
Enter Bellinda. Bellinda, you are grown an early Riser I hear!

Bell. Do you not wonder my Dear,
What made me abroad so soon?

Lov. You do not use to be so.

Bell. The Country Gentlewomen I told you of (Lord!
They have the oddest diversions!) would never
Let me rest till I promised to go with them
To the Markets this morning to eat
Fruit and buy Nosegays.

Lov. Are they so fond of a filthy Nosegay?

Bell. They complain of the stinks of the Town, and are
Never well but when they have their noses in one.

Lov. There are Essences and sweet waters.

Bell. O they cry out upon perfumes they are
Unwholesome, one of 'em was falling into a fit
With the smell of these narolii.

Lov. Methinks in Complaisance
You should have had a Nosegay too.

Bell. Do you think, my Dear, I could be so loathsome
To trick my self up with Carnations and stock-
Gilly flowers? I begged their pardon and
Told them I never wore any thing but Orange
Flowers and Tuberose. That which made me
Willing to go was, a strange desire I had
To eat some fresh Nectaren's.

Lov. And had you any?

Bell. The best I ever tasted.

Lov. Whence came you now?

Bell. From their Lodgings, where I crowded out of a
Coach and took a Chair to come and see you my Dear;

Lov. Whither did you send for that Chair?

Bell. 'Twas going by empty.

Lov. Where do these country Gentlewomen
Lodge I pray?

Bell. In the Strand over against the Exchange.

Pert. That place is never without a Nest of 'em,
They are always as one goes by flearing in
Balconies or staring out of Windows.

Enter Footman. Lov. [To the Footm.] Come hither. Whispers.

Bell. Aside. This fellow by her order has been
Questioning the Chairmen! I threatened 'em
With the name of Dorimant, if they should
Have told truth I am lost for ever.

Lov. In the Strand said you?

Footm. Yes Madam over against the Exchange.

Exit Footman. Lov. She Is innocent and I am much to blame.

Bell. Aside. I am so frighted, my countenance
Will betray me.

Lov. Bellinda! what makes you look so pale?

Bell. Want of my usual Rest, and jolting up and
Down so long in an odious Hackney. Footman returns.

Footm. Madam! Mr. Dorimant!

Lov. What makes him here?

Bell. Aside. Then I am betrayed indeed,
H' has broke his word, and I love a man that does
Not care for me.

Lov. Lord! you faint Bellinda!

Bell. I think I shall! such an oppression here on the sudden.

Pert. She has eaten too much fruit I warrant you.

Lov. Not unlikely!

Pert. It Is that lies heavy on her Stomach.

Loveit. Have her into my Chamber, give her some
Surfeit Water, and let her lie down a little.

Pert. Come, Madam! I was a strange devourer
Of Fruit when I was young,
So ravenous -- Ex. Bell. and Pert leading her off.

Loveit. Oh that my Love would be but calm awhile!
That I might receive this man with all the Scorn
And indignation he deserves.

Enter Dorimant. Dor. Now for a touch of Sir Fopling to begin with.
Hey -- Page -- Give positive order that none of my
People stir -- Let the Cannile wait as they should do --
Since noise and nonsense have such powerful charms,
I that I may successful prove,
Transform my self to what you love.

Loveit. If that would do, you need not change from
What you are, you can be vain and loud enough.

Dor. But not with so good a grace as Sir Fopling.
Hey, Hampshire -- Oh -- that sound, that sound
Becomes the mouth of a man of Quality.

Loveit. Is there a thing so hateful as a senceless Mimick?

Dor. He Is a great grievance indeed to all who like
Your self, Madam, love to play the fool in quiet.

Loveit. A ridiculous Animal, who has more of
The Ape, than the Ape has of the man in him.

Dor. I have as mean an opinion of a Sheer
Mimick as your self, yet were he all Ape
I should prefer him to the Gay, the Giddy,
Brisk-insipid Noisy fool you dote on.

Loveit. Those Noisy-fools, however you despise 'em,
Have good qualities, which weigh more (or ought
At least) with us Women, than all the penicious
Wit you have to boast of.

Dor. That I may hereafter have a just value for their
Merit, pray do me the favor to name 'em.

Loveit. You Will despise 'em as the dull effects of
Ignorance and Vanity! yet I care not if I mention some.
First, they really admire us, while you at best but
Flatter us well.

Dor. Take heed! Fools can dissemble too --

Loveit. They may! but not so artificially as you --
There is no fear they should deceive us! Then they
Are assiduous, Sir, they are ever offering us their service,
And always waiting on our will.

Dor. You owe that to their excessive idleness!
They know not how to entertain themselves at home,
And find so little welcome abroad, they are fain to
Fly to you who countenance 'em as a refuge against the
Solitude they would be otherwise condemned to.

Loveit. Their conversation too diverts us better.

Dor. Playing with your Fan, smelling to your Gloves,
Commending your Hair, and taking notice how it is
Cut and shaded after the new way --

Loveit. Were it sillier than you can make it, you must
Allow it is pleasanter to laugh at others than to be laughed at
Our selves though never so wittily. Then though they
Want skill to flatter us, they flatter themselves
So well, they save us the labor! we need not take
That care and pains to satisfy 'em of our Love
Which we so often lose on you.

Dor. They commonly indeed believe too well of
Themselves, and always better of you than you deserve.

Loveit. You are in the right, they have an implicit
Faith in us which keeps 'em from prying narrowly into
Our secrets, and saves us the vexatious trouble of
Clearing doubts which your subtle and causeless
Jealousies every moment raise.

Dor. There is an inbred falsehood in Women, which
Inclines 'em still to them, whom they may most easily deceive.

Loveit. The man who loves above his quality,
Does not suffer more from the insolent Impertinence of
His Mistress, than the Woman who loves above her
Understanding does from the arrogant presumptions
Of her friend.

Dor. You mistake the use of fools, they are designed for
Properties and not for friends, you have an indifferent
Stock of reputation left yet. Lose it all like a frank
Gamester on the Square, 'twill then be time enough
To turn Rook, and cheat it up again on a
Good Substantial Bubble.

Loveit. The old and the ill-favored are only fit for
Properties indeed, but Young and Handsome
Fools have met with kinder fortunes.

Dor. They have to the shame of your sex be it spoken,
'Twas this, the thought of this made me by a timely
Jealousy endeavor to prevent the good fortune you
Are providing for Sir Fopling --
But against a Woman's frailty all our Care is vain.

Loveit. Had I not with a dear experience bought the
Knowledge of your falsehood, you might have fooled
Me yet. This is not the first Jealousy you have
Feigned to make a quarrel with me, and get a week
To throw away on some such unknown inconsiderable
Slut, as you have been lately lurking with at Plays.

Dor. Women, when they would break off with a man,
Never want the address to turn the fault on him.

Loveit. You take a pride of late in using of me ill, that
The Town may know the power you have over me.
Which now (as unreasonably as your self) expects
That I (do me all the injuries you can) must love you still.

Dor. I am so far from expecting that you should,
I begin to think you never did love me.

Loveit. Would the memory of it were so wholly worn
Out in me that I did doubt it too! what made you
Come to disturb my growing quiet?

Dor. To give you joy of your growing infamy.

Loveit. Insupportable! insulting Devil! this from you,
The only Author of my Shame! this from another
Had been but Justice, but from you, it is a hellish and
Inhumane outrage. What have I done?

Dor. A thing that puts you below my scorn, and
Makes my anger as ridiculous as you have made my Love.

Lov. I walked last night with Sir Fopling.

Dor. You did Madam, and you talked and laughed aloud
Ha, ha, ha -- Oh that laugh, that laugh becomes
The confidence of a Woman of Quality.

Lov. You who have more pleasure in the ruin of a
Woman's reputation than in the indearments of her love,
Reproach me not with your self, and I defy you to name
The man can lay a blemish on my fame.

Dor. To be seen publicly so transported with the
Vain Follies of that Notorious Fop, to me is an infamy
Below the sin of prostitution with another man.

Lov. Rail on, I am satisfied in the Justice of what
I did, you had provoked me to 't.

Dor. What I did was the effect of a passion, whose
Extravagancies you have been willing to forgive.

Lov. And what I did was the effect of a passion
You may forgive if you think fit.

Dor. Are you so indifferent grown?

Lov. I am.

Dor. Nay! then it is time to part. I Will send you back your
Letters you have so often ask't for:
I have two or three of 'em about me.

Lov. Give 'em me.

Dor. You snatch as if you thought I would not -- there --
And may the perjuries in 'em be mine if ere I see you more.

Lov. Stay! Offers to go, she catches him.

Dor. I will not.

Lov. You shall.

Dor. What have you to say?

Lov. I cannot speak it yet.

Dor. Something more in Commendation of the fool.
Death! I want patience, let me go.

Lov. I cannot.
I can sooner part with the limbs that hold him. Aside.
I hate that nauseous fool, you know I do.

Dor. Was it the scandal you were fond of then?

Lov. Y' had raised my anger equal to my love, a thing
You never could do before, and in revenge I did --
I know not what I did: -- Would you would
Not think on it any more.

Dor. Should I be willing to forget it, I shall be daily
Minded of it, 'twill be a common place for all the
Town to laugh at me, and Medley, when he is Rhetorically
Drunk, will ever be declaiming on it in my ears.

Lov. 'Twill be believed a jealous spite! Come forget it.

Dor. Let me consult my reputation, you are too careless of it.
[Pauses] You shall meet Sir Fopling in the Mail again to night.

Lov. What mean you?

Dor. I have thought on it, and you must. It Is necessary to
Justify my love to the World: you can handle a coxcomb
As he deserves, when you are not out of humor Madam!

Lov. Public satisfaction for the wrong I have done you!
This is some new device to make me more ridiculous!

Dor. Hear me!

Lov. I will not!

Dor. You will be persuaded.

Lov. Never.

Dor. Are you so obstinate?

Lov. Are you so base?

Dor. You will not satisfy my love?

Lo. I would die to satisfy that, but I will not, to save you from
A thousand racks, do a shameless thing to please your vanity.

Dor. Farewell false woman.

Lov. Do! go!

Dor. You will call me back again.

Lov. Exquisite fiend! I knew you came but to torment me.

Enter Bellinda and Pert. Dor. surpised Bellinda here!

Bell. Aside He starts! and looks pale, the sight
Of me has touched his guilty Soul.

Pert. 'Twas but a qualm as I said, a little indisgestion;
The Surfeit Water did it Madam,
Mixed with a little Mirabilis.

Dor. I am confounded! and cannot guess how she came hither!

Lov. It Is your fortune Bellinda ever to be here,
When I am abused by this prodigy of ill nature.

Bell. I am amazed to find him here!
How has he the face to come near you?

Dor. Aside. Here is fine work toward!
I never was at such a loss before.

Bell. One who makes a public profession of breach of
Faith and Ingratitude! I loath the sight of him.

Dor. There is no remedy, I must submit to their Tongues
Now, and some other time bring my self off as well as I can.

Bell. Other men are wicked, but then they have some
Sense of shame! he is never well but when he triumphs,
Nay! glories to a Woman's face in his Villainies.

Lov. You are in the right Bellinda, but me thinks
Your kindness for me makes you concern your
Self too much with him.

Bell. It does indeed my Dear!
His barbarous carriage to you yesterday, made me hope
You never would see him more, and the very next day
To find him here again, provokes me strangely:
But because I know you love him I have done.

Dor. You have reproach't me handsomely, and I
Deserve it for coming hither, but --

Pert. You must expect it, Sir! all Women will hate
You for my Ladies sake!

Dor. Nay, if she begins too, it is time to fly! I shall be
Scolded to death else. Aside to Bellinda.
I am to blame in some circumstances I confess; but as to
The Main, I am not so guilty as you imagine.
I shall seek a more convenient time to clear my self.

Loveit. Do it now! what impediments are here?

Dor. I want time, and you want temper.

Loveit. These are weak pretenses!

Dor. You were never more mistaken in your life,
And so farewell. Dorimant flings off.

Loveit. Call a Footman! Pert! quickly,
I will have him dogged.

Pert. I wish you would not for my quiet and your own.

Loveit. I Will find out the infamous cause of all
Our quarrels, pluck her Mask off, and expose her
Barefaced to the world.

Bell. Let me but escape this time, I Will never Aside.
Venture more.

Loveit. Bellinda! you shall go with me.

Bell. I have such a heaviness hangs on me with what
I did this morning, I would fain go home
And sleep, my Dear.

Loveit. Death! and eternal darkness. I shall never
Sleep again. Raging Feavours seize the world and make
Mankind as restless all as I am. Ex. Loveit.

Bell. I knew him false and helped to make him so?
Was not her ruin enough to fright me from the danger?
It should have been, but love can take no warning. Ex. Bell.

SCENE II. Lady Townleys House.
Enter Medly, Young Bellair, Lady Townly, Emilia and Chaplain. Med. Bear up
Bellair, and do not let us see that
Repentance in thine, we daily do in Married faces.

L. Town. This Wedding will strangely surprise
My Brother when he knows it.

Med. Your Nephew ought to conceal it for a time,
Madam, since Marriage has lost its good name, prudent
Men seldom expose their own reputations till it is
Convenient to justify their Wives.

Old Bell. [[without] Where are you all there?
Out, a Dod will no body hear?

L. Town. My Brother, quickly Mr. Smirk into this Closet,
You must not be seen yet. Goes into the Closet.

Enter Old Bellair and L. Townleys Page. O. Bell. Desire Mr. Furb to walk into
the lower Parlor,
I will be with him presently -- Where have you
Been, Sir, you could not wait on me to day? To Y. Bellair.

Y. Bell. About a business.

O. Bell. Are you so good at business? a Dod I
Have a business too, you shall dispatch out of hand, Sir.
Send for a Parson, Sister; my Lady Woodvill and
Her Daughter are coming.

L. Town. What need you huddle up things thus?

O. Bell. Out a pise, youth is apt to play the fool,
And it is not good it should be in their power.

L. Town. You need not fear your Son.

O. Bell. H'has been idling this morning, and a Dod I do
Not like him. How do thou do sweet heart? To Emilia.

Emil. You are very severe, Sir, Married in such haste!

O. Bell. Go too, you are a rogue, and I will talk with thee anon.
Here Is my Lady Woodvill come. Enter L. Woodvill, Harriet and Busy.
Welcome, Madam; Mr. Furb's
Below with the Writings.

L. Wood. Let us down and make an end then.

O. Bell. Sister, show the way. To Y. Bell who is talking to Harriet.
Harry your business lies not there yet!
Excuse him till we have done Lady, and then a Dod
He shall be for thee. Mr. Medley we must
Trouble you to be a witness.

Med. I luckily came for that purpose, Sir.

Ex. O. Bell. Medley, Y. Bell. L. Townly and L. Woodvill. Busy. What will you
do Madam?

Har. Be carried back and mewed up in the Country again,
Run away here, any thing, rather than be married to a
Man I do not care for -- Dear Emilia, do thou advise me!

Emil. Mr. Bellair is engaged you know.

Har. I do; but know not what the fear of losing an
Estate may fright him to.

Emil. In the desperate condition you are in, you should
Consult with some judicious man; what think you of
Mr. Dorimant?

Har. I do not think of him at all.

Busy. She thinks of nothing else I am sure --

Emil. How fond your Mother was of Mr. Courtage!

Har. Because I contrived the mistake to make a little
Mirth, you believe I like the man.

Emil. Mr. Bellair believes you love him.

Har. Men are seldom in the right when they guess at a
Woman's mind, would she whom he loves loved him no better.

Busy. Aside. That Is e'n well enough on all conscience.

Emil. Mr. Dorimant has a great deal of wit.

Har. And takes a great deal of pains to show it.

Emil. He Is extremely well fashioned.

Har. Affectedly grave, or ridiculously wild and apish.

Busy. You defend him still against your Mother.

Har. I would not were he justly rallied, but
I cannot hear any one undeservedly railed at.

Emil. Has your woman learnt the Song you
Were so taken with?

Har. I was fond of a new thing, it is dull at second hearing.

Emil. Mr. Dorimant made it.

Busy. She knows it Madam, and has made me sing
It at least a dozen times this morning.

Har. Thy Tongue is as impertinent as thy fingers.

Emil. You have provoked her.

Busy. It Is but singing the song and I shall appease her.

Emil. Prithee do.

Har. She has a voice will grate your Ears worse than a
Cat-call, and dresses so ill she is scarce fit to trick up a
Yeomans Daughter on a Holyday.
Busy Sings. Song by Sir C. S.
As Amoret with Phillis sat
One Evening on the plain,
And saw the charming Strephon wait
To tell the Nymph his pain.
The threatening danger to remove
She whispered in her Ear,
Ah Phillis, if you would not love,
This Shepherd do not hear.
None ever had so strange an Art
His passion to convey
Into a listening Virgins heart
And steal her Soul away.
Fly, fly betimes, for fear you give
Occasion for your Fate.
In vain said she, in vain I strive,
Alas! it is now too late.

Enter Dorimant. Dor. Music so softens and disarms the mind.

Har. That not one Arrow does resistance find.

Dor. Let us make use of the lucky Minute then.

Har. Aside turning from Dorimant My love springs with
My blood into my Face, I dare not look upon him yet.

Dor. What have we here, the picture of celebrated
Beauty, giving Audience in public to a declared Lover?

Har. Play the dying Fop, and make the
Piece complete Sir.

Dor. What think you if the Hint were well improved?
The whole mystery of making love pleasantly designed
And wrought in a suit of Hangings?

Har. 'Twere needless to execute fools in Effigy who
Suffer daily in their own persons.

Dor. To Emilia aside Mrs. Bride, for such I know
This happy day has made you.

Emil. Defer the formal joy you are to give me,
And mind your business with her --
[Aloud] Here are dreadful preparations Mr. Dorimant,
Writi^gs sealing, and a Parson sent for --

Dor. To marry this Lady --

Busy. Condemned she is, and what will become of her
I know not, without you generously engage in a Rescue.

Dor. In this sad condition, Madam, I can do no less
Than offer you my service.

Har. The obligation is not great, you are the common
Sanctuary for all young Women who run from their Relations.

Dor. I have always my arms open to receive the
Distressed. But I will open my heart and receive you,
Where none yet did ever enter -- You have filled it
With a secret, might I but let you know it --

Har. Do not speak it, if you would have me believe it;
Your Tongue is so famed for falsehood 'twill do the
Truth an injury. Turns away her head.

Dor. Turn not away then; but look on me and guess it.

Har. Did you not tell me there was no credit to be given to
Faces? that Women now adays have their passions as
Much at will as they have their Complexions, and
Put on joy and sadness, scorn and kindness, with the
Same ease they do their Paint and Patches --
Are they the only counterfeits?

Dor. You wrong your own, while you suspect my Eyes,
By all the hope I have in you, the inimitable
Color in your cheeks is not more free from
Art than are the sighs I offer.

Har. In men who have been long hardened in Sin,
We have reason to mistrust the first signs of repentance.

Dor. The prospect of such a Heaven will make me
Persevere, and give you marks that are infallible.

Har. What are those?

Dor. I will renounce all the joys I have in friendship
And in Wine, sacrifice to you all the interest
I have in other Women --

Har. Hold -- Though I wish you devout,
I would not have you turn Fanatic -- Could you
Neglect these a while and make a journey into the Country?

Dor. To be with you I could live there:
And never send one thought to London.

Har. What e're you say, I know all beyond
High-Park's a desert to you, and that no gallantry
Can draw you farther.

Dor. That has been the utmost limit of my Love --
But now my passion knows no bounds, and
There Is no measure to be taken of what i will do
For you from any thing I ever did before.

Har. When I hear you talk thus in Hampshire,
I shall begin to think there may be some truth enlarged upon.

Dor. Is this all -- will you not promise me --

Har. I hate to promise! what we do then is expected from
Us, and wants much of the welcome it finds, when it surprises.

Dor. May I not hope?

Har. That depends on you, and not on me, and
It Is to no purpose to forbid it Turns to Busy.

Busy. Faith Madam, now I perceive the Gentleman
Loves you too, even let him know your mind and
Torment your selves no longer.

Har. Do think I have no sense of Modesty?

Busy. Think, if you lose this you may never
Have another opportunity.

Har. May he hate me, (a curse that frights me
When I speak it!) if ever I do a thing against the
Rules of decency and honor.

Dor. [To Emilia.] I am beholding to you
For your good intentions, Madam.

Emil. I thought the concealing of our Marriage
From her might have done you better service.

Dor. Try her again --

Emil. What have you resolved, Madam?
The time draws near.

Har. To be obstinate and protest against this Marriage.

Enter L. Townly in haste. L. Town. [To Emilia.] Quickly, quickly, let Mr. Smirk
Out of the Closet. Smirk comes out of the Closet.

Har. A Parson! had you laid him in here?

Dor. I knew nothing of him.

Har. Should it appear you did, your opinion
Of my easiness may cost you dear.

Enter O. Bellair, Y. Bellair, Medley, and L. Woodvill. O. Bell. Out a pise!
the Canonical hour is almost past;
Sister, is the man of God come?

L. Town. He waits your leisure --

O. Bell. By your favor Sir. A Dod a pretty spruce fellow*
What may we call him?

L. Town. Mr. Smirk! my Lady Biggots Chaplain.

O. Bell. A wise woman! a Dod she is.
The man will serve for the flesh as well as the spirit.
Please you Sir to Commission a young Couple to go to
Bed together a Gods name? -- Harry.

Y. Bell. Here Sir --

O. Bell. Out a pise without your mistress in your hand!

Smirk. Is this the Gentleman?

O. Bell. Yes Sir!

Smirk. Are you not mistaken Sir?

O. Bell. A Dod, I think not Sir.

Smirk. Sure you are Sir?

O. Bell. You look as if you would forbid the bains
Mr. Smirk, I hope you have no pretention to the Lady!

Smirk. Wish him joy Sir! I have done him the good
Office to day already.

O. Bell. Out a pize what do I hear?

L. Town. Never storm Brother, the truth is out.

O. Bell. How say you Sir! is this your wedding day?

Y. Bell. It is Sir.

O. Bell. And a Dod it shall be mine too,
Give me thy hand sweetheart, To Emilia.
What do thou mean? give me thy hand I say.

Emilia kneels and Y. Bell. L. Town. Come come, give her your blessing,
This is the woman your Son loved and is married to.

O. Bell. Ha! cheated! cozened! and by your
Contrivance Sister!

L. Town. What would you do with her,
She Is a Rogue and you cannot abide her.

Medley. Shall I hit her a pat for you Sir?

O. Bell. A Dod you are all Rogues,
And I never will forgive you.

L. Town. Whither! whither away?

Medley. Let him go and cool awhile!

L. Wood. to Dorimant Here Is a business broke out now
Mr. Courtage, I am made a fine fool of.

Dor. You see the old Gentleman knew nothing of it.

L. Wood. I find he did not. I shall have some trick put
Upon me if I stay in this wicked Town any longer.
Harriet! dear Child! where art thou?
I Will into the Country straight.

O. Bell. A Dod Madam, you shall hear me first --

Enter Loveit, and Bellinda. Lov. Hither my man dogged him! --

Bell. Yonder he stands my Dear.

Lov. I see him. -- Aside.
And with him the Face that has undone me! oh that I were
But where I might throw out the Anguish of my heart,
Here it must rage within and break it.

L. Town. Mrs. Loveit! are you afraid to come forward?

Lov. I was amazed to see so much company here in a
Morning, the occasion sure is extraordinary --

Dor. Aside. Loveit and Bellinda! the Devil owes me a
Shame to day, and I think never will have done paying it.

Lov. Married! dear Emilia! how am I transported
With the news?

Har. to Dorimant I little thought Emilia was the woman
Mr. Bellair was in love with -- I Will chide her for not trusting
Me with the secret.

Dor. How do you like Mrs. Loveit?

Har. She Is a famed Mrs. of yours I hear --

Dor. She has been on occasion!

O. Bell. A Dod Madam I cannot help it. To L. Woodvill.

L. Wood. You need make no more Apologies Sir!

Emil. to Loveit. The old Gentleman's excusing himself to
My Lady Woodvil.

Lov. Ha, ha, ha! I never heard of any thing so pleasant.

Har. She Is extremely overjoyed at something. To Dor.

Dor. At nothing, she is one of those hoyting Ladies,
Who gayly fling themselves about, and force a laugh,
When their aching hearts are full of discontent and malice.

Lov. Oh Heaven! I was never so near killing my self with
Laughing -- Mr. Dorimant! are you a Brideman?

L. Wood. Mr. Dorimant! is this Mr. Dorimant, Madam?

Lov. If you doubt it, your daughter can resolve
You I suppose.

L. Wood. I am cheated too, basely cheated.

O. Bell. Out a pize, what is here more knavery yet!

L. Wood. Harriet! on my Blessing come away I charge you.

Har. Dear Mother! do but stay and hear me.

L. Wood. I am betrayed and thou art undone I fear.

Har. Do not fear it -- I have not, nor never will do any
Thing against my duty -- believe me! dear Mother do.

Dor. to Lov. I had trusted you with this secret but that I
Knew the violence of your Nature would ruin my fortune
As now unluckily it has: I thank you Madam.

Lov. She Is an Heiress I know, and very rich.

Dor. To satisfy you I must give up my interest wholly to
My Love, had you been a reasonable woman,
I might have secured 'em both, and been happy --

Lov. You might have trusted me with any thing of this
Kind, you know you might. Why did you go under
A wrong name?

Dor. The story is too long to tell you now,
Be satisfied, this is the business; this is the Masque
Has kept me from you.

Bell. He Is tender of my honor, though he is Aside.
Cruel to my Love.

Loveit. Was it no idle Mistress then?

Dor. Believe me a Wife, to repair the
Ruins of my estate that needs it.

Loveit. The knowledge of this makes my Grief
Hang lighter on my soul; but I shall never more be happy.

Dor. Bellinda!

Bell. Do not think of clearing your self with me, it is
Impossible -- Do all men break their words thus?

Dor. The extravagant words they speak in love;
It Is as unreasonable to expect we should perform all we
Promise then, as do all we threaten when we are angry --
When I see you next --

Bell. Take no notice of me and I shall not hate you.

Dor. How came you to Mrs. Loveit?

Bell. By a mistake the Chairmen made for want of
My giving them directions.

Dor. 'Twas a pleasant one. We must meet again.

Bell. Never.

Dor. Never!

Bell. When we do, may I be as infamous as you are false.

L. Town. Men of Mr. Dorimants character, always
Suffer in the general opinion of the world.

Med. You can make no judgment of a witty man from
Common fame, considering the prevailing faction, Madam --

O. Bell. A Dod he is in the right.

Med. Besides it is a common error among Women,
To believe too well of them they know, and
Too ill of them they don't.

O. Bell. A Dod he observes well.

L. Town. Believe me, Madam, you will find Mr Dorimant
As civil a Gentleman as you thought Mr. Courtage.

Har. If you would but know him better --

L. Wood. You have a mind to know him better!
Come away -- You shall never see him more --

Har. Dear Mother stay --

L. Wood. I wo'not be consenting to your Ruin --

Har. Were my fortune in your power --

L. Wood. Your person is.

Har. Could I be disobedient I might take it out of
Yours and put it into his.

L. Wood. It Is that you would be at, you
Would Marry this Dorimant.

Har. I cannot deny it! I would, and never will
Marry any other man.

L. Wood. Is this the Duty that you promised?

Har. But I will never Marry him against your will --

L. Wood. She knows the way to melt my heart. Aside.
Upon your self light your undoing. To Har.

Med. [To O. Bell.] Come, Sir, you have not the heart
Any longer to refuse your blessing.

O. Bell. A Dod I have not -- Rise and God bless you both --
Make much of her Harry, she deserves thy kindness --
A Dod sirrah I did not think it had been in thee. To Emilia.

Enter Sir Fopling and's Page. Sir Fop. It Is a damned windy day! hey Page!
Is my Perriwig right?

Page. A little out of order, Sir!

Sir Fop. Pox of this apartment, it wants an Antichamber
To adjust ones self in. Madam! I came from To Loveit.
Your house and your Servants directed me hither.

Loveit. I will give order hereafter they
Shall direct you better.

Sir Fop. The great satisfaction I had in the Mail last night
Has given me much disquiet since.

Loveit. It Is likely to give me more than I desire.

Sir Fop. What the Devil makes her so reserved?
Am I guilty of an indiscretion, Madam?

Loveit. You will be of a great one, if you
Continue your mistake, Sir.

Sir Fop. Something puts you out of humor.

Loveit. The most foolish inconsiderable thing that ever did.

Sir Fop. Is it in my power?

Loveit. To hang or drown it, do one of 'em,
And trouble me no more.

Sir Fop. So fiere Serviteur, Madam --
Medley! where is Dorimant?

Med. Me thinks the Lady has not made you those
Advances to day she did last night, Sir Fopling --

Sir Fop. Prithee do not talk of her.

Med. She would be a bone fortune.

Sir Fop. Not to me at present.

Med. How so?

Sir Fop. An intrigue now would be but a temptation to me
To throw away that Vigor on one which I mean shall shortly
Make my Court to the whole sex in a Ballet.

Med. Wisely considered, Sir Fopling.

Sir Fop. No one woman is worth the loss of a Cut in a Caper.

Med. Not when it is so universally designed.

L. Wood. Mr. Dorimant, every one has spoke so much in
Your behalf, that I can no longer doubt but I was in the wrong.

Lov. There Is nothing but falsehood and impertinence in
This world! all men are Villains or Fools; take example from
My misfortunes. Bellinda, if thou would be happy, give thy
Self wholly up to goodness.

Har. to Loveit. Mr. Dorimant has been your God
Almighty long enough, it is time to think of another --

Lov. Jeered by her! I will lock my self up in my house,
And never see the world again.

Har. A Nunnery is the more fashionable place for such a
Retreat, and has been the fatal consequence of many a
Belle passion.

Lov. Hold heart! till I get home! should I answer
'Twould make her Triumph greater. Is going out.

Dor. Your hand Sir Fopling --

Sir. Fop. Shall I wait upon you Madam?

Lov. Legion of Fools, as many Devils take thee. Ex. Lov.

Med. Dorimant? I pronounce thy reputation clear -- and
Hence forward when I would know any thing
Of woman, I will consult no other Oracle.

Sir Fop. Stark mad, by all that is handsome! Dorimant
Thou have engaged me in a pretty business.

Dor. I have not leisure now to talk about it.

O. Bell. Out a pize, what does this man of mode do here again?

L. Town. He Will be an excellent entertainment within Brother,
And is luckily come to raise the mirth of the Company.

L. Wood. Madam, I take my leave of you.

L. Town. What do you mean Madam?

L. Wood. To go this afternoon part of my way to Hartly --

O. Bell. A Dod you shall stay and dine first! come we will
All be good friends, and you shall give Mr. Dorimant
Leave to wait upon you and your daughter in the Country.

L. Wood. If his occasions bring him that way, I have now
So good an opinion of him, he shall be welcome.

Har. To a great rambling lone house, that looks as it were
Not inhabited, the family's so small; there you will find my Mother,
An old lame Aunt, and my self Sir, perched up on Chairs at
A distance in a large parlour; sitting moping like three or
Four Melancholy Birds in a spacious vollary --
Does not this stagger your Resolution?

Dor. Not at all, Madam! The first time I saw you,
You left me with the pangs of Love upon me, and this
Day my soul has quite given up her liberty.

Har. This is more dismal than the Country! Emilia! pity
Me, who am going to that sad place. Methinks I hear the
Hateful noise of Rooks already -- Kaw, Kaw, Kaw --
There Is music in the worst Cry in London!
My Dill and Cowcumbers to pickle.

O. Bell. Sister! knowing of this matter, I hope you
Have provided us some good Cheer.

L. Town. I have Brother, and the Fiddles too --

O. Bell. Let 'em strike up then, the young Lady shall
Have a dance before she departs. Dance.
After the Dance. So now we'll in, and make this an arrant wedding day --
And if these honest Gentlemen rejoice, To the Pit.
A Dod the Boy has made a happy choice. Ex. Omnes.

The EPILOGUE by Mr Dryden.
MOST Modern Wits, such monstrous Fools have shown,
They seemed not of heavens making but their own.
Those Nauseous Harlequins in Farce may pass,
But there goes more to a substantial Ass!
Something of man must be exposed to View,
That, Gallants, they may more resemble you:
Sir Fopling is a Fool so nicely writ,
The Ladies would mistake him for a Wit.
And when he sings, talks loud, and cocks; would cry,
I vow methinks he is pretty Company,
So brisk, so gay, so travailed, so refined!
As he took pains to grass upon his kind.
True Fops help Natures work, and go to school,
To file and finish god-a'mighty's fool.
Yet none Sir Fopling him, or him can call;
He Is Knight of the Shire, and represents ye all.
From each he meets, he culls what e're he can,
Legion's his name, a people in a Man.
His bulky folly gathers as it goes,
And, rolling over you, like a Snow-ball grows.
His various modes from various Fathers follow,
One taught the Toss, and one the new French Wallow.
His Sword-knot, this; his Crevat, this designed,
And this, the yard long Snake he twirls behind.
From one the sacred Perriwig he gained,
Which Wind never blew, nor touch of Hat profaned.
Another diving Bow he did adore,
Which with a shog casts all the hair before:
Till he with full Decorum brings it back,
And rises with a Water Spaniel shake.
As for his Songs (the Ladies dear delight)
Those sure he took from most of you who Write.
Yet every man is safe from what he feared,
For no one fool is hunted from the herd.
FINIS.

