Laws and Ordinances OF WAR, Established for the better Conduct of the Army,
BY HIS EXCELLENCY The Earl of ESSEX, Lord General Of the Forces raised by the
Authority of the PARLIAMENT, For the defense of the KING and KINGDOM. Together
with A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT, Concerning the
regulating of great Inconveniences in HIS EXCELLENCIES Army.

LONDON, Printed for John Partridge, and John Rothwell. May 13. 1643.

ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX, Viscount HEREFORD, Lord FERRERS of Chartley, Bourchier,
and Lovain: Captain General Of the Army raised by the Authority OF PARLIAMENT,
for the defense of the KING and KINGDOM:
TO all the Officers of the Army; Colonells, Lievtenant-Colonells,
Serjeant-Majors, Captains, other Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, and
all others whom these Laws and Ordinances shall concern.

WHich Laws and Ordinances hereby published, all the said persons respectively
and severally are required and commanded to observe and keep on the Pains and
Penalties therein expressed.

Laws and Ordinances of War.
Of Duties to God.
Blasphemy.
I.FIrst, Let no man presume to blaspheme the holy and blessed Trinity, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; nor the known Articles of our
Christian Faith, upon pain to have his tongue bored with a red hot Iron.

Cursing.
II. Unlawful Oaths and Execrations, and scandalous acts in derogation of Gods
Honor, shall be punished with loss of Pay, and other punishment at discretion.

Neglecting Divine Worship.
III. All those who often and wilfully absent themselves from Sermons, and
public Prayer, shall be proceeded against at discretion: And all such who
shall violate Places of public Worship, shall undergo severe Censure.

Of Duties in general.
Intelligence with the Enemy.
I. ALl such as shall practice and entertain Intelligence with the Enemy, by any
manner of means or slights, or have any communication with them, without
direction from my Lord General, shall be punished as Traitors and Rebels.

Relief of the Enemy.
II. No man shall relieve the Enemy with Money, Victuals, Ammunition; neither
harbor or receive any such, upon pain of death.

Yielding up of Forts.
III. Whosoever yields up any Town, Fort, Magazine, Victuals, Arms,
Ammunition, or that motioneth any such thing, but upon extremity, and that to
the Governor, or in Council, shall be executed as a Traitor.

Careless Service.
IV. Whosoever shall be convicted to do his Duty negligently and carelessly,
shall be punished at discretion.

Violating of a Safeguard.
V. Whosoever shall presume to violate a Save-guard, shall die without mercy.

Of Duties toward Superious and Commanders.
Violating of the Lord General.
I. Whosoever shall use any words tending to the death of the Lord General,
shall be punished with death.

Quarrelling with Officers
II. No man shall presume to quarrel with his superior Officer, upon pain of
Cashiering, and arbitrary punishment; nor to strike any such, upon pain of
death.

Departing from Captains and Masters.
III. No Soldier shall depart from his Captain, nor Servant from his Master,
without license, though he serve still in the Army, upon pain of death.

Silence in the Army.
IV. Every private man and Soldier, upon pain of Imprisonment, shall keep
silence when the Army is to take lodging, or when it is marching, or
imbattallio, so as the Officers may be heard, and their Commandments executed.

Resisting against Correction.
V. No man shall resist, draw, lift, or offer to draw or lift his weapon against
any Officer correcting him orderly for his defense, upon pain of death.

Unlawful Assemblies.
VI. No person shall make any mutenous assemblies, or be present or assisting
thereunto, or in, or by them demand their pay, upon pain of death.

Resisting of the Provost-Marshall.
VII. No man shall resist the Provost-Marshall, or any other Officer, in the
execution of his Office, or break prison, upon pain of death.

Seditious words.
VIII. None shall utter any words of sedition and uprore, or muteny, upon pain
of death.

Concealing mutenous speeches.
IX. A heavy punishment shall be inflicted upon them who after they have heard
mutenous speeches, acquaint not their Commanders with them.

Receiving of Injuries.
X. Whosoever shall receive an injury, and shall take his own satisfaction,
shall be punished by Imprisonment, and as it shall be thought fit by the
Marshall-Court: But he that is injured shall be bound, if he do not forgive the
injury to seek reparation by complaint to his Captain, or Colonel, or other
superior Officer, and it shall be given him in ample manner.

Of Duties moral.
Drunkenness.
I. Drunkenness in an Officer, shall be punished with loss of place; in a
common Soldier, with such penalties as a Court-Marshall shall think fit.

Unnatural abuses.
II. Rapes, Ravishments, unnatural abuses, shall be punished with death.

Adultery.
III. Adultery, Fornication, and other dissolute lasciviousness, shall be
punished with discretion, according to the quality of the offense.

Theft.
IV. Theft and Robbery, exceeding the value of twelve pence, shall be punished
with death.

Provocation.
V. No man shall use reproachful nor provoking words or acts to any, upon pain
of Imprisonment, and further punishment, as shall be thought fit to be
inflicted upon enemies to discipline and service.

Seizing upon dead men's goods.
VI. No man shall take or spoil the goods of him that dies, or is killed in
Service, upon pain of restoring double the value, and arbitrary punishment.

Murder.
VII. Murder shall be expiated with the death of the murderer.

Of a Soldiers Duty touching his Arms.
Full Armor
I. ALl Soldiers coming to their Colors to watch, or to be exercised, shall
come fully armed, upon pain of severe correction.

Slovenly Armor.
II.None shall presume to appear with their Arms unfixt, or undecently kept,
upon pain of arbitrary correction.

Boosing of Horses and Arms.
III. If a Trooper shall lose his horse or hackney, or a Footman any part of
his Arms, by negligence or lewdness, by dice or cards, he or they shall remain
in quality of Pioners and Scavengers, till they be furnished with as good as
were lost, at their own charge.

Pawning or selling of Armor.
IV. No Soldier shall give to pawn, or sell his Armor, upon pain of
imprisonment, and punishment at discretion; and wheresoever any Armor shall be
found so sold or pawned, they shall be brought again into the Army.

Wilful spoiling of horses.
V. If a Trooper shall spoil his horse willingly, of purpose to be rid of the
Service, he shall lose his horse, and remain in the Camp for a Pioner.

Borrowed Arms.
VI. If one borrows Arms of another to pass the Muster withal, the borrower
shall be rigorously punished, and the lender shall forfeit his goods.

Imbezelling of Ammunition.
VII. None shall presume to spoil, sell, or carry away any Ammunition delivered
unto him, upon pain of death.

Of Duty in marching.
Waste and extortion.
I. NOne in their march through the Countries shall waste, spoil, or extort any
Victuals, Money, or pawn, from any subject, upon any pretense of want
whatsoever, upon pain of death.

Taking of horses out of the Plow.
II. No Soldier shall presume, upon no occasion whatsoever, to take a horse out
of the Plow, or to wrong the husbandmen in their persons, or cattle, or goods,
upon pain of death.

Straggling from the Colors.
III. No Soldiers, either Horse or Foot, shall presume in marching to straggle
from his Troop or Company, or to march out of his rank, upon pain of death.

Spoiling of trees.
IV. No Soldier shall presume, in marching or lodging, to cut down any
fruit trees, or to deface or spoil Walks of trees, upon pain of severe
punishment.

Of Duties in the Camp and Garrison.
Swerving from the Camp.
I. NO man shall depart a mile out of the Army or Camp without license, upon
pain of death.

Going in or out by-ways.
II. No man shall enter, or go out of the Army, but by ordinary ways, upon pain
of death.

Drawing of swords after setting the Watch.
III. No man shall presume to draw his sword without order, after the Watch is
set upon pain of death.

Giving a false Alarm.
IV. No man shall give a false Alarm, or discharge a piece in the night, or make
any noise without lawful cause, upon pain of death.

Drawing swords in a quarrel.
V. No man shall draw any sword in a private quarrel within the Camp, upon pain
of death.

Revealing the Watchword.
VI. He that makes known the Watchword without order, or gives any other word
but what is given by the Officers, shall die for it.

Offering violence to Victuallers.
VII. No man shall do violence to any that brings Victuals to the Camp, upon
pain of death.

Speaking with the Enemies Messengers.
VIII. None shall speak with a Drum or Trumpet, or any other sent by the Enemy,
without order, upon pain of punishment at discretion.

A Sentinel asleep, or drunk.
IX. A Sentinel or Perdue found asleep, or drunk, or forsaking their place
before they be drawn off, shall die for the offense, without mercy.

Failing at the Rendevouz.
X. No man shall fail wilfully to come to the Rendevouz or Garrison appointed
him by the Lord General, upon pain of death.

Remaining unrolled in the Army.
XI. No man that carries Arms, and pretends to be a soldier, shall remain
three days in the Army without being enrolled in some Company, upon pain of
death.

Departing without leave.
XII. No man that is enrolled, shall depart from the Army or Garrison, or from
his Colors, without License, upon pain of death.

Out-staying a Pass.
XIII. No private Soldier shall out-stay his Pass without a certificate of the
occasion, under the hand of a Magistrate at the next Muster, upon pain of
losing his pay, during all the time of his absence.

Absentings from the Watch.
XIV. He that absents himself when the sign is given to set the Watch, shall be
punished at discretion, either with bread and water in prison, or with the
wodden horse.

Discontented with their Quarters.
XV. Whosoever shall express his discontent with his Quarter given him in the
Camp, or Garrison, shall be punished as a Muteneer.

Lying or supping out of the Quarters.
XVI. No Officer, of what quality soever, shall go out of the Quarter to dinner
or supper, or lie out all night, without making his superior Officer
acquainted, upon pain of cashiering.

Keeping of the Quarters clean.
XVII. All Officers whose charge it is, shall see the Quarters kept clean and
sweet, upon pain of severe punishment.

Letting of Horses feed in sown grounds.
XVIII. None shall presume to let their horses feed in sown grounds whatsoever,
or to endamage the husbandmen any way, upon severest punishment.

Of Duties in Action.
Repairing to the Colors upon an Alarm.
I. NO man shall fail immediately to repair unto his Colors (except upon
evident necessity) when an Alarm is given, upon pain of death.

Flying.
II. No man shall abandon his Colors, or fly away in Battle, upon pain of
death.

Flinging away Arms.
III. If a Pike-man throw away his Pike, or a Muskettier his Musket or
Bandilier, he or they shall be punished with death.

Burning and wasting.
IV. No man shall burn any house or Barn, be it of friend or so, or wilfully
spoil any Corn, Hay, or Straw, or Stacks in the fields, or any Sheep, Boat,
Carriage, or any thing that may serve for the provision of the Army, without
order, upon pain of death.

Killing an Enemy who yields.
V. None shall kill an enemy who yields, and throws down his Arms.

Saving of men armed with offensive Arms.
VI. None shall save a man that has his offensive Arms in his hands, upon pain
of losing his prisoner.

Flinging away Powder.
VII. Whosoever in skirmish shall fling away his Powder out of his Bandiliers,
that he may the sooner come off, shall be punished with death.

Imbezzelling of the prey.
VIII. No Soldier shall imbezzell any part of the prey, till it be disposed of
by the Lord General, or others authorized, upon pain of death.

Concealing of Prisoners.
IX. No Officer or Soldier shall ransom, or conceal a Prisoner, but within
twelve hours, shall make the same known to the Lord General, or others
authorized, upon pain of death.

Pillaging without license.
X. No man upon any good success, shall fall a pillaging before license, or a
sign given, upon pain of death.

Retreating before handy-blows.
XI. A Regiment, or Company of Horse or Foot, that charge the Enemy, and
retreats before they come to handy-strokes, shall answer it before a Council
of War; and if the fault be found in the Officers, they shall be banished the
Camp; if in the Soldiers, then every tenth man shall be punished at
discretion, and the rest serve for Pioners and Scavengers, till a worthy
exployt take off that Blot.

Of the duties of Commanders and Officers in particular.
Commanders must see God duly served.
I. ALL Commanders are straightly charged to see Almighty God reverently served,
and Sermons and Prayers duly frequented.

Commanders must acquaint my Lord General with dangerous humors.
II. All Commanders and Officers that find any of discontented humors, apt to
mutinize; or any swerving from direction given, or from the policy of the Army
set down, shall straight way acquaint the Lord General therewith, or others
authorized, as they will answer their neglect.

Defrauding of Soldiers pay.
III. Any Officers that shall presume to defraud the Soldiers of their pay, or
any part of it, shall be casheered.

Stopping of Duellers.
IIII. No Corporal, or other Officer commanding the Watch, shall willingly
suffer a Soldier to go forth to a Duel, or private Fight, upon pain of death.

Drunken and quarrelsome Officers.
V. What Officer soever shall come drunk to his Guard, or shall quarrel in the
Quarter, or commit any disorder, shall be cashiered without mercy; and the next
Officer under him shall have his place, which he may pretend to be his right,
and it shall not be refused to him.

Careless Captains.
VI. A Captain that is careless in the training and governing of his Company,
shall be displaced of his charge.

Officers out-staying their pass.
VII. All Captains or Officers that shall out-stay their Pass, shall be
punished at the Lord Generals discretion.

All Officers bound to part quarrels.
VIII. All Officers, of what condition soever, shall have power to part quarrels
and frayes, or sudden disorders betwixt the Soldiers, though it be in any
other Regiment or Company, and to commit the disordered to prison for the
present, until such Officers as they belong unto are acquainted with it: And
what Soldier soever shall resist, disobey, or draw his Sword against such an
Officer (although he be no Officer of his Regiment or Company) shall be
punished with death.

Officers non-resident in Garrison.
IX. A Captain or Officer non-resident in the place assigned him for Garrison,
without license, shall have one months pay defaulted for the first offense; and
two months for the second: upon the third offense he shall be discharged of his
Command.

Cashiering of Soldiers.
X. After the Army is come to the general Rendezvous, no Captain shall cashiere
any Soldier that is enrolled; without special Warrant of the Lord General.

Mustering of false and counterfeit Troops.
XI. No Captain of a Troop shall present in Musters any but real Troopers, such
as are bound by their pay to follow the Troops, upon pain of cashiering without
mercy. And if any Victualler, Fee-booter, Enterloper, or Soldier whatsoever,
of any Troop or Company, shall present himself or his horse in the Muster, to
mislead the Muster-Master, and to betray the service; the same shall be
punished with death.

Commissaries of victuals and Ammunition must be true.
XII. No Provider; Keeper, or Officer of Victual or Ammunition, shall imbezell
or spoil any part thereof, or give any false account to the Lord General, upon
pain of death.

Of the Duty of Muster-Masters.
Muster-Masters conniving at counterfeits.
I. NO Muster-Master must wittingly let any pass in the Musters, but such as
are really of the Troop or Company presented, upon pain of death.

Captains must send a Roll of their men to the Lord General.
II. All Captains shall cause their Troops or Companies to be full and complete;
and two days after the General Mustering, they shall send to the Lord
General a perfect List or Roll of all their Officers of their Troops and
Companies, and likewise of all the Troopers and Soldiers that are in actual
Service, putting down distinctly on the head of each man his monthly pay.

Every payday.
III. The like Roll or List shall the Captains send to the Lord General, and to
the Treasurer of the Army, upon every pay-day during the Service, with of
punctual expression at the bottom of the said Roll (...) new Troopers or
Soldiers have been (...) find the last Pay-day, no (...) of such as are
either deceased or cashiered, and his wise the day whereon they were so
cashiered and (...).

Subscribed by all the officers of the Troop or Company.
IV. Which said List or Roll shall be subscribed not only by the Captain and
his Lieutenant and Coronet or Ensign, but also by the Sergeants and Corporals
respectively, who shall declare upon their Oaths, That the Troopers and
Soldiers and enrolled in the said List are real and actual Troopers and
Soldiers of the respective Troops and Companies. And whosoever shall be
convicted of falsehood in any of the premises, shall be cashiered.

Muster-Masters must use no other Rols
V. No Muster-master shall presume to receive or accept of any Roll to make the
Musters by, but the forementioned Rowls, upon pain of the loss of his place,
and other punishment at discretion.

Counterfeit names in the Rolls.
VI. No man shall presume to present himself to the Muster, or to be enrolled in
the Muster-Rolls by a counterfeit name, or surname, or place of birth, upon
pain of death.

Of Victuallers.
Victuallers issuing naughty Victuals.
I. NO Victuallers shall presume to issue or sell unto any of the Army, unsound,
unsavory, or unwholesome Victuals, upon pain of imprisonment, and further
arbitrary punishment.

No soldier must be a Victualler.
II. No Soldier shall be a Victualler without the consent of the Lord General,
or others authorized, upon pain of punishment at discretion.

(...)
III. No Victualler shall entertain any Soldiers in (...) Tent, or Hurt, after
the Warning-piece at (...) before the beating of the Ravalee in the (...)

IV. No Victualler shall forestall any Victuals, nor sell them before they be
appraised by the Marshall General, upon severe punishment.

Of administration of Justice.
Summary proceedings.
I. ALl controversies between Soldiers and their Captains, and all others,
shall be summarily heard and determined by the Counsel of War, except the
weightinesse of the cause require further deliberation.

The Provost-Marshall must look to his prisoners.
II. No Provost-Marshall shall refuse to keep a Prisoner committed to his
charge, nor dismiss him, being once received, upon pain of being liable to the
same punishment which should have been inflicted upon the party dismissed.

Goods of (...) destinct.
III. The goods of such as die in the Army or Garrison, or be slain in the
Service, if they make any Will by word or writing, shall be disposed of
according to their Will. If they make no Will, then shall go to their wives, or
next kin. If no wife or kindred appear within a year after, shall be disposed
of by the appointment of the Lord General, according to the Laws Civil and
Military.

Civil Magistrates imprisoning Soldiers.
IV. No Magistrate of Town or Country, shall without License imprison any
Soldier, unless for capital offenses.

For debts and other small offenses.
V. In matters of debts or trespass, or other inferior cases, the Magistrate
shall acquaint his Captain, or other chief Officer therewith, who is to end the
matter with the consent of the complainant, or to leave the party grieved to
take his remedy by due course of Law: And if the Officer fail of his duty
therein, the Lord General upon complaint of the party grieved, will not only
see him righted, but the Officer punished for his neglect in this behalf.

Braving the Court of Justice.
VI. No man shall presume to use any ^^aving or menacing words, signs, or
gestures, while the Court of Justice is sitting, upon pain of death.

Receiving of Run-awayes.
VII. No inhabitant of City, Town, or Country, shall presume to receive any
Soldier into his service, or conceal, or use means to convey such Run-awayes,
but shall apprehend all such, and deliver them to the Provost Marshall.

Detecting of offenders.
VIII. All Captains, Officers, and Soldiers, shall do their endeavors to
detect, apprehend, and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the
Officers of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer their slacknesse in
the Marshalls Court.

Offenses whatsoever to be punished by the Laws of War.
IX. All other faults, disorders, and offenses not mentioned in these Articles,
shall be punished according to the general Customs and Laws of War.

And to the end that these Laws and Ordinances be made more public and known,
as well to the Officers, as to the common Soldiers, every Colonel and Captain
is to provide some of these Books. And within a short time after that the Army
shall come to the general Rendevouz, these Laws in every several Regiment, in
the presence of all the Officers, are plainly and distinctly to be read by the
Marshalls of the several Regiments, assisted by the Marshall General; in the
horse Quarters by sound of Trumpet; and amongst the Foot by beat of Drum: And
weekly afterward, upon the pay day, every Captain is to cause the same to be
read to his own Company, in presence of his Officers. And also upon every main
Guard; the Captain is to do the like, that none may be ignorant of the Laws and
Duties required.

BY virtue of the Authority given me by the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
in Parliament, I command these Ordinances to be observed and obeyed in the
Army: And by these Presents give order that the same shall be forthwith printed
and published.

Given under my Hand, ESSEX.

A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: Concerning the
great Inconveniences in His Excellencies Army.
WHereas it is found, That great inconveniences have ensued, for want of a
strict and severe Discipline, to have been observed in the Army now raised by
Authority of Parliament, under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex; And for
that the Laws and Ordinances by him set forth for the Government of the said
Army, have not been put in execution: It is now Ordained and Declared by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That from henceforth the Officers
and Soldiers of the said Army may not expect any further forbearance of such
punishments to be inflicted on them for any their offenses, as shall be due
unto them by the said Laws and Ordinances; But that the Lord General may and
ought to punish them by death, or otherwise, according to their demerits.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

