She would if she could, A COMEDY.

Acted at His HIGHNESS the DUKE of YORK'S THEATER.

Written by GEORGE ETHEREGE Esquire

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
walk of the New Exchange. 1668.

Dramatis Personae.
Sir Oliver Cockwood and Sir Joslin Jolley, Two Country Knights. Mr. Courtall
and Mr. Freeman, Two honest Gentlemen of the Town. My Lady Cockwood. Ariana and
Gatty, Two young Ladies, Kinswomen of Sir Joslin Jolley's. Mrs. Sentry, My Lady
Cockwoods Gentlewoman. Mrs. Gazette and Mrs. Trinket, Two Exchange-women. Mr.
Rake-hell, A Knight of the Industry. Thomas, Sir Oliver Cockwoods Man. A
Servant belonging to Mr. Courtall. Waiters, Fiddlers, and other Attendants.
She would if she could.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Dining Room.
Enter Courtall and Freeman, and a Servant brushing Courtall. Court. SO, so,
it is well: let the coach be made ready.

Serve. It shall, Sir.
Ex. Serve.
Court. Well, Franck, what is to be done to day?

Free. Faith, I think we must e'ne follow the old
Trade; eat well, and prepare our selves with
A Bottle or two of good Burgundy, that our
Old acquaintance may look lovely in our Eyes;
For, for ought as I see, there is no hopes of new.

Court. Well! this is grown a wicked Town, it was
Otherwise in my memory; a Gentleman
Should not have gone out of his Chamber,
But some civil Officer or other of the Game
Would have been with him, and have given him
Notice where he might have had a course or
Two in the Afternoon.

Free. Truly a good motherly woman of my acquaintance
The Other day, talking of the sins of the times,
Told me, with tears in her Eyes, that there are a
Company of higling Rascals, who partly
For themselves, but more especially for some
Secret friends, daily forestall the Markets;
Nay, and that many Gentlemen who formerly had
Been Persons of great worth and honor, are of late,
For some private reasons, become their own
Purveyors, to the utter decay and disencouragement
Of Trade and Industry.

Court. I know there are some wary Merchants,
Who never trust their business to a Factor;
But for my part, I hate the Fatigue, and had
Rather be bound to back my own Colts, and man
My own Hawks, than endure the impertinencies
Of bringing a young Wench to the Lure.

Ent. Serve. Serve. Sir, there is a Gentlewoman below desires to
Speak with you.

Court. Ha, Freeman, this may be some lucky
Adventure.

Serve. She asked me, if you were alone.

Cour. And did not you say Ay?

Serve. I told her, I would go see.

Cour. Go, go down quickly, and tell her I am.
Franck, prithee let me put thee into this
Closet a while.

Free. Why, may not I see her?

Cour. On my life thou shall have fair play, and
Go halfs, if it be a purchase that may with
Honor be divided; you may over-hear all:
But for decency sake, in, in man.

Free. Well, good Fortune attend thee.

Enter Mrs. Sentry Cour. Mrs. Sentry, this is a happiness
Beyond my expectation.

Sent. Your humble Servant, Sir.

Cour. I hope your Lady's come to Town?

Sent. Sir Oliver, my Lady, and the whole Family:
Well! we have had a sad time in the Country;
My Lady's so glad she is come to enjoy the freedom
Of this place again, and I dare say longs to have
The happiness of your company.

Cour. Did she send you hither?

Sent. Oh no, if she should but know that I did such a
Confident trick, she would think me a good one.
I faith; the zeal I have to serve you, made me
Venture to call in my way to the Exchange,
To tell you the good news, and to let you know our
Lodgings are in Iames-street at the Black-Posts,
Where we lay the last Summer.

Cour. Indeed it is very obligingly done.

Sent. But I must needs desire you to tell my Lady,
That you came to the knowledge of this by some
Lucky chance or other; for I would not be discovered
For a world.

Cour. Let me alone, I warrant thee.

Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Oliver Cockwood, Sir, is come to wait on you.

Sent. O Heaven! my Master! my Lady, and my self
Are both undone, undone --

Cour. 'Sdeath, why did you not tell him I was busy?

Sent. For Heavens sake, Mr. Courtall, what shall
I do?

Cour. Leave, leave trembling, and creep into the
Wood-hole here.

she goes into the Wood-hole. Enter Sir Oliver. Cour. Sir Oliver Cockwood!

Embraces him. Sir Oliv. Honest Ned Courtall, by my troth I think
Thou take me for a pretty Wench, thou
Hug'st me so very close and heartily.

Cour. Only my joy to see you, Sir Oliver, and to
Welcome you to Town.

Sir Oliv. Methinks, indeed, I have been an age absent,
But I intend to redeem the time; and how, and how
Stand Affairs, prithee now? is the Wine good?
Are the Women kind?
Well, faith, a man had better be a vagabond
In this Town, than a Justice of Peace in the
Country: I was e'ne grown a Sot for want
Of Gentleman-like recreations; if a man
Do but rap out an Oath, the people start
As if a Gun went off; and if one chance
But to couple himself with his Neighbors
Daughter, without the help of the Parson of
The Parish, and leave a little testimony of
His kindness behind him, there is presently
Such an uproar, that a poor man is fain to
Fly his Country: as for drunkenness, it is true,
It may be used without so and all, but the Drink
Is so abominable, that a man would for bear it,
For fear of being made out of love with the vice.

Cour. I see, Sir Oliver, you continue still your old
Humor, and are resolved to break your sweet
Lady's heart.

Sir Oliv. You do not think me sure so barbarously
Unkind, to let her know all this; no, no, these
Are secrets fit only to be trusted to such
Honest Fellows as thou art.

Cour. Well may I, poor Sinner, be excused, since
A Woman of such rare beauty, such incomparable
Parts, and of such an unblemished
Reputation, is not able to reclaim you from
These wild courses, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. To say the truth, she is a Wife that no man
Need be ashamed of, Ned.

Cour. I vow, Sir Oliver, I must needs blame you,
Considering how tenderly she loves you.

Sir Oliv. Ay, Ay, the more is her misfortune and mine
Too Ned: I would willingly give thee a pai*
Of the best Coach-Horses in my Stable, so
Thou could but persuade her to love me
Less.

Cour. Her virtue and my friendship sufficiently
Secure you against that, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. I know thou were never married; but has it
Never been thy misfortune to have a Mistress
Love thee thus entirely?

Cour. It never has been my good fortune, Sir Oliver*
But why do you ask this question?

Sir Oliv. Because then, perchance, thou might have
Been a little sensible what a damned trouble it is.

Cour. As how, Sir Oliver?

Sir Oliv. Why look thee, thus: for a man cannot be
Altogether ungrateful, sometimes one is obliged
To kiss, and fawn, and toy, and lie fooling an hour
Or two, when a man had rather, if it were not for
The disgrace sake, stand all that while in the Pillory
Paulted with rotten Eggs and Oranges.

Cour. This is a very hard case indeed, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. And then the inconvenience of keeping
Regular hours; but above all, that damned fiend
Jealousy does so possess these passionate Lovers,
That I protest, Ned, under the Rose be it spoken,
If I chance to be a little prodigal in my expense
On a private Friend or so, I am called to so strict
An account at night, that for quietness sake I am
Often forced to take a Dose of Cantharides to
Make up the sum.

Cour. Indeed, Sir Oliver, every thing considered,
You are not so much to be envied as one may
Rashly imagine.

Sir Oliv. Well, a pox of this tying man and woman
Together, for better, for worse! upon my conscience
It was but a Trick that the Clergy might have
A feeling in the Cause.

Cour. I do not conceive it to be much for their
Profit, Sir Oliver, for I dare lay a good wager,
Let 'em but allow Christian Liberty, and they
Shall get ten times more by Christnings,
Than they are likely to lose by Marriages.

Sir Oliv. Faith, thou have hit it right, Ned; and now
Thou talk of Christian Liberty, prithee let us
Dine together to day, and be swingingly merry,
But with all secrecy.

Cour. I shall be glad of your good company, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. I am to call on a very honest Fellow, whom
I left here hard by making a Visit, Sir Iossin, Jolly,
A Kinsman of my Wifes, and my Neighbor in the
Country; we call Brothers, he came up to Town
With me, and lodges in the same house; he has
Brought up a couple of the prettiest Kinswomen,
Heiresses of a very good Fortune: would thou
Had the instructing of 'em a little;
Faith, if I am not very much mistaken,
They are very prone to the study of the
Mathematics.

Cour. I shall be beholding to you for so good an
Acquaintance.

Sir Oliv. This Sir Ioslin is in great favor with my
Lady, one that she has an admirable good
Opinion of, and will trust me with him
Any where; but to say truth, he is as arrant
A sinner as the best of us, and will boggle at
Nothing that becomes a man of Honor.
We will go and get leave of my Lady;
For it is not fit I should break out so soon
Without her approbation, Ned.

Cour. By no means, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. Where shall we meet about an hour hence?

Cour. At the French-house or the Bear.

Sir Oliv. At the French-house by all means.

Cour. Agreed, agreed.

Sir Oliv. Would thou could bring a fourth man.

Cour. What think you of Franck Freeman?

Sir Oliv. There cannot be a better -- well --
Servant, Ned, Servant, Ned!
Exit Sir Oliver.
Cour. Your Servant, Sir Oliver.
Mrs. Sentry!
Sentry in the hole. Is he gone?

Cour. Ay, Ay! you may venture to bolt now.
Sentry crawling out. Oh Heavens! I would not
Endure such another fright.

Cour. Come, come, prithee be composed.

Sent. I shall not be my self again this fortnight;
I never was in such a taking days of my life.
To have been found false, and to one who to
Say truth, has been always very kind
And civil to me; but above all, I was concerned
For my Lady's Honor --

Cour. Come, come -- there is no harm done.

Sent. Ah! Mr. Courtall, you do not know Sir Oliver
So well as I do, he has strange humors sometimes,
And has it enough in's Nature to play the
Tyrant, but that my Lady and my self awe him
By our Policy.

Cour. Well, well, all is well; did you not hear
What a taring Blade Sir Oliver is?

Sent. Ah! it is a vile dissembling man; how fairly
He carries it to my Lady's face! but I dare not
Discover him for fear of betraying my self.

Cour. Well, Mrs. Sentry, I must dine with 'em,
And after I have entered them with a Beer-glass
Or two, if I can I will slip away, and pay my
Respects to your Lady.

Sent. You need not question your welcome,
I assure you, Sir -- your Servant, Sir.

Cour. Your Servant, Mrs. Sentry, I am very sensible
Of this Favor, I assure you.

Sent. I am proud it was in my power to oblige you,
Sir.
Exit Sentry.
Cour. Freeman! come, come out of thy hole; how
Have thou been able to contain?

Free. Faith much ado, the Scene was very pleasant;
But above all, I admire thy impudence,
I could never have had the face to have wheadl'd
The poor Knight so.

Cour. Pish, Pish, 'twas both necessary and honest;
We ought to do all we can to confirm a
Husband in the good opinion of his Wife.

Free. Pray how long, if without offense a man may
Ask you, have you been in good grace with this Person
Of Honor? I never knew you had that
Commendable quality of secrecy before.

Cour. You are mistaken, Freeman, things go not
As you wickedly imagine.

Free. Why, have thou lost all sense of modesty?
Do thou think to pass these gross wheadles on
Me too? come, come, this good news should make
Thee a little merrier: faith, though she be an old
Acquaintance, she has the advantage of four or five
Months absence. 'Slid, I know not how proud
You are, but I have thought my self very spruce
E're now in an old Suit, that has been brushed
And laid up a while.

Cour. Freeman, I know in cases of this nature thou
Art an Infidel; but yet methinks the knowledge
Thou have of my sincere dealing with my
Friends should make thee a little more confiding.

Free. What devilish Oath could she invent to
Fright thee from a discovery?

Cour. Will thou believe me if I swear, the preservation
Of her Honor has been my fault, and not hers?

Free. This is something.

Cour. Why then, know that I have still been as
Careful to prevent all opportunities, as she has been to
Contrive 'em; and still have carried it so like a
Gentleman, that there has not had the least suspicion
Of unkindness: she is the very spirit of impertinence,
So foolishly fond and troublesome, that no man above
Sixteen is able to endure her.

Free. Why did you engage thus far then?

Cour. Some conveniences which I had by my
Acquaintance with the Sot her Husband, made
Me extraordinary civil to her, which presently
By her Ladyship was interpreted after the manner
Of the most obliging women: this Wench came
Hither by her Commission to day.

Free. With what confidence she denied it!

Cour. Nay, that is never wanting, I assure you;
Now is it expected I should lay by all other
Occasions, and watch every opportunity to wait
Upon her; she would by her good will give her
Lover no more jest, than a young Squire that
Has newly set up a Coach, does his only pair of Horses.

Free. Faith, if it be as thou say, I cannot much
Blame the hardness of thy heart: but did
Not the Oafe talk of two young Ladies?

Cour. Well remembered, Frank, and now I think
On It, 'twill be very necessary to carry on my business
With the old one, that we may the better have
An opportunity of being acquainted with them.
Come, let us go and bespeak dinner, and by the
Way consider of these weighty affairs.

Free. Well, since there is but little ready money
Stirring, rather then want entertainment,
I shall be contented to play a while upon Tick.

Cour. And I, provided they promise fair, and we find
There Is hopes of payment hereafter.

Free. Come along, come along.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Sir Oliver Cockwood's Lodging.
Enter Lady Cockwood. La. Cock. It Is too late to repent: I sent her, but yet
I cannot but be troubled to think she stay's so long;
Sure if she has so little gratitude to let him, he has
More honor then to attempt any thing to the
Prejudice of my affection -- Oh -- Sentry, are you come?

Enter Sentry. Sent. Oh Madam! there has been such an accident!

La. Cock. Prithee do not fright me, Wench --

Sent. As I was discoursing with Mr. Courtal, in came
Sir Oliver.

La. Cock. Oh! -- I Am ruined -- undone for ever!

Sent. You Will still be sending me on these desperate
Errands.

La. Cock. I am betrayed, betrayed -- by this
False -- what shall I call thee?

Sent. Nay, but Madam -- have a little patience --

La. Cock. I have lost all patience, and will never
More have any --

Sent. Do but hear me, all is well --

La. Cock. Nothing can be well, unfortunate Woman.

Sent. Mr. Courtall thrust me into the Wood-hole.

La. Cock. And did not Sir Oliver see thee?

Sent. He had not the least glimpse of me --

La. Cock. Dear Sentry -- and what good news?

Sent. He intends to wait upon you in the
Afternoon, Madam --

La. Cock. I hope you did not let him know I sent you.

Sent. No, no, Madam -- I Will warrant you I did every
Thing much to the advantage of your Honor.

La. Cock. Ah Sentry! if we could but think of some
Lucky plot now to get Sir Oliver out of the way.

Sent. You need not trouble your self about that,
Madam, he has engaged to dine with Mr. Courtall at the
French-house, and is bringing Sir Ioslin Jolly to get
Your good Will; when Mr. Courtall has fixed 'em
With a Beer-glass or two, he intends to steal
Away, and pay his Devotion to your Ladyship.

La. Cock. Truly he is a Person of much Worth
And Honor.

Sent. Had you but been there, Madam, to have
Overheard Sir Oliver's Discourse, he would have
Made you bless your self; there is not such another
Wild man in the Town; all his talk was of
Wenching, and swearing, and drinking, and tearing.

La. Cock. Ay, Ay, Sentry, I know he will talk of
Strange matters behind my back; but if he be not
An abominable Hypocrite at home, and I am not a
Woman easily to be deceived, he is not able
To play the Spark abroad thus, I assure you.
Enter Sir Oliver, and Sir Joslin, Sir Joslin singing My dearest Dear, this is
kindly done of thee
To come home again thus quickly.

Sir Oliv. Nay, my Dear, thou shall never have any
Just cause to accuse me of unkindness.

La. Cock. Sir Ioslin, now you are a good man, and
I shall trust you with Sir Oliver again.

Sir Ios. Nay, if I ever break my word with a Lady,
I will be delivered bound to Mrs. Sentry here,
And she shall have leave to carve me for a Capon.

Sent. Do you think I have a heart cruel enough
For such a bloody execution?

Sir Ios. Kindly spoke in faith, Girl, I Will give thee
A Buss for that.

Kisses her. La. Cock. Fie, fie, Sir Ioslin, this is not seemly in my
Presence.

Sir Ios. We have all our failings, Lady, and this is
Mine: a right bred Greyhound can as well forbear
Running after a Hare when he sees her, as I can
Mumbling a pretty Wench when she comes in my way.

La. Cock. I have heard indeed you are a parlous man,
Sir Ioslin.

Sir Ios. I seldom brag, Lady, but for a true Cock of
The Game, little Ioslin dares match with the best of 'em*

Sir Oliv. Sir Ioslin's merry, my Dear.

La. Cock. Ay, Ay, if he should be wicked, I know
Thou art too much a Gentleman to offer an injury
To thine own dear Lady.

Sir Ios. Faith, Madam, you must give my
Brother Cockwood leave to dine abroad to day.

La. Cock. I protest, Sir Ioslin, you begin to make
Me hate you too; well, you are e'ne grown as bad
As the worst of 'em, you are still robbing me of
The sweet Society of Sir Oliver.

Sir Ios. Come, come, your Discipline is too
Severe, in faith Lady.

La. Cock. Sir Oliver may do what he pleases, Sir,
He knows I have ever been his obedient Lady.

Sir Oliv. Prithee, my Dear, be not angry, Sir
Joseph was so earnest in his invitation, that none
But a Clown could have refused him.

Sir Ios. Ay, Ay, we dine at my Uncle Sir
Joseph Iolly's, Lady.

La. Cock. Will you be sure now to be a good
Dear, and not drink, nor stay out late?

Sir Ios. I Will engage for all, and if there be no
Harm in a merry Catch or a waggish Story --
Enter Ariana and Mrs. Gatty. Ha, ha! Sly-girl and Mad-cap, are you got up?
I know what you have been meditating on;
But never trouble your heads, let me
Alone to bring you consolation.

Gat. We have often been beholding to you,
Sir; for every time he is drunk, he brings us
Home a couple of fresh Servants.

Sir Oliv. Well, farewell my Dear, prithee do not
Sigh thus, but make thee ready, visit, and be merry*

La. Cock. I shall receive most satisfaction
In my Chamber.

Sir Ios. Come, come along, Brother: farewell
One and all, Lady and Sly-girl, Sly-girl and Mad-cap,
Your Servant, your Servant --

Ex. Sir Oliver and Sir Joslin singing* La. Cock. to Sentry aside. Sentry, is
the new Point I
Bought come home, and is every thing in a readiness?

Sent. Every thing, Madam.

La. Cock. Come, come up quickly then, Girl, and
Dress me.
Ex. La. Cock. and Sentry.
Aria. Do not thou wonder, Gatty, she should be
So strangely fond of this Coxcomb?

Gat. Well, if she does not dissemble, may I still
Be discovered when I do; did thou not see how*
Her Countenance changed, as soon as ever their
Backs were turned, and how earnestly she whispered
With her Woman? there is some weighty affair
In hand, I warrant thee: my dear Ariana, how
Glad am I we are in this Town again.

Aria. But we have left the benefit of the fresh
Air, and the delight of wandering in the
Pleasant Groves.

Gat. Very pretty things for a young Gentlewoman
To bemoan the loss of indeed, that is newly come to a
Relish of the good things of this world.

Aria. Very good, Sister!

Gatty. Why, have not thou promised me a thousand
Times, to leave off this demureness?

Aria. But you are so quick.

Gatty. Why, would it not make any one mad to hear
Thee bewail the loss of the Country? speak
But one grave word more, and it shall be my daily
Prayers thou may have a jealous Husband, and then
You Will have enough of it I warrant you.

Aria. It may be, if your tongue be not altogether
So nimble, I may be conformable; But I hope
You do not intend we shall play such mad Reaks
As we did last Summer?

Gatty. 'Slife, do thou think we come here to be
Mewed up, and take only the liberty of going from our
Chamber to the Dining Room, and from the
Dining Room to our Chamber again? and like a
Bird in a Cage, with two Perches only, to hop
Up and down, up and down?

Aria. Well, thou art a mad Wench.

Gatty. Would thou never have us go to a Play
But with our grave Relations, never take the air but
With our grave Relations? to feed their pride,
And make the world believe it is in their power
To afford some Gallant or other a good bargain?

Aria. But I am afraid we shall be known again.

Gatty. Pish! the men were only acquainted with
Our Vizards and our Petticoats, and they are wore
Out long since: how I envy that Sex! well! we
Cannot plague 'em enough when we have it in
Our power for those privileges which custom
Has allowed 'em above us.

Aria. The truth is, they can run and ramble here,
And there, and every where, and we poor Fools
Rather think the better of 'em.

Gatty. From one Playhouse, to the other Playhouse,
And if they like neither the Play nor the Women,
They seldom stay any longer than the combing
Of their Perriwigs, or a whisper or two with a
Friend; and then they cock their Caps, and out they
Strut again.

Aria. But whatsoever we do, prithee now let us
Resolve to be mighty honest.

Gatty. There I agree with thee.

Aria. And if we find the Gallants like lawless
Subjects, who the more their Princes grant,
The more they impudently crave.

Gatty. We'll become absolute Tyrants, and deprive
'Em of all the privileges we gave 'em --

Aria. Upon these conditions I am contented to trail
A Pike under thee -- march along Girl.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Mulberry-Garden.
Enter Courtal and Freeman. Court. WAs there ever a couple of Fops better
matched
Than these two Knights are?

Free. They are Harp and Violin, Nature has so
Tuned 'em, as if she intended they should
Always play the Fool in Consort.

Court. Now is Sir Oliver secure, for he dares not go
Home 'till he is quite drunk, and then he grows
Valiant, insults, and defies his sweet Lady;
For which with Prayers and Tears he is forced
To feign a bitter repentance the next morning.

Free. What do we here idling in the Mulberry-Garden?
Why do not we make this visit then?

Court. Now art thou as mad upon this trail, as if
We were upon a hot scent.

Free. Since we know the bush, why do we not start
The Game?

Court. Gently, good Franck; first know that the laws
Of Honor prescribed in such nice cases, will not
Allow me to carry thee along with me; and next,
Have thou so little wit to think, that a discreet
Lady that has had the experience of so much humane
Frailty, can have so good an opinion of the constancy
Of her Servant, as to lead him into temptation?

Free. Then we must not hope her Ladyship should
Make us acquainted with these Gentlewomen.

Cour. Thou may as reasonably expect, that an old
Rook should bring a young Snap acquainted
With his Bubble; but advantages may be
Hereafter made, by my admission into the Family.

Free. What is to be done then?

Cour. Why, look you, thus I have contrived it:
Sir Oliver, when I began to grow resty, that he
Might incline me a little more to drunkenness,
In my ear discovered to me the humor of
His dear friend Sir Ioslin: he assured me, that
When he was in that good natured condition,
To requite their courtesy, he always carried
The good Company home with him, and
Recommended them to his Kinswomen.

Free. Very good!

Court. Now after the fresh air has breathed on us
A while, and expelled the vapors of the Wine
We have drunk, thou shall return to these
Two Sots, whom we left at the French-house,
According to our promise, and tell 'em, I am a
Little stayed by some unlucky business, and
Will be with 'em presently; thou will find 'em
Tired with long fight, weak and unable to observe
Their Order; charge 'em briskly, and in a moment
Thou shall rout 'em, and with little or no damage
To thy self gain an absolute Victory.

Free. Very well!

Court. In the mean time I will make my visit to the
Longing Lady, and order my business so
Handsomely, that I will be with thee again immediately,
To make an Experiment of the good humor of
Sir Ioslin.

Free. Let Us about it.

Court. It Is yet too early, we must drill away a little
Time here, that my excuses may be more probable,
And my persecution more tolerable.

Enter Ariana and Gatty with Vizards, and pass nimbly over the Stage. Free. Ha,
ha -- how wantonly they trip it! there is
Temptation enough in their very gate, to
Stir up the courage of an old Alderman:
Prithee let us follow 'em.

Cour. I have been so often balk'd with these Vizard-
Masks, that I have at least a dozen times
Forsworn 'em; they are a most certain sign
Of an ill face, or what is worse, an old
Acquaintance.

Free. The truth is, nothing but some such weighty
Reason, is able to make women deny themselves
The pride they have to be seen.

Cour. The Evening's fresh and pleasant, and yet
There is but little company.

Free. Our Course will be the better, these Deer
^^^not herd: come, come man, let us follow.
(...) I find it is a mere folly to forswear any
(...) does but make the Devil the more
(...) temptation.

They go after the Women. Enter Women again, and cross the Stage. Aria. Now if
these should prove two men of War
That are crusing here, to watch for Prizes.

Gatty. Would they had courage enough to set upon
Us; I long to be engaged.

Aria. Look, look yonder, I protest they chase us.

Gatty. Let us bear away then; if they be truly valiant
They Will quickly make more Sail, and board us.

The Women go out, and go about behind the Scenes to the other Door. Enter
Courtall and Freeman. Free. 'Sdeath, how fleet they are! whatsoever faults
They have, they cannot be broken-winded.

Cour. Sure, by that little mincing step they
Should be Country Fillies that have been breathed
At Course a Park, and Barly-Break: we shall
Never reach 'em.

Free. I Will follow directly, do thou turn down the
Cross-walk and meet 'em.

Enter the Women, and after 'em Courtal at the lower Door, and Free, at the
upper on the contrary side. Cour. By your leave, Ladies --

Gatty. I perceive you can make bold enough
Without it.

Free. Your Servant, Ladies --

Aria. Or any other Ladys that will give themselves
The trouble to entertain you.

Free. 'Slife, their tongues are as nimble as their heels.

Cour. Can you have so little good nature to dash
A couple of bashful young men out of countenance,
Who came out of pure love to tender
You their service?

Gatty. 'Twere pity to baulk 'em, Sister.

Aria. Indeed methinks they look as if they never
Had been slipped before.

Free. Yes faith, we have had many a fair course
In this Paddock, have been very well fleshed,
And dare boldly fasten.

They kiss their hands with a little force. Aria. Well, I am not the first
unfortunate woman
That has been forced to give her hand, where
She never intends to bestow her heart

Gatty. Now, do you think it is a bargain already?

Cour. Faith, would there were some lusty earnest
Given, for fear we should unluckily break
Off again.

Free. Are you so wild that you must be hooded thus?

Cour. Fie, fie, put off these scandals to all good Faces.

Gatty. For your reputations sake we shall keep 'em
On: 'slife we should be taken for your Relations,
If we durst show our Faces with you thus
Publicly.

Aria. And what a shame that would be to a couple
Of young Gallants* methinks you should blush
To think on it.

Cour. These were pretty toys, invented, first, merely
For the good of us poor Lovers to deceive
The jealous, and to blind the malicious; but
The proper use is so wickedly perverted,
That it makes all honest men hate the
Fashion mortally.

Free. A good Face is as seldom covered with a Vizard-
Mask, as a good Hat with an oiled Case:
And yet on my Conscience, you are both
Handsome.

Court. Do but remove 'em a little, to satisfy a foolish
Scruple.

Aria. This is a just punishment you have brought
Upon your selves, by that unpardonable
Sin of talking.

Gatty. You can only brag now of your acquaintance
With a Farendon Gown, and a piece
Of black Velvet.

Cour. The truth is, there are some vain fellows
Whose loose behavior of late has given
Great discouragement to the honorable proceedings
Of all virtuous Ladies.

Free. But I hope you have more charity, than
To believe us of the number of the wicked.

Aria. There Is not a man of you to be trusted.

Gatty. What a shame is it to your whole Sex,
That a Woman is more fit to be a Privy-
Counselor, than a young Gallant a Lover?

Cour. This is a pretty kind of fooling, Ladies, for
Men that are idle; but you must bid a
Little fairer, if you intend to keep us
From our serious business.

Gatty. Truly you seem to be men of great
Employment, that are every moment rattling from
The Eating-Houses to the Play Houses, from the
Play Houses to the Mulberry-Garden, that
Live in a perpetual hurry, and have little
Leisure for such an idle entertainment.

Cour. Now would not I see thy face for the world;
If it should but be half so good as thy humor,
Thou would dangerously tempt me to dote
Upon thee, and forgetting all shame, become
Constant.

Free. I perceive, by your fooling here, that wit and
Good humor may make a man in love with
A Blackamore. That the Devil should contrive
It so, that we should have earnest business now.

Cour. Would they would but be so kind to meet us
Here again to morrow.

Gatty. You are full of business, and 'twould but
Take you off of your employments.

Aria. And we are very unwilling to have the sin to
Answer for, of ruining a couple of such
Hopeful young men.

Free. Must we then despair?

Aria. The Ladys you are going to, will not be so
Hard-hearted.

Cour. to Free. On my Conscience, they love us, and
Begin to grow jealous already.

Free. Who knows but this may prove the luckier
Adventure of the two?

Cour. Come, come, we know you have a mind to
Meet us: we cannot see you blush, speak it out
Boldly.

Gatty. Will you swear then, not to visit any other
Women before that time?

Aria. Not that we are jealous, but because we would
Not have you tired with the impertinent
Conversation of our Sex, and come to us dull
And out of humor.

Cour. Invent an Oath, and let it be so horrid
'Twould make an Atheist start to hear it.

Free. And I will swear it readily, that I will not
So much as speak to a woman, 'till I
Speak to you again.

Gatty. But are you troubled with that foolish
Scruple of keeping an Oath?

Free. O most religiously!

Cour. And may we not enlarge our hopes upon a
Little better acquaintance?

Aria. You see all the freedom we allow.

Gatty. It may be we may be entreated to hear a
Fiddle, or mingle in a Country Dance, or so.

Cour. Well! we are in too desperate a condition
To stand upon Articles, and are resolved to
Yield on any terms.

Free. Be sure you be punctual now!

Aria. Will you be sure?

Cour. Or else may we become a couple of credulous
Coxcombs, and be Jilted ever after.
-- Your Servants, Ladys.

Ex. Men. Aria. I wonder what they think of us!

Gat. You may easily imagine; for they are not of
A humor so little in fashion, to believe the best:
I assure you the most favorable opinion they can
Have, is that we are still a little wild, and stand in
Need of better manning.

Aria. Prithee, dear Girl, what do think of 'em?

Gat. Faith so well, that I Am ashamed to tell thee.

Aria. Would I had never seen 'em!

Gat. Ha! Is it come to that already?

Aria. Prithee, let us walk a turn or two
More, and talk of 'em.

Gat. Let us take care then we are not too particular
In their commendations, lest we should discover
We entrench upon one another inclinations,
And so grow quarrelsom.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Sir Oliver's Lodgings.
Enter Lady Cockwood and Sentry. Sent. Dear Madam, do not afflict your self thus
Unreasonably; I dare lay my life, it is not want
Of devotion, but opportunity that stays him.

La. Cock. Ungrateful man! to be so insensible
Of a Ladies passion!

Sent. If I thought he were so wicked, I should
Hate him strangely -- but, Madam.

La. Cock. Do not speak one word in his behalf,
I am resolved to forget him; perfidious Mortal,
To abuse so sweet an opportunity!

Sent. Hark, here is some body coming up stairs.

La. Cock. Peace, he may yet redeem his Honor.

Enter Courtall. Court. Your humble Servant, Madam.

La. Cock. starting. Mr. Courtall, for Heaven sake
How came you hither?

Court. Guided by my good Fortune, Madam --
Your Servant, Mrs. Sentry.

Sent. Your humble Servant, Sir; I protest you made
Me start too, to see you come in thus unexpectedly.

La. Cock. I did not imagine it could be known
I was in Town yet.

Court. Sir Oliver did me the favor to make me
A Visit, and dine with me to day, which brought
Me to the knowledge of this happiness, Madam;
And as soon as I could possibly, I got the
Freedom to come hither and enjoy it.

La. Cock. You have ever been extreme obliging, Sir.

Sent. It Is a worthy Gentleman, how punctual
He is to my directions!

Aside. La. Cock. Will you be pleased to repose, Sir?
Sentry, set some Chairs.

Exit Sentry. Court. With much difficulty, Madam, I broke
Out of my Company, and was forced by the
Importunity of one Sir Ioslin Jolly, I think they
Call him, to engage my Honor I would
Return again immediately.

La. Cock. You must not so soon rob me
Of so sweet a satisfaction.

Court. No consideration, Madam, could take
Me from you, but that I know my stay at this
Time must needs endanger your Honor; and how
Often I have denied my self the greatest satisfaction
In the world, to keep that unblemished, you
Your self can witness.

La. Cock. Indeed I have often had great trials
Of your Generosity, in those many misfortunes
That have attended our innocent affections.

Court. Sir Oliver, Madam, before I did perceive
It, was got near that pitch of drunkenness,
Which makes him come reeling home, and
Unmanfully insult over your Ladyship; and how
Subject he is then to injure you with an unjust
Suspicion, you have often told me; which makes
Me careful not to be surprised here.

La. Cock. Repose your self a little, but a little,
Dear Sir: these virtuous Principles make you worthy to be
Trusted with a Ladies Honor: indeed Sir Oliver
Has his failings; yet I protest, Mr. Courtall, I love
Him dearly, but cannot be altogether unsensible
Of your generous passion.

Court. Ay, Ay, I am a very passionate Lover!
Aside. Indeed this escape has only given me leisure
To look upon my happiness.

La. Cock. Is my Woman retired?

Court. Most dutifully, Madam.

La. Cock. Then let me tell you, Sir -- yet we
May make very good use of it.

Court. Now am I going to be drawn in again.

Aside. La. Cock. If Sir Oliver be in that indecent condition
You speak of, to morrow he will be very submissive,
As it is meet for so great a misdemeanour; then
Can I, feigning a desperate discontent, take
My own freedom without the least suspicion.

Court. This is very luckily and obligingly
Thought on, Madam.

La. Cock. Now if you will be pleased to
Make an assignation, Sir.

Court. To morrow about ten a clock in the
Lower walk of the New Exchange, out of which
We can quickly pop into my Coach.

La. Cock. But I am still so pestered with my Woman,
I dare not go without her; on my conscience
She Is very sincere, but it is not good to trust our
Reputations too much to the frailty of a Servant.

Court. I will bring my Chariot, Madam,
That will hold but two.

La. Cock. O most ingeniously imagined, dear Sir! for
By that means I shall have a just Excuse to give her
Leave to see a Relation, and bid her stay
There till I call her.

Court. It grieves me much to leave you so soon,
Madam; but I shall comfort my self with the
Thoughts of the happiness you have made me hope for.

La. Cock. I wish it were in my power eternally
To oblige you, dear Sir.

Court. Your humble Servant, Madam.

La. Cock. Your humble Servant, sweet Sir.
Exit Courtall. Sentry -- why Sentry -- where are you?

Enter Sentry. Sent. Here, Madam.

La. Cock. What a strange thing is this! will you
Never take warning, but still be leaving me alone
In these suspicious occasions?

Sent. I was but in the next room, Madam.

La. Cock. What may Mr. Courtall think of my
Innocent intentions? I protest if you serve me
So again, I shall be strangely angry: you should
Have more regard to your Lady's Honor.

Sent. If I stay in the room, she will not speak
Kindly to me in a week after; and if I go out, she
Always chides me thus: this is a strange infirmity
She has, but I must bear with it; for on my
Conscience, custom has made it so natural,
She cannot help it.

La. Cock. Are my Cousins come home yet?

Sent. Not yet, Madam.

La. Cock. Do thou know whither they went
This Evening?

Sent. I heard them say they would go take
The Air, Madam.

La. Cock. Well, I see it is impossible with virtuous
Counsel to reclaim them; truly they are so careless
Of their own, I could wish Sir Ioslin would remove
'Em, for fear they should bring an unjust
Imputation on my Honor.

Enter Ariana and Gatty. Sent. Heavens forbid, Madam!

La. Cock. Your Servant, Cousins.

Amb. Your Servant, Madam.

La. Cock. How have you spent the cool of the
Evening?

Gat. As the custom is, Madam, breathing the
Fresh Air in the Park and Mulberry-Garden.

La. Cock. Without the Company of a Relation,
Or some discreet body to justify your reputations
To the world -- you are young, and may be yet
Insensible of it; but this is a strange censorious Age,
I assure you.

Noise of Music without. Aria. Hark! what Musick's this?

Gat. I Will lay my life my Uncle's drunk, and has
Picked us up a couple of worthy Servants,
And brought them home with him in Triumph.

Enter the Music playing, Sir Oliver strutting, and swaggering, Sir Joslin
singing, and dancing with Mr. Courtall, and Mr. Freeman in each hand: Gatty and
Ariana seeing Courtall and Freeman shrick and -- Exeunt. Sir Ios. Hey-day! I
told you they were a couple of
Skittish Fillies, but I never knew 'em boggle
At a man before; I Will fetch 'em again I warrant
You, Boys.
Exit after them.
Free. to Court. These are the very self-same Gowns
And Petticoats.

Court. Their surprise confirms us it must be them.

Free. 'Slife, we have betrayed our selves
Very pleasantly.

Court. Now am I undone to all intents and purposes,
For they will innocently discover all to my Lady,
And she will have no mercy.

Sir Oliv. Dan, Dan, Da ra, Dan, etc.
Strutting. Avoid my presence, the very sight of that face
Makes me more impotent then an Eunuch.

La. Cock. Dear Sir Oliver!

Offering to embrace him. Sir Oliv. Forbear your conjugal clippings,
I will have a Wench, thou shall fetch me a
Wench, Sentry.

Sent. Can you be so inhumane to my dear Lady?

Sir Oliv. Peace, Envy, or I will have thee executed
For petty Treason; thy skin flayed off, stuffed and
Hung up in my Hall in the Country, as a
Terror to my whole Family.

Court. What Crime can deserve this horrid
Punishment?

Sir Oliv. I Will tell thee, Ned: 'twas my Fortune
The Other day to have an Intrigue with a Tinker's
Wife in the Country, and this malicious Slut
Betrayed the very Ditch where we used to
Make our assignations, to my Lady.

Free. She deserves your anger indeed, Sir Oliver:
But be not so unkind to your virtuous Lady.

Sir Oliv. Thou do not know her, Franck; I have
Had a design to break her heart ever since the
First month that I had her, and it is so tough,
That I have not yet cracked one string on it.

Court. You are too unmerciful, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. Hang her, Ned, by wicked Policy she
Would usurp my Empire, and in her heart is a
Very Pharaoh; for every night she is a putting
Me upon making Brick without straw.

Court. I cannot see a virtuous Lady so afflicted,
Without offering her some consolation:
Dear Madam, is it not as I told you?

Aside to her. La. Cock. The Fates could not have been more
Propitious, and I shall not be wanting to the
Furthering of our mutual happiness.

To Court. aside. Enter Sir Joslin, with Ariana and Gatty in each hand, dancing
and singing. CATCH.
This is sly and pretty,
And this is wild and witty;
If either stayed
Till she died a Maid,
I faith 'twould be great pity.
Sir Ios. Here they are, Boys, in faith, and now little
Ioslin's a man of his word. Heuk! Sly-girl and
Mad-cap, to 'em, to 'em, to 'em, Boys, Alou!
Flings 'em to Courtall and Freeman, who kiss their hands. What Is yonder, your
Lady in tears, Brother Cockwood?
Come, come, I Will make up all breaches.
He sings -- And we'll all be merry and frolic. Fie, fie, though man and wife
are seldom in good
Humor alone, there are few want the discretion
To dissemble it in Company.

Sir Joslin, Sir Oliver, and Lady stand talking together. Free. I knew we
should surprise you, Ladies.

Court. Faith I thought this Conjuring to be but
A mere Jest till now, and could not believe the
Astrological Rascal had been so skilful.

Free. How exactly he described 'em, and how
Punctual he was in his directions to apprehend 'em!

Gat. Then you have been with a Conjurer,
Gentlemen.

Court. You cannot blame us, Ladies, the loss of
Our hearts was so considerable, that it may well
Excuse the indirect means we took to find out
The pretty Thieves that stole 'em.

Aria. Did not I tell you what men of business
These were, Sister?

Gat. I vow I innocently believed they had some
Pre-engagement to a Scrivener or a Surgeon,
And wished 'em so well, that I am sorry
To find 'em so perfidious.

Free. Why, we have kept our Oaths, Ladies.

Aria. You are much beholding to Providence.

Gat. But we are more, Sister; for had we once
Been deluded into an opinion they had been
Faithful, who knows into what inconveniences
That error might have drawn us?

Court. Why should you be so unreasonable, Ladies,
To expect that from us, we should scarce
Have hoped for from you? fie, fie, the keeping
Of ones word is a thing below the honor
Of a Gentleman.

Free. A poor shift! fit only to uphold the
Reputation of a paultry Citizen.

Sir Ios. Come, come, all will be well again,
I warrant you, Lady.

La. Cock. These are insupportable injuries, but I will
Bear 'em with an invincible patience, and to morrow
Make him dearly sensible how unworthy he has been.

Sir Ios. To morrow my Brother Cockwood will
Be another man -- So, Boys, and how do you like
The flesh and blood of the Jollies -- Heuk, Sly-
Girl -- and Mad-cap, Hey -- come, come, you have
Heard them exercise their tongues a while; now
You shall see them ply their feet a little: this is
A clean Limbed wench, and has neither spavin,
Splinter, nor Wind-gall; tune her a Jig, and play't
Roundly, you shall see her bounce it away like a
Nimble Frigot before a fresh gale -- Hey, methinks I
See her under Sail already.

Gat. dances a Iig. Sir Ios. Hey my little Mad-cap -- here is a Girl of
The true breed of the Jollies, in faith -- But hark you,
Hark you, a Consultation, Gentlemen -- Bear up,
Brother Cockwood, a little: what think you,
If we pack these idle Huswives to bed now,
And retire into a room by our selves, and have
A merry Catch, and a Bottle or two of the
Best, and perfect the good work we have
So unanimously carried on to day?

Sir Oliv. A most admirable Intrigue -- tan, dan,
Da, ra, dan; come, come, march to your several
Quarters: go, we have sent for a civil person or two,
And are resolved to fornicate in private.

La. Cock. This is a barbarous return of
All my kindness.

Free. Cour. Your humble Servant, Madam.

Ex. La. Cock. and Sent. Cour. Hark you! hark you! Ladys do not harbor
Too ill an opinion of us, for faith, when you have
Had a little more experience of the world, you will
Find we are no such abominable Rascals.

Gatty. We shall be so charitable to think no worse
Of you, than we do of all Mankind for your
Sakes, only that you are perjured, perfidious,
Inconstant, ungrateful.

Free. Nay, nay, that is enough in all conscience Ladys,
And now you are sensible what a shameful thing
It is to break ones word, I hope you 'le be more
Careful to keep yours to morrow.

Gatty. Invent an Oath, and let it be so horrid --

Cour. Nay, nay, it is too late for raillery, in faith, Ladys.

Gatty. Aria. Well, your Servant then.

Free. Cour. Your Servant, Ladys.

Sir Oliv. Now the Enemy's marched out --

Sir Iosl. Then the Castle's our own Boys -- Hey.
And here and there I had her,
And every where I had her,
Her toy was such, that every touch
Would make a Lover madder.

Free. Cour. Hey brave Sir Ioslin!

Sir Oliver. Ah my dear little witty Ioslin, let me
Hug thee.

Sir Ioslin. Strike up you obstreperous Rascals, and
March along before us.

Exeunt Singing and Dancing. The end of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The New-Exchange.
Mrs. Trinckit sitting in a Shop, people passing by as in the Exchange. Mrs.
Trinc. WHat do you buy? what do you lack, Gentlemen?
Gloves, Ribbons, and Essences; Ribbons,
Gloves, and Essences?

Enter Mr. Courtall. Mr. Courtall! I thought you had a quarrel
To the Change, and were resolved we should never
See you here again.

Cour. Your unkindness indeed, Mrs. Trincket, had
Been enough to make a man banish himself
For ever.

Enter Mrs. Gazet. Trinc. Look you, yonder comes fine Mrs. Gazet, thither
You intended your visit, I am sure.

Gaz. Mr. Courtall! your Servant.

Cour. Your Servant, Mrs. Gazet.

Gaz. This happiness was only meant to
Mrs. Trinckit, had it not been my good Fortune
To pass by, by chance, I should have lost
My share on it.

Cour. This is too cruel, Mrs. Gazet, when all the
Unkindness is on your side, to rallie your Servant
Thus.

Gaz. I vow this tedious absence of yours made
Me believe you intended to try an Experiment
On my poor heart, to discover that hidden secret,
How long a despairing Lover may languish
Without the sight of the party.

Cour. You are always very pleasant on this
Subject, Mrs. Gazet.

Gaz. And have not you reason to be so too?

Cour. Not that I know of.

Gaz. Yes, you hear the good news.

Cour. What good news?

Gaz. How well this dissembling becomes you!
But now I think better on it, it cannot
Concern you, you are more a Gentleman, than
To have an amor last longer than an Easter
Term with a Country Lady; and yet there
Are some I see as well in the Country as in
The City, that have a pretty way of Huswifing
A Lover, and can spin an intrigue out a great
Deal farther, than others are willing to do.

Cour. What pretty art have they, good Mrs. Gazet?

Gaz. When Tradesmen see themselves in an ill
Condition, and are afraid of breaking, can they do
Better than to take in a good substantial
Partner, to help to carry on their trading?

Cour. Sure you have been at Riddle me, riddle me,
Lately, you are so wondrous witty.

Gaz. And yet I believe my Lady Cockwood is so
Haughty, she had rather give over the vanity of an
Intrigue, than take in a couple of young
Handsome Kinswomen to help to maintain it.

Cour. I knew it would out at last; indeed it is the
Principle of most good women that love Gaming,
When they begin to grow a little out of play
Themselves, to make an interest in some
Young Gamester or other, in hopes to rook
A favor now and then: but you are quite out
In your policy, my Lady Cockwood is none of
These, I assure you --
Hark you, Mrs. Gazet, you must needs bestir
Your self a little for me this morning, or else
Heaven have mercy on a poor sinner.

Gaz. I hope this wicked woman has no design
Upon your body already: alas! I pity your
Tender conscience.

Cour. I have always made thee my Confident, and
Now I come to thee as to a faithful Counselor.

Gaz. State your Case.

Cour. Why, this ravenous Kite is upon wing already,
Is fetching a little compass, and will be
Here within this half hour to swoop me
Away.

Gaz. And you would have me your Scar-Crow?

Cour. Something of that there is in it; she is still
Your Customer.

Gaz. I have furnished her and the young Ladys with
A few fashionable toys since they came
To Town, to keep 'um in countenance at a
Play, or in the Park.

Cour. I would have thee go immediately to the
Young Ladies, and by some device or other
Entice 'em hither.

Gaz. I came just now from taking measure of 'em
For a couple of Handkerchiefs.

Cour. How unlucky's this!

Gaz. They were calling for their Hoods and Scarfs,
And are coming hither to lay out a little Money
In Ribbons and Essences: I have recommended
Them to Mrs. Trinckits Shop here.

Cour. This falls out more luckily than what I had
Contrived my self, or could have done; for here
Will they be busy just before the Door, where
We have made our appointment: but if this
Long-wing'd Devil should chance to truss me
Before they come.

Gaz. I will only step up and give some directions
To my Maid, about a little business that is in
Haste, and come down again and watch her; if you
Are snap'd, I Will be with you presently, and rescue
You I warrant you, or at least stay you 'till
More company come: she dares not force you
Away in my sight; she knows I am great with
Sir Oliver, and as malicious a Devil as the best
Of 'em -- your Servant, Sir.
Ex. Gazet.
Enter Freeman. Cour. Freeman! it is well you are come.

Free. Well! what Counter-plot? what hopes of
Dis-appointing the old, and of seeing the young
Ladies? I am ready to receive your Orders.

Cour. Faith, things are not so well contrived as I
Could have wished 'em, and yet I hope by
The help of Mrs. Gazet to keep my word,
Franck.

Free. Nay, now I know what tool thou have made
Choice of, I make no question but the business
Will go well forward; but I am afraid
This last unlucky business has so distasted
These young Trouts, they will not be so easily
Tickled as they might have been.

Cour. Never fear it; whatsoever women say, I am sure
They seldom think the worse of a man, for
Running at all, it is a sign of youth and high
Metal, and makes them rather piquee, who shall
Tame him: that which troubles me most, is, we
Lost the hopes of variety, and a single intrigue
In Love is as dull as a single Plot in a Play,
And will tire a Lover worse, than the other does
An Audience.

Free. We cannot be long without some under-plots
In this Town, let this be our main design,
And if we are any thing fortunate in our contrivance,
We shall make it a pleasant Comedy.

Cour. Leave all things to me, and hope the best:
Be gone, for I expect their coming immediately;
Walk a turn or two above, or fool a while
With pretty Mrs. Anvill, and scent your Eyebrows
And Perriwig with a little Essence of Oranges,
Or Jessimine; and when you see us all together
At Mrs. Gazets Shop, put in as it were by chance:
I protest yonder comes the old Haggard, to your
Post quickly: 'sdeath, where is Gazet and these
Young Ladies now
Ex Free. Enter Lady Cockwood, and Sentry. O Madam, I have waited here at least
an hour, and
Time seems very tedious, when it delays so great
A happiness as you bring with you.

La. Cock. I vow, Sir, I did but stay to give Sir Oliver
His due correction for those unseemly injuries
He did me last night. Is your Coach ready?

Cour. Yes, Madam: but how will you dispose of
Your Maid?

La. Cock. My Maid! for Heavens sake, what do you
Mean, Sir? do I ever use to go abroad without her?

Cour. It Is upon no design, Madam, I speak it, I
Assure you; but my Glass-Coach broke last night,
And I was forced to bring my Chariot, which can hold
But two.

La. Cock. O Heaven! you must excuse me, dear Sir,
For I shall deny my self the sweetest recreations
In the world, rather than yield to any thing that
May bring a blemish upon my spotless Honor.

Enter Gazet, Gaz. Your humble Servant, Madam.
Your Servant, Mr. Courtall.

Lady. and Cour. Your Servant, Mrs. Gazet.

Gaz. I am extreme glad to see your Ladyship here,
I intended to send my Maid to your Lodgings
This Afternoon, Madam, to tell you I have a
Parcel of new Lace come in, the prettiest Patterns
That ever were seen; for I am very desirous so
Good a Customer as your Ladyship should see 'em
First, and have your choice.

La. Cock. I am much beholding to you, Mrs. Gazet,
I was newly come into the Exchange, and intended
To call at your Shop before I went home.

Enter Ariana and Gatty, Gazet goes to 'em. Cour. 'Sdeath, here are your
Cousins too! now there
Is no hope left for a poor unfortunate
Lover to comfort himself withal.

La. Cock. Will Fate never be more propitious?

Aria. Gatty. Your Servant, Madam.

La. Cock. I am newly come into the Exchange, and
By chance met with Mr. Courtall here, who will needs
Give himself the trouble, to play the Gallant, and
Wait upon me.

Gatty. Does your Ladyship come to buy?

La. Cock. A few trifles; Mrs. Gazet says she has a
Parcel of very fine new Laces, shall we go look
Upon 'em?

Aria. We will only fancy a suit of Knots or two
At this Shop, and buy a little Essence, and wait
Upon your Ladyship immediately.

Gatt. Mrs. Gazet, you are skilled in the fashion, pray
Let our choice have your approbation.

All go to the Shop to look upon Ware, but Courtall and La. Cockwood. Gaz. Most
gladly, Madam.

Cour. 'Sdeath, Madam, if you had made no Ceremony,
But stepped into the Coach presently, we had escaped this
Mischief.

La. Cock. My over-tenderness of my honor, has
Blasted all my hopes of happiness.

Cour. To be thus unluckily surpised in the height
Of all our expectation, leaves me no patience.

La. Cock. Moderate your passion a little, Sir, I may
Yet find out a way.

Cour. Oh it is impossible, Madam, never think on it
Now you have been seen with me; to leave 'em upon
Any pretense will be so suspicious, that my concern
For your honor will make me so feverish and
Disordered, that I shall lose the taste of all the
Happiness you give me.

La. Coc. Methinks you are too scrupulous, heroic Sir.

Cour. Besides the concerns I have for you, Madam,
You know the obligations I have to Sir Oliver,
And what professions of friendship there are on
Both sides; and to be thought perfidious and ungrateful,
What an affliction would that be to a generous spirit!

La. Cock. Must we then unfortunately part thus?

Cour. Now I have better thought on it, that is not
Absolutely necessary neither.

La. Cock. These words revive my dying joys,
Dear Sir, go on.

Cour. I will by and by, when I see it most convenient,
Beg the favor of your Ladyship, and your
Young Kinswomen, to accept of a Treat and a
A Fiddle; you make some little difficulty at
First, but upon earnest persuasion comply, and
Use your interest to make the young Ladys
Do so too: your company will secure their
Reputations, and their company take off from
You all suspicion.

La. Cock. The natural inclination they have to be
Jigging, will make them very ready to comply:
But what advantage can this be to our
Happiness, dear Sir?

Cour. Why, first, Madam, if the young Ladies, or
Mrs. Gazet, have any doubts upon their surprising
Us together, our joining company will clear 'em
All; next, we shall have some satisfaction
In being an afternoon together, though we enjoy
Not that full freedom we so passionately
Desire.

La. Cock. Very good, Sir.

Cour. But then lastly, Madam, we gain an opportunity
To contrive another appointment to morrow,
Which may restore us unto all those joys
We have been so unfortunately disappointed
Of to day.

La. Cock. This is a very prevailing Argument
Indeed; but since Sir Oliver believes I have
Conceived so desperate a sorrow, it is fit we
Should keep this from his knowledge.

Court. Are the young Ladies secret?

La. Cock. They have the good Principles not
To betray themselves, I assure you.

Court. Then it is but going to a house that is
Not haunted by the Company, and we are secure,
And now I think on it, the Bear in Drury Lane is
The fittest place for our purpose.

La. Cock. I know your Honor, dear Sir, and
Submit to your discretion --
Have you gratified your Fancies, Cousins?

To them Ariana, Gatty, and Gazet from the Shop. Aria. We are ready to wait
upon you, Madam.

Gat. I never saw colors better mingled.

Gaz. How lively they set off one another, and
How they add to the complexion!

La. Cock. Mr. Courtall, your most humble Servant.

Court. Pray, Madam, let me have the Honor
To wait upon you and these young Ladies,
Till I see you in your Coach.

La. Cock. Your friendship to Sir Oliver would
Engage you in an unnecessary trouble.

Aria. Let not an idle Ceremony take you from
Your serious business, good Sir.

Gat. I should rather have expected to have seen
You, Sir, walking in Westminster Hall, watching
To make a Match at Tennis, or waiting to
Dine with a Parliament Man, then to meet
You in such an idle place as the Exchange is.

Court. Methinks, Ladies, you are well
Acquainted with me upon the first Visit.

Aria. We received your Character before, you
Know, Sir, in the Mulberry-Garden upon Oath.

Court. aside. 'Sdeath, what shall I do?
Now out comes all my Roguery.

Gat. Yet I am apt to believe, Sister, that was
Some malicious Fellow that wilfully perjured
Himself, on purpose to make us have an
Ill opinion of this worthy Gentleman.

Court. Some rash men would be apt enough
To enquire him out, and cut his throat, Ladies,
But I heartily forgive him whosoever he was;
For on my conscience 'twas not so much out
Of malice to me, as out of love to you he did it.

Gaz. He might imagine Mr. Courtall was his Rival.

Court. Very likely, Mrs. Gazet.

La. Cock. Whosoever he was, he was an unworthy
Fellow I warrant him; Mr. Courtall is known
To be a Person of Worth and Honor.

Aria. We took him for an idle Fellow, Madam,
And gave but very little credit to what he said.

Court. 'Twas very obliging, Lady, to believe
Nothing to the disadvantage of a stranger --
What a couple of young Devils are these?

La. Cock. Since you are willing to give
Your self this trouble.

Court. I ought to do my Duty, Madam.

Exeunt all but Ariana and Gatty. Aria. How he blushed, and hung down his head!

Gat. A little more had put him as much out
Of countenance, as a Country Clown is
When he ventures to complement
His Attourny's Daughter.

They follow. SCENE.
Sir Oliver's Dining Room.
Enter Sir Joslin and Servant severally. Sir Ios. How now old Boy! where is my
Brother Cockwood to day?

Serve. He desires to be in private, Sir.

Sir Ios. Why? what is the matter, man?

Serve. This is a day of Humiliation, Sir,
With him for last nights transgression.

Sir Ios. I have business of consequence to impart
To him, and must and will speak with him --
So, ho! Brother Cockwood!

Sir Oliver without. Who Is that, my Brother Jolly?

Sir Ios. The same, the same, come away, Boy.

Sir Oliver without. For some secret reasons
I desire to be in private, Brother.

Sir Ios. I have such a design on foot as would
Draw Diogenes out of his Tub to follow it;
Therefore I say, come away, come away.
Sir Oliver entering in a Nightgown and Slippers. There is such a strange
Temptation in thy voice,
Never stir.

Sir Ios. What in thy Gown and Slippers yet! why,
Brother, I have bespoke Dinner, and engaged
Mr. Rake-hell, the little smart Gentleman I have
Often promised thee to make thee acquainted
Withal, to bring a whole Bevy of Damsels
In Sky, and Pink, and Flame-colour'd Taffeta's.
Come, come, dress thee quickly, there is to be
Madam Rampant, a Girl that shines, and will drink
At such a rate, she is a Mistress for Alexander, were
He alive again.

Sir Oliv. How unluckily this falls out! Thomas,
What Clothes have I to put on?

Serve. None but your Penitential Suit,
Sir, all the rest are secured.

Sir Oliv. Oh unspeakable misfortune! that I
Should be in disgrace with my Lady now!

Sir Ios. Come, come, never talk of Clothes,
Put on any thing, thou have a person and a
Mine will bear it out bravely.

Sir Oliv. Nay, I know my behavior will show
I am a Gentleman; but yet the Ladies
Will look scurvily upon me, Brother.

Sir Ios. That Is a Jest in faith! he that has Terra firma
In the Country, may appear in any thing before 'em.
For he that would have a Wench kind,
Never smugs up himself like a Ninny;
But plainly tells her his mind,
And tickles her first with a Guinny.
Hay Boy --

Sir Oliv. I vow thou have such a bewitching
Way with thee!

Sir Ios. How lovely will the Ladies look when
They have a Beer-glass in their hands!

Sir Oliv. I now have a huge mind to venture;
But if this should come to my Lady's knowledge.

Sir Ios. I have bespoke Dinner at the Bear, the
Privat'st place in Town: there will be
No Spies to betray us, if Thomas be but secret,
I dare warrant thee, Brother Cockwood.

Sir Oliv. I have always found Thomas very
Faithful; but faith it is too unkind, considering
How tenderly my Lady loves me.

Sir Ios. Fie, fie, a man, and kept so much under
Correction by a Busk and a Fan!

Sir Oliv. Nay, I am in my Nature as valiant
As any man, when once I set out; but in faith I
Cannot but think how my dear Lady will be
Concerned when she comes home and misses me.

Sir Ios. A Pox upon these Qualms.

Sir Oliv. Well, thou have seduced me;
But I shall look so untowardly.

Sir Ios. Again art thou at it? in, in, and make
All the haste that may be, Rake-hell and the
Ladies will be there before us else.

Sir Oliv. Well, thou art an errant Devil -- hey --
For the Lady's, Brother Jolly.

Sir Ios. Hey for the Lady's, Brother Cockwood.
Exit singing -- For he that would, etc.
SCENE III.
The Bear.
Without. Ho Francis, Humphry, show a Room there! Enter Court. Free. Lady
Cockwood, Aria. Gatty and Sentry. Court. Pray, Madam, be not so full of
apprehension;
There is no fear that this should come to
Sir Oliver's knowledge.

La. Cock. I were ruined if it should, Sir! Dear, how
I tremble! I never was in one of these houses before.

Sent. This is a Bait for the young Ladies to
Aside. Swallow; she has been in most of the Eating-
Houses about Town, to my knowledge.

Court. Oh Francis!

Enter Waiter. Wait. Your Worship's welcome, Sir; but I
Must needs desire you to walk into the next
Room, for this is bespoke.

La. Cock. Mr Courtall, did not you say, this
Place was private?

Court. I warrant you, Madam. What
Company dines here, Francis?

Wait. A couple of Country Knights, Sir Ioslin
Jolly and Sir Oliver Cockwood, very honest Gentlemen.

La. Cock. Combination to undo me!

Court. Peace, Madam, or you will betray
Your self to the Waiter.

La. Cock. I am distracted! Sentry, did not I
Command thee to secure all Sir Oliver's Clothes,
And leave nothing for him to put on, but his
Penitential Suit, that I might be sure he
Could not stir abroad to day?

Sent. I obeyed you in every thing, Madam; but I
Have often told you this Sir Ioslin is a wicked Seducer.

Aria. If my Uncle sees us, Sister, what
Will he think of us?

Gat. We come but to wait upon her Ladyship.

Free. You need not fear, you Chickens are
Secure under the wings of that old Hen.

Court. Is there to be no body, Francis,
But Sir Oliver and Sir Ioslin?

Wait. Faith, Sir, I was enjoined secrecy; but
You have an absolute power over me: coming
Lately out of the Country, where there is but
Little variety, they have a design to solace
Themselves with a fresh Girl or two, as I
Understand the business.
Exit Waiter.
La. Cock. Oh Sentry! Sir Oliver disloyal!
My misfortunes come too thick upon me.

Court aside. Now is she afraid of being
Disappointed on all hands.

La. Cock. I know not what to do, Mr. Courtall,
I would not be surpised here my self, and yet
I would prevent Sir Oliver from prosecuting
His wicked and perfidious intentions.

Aria. Now shall we have admirable sport,
What with her fear and jealousy.

Gat. I lay my life she routs the Wenches.

Enter Waiter. Wait. I must needs desire you to step into the next
Room; Sir Ioslin and Sir Oliver are below already.

La. Cock. I have not power to move a foot.

Free. We will consider what is to be done
Within, Madam.

Court. Pray, Madam, come; I have a
Design in my head which shall secure you, surprise
Sir Oliver, and free you from all your fears.

La. Cock. It cannot be, Sir.

Court. Never fear it: Francis, you may own
Mr. Freeman and I are in the house, if they ask for us;
But not a word of these Ladies, as you tender
The wearing of your Ears.

Exeunt. Enter Sir Joslin, Sir Oliver, and Waiter. Sir Ios. Come, Brother
Cockwood, prithee be brisk.

Sir Oliv. I shall disgrace my self for ever, Brother.

Sir Ios. Pox upon care, never droop like a Cock
In moulting time; thou art Spark enough in all
Conscience.

Sir Oliv. But my heart begins to fail me
When I think of my Lady.

Sir Ios. What, more Qualms yet?

Sir Oliv. Well, I will be courageous: but it is not
Necessary these Strangers should know this is
My Penitential Suit, Brother.

Sir Ios. They shall not, they shall not. Hark
You old Boy, is the meat provided? is the Wine
And Ice come? and are the melodious Rascalss
At hand I spoke for?

Wait. Every thing will be in a readiness, Sir.

Sir Ios. If Mr. Rake-hell, with a Coach full or two
Of Vizard-masks and silk Petticoats, call at the
Door, usher 'em up to the place of execution.

Wait. You shall be obeyed, Sir.
Exit Waiter.
Enter Rake-hell. Sir Ios. Ho, here is my little Rake-hell come!
Brother Cockwood, let me commend this ingenious
Gentleman to your acquaintance; he is a Knight
Of the Industry, has many admirable qualities,
I assure you.

Sir Oliv. I am very glad; Sir, of this opportunity
To know you.

Rake. I am happy, Sir, if you esteem me your
Servant. Hark you, Sir Ioslin, is this Sir
Oliver Cockwood in earnest?

Sir Ios. In very good earnest I assure you; he is
A little fantastical now and then, and dresses
Himself up in an odd fashion: but that is all one
Among Friends, my little Rake-hell.

Sir Oliv. Where are the Damsels you talked of,
Brother Jolly? I hope Mr. Rake-hell has not forgot 'em.

Rake. They are arming for the ran-counter.

Sir Ios. What, tricking and trimming?

Rake. Even so, and will be here immediately.

Sir Oliv. They need not make themselves so
Full of Temptation; my Brother Jolly and I can
Be wicked enough without it.

Sir Ios. The truth is, my little Rake-hell, we are
Both mighty men at Arms, and thou shall see us
Charge anon to the terror of the Ladies.

Rake. Methinks that Dress Sir Oliver is a little
Too rustical for a man of your capacity.

Sir Oliv. I have an odd humor, Sir, now and
Then; but I have wherewithal at home to
Be as spruce as any man,

Rake. Your Perriwig is too scandalous, Sir
Oliver, your black Cap and Border is never
Wore but by a Fiddler or a Waiter.

Sir Ios. Prithee, my little Rake-hell, do not put my
Brother Cockwood out of conceit of himself;
Methinks your Calot is a pretty Ornament, and
Makes a man look both Polite and Politic.

Rake. I will allow you, it is a grave ware, and fit
For men of business, that are every moment bending
Of their brows, and scratching of their heads, every
Project would claw out another Perriwig; but a
Lover had better appear before his Mistress with a
Bald Pate: 'twill make the Ladies apprehend a savor,
Stop their Noses, and avoid you: 'Slife, Love in a
Cap is more ridiculous then Love in a Tub, or Love
In a Pipkin.

Sir Oliv. I must confess your whole head is
Now in fashion; but there was a time when
Your Calot was not so despicable.

Rake. Here Is a Perruque, Sir.

Sir Oliv. A very good one.

Rake. A very good one? it is the best in England.
Pray, Sir Ioslin, take him in your hand, and draw
A Comb through him, there is not such
Another Frizz in Europe.

Sir Ios. It Is a very fine one indeed.

Rake. Pray, Sir Oliver, do me the favor to
Grace it on your head a little.

Sir Oliv. To oblige you, Sir.

Rake. You never wore any thing became you half
So well in all your life before.

Sir Ios. Why, you never saw him in your life before.

Rake. That Is all one, Sir, I know it is impossible.
Here Is a Beaver, Sir Oliver, feel him; for fineness,
Substance, and for fashion, the Court of France
Never saw a better; I have bred him but a
Fortnight, and have him at command already.
Clap him on boldly, never Hat took the fore-
Cock and the hind-cock at one motion so naturally.

Sir Oliv. I think you have a mind to make a
Spark of me before I see the Ladies.

Rake. Now you have the mien of a true Cavalier,
And with one look may make a Lady kind, and
A Hector humble: and since I named a Hector,
Here Is a Sword, Sir: Sa, sa, sa, try him, Sir Ioslin,
Put him to it, cut through the staple, run him
Through the door, beat him to the Hilts, if he
Breaks, you shall have liberty to break my Pate,
And pay me never a Groat of the ten for it.

Sir Ios. It Is a very pretty Weapon indeed, Sir.

Rake. The Hilt is true French-wrought, and
Doree by the best Workman in France. This Sword
And this Castor, with an embroidered Button and
Loop, which I have to vary him upon occasion,
Were sent me out of France for a Token by my elder
Brother, that went over with a handsome Equipage,
To take the pleasure of this Champagne.

Sir Oliv. Have you a mind to sell these things, Sir?

Rake. That is below a Gentleman; yet if a person
Of Honor or a particular friend, such as I esteem
You, Sir Oliver, take at any time a fancy to a Band,
A Cravat, a Velvet Coat, a Vest, a Ring, a Flajolet,
Or any other little Toy I have about me, I am
Good-natured, and may be easily persuaded
To play the Fool upon good terms.

Enter Freeman. Sir Ios. Worthy Mr. Freeman!

Sir Oliv. Honest Frank, how came thou to
Find us out, man?

Free. By mere chance, Sir; Ned Courtall is without
Writing a Letter, and I came in to know whether
You had any particular engagements, Gentlemen.

Sir Oliv. We resolved to be in private; but
You are men without exception.

Free. Methinks you intended to be in private
Indeed, Sir Oliver. 'Sdeath, what disguise have
You got on? are you grown grave since last
Night, and come to sin incognito?

Sir Oliv. Hark you in your Ear, Frank, this is
My habit of humiliation, which I always put on
The next day after I have transgressed, the better
To make my pacification with my incensed Lady --

Free. Ha, ha, ha --

Rake. Mr. Freeman, your most humble Servant, Sir.

Free. Oh my little dapper Officer! are you here?

Sir Ios. Ha, Mr. Freeman, we have bespoke all the
Jovial Entertainment that a merry Wag can wish
For, good Meat, good Wine, and a wholesome
Wench or two; for the digestion, we shall have
Madam Rampant, the glory of the Town, the
Brightest she that shines, or else my little Rake-hell
Is not a man of his word, Sir.

Rake. I warrant you she comes, Sir Ioslin.

Sir Joslin sings. And if she comes, she shall not escape,
If twenty pounds will win her;
Her very Eye commits a Rape,
It Is such a tempting sinner.

Enter Courtal. Court. Well said, Sir Ioslin, I see you hold up still,
And bate not an Ace of your good humor.

Sir Ios. Noble Mr. Courtall!

Court. Bless me, Sir Oliver, what are you going
To act a Droll? how the people would throng
About you, if you were but mounted on a
Few Deal-boards in Covent Garden now!

Sir Oliv. Hark you, Ned, this is the Badge of my
Lady's indignation for my last night's offense; do
Not insult over a poor sober man in affliction.

Court. Come, come, send home for your Clothes;
I hear you are to have Ladies, and you are not
To learn at these years, how absolutely necessary
A rich Vest and a Perruque are to a man that aims
At their favors.

Sir Oliv. A Pox on it, Ned, my Lady's gone abroad
In a damned jealous melancholy humor, and
Has commanded her Woman to secure 'em.

Court. Under Lock and Key?

Sir Oliv. Ay, Ay, man, it is usual in these cases, out
Of pure Love in hopes to reclaim me, and to
Keep me from doing my self an injury
By drinking two days together.

Court. What a loving Lady it is!

Sir Oliv. There are Sots that would think themselves
Happy in such a Lady, Ned; but to a true bred
Gentleman all lawful solace is abomination.

Rake. Mr. Courtall, your most humble Servant, Sir.

Court. Oh! my little Knight of the Industry, I am
Glad to see you in such good Company.

Free. Courtall, hark you, are the Masking-habits
Which you sent to borrow at the Playhouse come yet?

Court. Yes, and the Ladies are almost dressed:
This design will add much to our mirth, and give
Us the benefit of their Meat, Wine, and Music
For our Entertainment.

Free. 'Twas luckily thought of.

Sir Oliv. Hark, the Music comes.

Music. Sir Ios. Hey, Boys -- let 'em enter, let 'em enter.

Enter Waiter. Wait. An't please your Worships, there is a Mask
Of Ladies without, that desire to have the
Freedom to come in and dance.

Sir Ios. Hey! Boys --

(Rake-hell? Sir Oliv. Did you bid 'em come 'en Masquerade, Mr.

Rake. No; but Rampant is a mad Wench, she
Was half a dozen times a mumming in private
Company last Shrove-tide, and I lay my life she has
Put 'em all upon this Frolic.

Court. They are mettled Girls, I warrant them,
Sir Ioslin, let 'em be what they will.

Sir Ios. Let 'em enter, let 'em enter, ha Boys --

Enter Music and the Ladies in an Antic, and then they take out, my Lady
Cockwood Sir Oliver, the young Ladies Courtal and Freeman, and Sentry Sir
Joslin, and dance a set Dance. Sir Oliv. Oh my little Rogue! have I got thee?
How I will turn and wind, and fegue thy body!

Sir Ios. Mettle on all sides, mettle on all sides,
In Faith; how swimmingly would this pretty little
Ambling Filly carry a man of my body!
Sings. She Is so bonny and brisk,
How she would carvet and frisk,
If a man were once mounted upon her!
Let me have but a leap
Where it is wholesome and cheap,
And a fig for your Person of Honor.

Sir Oliv. It Is true, little Ioslin, in faith.

Court. They have warmed us, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. Now am I as rampant as a Lion, Ned,
And could love as vigorously as a Seaman that
Is newly landed after an East India Voyage.

Court. Take my advice, Sir Oliver, do not in your
Rage deprive your self of your only hope
Of an accommodation with your Lady.

Sir Oliv. I had rather have a perpetual civil War,
Then purchase Peace at such a dishonorable rate.
A poor Fiddler, after he has been three days persecuted
At a Country-wedding, takes more delight in scraping
Upon his old squeeking Fiddle, then I do in fumbling
On that domestic Instrument of mine.

Court. Be not so bitter, Sir Oliver, on your
Own dear Lady.

Sir Oliv. I was married to her when I was young,
Ned, with a design to be balked, as they tie Whelps
To the Bell-weather; where I have been so butted,
'Twere enough to fright me, were I not pure
Mettle, from ever running at sheep again.

Court. That Is no sure rule, Sir Oliver; for a
Wife's a dish, of which if a man once surfeit, he shall
Have a better stomach to all others ever after.

Sir Oliv. What a shape is here, Ned! so exact and
Tempting, 'twould persuade a man to be an
Implicit sinner, and take her face upon credit.

Sir Ios. Come, Brother Cockwood, let us get 'em
To lay aside these masking Fopperies, and then
We'll fegue 'em in earnest: give us a Bottle, Waiter.

Free. Not before Dinner, good Sir Ioslin --

Sir Oliv. Lady, though I have out of Drollery
Put my self into this contemptible Dress at present,
I am a Gentleman, and a man of Courage, as you
Shall find anon by my brisk behavior.

Rake. Sir Ioslin! Sir Oliver! these are none of our
Ladies, they are just come to the door in a Coach, and
Have sent for me down to wait upon 'em up to you.

Sir Ios. Hey -- Boys, more Game, more Game!
Fetch 'em up, fetch 'em up.

Sir Oliv. Why, what a day of Sport will here be,
Ned?

Exit Rake-hell. Sir Ios. They shall all have fair Play, Boys.

Sir Oliv. And we will match our selves, and make
A Prize on it, Ned Courtall and I, against Frank
Freeman and you Brother Jolly, and Rake-hell
Shall be Judge for Gloves and silk Stockings, to be
Bestowed as the Conqueror shall fancy.

Sir Ios. Agreed, agreed, agreed.

Court. Free. A match, a match.

Sir Oliv. Hey, Boys!
Lady Cockwood counterfeits a fit. Sentry pulling off her Mask. Oh Heavens! my
dear Lady!
Help, help!

Sir Oliv. What Is here? Sentry and my Lady!
'Sdeath, what a condition am I in now, Brother Jolly!
You have brought me into this Praemunire: for
Heavens sake run down quickly, and send the Rogue
And Whores away. Help, help! oh help! dear
Madam, sweet Lady!
Ex. Sir Joslin, Sir Oliver kneels down by her.
Sent. Oh she is gone, she is gone!

Free. Give her more Air.

Court. Fetch a glass of cold Water, Freeman.

Sir Oliv. Dear Madam speak, sweet Madam speak.

Sent. Out upon thee for a vile Hypocrite! thou
Art the wicked Author of all this; who but such a
Reprobate, such an obdurate sinner as thou art,
Could go about to abuse so sweet a Lady?

Sir Oliv. Dear Sentry, do not stab me with thy words,
But stab me with thy Bodkin rather, that I may here
Dye a Sacrifice at her feet, for all my disloyal actions.

Sent. No live, live, to be a reproach and a shame
To all rebellious Husbands; ah, that she had but
My Heart! but thou have bewitched her affections;
Thou should then dearly smart for this abominable
Treason.

Gat. So, now she begins to come to her self.

Aria. Set her more upright, and bend her a little
Forward.

La. Cock. Unfortunate Woman! let me go,
Why do you hold me? would I had a Dagger at
My Heart, to punish it for loving that ungrateful man.

Sir Oliv. Dear Madam, were I but worthy
Of your pity and belief.

La. Cock. Peace, peace, perfidious man, I am too
Tame and foolish -- were I every day at the Plays,
The Park, and Mulberry-Garden, with a kind look
Secretly to indulge the unlawful passion of some
Young Gallant; or did I associate my self with the
Gaming Madams, and were every afternoon at my
Lady Briefes and my Lady Meanwells at Vmbre and
Quebas, pretending ill luck to borrow money of a
Friend, and then pretending good luck to excuse the
Plenty to a Husband, my suspicious demeanor had
Deserved this; but I who out of a scrupulous
Tenderness to my Honor, and to comply with thy
Base Jealousy, have denied my self all those blameless
Recreations, which a virtuous Lady might enjoy,
To be thus inhumanely reviled in my own person, and
Thus unreasonably robbed and abused in thine too!

Court. Sure she will take up anon, or crack
Her mind, or else the Devil's in it.

La. Cock. Do not stay and torment me with thy
Sight; go, graceless Wretch, follow thy treacherous
Resolutions, do, and waste that poor stock of comfort
Which I should have at home, upon those your ravenous
Cormorants below: I feel my passion begin to
Swell again.

She has a little fit again. Court. Now will she get an absolute dominion over
Him, and all this will be my Plague in the end.

Sir Oliv. running up and down. Ned. Courtall, Frank Freeman, Cousin
Ariana, and dear Cousin Gatty, for
Heavens sake join all, and moderate her passion --
Ah Sentry! forbear thy unjust reproaches, take pity
On thy Master! thou have a great influence over her,
And I have always been mindful of thy favors.

Sent. You do not deserve the least compassion,
Nor would I speak a good word for you, but that
I know for all this, 'twill be acceptable to my poor
Lady. Dear Madam, do but look up a little, Sir
Oliver lies at your feet an humble Penitent.

Aria. How bitterly he weeps! how sadly he sighs!

Gat. I dare say he counterfeited his sin, and is
Real in his Repentance.

Court. Compose your self a little, pray, Madam;
All this was mere Raillery, a way of talk, which
Sir Oliver being well bred, has learned among
The gay people of the Town.

Free. If you did but know, Madam, what an odious
Thing it is to be thought to love a Wife in good
Company, you would easily forgive him.

La. Cock. No, no, 'twas the mild correction which
I gave him for his insolent behavior last night, that
Has encouraged him again thus to insult over my
Affections.

Court. Come, come, Sir Oliver, out with your
Bosom-secret, and clear all things to your Lady;
Is it not as we have said?

Sir Oliv. Or may I never have the happiness to be
In her good grace again; and as for the Harlots,
Dear Madam, here is Ned Courtall and Frank Freeman,
That have often seen me in company of the
Wicked; let 'em speak, if they ever knew me tempted
To a disloyal action in their lives.

Court. On my conscience, Madam, I may more
Safely swear, that Sir Oliver has been constant to
Your Ladyship, then that a Girl of twelve years old
Has her Maidenhead this warm and ripening Age.

Enter Sir Joslin. Sir Oliv. Here Is my Brother Jolly too can witness
The loyalty of my Heart, and that I did not intend
Any treasonable practice against your Ladyship
In the least.

Sir Ios. Unless feguing 'em with a Beer-glass be
Included in the Statute. Come, Mr. Courtall, to
Satisfy my Lady, and put her in a little good humor,
Let us sing the Catch I taught you yesterday, that was
Made by a Country Vicar on my Brother Cockwood.
And me.

They sing. Love and Wenching are Toys,
Fit to please beardless Boys,
The are sports we hate worse then a Leaguer;
When we visit a Miss,
We still brag how we kiss,
But it is with a Bottle we fegue her.
Sir Ios. Come, come, Madam, let all things be
Forgot; Dinner is ready, the Cloth is laid in the
Next Room, let us in and be merry; there was no
Harm meant as I am true little Ioslin.

La. Cock. Sir Oliver knows I cannot be angry with
Him, though he plays the naughty man thus; but
Why, my Dear, would y' expose your self in this
Ridiculous habit, to the censure of both our Honors?

Sir Oliv. Indeed I was to blame to be over-
Persuaded; I intended dutifully to retire into the
Pantry, and there civilly to divert my self at Back-
Gammon with the Butler.

Sir Ios. Faith, I must even own, the fault was
Mine, I enticed him hither, Lady.

Sir Oliv. How the Devil, Ned, came they to find
Us out here!

Court. No Blood-hound draws so sure as a jealous Woman.

Sir Oliv. I am afraid Thomas has been unfaithful:
Prithee, Ned, speak to my Lady, that there may be
A perfect understanding between us, and that Sentry
May be sent home for my Clothes, that I may no
Longer wear the marks of her displeasure.

Court. Let me alone, Sir Oliver.
He goes to my Lady Cockwood. How do you find your self, Madam, after
This violent Passion?

La. Cock. This has been a lucky adventure,
Mr. Courtall; now am I absolute Mistress of
My own conduct for a time.

Court. Then shall I be a happy man, Madam: I
Knew this would be the consequence of all, and
Yet could not I forbear the project.

Sir Oliv. How did thou shuffle away Rake-hell
And the Lady's Brother?

To Sir Joslin. Sir Ios. I have appointed 'em to meet us at six a
Clock at the new Spring-Garden.

Sir Oliv. Then will we yet, in spite of the Stars
That have crossed us, be in Conjunction with
Madam Rampant, Brother.

Court. Come, Gentlemen, Dinner is on the Table.

Sir Ios. Ha! Sly-girl and Mad-cap, I Will enter
You, in faith; since you have found the way
To the Bear, I Will fegue you.
Sings. When we visit a Miss,
We still brag how we kiss;
But it is with a Bottle we fegue her.

Exeunt singing. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
A Dining Room.
Enter Lady Cockwood. La. Cock. A Lady cannot be too jealous of her Servants
Love, this faithless and inconstant Age:
His amorous Carriage to that prating Girl to day,
Though he pretends it was to blind Sir Oliver,
I fear will prove a certain sign of his revolted
Heart; the Letters I have counterfeited in these Girls
Name will clear all; if he accept of that appointment,
And refuses mine, I need not any longer doubt.
Enter Sentry. Sentry, have the Letters
And message been delivered, as I directed?

Sent. Punctually, Madam; I knew they were to be
Found at the latter end of a Play, I sent a Porter
First with the Letter to Mr. Courtall, who
Was at the Kings-house, he sent for him out
By the Doorkeeper, and delivered it into
His own hands.

La. Cock. Did you keep on your Vizard, that
The Fellow might not know how to describe you?

Sent. I did, Madam.

La. Cock. And how did he receive it?

Sent. Like a Traitor to all goodness, with
All the signs of Joy imaginable.

La. Cock. Be not angry, Sentry, it is as my heart
Wished it: what did you do with the Letter to
Mr. Freeman? for I thought fit to deceive 'em both,
To make my Policy less suspicious to Courtall.

Sent. The Porter found him at the Dukes-house,
Madam, and delivered it with like care.

La. Cock. Very well.

Sent. After the Letters were delivered, Madam,
I went my self to the Playhouse, and sent in
For Mr. Courtall, who came out to me immediately;
I told him your Ladyship presented your humble
Service to him, and that Sir Oliver was going
Into the City with Sir Ioslin, to visit his Brother
Cockwood, and that it would add much more
To your Ladyships happiness, if he would be pleased
To meet you in Grayes-Inn-walks this lovely evening.

La. Cock. And how did he entertain the motion?

Sent. Bless me! I tremble still to think upon it!
I could not have imagined he had been so wicked;
He counterfeited the greatest passion, railed at
His Fate, and swore a thousand horrid Oaths,
That since he came into the Playhouse he had
Notice of a business that concerned both his
Honor and Fortune; and that he was an undone
Man, if he did not go about it presently;
Prayed me to desire your Ladyship to excuse
Him this Evening, and that to morrow he would
Be wholly at your devotion.

La. Cock. Ha, ha, ha! he little thinks how
Much he has obliged me.

Sent. I had much ado to forbear upbraiding
Him with his ingratitude to your Ladyship.

La. Cock. Poor Sentry! be not concerned for
Me, I have conquered my affection, and thou
Shall find it is not Jealousy has been my Counselor
In this. Go, let our Hoods and Masks be ready,
That I may surprise Courtall, and make the
Best advantage of this lucky opportunity.

Sent. I obey you, Madam.
Exit Sentry.
La. Cock. How am I filled with indignation!
To find my person and my passion both despised,
And what is more, so much precious time
Fooled away in fruitless expectation: I would
Poison my face, so I might be revenged on
This ungrateful Villain.

Enter Sir Oliver. Sir Oliv. My Dearest!

La. Cock. My Dearest Dear! prithee do
Not go into the City to night.

Sir Oliv. My Brother Jolly is gone before,
And I am to call him at Counselor Trott's
Chamber in the Temple.

La. Cock. Well, if you did but know the fear
I have upon me when you are absent, you would
Not seek occasions to be from me thus.

Sir Oliv Let me comfort thee with a kiss;
What should thou be afraid of?

La Cock. I cannot but believe that every Woman
That sees thee must be in love with thee, as I am;
Do not blame my Jealousy.

Sir Oliv. I protest I would refuse a Countess
Rather then abuse thee, poor Heart.

La. Cock. And then you are so desperate upon
The least occasion, I should have acquainted
You else with something that concerns your Honor.

Sir Oliv. My Honor! you ought in Duty to do it.

La. Cock. Nay, I knew how passionate you would
Be presently; therefore you shall never know it.

Sir Oliv. Do not leave me in doubt, I shall
Suspect every one I look upon; I will kill a
Common Councel-man or two before I come
Back, if you do not tell me.

La. Cock. Dear, how I tremble! will you
Promise me you will not quarrel then? if you tender
My life and happiness, I am sure you will not.

Sir Oliv. I will bear any thing rather then be
An Enemy to thy quiet, my Dear.

La. Cock. I could wish Mr. Courtall a man of better
Principles, because I know you love him, my Dear.

Sir Oliv. Why, what has he done?

La. Cock. I always treated him with great respects,
Out of my regard to your friendship; but he, like
An impudent man as he is, to day misconstruing
My Civility, in most unseemly language,
Made a foul attempt upon my Honor.

Sir Oliv. Death, and Hell, and Furies, I will
Have my Pumps, and long Sword!

La. Cock. Oh, I shall faint! did not you promise
Me you would not be so rash?

Sir Oliv. Well, I will not kill him, for fear of
Murdering thee, my Dear.

La. Cock. You may decline your friendship, and
By your coldness give him no encouragement
To visit our Family.

Sir Oliv. I think thy advice the best for this once
Indeed; for it is not fit to publish such a bus'nes:
But if he should be ever tempting or attempting,
Let me know it, prithee, my Dear.

La. Cock. If you moderate your self according
To my directions now, I shall never conceal
Any thing from you, that may increase your
Just opinion of my conjugal fidelity.

Sir Oliv. Was ever man blessed with such
A virtuous Lady! yet cannot I forbear going a
Aside. Ranging again. Now must I to the Spring-Garden
To meet my Brother Jolly and Madam Rampant.

La. Cock. Prithee, be so good to think how
Melancholy I spend my time here; for I have
Joy in no Company but thine, and let that
Bring thee home a little sooner.

Sir Oliv. Thou have been so kind in this discovery,
That I am loath to leave thee.

La. Cock. I wish you had not been engaged so far.

Sir Oliv. Ay, that is it: farewell, my virtuous Dear.
Exit Sir Oliver.
La. Cock. Farewell, my Dearest Dear. I know
He has not courage enough to question Courtall;
But this will make him hate him, increase his
Confidence of me, and justify my banishing that
False Fellow our house; it is not fit a man that
Has abused my Love, should come hither, and pry
Into my actions: besides this will make his
Access more difficult to that wanton Baggage.
Enter Ariana and Gatty with their Hoods and Masks. Whither are you going,
Cousins?

Gat. To take the Air upon the Water, Madam.

Aria. And for Variety, to walk a turn or two
In the new Spring-Garden.

La. Cock. I heard you were gone abroad
With Mr. Courtall and Mr. Freeman.

Gat. For Heaven's sake, why should your Ladyship
Have such an ill opinion of us?

La. Cock. The truth is, before I saw you, I believed
It merely the vanity of that prating man; Mr.
Courtall told Mrs. Gazet this morning, that you
Were so well acquainted already, that you
Would meet him and Mr. Freeman any where,
And that you had promised 'em to receive
And make appointment by Letters.

Gat. Oh impudent man!

Aria. Now you see the consequence, Sister,
Of our rambling; they have raised this false story
From our innocent fooling with 'em in the
Mulberry-Garden last night.

Gat. I could almost foreswear ever speaking
To a man again.

La. Cock. Was Mr. Courtall in the Mulberry-Garden
last night?

Aria. Yes, Madam.

La. Cock. And did he speak to you?

Gat. There passed a little harmless Raillery
Betwixt us; but you amaze me, Madam.

Aria. I could not imagine any man could
Be thus unworthy.

La. Cock. He has quite lost my good opinion
Too: in Duty to Sir Oliver, I have hitherto showed
Him some countenance; but I shall hate him
Hereafter for your sakes. But I detain you from
Your Recreations, Cousins.

Gat. We are very much obliged to your
Ladyship for this timely notice.

Aria. Gat. Your Servant, Madam.
Ex. Ariana and Gatty.
La. Cock. Your Servant, Cousins -- in the
Mulberry-Garden last night! when I sat languishing,
And vainly expecting him at home: this has
Incensed me so, that I could kill him. I am glad
These Girls are gone to the Spring-Garden, it
Helps my design; the Letters I have counterfeited,
Have appointed Courtall and Freeman to meet
Them there, they will produce 'em, and confirm
All I have said: I will daily poison these Girls
With such lies as shall make their quarrel to
Courtall irreconcilable, and render Freeman
Only suspected; for I would not have him
Thought equally guilty: He secretly began
To make an address to meat the Bear, and
This breach shall give him an opportunity
To pursue it.

Enter Sentry. Sent. Here are your things, Madam.

La. Cock. That Is well: Oh Sentry! I shall once
More be happy; for now Mr. Courtall has given
Me an occasion, that I may without ingratitude
Check his unlawful passion, and free my self
From the trouble of an Intrigue, that gives me
Every day such fearful apprehensions of my honor.
Ex. La. Cock. and Sentry.
SCENE II.
New Spring-Garden.
Enter Sir Joslin, Rake-hell, and Waiter. Wait. Will you be pleased to walk into
An Arbor, Gentlemen?

Sir Ios. By and by, good Sir.

Rake. I wonder Sir Oliver is not come yet.

Sir Ios. Nay, he will not fail I warrant thee,
Boy; but what is the matter with thy Nose,
My little Rake-hell?

Rake. A foolish accident; jesting at the Fleece
This afternoon, I mistook my man a little, a dull
Rogue that could not understand Raillery,
Made a sudden Repertee with a Quart-pot,
Sir Ioslin.

Sir Ios. Why did not thou stick him to the
Wall, my little Rake-hell?

Rake. The truth is, Sir Ioslin; he deserved it;
But look you, in case of a doubtful wound,
I am unwilling to give my friends too often the
Trouble to bail me; and if it should be
Mortal, you know a younger Brother has
Not wherewithal to rebate the edge of a
Witness, and mollify the hearts of a Jury.

Sir Ios. This is very prudently considered indeed.

Rake. It Is time to be wise, Sir; my Courage has
Almost run me out of a considerable Annuity.
When I lived first about this Town, I agreed
With a Surgeon for twenty pounds a Quarter*
To cure me of all the Knocks, Bruises, and
Green Wounds I should receive, and in one half
Year the poor Fellow begged me to be released*
Of his bargain, and swore I would undo him*
Else in Lint and Balsom.

Enter Sir Oliver. Sir Ios. Ho! here is my Brother Cockwood come --

Sir Oliv. I, Brother Jolly, I have kept my word,
You see; but it is a barbarous thing to abuse my
Lady, I have had such a proof of her Virtue,
I will tell thee all anon.
But where is Madam Rampant, and the rest of
The Ladies, Mr. Rake-hell?

Rake. Faith, Sir, being disappointed at noon,
They were unwilling any more to set a certainty
At hazard: it is Term-time, and they have
Severally betook themselves, some to their
Chamber-practice, and others to the Places
Of Public Pleading.

Sir Oliv. Faith, Brother Jolly, let us even go into
An Arbor, and then fegue Mr. Rake-hell.

Sir Ios. With all my heart, would we had
Madam Rampant.
Sings. She Is as frolic and free,
As her Lovers dare be,
Never awed by a foolish Punctilio;
She Will not start from her place,
Though thou nam'st a black Ace,
And will drink a Beer-glass to Spudilio.
Hey, Boys! Come, come, come! let us in,
And delay our sport no longer.
Exit singing, She Will not start from her, etc.
Enter Courtall and Freeman severally. Court. Freeman!

Free. Courtall, what the Devil's the matter with
Thee? I have observed thee prying up and down
The Walks like a Citizen's Wife that has dropped
Her Holy Day Pocket-handkercher.

Court. What unlucky Devil has brought thee hither?

Free. I believe a better natured Devil then yours,
Courtall, if a Leveret be better meat then an old
Puss, that has been cours'd by most of the young
Fellows of her country: I am not working my
Brain for a Counter-plot, a disappointment is not
My business.

Court. You are mistaken, Freeman: prithee be
Gone, and leave me the Garden to my self, or I
Shall grow as testy as an old Fowler that is put
By his shoot, after he has crept half a mile
Upon his belly.

Free. Prithee be thou gone, or I shall take it as
Unkindly as a Chemist would, if thou should
Kick down his Limbeck in the very minute
That he looked for projection.

Court. Come, come, you must yield, Freeman,
Your business cannot be of such consequence as mine.

Free. If ever thou had a business of such
Consequence in thy life as mine is, I will condescend
To be made incapable of affairs presently.

Court. Why, I have an appointment made me,
Man, without my seeking, by a Woman for
Whom I would have mortgaged my whole
Estate to have had her abroad but to break
A Cheese-cake.

Free. And I have an appointment made me without
My seeking too, by such a she, that I will break the
Whole ten Commandments, rather then
Disappoint her of her breaking one.

Court. Come, you do but jest, Freeman, a forsaken
Mistress could not be more malicious then thou
Art: prithee be gone.

Free. Prithee do thou be gone.

Court. 'Sdeath! the sight of thee will scare
My Woman for ever.

Free. 'Sdeath! the sight of thee will make my
Woman believe me the falsest Villain breathing.

Court. We shall stand fooling till we are both
Undone, and I know not how to help it.

Free. Let us proceed honestly like Friends,
Discover the truth of things to one another, and
If we cannot reconcile our business, we will
Draw Cuts, and part fairly.

Court. I do not like that way; for talk is only
Allowable at the latter end of an Intrigue, and
Should never be used at the beginning of an
Amor, for fear of frighting a young Lady from
Her good intentions -- yet I care not, though I
Read the Letter, but I will conceal the name.

Free. I have a Letter too, and am content
To do the same.

Court. reads. Sir, in sending you this Letter, I
Proceed against the modesty of our Sex --

Free. 'Sdeath, this begins just like my Letter.

Court. Do you read on then --

Free. reads. But let not the good opinion I have
Conceived of you, make you too severe in your
Censuring of me --

Court. Word for word.

Free. Now do you read again.

Court. reads. If you give your self the trouble to be
Walking in the new Spring-Garden this Evening, I
Will meet you there, and tell you a secret, which
I have reason to fear, because it comes to your
Knowledge by my means, will you make you hate
Your humble Servant.

Free. Verbatim my Letter, Hey-day!

Court. Prithee lets compare the Hands.

They compare 'em. Free. 'Sdeath, the Hand's the same.

Court. I hope the Name is not the same too --

Free. If it be, we are finely jilted, faith.

Court. I long to be undeceived; prithee do
Thou show first, Freeman.

Free. No -- but both together, if you will.

Court. Agreed.

Free. Ariana.

Court. Gatty -- Ha, ha, ha.

Free. The little Rogues are masculine in their
Proceeedings, and have made one another
Confidents in their Love.

Court. But I do not like this altogether so well,
Frank; I wish they had appointed us several
Places: for though it is evident they have
Trusted one another with the bargain, no
Woman ever seals before Witness.

Free. Prithee how did thou escape the snares
Of the old Devil this afternoon?

Court. With much ado; Sentry had set me; if her
Ladyship had got me into her clutches, there
Had been no getting off without a Rescue,
Or paying down the money; for she
Always arrests upon Execution.

Free. You made a handsome lie to her Woman.

Court. For all this, I know she is angry; for she
Thinks nothing a just Excuse in these cases,
Though it were to save the forfeit of a man's
Estate, or reprieve the life of her own
Natural Brother.

Free. Faith, thou have not done altogether like
A Gentleman with her; thou should fast thy
Self up to a stomach now and then, to oblige
Her; if there were nothing in it, but the hearty
Welcome, methinks 'twere enough to make thee
Bear sometimes with the homeliness of the Fare.

Court. I know not what I might do in a Camp,
Where there were no other Woman; but I shall
Hardly in this Town, where there is such plenty,
Forbear good meat, to get my self an
Appetite to Horseflesh.

Free. This is rather an aversion in thee, then any
Real fault in the Woman; if this lucky business
Had not fallen out, I intended with your good
Leave to have out-bid you for her Ladyships
Favor.

Court. I should never have consented to that, Frank;
Though I am a little resty at present, I am not such
A Jade, but I should strain if another rid against
Me; I have e're now liked nothing in a Woman
That I have loved at last in spite only,
Because another had a mind to her.

Free. Yonder are a couple of Vizards tripping
Toward us.

Court. It Is they, in faith.

Free. We need not divide, since they come together.

Court. I was a little afraid when we compared
Letters, they had put a trick upon us; but now I
Am confirmed they are mighty honest.

Enter Ariana and Gatty. Aria. We cannot avoid 'em.

Gat. Let us dissemble our knowledge of their
Business a little, and then take 'em down in
The height of their assurance.

Court. Free. Your Servant, Ladies.

Aria. I perceive it is as impossible, Gentlemen,
To walk without you, as without our shadows;
Never were poor Women so haunted by the
Ghosts of their self-murdered Lovers.

Gat. If it should be our good Fortunes to have
You in Love with us, we will take care you
Shall not grow desperate, and leave the
World in an ill humor.

Aria. If you should, certainly your Ghosts
Would be very malicious.

Court. 'Twere pity you should have your Curtains
Drawn in the dead of the night, and your pleasing
Slumbers interrupted by any thing but flesh
And blood, Ladies.

Free. Shall we walk a turn?

Aria. By your selves, if you please.

Gat. Our Company may put a constraint upon
You; for I find you daily hover about these
Gardens, as a Kite does about a backside,
Watching an opportunity to catch up the Poultry.

Aria. Woe be to the Daughter or Wife of some
Merchant-Taylor, or poor Felt-maker now;
For you seldom row to Fox-hall without
Some such Plot against the City.

Free. You wrong us, Ladies, our business has
Happily succeeded, since we have the
Honor to wait upon you.

Gat. You could not expect to see us here.

Court. Your true Lover, Madam, when he misses
His Mistress, is as restless as a Spaniel that has
Lost his Master; he ranges up and down
The plays, the Park, and all the Gardens, and
Never stays long, but where he has the
Happiness to see her.

Gat. I suppose your Mistress, Mr. Courtall, is
Always the last Woman you are acquainted with.

Court. Do not think, Madam, I have that false
Measure of my acquaintance, which Poets have
Of their Verses, always to think the last best,
Though I esteem you so, in justice to your merit.

Gat. Or if you do not love her best, you always
Love to talk of her most; as a barren Coxcomb
That wants discourse, is ever entertaining
Company out of the last Book he read in.

Court. Now you accuse me most unjustly, Madam;
Who the Devil, that has common sense, will go a
Birding with a Clack in his Cap?

Aria. Nay, we do not blame you, Gentlemen,
Every one in their way; a Huntsman talks of his
Dogs, a Falconer of his Hawks* a Jocky of
His Horse, and a Gallant of his Mistress.

Gat. Without the allowance of this Vanity, an
Amor would soon grow as dull as Matrimony.

Court. Whatsoever you say, Ladies, I cannot
Believe you think us men of such abominable
Principles.

Free. For my part, I have ever held it as ungrateful
To boast of the favors of a Mistress, as to deny
The Courtesies of a Friend.

Court. A Friend that bravely ventures his life in*
The field to serve me, deserves but equally with*
A Mistress that kindly exposes her Honor to
Oblige me, especially when she does it as*
Generously too, and with as little Ceremony.

Free. And I would no more betray the Honor
Of such a Woman, then I would the life of a
Man that should rob on purpose to supply me.

Gat. We believe you men of Honor, and know
It is below you to talk of any Woman that deserves it.

Aria. You are so generous, you seldom insult*
After a Victory.

Gat. And so vain, that you always triumph
Before it.

Court. 'Sdeath! what is the meaning of all this?

Gat. Though you find us so kind, Mr. Courtall,
Pray do not tell Mrs. Gazet to morrow, that
We came hither on purpose this Evening*
To meet you.

Court. I would as soon print it, and fee a Fellow
To post it up with the Play-bills.

Gat. You have reposed a great deal of confidence
In her, for all you pretend this ill opinion
Of her secrecy now.

Court. I never trusted her with the name of a
Mistress, that I should be jealous of; if I saw her
Receive fruit, and go out of the Playhouse
with a Stranger.

Gat. For ought as I see, we are infinitely
Obliged to you, Sir.

Court. It Is impossible to be insensible of so
Much goodness, Madam.

Gat. What goodness, pray, Sir?

Court. Come, come, give over this Raillery.

Gat. You are so ridiculously unworthy, that 'twere
A folly to reprove you with a serious look.

Court. On my conscience, your heart begins to
Fail you now we are coming to the point, as a
Young Fellow's that was never in the field before.

Gat. You begin to amaze me.

Court. Since you your self sent the challenge,
You must not in Honor fly off now.

Gat. Challenge! Oh Heavens! this confirms
All: were I a man, I would kill thee for the
Injuries thou have already done me.

Free. to Aria. Let not your suspicion of my
Unkindness make you thus scrupulous; was ever
City ill treated, that surrendered without Assault
Or Summons?

Aria. Dear Sister, what ill Spirit brought us
Hither? I never met with so much impudence
In my life.

Court. aside. Hey Jilts! they are as good at it
Already, as the old one in faith.

Free. Come, Ladies, you have exercised your
Wit enough; you would not venture Letters
Of such consequence for a jest only.

Gat. Letters! bless me, what will this come to?

Court. To that none of us shall have cause to
Repent I hope, Madam.

Aria. Let us fly 'em, Sister, they are Devils,
And not men, they could never be so
Malicious else.

Enter Lady Cockwood and Sentry. La. Cock. Your Servant, Cousins.

Court. starting. Ho my Lady Cockwood! my ears
Are grown an inch already.

Aria. My Lady! she will think this an appointment,
Sister.

Free. This is Madam Matchiavil, I suspect, Courtall.

Court. Nay, it is her Plot doubtless: now am I
As much out of countenance, as I should be if Sir Oliver
Should take me making bold with her Ladyship.

La. Cock. Do not let me discompose you,
I can walk alone, Cousins.

Gat. Are you so uncharitable, Madam, to think
We have any business with 'em?

Aria. It has been our ill Fortune to meet 'em
Here, and nothing could be so lucky as your
Coming, Madam, to free us from 'em.

Gat. They have abused us in the grossest manner.

Aria. Counterfeited Letters under our Hands.

La. Cock. Never trouble your selves, Cousins, I
Have heard this is a common practice with such
Unworthy men: did they not threaten to divulge
Them, and defame you to the World?

Gat. We cannot believe they intend any thing
Less, Madam.

La. Cock. Doubtless, they had such a mean opinion
Of your Wit and Honor, that they thought to
Fright you to a base compliance with their
Wicked purposes.

Aria. I hate the very sight of 'em.

Gat. I could almost wish my self a disease, to
Breathe infection upon 'em.

Court. Very pretty! we have carried on our designs
Very luckily against these young Ladies.

Free. We have lost their good opinion for ever.

La. Cock. I know not whether their folly or their
Impudence be greater, they are not worth your*
Anger, they are only fit to be laughed at, and despised.

Cour. A very fine old Devil this!

La. Cock. Mr. Freeman, this is not like a Gentleman,
To affront a couple of young Ladies thus; but I
Cannot blame you so much, you are in a manner a
Stranger to our Family: but I wonder how that
Base man can look me in the face, considering
How civilly he has been treated at our house.

Court. The truth is, Madam, I am a Rascal; but I
Fear you have contributed to the making me so:
Be not as unmerciful as the Devil is to a poor sinner.

Sent. Did you ever see the like? never trust
Me, if he has not the confidence to make my
Virtuous Lady accessory to his wickedness.

La. Cock. Ay Sentry! it is a miracle if my Honor
Escapes, considering the access which his greatness
With Sir Oliver has given him daily to me.

Free. Faith, Ladies, we did not counterfeit these
Letters, we are abused as well as you.

Court. I received mine from a Porter at the King's
Playhouse, and I will show it you, that you may
See if you know the Hand.

La. Cock. Sentry, are you sure they never saw
Any of your Writing?

Court. 'Sdeath! I am so discomposed, I know
Not where I have put it.

Sent. Oh Madam! now I remember my self,
Mrs. Gatty helped me once to indite a Letter
To my Sweetheart.

La. Cock. Forgetful Wench! then I am undone.

Court. Oh here it is -- Hey, who is here?

As he has the Letter in hand, enter Sir Joslin, Sir Oliver, and Rakehell, all
drunk, with Music. They sing. She Is no Mistress of mine
That drinks not her Wine,
Or frowns at my friends drinking motions;
If my Heart thou would gain,
Drink thy Bottle of Champaigne.
'Twill serve thee for Paint and Love-potions.
Sir Oliv. Who Is here? Courtall, in my Lady's
Company! I Will dispatch him presently;
Help me, Brother Jolly.

He draws. La. Cock. For Heavens sake, Sir Oliver!

Courtall drawing. What do you mean, Sir?

Sir Oliv. I Will teach you more manners, then
To make your attempts on my Lady, Sir.

La. Cock. and Sent. Oh! Murder! Murder!

They shriek. La. Cock. Save my dear Sir Oliver, Oh my
Dear Sir Oliver!

The young Ladies shriek and run out, they all draw to part 'em, they fight off
the Stage, she shrieks and runs out. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Sir Oliver's Dining Room.
Enter Lady Cockwood, Table, and Carpet. La. Cock. I Did not think he had been
so desperate in
His Drink; if they had killed one another,
I had then been revenged, and freed from all my
Fears -- Sentry, your carelessness and
Enter Sentry. Forgetfulness some time or other will undo me;
Had not Sir Oliver and Sir Ioslin came so luckily
Into the Garden, the Letters had been discovered,
And my Honor left to the mercy of a false man,
And two young fleering Girls: did you speak
To Mr. Freeman unperceived in the Hurry?

Sent. I did, Madam, and he promised me to disengag
Himself as soon as possibly he could, and wait
Upon your Ladyship with all secrecy.

La. Cock. I have some reason to believe him
A man of Honor.

Sent. Methinks indeed his very look, Madam,
Speaks him to be much more a Gentleman
Then Mr. Courtall; but I was unwilling before
Now to let your Ladyship know my opinion, for
Fear of offending your inclinations.

La. Cock. I hope by his means to get these Letters
Into my own hands, and so prevent the inconveniences
They may bring upon my Honor.

Sent. I wonder, Madam, what should be Sir
Oliver's Quarrel to Mr. Courtall.

La. Cock. You know how apt he is to be suspicious
In his Drink; it is very likely he thought Mr. Courtall
Betrayed him at the Bear to day.

Sent. Pray Heaven he be not jealous of your
Ladyship, finding you abroad so unexpectedly; if
He be, we shall have a sad hand of him when he
Comes home, Madam.

La. Cock. I should have apprehended it much
My self, Sentry, if his drunkenness had not unadvisedly
Engaged him in his quarrel; as soon as he grows a
Little sober, I am sure his fear will bring him
Home, and make him apply himself to me with
All humility and kindness; for he is ever under*
Hand fain to use my interest and discretion to
Make friends to compound these businesses,
Or to get an order for the securing his
Person and his Honor.

Sent. I believe verily, Mr. Courtall would have
Been so rude to have killed him, if Mr. Freeman and
The rest had not civilly interposed their Weapons.

La. Cock. Heavens forbid! though he be a wicked
Man, I am obliged in Duty to love him: whither
Did my Cousins go after we came home, Sentry?

Sent. They are at the next door, Madam,
Laughing and playing at Lantre-lou, with my old
Lady Love-youth and her Daughters.

La. Cock. I hope they will not come home then
To interrupt my affairs with Mr. Freeman:
Knocking without. Hark! some body knocks, it may be him,
Run down quickly.

Sent. I fly, Madam.
Exit Sentry.
La. Cock. Now if he has a real inclination for my
Person, I Will give him a handsome opportunity
To reveal it.

Enter Sentry and Freeman. Free. Your Servant, Madam.

La. Cock. Oh Mr. Freeman! this unlucky accident
Has robbed me of all my quiet; I am almost distracted
With thinking of the danger Sir Oliver's dear
Life is in.

Free. You need not fear, Madam, all things will
Be reconciled again to morrow.

Sent. You would not blame my Lady's
Apprehensions, did you but know the
Tenderness of her affections.

La. Cock. Mr. Courtall is a false and merciless man.

Free. He has always owned a great respect for
Your Ladyship, and I never heard him mention
You with the least dishonor.

La. Cock. He cannot without injuring the Truth,
Heaven knows my innocence: I hope you did
Not let him know, Sir, of your coming hither.

Free. I should never merit the happiness to wait
Upon you again, had I so abused this extraordinary
Favor, Madam.

La. Cock. If I have done any thing unbeseeming
My Honor, I hope you will be just, Sir, and
Impute it to my fear; I know no man so proper
To compose this unfortunate difference as
Your self, and if a Lady's tears and prayers
Have power to move you to compassion, I
Know you will employ your utmost endeavor
To preserve me, my dear Sir Oliver.

Free. Do not, Madam, afflict your self so much,
I dare engage my life, his Life and Honor shall
Be both secure.

La. Cock. You are truly noble, Sir; I was so
Distracted with my fears, that I cannot well
Remember how we parted at the Spring-Garden.

Free. We all divided, Madam: after your Ladyship
And the young Ladies were gone together, Sir
Oliver, Sir Ioslin, and the Company with them,
Took one Boat, and Mr. Courtall and I another.

La. Cock. Then I need not apprehend their
Meeting again to night.

Free. You need not, Madam; I left Mr. Courtall in
His Chamber, wondering what should make
Sir Oliver draw upon him, and fretting and
Fuming about the Trick that was put upon
Us with the Letters to day.

La. Cock. Oh! I had almost forgot my self; I
Assure you, Sir, those Letters were sent by one
That has no inclination to be an enemy of yours.
Knocking below. Some body knocks.
Exit Sentry. If it be Sir Oliver, I am undone, he will hate me
Mortally, if he does but suspect I use any secret
Means to hinder him from justifying his
Reputation honorably to the World.

Enter Sentry. Sent. Oh Madam! here is Mr. Courtall below in
The Entry, discharging a Coachman; I told
Him your Ladyship was busy, but he would
Not hear me, and I find, do what I can,
He will come up.

La. Cock. I would not willingly suspect you, Sir.

Free. I have deceived him, Madam, in my coming
Hither, and am as unwilling he should find me
Here, as you can be.

La. Cock. He will not believe my innocent business
With you, but will raise a new Scandal on my
Honor, and publish it to the whole Town.

Sent. Let him step into the Closet, Madam.

La. Cock. Quick, Sir, quick, I beseech you, I will
Send him away again immediately.

Enter Courtall. La. Cock. Mr. Courtall! have you no sense of*
Honor nor modesty left? after so many injuries,
To come into our House, and without my
Approbation rudely press upon my
Retirement thus?

Court. Pray, Madam, hear my business.

La. Cock. Thy business is maliciously to pursue
My ruin; thou come with a base design to have
Sir Oliver catch thee here, and destroy the
Only happiness I have.

Court. I come, Madam, to beg your pardon for
The fault I did unwillingly commit, and to know
Of you the reason of Sir Oliver's Quarrel to me.

La. Cock. Thy guilty conscience is able to tell
Thee that, vain and ungrateful man!

Court. I am innocent, Madam, of all things that
May offend him; and I am sure, if you would
But hear me, I should remove the Justice
Of your Quarrel too.

La. Cock. You are mistaken, Sir, if you think
I am concerned for your going to the Spring-Garden
This Evening; My Quarrel is the same with
Sir Oliver, and is so just, that thou deserve to
Be poisoned for what thou have done.

Court. Pray, Madam, let me know my fault.

La. Cock. I blush to think upon it: Sir Oliver, since
We came from the Bear, has heard something
Thou have said concerning me; but what it is,
I could not get him to discover: he told me 'twas
Enough for me to know he was satisfied of
My innocence.

Court. This is mere passion, Madam.

La. Cock. This is the usual revenge of such base
Men as thou art, when they cannot compass
Their ends, with their venomous tongues
To blast the Honor of a Lady.

Court. This is a sudden alteration, Madam; within
These few hours you had a kinder opinion of me.

La. Cock. It Is no wonder you brag of favors
Behind my back, that have the impudence to
Upbraid me with kindness to my face; do
Thou think I could ever have a good thought of
Thee, whom I have always found so treacherous
In thy friendship to Sir Oliver?

Knock at the door. Enter Sentry. Sent. Oh Madam! here is Sir Oliver come home.

La. Cock. O Heavens! I shall be believed guilty
Now, and he will kill us both.

He draws. Court. I warrant you, Madam, I Will defend your life.

La. Cock. Oh! there will be Murder, Murder;
For Heavens sake, Sir, hide your self in some
Corner or other.

Court. I Will step into that Closet, Madam.

Sent. Hold, hold, Sir, by no means; his Pipes
And his Tobacco-box lie there, and he
Always goes in to fetch 'em.

La. Cock. Your malice will soon be at an end:
Heaven knows what will be the fatal consequence
Of your being found here.

Sent. Madam, let him creep under the Table,
The Carpet is long enough to hide him.

La. Cock. Have you good Nature enough to
Save the Life and Reputation of a Lady?

Court. Any thing to oblige you, Madam.

He goes under the Table. La. Cock. running to the Closet. Be sure you do not
stir, Sir,
Whatsoever happens.

Court. Not unless he pulls me out by the Ears.

Sent. Good! he thinks my Lady speaks to him.

Enter Sir Oliver. La. Cock. My dear Sir Oliver --

Sir Oliv. I am unworthy of this kindness, Madam.

La. Cock. Nay, I intend to chide you for your*
Naughtiness anon; but I cannot choose but hug,
Thee, and kiss thee a little first; I was afraid.
I should never have had thee alive within*
These arms again.

Sir Oliv. Your goodness does so increase my
Shame, I know not what to say, Madam.

La. Cock. Well, I am glad I have thee safe at
Home, I will lock thee up above in my Chamber,
And will not so much as trust thee down stairs,
Till there be an end of this quarrel.

Sir Oliv. I was so little my self, I knew not what
I did, else I had not exposed my person to so
Much danger before thy face.

Sent. 'Twas cruelly done, Sir, knowing the killing
Concerns my Lady has for you.

La. Cock. If Mr. Courtall had killed thee, I was
Resolved not to survive thee; but before I had
Died, I would have dearly revenged thy Murder.

Sir Oliv. As soon as I had recollected my self a
Little, I could not rest till I came home to give thee
This satisfaction, that I will do nothing without
Thy advice and approbation, my Dear: I know
Thy Love makes thy life depend upon mine,
And it is unreasonable I should upon my own
Rash head hazard that, though it be for the
Justification of thy Honor.
U'ds me I have let fall a China-Orange that
Was recommended to me for one of the best
That came over this year; 'Slife light the Candle,
Sentry, it is run under the Table.

Knock. La. Cock. Oh, I am not well!

Sentry takes up the Candle, there is a great knocking at the door, she runs
away with the Candle. Sent. Oh Heaven! who is that that knocks
So hastily?

Sir Oliv. Why, Sentry! bring back the Candle;
Are you mad to leave us in the dark, and your
Lady not well? how is it, my Dear?

La. Cock. For Heavens sake run after her, Sir Oliver,
Snatch the Candle out of her hand, and teach
Her more manners.

Sir Oliv. I will, my Dear.

La. Cock. What shall I do? was ever Woman
So unfortunate in the management of affairs!

Court. What will become of me now?

La. Cock. It must be so, I had better trust my
Honor to the mercy of them two, then be
Betrayed to my Husband: Mr. Courtall, give
Me your hand quickly, I beseech you.

Court. Here, here, Madam, what is to be done now?

La. Cock. I will put you into the Closet, Sir.

Court. He Will be coming in for his Tobacco-box
And Pipes.

La. Cock. Never fear that, Sir.
Freeman out of the Closet door. Now shall I be discovered; pox
On your honorable intrigue,
Would I were safe at Giffords.

La. Cock. Here, here, Sir, this is the door,
Whatsoever you feel, be not frighted; for
Should you make the least disturbance,
You will destroy the life, and what is more,
The Honor of an unfortunate Lady.

Court. So, so, if you have occasion to remove
Again, make no Ceremony, Madam.

Enter Sir Oliver, Sentry, Ariana, Gatty. Sir Oliv. Here is the Candle, how
do thou,
My Dear?

La. Cock. I could not imagine, Sentry, you had
Been so ill bred, to run away, and leave your
Master and me in the dark.

Sent. I thought there had been another Candle
Upon the Table, Madam.

La. Cock. Good! you thought! you are always
Excusing of your carelessness; such another
Misdemeanour --

Sir Oliv. Prithee, my Dear, forgive her.

La. Cock. The truth is, I ought not to be very
Angry with her at present, it is a good natured
Creature; she was so frighted, for fear of
Thy being mischief'd in the Spring-Garden,
That I verily believe she scarce knows
What she does yet.

Sir Oliv. Light the Candle, Sentry, that I
May look for my Orange.

La. Cock. You have been at my Lady Love-youths,
Cousins, I hear.

Aria. We have, Madam.

Gat. She charged us to remember her Service to you.

Sir Oliv. So, here it is, my Dear, I brought it
Home on purpose for thee.

La. Cock. It Is a lovely Orange indeed! thank you,
My Dear; I am so discomposed with the fright
I have had, that I would fain be at rest.

Sir Oliv. Get a Candle, Sentry; will you go
To bed, my Dear?

La. Cock. With all my heart, Sir Oliver: it is late,
Cousins, you had best retire to your Chamber too.

Gat. We shall not stay long here, Madam.

Sir Oliv. Come, my Dear.

La. Cock. Good night, Cousins.

Gat. and Aria. Your Servant, Madam.

Exeunt Sir Oliver, Lady Cockwood, and Sentry. Aria. I cannot but think of
those Letters, Sister.

Gat. That is, you cannot but think of Mr. Freeman,
Sister; I perceive he runs in thy head as much as
A new Gown uses to do in the Country, the
Night before it is expected from London.

Aria. You need not talk, for I am sure the losses
Of an unlucky Gamester are not more his
Meditation, then Mr. Courtall is yours.

Gat. He has made some slight impression on my
Memory, I confess; but I hope a night will
Wear him out again, as it does the noise
Of a Fiddle after Dancing.

Aria. Love, like some stains, will wear out of it
Self, I know, but not in such a little time as
You talk of, Sister.

Gat. It cannot last longer then the stain of a
Mulberry at most; the next season out that goes,
And my heart cannot be long unfruitful, sure.

Aria. Well, I cannot believe they forged these
Letters; what should be their end?

Gat. That you may easily guess at; but methinks
They took a very improper way to compass it.

Aria. It looks more like the malice or Jealousy
Of a Woman, then the design of two witty men.

Gat. If this should prove a Fetch of her Ladyships
Now, that is a playing the loving Hypocrite
Above with her dear Sir Oliver.

Aria. How unluckily we were interrupted, when
They were going to show us the hand!

Gat. That might have discovered all: I have a
Small suspicion, that there has been a little
Familiarity between her Ladyship and
Mr. Courtall.

Aria. Our finding of 'em together in the Exchange,
And several passages I observed at the Bear, have
Almost made me of the same opinion.

Gat. Yet I would fain believe the countinuance
Of it is more her desire, then his inclination:
That which makes me mistrust him most, is her
Knowing we made 'em an appointment.

Aria. If she were jealous of Mr. Courtall, she
Would not be jealous of Mr. Freeman too; they
Both pretend to have received Letters.

Gat. There is something in it more then we are
Able to imagine; time will make it out, I hope,
To the advantage of the Gentlemen.

Aria. I would gladly have it so; for I believe,
Should they give us a just cause, we should find it
A hard task to hate them.

Gat. How I love the Song I learnt the other day,
Since I saw them in the Mulberry-Garden!
She sings. To little or no purpose I spent many days,
In ranging the Park, the Exchange, and the Plays;
For ne' re in my rambles till now did I prove
So luckie to meet with the man I could love.
Oh! how I am pleased when I think on this man,
That I find I must love, let me do what I can!
2.
How long I shall love him, I can no more tell,
Then had I a Fever, when I should be well.
My passion shall kill me before I will show it,
And yet I would give all the world he did know it;
But oh how I sigh, when I think should he woo me,
I cannot deny what I know would undo me!

Aria. Fie, Sister, thou art so wanton.

Gat. I hate to dissemble when I need not;
'Twou'd look as affected in us to be reserved
Now we are alone, as for a Player to maintain
The Character she acts in the Tyring-room.

Aria. Prithee sing a good Song.

Gat. Now art thou for a melancholy Madrigal,
Composed by some amorous Coxcomb, who
Swears in all Companies he loves his Mistress
So well, that he would not do her the injury,
Were she willing to grant him the favor,
And it may be is Sot enough to believe he
Would oblige her in keeping his Oath too.

Aria. Well, I will reach thee thy Guitar out of
The Closet, to take thee off of this subject.

Gat. I Would rather be a Nun, then a Lover at
Thy rate; devotion is not able to make
Me half so serious as Love has made
Thee already.

Aria. opens the Closet, Court. and Free. come out. Court. Ha, Freeman! is this
your business
With a Lawyer? here is a new discovery, in faith!

They shriek and run out. Free. Peace, man, I will satisfy your Jealousy
Hereafter; since we have made this lucky
Discovery, let us mind the present bus'nesses.

Court. and Free. catch the Ladies, and bring them back. Court. Nay, Ladies,
now we have caught you,
There is no escaping till we are come to a right
Understanding.

Enter Lady Cock. and Sir Oliv. and Sentry. Free. Come, never blush, we are as
loving as
You can be for your hearts, I assure you.

Court. Had it not been our good Fortunes to
Have been concealed here, you would have
Had ill Nature enough to dissemble with
Us at least a fortnight longer.

La. Cock. What Is the matter with you here?
Are you mad, Cousins? bless me, Mr. Courtall
And Mr. Freeman in our house at these
Unseasonable hours?

Sir Oliv. Fetch me down my long Sword, Sentry,
I lay my life Courtall has been tempting the
Honor of the young Ladies.

La. Cock. Oh my Dear!

She holds him. Gat. We are almost scared out of our wits;
My Sister went to reach my Guitar out of the
Closet, and found 'em both shut up there.

La. Cock. Come, come, this will not serve your
Turn; I am afraid you had a design secretly
To convey 'em into your Chamber: well,
I will have no more of these doings in my
Family, my Dear; Sir Ioslin shall remove
These Girls to morrow.

Free. You injure the young Ladies, Madam;
Their surprise shows their innocence.

Court. If any body be to blame, it is Mrs. Sentry.

Sent. What mean you, Sir? Heaven knows
I know no more of their being here --

Court. Nay* nay, Mrs. Sentry, you need not
Be ashamed to own the doing of a couple of
Young Gentlemen such a good office.

Sent. Do not think to put your tricks upon me, Sir.

Court. Understanding by Mrs. Sentry, Madam,
That these young Ladies would very likely
Sit and talk in the Dining Room an hour before
They went to bed, of the accidents of the
Day, and being impatient to know whether
That unlucky business which happened in
The Spring-Garden, about the Letters, had
Quite destroyed our hopes of gaining their
Esteem; for a small sum of money Mr. Freeman
And I obtained the favor of her to shut us
Up where we might over-hear 'em.

La. Cock. Is this the truth, Sentry?

Sent. I humbly beg your pardon, Madam.

La. Cock. A Lady's Honor is not safe, that keeps
A Servant so subject to corruption; I will turn
Her out of my Service for this.

Aside. Sir Oliv. Good! I was suspicious their bus'nesses
Had been with my Lady at first.

La. Cock. Now will I be in Charity with him*
Again, for putting this off so handsomely.

Sir Oliv. Hark you my Dear, shall I forbid
Mr. Courtall my house?

La. Cock. Oh! by no means, my Dear; I had
Forgot to tell thee, since I acquainted thee with
That business, I have been discoursing with my
Lady Love-youth, and she blamed me infinitely
For letting thee know it, and laughed exceedingly
At me, believing Mr. Courtall intended thee
No injury, and told me 'twas only a harmless
Gallantry, which his French breeding
Has used him to.

Sir Oliv. Faith, I am apt enough to believe it;
For on my conscience, he is a very honest Fellow.
Ned Courtall! how the Devil came it about
That thee and I fell to Sa, Sa, in the
Spring-Garden?

Court. You are best able to resolve your
Self that, Sir Oliver.

Sir Oliv. Well, the Devil take me, if I had the
Least unkindness for thee -- prithee let us
Embrace and kiss, and be as good Friends
As ever we were, dear Rogue.

Court. I am so reasonable, Sir Oliver, that I will
Ask no other satisfaction for the injury you have
Done me.

Free. Here Is the Letter, Madam.

Aria. Sister, look here, do you know this hand?

Gat. It Is Sentry's.

La. Cock. Oh Heavens! I shall be ruined yet.

Gat. She has been the Contriver of all this mischief.

Court. Nay, now you lay too much to her charge
In this; she was but my Lady's Secretary, I
Assure you, she has discovered the whole
Plot to us.

Sent. What does he mean?

La. Cock. Will he betray me at last?

Court. My Lady being in her Nature severely
Virtuous, is, it seems, offended at the innocent
Freedom you take in rambling up and down
By your selves; which made her, out of a
Tenderness to your Reputations, counterfeit
These Letters, in hopes to fright you to that
Reservedness which she approves of.

La. Cock. This has almost redeemed my opinion
Of his Honor.
Aside. Cousins, the little regard you had to the good
Counsel I gave you, puts me upon this
Business.

Gat. Pray, Madam, what was it Mrs. Gazet
Told you concerning us?

La. Cock. Nothing, nothing, Cousins: what I told
You of Mr. Courtall, was mere invention, the
Better to carry on my design for your good.

Court. Freeman! pray what brought you hither?

Free. A kind Summons from her Ladyship.

Court. Why did you conceal it from me?

Free. I was afraid thy peevish Jealousy might
Have destroyed the design I had of getting an
Opportunity to clear our selves to the
Young Ladies.

Court. Fortune has been our friend in that
Beyond expectation.
To the Ladies. I hope, Ladies, you are satisfied
Of our innocence now.

Gat. Well, had you been found guilty of the
Letters, we were resolved to have counterfeited
Two Contracts under your hands, and have
Suborned Witnesses to swear 'em.

Aria. That had been a full revenge; for I know
You would think it as great a Scandal to be
Thought to have an inclination for Marriage,
As we should to be believed willing to take
Our freedom without it.

Court. The more probable thing, Ladies, had
Been only to pretend a Promise; we have
Now and then courage enough to venture so far
For a valuable consideration.

Gat. The truth is, such experienced Gentlemen
As you are, seldom mortgage your persons
Without it be to redeem your Estates.

Court. It Is a mercy we have 'scap'd the mischief
So long, and are like to do Penance only for
Our own sins; most Families are a Wedding
Behind hand in the World, which makes
So many young men fooled into Wives, to pay
Their Fathers Debts: all the happiness a
Gentleman can desire, is to live at liberty,
Till he be forced that way to pay his own.

Free. Ladies, you know we are not ignorant
Of the good Intentions you have toward
Us; pray let us treat a little.

Gat. I hope you are not in so desperate a
Condition, as to have a good opinion of
Marriage, are you?

Aria. It Is to as little purpose to treat with us
Of any thing under that, as it is for those kind
Ladies, that have obliged you with a valuable
Consideration, to challenge the performance
Of your promise.

Sir Oliv. Well, and how, and how, my dear Ned,
Goes the business between you and these Ladies?
Are you like to drive a Bargain?

Court. Faith, Sir Oliver, we are about it.

Sir Oliv. And cannot agree, I warrant you; they
Are for having you take a Lease for life, and you are
For being Tenants at Will, Ned, is it not so?

Gat. These Gentlemen have found it so convenient
Lying in Lodgings, they will hardly venture on the
Trouble of taking a House of their own.

Court. A pretty Country-seat, Madam, with a
Handsome parcel of Land, and other necessaries
Belonging to it, may tempt us; but for a Town*
Tenement that has but one poor convenience,
We are resolved we'll never deal.

A noise of Music without. Sir Oliv. Hark! my Brother Iolly's come home.

Aria. Now, Gentlemen, you had best look to
Your selves, and come to an agreement with us
Quickly; for I Will lay my life, my Uncle has
Brought home a couple of fresh Chap-men,
That will out-bid you.

Enter Sir Joslin with Music. Sir Ios. Hey Boys!

Dance. Sings. A Catch and a Glass,
A Fiddle and a Lass,
What more would an honest man have?
Hang your temperate Sot,
Who would seem what he is not;
It Is I am wise, he is but grave.
Sir Ios. What Is here? Mr. Courtall and Mr. Freeman!

Sir Oliv. Oh man! here has been the prettiest,
The luckiest discovery on all sides! we are
All good Friends again.

Sir Ios. Hark you Brother Cockwood, I have got
Madam Rampant; Rake-hell and she are without.

Sir Oliv. Oh Heavens! dear Brother Jolly, send
Her away immediately, my Lady has such an aversion
To a naughty Woman, that she will swound if
She does but see her.

Sir Ios. Faith, I was hard put to it, I wanted a
Lover, and rather then I would break my old
Wont, I dressed up Rampant in a Suit I bought
Enter Rake-hell. Of Rake-hell; but since this good Company's here,
I Will send her away. My little Rake-hell, come
Hither; you see here are two powerful Rivals;
Therefore for fear of kicking, or a worse disaster,
Take Rampant with you, and be going quickly.

Rake. Your humble Servant, Sir.
Ex. Rake-hell and Rampant.
Court. You may hereafter spare your self this
Labor, Sir Ioslin; Mr. Freeman and I have vowed
Our selves humble Servants to these Ladies.

Free. I hope we shall have your approbation, Sir.

Sir Ios. Nay, if you have a mind to commit
Matrimony, I Will send for a Canonical Sir shall
Dispatch you presently.

Free. You cannot do better.

Court. What think you of taking us in the humor?
Consideration may be your Foe, Ladies.

Aria. Come, Gentlemen, I Will make you a fair
Proposition; since you have made a discovery
Of our inclinations, my Sister and I will be content
To admit you in the quality of Servants.

Gat. And if after a months experience of your
Good behavior, upon serious thoughts, you have
Courage enough to engage further, we will accept
Of the Challenge, and believe you men of Honor.

Sir Ios. Well spoke in faith, Girls; and is it
A match, Boys?

Court. If the heart of man be not very deceitful,
It Is very likely it may be so.

Free. A month is a tedious time, and will be a
Dangerous trial of our resolutions; but I
Hope we shall not repent before Marriage,
Whatever we do after.

Sir Ios. How stand matters between you and
Your Lady, Brother Cockwood? is there
Peace on all sides?

Sir Oliv. Perfect concord, man: I will tell
Thee all that has happened since I parted from
Thee, when we are alone, 'twill make thee laugh
Heartily. Never man was so happy in a
Virtuous and a loving Lady!

Sir Ios. Though I have led Sir Oliver astray
This day or two, I hope you will not exclude me
The Act of Oblivion, Madam.

La. Cock. The nigh Relation I have to you,
And the Respect I know Sir Oliver has for you,
Makes me forget all that has passed, Sir; but pray
Be not the occasion of any new transgressions.

Sent. I hope, Mr. Courtall, since my endeavors
To serve you, have ruined me in the opinion of
My Lady, you will intercede for a reconciliation.

Court. Most willingly, Mrs. Sentry -- faith, Madam,
Since things have fallen out so luckily, you must
Needs receive your Woman into favor again.

La. Cock. Her Crime is unpardonable, Sir.

Sent. Upon solemn protestations, Madam, that
The Gentlemen's intentions were honorable,
And having reason to believe the young Ladies
Had no aversion to their inclinations, I was
Of opinion I should have been ill natured, if I
Had not assisted 'em in the removing those
Difficulties that delayed their happiness.

Sir Oliv. Come, come, Girl, confess how many
Guinnys prevailed upon your easy Nature.

Sent. Ten, an't please you, Sir.

Sir Oliv. 'Slife, a sum able to corrupt an honest
Man in Office! faith you must forgive her,
My Dear.

La. Cock. If it be your pleasure, Sir Oliver,
I cannot but be obedient.

Sent. If Sir Oliver, Madam, should ask me to
See this Gold, all may be discovered yet.

La. Cock. If he does, I will give thee ten
Guinnys out of my Cabinet.

Sent. I shall take care to put him upon it;
It Is fit, that I who have bore all the blame,
Should have some reasonable reward for it.

Court. I hope, Madam, you will not envy me
The happiness I am to enjoy with your
Fair Relation

La. Cock. Your ingenuity and goodness, Sir,
Have made a perfect atonement for you.

Court. Pray, Madam, what was your business
With Mr. Freeman?

La. Cock. Only to oblige him to endeavor a
Reconciliation between you and Sir Oliver;
For though I was resolved never to see your
Face again, it was death to me to think
Your life was in danger.

Sent. What a miraculous come off is this*
Madam!

La. Cock. It has made me so truly sensible of
Those dangers to which an aspiring Lady
Must daily expose her Honor, that I am
Resolved to give over the great business of
This Town, and hereafter modestly
Confine my self to the humble Affairs
Of my own Family.

Court. It Is a very pious resolution, Madam,
And the better to confirm you in it, pray
Entertain an able Chaplain.

La. Cock. Certainly Fortune was never before
So unkind to the Ambition of a Lady.

Sir Ios. Come, Boys, faith we will have a
Dance before we go to bed -- Sly-girl and
Mad-cap, give me your hands, that I may
Give 'em to these Gentlemen, a Parson shall
Join you e're long, and then you will have
Authority to dance to some purpose: Brother
Cockwood, take out your Lady, I am for Mrs. Sentry.
We'll foot it and side it, my pretty little Miss,
And when we are aweary, we'll lie down and kiss.
Play away, Boys.

They dance. Court. to Gatty. Now shall I sleep as little
Without you, as I should do with you:
Madam, expectation makes me almost
As restless as Jealousy.

Free. Faith, let us dispatch this business;
Yet I never could find the pleasure of waiting*
For a Dish of Meat, when a man was heartily
Hungry.

Gat. Marrying in this heat would look as ill
As fighting in your Drink.

Aria. And be no more a proof of Love,
Then the other is of Valor.

Sir Ios. Never trouble your heads further;
Since I perceive you are all agreed on the
Matter, let me alone to hasten the Ceremony:
Come, Gentlemen, lead 'em to their Chambers;
Brother Cockwood, do you show the way
With your Lady.
Ha Mrs. Sentry!
Sings. I gave my Love a Green-gown
In The merry month of May,
And down she fell as wantonly,
As a Tumbler does at Play.
Hey Boys, lead away Boys.

Sir Oliv. Give me thy hand, my Virtuous, my Dear;
Henceforwards may our mutual Loves increase,
And when we are a bed, we'll sign the Peace.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

