A LETTER Written from HIS EXCELLENCY ROBERT Earl of ESSEX Unto the Speaker of
the House of Commons. Relating the true state of the late Skirmish at Chinner,
between a party of the Kings, and Parliaments Forces, on Sabbath day the 19th
of June, 1643.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith printed
and published. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Lawrence Blaiklock at the Sugar loaf
near Temple Bar, 1643.

A Letter sent from his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, directed to the
Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THere being some of my Horse that had an Encounter with the Enemy yesterday
being sunday, I thought fit to give the House an Account of the particulars of
it, knowing how apt many are to mis-report things to our disadvantage.

About two of the clock on Sunday morning the Enemy with about 1200. Horse and
a great body of Dragoons fell into a Town called Porcham, where one Troop of
Horse (being Colonel Morleyes) was quartered, of which they took the greatest
part, and from thence went not far to a another Village called Chinner, where
they beat up some of the new Bedfordshire Dragoons and took some of them
Prisoners, and three of their Colors; and some of the Officers behaving
themselves very well, and defending the houses wherein they were; they set fire
on the Town; these being out Quarters, the Alarm came where Major Gunter lay
with three Troops (viz.) his own, Captain Sheffields, and Captain Crosses, whom
he presently drew out and marched toward the Enemy; Colonel Hampden being
abroad with Sir Samuel Luke and only one man, and seeing Major Gunters Forces,
they did go along with them, Colonel Dulbeir the Quartermaster General did
likewise come to them: with these they drew near the Enemy, and finding them
marching away, kept still upon the Rear for almost five miles. In this time
there joined with them Captain Sanders Troop and Captain Buller, with fifty
commanded men, which were sent to Chinner by Sir Philip Stapleton, who had the
watch here that night at Them: when he discovered the fire there, to know the
occasion of it he likewise sent one Troop of Dragoons under the command of
Captain Dundasse who came up to them. There were likewise some few of Colonel
Melves Dragoons that came to them: at length our men pressed them so near,
that being in a large pasture Ground they drew up, and notwithstanding the
inequality of the numbers, we having not above 300 Horse, our men charged them
very gallantly, and slew diverse of them; but while they were in fight, the
Enemy being so very strong, kept a body of horse for his reserve, and with that
Body wheeled about and charged our men in the Rear, so that being encompassed
and overborne with multitude, they broke and fled, though it was not very
far; For when I heard that our men Marched in the Rear of the Enemy, I sent
to Sir Philip Stapleton, who presently Marched toward them with his Regiment;
and though he came somewhat short of the Shirmish, yet seeing our Men Retreat
in that disorder, he stopped them, caused them to draw into a Body with him,
where they stood about an hour: Whereupon the Enemy marched away. In this
Skirmish there were slain forty and five on both sides, whereof the greater
part were theirs. They carried off the Bodies of diverse persons of quality. On
our side Mayor Gunter was killed, but some say he is prisoner and so hurt; a
man of much courage and fidelity, his bravery engaging him and his small
Party too far: Colonel Hamden put himself in Captain Cross his Troop,
where he charged with much courage, and was unfortunately shot through the
Shoulder. Sir Samuel Luke thrice taken prisoner, and fortunately rescued:
Captain Cross had his Horse killed under him in the midst of the Enemy, and
was mounted by one of his own men, who quitted his own Horse to safe his
Captain. Captain Buller was shot in the Neck, who showed very much resolution
in this fight, taking one prisoner after he was shot. Mounseir Dulbeir with
Captain Bosa and Captain Ennis did likewise carry themselves very well. We
likewise lost two Colors, viz. Mayor Gunters, and Captain Sheffeilds; no
Prisoners of quality were taken by the Enemy, but Captain Sheffeilds Brother.
Prince Rupert was there in person, and the Runagado Hurry. We took prisoner one
of the Earl of Berks sons, Captain Gardener, the late Recorders son of
London, and Captain Smith, with some others of quality, and diverse prisoners.

Sir, this is the true Relation of what passed in this business. I rest,

Your assured Friend, Essex.
Them 19. June, 1643.
FINIS*

