AN ESSAYE Upon his Royal Highness the Duke of YORK His Adventure against the
DUTCH.
SInce the proud Dutch will yet again provoke
Heaven and the Duke to give the second stroke,
May he strike deep, and let the angry Fates
Make the Hogen Mogen, Poor distressed States.
Why may not good Prayers do as much as charms,
And make the Duke secure from shot and harms?
If Prayers repeated backwards have such might,
Sure they have greater when repeated right.
May The English Sea (like that famed steed would take
No other but his Master on his back)
Stoop to receive Great James, but praunc'd and throw
The Dutch, and trample over th'usurping Foe,
May't smile and frown at once, and every wave
To him a Bull-wark be to's Foes a Grave.
There let'um with their bodies satisfy
Neptune for the Earth they stole out of the Sea.
It Is fit some Colonies should be sent down,
To people once again their drowned Town:
Whose Steeples at low-tide peep out o'th Sea,
Showing what is become of all their Piety.
May the kind Winds which from the British Shore
Come whistling, on his head soft blessings pour.
And when he fights like Vassals let them run,
With their swift feet to aid the tardy Gun.
But to the Duth may their infections breath
Not only Storms and Tempests bring but Death.
Let 'um with oblique blasts their Bullets spoil,
Or make 'um on their Masters heads recoil.
And if the sacrilegious Lead comes near
Great James, let it straight melt into a Tear:
And fall at's feet, over come by's powerful rays
Whilst no bold Thunder hurt's his conquering Bays.
When e're his bellowing Guns shall roar for prey,
Impatient even of the short delay,
Of these swift Messengers, they just now sent,
VVhirling through the amazed Element:
May the sure Bullets, they (like Spiders) spun
From their own bowels, prove destruction.
And never from their bellies let 'um go
But into those of the capacious Foe.
Then may the Guns, as though they would Victory got,
With a great shout applaud the lucky shot.
May the great cloud of Smoke be, while they fight,
To our men Day, to those Egiptians Night.
And when our Ships laden with Fire and Death,
Directed by some VVind's auspicious breath.
Shall catch their perjured Hulks, may they enlarge
Whatever is committed to their charge.
Chains, Bullets, Fire, and whatsoever else kills.
As though they were Pandora's box of Ills.
Let those ambitious Semeles of theirs
Dye in the embraces of our Thunderers.
Let never a drunken Bacchus of them fly,
For safety to the shelter of Jove's thigh.
May our great Admiral still Victorious prove,
Assisted by the Almighty Power above.
Let Wildfire from his Guns so swiftly fly,
As if h'ad borrowed lightning from the Sky.
And if from theirs any attaque his Ship,
Let it like lambent Meteors harmless skip,
And on his Sails a lucky Castor be,
A certain token of Prosperity.
Whilst over the Dutchmen to inhaunce their fears,
Nothing but Hellen's boading Torch appears.
And when great York from Sea return's again,
May Squadrons of Dutch-Ships augment his train.
Let Captive Holland into England come,
And Conquering England into Holland roam.
FINIS.
Printed for W. Gilbert at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1672.


