THE Comical Revenge; OR, LOVE IN A TUB.

Acted at His Highness the Duke of YORK's Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LICENSED,

July 8. 1664* Roger L' Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Blew-Anchor, in the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1664.

To the Honorable CHARLES Lord BVCKHVRST.
My Lord,
I Could not have wished my self more fortunate then I have been in the success
of this Poem: The Writing of it was a means to make me known to your Lordship;
The Acting of it has lost me no Reputation; And the Printing of it has now
given me an opportunity to show how much I honor you.

I here dedicate it, as I have long since dedicated my self, to your Lordship:
Let the humble Love of the Giver make you set some value upon the worthless
Gift: I hope it may have some esteem with others, because the Author knows how
to esteem you, whose Knowledge moves admiration, and Goodness love, in all that
know you. But I design this a Dedication, not a Panegerick; not to proclaim
your Virtues to the World, but to show your Lordship how firmly they have
obliged me to be,

My Lord, Your most humble and faithful Servant, GEO. ETHEREGE.

Personae Dramatis.
The Lord Bevill, Father to Lovis, Graciana, and Aurelia. The Lord Beaufort,
Servant to Graciana. Colonel Bruce, A Cavalier, Friend to Lovis, in love with
Graciana. Lovis, Friend to Bruce. Sir Frederick Frollick, Cousin to the Lord
Beaufort. Graciana, A young Lady, in love with the Lord Beaufort. Aurelia, Her
Sister, in love with Col. Bruce. Mrs. Rich, A wealthy Widow, Sister to the Lord
Bevill, in love with Sir Frederick. Letitia, A Girl, waiting upon Aurelia.
Betty, Waiting Woman to the Widow. Dufoy, A saucy impertinent Frenchman,
Servant to Sir Frederick. Clark, Servant to the Lord Beaufort. Sir Nicholas
Cully. Knighted by Oliver. Wheedle and Palmer, Gamesters. Mrs. Grace, A Wench
kept by Wheedle. Jenny, Her Maid. Mrs. Lucy. A Wench kept by Sir Frederick. A
Coachman belonging to the Widow. A Bell-man. Footmen, Link-boys, Drawers, and
other Attendants.
THE PROLOGUE.
WHo could expect such crowding here to day,
Merely on the report of a new Play?
A man would think you have been so often bit
By us of late, you should have learned more wit,
And first have sent a Forlorne-hope to spy
The Plot and Language of our Comedy,
Expecting till some desperate Critticks had
Resolved you whether it were good or bad:
But yet we hope you will never grow so wise;
For if you should, we and our Comedies
Must trip to Norwich, or for Ireland go,
And never fix, but, like a Puppit-show,
Remove from Town to Town, from Fair to Fair,
Seeking fit Chapmen to put off our Ware.
For such our Fortune is this barren Age,
That Faction now, not Wit, supports the Stage:
Wit has, like Painting, had her happy flights,
And in peculiar Ages reached her heights,
Though now declined; yet could some able Pen
Match Fletcher's Nature, or the Art of Ben,
The Old and Graver sort would scarce allow
Those Plays were good, because we writ them now.
Our Author therefore begs you would forget,
Most Reverend Judges, the Records of Wit,
And only think upon the modern way
Of writing, whilst you are Censuring his Play.
And Gallants, as for you, talk loud in the Pit,
Divert your selves and Friends with your own Wit;
Observe the Ladies, and neglect the Play;
Or else it is feared we are undone to day.
THE Comical Revenge; OR, Love in a Tub.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
The Scene, an Ante-Chamber to Sir Frederick Frollick's Bedchamber. Enter
Dufoy, with a Plaster on his head, walking discontentedly; and Clarke
immediately after him. Clark. Good Morrow, Monsieur.

Dufoy. Good-mor', -- good-mor'.

Clark. Is Sir Fred'rick stirring?

Duf. Pox stir hime.

Clark. My Lord has sent me --

Duf. Begar me vil have de revenge; me vil no stay two day in England.

Clark. Good Monsieur, what is the matter?

Dufoy. De matre! de matie is easy to be perceive;
Dis Bedlame, Mad-cape, diable de matie, vas
Drunk de last night, and vor no reason, but dat
Me did advise him go to bed, begar he did
Strike, break my head, Jernie.

Clark. Have patience, he did it unadvisedly.

Dufoy. Unadvise I did not me advise him
Just when he did ite?

Clark. Yes; but he was in drink you say.

Dufoy. In drink! me vishe he had been over de head
And de ear in drink; Begar in France de
Drink dat van mand drink does not crack de
Noder man's brain; Hark! --
Sir Fred. knocks. He is avake, and none of de peeple are
To attend hime: Ian Villian day are all gone, run
Knocks again. To de Diable; have de patience, I beseech you.

Pointing toward his Masters Chamber. Clark. Acquaint Sir Frederick I am here
from my Lord.

Dufoy. I will, I will; your ver umble Serviteur.

Exeunt. SCEN. II.
Scene, Sir Frederick's Bedchamber. Enter Sir Frederick in his nightgown, and
after him Dufoy. Duf. Good-mor, good-mor to your Vorshippe; me am alvay
Ready to attend your Vorshippe, and your Vorshippe's
Alvay ready to beat and to abuse me; you vare drunk
De last night, and my head ache to day morninge;
Showing his head. See you here if my brain have no ver good raison
To counsel you, and to mind your business.

Sir Fred. Thou have a notable brain;
Set me down a Crown for a
Plaster; but forbear your rebukes.

Dufoy. It Is vercouragious ting to break de head of your
Serviteur, is it note? Begar you vil never keep
De good Serviteur, had no me love youever vel. --

Sir Fred. I know thou love me.

Dufoy. And darefore you do beat me, is dat de raison?

Sir Fred. Prithee forbear; I am sorry for it.

Dufoy. Ver good satisfaction! Begar it is me dat am
Sorry for it.

Sir Fred. Well, well.

Dufoy. De Serviteur of my Lord your Cousin
Be come speak vid you.

Sir Fred. Bring him in.
Exit Dufoy. I am of opinion that drunkenness is not so
Damnable a sin to me as it is to many; Sorrow
And Repentance are sure to be my first Work
The next morning: 'Slid, I have known some
So lucky at this recreation, that, whereas it is
Familiar to forget what we do in drink, have
Even lost the memory, after sleep, of being
Drunk: Now do I feel more qualms then
A young woman in breeding.
Enter Dufoy and Clark. Dufoy goes out again. Clark! What news from the God of
Love? he is
Always at your Master's elbow, h'as jostl'd the
Devil out of service; no more!
Mrs. Grace! Poor Girl, Mrs. Graciana has flung a
Squib into his bosom, where the wildfire will
Huzzee for a time, and then crack; it
Fly's out at's Breeches.

Clark. Sir, he sent me before with his service; he will
Wait on you himself when he is dressed.

Sir Fred. In very good time; there never was a girl
More humoursome, nor tedious in the dressing of
Her Baby.

Ex. Clark. Enter Dufoy, and Footboy. Dufoy. Hay! here is de ver vine varke
Begar, de ver vine varke! --

Sir Fred. What Is the business?

Dufoy. De business! de divil take me if dare be not
De whole Regiment Army de Hackene Cocheman,
De Linke-boy, de Fydler, and de Shamber-mayde,
Dat have beseege de house; dis is de consequance
Of de drink vid a pox.

Sir Fred. Well, the Coach-men and Link-boys must be
Satisfied, I suppose there is money due to 'em; the
Fiddlers, for broken heads and Instruments,
Must be compounded with; I leave that to your care;
But for the Chambermaid, I Will deal with her
My self; go, go, fetch her up.

Dufoy. De Pimpe, begar I will be de pimpe to no man
In de Christendom; do you go vech her up;
De Pimpe --
Exit Dufoy.
Sir Fred. Go Sirrah, direct her.
To the Foot-b.] Ex. Foot-b. Now have I most unmanfully fallen foul upon some
Woman, I Will warrant you, and wounded her
Reputation shrowardly: Oh drink, drink! thou
Art a vile enemy to the civillest sort of courteous
Ladies. --
Enter Jenny, Wheadle's Wenches maid. Oh Ienny, next my heart nothing could
Be more welcome.

Maid. Unhand me;
Are you a man fit to be trusted with a woman's
Reputation?

Sir Fred. Not when I am in a reeling condition; men are
Now and then subject to those infirmities
In drink, which women have when they are sober.
Drunkenness is no good Secretary, Ienny; you
Must not look so angry, good faith you must not.

Maid. Angry! we always took you for a civil Gentleman.

Sir Fred. So I am i'troth I think. --

Maid. A civil Gentleman will
Come to a Ladies Lodging at two a clock in
The morning, and knock as if it were upon
Life and death; a Midwife was never knocked up
With more fury.

Sir Fred. Well, well, Girl, all is well I hope, all is well.

Maid. You have made such an Uproar amongst
The Neighbors, we must be forced to change
Our Lodging.

Sir Fred. And thou art come to tell me whither; --
Kind heart! --

Maid. I Will see you a little better manner'd first.
Because we would not let you in at that
Unseasonable hour, you and your rude
Ranting Companions hoop'd and hollowed like
Madmen, and roared out in the streets,
A whore, a whore, a whore; you need not have
Knocked good people out of their Beds, you
Might have met with them had been good
Enough for your purpose abroad.

Sir Fred. 'Twas ill done Ienny, indeed it was.

Ma. 'Twas a mercy Mr Wheedle was not there, my Mistresses
Friend; had he been there sh'ad been quite undone.
There Is nothing got by your lewd doings; you are
But scandals to a civil Woman: We had so much
The good will of the Neighbors before, we had
Credit for what we would; and but this morning the
Chandler refused to score a quart of Scurvy Grass.

Sir Fred. Hang Reputation amongst a company of Rascals;
Trust me not if thou art not grown most wondrous pretty.

Offers to hug her. Maid. Stand off, or I protest I Will make the people
In your Lodging know what a manner of
Man you are.

Sir Fred. You and I have been intimate acquaintance; --
Why so coy now, Ienny?

Maid. Pray forbear: --
You Will never leave till I shriek out; -- Your
Noise within. Servants listen, hark -- there is some body coming.
My Mistress charged me to tell you she will
Enter Beaufort. Never see your eyes again; she never deserved
This at your hands, -- poor Gentlewoman: -- You had a
Fling at me too, you did not whisper it, I thank
You: It Is a miserable condition we
Women bring our selves too for your sakes.

Weeps. Beauf. How now Cousin! what, at wars with the Women?

Sir Fred. I gave a small alarm to their Quarters
Last night, my Lord.

Beauf. Ienny in tears! what is the occasion, poor Girl?

Maid. I Will tell you, my Lord.

Sir Fred. Buzze; Set not her tongue a going again;
Clapping his hand before her mouth. She Has made more noise then half a dozen
Paper-mills: London Bridge at a low water is
Silence to her; in a word, rambling last
Night, we knocked at her Mistresses Lodging,
They denied us entrance, whereupon a harsh
Word or two flew out, Whore -- I think, or
Something to that purpose.

Maid. These were not all your Heroic actions;
Ent. Dufoy. Pray tell the Consequence, how you marched
Bravely at the rere of an Army of
Link-boys; upon the sudden,: how you gave
Defiance, and then waged a bloody war with the
Constable; and having vanquished that
Dreadful enemy, how you committed a general
Massacre on the glass-windows: Are not these
Most honorable achievements, such as will be
Registered to your eternal Fame, by the most
Learned Historians or Hicks's Hall

Sir Fred. Good sweet Ienny let us come to a Treaty;
Do but hear what Articles I Will propose.

Maid. A Woman's heart's too tender to be an enemy
To Peace.

They whisper. Dufoy. Your most humble Serviteur, my Lord.

Beauf. Monsieur, I perceive you are much to blame;
You are an excellent Governor indeed.

Dufoy. Begar do you tinke dat I am de Bedlame?
No tinge but de Bedlame can govern hime.

Sir Fred. Ienny, here is my hand; I Will come and make
Amends for all -- pretty Rogue. --

Dufoy. Ver pret Rogue,
Vid a pox.

Maid. What rude French Rascal have you here?

Dufoy. Rascale! Begar ver it nod vor
De reverence of my Matre I vod cut off your occupation
French Rascale! Whore English --

Sir Fred. Dufoy, be gone, and leave us.

Dufoy. I will, I will leave you to your recreation; I
Vishe you ver good pastime, and de pox
Begar.
Exit Dufoy.
Maid. I never heard a ruder Fellow. -- Sir Frederick, you
Will not fail the time.

Sir Fred. No, no, Ienny.

Maid. Your Servant, my Lord.

Beauf. Farewell Ienny.

Ex. Ienny. Sir Fred. Now did all this fury end in a mild
Invitation to the Ladies Lodging.

Beauf. I have known this wenches Mistress
Ever since I came from Travel, but never
Was acquainted with that Fellow that
Keeps her; prithee what is he?

Sir Fred. Why his name is Wheedle; he is one whose trade is Treachery,
To make a Friend, and then deceive him;
He Is of a ready Wit, pleasant Conversation,
Thoroughly skilled in men; in a word, he
Knows so much of Virtue as makes him
Well accomplished for all manner of Vice:
He has lately insinuated himself into
Sir Nich'las Culley, one whom Oliver, for the
Transcendent knavery and disloyalty of
His Father, has dishonored with Knighthood;
A fellow as poor in experience as in parts,
And one that has a vainglorious humor to gain a
Reputation amongst the Gentry, by feigning good nature, and
An affection to the King and his Party.
I made a little debauch the other day in their Company,
Where I foresaw this fellow's destiny, his purse must pay
For keeping this Wench, and all other Wheadle's extravagances.
But pray, my Lord,
How thrive you in your more honorable
Adventures? Is harvest near? When is the
Sickle to be put in the Corn?

Beauf. I have been hitherto so prosperous,
My happiness has still out-flown my faith:
Nothing remains but Ceremonial Charms,
Graciana's fixed in the circle of my Arms.

Sir Fred. Then you are a happy man for a season.

Beauf. For ever.

Sir Fred. I mistrust your Mistresses Divinity; you will
Find her Attributes but Mortal:
Women, like Juglers Tricks,
Appear Miracles to the ignorant; but in them-
-Selves the are mere cheats.

Beauf. Well, well, Cousin; I have engaged that you this day
Shall be my Guest at my Lord Bevill's Table;
Pray make me Master of my promise once.

Sir Fred. Faith I have engaged to dine with my dear
Lucy; poor Girl, I have lately given her
Occasion to suspect my kindness; yet for your
Sake I Will venture to break my Word,
Upon condition you will excuse
My errors; you know my
Conversation has not been amongst ceremonious
Ladies.

Beauf. All modest freedom you will find allowed;
Formality is banished thence.

Sir Fred. This Virtue is enough to make me bear
With all the inconveniences of honest Company.

Beauf. The freeness of your humor is your friend.
I have such news to tell thee that I fear
Thou Wilt find thy breast too narrow for thy joy.

Sir Fred. Gently, my Lord, lest I find the thing too
Little for my expectation.

Beauf. Know that thy careless carriage has done more
Then all the skill and diligence of Love
Could e're effect.

Sir Fred. What? the Widow has some kind thoughts of my body.

Beauf. She loves you, and dines on purpose at her Brother's house
This day, in hopes of seeing you.

Sir Fred. Some Women like Fishes despise the
Bait, or else suspect it, whilst still it is
Bobbing at their mouths; but subtly waved
By the Angler's hand, greedily hang themselves upon the hook.
There are many so critically wise, they will suffer
None to deceive them but themselves.

Beauf. Cousin, it is time you were preparing for your Mistress.

Sir Fred. Well, since it is my fortune, I Will about it.
Widow, thy ruin lie on thy own head:
Faith, my Lord, you can witness 'twas none
Of my seeking.

Exeunt. SCEN. III.
Scene, Wheadle's Lodging. Enter Wheedle and Palmer. When. Come, bear thy losses
patiently.

Palm. A pox confound all Ordinaries,
If ever I play in an Ordinary again --

Bites his thumb. Whead. Thou Wilt lose thy money:
Thou have no power to forbear;
I will as soon undertake to reclaim
A Horse from a hitch he has learned in his pace,
Or an old Mastive from worrying of Sheep.

Palm. Ay, ay, there is nothing can do it but hemp.

Whead. Want of money may do much.

Palm. I protest I had rather still be vicious
Then owe my Virtue to Necessity.
How commendable is chastity in an Eunuch?
I am grown more then half virtuous of late:
I have laid the dangerous Pad now quite aside;
I walk within the Purlieus of the Law.
Could I but leave this Ordinary, this Square,
I were the most accomplished man in Town.

Whead. It Is pity thou art Master of thy Art;
Such a nimble hand, such neat conveyance.

Palm. Nay, I should have made an excellent Jugler, 'faith.

Whead. Come, be cheerful,
I Have lodged a Deer shall make amends for all;
I lacked a man to help me set my Toyls,
And thou art come most happily.

Palm. My dear Wheedle, who is it?

Whead. My new Friend
And Patron Sir Nicholas Cully.

Palm. He Is fat, and will say well, I promise you.
Well, I Will do his business most dexterously,
Else let me ever lose the honor
Of serving a Friend in the like nature.

Whead. No more words, but haste, prepare for the design;
Habit your self like a good thrifty Countryman;
Get Tools, Dice, and Money for the purpose,
And meet me at the Devil about three exactly.

Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, Sr Nicholas Cully is without.

Whead. Desire him to walk in.
Here Palmer, the back-way, quickly, and be sure --

Palm. Enough, enough, I Will warrant thee.

Ex. Palm. Enter Sir Nicholas Cully. Whead. Sir Nicholas, this Visit is too
great a favor;
I intended one to you; how do you
Find your self this morning?

Cul. Faith much the dryer for the last nights wetting.

Whead. Like thirsty earth, which gapes the more
For a small shower; we will soak you
Thoroughly to day.

Cul. Excuse me, faith I am engaged.

Whead. I am sorry for it;
I meant you a share in my good fortune;
But since it cannot be --

Cul. What? what good fortune?

Whead. Nay, 'twill but vex you to know it,
Since you have not leisure to pursue it.

Cul. Dear Wheedle, prithee tell me.

Whead. Now do I want power to keep it from you.
Just as you came in at that door, went
Out at this a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
Sent with a civil Message from her Lady,
To desire the happiness of my Company
This afternoon, where I should have the
Opportunity of seeing another lovely brisk
Woman, newly married to a foolish
Citizen, who will be apt enough to hear
Reason from one that can speak it better then
Her Husband: I returned my humble
Thanks for the honor she did me, and that
I could not do my self so great an injury
To disobey her will; this is
The adventure; But since you have business --

Cul. A pox on business, I Will defer't.

Whead. By no means for a silly Woman; our Pleasures
Must be slaves to our Affairs.

Cul. Were it to take possession of an
Estate, I Would neglect it.
Are the Ladies Cavaliers?

Whea. Oh, most Loyal-hearted Ladies!

Cul. How merry will we be then!

Whead. I say, mind your business.

Cul. I Will go and put it off immediately.
Where shall I meet you in the afternoon?

Whead. You Will find me at the Devil about three
A clock, where I expect a second summons as
She passes toward the City.

Cul. Thither will I come without fail; be sure
You wait for me.
Exit Cully.
Whead. Wait for thee, as a Cat does for a Mouse
She intends to play with, and then prey upon.
How eagerly did this half-witted fellow chap
Up the bait? like a ravenous Fish, that will
Not give the Angler leave to sink his Line,
But greedily darts up and meets it half way.

Ex. laughing. SCEN. IV.
Scene, The Lord Bevill's House. Enter Graciana, and Aurelia immediately after
her, with a Letter in her hand. Grac. The Sun's grown lazy; it is a tedious
space
Since he set forth, and yet's not half his race.
I wonder Beaufort does not yet appear;
Love never loyters, Love sure brings him here.

Aur. Brought on the wings of Love, here I present
Presenting the Letter. His Soul, whose Body Prisons yet prevent;
The noble Bruce, whose Virtues are his Crimes:
Grac. rejects the Letter. Are you as false and cruel as the times!
Will you not read the story of his grief?
But wilfully refuse to give relief?

Grac. Sister, from you this language makes me start:
Can you suspect such vices in my heart?
His Virtues I, as well as you, admire;
I never scorned, but pity much his fire.

Aur. If you did pity, you would not reject
This Messenger of Love: This is neglect.

Grac. rejects the Letter again. Grac. It Is cruelty to gaze on Wounds I Am sure,
When we want Balsome to effect their Cure.

Aurel. It Is only want of will in you, you have
Beauty to kill, and Virtue too to save.

Grac. We of our selves can neither love nor hate;
Heaven does reserve the power to guide our Fate.

Aurel. Graciana, --

Enter Lord Bevill, Lovis, and the Widow. Grac. Sister, forbear; my Father's
here.

L. Bev. So Girl; what, no news of your Lover yet?
Our Dinner's ready, and I am afraid
He will go nigh to incur the Cooks anger.

Wid. I believe h'as undertook a hard task;
Sir Frederick, they say, is no easy man
To be persuaded to come among us women.

Lovis. Sir.

Lovis and L. Bevill whisper. L. Bev. What now?

Wid. I am as impatient as thou art, Girl;
I long to see Sir Frederick here.

To Graciana. L. Bev. Forbear, I charge you on my blessing;
Not one word more of Colonel Bruce.

Lovis. You gave encouragement Sir to his Love;
The honor of our House now lies at stake.

L. Bev. You find by your Sisters Inclinations
Heaven has decreed her otherwise.

Lovis. But Sir, --

L. Bev. Forbear to speak, or else forbear the Room.

Lovis. This I can obey, but not the other.
Exit Lovis.
Enter Footboy. Foot-b. Sir, my Lord Beaufort's come.

L. Bev. It Is well.

Wid. D'hear, are there not two Gentlemen?

Foot-b, Yes Madam, there is another proper handsome Gentleman.
Exit Footboy.
L. Bev. Come, let us walk in, and give them entertainment.

Wid. Now Cousin for Sr Frederick, this man of men,
There Is nothing like him.

Exeunt all but Aurelia. Aur. With curious diligence I still have strove
Holding the Letter in her hand. During your absence, Bruce, to breath your Love
Into my Sisters bosom; But the fire
Wants force; Fate does against my breath conspire:
I have obeyed, though I cannot fulfill,
Against my self, the dictates of your Will:
My Love to yours does yield; Since you enjoined,
I hourly court my Rival to be kind;
With passion too, as great as you can do,
Taught by those wounds I have received from you.
Small is the difference that is between our grief;
Yours finds no cure, and mine seeks no relief:
You unsuccessfully your Love reveal;
And I for ever must my Love conceal:
Within my bosom I Will your Letter wear,
Putting the Letter in her bosom. It is a Tomb that is proper for despair.
Exit.
ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Scene, The Lord Bevill's House. Enter Clark and Dufoy. Clark. MEthinks the
wound your Master gave you Last night, makes you look very thin and Wan,
Monsieur.


Dufoy, Begar you are mistake, it be de vounde
Dat my Metresle did give me long ago.

Clark. What? some pretty little English Lady's
Crept into your heart?

Dufoy. No, but damned littel English Whore is creep
Into my bone begar, me could vish dat de
Diable vould take her vid all my heart

Clark. You have managed your business ill, Monsieur.

Dufoy. It vas de Raskal Cyrugin English dat did
Manage de business ille; me did put my
Business into his haunde; he did stop de
Tape, and de liquor did varke, varke, varke,
Up into de head and de shoulder begar.

Clark. Like soap clapped under a Saddle.

Dufoy. Here come my Matre, hold your peace.

Ex. Clark. Enter Sir Frederick, Widow, and Maid. Sir Fred. Whither, whither do
you draw me, Widow?
What Is your design?

Wid. To walk a turn in the Garden, and then
Repose in a cool Arbor.

Sir Fr. Widow, I dare not venture my self in those amorous
Shades; you have a mind to be talking of Love
I perceive, and my heart's too tender to be trusted
With such conversation.

Wid. I did not imagine you were so foolishly
Conceited; is it your Wit or your Person, Sir,
That is so taking?

Sir Fred. Truly you are much mistaken, I have no
Such great thoughts of the young man you
See; who ever knew a Woman have so much
Reason to build her Love upon merit?
Have we not daily experience of great
Fortunes, that fling themselves into the arms
Of vain idle Fellows? Can you blame me then
For standing upon my guard? No, let us
Sit down here, have each on's a Bottle of Wine
At our elbows; so prompted, I dare enter into
Discourse with you.

Wid. Would you have me sit
And drink hand to fist with you, as if we were
In the Fleece, or some other of your beloved
Taverns?

Sir Fred. Faith I would have thee come as near
As possible to something or other I have
Been used to converse with, that I may
The better know how to entertain thee.

Wid. Pray which of those Ladies you use to
Converse with, could you fancy me to
Look like? be merry, and tell me.

Sir Fred. Twere too great a sin to compare thee
To any of them; and yet thou have so incensed
Me, I can hardly forbear to wish thee one
Of Them, Ho, Dufoy!
Widow, I stand in awe of this Gentleman;
I must have his advice before I dare
Keep you company any further. -- How do
You approve the spending of my time
With this Lady?

Dufoy. Ver vel, Begar;
I could vish I had never spend my time in de
Vorse compaignie.

Wid. You look but ill, Monsieur; have
You been sick lately?

Dufoy. I have de ver great affliction in my mind,
Madam.

Wid. What is it?

Dufoy. Truly I have de ver great passion vor dis
Jentel-woman, and she have no compassion
At all vor me; she do refuse me all my
Amoure and my adresse.

Wid. Indeed Betty you are to blame.

Maid. Out upon him for a French dissembler,
He never spoke to me in his life, Madam.

Dufoy. You see, Madam, she scorn me vor
Her Serviteur.

Maid. Pray, when did you make any of your French
Love to me?

Dufoy. It vil break my heart to remember de
Time ven you did refuse me.

Wid. Will you permit me to serve you in this
Business, Monsieur?

Dufoy. Madam, it be d'honour vor de King de France.

Wid. Betty, whither run you?

Maid. I Will uot stay to be jeered by a sneaking
Valet-De chamber: I Will be revenged
If I live, Monsieur.

Ex. Betty. Wid. I Will take some other time.

Dufoy. Van you have de leisure, Madam.

Sir Fred. By those lips, --

Wid. Nay, pray forbear, Sir.

Sir Fred. Who Is conceited now, Widow? could
You imagine I was so fond to kiss them?

Wid. You cannot blame me for standing on
My guard so near an Enemy.

Sir Fred. If you are so good at that, Widow,
Let Us see, what guard would you choose to be at
Should the Trumpet sound a Charge
To this dreadful foe?

Wid. It is an idle Question amongst experienced
Soldiers; but if we ever have a War,
We Will never trouble the Trumpet; the
Bells shall proclaim our Quarrel.

Sir Fred. It will be most proper; they shall be
Rung backwards.

Wid. Why so, Sir?

Sir Fred. I Will have all the helps that may be to
Allay a dangerous fire; Widows must
Needs have furious flames; the bellows
Have been at work, and blown'em up.

Wid. You grow too rude, Sir: I will have my
Humor, a walk in the Garden; and afterward
We Will take the Air in the Park.

Sir Fred. Let us join hands then, Widow.

Wid. Without the dangerous help of a Parson
I do not fear it, Sir.

Ex, Sir Fred. and Wid. Dufoy, Begar, I do no care two Soulz if de
Shamber-maid ver hang be it not
Great deal better pretend d' affection to
Her, dan to tell de hole Varlde I do take
De Medicine vor de clape; begar it
Be de ver great deal better.
Ex. Dufoy.
SCEN. II.
Scene, A Garden belonging to my Lord Bevill's House. Enter Beaufort and
Graciana. Beauf. Graciana, why do you condemn your Love?
Your Beauty without that, alas! would prove
But my destruction, an unlucky Star
Prognosticating ruin and despair.

Grac. Sir, you mistake; it is not my Love I blame,
But my Discretion; Pointing to her breast.
Here the active flame*
Should yet a longer time have been concealed;
Too soon, too soon I fear it was revealed.
Our weaker Sex glories in a Surprise,
We boast the sudden Conquests of our Eyes;
But men esteem a Foe that dares contend,
One that with noble Courage does defend
A wounded Heart; the Victories they gain
They prize by their own hazard and their pain.

Beauf. Graciana, can you think we take delight
To have our happiness against us fight;
Or that such goodness should us men displease
As does afford us Heaven with greater ease?
Enter Lovis, walking discontentedly. See where your Brother comes; his
Carr'age has been strange of late to me;
I never gave him cause of discontent;
He takes no notice of our being here:
I will salute him.

Grac. By no means;
Some serious thoughts you see employ his mind.

Beauf. I must be civil. Your Servant, Sir.

Lov. You are my Sisters Servant, Sir; go fawn
Upon your Mistress; Fare-you-well.
Ex. Lovis.
Beauf. Fare-you-well, if you are no better Company.
Heavens! what is the matter?
Grac. weeps. What saucy sorrow dares approach your heart?
Waste not these precious Tears; Oh, weep no more!
Should Heaven frown the world would be too poor,
(Robbed of the sacred Treasure of your eyes)
To pay for Mercy one fit Sacrifice.

Grac. My Brother, Sir, is growing mad, I fear.

Beauf. Your Brother is a man whose noble Mind
Was to severest Virtue still inclined;
He in the School of Honor has been bred,
And all her subtle Laws with heed has read:
There is some hidden cause, I fain would know
From whence these strange disorders in him flow,
Graciana, shall I beg you to dispel
These Mists which round my troubled Reason dwell.

Grac. It is a Story I could wish you would learn
From one whom it does not so much concern;
I am the unhappy cause of what you have seen;
My Brother's passion does proceed from mine.

Beauf. This does confound me more! it cannot be;
You are the joy of all your family:
Dares he condemn you for a noble love
Which honor and your duty both approve.

Grac. My Lord, those errors merit our excuse
Which an access of virtue does produce.

Beauf. I know that envy is too base a guest
To have a lodge ng in his generous breast;
It Is some extreme of Honor, or of Love,
Or both, that thus his indignation move.

Grac. Er'e I begin, you my sad story end;
You are a Rival to his dearest Friend.

Beauf. Graciana, though you have so great a share
Of Beauty, all that see you Rivals are;
Yet during this small space I did proclaim
To you, and to the world, my purer flame,
I never saw the man that durst draw near,
With his ambitious Love t'assault your Ear.
What providence has kept us thus asunder?

Grac. When I have spoke you will find it is no wonder.
He has a Mistress more renowned then me,
Whom he does Court, his dearer Loyalty;
He on his legs does now her favors wear;
He is confined by her foul Ravisher:
You may not know his Person; but his Name
Is strange to none that have conversed with Fame.
It Is Bruce.

Beauf. The Man indeed I never did see,
But have heard wonders of his Gallantry.

Grac. This gallant Man my Brother ever loved;
But his Heroic Virtues so improved
In time those seeds of Love which first were sown,
That to the highest Friendship they are grown,
This Friendship first, and not his Love to me,
Sought an Alliance with our Family.
My Sister and my self were newly come
From learning how to live, to live at home;
When barren of Discourse one day, and free
With His Friend, my Brother chanced to talk of me;
Unlucky accident! his Friend replied,
He long had wished their Blood might be allied;
Then pressed him that they might my Father move
To give an approbation to his Love:
His Person and his Merits were so great,
He granted faster then they could entreat;
He wished the Fates which govern hearts would be
So kind to him to make our hearts agree;
But told them he had made a sacred Vow,
Never to force what Love should disallow.
Enter Sir Frederick and Widow. But see, Sir Frederick and my Aunt.
My Lord, some other time I will relate
The story of his Love, and of its Fate.

Sir Fred. How now my Lord? so grave a countenance
In the presence of your Mistress?
Widow, what would you give
Your eyes had power to make me such
Another melancholy Gentleman?

Wid. I have seen e'ne as merry a man as
Your self, Sir Frederick, brought to stand
With folded arms, and with a tristful look
Tell a mournful tale to a Lady.

Enter a Footboy, and whispers Sir Frederick. Sir Fred. The Devil ows some men
a shame;
The Coach is ready; Widow, I know
You are ambitious to be seen in my Company.

Wid. My Lord, and Cousin, will you honor
Me with yours to the Park; that may take off the
Scandal of his?

Enter Aurelia and Leticia. Beauf. Madam, we will wait upon you;
But we must not leave this Lady behind us.

Wid. Cousin Aurelia --

Aurel. Madam, I beg you will excuse me, and
You, my Lord; I feel a little indisposition,
And dare not venture into so sharp an
Air.

Beauf. Your Servant, Madam.

Exeunt all but Aurelia and Leticia. Aurel. Retire; I would not have you stay
with me,
I have too great a train of misery.
If virtuous Love in none be cause of shame,
Why should it be a crime to own the flame,
But we by Custom, not by Nature led,
Must in the beaten paths of Honor tread.
I love thee, Bruce; but Heaven, what have I done!
Leticia, did I not command you hence?

Letic. Madam, I hope my care is no offense:
I am afflicted thus to see you take
Delight to keep your miseries awake.

Aurel. Since you have heard me, swear you will be true;
Leticia, none must know I love but you.

Letic. If I at any time your Love declare,
May I of Heaven and serving you despair.
Though I am young, yet I have felt this smart;
Love once was busy with my tender heart;

Aurel. Were thou in love?

Letic. I was.

Aurel. Prithee, with whom?

Letic. With one that like my self did newly bloom:
Methoughts his Actions were above his Years.

She weeps. Aurel. Leticia, you confirm me by your tears;
Now I believe you loved; did he love you?

Letic. That had been more then to my Love was due;
He was so much above my humble Birth,
My Passion had been fitter for his mirth.

Aurel. And does your Love continue still the same?

Letic. Some sparks remain, but Time has quenched the flame;
I hope 'twill prove as kind to you, and cure
These greater griefs which (Madam) you endure.

Aurel. Time to my bleeding heart brings no relief;
Death there must heal the fatal wounds of grief:
Leticia, come, within this shady Bower
We Will join our mournful voices, and repeat
The saddest tales we ever learned of Love.

Aurelia and Leticia walk into an Arbor, and sing this Song in Parts. SONG.
WHen Phillis watched her harmless Sheep
Not one poor Lamb was made a prey;
Yet she had cause enough to weep,
Her silly heart did go astray:
Then flying to the neighboring Grove,
She left the tender Flock to rove,
And to the Winds did breath her Love.
She sought in vain
To ease her pain;
The heedless winds did fan her fire;
Venting her grief
Gave no relief;
But rather did increase desire.
Then sitting with her arms across,
Her sorrows streaming from each eye;
She fixed her thoughts upon her loss,
And in despair resolved to die.
Aur. Why should you weep, Leticia, whilst we sing?
Walking out of the Arbor. Tell me from whence those gentle Currents spring.
Can yet your faded Love cause such fresh showers?
This water is too good for dying flowers.

Letic. Madam, it is such Love commands this dew
As cannot fade; it is my love to you.

Aurel. Leticia, I am weary of this place;
And yet I know not whither I should go.

Letic. Will you be pleased to try if you can sleep?
That may deceive you of your cares awhile.

Aurel. I will: there is nothing here does give me ease,
But in the end will nourish my disease.

Exeunt. SCEN. III.
Scene, A Tavern. Enter Wheedle, and immediately after him a Footboy. Whead.
The hour is come;
Where Is your Master, Sirrah?

Foot-b. He Will be here immediately, Sir.

Whead. Is he neatly dressed?

Boy. In the very suit he won the other day
Of the Buckingham-shire Grasier.

Whead. Take this Letter, and give it me
When you perceive me talking with
Sir Nicholas Cully, with recommendations from
A Lady; lurk in some secret place till he is
Come, that he may not perceive you at his
Entrance. Oh, here is Palmer.
Exit Footboy. Thom, what is the price of a score of fat
Enter Palmer. Weathers?

Palm. Do they not well become me, boy?

Whead. Nature doubtless intended thee for a Rogue,
She has so well contrived thee for
Disguises. Here comes Sir Nicholas.
Enter Sir Nicholas. Sir Nicholas, come, come; This is an honest Friend
And Countryman of mine.

Sir Nich. Your servant, Sir; is not the Lady come by yet?

Whead. I expect her every moment, -- Ho, here is her Boy.
Well, what news?

Enter Boy. Boy. My Lady presents her service to you, Sir, and has
Sent you this.

Delivers a Letter. Wheedle reads, and seems much displeased. Sir Nich. What is
the matter, man?

Whea. Read read; I want patience to tell you.
Gives Cully the Letter. Fortune still jades me in all my expectations.

Sir Nich. reading the Letter. The Citizens wife forced
To go to Greenwitch with her husband;
Will meet some time next week.
Come, come, Wheedle, another time will do;
be not so passionate, man.

Whead. I must abuse my friend upon an idle
Woman's words!

Sir Nich. Pish, it is an accident: Come, let us
Drink a glass of Wine, to put these Women
Out of our heads.

Palm. Women? ho Boys, Women, where are the Women?

Whead. Here Is your merry Countryman.

Palmer sings.
He took her by the Apron,
To bring her to his beck;
But as he wound her to him
The Apron-strings did break.
Enter Drawer with Wine. Sir Nich. A merry man indeed. Sir, my service to you.

Drinks to Palmer. Palm. Thank you, Sir. Come Mr Wheedle, remembering
My Landlord, in faith; would he were even among us now.
Come, be merry man. To S. Nich.
Lend me your hand, Sir; you
Look like an honest man; here is a good health
To all that are so: Tope -- here pledge me.

Drinks. Gives Sir Nicholas the Glass. Sir Nich. Mr Wheedle, to you.

Drinks, and leaves some in the Glass. Palm. I Will not abate you an ace. 'Slid,
you are not
So honest as I took you for.

Sir Nicholas drinks up the rest. Palmer Sings.
If any man baulk his Liquor
Let him never baulk the Gallows,
But sing a Psalm there with' Vicar,
Or die in a dirty Alehouse.
Enter Drawer. Drawer. There Is a Countryman below desires to
Speak with his Master Palmer.

Palm. So, so, thank thee Lad; it is my man, I
Appointed him to call here; h'as sold the Cattle
I Will warrant you: I Will wait upon you again
Presently, Gentlemen.
Ex. Palmer.
Whead. Is not this a very pleasant fellow?

Sir Nich. The pleasant'st I ever met with; What is he?

Whead. He Is a Buckingham-shier Grasier, very
Rich; he has the fat Oxen, and fat Acres in the Vale:
I met him here by chance, and could not avoid
Drinking a glass of Wine with him. I believe he is
Gone down to receive money;
'Twere an excellent design to buble him.

Sir Nich. How 'twou'd change his merry note; will you
Try him?

Whead. Do you:
I cannot appear in it, because he takes me for his Friend.

Sir Nich. How neatly I could Top upon him!

Whead. All things will pass upon him; I Will go
Your half: Talk of Dice, you will
Perceive if he is coming. What money have you
About you?

Sir Nich. Ten pieces.

Whead. I have about that quantity too, here, take it.
If he should run us out of our ready money
Be sure you set him deep upon Tick,
If he will be at you, that we may recover it;
For we will not pay a farthing of what we lose
That way. Hush, here he comes.

Enter Palmer with a bag of Money under his arm, and flings it upon the Table.
Palm. All my fat Oxen and Sheep are melted
To this, Gentlemen.

Whead. Their grease is well tried, Sir.

Sir Nich. Come, Sir, for all your riches, you are in
Arrear here.

Offers him a Glass. Palm. I Will be soon out of your debts: My hearty
Love to you, Sir. Drinks.] Would
I had you both in Buckingham-shier, and a
Pipe of this Canary in my Cellar; we'd
Roast an Ox before we parted; should we
Not, Boy?

Palmer Sings.
We'd sing, and we'd laugh, and we'd drink all the day;
Our Reason we'd banish, our senses should sway;
And every Pleasure our Wills should obey.
Palm. Come, drink to me a brimmer if you
Dare now.

Sir Nich. Nay, if you provoke me you will find me a
Bold man: Give me a bigger glass, Boy:
So, this is fit for men of Worship: Hang your
Retail Drinkers; have at thee, my brave Countryman.

Drinks. Palm. I Will do all I can for my guts to pledge thee.
Ho, brave boys! that is he, that is he, in faith; how
I could hug thee now! Mr Wheedle, to you.

Whead. I protest, Gentlemen, you will fright me out
Of your Company. Sir Nicholas, shall we have
The Other round.

Sir Nich. Let Us pause a while. What say
You, Gentlemen, if, to pass away the time,
And to refresh us, we should have a box and dice,
And fling a merry Mayn among our selves in sport?

Whea. 'Twil spoil good Company; by no means, Sr Nicholas.

Palm. Hang play among Friends; let us have a Wench:
Sings.
And Jenny was all my Joy,
She had my Heart at her will;
But I left her and her toy
When once I had got my fill.
What say you, shall we have her?

Sir Nich. We are not drunk enough for a Wench.

Palm. Let Us sing a Catch then.

Whead. Cull. Agreed, agreed.

Whead. Begin, Mr Palmer.

Palmer sings, standing in the middle, with a Glass of Wine in his hand. Palm.
I have no design here,
But drinking good Wine here.

Whea. Nor I, Boy.

Sr Nic. Nor I, Boy.

Whea. The art my Boy.

Sr Nic. The art my Boy.

All 3. Our heads are too airy for Plots:
Let us hugg then all three,
Since our Virtues agree,
We Will hollow and cast up our Hats.

They hollow whilst Palmer drinks, and then change till it has gone round. Sir
Nich. Enough, enough.

Palm. Very good boys all, very good boys all. Give
Me a glass of Wine there; fill a Brimmer: Sir
Nicholas, your Lady.

Sir Nich. Pray, Sir, forbear; I must be forced to leave
Your Company else.
Prithee, Wheedle, let us have a Box and Dice.

Whead. We shall grow dull. Mr Palmer, what say
You to the business?

Palm. I do not understand Dice: I understand good
Pasture and drink. -- Hang the Devil's bones.

Wheedle whispers Cully to send for Dice. Cully whispers the Drawer. Palmer
Sings.
He that leaves his Wine for Boxes and Dice,
Or his Wench for fear of mishaps,
May he beg all his days, cracking of Lice,
And die in conclusion of Claps.
Enter Drawer with Dice. Palm. Come, come, Gentlemen, this is the harmlesser
Sport of the two; a merry glass round.

Sir Nich. Excuse me, Sir; I Will pledge you here.
Takes Dice. Come, come, Sir, on Six; Six is the Main.

Palm. The Main? what is the Main?

Sir Nich. Do not you understand Hazard?

Palm. I understand Dice, or hap-hazard!

Sir Nich. Can you play at Passage?

Palmer. You pass my understanding: I can fling
Most at a throw, for a Shot, or a glass of Wine.

Sir Nich. Passage is easily learned: The Caster wins
If he fling above ten with Doublets upon
Three Dice.

Palm. How Doublets?

Sir Nich. Two of a sort; two Cinques, two Tre's, or the like.

Palm. Ho, ho; I have you.

Sir Nich. Come, set then.

Palm. I set you this Bottle.

Sir Nich. Nay, nay, set money!

Palm. Is it a fair play Mr. Wheedle, I trust to you.

Whead. Upon my word a very fair square play; but
This table is so wet, there is no playing upon it.

Drawer. Will you be pleased to remove into the next Room,
Gentlemen?

Sir Nich. I think 'twill not be amiss.

Whead. Much better. Come Mr Palmer.

Palm. I Will follow, Sir.

Palmer sings.
If she be not as kind as fair,
But peevish and unhandy,
Leave her, she is only worth the care
Of some spruce Iack-a-dandy.
I would not have thee such an Ass,
Had thou never so much leisure.
To sigh and whine for such a Lass
Whose Pride's above her Pleasure.
Sir Nich. Ho brave Boy!

Palm. March on, march on.
SINGS.
Make much of every buxome Girl,
Which needs but little Courting;
Her value is above the pearl,
That takes delight in sporting.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Scene, A Tavern. Enter Sir Nicholas Cully, Wheedle, Palmer, and Drawer. Palm.
NAy, Sir Nich'las, for all your haste, I must
Have a Note under your hand for the tho usa
Pounds you owe me.

Whead. This must not be among Friends, Mr Palmer;
Sir Nich'las shall not pay the money.

Sir Nich. I had been a Madman to play at such a rate
If I had ever intended to pay.

Palm. Though I am but a poor Countryman I scorn
To be choused; I have Friends in Town.

Whead. But hark you, Mr Palmer.

Palm. Hark me no harks; I Will have my money.

Sir Nich. Drawer, take you Reckoning.

Whead. laughing. Farewell, Sir; haste into the Country to
Mind your Cattle.

Palm. But hark you, Gentlemen; are you in earnest?

Whead. Ay indeed; fare you well, Sir.

Palm. I took you for my Friend, Mr Wheedle;
But now I perceive what you are.
To Cully*
Your ear, Sir.

Whead. Never fear him; he dares not to go into the
Field, without it be among his sheep.

Cul. Agreed; to morrow, about eight in the morning,
Near Pancridge.

Whead. I will have the honor to serve you, Sir Nich'las.
Provide your self a Second, Mr Palmer.

Exeunt Sir Nich and Whead. laughing. Palm. So, laugh:
This is the Sheep that I must fleece.
Exit.
SCEN. II.
Scene, COVENT GARDEN. Enter Sir Frederick Frollick, with Fiddlers before him,
and six or eight Link-boys, dancing and singing. Sir Fred. Here, here, this is
the window; range your
Selves here.

Enter the Bell-man, Bell-m. Good Morrow, Gentlemen.

Sir Fred. Honest Bell-man, prithee lend me they Bell.

Bell-m. Withal my heart, Master.

Sir Fred. rings the Bell, and then repeats these Verses. Sir Fred. You Widow,
that do sleep dog-sleep,
And now for your dead Husband weep,
Perceiving well what want you have
Of that poor worm has eat in Grave;
Rise out of Bed, and open the door;
Here Is that will all your joys restore.
Good Morrow, my Mistress dear, Good Morrow.
Good Morrow, Widow.

He rings the Bell again. The Chambermaid comes to the Window unlac'd, holding
her Petticoats in her hand. Maid. Who Is that that comes at this unseasonable
Hour, to disturb my Ladies quiet.

Sir Fred. An honest Bell-man, to mind her of her frailty.

Maid. Sir Frederick, I wonder you will offer this;
You will loose her favor for ever.

Sir Fred. Y' are mistaken; now is the time to creep into
Her favor.

Maid. I Am sure you have waked me out of the sweetest sleep.
Hey ho --

Sir Fred. Poor girl! let me in, I Will rock
Thee into a sweeter.

Maid. I hear a stirring in my Mistresses Chamber;
I believe you have frighted her.
Exit Maid.
Sir Fred. Sound a fresh Alarm; the Enemy's at hand.

Fiddlers play. The Widow comes to the Window in her Nightgown. Wid. Whose
insolence is this, that dares affront me Thus?

Sir Fred. in a Canting Tone. If there be insolence in Love, it is I
Have done you this unwilling injury.

Wid. What pitiful rhyming fellow's that? he speaks
As if he were prompted by the Fiddlers.

Sir Fred. Alas, what pains I take thus to unclose
Those pretty eyelids which locked up my Foes!

Wid. A godly Buke would become that tone a great
Deal better: He might get a pretty living by
Reading Mother Shipton's Prophesies, or some
Pious Exhortation at the corner of a Street:
His mournful voice, I vow, has moved my compassion.

Sir Fred. Ay, ay, we should have a fellow-feeling of one
Another indeed, Widow.

Wid. Sir Frederick, is it you?

Sir Fred. Yes truly; and can you be angry, Lady?
Have not your Quarters been beaten up
At these most seasonable hours before now?

Wid. Yes; but it has been by one that has had a Commission
For what he did: I Am afraid should it once become
Your Duty, you would soon grow weary of the Employment.

S. Fr. Widow, I hate this distance; it is not the English fashion:
Prithee let us come to it hand to fist.

Wid. I give no entertainment to such lewd persons.
Farewell, Sir.
Exit Widow.
S. Fr. I Will fetch thee again, or conjure the whole Garden up,
Sing the Catch I taught you at the Rose.

Fiddlers sing. SONG.
HE that will win a Widows heart
Must bear up briskly to her:
She loves the Lad that is free and smart,
But hates the Formal Wooer.
Widow runs to the Window again, with her Maid. Wid. Hold, hold, Sir Frederick;
what do you imagine
The Neighbors will think?

Sir Fred. So ill, I hope, of thee, thou wilt be forced to
Think the better of me.

Wid. I am much beholden to you for the care you have
Of my Reputation.

Sir Fred. Talk no more, but let the door be opened;
Or else Fiddlers --

Wid. Pray hold; what security shall I have for
Your good behavior?

Sir Fred. My Sobriety.

Wid. That Is pawned at the Tavern from whence
You came.

Sir Fred. Thy own Honesty then; is that engaged?

Wid. I think that will go nigh to secure me.
Give 'em entrance, Betty.

Ex. Widow, and her Maid. Enter Palmer, with a Link before him. Sir Fred. Ha!
who goes there?

Palm. An humble Creature of yours, Sir.

Sir Fred. Palmer in a disguise! What roguery
Have thou been about?

Palm. Out of my loyal inclinations doing
Service to his Majesty.

Sir Fred. What? a plotting?

Palm. How to destroy his enemies, Mr Wheedle
And I are very vigilant.

Sir Fred. In bubbling of some body, on my life,

Palm. We do not use to boast our services,
Nor do we seek Rewards; good actions
Recompense themselves.

Sir Fred. Ho, the door opens; farewell, Sirrah.
Gentlemen, wait you without, and be ready
When I call.
Honest Bell-man, drink this.

Gives the Bell-man money. Bell-m. Thank you, Noble Master.
Exit Bell-man.
Sir Fred. entering. Here Is something to stop thy mouth too.

The Maid shrieks. Maid. Out upon you, Sir Frederick; you will never leave
Your old tricks.

Exeunt. SCEN. III.
Scene, The Widows House. Enter Sir Frederick, leading the Widow, followed by
her Maid. Sir Fred. Little did I think I should ever have been brought
To this pass: Love never had the power to rob me
Of my rest before.

Wid. Alas, poor Gentleman! he has not been used to
These late hours.

Sir Fred. Widow, do not you be peevish now; it is dangerous
Jesting with my affection; it is in its infancy, and
Must be humored.

Wid. Pray teach me how, Sir.

Sir Fred. Why, with kisses, and such pretty little dalliances;
Thus, thus.

Kisses her. Wid. Hold, hold, Sir; if it be so froward, put it out
To Nurse; I am not so fond of it as you imagine;
Pray how have you disposed of your brave Camerades?
Have you left them to the mercy of the Beadle?

Sir Fred. No, you must be acquainted with their Virtues.
Enter, Gentlemen.

Enter the Fiddlers, and a Masque of the Link-boys, who are Dancing-masters,
disguised for the Frollick. Wid. These are men of skill.

After the Masque. Sir Fred. I disgus'd 'em for your entertainment.

Wid. Well, Sir, now I hope you will leave me to my
Rest.

Sir Fred. Can you in conscience turn a young man
Out of doors at this time of the night, Widow?
Fie, fie, the very thought on it will keep you
Waking.

Wid. So pretty, so well-favour'd a young man;
One that loves me.

Sir Fred. Ay, one that loves you.

Wid. Truly it is a very hard-hearted thing.

She sighs. Sir Fr. Come, come, be mollifi'd. You may go, Gentlemen,
And leave me here; you may go.

To the Masquers. Wid. You may stay, Gentlemen; you may stay,
And take your Captain along with you:
You Will find good Quarters in some warm Hay-loft.

S. Fr. Merciless Woman! Do but lend me thy Maid; faith I Will
Use her very tenderly and lovingly, even as I Would use
Thy self, dear Widow, if thou would but make proof
Of my affection.

Wid. If the Constable carry your suspicious person to the
Compter, pray let me have notice of it; I Will send my
Tailor to be your Bail.

Sir Fr. Go, go to bed, and be idle, Widow; that is worse then
Any misfortune I can meet with. Strike up, and give
Notice of our coming. Farewell, Widow;
I pity thy solitary condition.

Exeunt Fiddlers playing. SCEN. IV.
Scene, Sir Frederick's Lodging. Enter Dufoy, and Clark. Clark. I wonder Sir
Frederick stays out so late.

Dufoy. Dis is noting; six, seven a clock in de morning
Is ver good hour.

Clark. I hope he does not use these hours often.

Dufoy. Some six, seven time a veeke; no oftiner.

Clark. My Lord commanded me to wait his coming.

Dufoy. Matre Clark, to divertise you, I will tell you
How I did get be acquainted vid dis bedlam Matre.
About two, tree year ago me had for my conveniance
Enter a Footboy. Discharge my self from attending as Matre D'ostel to
A person of Condition in Parie; it hapen after de
Dispatch of my littel affair --

Foot-b. That is, after h'ad spent his money, Sir.

Dufoy. Jan foutre de Lacque; me vil have de Vip
And de Belle vor your breeck, Rogue.

Foot-b. Sir, in a word, he was Iack-pudding to a Mountebank,
And turned off for want of wit; my Master picked him
Up before a Puppit-show, mumbling a halfpenny
Custard, to send him with a Letter to the Post.

Dufoy. Morbleu, see, see de insolance of de Footboy English,
Bogre Rascale, you lie, begar I will cut your troate.

Exit Footboy. Clark. He Is a Rogue; on with your story, Monsieur.

Dufoy. Matre Clark, I am your ver humble Serviture; but
Begar me have no patience to be abuse. As I did say, After
De dispatche of my affa^^e van day being Idele, vich
Does produce de Mellanchollique, I did valke over
De new Bridge in Parie, and to devertise de time,
And my more serious tough^e, me did look to see
De Marrionete and de Jack-puddinge, vich
Did play hundred pretty trike, time de
Collation vas come; and vor I had no company, I vas
Unvilling to go to de Cabarete, but did buy a Darriole,
Little Custarde vich did satisfy my apetite ver vel:
In dis time young Mounfieur de Grandvil (a Jentelman
Of ver great Quallity, van dat vas my ver good Friend,
And has don me ver great and insignal faveure)
Come by in his Caroche, vid dis Sir Frollick, who did
Pention at de same Academy, to learn de
Language, de bon mine, de great horse, and
Many oder trike; Monsieur seeing me did
Make de bow, and did beken, beken me come
To him; he did tell me dat de Englis Jentelman
Had de Letre vor de Post, and did entreat
Me (if I had de oppertunity) to see de Letre
Deliver; he did tell me too, it vold be ver great
Obligation: de memory of de faveur I had
Receive from his Famelye, beside de inclination I
Naturally have to serve de strangere, made me
Return de complemen vid ver great civility,
And so I did take de Letre, and see it delivere.
Sir Frollick perceiving (by de managment of dis
Affair) dat I vas man d'esprit, and of vitte, did
Entreat me to be his Serviteur; me did take
D'affection to his Person, and vas content to live
Vid him, to counsel and to advise him. You see
Now de lie of de Bougre de Lacque English, Morbleu.

Enter a Footman. Foot-m. Monsieur, the Apothecary is without.

Dufoy. Dat news be no ver velcome, begar.
Matre Clarke, go and sit you down; I will but swal
My breakface, and be vid you again present.
Morbleu L' apothecare.

Exeunt. SCEN. V.
Scene, A Field. Enter Wheedle and Cully. Cully. Dear Wheedle, this is too
dangerous a testimony
Of thy kindness.

Whead. I should be angry with you if you thought so:
What makes you so serious?

Cul. I am sorry I did not provide for both our safeties.

Whead. How so?

Cul. Colonel Hewson is my neighbor, and very good
Friend; I might have acquainted him with
The business, and got him with a File of
Musketeers to secure us all.

Whead. But this would not secure your Honor.
What would the world have judged?

Cul. Let the world have judged what it would: Have
We not had many presidents of late, and
The world knows not what to judge?

Whead. But you see there was no need to hazard
Your Reputation; here is no enemy appears.

Cul. We have done our duty, let us be going then.

Whea. We ought to wait a while.

Cul. The air is so bleak, I vow I can no longer
Endure it.

Whea. Have a little patience, methinks I see two
Making toward us
In the next Close.

Cul. Where, where? it is them.

Whead. Bear up bravely now like a man.

Cul. I protest I am the worst dissembler
In cases of this nature.

Whead. Alon; look like a man of resolution.
Whither, whither go you?

Cul. But to the next house to make my Will,
For fear of the worst; tell them I Will be here
Again presently.

Whead. By no means; if you give 'em the least occasion
To suspect you, they' I appear like Lions.

Cul. Well, it is but giving security for the money;
That will bring me off at last.

Enter Palmer and his Second. Palm. I see you ride the Fore-horse, Gentlemen.

All strip but Cully, who fumbles with his Doublet. Whead. Good Morrow, Sir.

Sec. Come, Sir, let us match the swords.

To Wheedle. Whead. With all my heart.

They match the Swords. Palmer Sings.
He had and a good right Bilbo blade,
Wherewith he used to vapor;
Full many a stubborn Foe had made
To wince and cut a caper.
Sec. Here Is your Sword, Sir.

To Palmer. Palm. Come, Sir, are you ready for this sport?

To Cully. Cul. By and by, Sir; I will not rend the buttons from my
Doublet for no man's pleasure.

Whead. Death, you have spoiled all; make haste.

Cul. Hang 'em, the Devil eggs 'em on; they will fight.

Palm. What, will you never have done fumbling?

Sec. This is a shame; fight him with his Doublet on;
There Is no foul play under it.

Palm. Come, Sir, have at you.

Making to Cully. Sec. Here, here, Sir.

To Wheedle. Whead. I am for you, Sir.

Wheedle and the Second seem to fight. Cul. Hold, hold, I beseech you, Mr
Palmer, hear me,
Hear me.

Whead. What Is the matter?

Cul. My Conscience will not let me fight in a wrong
Cause; I will pay the money, I have fairly lost it.

Whead. How contemptible is man, overcome by the worst of
Passions, Fear! it makes him as much below Beasts
As Reason raises him above them. I will my self
Fight you both; Come on, if you dare. --

Cul. Prithee, dear Wheedle, do but hear me.

Whead. I disown all the kindness I ever had for you:
Where are these men of valor, which owe their
Virtue to this man's Vice? let me go, I will chastise
Their insolence my self.

Cully holds him. Cul. Dear Wheedle, bear with the frailties of
Thy Friend.

Whead. Death, what would you have me do? can I serve
You with any thing more dear then my life?

Cul. Let us give them security.

Whead. Do you know what it is you would do? have you considered
What a thousand Pounds is? it is a Fortune for any one man.

Cul. I will pay it all; thou shall be no loser.

Whead. Do you hear, Shepherd? how do you expect
This money?

Palm. I expect such security for it as my friend shall advise.

Sec. A Warrant to confess a Judgment from you both.

Whead. You shall be damned first; you shall
Have nothing.

Palm. and Sec. We Will have your bloods.

They proffer to fight; Cully holds Wheedle. Whead. Let me go.

Cul. Dear Wheedle, let it be so. You shall
Have a Judgment, Gentlemen.

Whead. I will take care hereafter with whom I engage.

The Second pulls papers out of his pocket What? you have your tackling about
you.
Sec. We have Articles for Peace, as well as Weapons
For War.

Whea. Dispatch, dispatch then, put me to no more
Torment with delays.

Sec. Come Sr Nicholas to the Book; you see we are favorable,
We grant you the benefit of your Clergy. -- Your
Cully subscribes on Palmer 's back, and then Wheedle. Helping hand, good Mr
Wheedle, to finish the work.

Whead. Take that into the bargain.

Kicks him. Palm. You shall have another, if you please, at the price.

Sec. We seldom quarrel under a thousand pounds.

Palm. and Sec. We wish you merry, Gentlemen.

Palmer Sings.
Come, let us to the Tavern escape,
And drink whilst we can stand;
We thirst more for the blood of the Grape
Then for the blood of man.
Exeunt Palmer and Second. Whead. Do you see now what men of mighty prowess
These are?

Cul. I was to blame, indeed.

Whead. I am in such a passion I know not what
To do: Let us not stand gazing here;
I would not have this known for a Kingdom.

Cul. No, nor I neither.

Exeunt. SCEN. VI.
Scene, The Lord Bevill's House. Enter my Lord Bevil and Lovis. Lovis. It Is yet
within your power, Sir, to maintain
Our Honor, and prevent this threatening stain.

L. Bev. Forbear this wicked insolence: Once more
I charge you think on your Obedience.
Exit L. Bevill.
Lovis. Beauty, what art thou, we so much admire!
Thou art no real, but a seeming fire,
Which, like the glowworm, only cast'st a light
To them whose Reason Passion does benight.
Thou art a Meteor, which but blazing dies,
Made of such vapors as from us arise.
Within thy guilty beams lurk cruel Fates,
To peaceful Families, and warring States.
Unhappy Friend, to dote on what we know --

Ent. a Servant. Serve. Sir, Colonel Bruce, unexpectedly released from
His Imprisonment, is come to wait upon you.
Exit Servant.
Lovis. What shall I do! Ye Powers above be kind,
Some counsel give to my distracted mind:
Friendship and shame within me so contend,
I know not how to shun or meet my Friend.

Enter Bruce. Bruce. Where is my generous Friend? Oh Noble Youth,
How long have I been robbed of this content?
They embrace. Though deprivation be the greatest pain,
When Heaven restores our happiness again,
It makes amends by our increase of joy,
Perfecting that which it did once destroy.
Dear Friend, my love does now exact its due;
Graciana must divide my heart with you:
Conduct me to your Sister, where I may
Make this my morn of Joy a glorious day.
What means this sad astonishment!

Lovis. How can we choose but with confusion greet,
When I your Joys with equal Sorrows meet?

Bruce. O Heaven! must my afflictions have no end!
I escaped my Foe, to perish by my Friend.
What strange disaster can produce this grief!
Is Graciana dead? Speak, speak; be brief.

Lovis. She lives; but I could wish her dead.

Br. Rash man! why should your envy swell so high,
To wish the world this great calamity?
Wish the whole frame of Nature were dissolved;
That all things to a Chaos were revolved.
There is more charity in this desire;
Since with our loss, our sorrows would expire.

Enter Aurelia. Lovis. Here comes Aurelia, sent for my relief;
Heaven knows her tongue can best express this grief:
Examine her, and you shall find ere long
I can revenge, though not relate your wrong.

Bruce. For pity haste, Aurelia, and declare
Kisses her hand. The reasons of your Brothers frighting care:
My soul is racked with doubts, until I know.
After a pause. Your silence and your looks, Aurelia, show
As if your kindness made you bear a part
Of those great sorrows that afflict his heart.

Aurel. His passion is so noble and so just,
No generous Soul can know it but it must
Lay claim unto a portion, as its due:
He can be thus concerned for none but you.

Bruce. Kind Maid, reveal what my misfortunes are;
Friendship must not engross them, though it share.
I would not willingly my Love suspect;
And yet I fear it is answered with neglect.

Aurel. My Sister, by unlucky stars misled,
From you and from her happiness is fled;
Unskilful in the way, by passion pressed,
She has took shelter in another breast.

Bruce. Fate, thou have done thy worst, thy Triumph sing;
Now thou have stung so home, thou have lost thy sting.
I have not power, Graciana, to exclaim*
After a pause. Against your fault; indeed you are to blame.

Lovis. Tell me, did she her promise plight, or give
Your love encouragement enough to live?

Bruce. It was her pity sure, and not her Love,
That made her seem my passion to approve:
My story was unpleasant to her ear
At first; but time had made her apt to hear
My Love: She told me that it grew her grief,
As much as mine, my pain found no relief;
Then promised she would endeavor the decrease
Of that in her which warred against my peace.
'Twas in this joyful spring of Love that I
Was ravished from her by our enemy:
My hopes grew strong, I banished all despair:
These glowing sparks I then left to the care
Of this fair maid, thinking she might inspire
My passion, and blow up the kindling fire.

Lovis. Alas! she, to my knowledge, has been true;
She Has spoke and sighed all that she could for you.

Aurel. When you were forced to end, I did proceed,
And with success the catching fire did feed;
Till Noble Beaufort, one unlucky day,
A visit to our Family did pay;
Newly arrived from Foreign Courts, and Fraught
With all those Virtues that in Courts are taught:
He with his amorous Tales so charmed her ear,
That she of Love from none but him would hear.

Bruce. That heart which I so long with toil and pain
Besieged, and used all stratagems to gain,
Enter a Servant, and whispers with Lovis. Is now become within a trice we see
The Triumph of another Victory.
There is a fate in love, as well as war;
Some though less careful more successful are.

Lovis. Do not this opportunity withstand;
These Lovers now are walking hand in hand
In The Garden; fight him there, and sacrifice
His heart to that false Woman's cruel eyes:
If fate be so unjust to make thee fall,
His blood or mine shall wait thy Funeral.

Bruce. Young man, this rashness must have my excuse,
Since it is your friendship does your fault produce;
If Powers above did not this passion sway,
But that our Love our Reason did obey,
Your Sister I with Justice might accuse,
Nor would I this occasion then refuse.

Lovis. Does Bruce resolve thus tamely to decline
His interest, and like foolish women pine?
Can that great heart which in your breast does dwell
Let your fond griefs above your courage swell?

Bruce. My passions grow unruly, and I find
Too soon they will raise a Tempest in my mind.
Graciana, like fond Parents, you are to blame
You did not in its youth correct my flame;
It Is now so headstrong, and so wild a fire,
I fear to both our ruins 'twill conspire:
I grow impatient, Friend, come lead me where
I may to her my injured Love declare.
Graciana, yet your heart shall be my Prize,
Or else my heart shall be your Sacrifice.
Despair's the issue of ignoble minds,
And but with Cowards entertainment finds.

Exeunt Lovis and Bruce. Aurel. Heaven grant some moderation to this rage,
That Reason their swelled passions may assuage.
Oh, Bruce! thou little think the Fates in me
Have to the full revenged thy injury.
Exit.
SCEN. VII.
Scene, A Garden belonging to my Lord Bevill's House. Enter Beaufort and
Graciana. Beauf. Madam, what you have told so much must move
All that have sense of Honor or of Love,
That for my Rival I could shed a Tear,
If grief had any power when you are near.

Grac. Leave this discourse; your Mistress you neglect,
And to your Rival all your thoughts direct.

Enter Bruce and Lovis, and stand undiscovered. Beauf. Forgive me, dear
Graciana, I have been
By my compassion soothed into a sin.
The holiest man that to the Altar bows
With wandering thoughts too often stains his Vows.

Bruce. Graciana, you are altered much, I find;
Surprising her by the hand. Sine I was here you have learned how to be kind.
The god of Love, which subt'ly let you sway,
Has stolen your heart, and taught it to obey.

Grac. Heavens! what strange surprise is this!

Bruce. Hither I Am come to make my lawful claim;
You are my Mistress, and must own my flame.

Beau. Forbear, bold man, and do not tempt thy fate;
Taking her by the other hand. Thou have no right, her Love does right create:
Thy Claim must to my Title here give place;
It Is not who loves, but whom she is pleased to grace.

Grac. Hear me but speak; Bruce, you divide my care;
Though not my Love, you my Compassion share;
My heart does double duty; it does mourn
For you brave Bruce; for you brave Beaufort burn.

Bruce. Your pity but destroys; if you would save,
It is your Love, Graciana, I must have.

Beauf. Her Love is mine, she did it now declare;
Name it no more, but vanish and despair.

Bruce. Death, do you think to conjure me away!
I am no Devil that am forced to obey:
If you are so good at that, here are such charms
Laying his hand on his Sword. Can fright y'into the circle of her arms.

Beauf. Here is a Sword more fit for my defense;
This is not courage, Bruce, but insolence.
Grac. takes Beauf. in her arms. Graciana, let me go, my heart wants room.

Grac. My arms till now were never thought troublesome.

Bruce. Beaufort, I hope you have courage to appear,
Where sacred Sanctuary is not near.
I Will leave you now within that happy state
Which does provoke my fury and my hate.
Ex. Bru. and Lov.
Grac. You must not meet him in the field, to prove
A doubtful Combat for my certain Love.
Beside, your heart is mine; will you expose
The heart you gave me to its raging foes?
Those men want Honor who stake that at play
Which to their Friends their kindness gave away.

Beauf. Graciana, why did you confine me so
Within your arms? you should have let me go:
We soon had finished this our hot debate,
Which now must wait a longer time on Fate.

Grac. None, in combustions blame such sa desire
To save their precious Goods from raging fire.
Banish this passion now, my Lord, and prove
Your anger cannot overcloud your Love.

Beauf. Your glorious presence can this rage control,
And make a calm in my tempestuous soul;
But yet there must be time; the Sun does bear
A while with the fierce tempests of the Air,
Before he make those stormy conflicts cease,
And with his conquering beams proclaims a Peace.

Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Lord Beaufort and Lovis. Lovis. FArewell, my Lord, I Will to my Friend
declare
How generous you in your acceptance were.

Beauf. My Honor is as forward as my Love,
On equal wings of jealousy they move:
I to my Rival will in neither yield;
I Have won the Chamber, and will win the Field.

Lovis. Your Emulation, Sir, is swollen so high,
You may be worthy of his Victory:
You Will meet with Honor blown, not in the bud,
Whose Root was fed with vast expense of blood.
Ex. Lovis.
Enter Sir Frederick. Sir Fred. What, my Lord, as studious as a Country
Vicar on a Saturday in the afternoon?
I thought you had been ready for the Pulpit.

Beauf. I am not studying of speeches for my Mistress;
It Is action that I now am thinking on,
Wherein there is Honor to be gained;
And you, Cousin, are come luckily to share it.

Sir Fred. On my life a Prize to be played for your Mistress:
I had notice of your Quarrel, which brought me
Hither so early with my Sword to serve you.
But dares so zealous a Lover as your Lordship
Break the commandment of your Mistress? I heard,
Poor Lady, she wept, and charged you to sleep
In a whole skin; but young men never know
When they are well.

Beau. Cousin, my love to her cannot make me forget my duty
To my Family.

Sir Fred. Pray whose body must I exercise my skill Upon?

Beauf. You met the man; Graciana's Brother.

Sir Fred. An expert Gentleman, and I have not
Fenced of late, unless it were with my
Widows Maids; and they are even too hard
For me at my own weapon.

Beauf. Cousin, it is time we were preparing for the Field.

Sir Fred. I wait to serve you, Sir.

Beauf. But yet with grief, Graciana, I must go,
Since I your Brother there shall meet my Foe:
My fate too near resembles theirs where he
Did wound himself that hurt his Enemy.

Exeunt. SCEN. II.
Enter Wheedle, and Palmer dressed like the Lord Bevil. Whead. So, my Proteus,
exactly dressed!
Dexterous Rogue! Is Grace ready in her Geers, and
Settled in my Lady Dawbwells house?

Palm. Every trap is baited.

Whead. I Will warrant thee then we catch our Cully:
He Is gone to put himself into a fantastic
Garb, in imitation of Sir Frederick Frollick;
He Is almost frantic with the very conceit
Of gaining the rich Widow. But hark, I
Hear him coming; slip down the back way,
And to your charge.

Exit Palmer. Enter Cully. Sir Nich. Wheedle, and what think you of this
Habit? is it not very modish?

Whead. As any man need wear: How did you
Furnish your self so suddenly?

Sir Nich. Suddenly? I protest I was at least at
Sixteen Broakers, before I could put my self
Exactly into the fashion; but now I defy
Sir Frederick; I am as fine as he, and will be as mad
As he, if that will carry the Widow, I Will warrant
Thee.

Whead. Is it not better pushing thus for a Fortune,
Before your Reputation's blasted
With the infamous names of Coward and Gamester?
And so become able to pay the thousand pounds without noise,
Then going into the Country, selling your Land,
Making a havoc among your Woods, or mortgaging
Your Estate to a scrupulous Scrivener, that will
Whisper it iuto the ears of the whole Town,
By inquiring of your good behavior?

Sir Nich. Excellent Wheedle! And will my Lord
Bevill speak my commendations to his Sister?

Whead. She is impatient till she see you, Sir;
For in my hearing, upon the account I gave him
Of you, he told her you were the prettiest, wirtest,
Wildest Gentleman about the Town, and a Cavalier
In your heart; The only things that take her.

Sir Nich. Wheedle, come, I will go to the Tavern,
And swallow two whole quarts of Wine
Instantly, and when I am drunk
Ride on a Drawers back to visit her.

Whead. Some less Frollick to begin with.

Sir Nich. I will cut three Drawers over the pate then,
And go with a Tavern-Lanthorn before me at noonday.
Come away.

Exeunt, Cully singing. SCEN. III.
Enter Palmer and Grace. Palm. Do not I look like a very Reverend Lord, Grace?

Grace. And I like a very fine Lady, Mr Palmer?

Palm. Yes in good faith, Grace; what a rogue is that
Wheedle, to have kept such a Treasure to himself,
Without communicating a little to his Friends?

Offers to kiss her. Grace. Forbear; you will be out in your Part,
My Lord, when Sir Nich'las comes.

Palm. The truth is, my Lady, I am better
Prepared at this time to act a Lover then
A Relation.

Grace. That grave dress is very amorous indeed.

Palm. My Virtues, like those of Plants in the Winter,
Are retired; your warm Spring
Would fetch 'em out with a vengeance.

Enter Jenny in haste. Ienny. Mr Wheedle and Sr Nich'las are come.

Palm. Away, away then, Sister; expect your Kew.

Enter Wheedle, and Sir Nicholas, kicking a Tavern boy before him, who has
three Bottles of Wine on a Roap hanging at his back. Cul. singing. Then march
along, Boys; valiant and strong, Boys.
So, lay down the Bottles here.

Whead. My Lord, this is the worthy Gentleman
That I told you was
Ambitious to be your Sisters Servant.

Cul. Hither I am come, my Lord, to drink
Your Sisters Health, without offense, I hope.

Palm. You are heartily welcome, Sir.

Cul. Here Is a Brimmer then to her, and all the
Fleas about her.

Palm. Sir, I Will call her self to pledge it.

Cul. Stay, stay, my Lord, that you may
Be able to tell her you have drunk it.

Palmer drinks and exit. Cul. Wheedle, how do you like this?
Draws his Sword. Shall I break the Windows?

Whead. Hold, hold; you are not in a
House of evil reputation.

Cul. Well admonished, Sir Frederick Frollick.

Enter Palmer and Grace. Palm. This is Sir Nich'las, Sister.

Cul. I, Madam, I am Sir Nich'las, and how do you like me?

Grace. A pretty Gentleman.
Pray, Sir, are you come a House-warming,
That you bring your Wine with you?

Cul. If you ask such pert Questions,
Madam, I can stop your mouth.
Kisses her. Hither I am come to be drunk,
That you may see me drunk; and
Here Is a Health to your Flanel Petticoat.

Drinks. Grace. Mr Wheedle, my service to you; a Health
She drinks part. To Sr Nich'las's great Grand-father's Beard-brush.

Cul. Nay, pledge me; ha --

Grace. You are not quarrelsom in your drink,
I hope, Sir.

Cul. No, faith; I am wondrous loving.

Huggs her. Grace. You are a very bold Lover.

Cul. Widow, let you and I go upon the ramble
To night.

Grace. Do you take me for a Night-walker, Sir?

Cul. Thou shall be witness how many Constables
Staves I Will break about the Watchmens ears;
How many Bell-men I Will rob of their Verses,
To furnish a little Appartment in the back side
Of my Lodging.

Grace. I believe you are an excellent man at
Quarter-staff, Sir.

Cul. The odds was on my head against any Warrener
In all our Country; but I have left it off this
Two year. My Lord, what say you, Do you think
Your Sister and I should not furnish a Bedchamber
As well as two soberer people? what think you, my Lord?

Grace. I, and a Nursery too, I hope, Sir.

Cul. Well said, Widow, in faith; I will get upon thy body
A generation of wild Cats, children that shall
Waw, waw, scratch their Nurses, and be drunk
With their sucking-bottles.

Whead. Brave Sir Nich'las.

Cul. Wheedle, give me a Brimmer; the Widow
Shall drink it to our Progeny.
Where, where is she gone?

Exit Grace. Palm. You have frighted her hence, Sir.

Cul. I Will fright her worse, if I find her in a corner.
Ha, Widow, I Will follow you; I Will follow you, ha.

Whead. The Wine makes the Rogue witty; he
Over-acts the Part I gave him;
Sir Fredrick is not half so mad: I will keep
Him thus elevated till he has married Grace,
And we have the best part of his Estate at our mercy.

Palm. Most ingenious Wheedle!

Whead. I was not born to ease nor Acres;
Industry is all my stock of living.

The women shriek within. Palm. Hark, he puts them to the squeek.

Whead. We must go and take him off; he is as fierce
As a Bandog that has newly broke his chain.

Exeunt laughing. SCEN. IV.
Scene, A Field. Enter Bruce and Lovis, and traverse the Stage. Then enter four
or five men in disguises. 1 Man. This way they went; besure you kill the
Villain;
Let pity be a stranger to your breasts.

2 Man. We have been bred, you know, unacquainted with Compassion.

3 Man. But why, Colonel, should you so eagerly
Pursue his life? he has the report of
A gallant Man.

1 Man. He murdered my Father.

3 Man. I have heard he killed him fairly in
The Field at Nasby.

1 Man. He killed him, that is enough; and I my self.
Was witness: I accused him to the
Protector, and subborn'd Witness
To have taken away his life by form
Of Law; but my Plot was discovered, and
He yesterday released; since which I Have
Watched an opportunity, without the
Help of seeming Justice, for my Revenge.
Strike home. --

3 Man. We are your hired slaves; and since
You Will have it so, we will shed his blood,
And never spare our own.

Exeunt, drawing their swords. Enter Beaufort and Sir Frederick, and traverse
the Stage. Enter Bruce and Lovis at another door. Bruce. Your Friendship, noble
Youth, 's too prodigal;
For one already lost you venture all;
Your present happiness, your future joy;
You for the hopeless your great hopes destroy.

Lovis. What can I venture for so brave a friend?
I have no hopes but what on you depend.
Should I your Friendship and my Honor rate
Below the value of a poor Estate,
A heap of dirt! Our Family has been
To blame, my blood most here atone the sin.
Enter the five Villains with drawn Swords. Heavens! what is there an Ambuscado
laid!
Draw, dearest Friend, I fear we are betrayed.

I Will. Bruce, look on me, and then prepare to die.

Pulling off his Vizard. Bruce. O Treacherous Villain!

I Will. Fall on, and sacrifice his blood to my Revenge.

Lovis. More hearts then one shall bleed, if he must die.

They fight. Enter Beaufort and sir Frederick. Beauf. Heavens! what is this I
see! Sir Fredrick, draw;
Their blood's too good to grace such
Villains Swords. Courage, brave men; now
We can match their Force.

Lovis. We Will make you, slaves, repent
The Villains run. This Treachery.

Beauf. So.

Bruce. They are not worth pursuit; we will let them go.
Brave men! this action makes it well appear
It Is Honor and not Envy brings you here.

Beauf. We come to conquer, Bruce, and not to see
Such Villains rob us of our Victory.
Your lives our fatal swords claim as their due;
W'ad wronged our selves had we not righted you.

Bruce. Your generous courage has obliged us so,
That to your succor we our safety owe.

Lovis. You Have done what men of Honor ought to do,
What in your cause we would have done for you.

Beauf. You speak the truth, w'ave but our duty done;
Prepare: Duty's no obligation.

He strips. Bruce. My Honor is dis-satisfi'd; I must,
Lovis and Sir Frederick strip. My Lord, consider whether it be just
To draw my Sword against that life which gave
Mine, but even now, protection from the grave.

Beauf. None come into the Field to weigh what is right;
This is no place for Council, but for Fight.
Dispatch.

Bruce. I am resolved I will not fight.

Beauf. Did I come hither then only to fright
A company of fearful slaves away;
My Courage stoops not at so mean a prey:
Know, Bruce, I hither come to shed thy blood.

Bruce. Open this bosom, and let out a flood.

Beauf. I come to Conquer bravely in the Field,
Not to take poor revenge on such as yield.
Has nothing power, too backward man, to move
Thy Courage? Think on thy neglected Love:
Think on the beauteous Graciana's Eyes;
It Is I have robbed thee of that glorious prize.

Br. There are such charms in Graciana's Name,
Strips hastily. My scrup'lous Honor must obey my Flame:
My lazy Courage I with shame condemn:
No thoughts have power streams of blood to stem.

Sir Fred. Come, Sir, out of kindness to our Friends
You and I must pass a small complement
On each other.

They all fight. Beaufort after many Passes closes with Bruce; they fall;
Beaufort disarms him. Beauf. Here, live.

Giving Bruce his Sword again. Bruce. My Lord, you have gained a perfect Victory;
You Have vanquished and obliged your enemy.

Beauf. Hold, gallant men.

Bruce and Beaufort part Lovis and Sir Fred. Lovis. Before we bleed! Do we here
fight a Prize,
Where handsome proffers may for Wounds suffice?
I am amazed! What means this bloodless Field?

Bruce. The stoutest heart must to his fortune yield.
Brave Youth! here Honor did with Courage vie;
To Beauf. And both agree to grace your Victory.
Heave with such a Conquest favors few:
It Is easier to destroy then to subdue.
Our bodies may by brutish force be killed;
But noble Minds alone to Virtue yield.
My Lord, I Have twice received my life from you;
Much is to both those generous actions due:
The noble Giver I must highly prize,
Though I the Gift, heaven knows, as much despise.
Can I desire to live, when all the Joy
Of my poor life its Ransom does destroy!
No, no, Graciana's loss I Will never survive;
I pay too dear for this unsought Reprieve.

Falls on his Sword, and is desperately wounded. Beauf. Hold gallant man!
Honor her self does bleed;
Running to him, takes him in his arms. All generous hearts are wounded by this
deed.

Lovis. He does his blood for a lost Mistress spend;
And shall not I bleed for so brave a Friend?

Lovis offers to fall on his Sword, but is hindered by sir Frederick Sir Fred.
Forbear, Sir; the Frollick's not to go round, as I
Take it.

Beauf. Twere greater Friendship to assist me here:
I hope the wound's not mortal, though I fear --

Bruce. My Sword, I doubt, has failed in my relief;
'Thas made a vent for blood, but not for grief.
Bruce struggling, Lovis and St Fred* help to hold him. Let me once more the
unkind Weapon try.
Will you prolong my pain? oh cruelty!

Lovis. Ah, dearest Bruce, can you thus careless be
Of our great friendship, and your Loyalty!
Look on your Friend; your drooping Country view;
And think how much they both expect from you.
You for a Mistress waste that precious blood
Which should be spent but for our Masters good.

Sir Fred, Expense of blood already makes him faint;
Let Us carry him to the next house, till we can
Procure a chair to convey him to my Lord Bevill's,
The best place for accommodation.

They all take him up. Beauf. Honor has played an after-game; this Field
The Conq'rour does unto the Conquered yield,

Exeunt. SCEN. V.
Enter Graciana weeping. Grac. Farewell all thoughts of happiness, farewell:
My fears together with my sorrows swell:
Whilst from my eyes there flows this Crystal flood,
From their brave hearts there flows such streams of blood.
Here I am lost, while both for me contend;
With what success can this strange Combat end!
Honor with Honor fights for Victory,
And Love is made the common enemy.

Enter Lord Bevill. L. Bevill weeping. Ah, Child! --

Grac. Kill me not with expectation, Sir.

L. Bev. The generous Bruce has killed himself
For you: Being disarmed, and at his Rival's mercy,
His Life and Sword were given him by the
Noble Youth; He made a brave acknowledgment
For both; but then considering you were lost,
He scorned to live; and falling on his Sword,
Has given himself a mortal wound.
Exit L. Bevill.
Enter Aurelia weeping. Aurel. Cruel Graciana, Go but in and see
The fatal Triumph of your Victory.
The Noble Bruce, to your eternal shame,
With his own blood has quenched his raging flame.

Grac. weeping. My carriage shall in these misfortunes prove
That I have Honor too, as well as Love.

Aurel. aside. Thy sorrows, sad Aurelia, will declare
At once, I fear, thy Love and thy Despair:
These streams of grief straight to a flood will rise;
I can command my Tongue, but not my eyes.
Exit Aurel.
Grac. In what a Maze, Graciana, do thou tread!
Which is the Path that does to Honor lead?
I in this Lab'rynth so resolve to move,
That none shall judge I am misled by Love.

Enter Beaufort. Beauf. Here Conq'rours must forget their Victories,
And homage pay to your victorious Eyes*
Graciana, hither your poor slave is come,
After his Conquest to receive his doom;
Smile on his Victory; had he proved untrue
To Honor, he had then proved false to you.

Grac. Perfidious man, can you expect from me
An approbation of your Treachery!
When I, distracted with prophetic fears,
Blasted with sighs, and almost drowned in tears,
Begged you to moderate your Rage last night*
Did you not promise me you would not fight?
Go now and triumph in your Victory;
Into the Field you went my Enemy,
And are returned the only man I hate,
The wicked instrument of my sad fate.
My Love has but dissembled been to thee,
To try my generous Lover's constancy.
Exit Graciana.
Beauf. Oh Heaven! how strange and cruel is my fate!
Preserved by Love, to be destroyed by Hate!
Exit Beaufort.
SCEN. VI.
Scene, The Widows House. Enter Betty and Lettice, the two Chamber-maids,
severally. Betty. Oh, Lettice, we have staid for you.

Let. What have thou done to the Frenchman,
Girl? he lies yonder neither dead nor drunk;
No body knows what to make of him.

Betty. I sent for thee to help make sport with him;
He Will come to himself, never fear him:
Have you not observed how scurvily h'as looked
Of late?

Let. Yes; and he protests it is for love of you.

Betty. Out upon him, for a dissembling Rascal;
H'as got the foul Disease;
Our Coachman discovered it by a Bottle of Diet
Drink he brought and hid behind the stairs, into which
I infused a little Opium.

Let. What do intend to do with him?

Betty. You shall see.

Enter Coachman, with a Tub without a bottom, a shut at the top to be locked,
and a hole to put ones head out at, made easy to be born on ones shoulders.
Coach-m. Here Is the Tub; where is the Frenchman?

Betty. He lies behind the stairs; haste and bring him in,
That he may take quiet possession of this wooden Tenement;
For it is near his time of waking.
The Coachman and another Servant bring in Dufoy, and put him into the Tub. Is
the Fiddler at hand that used to ply at the blind
Alehouse?

Coach-m. He Is ready.

Enter a Fiddler. Betty. Well, let us hear now what a horrible noise you
Can make to wake this Gentleman.

Fiddler plays a Tune. Let. He wants a helping hand; his eyelids
Dufoy begins to wake. Are sealed up; see how the wax sticks upon 'em.
Let me help you, Monsieur.

Dufoy. Vat are you? Jernie! vat is dis! am I
Jack in a box? begar, who did put
Me here?

Betty. Good Morrow, Monsieur; will you be pleased
To take your Pills this morning?

Dufoy. Noe; but I vo'd have de diable take you;
It vas you dat did abuse me duss, vas
It note? begar I will kille ale de
Shamber-maid in England.

Let. Will you be pleased to drink, Monsieur?
There Is a Bottle of your Diet-drink within.

Dufoy. Are you de littel diable come to tormente me?
Morbleu! vas ever man afronte in dis nature!

Betty. Methinks he has ferbon, mine Monsieur,
Now if you please to make your little Address,
And your amoure, you will not find me so coy.

Dufoy. Begar I will no marie de cousin Germain
Of de diable.

Let. What should he do with a Wife? he has not
House-room for her.

Betty. Why do you not keep your head within
Doors, Monsieur?

Let. Now there is such a storm abroad.

Dufoy. Why did not you keep your Maiden-heade
Vid in door? begar, tell me date.

Coach-m. Have you any fine French Commodities to sell,
Gloves and Ribbands? you have got
A very convenient shop, Monsieur.

Dufoy. I do hope you vil have de very
Convenient haltere, begar.
Jerny, Can I not tare dis tinge in de pieces?

Betty. You begin to sweat, Monsieur; the Tub is
Proper for you.

Dufoy. I have no more patience;
I will break dis prison, or I will break
My neke, and ye shall ale be hang.

Struggles to get out. Let. He begins to rave; bless the poor man.

Betty. Some Music quickly, to
Compose his mind.
The Music plays; and they Dance about him. How prettily the snail carries
his Tenement
He walks with the Tub on his back. On his back! I Am sorry I am but his
Mistress:
If I had been your Wife, Monsieur, I had made
You a complete snail; your horns
Should have appeared.

Dufoy. I will have de patience, dear is no oder remede;
You be ale de Raskale Whore; de diable
Take you ale; and I will say no more, begar.

Betty. This is a very fine Vessel, and would swim well;
Let Us to the Horse-pond with him.

Let. Come, come, he looks as sullenly as a Hare
In her Form; let us leave him.

Coachm. Your Serviteur tres humble, Monsieur.

Exeunt all but Dufoy. Dufoy. Bougre, I canno hang my self; begar I canno
Drown my self; I will go hide my self;
And starve to dye; I will no be de laughe
For every Jackanape English. Morbleu.

SCEN. VII.
Sir Frederick is brought in upon a Bier, with a mourning Cloth over him,
attended by a Gentleman in a mourning Cloak: Four Fiddlers carry the Corpse, with
their Instruments tucked under their Cloaks. Enter the Widow weeping. Mourner.
Madam, you must expect a bloody consequence
When men of such prodigious courage fight.
The young Lord Beaufort was the first that fell,
After his Sword too deeply had engaged
His Rival not to stay behind him long.
Sir Frederick with your Nephew bravely fought;
Death long did keep his distance, as if he
Had feared excess of Valor; but when they,
Oreloaded with their wounds, began to faint,
He with his terrors did invade their breasts.
Fame soon brought many to the Tragic place,
Where I found my dearest Friend, Sir Fred'rick,
Almost as poor in breath as blood:
He took me by the hand, and all the stock h'ad left
He spent, Madam, in calling upon you.
He first proclaimed your Virtues, then his Love;
And having charged me to convey his Corpse hither
To wait on you, his latest breath expired with
The Command.

Wid. The World's too poor to recompense this loss.
Unhappy woman! why should I survive
The only man in whom my joys did live?
My dreadful grief!

The Fiddlers prepare. Enter Dufoy in his Tub. Dufoy. Oh my Matre, my Matre; who
has kill my
Matre? Morbleu, I will --
The Widow shrieks, and runs out: All the Fiddlers run out in a fright. Oh, de
diable, de diable!

Sir Frederick starts up, which frights Dufoy. Sir Fred. What devilish accident
is
This? or has the Widow undermined me?

Enter the Widow and her Maid laughing. Sir Fred. I shall be laughed to death
now indeed.
By Chamber-maids; why have you no
Pity, Widow?

Wid. None at all for the living; Ha, ha, ha.
You see w' are provided for your Frollick, Sir; ha, ha.

Sir Fred. Laugh but one minute longer I will foreswear
Thy company, kill thy Tabby Cat, and make thee weep
For ever after.

Wid. Farewell, Sir; expect at night to see the old
Man, with his paper Lanthorn and cracked
Spectacles, singing your woeful Tragedy
To Kitchin-maids and Cobblers Prentices.

Widow offers to go, Sir Frederick holds her by the arm. Sir Fred. Hark you,
hark you, Widow:
By all those Devils that have
Hitherto possessed thy Sex --

Wid. No swearing, good Sir Fred'rick.

Sir Fred. Set thy face then; let me not see the remains
Of one poor smile: So, now I will kiss thee,
And be friends.
Widow falls out a laughing. Not all thy wealth shall hire me to
Come within smell of thy breath again.
Jealousy, and, which will be worse for thee, Widow, Impotence
Light upon me, if I stay one moment longer with thee.

Offers to go. Wid. Do you hear, Sir; can you be so angry with one
That loves you so passionately she cannot survive
You?

Sir Fred. Widow, May the desire of man keep thee
Waking till thou art as mad as I am.
Exit Sir Frederick.
Wid. How lucky was this accident!
How he would have insulted
Over my weakness else!
Sir Frederick, since I Have warning, you shall prove
More subtle ways, before I own my Love.

Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Scene, The Lord Bevill's House. Enter Lovis, a Chyrurgion, Servants, carrying
Bruce in a Chair. Chyr. COurage, brave Sir; do not mistrust my Art.

Bru. Tell me, did thou ever cure a wounded heart?
Thy skill, fond man, thou here imploy'st in vain;
The ease thou giv'st does but increase my pain.

Lovis. Dear Bruce, my life does on your life depend;
Though you disdain to live, yet save your Friend.

Bruce. Do what you please; but are not those unkind
That ease the body, to afflict the mind?
The Surgeon dresses him. Oh cruel Love! thou shoot'st with such strange
skill,
The wounds thou make will neither heal nor kill*
Thy flaming Arrows kindle such a fire
As will not waste thy Victims, nor expire!

Enter Aurelia. Lovis. Is the wound mortal? tell me;
To the Chyrurgion. Or may we cherish hopes of his Recovery?

Chyr. The danger is not imminent; yet my Prognostic
Boads a sad event: For though there be no great
Vessel dissected, yet I have cause to fear
That the Parenchyma of the right lobe of the lungs,
Near some large branch of the Aspera arteria,
Is perforated.

Lovis. Tell me in English, will he live or die?

Chyr. Truly I despair of his recovery.
Exit Chyrurgion.
Aurel. aside. Forgive me, Ladies, if excess of Love
Me beyond rules of Modesty does move,
And, against custom, makes me now reveal
Those flames my tortured breast did long conceal;
It Is some excuse, that I my Love declare
When there is no medicine left to cure despair.

Weeps by the Chair side. Bruce. Oh Heaven! can fair Aurelia weep for me!
This is some comfort to my misery.
Kind Maid, those eyes should only pity take
Of such as feel no wounds but what they make:
Who for another in your sight does mourn,
Deserves not your compassion, but your scorn.

Aurel. I come not here with tears to pity you;
I for your pity with this passion sue.

Bruce. My pity! tell me, what can be the grief,
That from the miserable hopes relief!

Aurel. Before you know this grief, you feel the pain.

Bruce. You cannot love, and not be loved again:
Where so much Beauty does with Love conspire,
No mortal can resist that double fire.

Aurel. When proud Graciana wounded your brave heart,
On poor Aurelia's you revenged the smart:
Whilst you in vain did seek those wounds to cure,
With patience I their torture did endure.

Bruce. My happiness has been so long concealed,
That it becomes my misery revealed:
That which should prove my joy, now proves my grief;
And that brings pain, which, known, had brought relief.
Aurelia, why would you not let me know,
Whilst I had power to pay, the debt I owe?
It Is now too late; yet all I can I Will do;
I Will sigh away the breath I Have left for you.

Aurel. You yet have power to grant me all I crave;
It Is not your Love I court, I court your Grave.
I with my flame seek not to warm your breast,
But beg my ashes in your Urn may rest:
For since Graciana's loss you scorned t'out-live,
I am resolved I Will not your death survive.

Bruce. Hold, you too generous are; yet I may live:
Heaven for your sake may grant me a reprieve.

Aurel. Oh, no; Heaven has decreed, alas, that we
Should in our Fates, not in our Loves agree.

Bruce. Dear Friend, my rashness I too late repent;
To Lovis. I never thought death till now a punishment.

Enter Graciana. Grac. Oh, do not talk of death! the very sound
Once more will give my heart a mortal wound:
Here on my knees I Have sinned I must confess
Against your Love, and my own happiness;
I, like the child, whose folly proves his loss,
Refused the gold, and did accept the dross.

Bruce. You have in Beaufort made so good a choice,
His virtue's such, he has his Rival's voice;
Graciana, none but his great Soul could prove
Worthy to be the center of your Love.

Grac. You to another would such virtue give,
Brave Sir, as in your self does only live.
If to the most deserving I am due,
He must resign his weaker claim to you.

Bruce. This is but flattery; for I Am sure you can
Think none so worthy as that generous man:
By honor you are his.

Grac. Yet, Sir, I know
How much I to your generous passion owe;
You bleed for me; and if for me you die,
Your loss I Will mourn with vowed Virginity.

Bruce. Can you be mindful of so small a debt,
And that which you to Beaufort owe forget?
That will not Honor but Injustice be;
Honor with Justice always does agree.
This generous pity which for me you show,
Is more then you to my misfortunes owe:
These tears, Graciana, which for me you shed,
Ore-prize the blood which I for you have bled:
But now I can no more --
My spirits faint within my wearied breast.

Lovis. Sister, it is fit you give him leave to rest.
Who waits?
Enter Servants. With care convey him to his bed.

Bruce. Hold --
Dearest Aurelia, I will strive to live,
If you will but endeavor not to grieve.

Lovis. Brave man! The wonder of this Age thou wilt prove,
For matchless Gratitude, and generous Love.

Exeunt all but Graciana. Grac. How strangely is my soul perplexed by fate!
The man I love I must pretend to hate;
And with dissembled scorn his presence fly,
Whose absence is my greatest misery!

Enter Beaufort. Beauf. Hear me, upon my knees I beg you will hear.
She Is gone.
Exit Graciana. There was no need, false woman, to increase
My misery with hopes of happiness.
This scorn at first had to my Love and me
But Justice been; now it is Cruelty.
Was there no way his constancy to prove,
But by your own inconstancy in Love?
To try another Virtue could you be,
Graciana, to your own an enemy?
Sure it is but passion which she thus does vent,
Blown up with anger and with discontent,
Because my Honor disobeyed her Will,
And Bruce for love of her his blood did spill.
I once more in her eyes will read my fate;
I need no wound to kill me, if she hate.

SCEN. II.
Enter Cully drunk, with a blind Fellow led before him playing on a Cymbal,
followed by a number of boys hollowing, and persecuting him. Cul. Villains,
sons of unknown fathers, tempt
Me no more.
The boys hout at him, he draws his Sword. I will make a young generation of
Cripples, to
Succeed in Lincolns-Inn-Fields and Covent Garden.
The barbarous breeding of these London- boys!

Frights the boys away. Boy that leads the Cymbal. Whither do you intend to go,
Sir?

Cul. To see the wealthy Widow,
Mrs. Rich.

Boy. Where does she dwell, Sir?

Cul. Hereabouts; enquire; I will Serenade
Her at noonday.

Exeunt. Enter the Widow and her maid Betty. Wid. Where is this poor Frenchman,
Girl? h'as done me
Good service.

Betty. The Butler has got him down into the Cellar, Madam,
Made him drunk, and laid him to sleep among
His empty Cask.

Wid. Pray, when he wakes let him be released of his
Imprisonment; Betty, you use your Servant too severely.
The Cimbal plays without. Hark, what ridiculous noise is that? it sets my teeth
An edge worse then the scraping of Trenchers.

Enter a Servant. Serve. Madam, a rude drunken fellow, with a Cimbal before
Him, and his sword in his hand, is pressed into your House.

Enter Cully and Cimbal: The women shriek. Cul. Sirrah, play me a bawdy Tune,
to please the
Widow; have at thee, Widow.

Betty. It Is one of Oliver's Knights, Madam,
Sir Nicholas Cully; his Mother was my Grand-mother's
Dairy maid.

Enter Servants; they lay hands on him, and take away his Sword. Cul. Let me
go; I am not so drunk but I can stand
Without your help, Gentlemen.
Widow, here is Music; send for a Parson,
And we will dance Barnaby within this
Half hour.

Wid. I will send for a Constable, Sir.

Cul. Have a mind to see me beat him? how those Rogues
Dread me! Did not Wheedle tell thee upon what
Conditions I would condescend to make thee my
Bedfellow, Widow, speak?

Wid. This is some drunken mistake; away with him,
Thrust him out of door.

Enter a Servant: Clashing of Swords and noise without. Serve. Help, help, for
Sir Frederick.

Wid. What Is the matter?

Serve. He is fighting, Madam, with a Company of Bailiffs,
That would arrest him at the door.

Wid. Haste every one, and rescue him quickly.

Exeunt all but Cully. Cul. Widow, come back, I say, Widow;
I will not stir one foot after thee:
Come back, I say, Widow.

Falls down and sleeps. Enter Dufoy. Dufoy. Vat de diable be de matre? here is
de ver
Strange varke in dis house; de Vemen day do
Cry, ha, ha, ha; de men day do run, day do
Take de Batton, de dung-vorke, and de vire-vorke:
Vat is here, van kille?

Looking on Cully. Enter Betty. Betty. You are a trusty Servant, indeed: here
you are locked
Up, while your poor Master is arrested, and dragged
Away by unmerciful Bailiffs.

Dufoy. My Matre? Jernie! Metres Bet, let me go;
Begar I will kill all de bogre de
Bailie, and recover my Matre. Bogre de Bailie.

Betty. So, make all the haste you can.

She helps him out of the Tub. Dufoy. Morbleu! bogre de Baylie!
I will go prepare to kille a tousand Baylie
Begar: Bogre de Baylie.
Exit.
Enter the Widow and Servant severally. Wid. Well, what news?

Serve. Madam, they have arrested him upon an
Execution for Two hundred pounds, and carried
Him to a Bailiffs house hard by.

Wid. If that be all, Betty, take my key, and give him
The money in Gold; do you content the Bailiffs,
But let Sir Frederick know nothing of it;
And then let them bring him to my house
As their Prisoner: dispatch.

Exeunt Betty and Servant. Enter a Footboy. Foot-b. Pray, Madam, is there not
a stray Gentleman
Here, misled by drink?

Wid. There lies the beast you look for;
You had best remove him quickly,
Or I shall cause him to be put into the Pound.
Exit Widow.
Foot-b. If I do not get this fool clear off before he
Comes to himself, our plot is quite spoiled:
This Summer-Livery may chance to hover over
My shivering limbs next Winter.
Yonder sits honest Palmer, my poor Master,
In a Coach, quaking for fear; all that
See him in that reverend disguise,
Will swear he has got the Palsy.
Ho, Sir Nich'las.

Pulls him. Cul. I will drink three Beer-glasses to the Widows health
Before I go.

Foot-b. The Widow stays for you, to wait upon her
To the Exchange.

Cully. Let her go into her Bedchamber and meditate;
I am not drunk enough to be seen in her company.

Foot-b. I must carry him away upon my back; but,
Since things may go ill, it is good to make sure
Of something; I Will examine his pockets first:
So, for this I thank my own ingenuity; in this
Way of plain dealing I can live without the
Help of my Master.
Enter a Servant. Pray, Sir, will you help me up with my burden.

Serve. I am sure your Master has his load already.

They lift him up. Cul. Carry me to my Widow, Boy: Where is my
Music?

Enter Sir Frederick with the Bailiffs, who are Fiddlers disguised, with their
Fiddles under their Coats, at one door; and the Widow at another. Boy. There is
no hopes now;
I Will shift for my self.
Exit Boy.
Sir Fred. Widow, these are old acquaintance of mine,
Bid them welcome: I was coming
To wait upon you before; but meeting
Them by the way, they pressed me to drink --

Cully reels against Sir Frederick. Cul. Sir Frederick! Widow, bid him welcome;
he is
A very good friend of mine, and as mad a fellow as my self.
Kiss, kiss the Widow, man; she has a plump
Under-lip, and kisses smartly.

Sir Fr. What Is here? Cully drunk, transformed into a Gallant,
And acquainted with the spring and proportion of the
Widows lips!

Cul. I, I am drunk, Sir; am I not Widow? I Scorn to be
Soberer then your self, Sir; I will drink with you, swear
With you, break windows with you, and
So forth.

Sir Fred. Widow, is this your Champion?

Wid. You have no exceptions against him, I hope;
He has challenged you at your own weapons.

Cul. Widow, Sir Frederick shall be one of our Bride-men;
I will have none but such mad fellows at our Wedding;
But before I marry thee I will consider upon it.

He sits down and sleeps. Sir Fred. Pray, Widow, how long have you been
acquainted
With this mirror of Knighthood?

Wid. Long enough you hear, Sir, to treat of Marriage.

Sir Fred. What? You intend me for a reserve then?
You will have two strings to your bow, Widow;
I perceive your cunning; and faith I think I shall
Do the heartier service, if thou imploy'st me by the by.

Wid. You are an excellent Gallant indeed; shake off
These lousy Companions; come carry your Mistress
To the Park, and treat her at the Mulberry-garden
This glorious Evening.

Sir Fred. Widow, I am a man of business, that ceremony's
To be performed by idle fellows.

Wid. What would you give to such a friend as should dispatch
This business now, and make you one of those idle
Fellows.

Sir Fred. Faith pick and choose; I carry all my wealth about
Me; do it, and I am all at thy service, Widow.

Wid. Well, I have done it, Sir; you are at liberty,
And a leg now will satisfy me.

Sir Fred. Good faith, thou art too reasonable, dear Widow;
Modesty will wrong thee.

Wid. Are you satisfied?

Fidl. Yes, Madam.

Enter Dufoy, with a Helmet on his head, and a great Sword in his hand. Dufoy.
Vare are de bougre de Baylie?
Tetibleu, bougre Rogue.

He falls upon the fiddlers. Fidl. Help, help, Sir Fred. murder, murder! alas,
Sir, we
Are not Bailiffs; you may see we are men of an honester
Vocation.

They show their Instruments. Sir Fred. Hold, hold, thou mighty man at Arms.

Dufoy. Morbleu, de Fiddler! and is my Matre at liberty? play
Me de Trichate, or Jegg English, quickly,
Or I will make you all dance
Vidout your Fiddle; quike.

Wid. I am over-reached, I perceive.

Dufoy dances a Iegg. Sir Fred. Kind Widow, thank thee for this release.
Shakes his pockets. Laugh, Widow; ha, ha, ha: where is your counterplot, Widow?
Ha, ha, ha. Laugh at her, Dufoy. Come,
Be not so melancholy; we will to the Park:
I care not if I spend a piece or two upon thee in Tarts and
Cheescakes. Pish, Widow, why so much out of humor?
It Is no shame to love such a likely
Young Fellow.

Wid. I could almost find in my heart to punish my self,
To afflict thee, and marry that drunken Sott I never
Saw before.

Sir Fred. How came he hither?

Wid. Enquire elsewhere; I will not answer thee one
Question; nor let thee see me out of a Mask any more
This Fortnight.

Sir Fred. Go, go into thy Closet, look over thy old Receipts,
And talk wantonly now and then with thy Chambermaid:
I shall not trouble thee much till this is spent;
Shakes his Pockets. And by that time thy foolish Vow will be near over.

Wid. I want patience to endure this insolence.
Is my charity rewarded thus?

Sir Fred. Pious Widow, call you this Charity? 'twill get
Thee little hereafter; thou must answer for every sin
It occasions: Here is Wine and Women
In abundance.

Shakes his Pockets. Wid. Avoid my house, and never more come near me.

Sir Fred. But hark you, hark you, Widow; do you think
This can last always?

Wid. Ungrateful man!
Exit Widow.
Sir Fred. She Is gone; impatience for these two hours
Possess her, and then I shall be pretty well
Revenged.

Dufoy. Begar, Matre, have you not de ver faithful
Serviteur? you do never take notice of my merit.

Sir Fred. Dufoy, thou art a man of courage, and have done
Bravely; I will cast off this Suit a week sooner then
I intended, to reward thy service.

Dufoy. Begar I have several time given you ver
Dangerous testimony of my affection.

Enter a Servant, and takes up Cully in his arms. Sir Fred. Whither do you
carry him?

Serve. Sir, there is an old Gentleman below in a Coach,
Very like my Lord Bevill,
Who, hearing what a condition Sir Nich'las was in,
Desired me to bring him to him in my arms.

Cul. Let me go; where is the Widow?

Sir Fred. What Widow?

Cul. Mistress Rich; she is to be
My wife.

Sir Fred. But do you hear, Sir Nich'las? how long have you
Courted this Widow?

Cul. Mr Wheedle can tell you: trouble me not with idle
Questions. Sir Frederick,
You shall be welcome at any time; she loves men
That will roar, and drink, and Serenade her.

Sir Fr. This is some strange mistake; Sure Wheedle, intending
To chouse him, has showed him some counterfeit Widow;
And he, being drunk, has been misguided to the true
Widow's house. The fellow in the Coach may
Discover all; I will step and see who it is:
(...) him here, Dufoy, till I return: Gentlemen,
Come you with me.

Exit Sir Frederick and Fiddlers. Cul. Where is my Mistress?

Dufay. Vat Metres?

Cul. The Widow.

Dufoy. She be de Metres of my Matre.

Cul. You lie, Sirrah.

Dufoy. Begar you be de Jackanape to tell
Me I do lyea.

Cul. You are a French Rascal, and I will blow
Your nose without a handkerchief.

He pulls Dufoy by the nose. Duf. Help, help me; Morbleu! I will beat you vid
my fiste
And my foot, tell you ask me de pardon; take
Dat and date; ask me de pardon.

Cully falls down, and Dufoy beats him. Cul. I ask you pardon, Sirrah?

Dufoy. Sirrah? Tettibleu.

Offers to strike. Enter Sir Frederick and Fiddlers, leading in Palmer
trembling. Sir Fred. Hold, hold, Dufoy.

Dufoy. Begar he do merit to be beat; he swear he vil
Mar your Metres.

Palm. I beseech you, Sir Frederick.

Cul. My Lord Bevill!

Sir Fred. So, he takes him for my Lord Bevill;
Now the Plot will out.
It Is fit this Rascal should be cheated;
But these Rogues will deal too
Unmercifully with him: I Will take compassion upon
Him, and use him more favorably my self.

Cul. My Lord, where is the mad Wench your Sister?

Sir Frederick pulls off Palmer' s disguise. Sir Fred. Look you, Sir Nich'las,
where is my Lord Bevill Now?

Cul. My merry Countryman, Mr Palmer! I thought you had
Been in Buckingham-shire.
Sings. And he took her by the Apron
To bring her to his beck.
Never a Catch now, my merry Countryman?
Sir Frederick, I owe this Gentleman a thousand pounds.

Sir Fred. How so?

Cul. He won it of me at Dice, Wheedle went my halfs;
And we have given him a Judgment for it.

Sir Fr. This was the roguery you had been about the other
Night, when I met you in disguise, Palmer:
You Will never leave your cheating and your robbing,
How many Robberies do I know
Of your committing?

Palm. The truth is, Sir, you know enough to hang me;
But you are a worthy Gentleman, and a lover of Ingenuity.

Sir Fred. This will not pass: Produce
The Judgment.

Palm. Alas, Sir, Mr Wheedle has it.

Sir Fred. Produce it, or -- Fetch the Constable, Boy.

Palm. Sir Frederick, be merciful to a sorrowful Rascal:
Here is a Copy of the Judgment, as it is entered.

Sir Fred. Well, who is this counterfeit Widow? confess.

Palm. Truly 'twas Wheadle's contrivance; a Pox on him:
Never no good comes on it when men are so unconscionable
In their Dealings.

Cul. What, am I cheated, Sir Frederick? Sirrah, I will have
You hanged.

Sir Fred. Speak, who is this Widow?

Pal. It Is Grace, Sir, Wheadle's Mistress, whom he has placed
In my Lady Dawbwell's house: I am but a poor Instrument,
Abused by that Rascal.

Sir Fr. You See, Sr Nich'las, what Villains these are; they have
Cheated you of a thousand pounds, and would have married
You to a Wench, had I not discovered their Villainy.

Cul. I am beholden to you, Sir Frederick; they are Rogues,
Villainous Rogues: But where is the Widow?

Sir Fred. Why, you saw the true Widow here a little while Ago.

Cul. The truth is, me-thoughts she was something
Comlier then my Mistress: But will not this Widow
Marry me?

Sir Fred. She is my Mistress.

Cul. I Will h^^e none of her then.

Sir Fred. Well, I have discovered this cheat, kept you from
Marrying a Wench, and will save you the thousand pounds too.
Now, if you have a mind to marry, what think you of my
Sister? She is a plain brown Girl, and has a good
Portion; but not out twenty thousand pounds: This offer
Proves I have a perfect kindness for you.

Cul. I have heard she is a very fine Gentlewoman;
I will marry her forthwith, and be your Brother-in-Law.

Sir Fred. Come then, I Will carry you
Where you may see her, and ask her consent.
Palmer, you must along with us,
And by the way assign this Judgment to me.
Do you guard him, Gentlemen.

To the Fiddlers. Sir Fred. Come, Sir Nich'las.

Cul. How came I hither?

Sir Fred. You will be satisfied in that hereafter.

Palm. What cursed accident was this? what
Mischeivous Stars have the managing
Of my Fortune? Here Is a turn with all my heart,
Like an after-game at Irish!

Dufoy. Alon march, Shentelman shete;
March: You make de mouth of
De honest Shentelmen: begar you vil make de
Wry mouth ven you be hang.

Exeunt. SCEN. III.
Scene, A Garden. Enter Graciana and Letitia severally; Letitia with a Nosegay
in her Hand. Grac. Letitia, what have thou been doing here?

Let. Cropping the beauty of the youthful year.

Grac. How innocently do thouspend thy hours,
^ecting from the crowd the choicest Flowers!
Where is thy Mistress?

Let. Madam, she is with the wounded Colonel.

Grac. Come then into this Arbor, Girl, and there
With thy sweet voice refresh my wearied soul.

They walk into an Arbor. SONG.
LAdies, though to your Conquering eyes Let. sings.
Love owes his chiefest Victories,
And borrows those bright Arms from you
With which he does the world subdue.
Yet you your selves are not above
The Empire nor the Griefs of Love.
Then wrack not Lovers with disdain,
Lest Love on you revenge their Pain;
You are not free because you are fair;
The Boy did not his Mother spare.
Beauty's but an offensive dart;
It is no Armor for the heart.
Grae. Dear Girl, thou art my little Confident;
I often to thee have breathed my discontent;
And thy sweet voice as often has eased my care:
But now thy breath is like infectious Air;
Enter Beaufort. It feeds the secret cause of my disease,
And does enrage what it did use to appease.

Beauf. starting. Hark, that was Graciana's voice.

Grac. Oh Beaufort!

Beauf. She calls on me, and does advance this way;
I will conceal my self within this Bower; she may
The secret causes of my grief betray.

Beaufort goes into an Arbor, and Graciana and Letitia come upon the Stage.
Grac. Too rigidly my Honor I pursue;
Sure something from me to my Love is due:
Within these private shades for him I Will mourn,
Whom I in Public am obliged to scorn.

Let. Why should you, Madam, thus indulge your grief?
Love never yet in Sorrow found relief:
These Sighs, like Northern winds to the early Spring,
Destruction to your blooming Beauty bring.

Grac. Letitia, peace; my Beauty I despise:
Would you have me preserve these fatal eyes?

Let. Had you less beauteous been, y'ad known less care;
Ladies are happiest moderately fair:
But now should you your Beauty waste, which way
Could you the debt it has contracted pay?

Grac. Beaufort, did thou but know I weep for thee,
Thou would not blame my scorn, but pity me.

Let. When Honor first made you your Love decline,
You from the Center drew a crooked line;
You were to Beaufort too severe, I fear,
Lest to your Love you partial might appear.

Grac. I did what I in honor ought to do;
I yet to Beaufort and my love am true;
And if his Rival live, I Will be his Bride,
Joy shall unite whom Grief does now divide;
But if for love of me brave Bruce does die,
I am contracted to his Memory.
Oh, Beaufort!

Beauf. Oh, Graciana! here am I
(By what I Have heard) fixed in an ecstasy.

Grac. We are surpised; unlucky accident!
Fresh Sorrow's added to my discontent.

Exeunt Graciana and Letitia leasurely. Beaufort Enters. Beauf. Graciana, stay,
you can no more contend,
Since Fortune joins with Love to be my Friend;
There is no fear of Bruce his death; the wound
By abler Chyr'gions is not mortal found.
She will not stay:
My Joys, like waters swelled into a flood,
Bear down whatever their usual streams withstood.
Exit Beaufort.
SCEN. IV.
Scene, My Lady Dawbwell's House. Enter Wheedle and Grace. Whead. I wonder we
have yet no tidings of our Knight,
Nor Palmer, --
Fortune still crosses the industrious, Girl.
When we recover him you must begin
To lie at a little opener ward;
It Is dangerous keeping the Fool too long at bay*
Lest some old Wood-man drop in by chance,
And discover thou art but a rascal Deer.
I have counterfeited half a dozen Mortgages,
A dozen Bonds, and two Scriveners to vouch all;
That will satisfy him in thy Estate:
He has sent into the Country for his
Writings:
But see, here he comes.
Enter Sir Nicholas. Sir Nich'las, I must chide you, indeed I must;
You neglect your duty here: Nay, Madam, never
Blush; faith I Will reveal all. You Are the happiest,
The luckiest man --
Enter Sir Frederick. We Are betrayed; death, what makes him here?
To Sir Frederick. Sir Frederick, your humble Servant; you are come
In the luckiest time for mirth; will you but lend
Me your ear? do not you see Sir Nich'las and Grace
Yonder? look, look.

Sir Fred. Yes.

Whead. I am persuading him to keep her; she is a pretty
Deserving Girl; faith let us draw off a while,
And laugh among our selves, for fear of spoiling
The poor Wenches market; let us, let us.

Sir Fred. With all my heart.

Bailiffs meet Wheedle at the door, and Arrest him. Bailiffs. We arrest you,
Sir.

Whead. Arrest me? Sir Frederick, Sir Nicholas.

Sir Fred. We are not provided for a Rescue at present, Sir.

Whead. At whose Suit?

Bailiffs. At Sir Frederick Frollick's.

Whead. Sir Frederick Frollick's? I owe him never a farthing.

Sir Fr. You Are mistaken, Sir; you owe me a thousand pounds:
Look you, do you know Mr Palmer's hand?
He has assigned such a small debt over to me.

Enter Palmer and Jenny. Whead. How was I bewitched to trust such a villain!
Oh Rogue, Dog, Coward, Palmer!

Palm. Oh thou unconscionable Wheedle; a thousand pounds
Was too small a bubble!

S. Fred. Away with him, away with him.

Whead. Nay, Sir Frederick, it is punishment enough to fall
From my expectation:
Do not ruin a young man.

Grace. I beseech you, Sir.

S. Fred. Thou have moved me, Grace;
Do not tremble, Chuck; I love thy profession too well
To harm thee.
Look you, Sir, what think you of a rich Widow?
Proffering him the Whore. Was there no Lady to abuse, Wheedle, but my Mistress?
No man to bubble but your Friend and Patron, Sir Nich'las?
But let this pass; Sir Nich'las is satisfied; take Grace
Here, marry her, we are all satisfied:
She Is a pretty deserving Girl, and a Fortune now
In earnest; I Will give her a thousand pounds.

Whead. Pray, Sir, do but consider --

S. Fred. No consideration; dispatch, or
To Limbo.

Whea. Was there ever such a Dilemma? I shall rot in Prison.
Come hither, Grace; I did but make bold, like a young Heir,
With his Estate, before it come into his hands:
Little did I think, Grace, that this Pasty,
Stroaking her belly. When we first cut it up, should have been preserved
For my Wedding Feast.

S. Nich. You are the happiest, the luckiest man, Mr Wheedle.

Palm. Much joy, Mr Wheedle, with your rich Widow.

Whead. Sir Frederick, shall that Rogue Palmer laugh
At me?

S. Fr. No, no; Ienny, come hither; I Will make thee amends,
As well as thy Mistress, for the injury I did thee
The other night:
Here is a Husband for thee too:
Mr Palmer, where are you?

Palm. Alas, Sir Frederick, I am not able to
Maintain her.

S. Fred. She shall maintain you, Sir.
Do not you understand the mystery of Stiponie,
Ienny?

Maid. I know how to make Democcuana, Sir.

S. Fred. Thou art richly endowed, in faith: Here, here, Palmer;
No shall I, shall I; This or that, which
You deserve better.

Palm. This is but a short Reprieve; the Gallows will
Be my destiny.

S. Fred. Sir Nich'las, now we must haste to a better
Solemnity; my Sister expects us.
Gentlemen, meet us at the Rose; I Will bestow a Wedding
Dinner upon you, and there release your Judgment,
Mr Wheedle.
Bailiffs, wait upon them thither.

S. Nich. I wish you much joy with your fair Brides,
Gentlemen.

Whead. A pox on your Assignment, Palmer.

Palm. A pox on your rich Widow, Wheedle: Come, Spouse,
Come.

Exeunt. SCEN. V.
Scene, The Lord Bevill's House. Enter Lord Bevill, Bruce led in, Lovis,
Beaufort, Graciana and Aurelia. Bruce. Graciana, I have lost my claim to you,
And now my Heart's become Aurelia's due;
She all this while within her tender breast
The flame of Love has carefully suppressed,
Courting for me, and striving to destroy
Her own Contentment, to advance my Joy.

Aurel. I did no more then Honor pressed me to;
I wish I Would wooed successfully for you.

Bruce. You so excel in Honor and in Love,
You both my shame and admiration move.
Aurelia, here, accept that life from me,
Which Heaven so kindly has preserved for thee.
My Lord, I hope you will my choice allow,
To L. Bevill. And with your approbation seal our Vow.

Bevill. In generous minds this to the world will prove
That Gratitude has power to conquer Love.
It were, brave Man, impiety in me
Not to approve that which the Heavens decree.

Bruce. Graciana, on my generous Rival you*
Must now bestow what to his Merit's due.

Grac. Since you recovering, Bruce, your claim decline,
To him with honor I my Heart resign.

Beauf. Such Honor and such Love as you have shown*
Are not in the Records of Virtue known.
My Lord, you must assist us here once more;
To L, Bevill. The God of Love does your consent implore.

L. Bev. May Love in you still feed your mutual fire.

Joining their hands. Beauf. And may that flame but with our breaths expire.

Lovis. My Lord, our Quarrel now is at an end;
You are not Bruces Rival, but his Friend.

Beauf. In this brave strife your Friendship soared above
The active flames of our aspiring Love.

Bruce. Dear Friend, thy merits Fame cannot express.

Lovis. They are rewarded in your happiness.

Bruce. Come all into my Arms before I rest;
Let Us breathe our Joys into each others breast:
Thus mariners rejoice when winds decrease,
And falling waves seem wearied into Peace.

Enter Sir Frederick and Dufoy at one door, and the Widow and Betty at another.
S. Fred. Haste, Dufoy, perform what I commanded
You.

Dufoy. I will be ver quick begar; I am more den half de Mercury.

S. Fred. Ho, Widow! the noise of these Nuptials brought
You hither; I perceive your mouth waters.

Wid. Were I in a longing condition I should be apt
Enough to put my self upon you, Sir.

S. Fred. Nay, I know thou art spiteful, and would
Fain marry me in revenge; but so long as I have
These Guardian Angels about me, I defy thee
And all thy Charms: Do skilful Faulkners thus
Reward their Hawks before they fly the Quarry?

Wid. When your gorge is empty you will come to the
Lure again.

S. Fred. After I have had a little more experience of the
Vani y of this world, in a melancholy humor
I mat be careless of my self.

Wid. And marry some distressed Lady, that has had
No less experience of that vanity.

S. Fr. Widow, I prosess the contrary; I would not have the
Sin to answer for of debauching any from such
Worthy principles: Let me see; if I should be good
Natured now, and consent to give thee a Title
To thy own wealth again, you would be stubborn,
And not esteem the favor, Widow.

Wid. Is it possible you can have thoughts of gratitude?
Do you imagine me so foolish as your self, who
Often venture all at play, to recover one inconsiderable
Parcel.

S. Fr. I told you how 'twou'd be, Widow: Less providence
Attend thee, else I shall do no good upon thee:
Farewell.

Wid. Stay, Sir; let us shake hands at parting.

S. Fred. Nay, if thou once art acquainted with my
Constitution, thou't never let me go; Widow, here,
Examine, examine.

Holding out his hand. Bevill. Sister, I long have known your inclinations;
Give me leave to serve you. Sir Frederick, here,
Take her; and may you make each other happy.

Wid. Now I have received you into my Family,
I hope you will let my maids go quietly about
Their business, Sir.

S. Fred. Upon condition there be no twits of the good man
Departed; no prescription pleaded for evil customs
On the Wedding night.
Widow, what old doings will be anon!
I have coupl'd no less then a pair-royal my self.
This day, my Lord, I hope you will excuse the liberty
I have taken to send for them; the sight will much
Increase your mirth this joyful day.

L. Bev. I should have blamed you, Sir, if you had restrained
Your, humor here.
These must needs be pleasant Matches that are of his
Making.

Enter Dufoy. Sir Fred. What, are they come?

Dufoy. Day be all at de door, begar; every man vid his
Pret Metres, Brid, Whore.
Enter, Jentelmen, vid your Lady, enter vid your great
Fortune: Ha, ha, ha.

Enter Sir Nicholas and his Bride, Wheedle and his Bride, Palmer and his Bride.
Sir Nich. Brother, do you see how sneakingly Wheedle looks
Yonder, with his rich Widow?

Wid. Brother! is this fellow your Brother?

Sir Nich. Ay, that I am.

Sir Fred. No, no, Sir Nicholas.

Sir Nich. Did not I marry your Sister, Sir?

Sir Fred. Fie, fie, Sir Nich'las; I thought y'ad been
A modester man.

Sir Nich. Is my wife no kin to you, Sir?

Sir Fred. Not your Wife; but your Son and Heir may,
If it prove so. To Lucy.
Joy be with thee, old acquaintance.
Widow, resolving to lead a virtuous life,
And keep house altogether with thee,
I have disposed of my own household stuff, my
Dear Mrs. Lucy, to this Gentleman.

Whead. and Palm. We wish you joy with your fair Bride,
Sir Nich'las.

Sir Nich. I will go and complain, and have you all clapped
Up for a plot immediately.

Sir Fred. Hold, hold, Sir Nich'las; there are certain
Catch-poles without; you cannot escape,
Without you have a thousand pounds in your
Pocket: Carry her into the Country, come;
Your Neighbors Wives will visit her, and vow
She Is a virtuous well-bred Lady:
And, give her her due, faith she was a very
Honest Wench to me, and I believe will make a very
Honest Wife to you.

Sir Nich. If I discover this I am lost; I shall be ridiculous,
Even to our own Party.

Sir Fred. You are in the right: Come,
Take her, make much of her,
She shall save you a thousand pounds.

Sir Nich. Well, Lucy, if thou can but deceive my
Old mother, and my neighbors in the Country,
I shall bear my fortune patiently.

Sir Fred, I Will warrant you, Sir, Women so skilled in Vice can
Dissemble Virtue.

Dufoy. Fie, fie, make de much of your Lady, Shentelmen;
Begar you vil find them ver civil.

Sir Fred. Dufoy, I had almost forgot thee.

Dufoy. Begar my merit is ver seldom in your
Memory.

Sir Fred. Now I will reward thy services; here, enjoy thy
Mistress.

Dufoy. Ver vel, begar; you will give me two tree old
Gown vor all my diligence.

Betty. Marry come up! Is that a despicable portion
For your greafie Pantaloons?

Dufoy. Peace, peace, Metres Bett; ve vil be ver good
Friend upon occasion; but ve vil no marry:
Dat be ver much beter, begar.

Sir Fred. Did you bring the Bailiffs with you?

Dufoy. Day be vidout: Begar, Shentelmen, You have bin
Made ver sad; and now you shall be made ver mer
Vid de Fiddler.

Whead. Ha! cozened with Fiddlers for Bailiffs!
I durst have sworn false Dice might as soon have passed
Upon me.

Sir Fred. Bid them strike up; we will have a Dance.
Widow, to divert these melancholy Gentlemen.

They dance. L. Bev. Sir Fredrick, you shall command my House this day;
After the Dance. Make all those welcome that are pleased to stay.

Sir Fred. Sir Nicholas, and Mr Wheedle, I release you both
Of your Judgment, and will give it you under
My hand at any time.
Widow, for all these bloody preparations, there
Will be no great massacre of Maiden-heads
Among us here.
Anon I will make you all laugh with the occasion
Of these Weddings.
On what small accidents depends our Fate,
Whilst Chance, not prudence, makes us fortunate.

EPILOGUE.
Spoke by the Widow. SIr Frederick, now I am revenged on you;
For all your Frollick Wit, you are cozened too
I have made over all my Wealth to these
Honest Gentlemen; they are my Trustees.
Yet, Gentlemen, if you are pleased, you may
Supply his wants, and not your Trust betray.
Spoke by Wheedle. Poor Wheedle hopes h'as gi'n you all content;
Here he protests it is that he only meant:
If you are displeased we are all cross-bit to day,
And he has wheadl'd us that writ the Play.
THE EPILOGUE.
LIke Prisoners, conscious of the offended Law,
When Iuries after the Evidence withdraw;
So waits our Author between hope and fear,
Until he does your doubtful Verdict hear.
Men are more civil then in former days;
Few now in Public hiss or rail at Plays;
He bid me therefore mind your looks with care,
And told me I should read your Sentence there;
But I, unskilled in Faces, cannot guess
By this first view, what is the Plays success;
Nor shall I ease the Author of his fear,
Till twice or thrice, at least, I Have seen you here.
FINIS.

