THE Earl of ESSEX HJS LETTER to the Earl of SOUTHAMPTON in the time of his
Troubles.

Containing many Pious Expressions, and very comfortable for such as are in any
Troubles:

September. 29. 1642.

LONDON, Printed by LVKE NORTON, for T. T.

The Earl of ESSEX his Letter to the Earl of Southampton, in the time of his
Troubles.
My Lord:
AS neither Nature nor Custom never made me a man of Complements. So now I
shall have less will, than heretofore, to use such ceremonies; When I have
left with Martha to be, Solicitus circa multa, and believe with Mary, unum
sufficit, but it is no complement or ceremony, but a real and necessary duty,
that one friend owes to another in absence, and especially at their leave
taking, when in man's reason many accidents may either keep them long divided,
or perhaps bar their meeting till they meet in another world* For then shall
I think that my friend, whose honor, whose person, and whose fortune, is dear
unto me shall prosper and be happy where ever he go, and what ever he takes
in hand, when he is in the favor of that God, under whose protection there is
only safety, and in whose service there is only true happiness to be found.
What I think of your natural gifts, or of your abilities in this age, and in
this state to give glory to God, and to win honor to your self, if you
employ the talents you have received, to their best use; I will not now tell
you, it suffices that when I was furthest of all times from dissembling, I
spoke truly, and have witness enough. But those things I will only put your
Lordship in mind of. First, that you have nothing that you have not received.
Secondly, That you possess them not as a Lord over them, but as an accomptant
for them. Thirdly, If you employ them to serve this world, or your own wotldly
delights, which the Prince of this world will seek to entertain you with; it is
ingratitude, it is injustice, yea, it is perfidious treachery. For what would
you think that such a servant of yours, that shall convert your goods,
committed to his charge, to the advantage or service of your greatest Enemy:
And what do you less than thus with God, since you have all from him, and know
that the world and the Ptince thereof are at continual enmity with him. If
ever therefore the admonition of your truest friend be heard by you, or your
Country (which you may serve in so great and many respects) be dear unto you:
If your God (whom you must, if you deal truly with your self, acknowledge to
be powerful over all, and just in all) be feared by you; yea, if you be dear
unto your self, and prefer an everlasting happiness before a pleasant dream,
which you must shortly awake out of, and then repent in the bitterness of your
soul, any of these things be regarded by you; then, I say, call your self to
an account for what is past, Cancel all the leagues which you made without the
warrant of a religious conscience, make a resolute Covenant with your God to
serve him with all your natural and spiritual inward and outward gifts and
abilities, and then he that is faithful and cannot lie, has promised to
honor them that honor him, he will give you that inward peace of soul, and
true joy of heart; which til you have you shall never rest, which when you have
you shall never be shaken, and which you can never attain to by any other way
then this that I have showed you; I know your Lordship that when you read
this, you may say to your self, and object to me, this is but a vapor of
Mellanchollie, and a style of a prisoner; and that I was far enough from it
when I lived in the world (as you do now; and may do so again when my fetters
are taken from me. I answer, Though your Lordship should think so, yet cannot
I distrust the goodness of my God, that his mercy will fail me, or his grace
forsake me, I have so deeply engaged my self that I should be one of the most
miserable Apostates that ever was: I have so avowed my profession, and called
so many from time to time to witness it, and to be watchmen over me, that I
should be the hollowest Hypocrite that ever lived, and the most detestable
Atheist that ever was borne. But though I should perish in my own sin, and
draw upon my self my own condemnation; should not you take hold of the
Grace and Mercy of God which is offered and make your profit of my fearful,
wretched and miserable example. I was longer a slave and servant to the world,
and the corruption of it, than you have been, and therefore could hardly be
drawn from it, I had many callings, and answered some of them: thinking a soft
pace fast enough to come to Christ: and my self forward enough, when I saw the
end of my journey, though I arrived not at it. Therefore I have been by Gods
providence violently pulled, halled, and dragged to the Marriage feast, as all
the world has seen. It was just with God to afflict me in this world, that he
might give me joy in another: I had too much knowledge, while I performed too
little obedience, and was therefore to be beaten with double stripes; God grant
your Lordship may quietly feel the comforts I now enjoy in my unfeigned
conversion, but that you never feel the torments I have suffered for the too
long delaying it; I had none but Divines to call upon me: To whom I said, If my
ambition could have entered into their narrow hearts, they would not have bin so
humble; or if my delights had bin once tasted by them, they would not have bin
so precise; But your Lordship has one to call upon you that knows what it is
you now enjoy, and what the greatest fruit and end is of all contentments that
this world can afford; think therefore (Dear Earl) that I have staked and
bounded all the ways of pleasure to you, and left them as sea-markes for you
to keep the channel of religious ventures; for shut your eyes never so long,
they must be opened at last, and then you must say with me, There is no peace
to the wicked and ungodly, I will make a covenant with my soul: not suffer
mine eyes to sleep in the night, nor my thoughts to attend the first business
of the day, till I have prayed to my God that your Lordship may believe, and
may profit by this plain, but faithful admonition. And then I know your
Country and friend shall be happy in you, and you successful in all you take
in hand: which shall be an unspeakable comfort to your Lordships

Cousin and true Friend, which no worldly cause can divide from you, ESSEX.

FINIS.

