THE EARL OF ESSEX His SPEECH in the Artilrie garden to the Soldiers on
Tuesday Last. WITH HIS MAJESTY'S Propositions to the CITIZENS OF LONDON,
LIKEWISE TERRIBLE AND BLOODY NEWS FROM YORK Concerning the great affront,
which was given to the said City, by the Cavileers, and how the Citizens gave
them a repulse and shut up the gates.Whereunto is annexed, Londons Resolution
for the defense of the King and Parliament.

Ioh. Bro. Cler. Par.

Hen: Else. Parl. D. Com.

July. 28. Printed for Thomas Baley. 1642.

His Majesty's PROPOSITIONS TO THE Citizens of London. Wherein he declares his
Royal intentions concerning the said City.
BY woeful experience we have known and found, the rebellions insurections and
wicked policies and stratagens of these most hellish Papists, and malignant
party are grown to such a head that it is feared, without the great mercy of
God, we are like to endure the hardest Censure, and bloody devises: they
possiblely can inflict upon this our Kingdom; For these Counties viz.
YORKSHIRE, LINCOLNSHIRE, LANCASHIRE, are so greviouslie perplexed, with the
fear of a Civil War, which still these Cavileers with oaths and threats, do
daily insist to the fears of all good Christians; they are now grown to so
insolent and turbulent spirits, being countenanced with the smiles of many
Peers, of this Kingdom, and they are grown to such a higth that they began to
use such lacivious actions that the inhabitants of these parts, are grown to a
most miserable thinking daly and hourly when these men will cease upon their
goods, and they began since His Majesty went into L^ncolne, and Beverly, to
use many outrages against the City. Whereupon the Citizens of York foreseing
the danger that would ensue, caused the gates to be shut up, they having a long
time groaned under the dominering of the Cavileers.

The truth whereof was reported to the Honorable House of Commons, on Saturday
last the sixteenth of July, both Houses taking into consideration the Militia,
of the Kingdom propounded and Ordered, that it is against the Laws, and
liberties of the Kingdoms, that any of the Subjects thereof should be compelled
by the King, to attend him at his pleasure but says as is bound thereto,

And the Lords and Commons, in Parliament do declare.

That it is both against the Laws of the Land and the liberty of the Subject,
for any Messenger or Officer, to cease upon any His Majesty's Subjects. And
likewise declare that it ^s against the Public Peace of the Kingdom, and
that the same be forthwith Printed and Published, and Assigned under the Clarks
hand-

His Royal Majesty likewise declares that neither the testimony of, so many
of our Lords now with us can credit, with diverse men that they proceed to Levy
Men, and Money, and raise Horse.

Therefore We are not to be misliked if after so many gracious expositious
upon considerable purposes and reasons, which they answer by Ordering that we
answer to be Reason and so appear to leavie War against Us. And therefore We
make such Provision, that as we have been forced from London, and kept from HVL
We may not be surprised at YORK, but in a condition to bring Justice on these
men, who would persuade Our People that their Religion is in danger, because
we will not consent, it shall be in their power, and that their Votes and
liberties are in danger, because We will allow no Judge of that liberty, but
the known power of the land.

Yet whatsoever prouison, we shall be compelled to make for our security, We
shall be ready, to lay down* so soon as they shall have revoked their Orders
which they have made, and submit those persons, who have detained Our towns
carried away our Arms, and put the Militia in Execution contrary to our
Proclamation, to that trial of innocence, and to which they were borne.

and if this be not submitted We shall with as good a Conscience, and we
believe We shall not want, the good affections of our Subjects to that end,
proceed against those who shall prepare to exercise that pretended Ordnance of
the Militia, and Sr. John Hotham who keeps Our Town of HUL from Us, as We
would resist persons that come in a far greater way; And therefore We shall
repose and require our City of London to obey our Commands, and not to be
misled by those men who are led desperate by their fortunes who tell them that
their Religion, liberty, and property, is to be preserved by no other way but
by their disloyalty.

Therefore we propound unto them that they are now at the brincke of the
River, and may draw their swords when nothing pursues them but their own evil
Consiences. His Royal Majesty likewise declares that the worth and glory of
the City is not like to be destroyed any other way but by rebelling against Us,
or their wives and Children to be exposed to uiolence and villainy, but by
those who make their appitite and will, their measurs and guide to all their
Actions.

And his Royal and Sacred Majesty does likewise again propound and declare
that he is resolved to proseed against all those persons that shall assist by
furnishing of Horse, Men, and Plate as against the disturbers of the public
Peace of the whole Kingdom in general protesting that for his one part his
intenciones are Royal as alredey has b^e published and declared to all the
world.


