SHIBBOLETH OR, Observations of several Errors in the last Translations of the
English and French Bibles. Together, With many other received Opinions in the
Protestant Churches, which being weighed in the balance are found too light.

Written by John Despagne, Minister of the French CHURCH; And translated into
English, By Robert Codrington, Mr of Arts.

London, Printed in the year* 1656*

THE PREFACE.
REader, I am one of the least, but of those who are peaceable and faithful in
Israel; And amongst those I am not the first, who have undertaken to lay open
those defects, to which the most learned are subject. Where is that Moses who
still does not stammer, although God himself has talked to him? It is true,
the Defects* which I have here noted, are not so fatal in their consequences,
as that of Shibboleth was unto the Ephraimites, Howsoever we should endeavor,
to correct our selves unto the truth, and to speak as uprightly and as properly
as we can. Amongst a multitude of passages, and places which deserve a review,
I have only taken a small number, and have ranked them by no other order, but
by that only of my memory, and according to that measure which it has
presented them unto me. A work more complete and exact does pertain to the
great Masters of knowledge, unto whom I do commend the care thereof.
Nevertheless, If time, or rest, or life; if sight, or light, (and which is
more* if the light of GOD does not fail me* I hope I shall not be altogether
unprofitable.

Diverse Treatises heretofore published by this Author.
POpular Errors in General points which concern the knowledge of Religion,
referred to their causes, and comprehended in several observations. The use of
the Lords Prayer maintained against the Objections of the Innovators of these
times. New Observations on the Creed: New Observations on the Decalogue. The
eating of the Body of Christ considered in its principles.
SERMONS
An Abridgement of the Sermon Preached on the 12. of Sept. 1648. Upon the
Treaty which was then to begin betwixt the late King and the Parliament. A
Funeral Sermon of the Author upon the Death of his wife. A Funeral Sermon on
the Death of Philip Earl of Penbrok^. An Advertisement on the Breaking and
distributing of the Bread in the Sacrament of the Supper omitted in many
Orthodox Churches. An Abridgement of two Sermons which preceded the Ordination
of a Pastor in the French Church at Canterbury. Considerations on the Eclips of
the Sun, March 29. the year 1652. The Charity of the Parliament of England to
the French Church gathered in the Chapel at Somerset House.
The greatest part of the works above mentioned have been already translated
into English by diverse learned men.

SHIBBOLETH OR The Reformation of several places in the Translations of the
French and of the English Bible.
Of a general Fault in the English Translation at the beginning of the Lords
Prayer, and a great number of other places in the New Testament.
INstead of saying, Our Father which art in the Heavens, the English do express
it, Our Father which art in Heaven, There are ^ew who can be persuaded but they
express this Prayer in the same terms as our Savior did dictate it.
Nevertheless the mistake is very visible; If it proceeded only from custom and
vulgar use, I should not here make mention of it. But it is authorized by the
public Translation, reviewed, and oftentimes re-imprinted. For all the
Translations of Math. 6. and Luke the 11. do with one voice pronounce, Who art
in Heaven.

I shall not here study at all to give an Answer to those, who immediately will
reply; Is it not all one, If we say that GOD is in Heaven or in the Heavens? A
man experienced in the Scriptures will never speak it. The difference is very
great betwixt Heaven in the Singular, and Heavens in the Plural Number; And
although in some matters, the Singular be indifferently pronounced as the
Plural, as in Math. 16. and 19. and Math. 18. and 18. yet this difference is
not universal. On the contrary, It is of great importance to discern, when the
Scripture speaks of the Heavens, and when it speaks of Heaven; Of which I will
not treat at this present, It shall suffice to speak, that the word Heavens in
the Plural, does far more express the extent of the power of GOD, whom in that
Prayer we do implore; And also that Term does imply, that he has all the
Heavens at his service to assist us, Not only the Angels who are in the
highest Heaven, but the Sun and the Stars also, which are in another Heaven,
and besides them, the Rain, and the Air which is also called Heaven. In the
same Prayer, The Heaven in which the Angels do perform the Will of God, is
distinguished by the Singular number from the Heavens in the Plural, which our
Father does fill with his presence and ^is power.

But why should I allege Reasons to maintain a truth, which cannot be de^yed?
He that is no extraordinary Grecian may understand well enough that are the
terms in the Original to which the Translation ought to answer. Is it Our
Father which art in Heaven? No, It is, Who art in the Heavens. Wherefore then
do we not speak it so? Wherefore do we not translate the word, as they are in
the Original Text? Is it because the Ianguage of this Island does want a word
to express the Heavens in the Plural? The contrary is sufficiently known, as
by experience it is evident. Is it because the changing of one word, to which
the people have a long time been accustomed, would appear either strange or
difficult. We ought to regard more the truth of God, then the custom of men.
And it will not be so uneasy in a new Translation, to change a supposition in
the singular number, into a truth, in the Plural.

Nevertheless, it is here requisite, that I meet with, and prevent a
subterfuge, which may be used, For it may be objected, The Evangelists
themselves repeating the passages of the old Testament, in which the Heavens
are named in the Plural, have translated in Heaven in the singular number, As
may appear in the 7th. of the Acts and the 46. verse, in comparing it with the
66. of Esaias 1. To which I answer, That we are not Evangelists of such a rank as
they were, and that our Translations proceed not as theirs did from the
Dictates of the infallible Spirit, And when we render the new Testament into
any other language, we ought to express the very terms of the Evangelists, and
the Apostles, And likewise when we translate the old Testament, we should
represent the very terms thereof.

It is remarkable that in all the New Testament the Son of God did never say.
Your Father which is in Heaven, or My Father which is in Heaven, But always,
which is in the Heavens; In the Heavens in the Plural. The Evangelists do
recite a great number of the passages in which he has said, Our Father or my
Father which art in the Heavens; But not that he ever said, The Father which
art in Heaven. Wherefore then, Do we make him to change his style in the Prayer
which he has prescribed to us? But the English Translation does change also
all the other places in which Jesus Christ does express the Heavens in the
Plural Number, when he speaks of the Father.

To the same purpose, our Lord did never say the Kingdom of Heaven, but always
the Kingdom of the Heavens. One only of the Evangelists has this term of the
Kingdom of the Heavens no less then six and thirty times, but the Kingdom of
Heaven not once; which plainly does demonstrate, seeing the multitude of
passages, in which the Plural number is always employed and never the
Singular, that there is a mystery or an Emphasis in the one, which is not in
the other. But the English Translation to the contrary does never say the
Kingdom of the Heavens, but always the Kingdom of Heaven.

Amongst all the places of the New Testament, where the Original names the
Heavens, there are very few where the English do express the Plural. It is in
their translation of the 2 Cor. 5. 1. and Heb. 1. 10. Why ought it not to be,
or could it not be as well, in all the other places which the holy Ghost has
dictated? And in Ephesians. 1. 10. where the Original mentions the Heavens in
the Plural, the English Translation does only put it in the Margent, and
places the Singular in the text it self.

Of Lucifer, who is mentioned in the English Translation Esaias 14. ver. 12.
THe Schoolboys know that Lucifer is a Latin word, and it is the name of the
Star, which shows its self before the rising of the Sun. The Hebrew which
signifies this Star is indeed expressed it self by the word Lucifer, but it is
when we speak in Latin, not when it is translated into English. To what
purpose then is this Lucifer in the English translation?

The translators in the Margent have inserted the true word of the English
tongue, which is the Day Star, but in the body of the text, they had rather
employ the Name of Lucifer; as if it were better English, or as if there were
some great cause which did oblige them to it.

It is indeed no other thing but the tracing of an ancient Allegory* which
applies to the Devil, that which is spoken to the King of Babylon, and of the
Name of a Star has made it to be the proper Name of the Prince of evil
Spirits, and give it him in Latin, that is to say Lucifer. And because proper
Names do retain themselves in whatsoever language they are spoken, it was
believed that this ought not to be changed for any other.

But wherefore do we yet retain the relics of such notorious folly censured a
long time since, and disavowed by our selves, who is he amongst the vulgar that
finding in his Bible this word Lucifer does not immediately believe that it is
the Name of a great Devil, whom common ignorance so calls. It is true that
the Divines, who have published the last annotations on the English Bible have
also condemned those, who do so understand the name of Lucifer. But so long as
that word shall remain in the text, the error will continue. What need is there
to retain a word which is not of the English tongue, since the English can
express the Hebrew without this Latin word, which only serves to nourish an
ancient folly?

The common people of England have a long time thought that the evil Rich man
Luke 16. verse 19, etc. was called Dives according to his proper Name; And for
the greatest part they do to this day believe it; for they ordinarily say that
Dives is in Hell, that Dives spoke with Abraham, etc. As if Dives had been his
Christen-name or at least his Surname: Now this ridiculous opinion was
conceived and born at that time when the people had not the Bible but in Latin;
For because that Dives does signify a rich man in the Latin tongue, when
mention was made of Dives, the ignorant did imagine that it was the name of a
man; An interpretation as vain as that which is recited in a modern Satyr, of
one, who maintained that the name of Tobyes Dog was Canis, because, it is said
that Canis followed his Master. But it is to be admired how this ignorance has
been fomented even by the Orthodox themselves since the Reformation, when they
published the Scriptures in the English tongue, for in the Contents of the
Chapter which they have prefixed to the 16. of Luke, we do yet read as if that
Chapter did speak of Dives and Lazarus. The last translation has not this word
Dives; No more ought Lucifer to be any more especially in the text it self.

Of Mary Magdalen, who falsely is said to be a Woman of a bad life. The injuries
which Divines for the most part a^ her in their Sermons and their Books, And
especially the English Bible in the Argument of the seventh Chapter of St. Luke.
THe injury which the Roman Church does to another Mary, who was the Sister of
Lazarus has been sufficiently confuted by the Orthodox. Ignorance has caused
to believe, that this Mary, and another who was of Magdala, and the Sinner
mentioned in the 7th. of Saint Luke were but one and the same person,
confounding these three in one, now we have truly and already vindicated one of
the three, who is Mary of Bethany, who was the Sister of Lazarus, but we do
still defame her of Magdala, as if this Magdalen were the Sinner of whom Saint
Luke speaks.

There is nothing more common in the mouth of the vulgar then the wicked life
of Magdalen. The Preachers willing to comfort Souls afflicted with the horror
of their sins, do represent unto them this Woman, as one of the most unchaste
and most dissolute that ever was, to whom nevertheless GOD has been merciful.
On the same prejudice which is but imaginary, the reason is builded, wherefore
the Son of God being raised from the dead, did appear first to Mary Magdalen,
before he appeared to any other, for it is alleged, it was because she had more
need of comfort, having been a greater finner than others. The common places,
the Indexes, even that of Marl^rat himself, and other Books, which serve for an
Address to Students, do give them betimes this impression which always
afterward they retain. He who has wrote the Practice of Piety, of whom I
shall speak more hereafter, does rank this Magdalen, with the most enormous
sinners, yea, with Manasse himself, one of the most wicked that ever was. And
yet more to atuhorize this error, it is inserted into the Bible it self.

For the Contents of the 7th. Chapter of Saint Luke in the English translation
does tell us, that the Woman, whose sins were in a greater number then the sins
of others, the Woman, who until then had led a wicked life and full of
uncleaness, was Mary Magdalen.

But 1. the text gives no name to that sinner; where have we then found it? Who
of the Evangelists, or what other Authentic Scripture has taught us the
proper name or the surname of that Woman? For she who poured the ointment on
Jesus Christ Mat. 26. and John 12. was neither that sinner, nor Mary Magdalen,
but the sister of Lazarus. All the circumstances do demonstrate that they are
two distinct Histories, two diverse actions performed in diverse times, in diverse
places, and by diverse persons. Secondly, Where shall we find that Mary Magdalen
did ever anoint the feet of our Savior? Thirdly, Where shall we find that Mary
Magdalen was a Woman of an ungodly life? The Gospel does inform us, that she
was tormented with seven Devils, or evil Spirits, an affliction which may
befall the most holy man or woman in the world. But we find not the least
shadow of a word which does stain her with any note of infamy. Wherefore then
do we yet adhere to an invention not only fabulous, but injurious to the
memory of a woman illustrious in piety? We must abstain from bearing false
witness, as well against the dead, as against the living.

It is remarkable that neither the sinner, mentioned in Luke the 7th. nor the
Adulteress, in the 8th. of Saint John are found to have any name in the sacred
History, no more than the theif who was converted being on the Cross. There are
(no doubt) particular reasons for it, and in part we may conjecture of them,
why the Holy Ghost abstained to express the proper names of these great
sinners, although they were converted. It is not then for us to impose names on
them, much less to appropriate them to persons whom the Scripture has not
marked with any note of enormous sins.

Of the Sons of Saul whom the French Bible represents to have been crucified 2 Samuel 21.
IT has been observed that this word the Cross is not found in the old
Testament, and even that the Hebrew tongue has not any term to signify that
kind of punishment, which was unknown to the ancient people of Israel. The two
and twentieth Psalm foretelling that kind of death which Christ should suffer,
does express it only by a Periphrasis. They have ^eirced my hands and my feet.
It is true that the Latin tongue does give a more ^arge signification of this
word the Cross, But in our vulgar tongues it is only taken for that kind of
Execution, in which they did nayl to the wood the hands and the feet of the
Malefactor. And this cannot be said of the Sons of Saul. The Original affirms
that they were hanged by the Gabaonits, who demanded that they might be
delivered to them to be hanged. This is the word of the text, which is also
expressed in the English translation, In the place whereof, the French
translation says, that they were stretched forth on the Cross, And that the
Gabaonits did demand them, to the end (say they) that we may stretch them forth
on the Cross. But the word of the Cross, or the Crucifying is neither in that
place, nor in any other of the old Testament, and therefore ought not to be in
the translation.

Of the beginning or Preface which is commonly added to the Text of the
Decalogue.
WHen the common people do rehearse the ten Commandments, they begin in these
words, Hearken O Israel, etc. The Books in which the Extract or Copy of the
Decalogue is found, The Catechisms in which it is interpreted, The Poetical
Paraphrases in which it is sung, do all give it this beginning, Hearken O
Israel.

Now there is no man who ought to take offense at what I shall say. He has
more reason to wonder that no more heed is taken of so manifest an addition,
For those two first words, Hearken Israel, which we pronounce when we recite
the Decalogue, are no part of the Decalogue it self, nor were they spoken then
when GOD with his own mouth did publish it in Sinai, neither were they
comprehended in the writing which he did give in the tables of that Law. This
is easy to prove the Decalogue, which is wholly entire in two places of Moses
(Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 5. has not these words, Hearken Israel.

But what inconvenience does arise to place them in the front of the Decalogue?
Surely none at all, for the substance of them, for it is well known that it was
to Israel to whom GOD did speak them. But if we shall affirm that they are the
proper terms of the Decalogue, it is a great mistake, And the Jews would tell
us that we are but bad Text-men. It is expedient at the least that the common
people should be advertised to discern an addition, or a Paraphrase, be it
never so pertinent, from the express words of that Law.

It may be demanded, From whence did that custom proceed, to begin the
Decalogue with those words which are not there? It may be from hence, that
Christ (Mark 12. 29.) citing Moses (Deuteronomy. 6. 4.) says that the first of all
the Commandments is, Hearken O Israel, the Lord our God is the only Lord. But
these words do not prove that the Decalogue in express terms did begin so, No
more then by this which follows, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, etc. That is the first Commandment. For these words, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God are not in the Decalogue, although the other
Commandments have their reference to it, as to the first, that is to say, the
greatest of them all.

To all this I shall add that the French Paraphrase, which we sing in our
Churches, willing to represent this Preface, Hearken O Israel, does not express
at all the name of Israel, which nevertheless ought to be there expressed. And
which is more, in the place of Israel, which was a title of honor, this
Paraphrase has inserted an Epithet of Reproach, which is a hardened people. No
man ought to take it in ill part, if we mark the defect^ of the language of men

Of a distinction unknown to us which was in the writing o^ every one of the
tables of the Decalogue. A Q^^stion on that Subject.
IT is not needful in this place to demonstrate, that which is eviden^ in
History, that the Decalogue was not contained in two pages, or Columes, as it
is ordinarily represented, but in four. For every Table was written on two
sides, which were as two pages in one leaf, in such a manne^ that all the
Decalogue was comprehended in four pages, every one o^ which did contain a part
of this Law Exodus 32. 15.

Now we cannot give an account, i^ what words, nay which is more i^ what
Commandment the first pag^ did end, nor consequently where the second did
begin. For one part of the four first Commandments was written on one of the
sides of the first table, and another part on another side. But how many of the
Commandments, or words, and what were written in every side, is that of which
we are ignorant. And the like for the second table; we know not where the first
page ended, and where the other did begin. I have been willing to give this
advertisement to those who before did not think of it.

But it may be demanded, wherefore has not the sacred History marked this
distinction to instruct us, which were the last words of the foregoing page, or
which were the first of tha^ which followed? It may be, it was to hinder
those, who would have counterfeited the tables of the Law, for it was not
permitted to make any like unto them. And these tables were shut up in an Ark,
that they might not be exposed to the view of men; And so not knovving what
words finished the first page neither of one table nor the other, it is
impossible to make a certain and an assured Representation of them.

Of the Songs which without any proof are attributed to the Blessed Virgin, to
Zachary and to Simeon, Luke Chap. 1. and 2.
I May add to this the song of the Angels, who (it is said) did sing these
words, Glory be unto God, etc. when they published the Nativity of our
Savior. This is a common opinion, follovved also by the English Bible in the
Argument of the second Chapter of Saint Luke. But that which may be spoken of
it, has been touched by others, which is the reason that I abstain to proceed
any further on it.

Nevertheless, the same Judgment may be made of this title, which is given to
these three other parcels of Scripture, which are called Songs, As the Song of
the Virgin, the Song of Zachary, and the Song of Simeon. So speak the Comm^n
Places, so the Commentators, and so Calvin himself as to the Song of the Virgin.

The Evangelist does tell us that these words, to which the Name of a Song is
given, were pronounced, but not that they were sung, either by the Virgin, or
by Zachary, or Simeon, nor that they were so much as conceived or brought
forth in the form of a Song, or measured by the Rules of Poetry.

It will not serve to affirm that their style is Poetical, and that certain
passages in some of the Psalms, and other Hymns of the old Testament are
inchaced in them; for some verses of a Song inserted into a discourse, do not
make the whole dicourse to be an entire Song. Much less may we conclude that
it was sung by pronouncing. Howsoever it was, there is nothing of any
certainty in it, to make the vulgar opinion to pass for an undoubted truth.

In all the New Testament there are but two Songs, so named in express terms,
And both those are in the Revelations only, and only in a Vision: Rev. 5. ver
9. 10. and Revel. 15. ver. 3. 4.

I do not say that those excellent words of the Virgin, of Zachary, and of
Simeon may not in our vulgar tongues be put into the form of Songs, and sung in
our public Congregations; It is of great edification. But it is not convenient
to believe for certain, that they were Songs in the Original. Wherefore do
we not say as well that the words of Elizabeth dictated by the Holy Ghost
are a Song also Luke 1?

Of a very harsh expression in the English Bible Jerem. 20. ver. 7. And other
Translations on the same place in the Latin and the French Bible.
IN this place the Translation makes Jeremy addressing himself to GOD, to speak
in these words, Thou have deceived me, O Lord, and I have been deceived. It is
true that the Translation of S. Jerome, has the same expression, if not a
worse, Thou have (says it) seduced me, and I have been seduced. That of
Tremelius has it; pellexisti me. And the French Translation, tumas attrait. To
which the English does answer in the Margent. But in the text it says, Thou
have deceived me. A word full of horror. Now, saving the reverence which is due
unto knowing and learned men, none of these expressions does please me. The
Question is if the word in the Hebrew does signify nothing else but to
deceive or to attract. The Translators were not ignorant, that it does signify
also to persuade, to induce or to give an Inclination; which words may bear a
good sense? Wherefore then in this place do not we employ them in the room of
others, whose signification is so sinister. Wherefore do we put a Blasphemy
into the mouth of the Prophet, when his language might otherwise be
interpreted? In such a circumstance, the most favorable Exposition is also to
be most received.

Of two Interpretations of one word which is in the 34. Chap. of Job ver. 36.
And which is the most convenient.
IN this place the French Bible makes Elihu as addressing his speech to God, to
speak in this manner. My Father let Job be proved. So the Latin Bible, And that
also o^ Junius reads it. The English Bible has not these words, My Father, but
in the Margent only. For within the text it says, My desire is that Job be
proved.

This Diversity does arise from this, that the Hebrew word, which begins this
verse, may be taken in both senses. It signifies my desire, It signifies also
my Father. Now of these two significations which ought we to choose? For it is
not so indifferent, that a man may think to take that which he pleases.

It is and has a long time been marked, that the faithful of the old
Testament, when they did speak unto GOD, did never call him their Father. There
is only one Prayer in which he was called by that Name, Esaias 63. 64. For the
rest, Amongst so many Prayers, so many thanksgivings, and Confessions, amongst
so many Psalms, and so many Dialogues, betwixt GOD and the most holy men of
that time, None of them did ever say unto him Father, or Our Father* how great
so ever was their privacy with him. It is true that speaking of God amongst
themselves, they acknowledged that GOD was as favorable to them, as a Father
to his Children. GOD did call himself their Father, when he did speak unto
them, but when they spoke unto GOD, they did never call him by that Name. The
liberty to cry Abba Father, was reserved to the faithful in the new
Testament, Gal. 4. ver. 1* etc. according to the promise, Jerem. 3. ver. 4. and
19. We ought not then so easily to put this word into the mouth of Elihu.

There is yet another Reason which ought to restrain us from making Elihu to
speak in these words, My Father. For it is of a far greater signification,
then when we do call him Our Father in generality. It is known that in all the
Scripture there was never any but Jesus Christ only, who speaking unto God
did say, My Father. It is the Prerogative of the only Son begotten of the
Father. It is true that David Psalm. 89. ver. 7. does recite the privilege
which he ha^h received of GOD to be such, that it does enable him to say, Thou
art my Father; But David did never directly call him so. And those words which
express this pre-eminence, do properly concern Jesus Christ, in the same manner
as do those in the second Psalm. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee: Wherefore then do we attribute to Elihu the language which none ever
spoke but the Son of God only; or what need we to seek a Parallel which is to
be found in no other place of the Scripture?

It is not necessary here to make mention of the French rythm in the 27 Psalm,
which says, My GOD, my Father, teach me thy way, etc. For this word Father is
not in the Original. Neither will I in this place examine that in the French
Catechism, Sect. 38. which says, that every believer can call GOD his Father
in particular. It is necessary as much as can be, we should keep unto the style
of the Holy Ghost: Otherwise the consequences are greater then they appear to
be.

Of a superfluous word, yea a dangerous one, in many places of the English
Bible, expressing the form of the Oaths recited in the sacred History.
THe Hebrews did ordinarily swear in these terms. The Eternal is living, such
a thing is, etc. The Examples thereof are frequent in the old Testament. The
sense is. The Eternal, who is living is witness of that which I speak. And this
Epithete, which they gave to God, was to distinguish him from false Gods, whom
the Scripture calls dead, Psalm. 126. 28. Now in all those places, which are
many in number, in which these words are contained. The Eternal, or, ^he Lord
is living, The English Translation does prevent this oath, with a word in the
beginning of it, saying AS the Lord is living, etc. The Bible of Tremelius has
also the same addition to render the Hebrew Phrase more intelligible, which
otherwise seems not to be complete.

But this addition is not necessary, and if it were, yet a better may be found.
The popular ignorance or liberty (when it will affirm the truth of any thing)
will be so hardy as to say, That it is as true as there is a God, Or, As true
as God is living. A word full of exccess. For there is nothing that can be so
true as that GOD is; All other truths are but the shadow of it.

It will be replied that the difference is great between these two expressions.
As true as GOD is living, And, As GOD is living. For this last does signify
nothing but a resemblance and a conformity to the truth, and not an equality.
But First: This comparison is not in the Original, and it is not necessary to
say that these words God is living, do signify that any thing is as true as GOD
is living. The sense is more full, That GOD, who is living, does know that such
a thing is true. Secondly, Although in the Original these words GOD is living
are not joined with any particle to the words following, and therefore did
render the sense more obscure, yet I had rather in this manner to content my
self with them, then introduce into the text an addition which is disputable.
And so the French Translation (at least that which is most exact in such
places* does speak word for word according to the Hebrew.

The vulgar opinion touching the sin against the Holy Ghost. The Contents of
the twelfth Chapter of St. Matthew in the French Bible.
IT is a common saying that the sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable. So
speak the Divines in their Sermons and their Books. But this assertion
expressed in such words is either defective or erroneous. Defective, If we
presuppose, that there is but one kind of sin against the Holy Ghost. Erroneus,
if we understand, that all sorts of sins against the Holy Ghost are
unpardonable. Both are but one.

Now this does proceed from a gross misadvertisement, which does yet continue,
For if precisely we regard the terms of the Gospel, in which our Savior
speaks of the sin which is unpardonable, we shall never find that he
pronounced this word, That a sin against the Holy Ghost shall be never
pardoned. But he has said, that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall be
never pardoned; Or that he who shall speak against the Holy Ghost shall have
no remission. The crime then which he has declared shall never be forgiven, is
not universally every sin against the Holy Ghost, but only Blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost.

Certainly we sin diverse vvays against the holy Ghost, whether it be in
resisting, or whether it be in grieving the Spirit, or by what kind of offense
so ever it be. Is there any one of us who can boast to have never committed any
thing against the illumination, which the Spirit of GOD has infused into his
conscience. Have we never acted against the motions of the Spirit? To lust
against the Spirit, is that also to sin unpardonably against the Spirit? But
where is that Christian in whom the flesh does not lust against the Spirit? Woe
be unto us All, if every sin committed against the Holy Ghost were excluded
from pardon. Is it not a sin against the Holy Spirit, to make sad and to grieve
the Holy Spirit? Now the Israelites in the Desert did grieve him oftentimes,
Esaias 63. 10. Shall we dare affirm, that all those souls who sinned thus against
the Holy Ghost, are for ever shut out from obtaining mercy both in this world
and the world to come? To prove the contrary we shall find in the same place,
that the compassions of GOD were even then upon them, seeing that his Spirit,
which they had so much provoked, was still their Conductor.

There are then many kinds of sin against the Holy Ghost, and amongst others,
one which shall not be pardoned, that is, Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. But
it is either forgetfulness, or too confused a speech, to say without
distinction or exception, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be
forgiven. The French Bible in the Argument on the twelfth of Saint Matthew,
says that the Blasphemy of those, who speak evil of the miracles of the Son
of GOD, is a sin against the Holy Ghost. But these terms are ambiguous, and do
not express the sense of the text. For Christ does not say generally or
indefinitly, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be remitted, but
it specifies, and marks out that sort of sin, which shall never be forgiven;
not any sin against the Holy Ghost, but only the sin of Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost.

Of the Name which many give to the mountain on which Jesus Christ was
transfigured.
IT is said that this wonder was wrought on Mount Thabor; And this saying is
as ancient as it is common. The opinion indeed is not without great appearance
of truth, For the situation of the Mount Thabor, the form, the beauty and the
height thereof do all seem to speak that it was the place where this great
miracle was wrought. It was seated in Galile the less, in a champian place; it
was round on the ridge thereof, it was equal on all sides, fourteen furlongs
in height, according to the level. I do therefore willingly yield to the
vulgar opinion, provided it be said to be an opinion only, and not a certainty.

This transfiguration is recited four times in the new Testament, to wit by
three Evangelists, and by the Apostle Saint Peter, who with his eyes did behold
it. But none of them has given us the Name of that Mountain. Their silence in
this particular should also shut up our mouths concerning this. No doubt, it
was not without a special cause, that the Holy Ghost abstained from naming
that place, seeing other places are named, which seem to be less considerable.
Nevertheless if we say that it was Mount Thabor, we ought not to pronounce it
as an assured truth, as ordinarily it is done even in Sermons, and in our Books
also of devotion, For they who say so, do speak it as if it were most true, and
not to be doubted, without thinking that it is an uncertain fore-judgement.

Of the Son of God whom the English Bible says is mentioned by Nebuchadnezar.
Dan. 3. 5.
IN this translation Nebuchadnezzar speaks, that of the four men whom he saw
in the furnace, one of them resembled the Son of GOD. This would make us to
believe that Nebuchadnezzar did understand the mystery of the Trinity, which
nevertheless was obscure in the old Testament. When we do say the Son of GOD,
it is presently understood that we do speak of him who is the only Son of the
Father, But there is no appearance that this Heathen Prince did speak in this
sense. The Prophets themselves, when they touched on this point, have never
expressed the name of the Son of GOD but in a figure, as in the persons of
David and of Solomon, or of the entire Body of Israel, Mat. 3. 15. Nay Daniel,
from whom Nebuchadnezzar received all that he did know concerning the true GOD,
did never in express terms name the Son of GOD. Nay, speaking of him, he
recites that he saw him like unto the Son of man. Dan. 7.

The French Bible does otherwise render the words of Nebuchadnezzar. The fourth
(says it) is like unto a Son of GOD, to a man divine, excellent,
extraordinary. So spoke the Pagans themselves, when they would represent a man
of rare qualities, whether of Body or of Mind. So the best Interpreters have
observed, And so this place ought to be translated. Between these two (the Son
of GOD, and, a Son of GOD) there is an infinite distance.

Of the Name of Children which was given to the three Companions of Daniel.
IN our vulgar tongues the Name of Child, when it is understood without any
correlative, is taken for one of a very tender age. It is commonly said that
the three Children were cast into the Furnace. And the Song which is attributed
to them, is called the Song of the three Children. But certainly they were not
Children then when they chose rather to be cast into the flame, than to adore
the Image. Before that time, they were reputed amongst the wise men of Babylon,
and they should have dyed amongst those who could not interpret the dream of
Nebuchadnezar. And before they were cast into the Furnace, they managed all the
great affairs of the Province of Babylon, of which they were Governors. And
were they yet but Children? The History also which recites the Martyrdom, from
whence they were miraculously delivered, does make mention of them as of men of
age, and not as of Children. Daniel 3. ver. 12. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

Of the first words of the French Bible.
IN the Original the first words of the Book of Genesis are couched in this
order. In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. The Scripture
begins with the same word of beginning, so do all the Translations which I have
seen, the French only excepted, which says, God created in the beginning, etc.

It may be said, that I stand here upon too nice a punctilio. For what ^oth it
import, if we read it, God created in the beginning, Or, In the beginning GOD
created? It is true, It is the same sense indeed: nevertheless besides the
general reason which does oblige us to follow the order of the original
words, as near as the propriety of our vulgar languages will permit, there is a
more particular consideration on this place.

Saint John does in the same manner begin his Gospel, In the beginning was the
word, etc. The first Syllables of the Evangelist do represent those which are
first in the Bible. And that this was his design, is evident by that which
follows. For immediately afterward he does mention that word by which all
things were made, and does make use of those terms which do manifestly reflect
on the words of Moses, when he describes the Creation of the world, And as
this term, in the beginning, is the first in Moses and in the Scripture, so it
is first of all expressed by this Evangelist.

This Concurrence, which is so considerable, does not so plainly appear when we
read it, God created in the beginning. I (...) most clear when we hear Moses,
who says, In the beginning GOD created, And the Evangelist who says, In the
beginning was the word.

The Tabernacles of the Israelites being in the Wilderness, ill represented in
the pictures inserted in the Bible.
THese Tabernacles were Cabbins made of the branches of certain trees. Such
were the lodgings of the Hebrews after their departure out of Egypt, until
they entered into the Land of Canaan. In memory whereof they were enjoined to
celebrate every year a Feast of seven days, during which they lodged in
Tabernacies made of the branches of diverse trees, Le. 23. N^h. 8. But the
Painters do make them of materials very different. For representing the
Israelites on the foot of Mount Sinai, or in some other place of the
Wilderness, they do lodge them in tents which according to the painting were
made of Linen, or of the skins of Beasts. So that the Figure does not answer
either to the matter or to the form of those tabernacles of which we speak, now
in the pictures of many of our Bibles, we may see pourtrayed the Camp of
Israel, and a certain number of Pavilions, such as at this day are used when
our Armies lie in the field: but they do in no wise resemble the tents of the
Israelites. Such a portraict does disguise the History, and the Jews have a
cause to tax us for it of ignorance.

Of the Name of Beelzebub which is imposea on the Prince of the Devils.
IT is known that the Jews gave him this Name, which is the Name of an Idol.
And the Pharisees when they blasphemed the Son of GOD, did call him after that
Name. But when Christ did answer them concerning Beelzebb, he did not say as
they, that Beelzebub was the Prince of the Devils, or that such was the Name of
the chief of evil Spirits.

We ought to know that the Scripture gives no proper or peculiar name to any of
the evil Angels. Some of the good Angels, and only one or two of them have a
particular name, as Gabriel, and Michael, But the evil Spirits have but one
common name as Satan, The Adversary, The Devil, The Slanderer, And although
there is a chief of the evil Angels, yet he has not a particular name. See
Mat. 25. 41. We ought not then to imagine with the vulgar, that Beelzebub is the
proper name of the Prince of the Devil^. It were the Pharisees, and not Christ
that said so.

Of Easter Day improperly so called or ill assigned.
I Dispute not the ancient custom to solemnize one Day every year, in the
memory of the Resurrection of our Savior, although that every Sunday is
observed for that end; But as for that Day, which every year is celebrated,
there is no reason to call it the Day of the Passover; But rather (clean
contrary) we ought to give that name to that Day in which Christ our Paschall
Lamb was Sacrificed, to that Day in which he dyed, and not unto that Day in
which he did rise from the Dead. For the word of the Passover being applied to
Christ, has reference to his Death, and not at all to his Resurrection; so the
Day which is called the Passover, is not the true Day of it, but rather the
contrary.

It will be alleged that every one does so understand it* and that the words
are indifferent, if they give an agreeable sense unto them. But where^ore do we
give unto words a sense which they have not, nay a sense which is contrary to
that which they have, or wherefore do we speak otherwise than we do understand?

Of the word the CROSS, which is ordinarily abused, when mention is made of
afflictions.
THere is nothing more common in the mouths of afflicted Persons, or of those
who would comfort them, then to say that they do bear their Cross, and that
their ^ross is heavy, and man is subject ^o many crosses. But according to ^he
language of GOD, there are no afflictions which can be called crosses, those
afflictions being excepted, which men make us to suffer for the cause of our
crucified Savior, and for the cause of his Gospel. To such sufferings GOD has
reserved and appropriated this honorable title of the Cross. In the like
manner, the persecutions which are raised against us for the cause of Christ,
the punishments, the proscriptions, the losses, the reproaches, and whatsoever
a Christian endures for that quarrel, are honored with this Name of the
Cross, by reason of the Communion, which they have with the sufferings of
Christ, and more particularly of his Death. The afflictions which do proceed
from other causes, have no part in so glorious an Epithete.

Nevertheless a man, who is chastised, or even punished for his sins, or by his
Improvidence or Intemperance has plucked an affliction on himself, will say
that it is a Cross which GOD has sent him. This is to abuse the word. Such
afflictions, and those which proceed from hidden causes, as that of the man who
was born blind, John 9. 2, 3. cannot be called Crosses. And yet, this
Impropriety is not only in the language of the common people, but also of many
Divines, nay, and in their Books also. For they do write in their Books, that
a wicked man has his Cross also. A great mistake: For the afflictions of a
wicked man are not worthy of that Name. If he himself be an enemy to the Cross,
and is punished, shall we say that his punishment is a Cross, can that be
spoken of a Malefactor who suffers for his crimes? All the afflictions even
of a good Christian are not to be called Crosses.

Of crying sins which men do not discern from others.
THere are some sins to which the Divines have given the name of crying sins,
And this Epithet is taken from the Scripture. By this name the effusion of
Innocent blood is called, because the blood of Abel did cry unto GOD. So also
is the abominable sin of Sodom, Genesis 18. 20, 21. and 19. 13. So also is the
detaining of the hire of the labourer, James 4. 5. So also a House builded by
rapine is called a crying sin, because it is said that the stones of the wall
do cry out against it, Habakuk 2. 11. And so generally all violence, and
oppression is called a crying sin, Exodus 3. 17. and 22. 23, 27.

Now there are reasons wherefore these sins more than others are called crying.
But without entering into the search thereof, we are not to think that this name
ought to be given to all those sins, which are more enormous and exorbitant
than others; for neither Idolatry, nor Blasphemy, no, nor the worshipping of
Devil are called crying sins: And in general I do observe, that of all the
sins which do violate the first table of the Law, there is not one which is
called a crying sin. All those sins also, which are committed against the
second table, have not that name in the Scripture, but those only which I have
specifyed.

This distinction, although it oftentimes be too much neglected, even by men of
knowledge themselves, yet we ought nevertheless to observe it, if we will
follow the language of the Spirit, and not that of the common people, for there
is nothing more trivial than these words, you may here see, what it is that
cries for vengeance, It is a crying sin, And nevertheless the common speak
thus of such a sin, which the Scripture does not put in the number of crying
sins. By this confusion there will be no sin, which we may not call a crying
sin, if we will be governed by passion, by zeal without knowledge.

Of faults committed in citing the Histories of the Ancients.
I Will produce but two examples. A very famous Scholar in his Book of the
truth of Christian Religion, does allege an Author, who does recite a very
strange story concerning Jesus Christ, which is that the Jews did choose him to
be one of those, who offered sacrifice, and that they received him into their
order, qualifying thus the Son of GOD and of the Virgin Mary.

This story, if there were no other thing to object against it, does directly
oppose, that which the Apostle speaks in the Hebrews, that our Savior came
from the tribe of Juda, a tribe, none whereof did assist at the Altar, a tribe,
of which Moses spoke nothing at all concerning the Leviticall Priesthood, that
if Christ again were upon the earth, he would not be a Priest, etc.

These fabulous stories which are used to maintain Christianism, do only
serve but to render it suspected, nay ridiculous to the Jews, and other
Miscreants.

The other example is not of so great importance, nevertheless it will serve to
show, how the most learned do mistake themselves, men in matters purely
Historical, which contain nothing: but first that requires no exercise of
judgment, but only of attention. A modern Writer (whom I highly do esteem)
does recite and follow, in this passage which I have produced, one of the
greatest personages of Antiquity, Epiphanius by name. This Author affirms that
until the twentieth age after the Creation of the world, there cannot any
example be produced of any Son, who dyed before his Father, that is to say of a
natural Death. This was put in because Abel might not be objected against it.
The order of nature was kept, that he, who was born first in a line descendant,
should also dye first, this continued until that Therah the Father of Abraham
did invent Idolatry, And then (the first that is marked out for an example) his
Son Haran dyed before his Father Therah, Genesis 11. 28. By a Judgment until
then unheard of, GOD did punish Therah causing that his Son should dye before
his Father.

But all this observation is null, and proceeds from a great mistake. For long
before the days of Therah, nay before the time of the Deluge, we have the
example of a Son, who dyed before his Father, and of a natural Death. It is
Lamech the Son of Methuselah. The proof is most evident. Compare the 5. Chapter
of Genesis, ver. 25. with the 31. From the birth of Lamech unto the death of
Methuselah were 782. years, but Lamech lived but 777. He dyed therefore five
years before his Father, And by this account Methuselah, and not Therah was the
first Father by whom we find that his Son dyed before him of a natural Death;
And by this the truth of this Commentary, which attributes the first example of
this accident to the Idolatry of Therah does vanish into nothing; many other
defects may be noted in those who do recite Histories, for oftentimes it seeems
they slumber when they recite them.

The first words of the ten Commandments, which the ignorance of some has
razed out, and taken away from the walls of their Churches.
THose men, who are not far from us, have made it no difficulty to blot out all
the first words, to show unto the eyes of the people a Decalogue without a head,
as if they had beheaded it; All these words they leave suppressed. I am the
Eternal, thy God, who have taken thee out of the land of Egypt out of the
House of Bondage.

I know not who has moved them to beat down the Frontispiece of the Law of
GOD, For, first, since we make a profession to retain all the words which GOD
then pronounced, when he published the Law (as it is written that GOD spoke all
these words, I am the Lord thy GOD, etc. why do not we write them all? why do
we raze out those which are the first? Secondly, These very first words are the
foundation of all the Decalogue, for they do mention who is this Lawgiver, and
do show the right which he has to command. We cannot then omit them without
taking away the fundamental principle on which the whole Decalogue is builded.
Thirdly, The sense of the first Commandment is not entire or complete without
these words, which go before it, and on which it immediately does depend. I am
the Lord thy GOD, from whence it directly follows, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me. These first words are the soul of this Commandment, and they
ought not to be disjoined from it. Fourthly, It is unfit, and without Judgment
to begin the Decalogue without this Preface, and to speak abruptly, Thou shall
have no ^ther Gods, For this word other, does ^resuppose that the Decalogue
has ^lready spoken of one GOD, who ex^ludes all other, And therefore this
ought first to be expressed; without that it is to speak as men, who have not
so much as common sense. Fifthly, Besides all these defects, there yet remains
one more enormous, which is a great soloecism in Divinity, and by it an injury
is done to all Christians, For, when GOD says, I am thy everlasting GOD, he
does imply, I am thy Savior. GOD never speaks in these words, but unto those
to whom he does present salvation. These words are Evangelicall. GOD has
fastened the Gospel unto the entrance of the Law. Wherefore, if the Gospel did
not here speak first, the Law would beat us back, and bear us down, as persons
under the malediction* Those then, who present us the Decalogue without these
first words* which do give us access and a confidence in the mercies of the
Law-give^ knew not what they do.

Of certain pictures which are in some Bibles.
AT the entrance into the English Bible, Jesus Christ with his twelve Disciples
celebrating the Passover, are represented sitting at a table, as we are
accustomed to do when we take our Repast. But we know that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles sat not then in that posture, and that their Table did not resemble
those in which we set our viands. They did not sit but did almost lie along
either upon some Cushions or on the ground, leaning upon their Elbows, ^s it is
custom in these times in the Eastern Countries. The Original ^ext says not
that they sat, but does make use of a term which cannot properly be expressed
in our vulgar ^anguages. The French Bible in a more general expression says,
he ^id set himself at the table, The Eng^ish has it, He sat down, and this
word for the want of a better, and one more answerable to the Greek text, is
tolerable in a translation. But a picture, which speaks in all languages,
ought not to corrupt the Histories in representing them otherwise than they
are. The same picture does very ill describe Saint John in the Bosom of Jesus
Christ, The particulars are by so much the more considerable, because they
concern some circumstances of the Supper of our Lord, and it is of great
importance that we should understand them, because they do furnish us with
Arguments against Altars, against the elevation of the Host, and the
worshipping of it.

I will not here speak of the ignorance of Painters, who representing Lazarus
in the breast of Abraham, do paint him as a little Infant on the Knees of that
great Patriark.

Moreover in some Bibles of the old Impression we may see GOD represented in
the form of a man, producing Eve from the side of Adam. We may truly paint Adam
or Eve, but it is impossible to paint God. Those who have such pictures in
their Bibles, ought rather to take them out, then take delight to behold them,
If it be unlawful to have Images to represent God, much less it is permitted
to have them in the Bible which does prohibit such portraictures.

Of the Name of the SON of GOD, which some of our Bibles do give unto Adam,
Luke 3. verse the last.
THe English Bible says of Adam that he was the Son of GOD, the Latin
translation of Beza does no^ give him that Name in the text, but the note in
the Margent does interpret that Adam was the Son of GOD* And some French
Editions do speak so in the text it self.

But we ought to know that Adam neither in this, nor any other place of the
Scripture, was ever called, Son of GOD, much less the Son of GOD* That Name
does only appertain to the second Adam. So the last French translation does
not say that Adam was the Son of GOD, but that he was created by GOD.

In the Original, the word Son i^ found but once, and it is only spoken of
Jesus Christ. Observe how Saint Luke speaks it, That Jesus was the Son (as it
was esteemed) of Joseph, of Heli, of Matthat, etc. of Zorababel, etc. of David,
etc. of Abraham, etc. of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, of GOD. The sense is that
(according to the opinion of men) Jesus was the Son of Joseph, and that in
effect he is of Heli, of Matthat, etc. of David, of Abraham, etc. of Seth, of
Adam, of God. And thus (as many learned men have a long time observed it) it ^s
Jesus Christ, and not Adam who is called the Son of God.

These words so often repeated who was the Son, who was the Son, which are
added to every one of the persons who are named in this Genealogy in ascending
from Heli to Adam. These words (I say) which are not in the Original have
caused diverse to believe, that Adam is called the Son of GOD. But in all the
Catalogue this word the Son ought to be referred to Jesus Christ alone, which
without the addition of these words would be more easy to be understood, As
there is no need of that which in the French Bible is inserted touching Adam,
to wit, that he was created.

Of the twelfth Stone which was on the Breast of the High Priest, which the
French Bible does call a Beryll, and the English a Jasper, Exodus 28. 20.
WE know that the Hebrew Nomenclation of precious Stones, as of many other
things, is at this day very obscure, and the interpretations are very
different, Nevertheless I will speak one word on this place.

Two Reasons do induce me to believe, that it was rather a Jasper, that any
other Stone. First, Because, it is the very same word in the Original^ text,
for the Hebrew word of tha^ Stone which is twelfth, and the la^^ upon the
Pectorall is a Jasper; which word has been retained in the Gree^ tongue (the
most ancient of thos^ sinc^ Babel) and has passed into the Latin tongue, and
diverse other vulgar languages, signifying always that, which we do call a
J^sper. To this the Translation of J^^ius does accord, who pu^teth the Jasper
the last of all, in the like manner as does the English Bible.

Moreover, This Interpretation is more apparent by a light which results from
that place, Revel. 21. 19. The Heavenly Jerusalem has also twelve precious
stones, on which it is founded, and who do reflect upon those of the Pectorall,
but they are not ranked in the same order, for in that Jerusalem, the Jasper is
the first stone, which is the last in the Pectorall, and this is not without a
mystery, that the same stone, which is the last in the old Testament, is the
first in the new, as joining the two Testaments together, and making the end of
the one to be the beginning of the other, so admirable a Concurrence, ought not
to be taken away from a passage where it is accompanied with other apparences.

Of certain Books written on the Revelation, and believed to be prophetical.
THe Interpretations of Napeir on this last Book of the Bible have been a long
time admired, but they have now lost their reputation, for the term, which they
gave to diverse events that are yet to come, is already expired. These mistakes
ought to serve to disabuse the vulgar, who oftentimes imagine that the
conceptions of Expositors are infallible predictions. So diverse men do to this
day extol Brightman, who has also commented upon the Revelations, as if that
man had the Spirit of Prophecy; Nevertheless, if we shall observe the
applications which he makes, especially at the beginning, we shall find that
he stragleth very much if we will not take fancies for Oracles.

Of a prejudication common to a great sort of them, who do read or inte^pret
the prophecies, especially the Revelation.
IT is ordinary to imagine that the Prophecies speak not but of our selves
only, or of our Country. If there be any prediction not yet accomplished, it
seems to us that, that star is directly over our heads, and the influence of it
only for our Climat, although (it may be) it concerns us not at all. Such a
Prophecy, it may be, is not to be accomplished but in Asia or America, and yet
we expect to see it fulfilled in our Northern Climate. From hence oftentimes it
comes to pass, that our Interpretations hit not aright. I do confess that a
great part of the Revelations does concern our Western Countries, but all the
prophecies of that Book ought not to be restrained or applied to this little
corner of the World, As if the Holy Ghost had thought on none but on us only.
Or, As if God had no others, that are elected in other Countries of the world.

Of some Interpreters who censure Saint Paul for wishing to be accursed or
separated from Christ, for the love to his Brethren the Israelites.
THe learned Marlorat in his common places, and the Divines, who have followed
and enlarged them writing on the word peccatum, and marking forth those sins,
into which diverse holy personages were fallen, they do in that number
comprehend thi^ wish of Saint Paul, and without haesitation do pronounce that,
in that he was not without blemish.

But first of all, It is very dangerou^ to condemn every action, or every word
which is above the common Rule, for it may be authorized, yea and imposed by
him, who is above the Law, as was the Will which Abraham had to sacrifice his
own Son. Such Acts which otherwise would be irregular are heroical and
transcendent. Secondly, If we would fathom the depth hereof, we would say (as
it is most true) that the Glory of GOD ought to be more precious to us than our
own salvation; And from hence proceeded this wish of Saint Paul. Thirdly, The
words which immediately go before do sufficiently demonstrate, that the Apostle
spoke this by the Spirit of GOD, which could not err, I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness with the Spirit; That I
have great sorrovv, etc. For I would be accursed, etc. Shall we say that,
calling the Holy Ghost for witness, he immediately afterward did pronounce
those words which are contrary to the motions and the Rules of the Holy Ghost.
Fourthly, If in this wish Saint Paul speaks like a man that was besides
himself; If his words are to be reproved, Is not this to derogate from the
whole Epistle, and to render it suspected, as if it proceeded only from man,
and not from the Spirit of GOD? That of Jeremy ought not to be here objected,
who in the midst of his divine expressions, does pass so f^r as to curse the
Day of his Nativity; For the Prophet did record these words only by way of
Narration, to show that they escaped from him; and his desultory style in this
expression is far different from Saint Paul's in this place.

Of a vulgar Book entitled the PRACTICE of PIETY.
I Have often admired at the folly of the common people, yea, and of many
persons, that were conceived to be more judicious, who have almost adored this
Book, and have made more account thereof than of the Bible it self. This
little, which concerning it I have extracted, shall serve to disabuse those
who will give regard unto it.

At the beginning the Author very magisterially, yea, and with terrible
threatenings, does advertise all sorts of people, yea, and the most learned
without exception, whosoever thou art, says he, who do cast thy eyes on
this Book, make haste to read it, for fear that before thou have read it over,
GOD (by some sudden Death) does cut the thread of thy life; you see then it is
very dangerous to dye before this Book be read over, which is so necessary to
salvation O unhappy those who are dead before they can come to the last page!
What Apostl^e has ever spoken thus concerning his own writings? Is it less
dangerous to dye without reading over the Bible it self? The Prologue of this
man ^o show the excess of a Spirit which has a marvailous opinion of it self.

But his work does not answer to his boastings. I omit that which may be spoken
on the generality of the Book In many thing he is defective in many
superfluous, in some obs^ur, in others frivolous, and ridiculous, and which
carry with them even a ^^av^n of Popery it self.

First he describes to us the torments of H^ll after the manner of the monks
very curiously, and as it were by parcels, so far as to particularize the ill
smell of the Brimstone which does offend the Nostrill. And speaking of the
Evil Angels, he calls them Furies, which is the Name that the Pagans give to
their Infernal Goddesses.

Secondly he represents the damned soul, who does accuse the Body, and does
impute unto it the sins which she has committed. This Prosopopeia is extracted
from the Contemplations of certain Monks, who have feigned a Dialogue, where
the damned soul reproacheth the Body with the faults she has done. And this
smells of the Heresy of those who affirm, that the soul does not sin, but only
by the inducement of the Body.

Thirdly, According to the same Monastical style, he describes the diversity
of the Crowns in Bliss As the Crown of Martyrdom, the Crown of Virginity, which
has overcome he temptations of the Flesh. The Crown of those who are married.
The Crown of good works for the ^ivers of Alms (as if no other works were
good, but the giving of Alms only,) etc.

He represents the faithful soul incountring the Body at the Resurrection, to
whom she makes this joyful Complement. O welcome are you! O well met, my
beloved Sister. These Indeerments cannot but carry a great Grace (no doubt)
with them.

He does make it remarkable that the Virgin Queen Elizabeth was born on the
Eve of the Nativity of the Virgin, and that she dyed on the Eve of the
Annunciation of the Virgin. But who told him either the Eve or Day in which
the Virgin was born, For, as for that annual Feast, which the Church of Rome
does celebrate, there is no proof that it is the Day of the Birth of the
Virgin, It is only an ungrounded, and an uncertain tradition. In the same
manner the Day of the Annunciation is unknown to us, because we know not the
Day of the Nativity of Christ. And thus the observation of this Author is
build^^ in the Air. And though it should appear unto us that the said Queen was
born on the same Day as was the Virgin, and dyed on the same Day wherein the
Angel appeared to the Virgin, could not the same thing happen to diverse other
persons? And would not the same accident be as mysterious in every one of them?

It is very likely (says he) that on the seventh Day, which is Sunday the
world will end; And to this purpose he alleges a tradition, which imports
that the second coming of Christ shall be on the Sunday. But the same Day is
not Sunday throughout all the world. In some places of the world it is Sunday,
when in other places it is hardly Saturday. In which Country then shall it be
Sunday, when our Lord shall come. Shall it be in England, or rather in the East
Indyes?

Speaking of Fasts he says, that they were instituted in the terrestrial
Paradise, because GOD did forbid Adam the fruit of the Tree of knowledge. On
this account; First, Adam did fast although he did eat of all the other fruits
of the Garden. The Isaelites also did fast all their lives, because many viands
were forbidden them, although they did eat of others. By the same reason it may
be said, that a man does fast, even when he is eating. This is the language of
the Church of Rome to say we fast, when we abstain from flesh, although we then
feed upon abundance of fish. Secondly, the Fasts of which he there speaks,
had other ends than had the abstinence from the forbidden fruit, For we fast
especially either to promote or to testify our repentance; which could not be
spoken of Adam, who had no need of repentance, because he had not as yet
sinned, when this abstinence was enjoined.

Adam (says he) was overcome by the Serpent, for having not observed this
Fast, But first, he ought rather to have said, that Adam did not keep this
Fast, because he was overcome by the Serpent, or to speak more properly by Eve
already overcome by the Serpent. Secondly these words are doubtful and
dangerous to affirm, that the Fall of Adam did proceed because he did not keep
the Fast, As if his sin did arise from gluttony which is a gross error.

This Book in the end thereof does represent a Colloquy between the soul and
her Savior, concerning which take these parcels. Lord wherefore wast thou
covered with a Garment of purple? R. Because I take away thy sins which are as
red as Scarlet.

Wherefore was a Reed put into thy hand? R. I am not come to bruise the broken
Reed.

Wherefore were thy eyes blinded and covered? R. That thy eyes may be opened
from spiritual blindness.

Wherefore were thy feet and thy hands nailed to the Cross? R. To embrace thee
more affectionately.

Wherefore did thou suffer thy face to be spitted on? R. That I might make
thee clean from the ordure of sin.

Wherefore was thy side opened with the point of a spear. R. To the end that
thou might find an entrance to draw near unto my heart.

O gallant Demonstrations; In all these answers, and in those which are made to
diverse other questions, which I purposely omit, Is there any thing pertinent at
all? Are they not meet extravagances?

Of the word AMEN which the people ought to pronounce at the end of public
prayers and Benedictions.
EVery one does know that it was the practice of the ancient Church approved
and recommended by the Apostles themselves, that the Pastor having pronounced a
Benection, or a prayer, or the giving of thanks, all the Congregation, even
those who were of the simplest people did make answer to him in saying Amen, 1
Cor. 14. 16.

It would be a folly to reply that they did not speak it, but in their hearts
only, or within their teeth. For, First, This Amen was spoken publicly to
witness, that they did partake in that which the Pastor had pronounced. This
Amen was spoken to express that which they had in their hearts. How had they
expressed it, if they had not spoken it but in their hearts only? Secondly,
this custom which the people had to close such actions with an Amen, was the
very same as was practiced in the old Testament, by which it is apparent, that
this Amen was pronounced with a loud voice, 1 Chronicles. 16. 36. Nehem. 8. 6. Psalm
1. 16. 48. So in the first ages of the Christian Church, this Amen, when the
Congregation was numerous, was heard afar off, as if it had been some clap of
thunder, as the History does inform us.

It is known that this custom by little and little, annihilating by the want of
zeal, and coldness of the people in the service of GOD, there was one
substituted, who in their Names should answer Amen. And this is practiced even
in the English Church, since it has renounced Popery. But because this Amen is
not in the mouth of the people, it would be better to reduce our Churches to
the Primitive and ancient custom authorized by the Apostles themselves.

We who make a profession of an exact conformity or correspondence with the
Primitive Church, wherefore do we suppress, that which she so religiously has
observed in her Congregations, which is the pronouncing of this Amen. What
difficulty do the people find in it; what excuse can they make whereby they may
be dispensed. Can it be objected that it would appear a novelty? Such a novelty
is of great antiquity, and would be better than the continuation of a fault
occasioned by coldness in the service of GOD.

In the Roman Church, where the public service is spoken in a tongue, which
the people understand not, they know not in reason where to give this
acclamation of Amen. But why do our Congregations refuse this testimony of
approbation, unto that which they do understand, and to which they do consent?

Moreover (as it may so come to pass) if Idolaters should be found in the
Congregations of Christians, 1 Cor. 14. 23. 24. this Amen would serve to make a
distinction of those who make a profession of Christianity, from those who
being yet Pagans do not pronounce it. But in our Congregations at this Day, the
Orthodox do no more pronounce it, than do the Idolaters that are amongst them.

Of the buildings of Jerusalem represented in a Picture at the beginning of
many English Bibles.
THis Portraict is to be seen in the Corner of that sheet, which describes the
land of Canaan, where also the fields, and the way which the Israelites did go
in the wilderness is represented. But their tabernacles or pavillions are ill
described, as they are also in many French Bibles at the beginning of
Leviticus, as I have observed before.

As for the buildings of Jerusalem, it is known that their houses were flat,
and plain on the top, as they are through all the East, insomuch that men might
walk upon them, yea, and keep assemblies on them. The upper part of the Temple
was made in that platform. Many passages of the sacred History will be
incredible to those who mark not this Architecture of public and particular
edifices, as Judges 16. 27. But this Picture in the English Bible does
transform these upper parts of the houses, yea of the Temple it self, into
Pyramids, as if they were the heads of Bells. Jerusalem was not builded in that
manner. Such a portraict does give a lie unto the History, and does deceive the
common people.

Of the Tree of Life which has been believed to be but one single plant.
IT is a common prejudging that this Tree did consist in one only Individual,
which was but one in its kind, as we do speak of the Phoenix. But in the last
Book of the Bible which does end there, where the first does begin (although it
be in a Spiritual sense) we do read that the Tree of life was both in the
middle of the place, and also on both sides of the River, Revel. 22. 2. which
could not have been spoken, if there were not more trees of the same kind.

A learned Man, who lately has wrote annotations in English on the new
Testament, did rather chose to alter the ordinary reading of the place, than
depart from the common opinion, which imports that thi^ tree was one only in
her kind. The sense which he gives to the text (...) this, That the tree of
life did stan^ between the place and the River; The place being on the one side
of it, and the River on the other.

This Construction is indeed ingenious, and seems to be most natural to the
Greek text. But there is a reason which does dissuade me from conceiving it to
be so. This Description contained in the two first verses of the 22. of the
Revel is taken out of Ezekiel Chap. 47. 12. The Prophet there does represent
this River coming forth of the Sanctuary; which Saint John does call the throne
of GOD. He speaks there of the trees, which brought forth their fruit every
month. He does there make mention of their leaves, which were medicinal. It is
there said that these trees shall grow on the bank of the River on both sides
thereof. In all this Saint John accords with Ezekiel, But this correspondence
will fail, if it is said, that the trees, of which Saint John speaks, is
only but on one side of the River. It is true that Ezekiel speaks in the
Plural number of many trees, and that Saint John mentions but one which is
the tree of life. But we know that the singular name of one kind, does
compreprehend all the Individuals to which that kind is common.

I will be replied, that it is inconvenient to maintain that there were many
Individuals of that kind of tree. And to prevent this inconvenience, this same
Doctor, whom I do honor for his excellent knowledge, has changed the ordinary
reading of this place in the Revelations: But as for the inconvenience I cannot
see what it is. Is it because the History does not make mention of this tree as
of an individual? why, that is it which is in question. Is it because that
this tree did prefigure Christ who is but only One? But Christ has been
represented both by figures of diverse kinds, as by the Cloud, and by the Sea, 1 Corinthians. 10. and by many figures of the same kind, as by two Rocks, and a great
way distant from one another, Exodus 17. 6. Numb. 20. 28. etc. Is it because the
fruit of this Tree had a singular virtue to preserve the life of Man? It does
not from hence follow, that there should be but one plant only, which should
bear this fruit. On the contrary, As of all the Trees that were in the Garden,
this here was most necessary for man: so it is to be believed that the
liberality of GOD, which is ordinarily abundant in things which are most
necessary, and which do wast away by use had given him more than only one tree
of that kind. Moreover, as the Tree of life was endued with singular
properties, so had it the virtue also, as well as other plants, to multiply it
self. But without affirming that there were many Individuals of it, I only say
that the contrary opinion has no such certainty in it, that it may be received
for an undoubted truth.

Of the Nature of the Viper marked in the table at the end of the New Testament
in some Editions in French.
THis Index speaking of this kind of Serpent, does affirm that the young ones
do eat their own mother to come out of her Belly by force, It is an old opinion
indeed, but at this Day contradicted. Two modern writers both of this Isle, and
both very learned amongst many other subjects, in which they are of a contrary
opinion, have treated on this question. One of them my intimate friend and a
most reverend man is so amorous of antiquity, that he undertakes to maintain
all the Paradoxes, which this opinion has produced; and although that ocular
experience does show us that Vipers are born without giving a Death unto their
mother, yet he is pleased to make answers to it. But without engaging my self
in this difference, I will only speak one word on that which is in the Index,
which I have mentioned. It is dangerous either in Interpretations or
Annotations on the Bible, to lay down that for a certain truth, which is
disputable, especially when there is experience to the contrary. Secondly, To
what purpose, or in what regard was it spoken that the Pharisees, and the
Sadduces, whom the Scripture calls a Generation of Vipers, had in their birth
killed their mothers. Thirdly, if I were to expound such places, I should
search out the sense in a propriety, which is constant and particular to the
Viper only, amongst all the kinds of Serpents. All other Serpents do proceed
from their Mothers, having neither their form as yet, nor any faculty to stir
or to move themselves. For the Creature is shut up in an egg, which the mother
has produced, and will ask ^ome respite of time before it be ^atched. But the
Vipers are already in life, and all formed when they come out of the Belly of
their Mother. When the Scripture therefore does give this Epithete of a
Generation of Vipers to certain Men, It is to express, that from their Birth
they have already actually hurted, or that their malice was already completely
formed.

Of those who in the unfolding of a Text do believe that they must always
divide it into parts.
THere are some Auditors who believe the Sermon to be without method, if in the
beginning thereof, the Text be not divided into parts. But these people are not
good Logicians, for there are points indivisible and which will admit of no
separation. As in the Tabernacle there we^^ movables which were not to be
taken down, or which were made a^ of one piece, so there are Texts which do not
suffer to be divided. Diverse Preachers striving to use it where it cannot be
admitted, have fallen into irregularities not to be perceived indeed by the
common people, but sounding ill in their ears, who know the Laws of a true
method, and of that also which is popular, to which it is permitted to be less
exact than if the Auditors had been altogether composed of learned men.

Of the diverse Interpretations on the twelfth Chapter of the Revelations verse
the first.
ALthough the Interpretations, which are above recited, do contain nothing in
them but what is pious, nevertheless they seem to me to draw vvide from the
mark. This place represents a woman environed with the Sun, having the Moon
under her feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head. This Woman is the
Church, or rather the Church of Israel, which has brought forth Christ unto
us. But what means this Sun that invirons her, this Moon which is at her feet,
and what is the signification of these twelve stars. Here instead of
expositions, an Allegory that is prophetical is interpreted by Allegories that
are Arbitrary.

That which is most received is this. The Church (they say) is clothed with
Celestial Glory as with the Sun. She treads under her feet the inconstancy of
all humane things signified by the Moon, who perpetually does change. But this
is not to interpret but without proof to allegorize, For on the contrary, in
the Scripture, which ought to be interpreted by its self, the Moon is
considered as an Emblem of firmness and perpetuity. As in the 9 Psalm. It is
promised that the throne of David shall be as the Sun, and that it shall
always be established as the Moon.

Some modern writers (and those very learned ones) do believe that this Moon
does signify the service of the Ceremonial Law, for the greatest number of the
Festival days had their time, were marked according to the course of the
Moon, And that in this sense it is that the Church sees the Moon under her
feet, that is, the Ceremonial Law abolished. And these Authors do affirm,
Because the Moon does rule by Night, and that the service of Idols is a work of
Darkness; that the Church does tread under her foot the Moon, that is to say
the service of Idols. But I am possessed with amazement that wise men should
give us such Allegories, which have no solid foundation, and may be easily
overthrown.

To speak no more, this place of the Revelations does interpret it self by
another from whence it is extracted. The portraict of this woman environed with
the Sun is in part, the Copy of that table which is to be seen in the 37 Chap.
of Genesis The Sun, the Moon, and the eleven Stars did show themselves to Joseph
in a dream. The Son was Jacob as he himself did interpret it. The Moon was
Leah, who by the twelve Patriarchs had the place of a Mother. The Stars were
the Brothers of Joseph. Now this place in the Revelations does represent the
Original of Christ, who according to the Flesh was descended from this Family,
which was composed of this Sun, this Moon, and these Stars. If then these
twelve Stars were the twelve Patriarchs, (as it is most evident) it must also
be, that the Son be Jacob, and the Moon be Leah, Otherwise this Portraict,
which is taken out of the 37. Chapter of Gen^si^ will not agree either with the
Original or with it self.

Those who take these twelve Stars for the twelve Apostles have no regard unto
the text. The Church represented by this Woman is said to have this Crown of
Stars before she brought forth Christ, when she was yet in her travail, and
undelivered. There was at that time no Apostles at all. It could not be then
said, that the Apostles were already the stars of the Church, for they
themselves were not then in being. So that these Stars could be no others than
the twelve Patriarchs, nor the Sun any other than Jacob, nor the Moon than Leah.

Now the reason of the similitude will easily demonstrate in what sense it is
said that the Sun does inviron the Church, and that the stars do serve her for
a Crown. All the difficulty consists in this which is of Leah, how it can be
said that she was under the feet of the Church. The inconvenience, which
appears at the first sight, has caused, that in stead of Leah, there have
been clean another thing imagined. For it has been presupposed, to have the
Moon under ones feet, does signify to tread it under foot, either by misprision
as a thing worth nothing, or by hatred, as a thing that is odious. But these
words do not always bear this sense. Sometimes they denote the power or
authority that is exercised over one. So it is said that GOD has put all
things under the feet of man, Psalm. 8. Sometimes they have reference to that
which is as a supporter, or a rest to the feet of man. So by a metaphor^ it is
spoken that GOD had a darkness under his feet. And in the same sense it is
spoken immediately after, that he was mounted on the Cherubins. As for this
Moon, seeing she is adjoined to the Sun and to the Stars, which represent the
Glory of the Church, she cannot be taken for a figure of contemptible things,
and such we tread on by disdain. It remains then that this Woman, the Church
of Israel, had the Moon under her feet, as sustaining her self thereon. Now it
is not strange to say that Leah was the supportress of the Church of Israel,
because she had held it in her arms, and nourished it from her Infancy. To
this the Hebrew Phrase has reference. To bring up upon the knees. Genesis 30. 3.
and 50. 23. that is to say, Of one who is charged with children, and who in
nursing of them, does lift them up, as if they had their feet in her lap.

Of the brazen Serpent which has been thought to be a figure of Christ.
I Have a long time followed this common opinion, which is believed to have
been grounded on these words. As Moses did lift up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, John 3. 14. But since I have
considered that this similitude was not between Christ and the Serpent) for
such a similitude would be horrible and monstrous^ but only between the
lifting up of the one, and the lifting up of the oother; when it is said that
the Lord shall come like a thief in the night shall we say that a thief does
bea^ the resemblance of our Savior? The similitude ought to be restrained
(...) the point in which it does consist.

Since that I have found some modern Writers who have gone before me, and have
already showed that the Serpent is not the figure of Christ but that on the
contrary it represents Satan over whom Christ has triumphed on the Cross. I
have nothing to add unto their reasons, but one passage only, which they have
omitted, although it be express upon this subject.

The Apostle says, that Christ has fastened to the Cross the obligation which
was against us, that he has despoyled Principalities and Powers (which are
Satan and his Angels) and has brought them to be beheld by all, and triumphed
over them on it. Col. 2. 14, 15. Behold here then Satan, who was made a public
spectacle. Behold the Serpent, who has been lifted up as a Trophy, and fastened
to the same Cross, on which he was overcome by Christ, as our old Man, sin it
self has been crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6.

And thus all these Imaginary resemblances, and correspondences, which are
sought after between the Brazen Serpent and Jesus Christ do vanish into air,
And so many Sermons which have been grounded on it, are no more than Straw and
Chafe, too light to endure the trial of the fire.

Concerning the Jews whether it were expedient to permit them to have an abode
in England.
THis is that which some do affirm. But the Question is not in General,
whether it be lawful for Christian Estates to tolerate the Jews in their
territories. On this subject many great men have written many years ago. I
will neither contradict nor debate their opinions, but speak only what belongs
to England.

And yet the Question is not whether it be lawful, but whether i^ would be
expedient to entertain the Jews here, at this time wherein we live. For all
that which is lawful is not expedient, And again all tha^ which is unexpedient
may become unlawful.

The Politicians ought not to allege their reasons against this principle. If
they were to be received we might as well justify the prodigious impiety of
King Henry the second, who constrained the Jews, who were made Christians, to
return to Judaism. The motive was Avarice. For the Jews, continuing in their
profession of Judaism, were more advantageous to him, than after the time that
they were rendered Christians.

But some may reply, we will call them to convert them. We will prepare the way
for that great work, which GOD has promised to do in them, to save all Israel.
But observe in the first place. It is not so easy as we think it is, to convert
the Jews. The Controversies, which are betwixt them and us are full of Abysms,
the depths whereof are unknown to the people; nay, and unto many who meddle in
Divinity. Before we undertake to reduce the Jews, we must be harder Students.
Secondly, How shall we convert them being our selves divided into so many
Sects, and giving the lie to one another? What would the Jews find, if they
should come amongst us? A confusion of language more great than that of Babel,
an infiniteness of shameful extravagancies, which are a scandal to all true
Christians. Will this be to convert the Jews? No, but rather to divert them
from Christianism. Thirdly, The people here are prone to receive all the
follies which are presented to them. The greatest horrors are the most
excellent mysteries. Is it not to be feared that many will learn to Judaize?
and, to convert two or three Jews, a million of Christians will be exposed to
the danger to become Jews? Fourthly, Although they will not all be so in
general, yet there will be many in particular, and we shall observe new
Religions that will result out of the mixture of Judaism with Christianism. Who
knows, what monsters will proceed from thence. All the precautions, which other
States do use to hinder that Judaism corrupts not Christians, are found too
feeble there, where the torrent of an unbounded license has already in so many
places over-topp'd and broken down, the bounds which ought to restrain it.

I shall always wish that we travail to convert the enemies of the Faith, but
without indangering those who are of the Household of it, For this were to do
evil that good may come thereby, and GOD who knows both the time and the
means, he will employ for the conversion of the Jews, has no need that we
should do evil for the performance of such a good. It were rather to be
desired that those English, who have such an affection to the Jews, who
blaspheme the name of Christ, had as much charity toward some strangers, who
do here profess the name of Christ, their own Country not vouchsafing them the
liberty to exercise the Arts necessary for the sustenance of their own persons
and families, unless they will abjure the Orthodox Religion to become Idolaters.

Of the Presagers, who boast they have a prophetic Spirits. Of the follies and
Blasphemies which they produce.
WE have sometimes seen in Holland one Doctor Stephens a Divine, who published
a Book of his own, on one part of the Revelations, That which is spoken of
Christ this man did attribute to Frederick King of Bohemia, who then lived. He
also foretold that the said Prince should take the Pope and the King of Spain
Prisoners, commence a Process against them, and cause them to suffer under the
stroke of the Executioner. Time has since confuted this Doctor, who
notwithstanding was discreet and modest in all other things.

About that time, there was at Geneva a Boy of twelve years of age, of honest
Parentage, who took upon him to discover marvailous things, he discoursed
pertinently and magnificently, which caused an admiration of him in all that
heard him. Insomuch that some excellent Divines were at a stand about it,
doubting whether it were not an extraordinary inspiration of GOD. But at last
the Spirit, which made the Boy to speak, did discover himself, for the Divill,
who served himself with the tongue of that poor creature did cause him to
speak the most ridiculous things in the world, making mocks himself at the
credulity of those whom he had abused.

It is commonly seen that a knowing and a wise man is never so much admired as
an ignorant fool, who speaks like a wise man, for we imagine that he proceeds
from God, when oftentimes there do come causes from him, which are worse than
folly it self. And it is a great simplicity to give more regard to one good
word proceeding from the mouth of a frantic man, than to the knowledge and
wisdom of him who is alvvaies discreet and judicious.

As for those who counterfeit the Prophets, the wisdom of God has always
left some mark on them to be known to be Impostors. One dead Fly only does
trouble and cause the whole perfume to stink, Eccl. 10. One only
Impertinency, which is found in a prophecy, does discover the falsehood of the
Author. How much more if there be blasphemies in it. How much more if they be
unnumbred, and in the swarm. A^ this day a senseless fellovv has dared to
publish that there is none but himself alone, who has the Spirit o^
Illumination and Instruction; Tha^ all Divines are in darkness, Tha^ many
places which cannot be understood but of the Son of GOD only, do signify a
King mortal, which (according to the saying of that man) shall reign for ever
throughout the world. That Jesus Christ has not been in possession of this
Kingdom until the coming of this King, who nevertheless dyed some few years
since: that this King is truly the third person, and whosoever speaks against
him shall never be pardoned. That in this King all the Scripture is
accomplished. That the Elect are no where but here in England, and that they
are confined only to this Country. That the Liturgy of England, otherwise
called the Book of Common Prayers, is the rule of the Spirit of truth, nay, and
the only Rule. That the Reformation of Luther, of the Calvinists and Huguenots
in France and Scotland and others, are but only rules of Rebellion, like unto
the Rods of the Sorcerers of Egypt. That the Savior, who is spoken of Esaias 19.
20. is not Jesus Christ, but another.

I would not vouchsafe to make mention of such horrors, were it not that there
are men of understanding, who do lend an ear to the predictions of such
senceless people, because they meet sometimes with some events which have
followed them. To speak no more, their Blasphemies sufficiently do demonstrate
what is the Spirit which does dictate these prophecies unto them.

Of some false Miracles which have been held for true ones.
THere has been in our time a flying report of a maid, who has lived many
years without eating or drinking, It has been believed for a truth, and on
this presumption, all the world has cried out a miracle. The Philosophers, the
Physicians, the Divines have been exercised on the question; It there could be
any natural cause for so long an abstinence. But there was no need for it, for
it has been verified and confessed, that this pretended fast was but an
Imposture, and the greatest miracle to be seen was the credulity of the people.

It is recorded that at Cairo in Egypt there is seen every year on a certain
day a spectacle worthy of admiration, which is the Bodies of men, which appear
some half out of the earth, others showing their heads only, and some having
nothing to be seen but their Arms or their Legs. The Evening before, their is
no appearance of any such thing at all, but the wonder does discover it self on
the Morning following, and there are then to be seen pieces of Bodies, which in
this posture do show themselves as if they had been forced out of the Earth.
They are all that day to be beheld, but if you return the next morning there is
nothing to be seen. On the Day of this Prodigy (for it is yearly on a prefixed
Day) they flock thither from all parts far, and neet to behold the miracle
which has been a fruitful Argument for many discourses.

For amongst the diverse causes which are rendered of it, there are some who
report that heretofore in the self same place the Pagans devoured a great
number of Christians, who were there assembled to pray unto GOD, And that every
year since, on the same Day, in which the Massacre was committed, these
imperfect and dismembered Bodies, do show themselves out of the Earth, as if
still they would attest the truth for which they were murdered.

This was a brave miracle, if it were a true one, but we ought to take heed
that we be not too credulous. I have lately read the relation of an English
Travailer, who has been upon that place, and has been a spectator of this
pretended wonder. He says, that as the Egyptians from all antiquity have been
very careful to imbalm the Bodies of the dead, they know a long time to
preserve them either entire or in pieces (accordingly as time does dismember
and run them into ruin) and to carry them from place to place. Of such pieces
is the foresaid miracle composed, for the Inhabitants of that Country who make
provision for them, and with great care do keep them, do go once a year on a
certain night to plant them in the ground in a a certain place, where the next
morning they may be seen to the great amazement of those who know not how they
came thither, nor how after that day they disappeared. But those, who brought
them the night before, do carry them away the night following. And the opinion
that this is done by miracle, does draw thither a great multitude of strangers,
from whence great profit does arise to the Inhabitants, which is the design of
all the mystery.

Of the Curing of the Evil attributed to the Kings of England.
I Do not dispute at all if there be any Royalty to which God has annexed this
particular gift to cure such a malady by the bare touch of the Hand, and the
Intervention of certain Prayers, neither do I dispute whether the Kings of
England have this gift, or whether Royalty being suppressed, the gift expireth
with it. A hundred Questions might arise from hence.

I have here to produce on only consideration. Royalty may be descended to the
Women, and there are two who one after another have reigned in England. And
have these women also the miraculous gift to cure the Evil? If it be denied,
It follows that this gift is not fastened to the Scepter nor does accompany
Royalty. If it be affirmed, I have one thing more to allege.

Amongst all gifts supernatural there are two which we read, were never
communicated to any woman which is the gift of Languages and the gift of
miracles. It is already a great Paradox, and unheard of in all the time of the
old Testament, and the Primitive Christian Church that a woman ever had the
gift of miracles. Moreover as the supernatural gift of languages was never
communicated to that Sex, because it is forbidden them to speak in the Church,
to which the gift of tongues does principally serve, so for the same cause,
GOD has not been pleased that any woman should have the gift of miracles in
that very time; when they were both necessary and frequent. For as miracles
did tend to confirm the Doctrine which was Preached, so were they not wrought
but by those men who had a charge to Preach it, which was forbidden unto
women.

Of an advertisement which is put into the Margent of some passages in the
Bible.
WHen the Annotators do meet with a difficulty in any place of the Scripture
they speak of it, that it is a thing which ought not too curiously to be
searched unto. But before we do forbid or restrain the searching after a point,
we ought first to be assured that it is not in the Scripture. For this is not
to be too curious to undertake to know that which GOD has been pleased to
speak. Wherefore does GOD speak unto us, if it be not to be understood. Nay,
when he speaks obscurely in some places, it is to this end, that we should
yet search more after it, and not that we should recoyl from it. And if it be a
thing which we understand not, it may be that others do or may hereafter
understand it, whose labors we ought not to hinder. How many passages are
there which have been taken for Riddles, which are now clearly expounded. How
many Questions have been held inexplicable which are now loosed and laid open.
How many particulars, allusions, and mysteries, which were not observed in the
Scriptures, are now discovered to the great contentment of those Spirits who
are lovers of knowledge.

Of the Dragon which was believed to be a flying Serpent.
SO he is painted nay and in some Bibles also, And it is a common opinion, that
there is such a kind of Serpent having wings. But although this be maintained
by diverse, there are no more ocular witnesses of it, then of the Horse Pegasus.
Nay it contradict; that which the Naturalists have observed which is, that
there is no Bird which is venomous, for the providence of GOD has not been
pleased to give wings to creatures, which are venomous, And it is to prevent an
infinite number of calamities which would come to pass, if creatures so
dangerous could fly, or move at random in the traverse of the Air. How many
deaths not to be avoided would ensue hereby both to men and Beasts? This
Fiction of flying Serpents is tolerable, but we ought by no means to introduce
it into the Bible.

It is moreover observable that the Scripture does give wings to the Cherubins
who represent Angels, but it never does attribute wings to the Serpent which
represents Satan. Add to this, that in the 12. of the Revelations the Woman
who fled before the Dragon, had wings given her to fly away, but the Dragon had
no wings to fly after her, and all that he could do was to send a vomit of
water lik a River from her gorge. It is therefore an Imagination in this
passage to suppose a flying Serpent. Such a Serpent not found either in Nature
or the Scripture.

Of the Serpent which tempted Eve which many think to be presented in the face
of a Woman.
I Have already made mention of two learned men in this age, who are of a
contrary opinion in many things which antiquity has dictated. Behold yet one
point more of which they are in dispute. Some hold that this Serpent which
seduced Eve had the face of a maid, and so he has been painted for a long
time. One of these great personages rejects this opinion in this Picture. But
he gives no reason for it all, but only says that there being but two faces
of mankind in the whole world that of Adam and that of Eve, if Eve had seen a
third it had been suspected by her, and the Imposture had been discovered. To
this the other does answer in the contrary. Satan did take the face of a woman
to be less suspected, because it was not so strange that such a head should
speak, as to hear a Serpent speaking and reasoning like a woman. And that Eve
had no reason to wonder that a Serpent should have the face of a woman, since
there are diverse Beasts who are endued with such a form.

These two Antagonists have this common betwixt them, that contending on a
matter of Fact, they would decede the controversy, rather by reason then keep
close unto the History, which ought to be preferred to all our own suggestions.
Does the History then say, that the Serpent which tempted Eve had the face of a
woman? Could Moses who makes mention of the great subtilty of this Creature
have forgotten so considerable a particular in so great an Occurrence, as the
Visage of a woman in a Beast, Do other holy writers who speak of this Serpent,
speak one word of this face which is attributed to it? It is only then an
Invention of the Brain of man, which is sufficient enough to dissuade us from
receiving it.

But were it necessary to take off this difference by reasons it is easy
enough to decide the controversy. Will any one affirm that there has been
extant any kind of Serpent, which has the face of a woman? No man can affirm
it, And no man ever has affirmed it, that I do know of. And if it should be
so, it could not prove that the Serpent which seduced Eve was of that kind
since the History makes no specification of it. Much less can it be said that
it was a monster composed of the face of a woman, and of the Body of a
Serpent, For no monsters were produced till after the sin of man, and sin
entered not till after the temptation of the Serpent.

We must be then constrained to affirm that this face of a woman was only an
apparition or a figure formed by Satan in the Serpent. But again, Was this
Serpent but an apparition only? Certainly the subtilty which the Scripture
attributes unto him, above all the Beasts of the field, cannot be said to be an
apparition on a figure formed in the Air. Will any man say that this real
Serpent had a face which was not real but only in appearance? This is a
Serpent composed of a fiction and reality without any other proof but our
imagination only. Finally, will any man allege, that Satan borrowed any one
of those creatures, who have a face like unto that of a woman? Why then that
Creature had been condemned to the same punishment, as was the Serpent for
having served Satan with its voice. But this not so, And the sentence was not
pronounced against any other Beast but the Serpent. To conclude, that humane
face in which it is believed, that the Serpent did show himself is purely
imaginary.

Of the discord which is in modern Music, and more particularly of that in our
Psalms.
THere are those who have desired that all our Psalms had but one Tune, that so
they may be more easy to the common people, Others do approve of the multitude
and diversity of Ayrs, as the most delightful, and most proper to move the
Spirit. And certainly, the difference which is in the Psalms, as to the
measures of the Hebrew verse, does sufficiently demonstrate that there were
diversities of Tunes. But because they are unknown to us, it remains that we
give to every Psalm, yea to every verse that tune which shall be most
convenient, and the most convenient is that which does best represent the
matter of which we sing. The voice which does express a sad and mournful
subject, ought not to be of one tune, and the voice which does express a great
joy ought to be of another. The voice also of him which speaks as an
affrighted man does differ much from the voice of him who is safe from danger,
And generally the sound ought not to be correspondent to the matter, 1 Cor, 14,
7, 8. But although the Music of our Psalms, (more particularly that of the
French) be very excellent, and the ayrs be there conformable to the subjects in
many respects, nevertheless it is not so universally over all, nor is there
that perfection which may be desired, and it is observable, there are diverse
Psalms, the subjects whereof are of a contrary nature, yet nevertheless they
have the same tune. The hundred and forty second which represents the affrights
and the cries of a man brought into the greatest danger, has the same air as
the hundredth which expresses nothing but joy and the giving of thanks. The
seventy fourth is full of grief and lamentation. The hundred and sixteenth is
as full of joy and thankfulness, yet notwithstanding one is sung in the same
tune as the other. Nay in the very same Psalm there is a verse which corrects
the matter of the precedent. In the one the soul speaks as beaten down with
sadness and makes great complaints in the other (as if another person did
speak) the same is reprehended for the words it did speak, and for its want of
courage. Moreover there is oftentimes an alternative reiteration of these two
Contraries which clap in betwixt one another, the Flesh and the Spirit, as
particularly in the 42, the 73. and the 77. Psalms. These verses which
represent contrary motions, although in one Psalm ought to differ in the tune,
instead whereof in every Psalm we have but one tune common to all the verses.

To this no other thing can be answered, but that it will be very difficult,
and almost impossible to have a Music so exact and so universally
corresponding with such diversity of matters, and which (moreover) can be easy
for the people to learn. This is true, so that I speak not to make any change
in the tune, which is used in our Churches. In the Churches of France, we have
undertook to give a tune to many Songs in the Bible, which have been as Psalms,
and for that end put into Music. But the common people being not accustomed to
them, and disorder from thence arising we have been constrained to desist. That
which has led me to this discourse, is to speak of those who would reduce
all the Psalms to one, and the same tune, when it would be more convenient to
multiply, and to diversify the tune more then we do. And although it be
impossible to put in practice a Music so perfect as that which has been
spoken, yet it is not superfluous to have made mention of it, to the end that
we may know how imperfect and how defective we are in that regard.

Of those who on the first day of the year do make a scruple to wish a good
year to any one and of a passage which is in the French Bible.
THere are some even of those who are learned and Orthodox Divines who reject
this salutation when it is given them. But for what cause? Is it forbidden to
wish long life to our Neighbor? Certainly when the Apostle Ephesians. 6. 3.
exhorts children to observe the Commandment to which the promise is annexed
to make them live a long time, he desires that this promise may be made
effectual to them. If he does wish them long life, that is many years. If it
be lawful to wish unto a Neighbor many years, wherefore not one year? And
again can we wish him many years, without wishing him one year which is
comprehended in many years?

Well any one object, that the favors of GOD ought not to be restrained to a
year? Why, this would be to restrain them yet more, when we do wish good morrow
to our Neighbor, And yet no man condemns this salutation, for in wishing that
the morning may prove happy, we do not pray that his happiness may expire with
the Day.

That which gives distaste is that this salutation is given in a Day which is
presupposed to be the first Day of the year, when it is uncertain not only on
what Day, but also in what season the first year of the world began. But this
very incertitude in which GOD has pleased that we should be, does show that
the knowledge of this Day is not necessary for us, and that it is indifferent
to begin the account of the Days of the year, with such a Day which should be
made choice of and received in use. If we should stay until we know in what
Day of the year the world began, we should deprive our selves of many helps
which are necessary for the measuring of time, and the affairs which are ruled
by time; And if it be lawful in whatsoever year it be to wish a good day to a
Neighbor, wherefore shall this wish be unlawful on the day in which we do
begin to count the days of the year.

It will be objected that this Day is sullyed with superstition, but there is
not a Day in the year which is not so soyled. Ought we therefore all the year
to refrain from acts of civility or charity? If on such a Day superstition is
more present to us, or more offensive, the more ought we to correct that bad
air by actions of a sweet savor, not intermitting that which ought to be
practiced every day.

On this Subject I have made use of a passage which is in the French Bible 1 Samuel 25, 6. David did send this salutation to Nabal who did sheere his Sheep.
And so may thou make the year to come in the same season, etc. But these
words are not formally in the Original text, no more are they to be found in
the English translation, nor in many other translation. Instead of all these
words the Hebrew has but one, viz. To living, And this word being not
accompanied with any Noun Substantive, diverse senses are given to it, but that
which our French Bible does give unto it is more forced and more far drawn.

Of the salutation which is given to those who sneeze.
THis is practiced almost universally amongst all the Christian in the West.
There are some nevertheless who not so precisely do observe that custom, as
more particularly the English. And it is disputed if it be well done, to salute
those who do sneeze in our presence. For neither in the old Testament or the
New is there found any Example. In all the holy History there is not mention
made of any but only one, And this was the Son of the Shunamite, who sneezed
seven times in the presence of Elisha, and nevertheless this Prophet did not
use any salutation to him. Some do believe that this custom did begin about one
thousand and fifty years since upon the occasion of a Disease, which was then
Epidemicall, in which men and women dyed sneezing. But the Original is far
more ancient, as it can be made manifest. It is certain that it had its
Original in the time of Paganism, but the cause is uncertain. But presupposing
that it did proceed from Paganism the question is, is it lawful to practice it.

Our answer is grounded on these following hypotheses, First there are things
which GOD forbids us to do, but nevertheless being done he wills not, that
they should be undone. He did forbid that Jericho should be builded again, yet
nevertheless being afterward rebuilded, he did not command that it should be
demolished. Even some of the Prophets, as Elisha, did keep there their
Assemblies, and Jesus Christ did there convert Zacheus and cured the blind. So
God forbids to marry with a person that is an Infidel, but such a marriage
being made God forbids that it should be broken. The league of Josuah with the
Gibeonits was not lawful in all things; nevertheless GOD would not that it
should be infringed, and chastised the house of Saul, who had ill treated the
Gibeonits. Secondly, That which has been introduced for bad ends, being
otherwise indifferent in it self, may be applied to other uses. The custom of
imbalming the Bodies of the dead proceeded from the Egyptians, who did practice
it either for superstition or for vanity; nevertheless this custom has passed
amongst the people of GOD, who has never reproved it. Thirdly, It is known,
That we ought to distinguish of that which is lawful in it felt from the abuse
which superstition has mingled with it. The Example which the Apostle gives
touching meat sacrificed to Idols, does serve for this purpose, 1 Cor. 8. 10 I
am of opinion that external Actions, which belong even to the service of GOD,
ought to be done with discretion of circumstances, nay, ought sometimes to be
suspended. Elisha would not pray unto GOD in the presence of Naaman, 2 Kings 5.
10. 11. If I am constrained to pass before an Idol, I will abstain from
pronouncing any prayer, because I will not give on occasion to any to suppose
that my prayer tends to honor the Idol.

This foundation being laid, It is easy to answer the question. First to salute
any, or to pray to GOD for him is not only lawful in its self, but also it is
commendable. It cannot then be evil, but by accident only, either by the
superstition of him who sneezeth, or of those who do salute him, or of others
who are present, or on the contrary for the occasion of those who take offense
to hear that salutation, because they do believe it to be superstitious.
Secondly, If I am then in the presence of any who is superstitious in that
kind, I will abstain from saluting any who does sneeze, to the end that I may
not seem to adhere to superstition. And on the contrary, If it be in the
presence of any to whom this salutation is a scandal, I will abstain also.
Thirdly, But without the appearance of superstition, or of scandal, this custom
being no more practiced for the imaginary causes which the Pagans had
thereunto, but being converted into civility, it may be exercised without
offense. The Jews were accustomed, when they beheld the Rainbow, to say their
prayers, and to confess that they did merit a second Deluge, and that they
subsisted not but only by the mercy of GOD. If there were not any mixture in
it of superst^tion, I should make it no difficulty being in their company, and
on such an occurrence to speak as they do.

Of those who without any distinction do pronounce that Divines ought not to
meddle with the affairs of State.
THis common saying is not true, but in some respects, and in others it is
false, injurious to GOD, and pernicious to the State it self. But because the
Questions, which on this subject do present themselves, have been largely
handled by diverse learned and judicious Men, I will speak but one word by the
way. The affairs of State, and all other humane affairs public or particular
are considered, First, Or in themselves within their circuit, every one
according to the rules of its Art. Or, Secondly, within that Dependence which
subjects them to the Law of GOD which is the Rule of Conscience.

In the first the Divine meddles not at all. He is a stranger in that Element.
In navigation the Pilot is more to be believed then Saint Paul, if this Apostle
had not some extraordinary revelation.

But the irregularities which we may here meet with to the prejudice of GOD are
under the cognizances of the Divine. It belongs to him to prevent them by his
Counsels, yea, and to reprove them if they are broke forth into action. Indeed,
It belongs not to him to handle the weights and the measures in a shop, but if
they are notoriously false, ought he to hold his peace under the pretense that
he ought not to meddle with another man's trade? The Balance, The Beams and the
weights are of the Jurisdiction of GOD, Proverbs 16. In this Island we complain
of diverse Divines of the Court, who wink at certain innovations introduced
under the pretense of the reason of State, and authorized by the Sovereign
power which then was. But because these novelties passed for matter of State,
it would be a wrong to have blamed the silence of the Divines, when they should
be taxed for omitting that which they owe to GOD, to their charges, to the
Church and to the Stat^ i^ self.

Of the Angel of Satan who buffeted Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. A now
interpretation of that passage.
MAny (as Beza) does think that Saint Paul in this place does complain that
Satan kindled in him some inordinate affections. But this Exposition is
contradicted by many forcible reasons which have been noted hereupon. Others
take these words at the foot of the Letter, as if in effect some evil Spirit
had given buffets to Saint Paul tormenting him in his Body, as sometimes he had
struck Job. Lastly* Some understand this of some wicked man, who by the
instigation of Satan persecuted Saint Paul. And to speak the truth, it is not
necessary that this Name, The Angel of Satan, should always signify a Spirit.
In the twelfth of the Revelation, the Angels of the Dragon (in the judgment of
some knowing interpreters) do signify those that serve the Dragon as his
Ministers* And so this Angel of Satan may be some man whom Satan employed to
torment the Apostle. But this Exposition has need of a prop to sustain it, and
this is it which has obliged me to bring unto it this note that follows.

The language of the new Testament is composed of an infiniteness of phrases,
which do reflect either on the matter of the old Testament, or on diverse other
subjects. Now the passages, which contain such allusions, ought to be
interpreted by them, otherwise we shall draw wide* or if we ^it the mark it
will be by accident.

I find then in the old Testament a History which is almost in all things the
same with this, which St. Paul speaks of himself: in the 1. of Kings the 22. A
Prophet saw GOD sitting in his Throne, and all the Army of Heaven about him on
the right hand and on the left. He heard GOD proposing an affair, And the
Angels, as in Council, diversely debating of it. He heard a Commission which was
given to Satan, which he promised to put in execution by his Emissaries. After
so high a revelation, and the hearing of words so sublime, this Prophet is
buffered by one of the Messengers of Satan by a false Prop^et who did strike
him on the cheek. That History does so much resemble ^his which Saint Paul
recites of himself, that the allusion is most appa^ent, Now if the Analogy be
entire, he who buffeted Saint Paul was some false Apostle, who did persecute
him* And so this quality of Angel o^ messenger of Satan does not pertain to
all sor^s of persecutors, but to those only (...) them, who carried unto
others the Doctrine of Satan.

Of a great number of places in the new Testament, which mention the curing of
those who were possessed with Spirits, In which our Translations change the
word which is in the Original Text.
THe Names of Satan, Devil, Demon, are the Epithets of evil Spirits,
nevertheless they are not Synonit^a^, and the Scripture does (...)
indifferently express them, but dot^ make use of one of them rather the
another, as they are more cond^^cing to the occurrences or matte^ which are
treated. The Name (...) Devil, and that of Demon are (...) in the old
Testament, but are very frequent in the new, the language whereof is Greek,
nevertheless these two words do pass the one for the other.

When the Holy Spirit does speak of these evil Spirits, which the Son of GOD
did cast out of the Bodies of Men or Women, It does not say that it cast forth
Devils, but that he cast forth Demons, that he commanded Demons, that he gave
power to cast forth Demone, etc. From which word comes that also of Demoniack.
Now since in this thing the Holy Spirit does express the word of Demon, and
never the word of Divill, our Tranflations ought to answer the Original in the
place, where we read that he cast forth Devils, etc. It is true that this
change is more tolerable in those tongues, to which the word Demon is unknown,
as in particular to the English Tongue, but since the word is become French, It
would in those places do better in the translation then the Name of Devil.

I will make no stop at all to give satisfaction to the Question of the
Ignorants who will demand, If it be not all one to read Devils, instead of
reading Demons, In one word I shall tell them that we ought to read it
according to the Original. And without doubt there were reasons which obliged
the Evangelists to make use of one of these words, and to abstain from the
other, when they spoke of those Spirits, which tormented humane Bodies. Many
(as the Saduces) did believe that these Spirits were not substances, but only
motions or Impulsions which come by nature. Now the word Devil which only
signifies a Slanderer, and can be spoken of a man also, does not so well denote
a spiritual substance, and different from humane kind. The word Demon is more
significant in this regard, for it is the Name which the Pagans gave unto their
Gods, who in effect were evil Spirits. So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 20. 21.
says not (according to our Translation) that the Gentiles sacrificed to
Devils, but that they sacrificed to Demons. I forbear many other observations
which might be made on this subject.

Of Bulls crowned with Garlands which are read in the French Bible, Acts 14. 13.
THe Original text says, that the Priest of Jupiter had brought with him
Bulls, and Crowns or Garlands. But it dot not say that the Bulls were crowned
with them. It is true enough that the Pagans were accustomed so to adorn those
Creatures which were the Victims in their sacrifices by putting chaple^s of
flowers on their heads, or round about their horns. But that could not be
practiced in every season of the year. And as for the Garlands which are
mentioned in this place, the History expresses not that the Priest in that
nature did make use of them. It may be, that he would have crowned with them
Paul and Bar^abas, as the Pagans so did honor their false Gods in their
Images. And although that these Garlands were brought to crown the Bulls, yet
the Greek Text says, not that they were already crowned, but only that the
Priest brought with him Crowns, and Garlands. So speaks the Syriack translation
and so (the Interpreter of the Syriack. Tremellius, and so also does the
English Bible. The French have followed the Latin translation of Beza, who in
this particular has not word for word expressed the Original. This Note will
not appear fr^volous but to those only who not, that there is not one jo^e in
the Scripture, which is not considerable.

Of one word which the French add to the end of the Lords Prayer.
WE say thine is the Kingdom, etc. In ages of ages; so we speak in pronouncing
that Prayer. So we read in our Books wherein it is written, and even in the
French Catechism it self.

But the Original Text, Mat. 6. 13. where the terms are expressed, which
conclude that admirable Prayer, has not twice this word Ages. It is so word
for word. Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, in ages. Amen. This
word Ages is there expressed but once, instead whereof we redouble it, nay with
the addition of a particle which represents a change of the Case in the
Grammars of the Greeks and Latins.

This Amplification brought into common use, proceeds from this that, there
being other places of the new Testament, in which these words we read. To him
be glory in ages of ages, they have been taken as if they were the very same,
which are in the end of the Lords Prayer, which notwithstanding has not this
doubling of the word ages. This Phrase, in ages of ages is of the style of the
Hebrews representing a Superlative, who would be called Eternity it self, the
longest Duration which can be imagined. This expression is not found but in the
Revelat. Chap. 1. ver. 6. and Chap. 5. ver. 13. 14. If any shall reply (as it
is true enough) that these words in ages, in the Lords Prayer do signify as
much, as in ages of ages. I answer, wherefore then in reciting the Lords
Prayer, do we not content our selves with the terms which are there? The excuse
is not sufficient that we add nothing to the sense, For when we make
profession to transcribe, or to translate, we ought to retain the words of the
Original, as far as our vulgar tongues are able to represent them* without
thrusting in any amplificatio^ at all. I forbear to speak that there is a
secret reason for which this phrase in ages of ages, has been reserved for the
last Book of the Scripture.

How the word ages, which is in the Original of the Lords Prayer is translated
in the French and English Bibles.
BEhold here clean contrary to that which I have touched on in the precedent
observation, for in neither of the one or the other of these two Bibles, has
this Prayer so much as once this word ages, but in the steed thereof, they both
say, For ever, or always. Now although the terms are equivalent, if it be said
in ages, or if it be said, For ever, nevertheless the word ages, in the style
of the Scripture, do include distinctions of great importance, which this
Periphrasis does not contain, and which I have not the leisure to illustrate in
this place. The English Translation is excusable in this, because the language
has not a word, which properly does express that which we call, ages. But
since this word is become French, and does better answer to that which is in
the Original Greek, it ought to be retained in the French Translation of the
Lords Prayer, as well as we have retained it in the other places in which it is
employed in the same sense, and in the same matter; Revel. 1. 6. and 5. 13.

Of the sacrifice of Isaac ill represented in many pictures, and particularly
in the front of the English Bible.
ISaac is here painted on his knees before an Altar, and Abraham behind him
holding a knife in his hand, which is lifted up to give the blow. But this
picture is false, and does belly the holy History. For before that Abraham did
advance his arm, nay before he had the knife in his hand to strike Isaac, Isaac
was not before the Altar, but on the Altar it self. The particulars of the
action are recited to us in this order. That Abraham did build an Altar, and
ranged wood upon it, that he bound Isaac, and put him on the wood, and
afterward that he took the knife into his hand to cut his throat, Genesis 22. 9.
10. Isaac was then on the Altar, not at the foot of the Altar, when Abraham did
lift up his hand with the knife to strike him. It is a great mistake to frame a
portraict which contradicts the History.

Howsoever I shall note this by the way. This posture in which Isaac is
represented having Abraham behind him, and holding a sword in his hand does
cause many to believe that it was to cut off his head, and it is also the
common opinion that in this sacrifice, Abraham would have taken away the life
of his Son by taking off his head. But this prejudging although ancient, and
very general, is not soassured as it is imagined to be; and at least it ought
not to be held for a certain truth. The Text says that Abraham took the knife
to cut the throat of his Son, now this word is not restrained to that which we
call beheading; And moreover we ought to consider that Abraham had order to
offer his Son as a Holocaust, In which kind of sacrifice, the victim was not
beheaded until after it were dead, For first of all the blood was let forth,
either at the throat, or at the breast until the sacrifice was dead, after
that it was cut in pieces, the head was severed from the Body, and the other
parts the one from the other. This was the method of the Holocaust confirmed in
Leviticus, 1* 11. 12.

Of the Catachism of the French Churches.
THis Catechism is no more perf^ct than any other of the writings of Men, I am
not the first that has so judged. It is defective in many points. It is prolix
and exuberant in questions, in certain matters where it ought to be more
succinct. On the contrary, it is too brief there where it ought more to enlarge
it self. It sometimes dispatcheth two Commandments of the Law, or two
Petitions of the Lords Prayer in one Section only, when every Commandment,
and every Petition do demand one entire action, it mingles sometimes in one
section diverse Articles of Faith, every one of which does require a Section by
its self. There are also some transpositions; and articles not so commodious as
could be desired. It would be convenient to change the form in diverse respects,
for we ought not be so superstitious toward those who have drawn up this
Ca^echism, as to take it for a perfect Draught. We may retain it still, but in
some places reform it.

I do rather wish that our Churches had an Historical Ca^echism, which by
Questions and Answers might re-Present all the History of the Bible, at least
the generalities of it, and the most illustrious particulars. Some English men
have travailed in it, And if the work had been complete it would produce a
great benefit to the Common people.

But amongst so many Ca^echisms that are written, it were to be desired that we
had one where the Doctrine of the Sacraments were better grounded than it has
accustomed to have been, For although a Ca^echism ought to be popular, yet we
should not omit that which gives intelligence of the true ground of the matter.
Of this I shall speak more largely in a particular treatise, if GOD permit.

Of the Common opinion that in the death of a man the soul comes out of the
mouth.
WHen a man dies, It is said, that he has his soul already on the brink of
his lips. So speak the Divines, and so Antiquity has spoken. This language
proceeds from a popular opinion, that when the soul dislodgeth from the body it
goes out at the mouth.

I will not undertake to answer the curious Questions, which may be moved
touching the coming forth of the soul. I only affirm that this prejudging of
the vulgar is not solid. If the soul be universally dilated in every part of
the body, as many Philosophers do affirm, wherefore is it locked up in a
particular place at the departure? If it lodges properly and particularly in
the heart, or in the Brain, what need has it to come out at an open passage,
seeing it is a Spirit which can pass away, at the traverse of the Skull or any
other Bone. Now who has told us, that it comes forth rather at the mouth than
at the ear or eyes, which are as the windows of the soul? If I were at leisure
to affirm something in a point, the decision whereof is neither certain nor
necessary, I should say that it is rather to be believed, that as the soul of
the first man did enter into him by the Nostri^ls, so it goes forth that way,
Genesis 2. 7. And certainly, when the Scripture would express that man is always
near unto Death, it says that the Spirit or the breath of him is in his
nostrill, as being ready there to come out, Esaias 2. 22. To this the words of
Job have reference, Job 27. 3. So long as the breath of the mighty God shall be
in his nostrills, which is to say, when this soul it self, which God has
breathed into me, shall be upon the point of its departure, having no more hold
of it, but in my nostrills only.

Of the testimony which Josephus the Historian of the Jews did render of Jesus
Christ.
THis testimony is found in the eighteenth Book of the Jewish antiquities. This
Author making mention there of Jesus, does doubt if it be lawful to call him a
man, seeing the great miracles which he wrought. He also says that this Jesus
is the Christ. That at the third day after his death, he showed himself to be
alive. That such things, and other miracles were forespoken of him by the
Prophets.

It is a long time since the Christians employed this testimony of Josephus to
convince the Jews. But, not to displease so many learned men, ancient and
modern; I cannot persuade my self that this Jew, which gives not the least
appearance to be inclined to Christianism, has written so much to the advantage
of our Religion; Would he so highly have published in his Book a belief of
which he never made profession? And he is so far from acknowledging Jesus to be
the Christ, to whom the Prophets did attribute the Segniory of the whole world,
that, on the contrary, he gives it to Vespasian a Pagan Prince, and applies to
him the Oracle which belongs only to the Son of God. This is far off from
acknowledging Jesus to be the Christ. It may be objected that if these words
above mentioned were not the words of Josephus, it would follow that this
Author made no mention of Jesus Christ in any place of his History, for he
speaks not of him, but in this place only which is in question. Now it is not
believed that having undertaken to write of the memorable things of those
times, he should in silence pass by the miracles performed by Jesus Christ,
which were known to all the world. But this is not the only Omission that is
to be noted in Josephus. The Massacre of the Infants at Bethlehem, of which
Herod was the Author, was so famous, that the Heathens themselves did write of
it, and nevertheless Josephus, who has recorded many other cruelties of this
Herod, does make no mention of it. And he is no^ the only Historian who by
contrivement or otherwise has surpassed some part of that which was most
memorable in his time. And shall we wonder that a Jew, who never adhered to
Christianism, should purposely omit the miracles of Jesus Christ? Was not his
Resurrection contradicted by the Priests, although they were convinced of the
truth thereof?

Nevertheless I do believe that this passage was Josephus his own, but withal
that some have changed some words therein, and this is not the only writing,
to which by the irregular zeal of some, such a thing has happened. But for
this in this place Saint Jerome who translated this Author into Latin, and who
forgot not ^o value the testimonies, which the Jews and the Pagans rendered to
the Christian Religion, does make Josephus to speak otherwise, For he ^akes him
not to say, that Jesus was ^he Christ, but that it was believed he was the
Christ. Josephus then only recites, that it was the belief of others, to wit,
the Christians, but not his own, for he was not a Christian, and being not one,
nor making profession of Christianity, much less could he say, that Jesus was
the Christ. Now if one word in this place be changed, it is not incredible, but
the contexture also of other terms is altered, in which this Author speaks of
Jesus Christ.

Let us not think the Christian Religion to be less assured, because a Jew does
not confess Jesus to be the Christ. Truth needs not the suffrage of her
adversaries. Nevertheless this passage of Josephus is advantageous to us in one
respect. The Jews maintained that the Death of Christ was not under Pilate, who
in the Name of the Romans (as they allege) was Commander above one hundred
years before; The consequences are far greater then they seem to be at the
first appearance, of which I will not speak at this present. So great liars are
these malicious people proved to be by their own Historian, who in express
terms affirms that Jesus, of whom the Christians took their Name, was
crucified by Pilate.

Of the name Jehovah which the French Bible marketh not in the twelfth Chapter
of Job ver. 9.
IN all the pleadings of the friends of Job, we never read of the Name of
Jehovah, Job himself did never but once pronounce it, in this place above
named, so that from the beginning of the 3. Chapter of this Book to the end of
the the 37. the Name Jehovah is found but once, although diverse other Names of
God, as the strong, the Almighty are there very frequent. I have not now to
speak wherefore the Name of Jehovah (the importance whereof is represented.
Exodus 6. 31.) is not at all in the mouth of the friends of Job, nor but once in
the mouth of Job, many remarkable considerations may hereupon be produced, I
shall only say that, as we at least ought to mark and distinguish this place,
which is only to be found, where Job expresses this great name of Jehovah.
And because this name cannot be translated into any other language, the new
Testament represents it by the word Signior, And in the imitation of it is the
English translation of the old Testament. The French does note it by another
word, which is the Eternal. We dispute not which of these names does approach
most near to that of Jehovah. But since the French Bible does represent it
under the name of Eternal* This name Eternal ought to be in this place of
Job, where the name of Jehovah is found, For it says tha^ it is the hand of
Jehovah which has made all things. Of Jehovah, that i^ to say of the Eternal,
as the French translation does usually interpret in And nevertheless the same
translation forgetting it self in this place instead of saying, the hand of the
Eternal, does say, the hand of God. A mistake by so much the more remarkable,
that in this place eclipsing the name of the Eternal, which represents that
of Jehovah, it will follow that Job never pronounced this name of Jehovah. And
having but once pronounced it, so much the more illustrious is this place, and
so much the more important is it, to retain here this word, which does
distinguish it self from all the other words of Job, and from those of his
friends, by a mark so much the more considerable that it is not obvious to the
vulgar.

The word Heaven in the singular number is not found in any place of the old
Testament. A difference in that respect between the Original, and many
translations, especially the English.
IT is known that neither the Hebrew nor Caldean, which are the original
tongues of the old Testament have this word Heaven, but always say Heavens in
the Plural, or the Duall numbers. From hence it comes that in all the old
Testament this word is never read in the singular number, and nevertheless the
greatest part of the Latin and vulgar translations have introduced it in
diverse places, especially the English, which does serve it self more often with
the Singular then the Plural; which is very strange.

In the beginning of this treatise, I prevented some objections that might be
made hereon, and I will not now

(...) rily abused when we speak of afflictions page 47 Of ^rying sins which we
discern not from others page. 50 Of the faults committed in citing the
Histories of the Ancients page. 52 The first words of the ten Commandments,
which the Ignorance of some have razed from the walls in their Churches page.
56 Of some pictures which are in certain Bibles. page. 59 Of the Name of the
Son of GOD which some of our Bibles give unto Adam, Luke 3 ver. last page. 62
Of the twelfth stone which was on the Breast of the High Priest, which the
French Bible calls a Berill, and the English a Jasper, Exodus 28. 20. page. 64
Of certain Books written on the Revelations and steemed as prophetical page*
66 Of a prejudging common to many of th^se who read or interpret the
prophecies, especially the Revelations page. 67 Of some Interpreters who
censure St. Paul for wishing to be Anathema or separated from Christ for the
love of the Israelites, Romans 9. 3. page. 68 Of the vulgar Book, entitled, The
Practice of Pi^ty page. 71 (...) the word, Amen, which the people ought to
pronounce at the end of public prayers, and benedictions page. 79 Of the
buildings of Jerusalem represented in a picture on the beginning of many
English Bibles page. 82 Of the tree of life which was thought to be but one
only plant page. 84 Of the Nature of the Viper in some Editions marked in the
Index at the end of the new Testament in French page. 88 Of those who believe
that in the unfolding of a Text they must always divide it into parts page. 90
Of the diverse sense given to the 2 th. Chapter of Revel. ver. 1. page. 92 Of
the Brazen Serpent which was thought to be a figure of Christ page. 98 Of the
Jews; If it were convenient to grant them a residence in England page. 100 Of
Presagers who boast they have a prophetic Spirit, and of the Follies, and
Blasphemies they produce page. 104 Of some false Miracles* which have been held
for true page. 109 Of the curing of the Evil attributed to the Kings of
England page. 113 Of an advertisement in the Margent of some places in the
Bible page. 115 Of the Dragon which was thought to be a flying Serpent page.
117 Of the Serpent which tempted Eve, which many think had the face of a woman
page. 119 Of a discord in modern Music and pa^ticularly in that of the Psalms
page. 123 Of th^se who in the first day of the year do make a scruple, to wish
a good year to any, And of a passage which is in the French Bible page 127 Of
the salutation given to those who s^eeze page. 130 Of those who without any
Distinction do pronounce that Divines ought not to meddle with the affairs of
State page. 135 Of the Angel of Satan who buffetted Saint Paul 2 Cor. 12. 7. A
new Interpretation on that place page. 137 A great number of places which
mention the cure of Demoniacks, in which our Translations d^ change the word,
which is in the original Text page. 140 Of the Bulls crowned with garlands*
which are read in the French Bible Acts 14. 13. page. 143 Of one word which the
French add at the close of the Lords Prayer page. 145 How the word ages, which
in the original is in the Lords Prayer, is translated in the French and
English Bibles page. 147 Of the sacrifice of Isaac ill represented in ma^y
pictures, and particularly at the beginning
(...)
