THE ART OF Making DEVISES.

Done into English by Tho Blovnt Gent 1646.

(...) CUM DEFICIT

NUNQVAM SICCABITU^ AESTU

IMMOTUM IN MOTU

CECIDISSE VIDETUR

SUNT QVOS IGNIS ^ALIT

SUB IUDICE LIS EST

ALTERA LEVATUR

SAEPE CADENDO

POST TENEBRAS LUCEM

DECVS ET TU ^AMEN IN ARMIS

W M sculpsit



I
S C AR TI SEMPRONIVS GRACCVS Q. DESIG

Quod si ^^clandum est ms. regnandi gratia violandum est asijs in re^^^
pretatem cosas.



II
TI. CAESAR DIVI. AVG. F. AUGUSTUS AR PONTIF. MAXIM.

Boni nastor is est (...) ecus. non. (...).



III
AUGUSTUS DIVI F. AR IMP.

Romam lateritiam accepi. marmoream relinquo.



IIII
C. CAESAR DIVI AVG PRON. AVG. PM. TR. P IIII P.P. AE IVLIA DRVSILLA AGRIPINA SC

Hilnl mag in talura mea probo quam inverecundiam.



V
TI CLAUDIUS CAESAR AVG PM TRPIM P.PP. AE AVGSTA LIBERTAS SC

Non eodem modo a Pulice et f^ra bellua cavendum est



VI
IMP. SER. GALBA CAESAR AVG. AR ROMA

Mes fuit deligere, non emere milites



VII
NERO CAESAR AVG. P. MAX. TRP. PP. IMP. AE SC

Priamus miru^ in modum bealus fuit* quod patriam simul cum regno per^i^am
^^dit.



AR
IMP. OTHO CAESAR AVG. TR. P AR PONT. MAX.

Multo melius iustusque est vnum pro multis. quam pro vni multo^ (...)



IX
A. VITELLIVS GERMA N IMP. AV G. PM TB P. AE SC

Optime olet occisus hostis sed melius ciuis



X
T. CAES. IMP. AVG. F. TR. P. COS. V. CENSOR AE SC

Non oportel quenqua^ a conspectu Principis tristem discedere.



XI
IMP. CAES. VESPASIAN. AVG. P. M. TR. P. P. COS. III. CEN. AR IVDAEA

Lueri bonus odor exre qualibet



XII
CAES. DOMIT. AVG. GERM. P. M. TR. P. VII. IMP. AR IMP. XIIII. COS. XIIII. GER.
TR. P. P. P.

Paucis notum est quam misera sit Princip^ conditio.



13
IMP. NERVA CAES. AVG. P. M. TR. POT. AR COS. TER PAT. PATRIAE

Nihil me fuisse scio quo minus possem deposito Imperio. privatu tuto uinere



14
HADRIANVS AVG. COS IIIPP. AE SC

Sic gesturus sum imperium et sciam rem populi esse, non meam priuatam.



15
IMP CAES. NERVAE TRAIANO AVG GER. DAC PM TRP COS. V P. P. AE SPQR

Talis priuatis set Imperator quales sibi priuato^ optat habere



16
ANTONIUS AVG. PIUS P. P. TR P. COS. II. AE BONA EVENTVI SC

Honestius est Caesari vnum ciuem ^eruare quam mill haster occidere.



17
ANTONIUS AVGVR IIIN IR. R. PC AR ANTONIUS ET VERVS AVG. REST

Non decet Imperatorem praepropere quicquam agere.



18
ANTONIUS AVG. M. COMMODVS FELL AVG TR COS III P P SC

Ab incolumi quamnis paulatim, negotia perfici possuni^ a mortuo nihil.



19
AURELIUS CAESAR AVG PII F. AR TR POT. XV COS. III.

Aequius est me tot et talium amicorum consisium quam tot tales meam vnius
voluntatem sequi



20
IMP. CAES. P. HELV PERTIN. AVG. AE AEQVIT. AVG. TR P. COS. II.

Sanctius est inopem Rempub^ obtin ere quam ad d^^ ^iarum cumulu^ per
discrimunu^ atq, dedecorum vestigia peruenire



THE ART Of making DEVISES: TREATING OF Hieroglyphics, Symboles, Emblemes,
Aenigma's, Sentences, Parables, Reverses of Medalls, Arms, Blazons, Cimiers,
Cyphres and Rebus.

First Written in FRENCH BY HENRY ESTIENNE, Lord of Fossez, Interpreter to the
French King for the Latin and Greek Tongues: AND Translated into English by
THO: BLOUNT of the Inner Temple, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by W. E. and J. G. and are to be sold by Richard Marriot in S.
Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet. 1646.

TO THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY of ENGLAND.
THis Piece (being sent me out of France, as a double rarity, both in respect
of the subject and the quality of the Author) I had no sooner read, then (taken
with its ingenuity) I was moved to cloathe it in an English habit, partly out
of envy, that other Nations should glory to have out-knowne us in any Art,
especially ingenious, as is this of Devises, which being the proper badges of
Gentlemen, Commanders, and persons of Honor, may justly challenge their
countenance and favor, whereunto it is sacred.

My Author affirms himself to be the first has written of this subject in
his Mothertongue; and I might say the like here, were it not that I find a
small parcel of it in Camdens Remains, under the title of Impreses, which are
in effect the same with Devises. Thence, you may gather, that the Kings of
England, with the Nobility and Gentry, have for some hundreds of years (though
Devises are yet of far greater Antiquity) both esteemed and made use of them:
only in former times they arrived not (as now) to that height of perfection;
for they sometimes did (as the unskilful still do) make use of Mottoes
without figures, and figures without Mottoes. We read that Hen. the 3. (as
liking well of Remuneration) commanded to be written (by way of Devise) in his
Chamber at Woodstock, Qui non dat quod amat, non accipit ille quod optat. Edw.
the 3. bore for his Devise the rays of the Sun streaming from a cloud
without any Motto. Edmond of Langley, Duke of York, bore a Faulcon in a
Fetter-lock, implying, that he was locked up from all hope and possibility of
the Kingdom. Hen. the 5. carried a burning Cresset, sometimes a Beacon, and
for Motto (but not appropriate thereunto) UNE SANS PLUS, one and no more. Edw
the 4. bore the Sun, after the Battle of Mortimers-Crosse, where three Suns
were seen immediately conjoyning in one. Hen. the 7. in respect of the union
of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, by his marriage, used the White Rose
united with the Red, sometimes placed in the Sun. But in the reign of Hen.
the 8. Devises grew more familiar, and somewhat more perfect, by adding Mottoes
unto them, in imitation of the Italians and French (amongst whom there is
hardly a private Gentleman, but has his particular Devise) For Hen. the 8. at
the interview between him and King Francis the first, whereat Charles the fifth
was also present, used for his Devise an English Archer in a green Coat
drawing his Arrow to the head, with this Motto, CUI ADHaeREO, PRaeEST; when as
at that time those mighty Princes banding one against another, wrought him for
their own particular.

To the honor of Queen Jane, (who dyed willingly to save her child King
Edward) a Phoenix Was represented in his Funeral fire with this Motto, NASCATUR
UT ALTER. Queen Mary bore winged Time, drawing Truth out of a pit, with
VERITAS TEMPORIS FILIA. Queen Elizabeth upon several occasions used many
Heroical Devises, sometimes a Sive without a Motto, (as Camden relates) and at
other times these words without figure, VIDEO, TACEO, and SEMPER EADEM. King
James used a Thistle and a Rose united, and a Crown over them, with this Motto,
HENRICUS ROSAS, REGNA JACOBUS. Pr. Henry (besides that Devise which is
appropriate to the Princes of Wales) made use of this Motto, without figure,
FAS EST ALIORUM QUaeRERE REGNA. And His Majesty that now is, that other of
CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO. Our Prince bears (as all the Princes of Wales have done
since the black Prince) for his Devise (which we commonly, though corruptly
call the Princes Arms) a Coronet beautified with three Ostrich feathers, and
for Motto, A learned Brittan is of opinion that it should be Eich din, i.e.
your man, in the British tongue.
ICH DIEN, i.e. I serve, in the Saxon tongue, alluding to that of the Apostle,
The heir while he is a child, differs nothing from a servant.

The late Earl of Essex, when he was cast down with sorrow, and yet to be
employed in Arms, bore a sable Shield without any figure, but inscribed, PAR
NULLA FIGURA DOLORI. Sir Philip Sidney (to trouble you with no more) denoting
that he persisted always one, depainted out the Caspian Sea, surrounded with
its shoares, which neither ebbeth nor flows, and for Motto, SINE REFLUXU.

Some may object, that in regard Tiltings, Tournaments, and Masks, (where
Devises were much in request) are for the present laid aside, therefore Devises
are of less use.

Whereto I answer, that as those Justing or jesting Wars are disused, so have
we now an earnest, though much to be lamented War, which renders them more
useful then ever, I mean for Cornets and Ensigns; And of these, let me also
give you some examples out of the present times. On the Kings party, one bears
for his Cornet-Devise Saint Michael killing the Dragon for the figure, and for
Motto, QUIS UT DEUS? Another is so bold as to bear the picture of a King
Crowned and Armed, with his Sword drawn, and this Motto, MELIUS EST MORI IN
BELLO, QUAM VIDERE MALA GENTIS NOSTRAE. A third bears only a Dye, with
UTCUNQUE QUADRATUS. A fourth figures the beast called an The Naturalists say
that this beast will rather choose to dye, then defile her su^e.
Ermyne, with this Motto, MALLEM MORI QUAM FoeDARI. A fifth represents five
hands snatching at a Crown, defended by an armed hand and sword from a Cloud,
with this Motto, REDDITE CaeSARI. A sixth figures a Landscape of a pleasant
Country, with houses, corn, etc. invaded by beggarly people, and for Motto,
BARBARUS HAS SEGETES? etc.

On the Parliaments party we find one bearing in his Cornet, the Sun breaking
through a Cloud, with EXURGAT ET DISSIPABUNTUR. Another represents a
Deaths-head, and a Lawrell-Crown, with MORS VEL VICTORIA. A third figures an
armed man, presenting a sword to a Bishops breast, with VISNE EPISCOPARE? the
Bishop answering, NOLO, NOLO, NOLO. A fourth says only (without any figure)
TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT. A fifth represents the Sun, dissipating a cloudy
storm, with POST NUBILA PHOEBUS. A sixth, figures an armed man, hewing off the
corners of an University Cap with his sword, and this Motto, MUTO QUADRATA
ROTUNDIS, andC.

Now though these Devises for the most part argue wit in the Composers, yet
many of them are either imperfect or defective, which may be attributed to the
want of the prescribed rules of this Art, which this Treatise does afford you,
together with a Synopsis or short view of Hieroglyphics, Emblemes, Reverses of
Medalls, and all other inventions of wit, which any vvayes relate thereunto.
I might also show you here how many several ways Devises are useful
(especially for Seals, being drawn from some essential part of the bearers
Arms) but that I hold it not fit to forestall the Reader in a Preface. I am
only to beg pardon for my less polisht style,(which I shall the rather hope to
obtain, since things of this nature require a plain delivery, rather the^
elegancy or affected phrase) not doubting but that the discovery of this Art
will yield so great contentment to you, whose wits are elevate as far above
the vulgar, as are your ranks and qualities that in some Academicall Session,
you will decree the Author to be your President, the Art your Exercise.

Ex Aedib. Interioris Templi 27, Mart. 1646. T. B.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
RUscelli (an Italian Author) says, that it belongs only to the most
excellent wits and best refined Judgments to undertake the making of Devises,
and that it is a quality which has been sought and desired by many, but very
few have been able to put it in execution. Paulus Jovius (one of the choicest
wits of his time, and the first that enriched us with this Art) confesses
ingenuously, that of himself he could never make any one whereof he could be
entirely satisfied. Johannes Andreas Palazzi inferrs from thence, that if it be
a difficult matter to frame a Devise, completed with all its properties, That
a Fortiori it is a hard thing to prescribe precepts, and score out the Way to
attain to that perfection. As for my self I confess freely, that being moved
unto and instructed by my late Uncle Robert Estienne in making Devises, eight
and twenty years ago, I made a greater quantity then and found it a less
labor, then now, that I know the excellency and subtility of the Art; wherein
verily I have taken so great delight, that the exercise of Arms, could never
divert me from so noble an employment, which has always been to me a
well-pleasing recreation amidst the fatigues of war. And as I endeavored (as
near as possible) to attain to the perfection of this Art, I applied my self
(with equal care) to read the Greek, Latin, Italian, and French Authors, who
have treated of Hieroglyphics, Symboles, Emblemes, Aenigmaes, Armories,
Cimiers, Blazons, Reverses of Medalls, Devises, and such like inventions of
Wit, which have some relation to each other, I distinguished them the one from
the other, for my own particular use; and collected thence all that seemed most
notable unto me. At length being solicited by my friends (who had a great
opinion of my ability for these Essaies,) I have adventured to publish this
little Tractate, devoid of all graces and embellishments, contenting my self
only to discover to others the light which I could receive from famous
Authors; To the end that those who have less experience herein then my self,
may reap some profit thence. And that I may excite some better Genius
(wherewith this age is much more em iched then the precedent) to improve my
design and supply my defects; From such I hope happily to gain some favor
(though otherwise my labors succeed not, according to my aim) since I am the
first that has treated of this subject in our mother tongue. In a word,
there is no beginning, but is difficult, nor is there any Pesant (though never
so simple) that merits not some kind of recompense; in having been a guide and
showed the way to a great number of Captains, who following it, have atcheived
their noble designs.

I am then resolved to entreat of Hieroglyphics, Symboles, and reverses of
Medalls, of the Ancients (and of those but summarily, because many have already
beaten the same Tract) since most Writers draw the origin of them from our
Devises; Nor will I lose the opportunity to say something of Aenigma's,
Emblemes, Gryphes, and Parables, As also of Arms, Cimiers, Blazons, Ciphers,
and Rebus, which the un-knowing confound with Devises, according to the
necessity of the discourse, which shall oblige us to unfold their differences.
We shall observe the definition and Etimologie of Devises, their origin and
antiquity, their utility and final end. We shall (to render them perfect)
recite the rules of their bodies, which some call figures, and of their Mottoes
which are termed Souls and words, with the relation they have each to other,
the places from whence they ought to be drawn, and generally all that is to be
observed in bringing a Devise to perfection; yet Without undertaking to
establish such inviolable Rules, either by my own particular opinion, or in
the name of the Italians, but that I will submit my Judgment to the more
learned in this Art. Nor will it be held reasonable that we altogether subject
our selves to the Italian Laws in this occurrence of so small concernment,
since in all things else they are accustomed to receive Law from our Arms.

Henry Estienne St des Fossez.
A PARIS, Acheve d'imprimer pour la premiere fois le 10. Mars, 1645.
To my Noble Friend, Mr THOMAS BLOUNT, upon his Translation.
HOw could I style, or think my self a Friend
To thee or Learning, should I not commend
This curious Piece of thine? So full of wit
As not to praise it, shows a want of it.
Well may I term it thine, so many things
Added by thee, with rare Embeleshings.
The subject lauds it self: the heavenly sphere
The Elements, and works of Nature bear
The matter of this Art; from whence to draw
The life-conferring form thou giv'st the Law.
What Ensign, Arms, or Action that aspires,
But, to complete it, an Imprese requires?
What generous Soul will in a noble way
His Mistress Court, and not his wit display
In some Devise? Let those who have but soul
Enough to eat and drink this work control:
Wits will applaud it, and the most refined
Dislcose most Entertainments for the Mind.
J. W. Ar.

The Names of the Greek, Latin, Italian, and French Authors cited in this
Treatise.
Aulus Gellius. Alexander. Alciat. Atheneus. Aristotle. Alexandro Farra.
Antipater. Arvigio. Academico Renovato. Bible. Budaeus. Bargagli. Bartholomy
Taegio. Caussinus. Cicero. Clearehus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Charles Estiennies
history. of Lorraine. Diomedes. Donatus. Demetrius Phalerius. Du Belly.
Aeschylus. Eusebius Epictetus. Fabius. Frastaglato Intr^nate. Gabriel Simeoni.
Hannibal Caro. Herodotus. Hipparchus. Horace. Johannes Bodinus. Jacques Torelly
Fano. Johannes Andreas Palazzi. Lucan. Ludovico Dominici. Moscopulus. Olaus
Magnus. Origin. Orus Apollo. Ovid. Paulus lovius. Philo the Jew. Pythagoras.
Pierius. Porphirius. Pindarus. Pausanias. Petrarch, Plutarch. P. Critus.
Ruffinus Aquiliensis. Ruscelli. Stacius. Salmazius. Scipione Ammirat^.
Tipotius. Virgil. Valla. Valerius Probus.
THE ART Of making DEVISES: TREATING OF Hieroglyphics, Symboles, Emblemes,
Aenigma's, Sentences, Parables, Reverses of Medalls, Arms, Blazons, Cimiers,
Cyphres and Rebus.
CHAP. I.
Of Hieroglyphics.
THere is no doubt, but that after the Hebrews, the Egyptians were the first
that did most precisely addict themselves to all manner of Sciences; nor did
they profess any one, which they esteemed more commendable, then that of
Hieroglyphics, which held the first rank among their secret Disciplines,
whereof Moses had without doubt a perfect Idea, as the holy Scriptures
testify: From whence we gather, that he was absolutely perfect in all the
learning of the Egyptians.

Philo the Jew confirms this more clearly in the life of Moses which he has
written; where it is observed, that Moses had learned from the Doctors of
Egypt, Arithmetic, Geometry, and Music, as well practick as Theorick,
together with this hidden Phylosophie, expressed by Characters, which they term
Hieroglyphics, that is to say, some marks and figures of living creatures,
which they adored as Gods: Whence we prove the Antiquity of this Science, which
had Moses for her most renowned Disciple.

And Pythagoras (whose Master in this Science was Aenopheus of Heliopolis)
transferred it into Greece, where he enriched it with many Symboles that bear
his name.

Nevertheless it is not probable, that the Egyptians were absolutely the first
Authors of this Learning, since Eusebius makes mention of this Author.
Alexander (in the History of the Jews which he compiled) says, that Abraham
lived some certain time in the City of Heliopolis, with the Egyptian Priests,
to whom he taught Astrology, which he gloried to have received by Tradition
from Enoch. And truly, the Principles of other Sciences could not be infused by
Abraham into the minds of Posterity, without these kinds of Symboles and
Aenigma's, which serve as a Rind or Bark to conserve all the mysteries of our
Ancestors wisdom.

Besides, God framing this world with such varieties of living creatures, set
before the eyes of our first Parents some draughts and resemblances, whence men
might perceive, as through the traverse of a Cloud, the insupportable rays of
his Divine Majesty. Therefore Epict^tus to good purpose has noted, that men
have within their souls (...), some Symboles and marks of his Divinity, which
God imprints in us, by the Species of all those objects which he sets before
our eyes. 'Twas for the same reason that so many objects which presented
themselves to the view of Adam, Enoch, Moses, and the other Patriarchs, were as
so many Characters illuminated by the Divine splendor, by means whereof the
Eternal Wisdom did consigne his name into the heart of man. And I am the
rather of this opinion, because I see, that all those, who (moved by the same
spirit) have treated of the mysteries of our Religion, have shrouded them under
the veiles of Figures and Symboles; we see nothing more frequent in the one and
the other Testament. And truly the Hebrews did so esteem this way of speaking
and writing by Characters, that all their discourses which were subtle and
ingenious, and had in them much grace and acuteness, they called MASCHAL,
which word is properly und^rstood of Parables and Similitudes.

But that which begot credulity that the Egyptians were the first inventors of
this Science, was the great esteem they had of it, and the multitude of
Figures which are ^ngraven by them in all Monuments of Antiquity.

Philo the Jew says, That the Science of the Egyptians is twofold; The one
vulgar, plain and exposed to all the world, to wit, Geometry, Astrology,
Arithmeticke, and Musiqne: The other obstruse and sacred, called
Hieroglyphics, which by the means of some Symboles and Enigma's, did contain
the grave and serious mysteries as well of the faculty of Theology as of
Phisiologie and Policy: And this was only common amongst the most learned
Priests. Therefore Origin calls this Science of Symboles, (...), holy letters.

Moreover, the Egyptians were wont to say, that there was a certain divine
power that presided in the science of Hieroglyphics and illuminated the
understandings of those who studied it, by expelling those shades of darkness
occurring in the Meanders and ambiguities of so great diversity of things, to
conduct them to: perfect and true knowledge of their Characters.

The places whereon they incised these Figures, to conserve their memory, were
their laborious Obelisques, the well-wrought Frontispieces of their Temples,
and the huge bulk of their Pyramides, whereof Lucan makes mention in these
Verses: Nondam flumineos Memphis contexere libros
Noverat, in saxis tantum volueresque feraeque
Sculptaque servabant magicas animalia linguas.
Nor yet knew Memphis (now grand Cairo named)
With fluid Ink to write what they would have famed:
Birds, Beasts of stone, engraven shapes they used,
As signs, and books, of what they deeply mused.


Ammianus Marcellinus makes ample mention of the Figures engraven upon those
Pyramides, and says, that they did not make use of Letters, as we do, but
that one only Letter did sometimes signify a word, and one sole word a
sentence, and did also express their minds by certain Characters; As by the
Be making Honey, they meant a King that ought to observe moderation and
clemency amid the rigor of his Laws: and so of other Examples, which I omit,
to avoid prolixity.

Nor did the Egyptians only make use of these Hieroglyphics, for that Science
did extend to other Nations, even to the Septentrionalls, as Olaus Magnus
witnesses. We have the example of Idanthura, King of the Scythians, in Clemens
Alexandrinus, who threatening War against Darius, instead of Letter, sent him
a Mouse, a Frog, a Bird, a Dart, and a Plough, giving him to understand, that
he would constrain him to deliver up his Empire to him: By the Mouse meaning
the Houses; by the Frog, the Waters; by the Bird, the Air; by the Dart, the
Arms; and by the Plough, the Soil.

Others expound it thus: That if they did not like Birds, or hide themselves
like Mice in the ground, or like Frogs in the water, that they should not avoid
the power of his Arms, denoted by the Dart.

The Symbol, Aenigma, Emblem, Fable and Parable depend upon, and have
affinity with this Science, yet they differ in some respects.

CHAP. II.
Of Symboles.
THis word Symbol has a large extent, according to the number of its
significations: for being derived (...), this word Symbolum must of necessity
have many Interpretations, which the Grammarians as well Greeks as Latins have
noted: For sometimes it signifies that which any one brings for his part by
way of contribution to a Feast, other whiles it is taken for the Feast it
self: sometimes for a Seal for Letters, and sometimes it signifies the
order, watchword, or fieldword, given to Captains and Soldiers, and diverse
other things, which draw their origin from thence. Besides, it imports a kind
of presage or token of some future event; such as desire to know more of it may
consult Moscopulus. But that which is for our purpose above all this, it also
signifies the Arms of a Town, or the Medal of a Prince. And as the Greeks
made use of Symboles for their Cities and Laws, so also for intricate
sentences and mystical matters. Therefore Ruffinus Aquiliensis says, that for
this reason, the Apostles published their Symbol, by which they declared their
belief concerning Religion. Even so the Pythagoreans in a mystical and
abstruse sense, did by Symboles briefly demonstrate that which they would have
to be observed. In a word, the property of Symboles is to be concealed and
enveloped in Labyrinths of obscure sentences, which has been so much observed
by Pythagoras, that thereby we know those which are his.

Moreover, Demetrius Phalerius does note one thing in Symboles worthy
observation, That a great sense ought to be comprised under the gravity and
brevity of Symboles, whereof he gives an example, when we say, that the Cigales
are a kind of thick, broad-headed and mouthlesse flies, which ordinarily sit on
trees, and sing (after their screaking fashion) both day and night; living
only of the dew of heaven, which they draw into them by certain tongue-like
prickles, placed on their breasts
Cigales sing upon the ground, as much as to say, the trees are felled.
Therefore brevity mixed with a certain gravity, comprehending many things under
one and the same signification, is the property of a Symbol.

There are some Symboles which are of the nature of Proverbs, and Pythagoras
himself made use of them, as when he says, Exomni ligno non fit Mercurius,
giving to understand, That all wits are not capable of Learning.

It is also to be noted, that they are of three kinds, Moral, Natural, and
Theological. And that which is proposed to us in these Symboles, by means of
the Corporeal senses, does penetrate our understanding.

The learned Caussinus (from whom I have borrowed the most of that which I have
spoken concerning Hieroglyphics)says in a Book he compiled thereof, That
Symboles (in the signification we treat of) are no other, then the signs of
some intricate thing: or (as Budaeus would have it) they are but similitudes
and resemblances of things natural.

Hereunto I will add, That the Ancients themselves made use of Symboles
instead of Epitaphs, upon the tombs of the dead, without any other
Inscription, as it is to be seen in one of Antipaters Epigrammes of a woman,
on whose Urne were engraven a Bridle, a Head-stall, and a Cock; The Cock
signified Vigilance; the Bridle, that she was the Moderatrix of the house; and
the Headstall, that she was very retentive in words. There is another example
hereof in the learned Salmazius his Exercitations upon Pliny.

CHAP. III.
Of the Aenigma.
AENigma is a Greek word, which signifies an obscure and intricate speech or
sentence, so that in holy Scripture it is often taken for a mystical and
abstruse matter, and Philosophers themselves, with other famous Authors, have
attributed the name of Symbol to Aenigma's. Gellius says, that Aenigma's are
also called Gryphes, from the name of a certain Net, forasmuch as at Banquets
(where Aenigma's are much in request) the understandings of the Feasters are
caught (as it were in nets) by obscure questions. Amongst the Greeks they also
took their denomination from Cups and Goblets, for that they are used amongst
such instruments. But let us leave this Discourse to Grammarians, as also the
difference between Gryphe and Enigma, to come to the definition.

The Aenigma (according to Diomedes and Donatus) is an obscure sentence,
expressed by an occult similitude of things, or it is a speech hard to be
understood in respect of the obscurity of the Allegory: And for this reason
Fabius has written, that the Aenigma was called a very obscure Allegory (...),
which signifies to speak obscurely and ambiguously.

The Gryphe (according to Clearchus) is a sportive question, which exacts an
information of the matter, contained in the sentence proposed, be it for honor
or reprehension, Cicero does not approve the use of it in orations, because
obscurity therein is a great defect: But it may very well be used at merryments
and in Princes Courts, for as much as such questions do what men's wits, and
hold them in suspense, to the great contentment of the hearers. Now or
Aenigma's, some are obscure in words only, some in their sense and meaning, and
others both in the one and other. These are commonly derived from Similitude,
Dissimilitude, Contrariety, Accidents, History, Equivocall terms, and other
figures of Rhetoric, according to the variety of Langueges. Clearchu^ and
Atheneus (whose opinions Aulus Gellius follows) do allow of them in serious
matters, and in other subjects of Philosophic. In times past rewards were
assigned to those that could explicate Aenigma's, when contrariwise, those that
were Non-plus'd by them, were condemned in a certain Fine.

CHAP. IV.
Of Emblemes.
THough an Emblem has some affinity with the Aenigma, it differs
notwithstanding in this, that drawing (as it were) the Curtain from before the
Aenigma, it declares the matter more plainly: For the Emblem is properly a
sweet and moral Symbol, which consists of picture and words, by which some
weighty sentence is declared. See an Example.



Emblemes are reduced unto three principal kinds, viz. of Manners, of Nature,
of History or Fable. The chief aim of the Emblem is, to instruct us, by
subjecting the figure to our view, and the sense to our understanding:
therefore they must be something covert, subtle, pleasant and significative.
So that, if the pictures of it be too common, it ought to have a mystical
sense; if they be something obscure, they must more clearly inform us by the
words, provided they be analogick and correspondent. Thus much for the Aenigma
may suffice, since Alciat, and many other Authors have entreated thereof more
at large.

CHAP. V.
Of Parables and Apologues.
THe Parable is a similitude taken from the form to the form, according to
Aristotle: that is to say, a Comparison in one or many affections of things,
otherwise much unlike. Those Grammarians are mistaken, that affirm, that a
Parable cannot be taken but from things feigned, for it may be drawn from any
History, as well Natural as Moral, and sometimes from Fables, but in such
case Parables are properly called Apologues, such are those of Aesop.

There are two kinds of Parables, the one vulgar, which comprehends the common
and trivial similitudes; the other sacred, which is drawn from a more holy
and mystical doctrine.

I have spoken of all these things in the first place, to the end, that viewing
the definition and natures of them, we be not henceforth troubled to discern
them from Devises, whereof we are about to commence our Discourse.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Etimologie and Definition of Devises.
IN this point, Scarcity restraines me on the one side, and Superfluity
distracts me on the other. I find not any man that shows me the Etimologie of
this word, Devise: And in its definition the Italians have so many different
opinions, that it is a hard matter to discover which of them is the best.

Those that have written of Devises in Latin, as Tipotius, (who has made an
ample collection of them) calls it Hierographie; because (says he) it is a
more sacred signification of the thing, or of the person, which is not only
expressed, but also impressed with Characters and Letters. He calls it sacred,
not only because the invention in it self is sacred, if you attribute it to
the Egyptians; or for that almost every thing was by the Pagans esteemed holy,
and to be honored with Divine Worship; But also, because that after the manner
of mysteries, it conceales more then it discovers.

He observes, that the Characters were painted, carved, or engraven, and the
Letters written, either to form sillables, words, or sentences; Therefore that
Author divides Hierography into Hieroglyphick and Symbol: whereof the first is
taken for the picture, as the other for the inscription.

The Italians call a Devise an Imprese, deriving it from the verb Impre^dere,
which signifies, to undertake; because the ancient Knights did bear upon their
Sheilds a Devise, discovering the design of their enterprise, which is called
in Italian Imprese, and that does also signify a gallant and heroicke action.
Palazzi confounds this word Devise (which he so calls in Italian) with that of
Liuree, but we take it not according to that signification: For Liurees are
Badges, Liveries, or Cognizances, and a Devise is nothing else with us, but the
Imprese of the Italians, and in that sense Gabriel Simeoni takes it. Therefore
I am of opinion, that the Devise, having the same end and scope, ought also to
have the same original; And it is very probable, that this French word is
taken from Architecture: For when a Master Mason, or Architect, undertakes a
building, he lays the Plat-forme and Devise of it, to make the agreement;
insomuch, as from this word Devise (which is the discourse made upon the
Structure of the whole edifice) comes the term of devising a work, or devising
a building; that is to say, to lay the plot or design of it, and from thence,
without doubt, comes this word Devise, which is, as an Image of our
inclinations or affections. Besides, we have a more particular definition of
it, in this French word Deviser; whereof Du Belley makes use, when he says
Deviser quelqu'vn, in stead of describing or displaying peoples manners: And
truly, a man cannot better depaint the humor or passion of any person, then by
making his Devise. It is by it (as Palazzi says) that we represent and
discover humane passions, hopes, fears, doubts, disdain, anger, pleasure,
joy, sadness, care, hatred, friendship, love, desires, and all other motions
of the soul. This I take to be the true Etimologie of the word, which relates
more to the purpose, and has a more proper signification then the Imprese of
the Italians, since they do not only express generous designs by their
Impreses (as Bargagly says) but also all kinds of fancies, and other
affections, which nevertheless the verb Imprendere does not include in the
Italian signification.

As for the definition of a Devise (according to the Tract which Ammirato has
compiled on this subject, and entitled, Il'Rota) the true Devise is that which
bears the picture of some living creature, Plant, Root, Sun, Moon, Stars,
or of any other corp^real subject, with some words, sentence, or proverb, which
serve as it were for its soul. Moreover, this Author adds, that a Devise is no
other thing, then an expression of our mind, or a d^claration of our thoughts,
veyled nevertheless under a knotty conceit of words and figures: so that being
too obscure, and therefore unintelligible, it rather merits the name of an
Aenigma, then that of a Devise: He says further, that as some define Poetry to
be a Philosophy of Philosophers: that is to say, a delightful meditation of the
learned: so we may call a Devise the Philosophy of Cavaliers.

But Bargagli (who is one of the last Authors that has seriously handled this
Art) checks this definition of Ammirato, and proves it insufficient, and not
particular enough for a Devise; for that the Emblem and Reverse of Medals may
be comprised in it: Therefore he defines it thus particularly; saying, That a
Devise is an amassing or connection of figures and words, so strictly united
together, that being considered apart, they cannot explicate themselves
distinctly the one without the other.

But to give you a definition, which may be essential, and more apposite for
the Devise, it is needful to know the substance, true form and propriety of
it: Let us therefore search out these three parts of the Devise in other
Authors.

The secret Academicks of Bresse hold that a Devise is a mystical medl^y of
picture and words, representing in a narrow room to all those, whose fancies
are not altogether blunted with want of knowledge, some secret meaning, in
favor of one or more persons.

Contile is of opinion, that a Devise is a thing compounded of figures and
words, which discover some gallant and heroic design: And (to explain himself)
says, that the term of Composition holds the place of a Genus and Predicament
in this desinition; That that resemblance or relation which discovers the
Authors intention is to be found in the figure, That the words represent a
short discourse in some sort obscure, the sense whereof relates to the
particular quality of the figure, whereto it serves in liew of a soul: And
that the heroic design holds the rank of Difference, being here, as the form
that specifies the true propriety of the Devise.

Bargagli does not altogether opprove of this definition, having observed, that
an essential part of the Devise is therein wanting, which is the Comparison,
and upon the word Similitude (he says) that Author does not sufficiently
explicate himself; besides that, Devises are not always framed for noble and
magnanimous Designs, but indifferently to represent any passion of the mind.

And according to Palazzi, a Devise is a means to express some one of our more
particular conceptions, by the Pourtraict of some thing, which of it self has
some relation to our fancy, and by the use of some words, which are proper to
the subject. This Author unfolds also the parts of this Definition, putting for
the Genus, that a Devise is a means to express some Conceptions, and for the
Difference, he adds, that the conceit of our fancy is expressed by the
Figure, and that this Figure is necessarily accompanied with a concise Motto.
By the term of our fancy, he shows that it is in this, that a Devise differs
from an Emblem, which is put for a general precept, and not for any one
particular person. By the figure of one thing and not of diverse, for that one
only thing suffices to make a perfect Devise, though we may make use of two or
three; so that this number, ought never to be exceeded: nevertheless, we may
say that by those two or three, one only thing is represented. He adds
thereto, this term ( of it self) to the end, that all help of colors (which
we use in Blazons) may be excluded. He adds further, that it has some
relation; that it to say, it is not to be used without reason; to the end, that
Ciphers in particular be rejected, whereof the figures serve to no other end
then to represent the names of the persons for whom they are made. And lastly
he says, that the Figure must be accompanied with a Motto, to show the
difference between a Devise, and other representations, where words are not
requisite, as in Devises, where the Motto is an essential part, giving the
form, and as it were the soul to the body. The Commentator upon Paulus Iovius
says, That a Devise is a proper Badge of any one, taken to serve as an
ornament or declaration of some thing, which he has done, is to do, or is
still in doing But this (according to Bargagli is proper to the Reverse of
Medals, where matters of Fact are represented. But amongst all the definitions.
that of Bargagly is the most exact, where he says, That a Devise is no other
thing, but a particular and rare conceit of wit, which is made by means of a
similitude or comparison, having for that purpose the figure of something
either natural (so it be not humane) or artificial, accompanied of necessity
with acute subtle, and concise words.

The first part of this definition is taken for the Genus: For as much as we
may express those conceptions by other means, by gestures or actions, words,
characters, and letters. Therefore he immediately says, that it is by way of
Comparison, and therein is the principal, and essential difference of the
definition; since he does not allow that to be called a Devise, which has no
similitude or comparison, with the figure of some natural or artificial
thing. These terms give us better to understand the difference of the
definition, in explaining the way of the comparison, which is drawn from the
nature or propriety of the thing figured; from whence, (as from their proper
place) similitudes may be drawn, fit for our purpose. Nevertheless, he does
not allow us to make use of the humane figure therein: But adds further, that
the figure must be accompanied with a concise and subtle Motto; to the end, we
may distinguish a perfect Devise, from that which has no words (and which for
that reason merits not that name;) as also to distinguish it from Emblemes.
Reverses of Medalls, and such like inventions.

This last definition seems to me the most exact and rigorous of all: For to
say the truth, to set forth or defend a perfect Devise, it ought to have all
those conditions, according to the general opinion of the most learned
Authors, And Paulus Iovius (though he has not always been so exact an
ob'server of that Law, which in Devises prohibits the use of any figure of
humane body) is surely as well excusable therein, as those Authors. who to good
purpose, and gracefully have made use of the Images of some false Divinities:
And as for the comparison, I am clear of opinion, that in it consists the
greatest slight and subtilty of this Art; Not but that very handsome Devises
may be composed by other means: but they cannot be perfect in all points,
unless they be formed upon some comparison.

As for the Connection of the words with the body of the D^vise, I am of his
opinion, that there is no invention that merits the title of Devise, if it be
deprived of a Motto.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Excellency and Vtility of Devises.
ONe of the advantages which raises us above all other living Creatures, is the
principle and faculty which enables us to communicate and understand each
others will. Hoc enim uno prestamus vel maxim feris quod colloquimur inter
nos, and quod exprimere dicendo sensa possumus, says Cicero: But amongst all
external ways of expressing our conceptions, be it by word, sentence, or
gesture; there is one which we call Devise, by means whereof the most pregnant
wits discover to their like, all the motions of their soul; their hopes,
fears, doubts, disdaines, affrights, anger, pleasure and joys, anguishes and
sorrows, hatred and love, desires and other heart-possessing passions. And by
how much this way of expression is less usual with the common people, by so
much is it the more excellent: For it is clean another thing to express our
conceptions by a soul and a body, or (if you will) by figures and words, then
to manifest them by way of Discourse. Bargagli says with good reason. That a
Devise is nothing else, but a rare and particular way of expressing ones self;
the most compendious, most noble, most pleasing, and most efficacious of all
other that humane wit can invent. It is indeed most compendious, since by two
or three words it surpasses that which is contained in the greatest Volumes.
And as a small beam of the Sun is able to illuminate and replenish a Cavern
(be it never so vast) with the rays of its splendour: So a Devise enlightens
our whole understanding, and by dispelling the darkness of Error, fills it
with a true Piety, and solid Virtue. It is in these Devises as in a Mirror,
where without large Tomes of Philosophy and History, we may in a short tract of
time, and with much ease, plainly behold and imprint in our minds, all the
rules both of Moral and Civil life; tending also much to the benefit of
History, by reviving the memory of such men, who have rendered themselves
illustrious in all sorts of conditions, and in the practice of all kinds of
Virtue.

It is the most noble way, since the persons, for whom Devises ought lawfully
to be composed, ought to be of a very eminent quality, or of an extraordinary
virtue; such as all Sovereigns or Ministers of State, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Generals of Armies, Persons of Honor, and the most renowned
Professors of Arts and Sciences. And to say truth, Princes and their chief
Ministers are the persons that do most earnestly desire them, as if those
noble minded Souls (created by God to command and rule) had received from him
a particular inclination to whatsoever is Divine, or August, as well on earth,
as in the minds of men. There are also some Princes, that have addicted
themselves to the invention of Devises; of which there is no small number
amongst the Italians. And with the French, we find the great King Francis, who
(besides the glorious Title of Conqueror) deserved that of Learnings
Restaurator; and to whom the Family of the Estiennes has such particular
obligations: I mean Francis the first, who daigned himself to become the
Author of his own Devise, where he caused a Salamander to be put into a fire
with this Italian Motto, NUTRISCO ET EXTINGO, i. e. I am nourished by it, and
perish by it, As Paulus Jovius does assure us.

Moreover, the invention is pleasing and efficacious, since to the contentment
of the sight, it adds a ravishing of the mind, and that to the satisfaction
both of the one and the other; it brings also some profit and utility, which is
the perfection of a work: wherefore it surpasses not only all other Arts, but
also Painting, since this only represents the body and exquisite features of
the face, when as a Devise exposes the rare conceits, and gallant resolutions
of its Author, far more perspicuously and with more certainty, then Physiognomy
can, by the proportions and lineaments of the face. It also much excels
Poetry, in that it joyneth profit with pleasure; for as much as the most part
of Poetical inventions tend only to administer delight, when as none merit
the Title of true and perfect Devises, unless they beget content with their
gentillesse, and yield profit by their Doctrine. For they not only express
our best fancies, but also render them in a more delightful and vigorous
manner, then that which is used either in speaking or writing. By the conceits
of the Devise, you declare the humor or inclination of him that be^res it,
during the whole course of his life, and in respect the invention of the Devise
is grounded upon some good design, the bearer is obliged, ever to appear to all
the world, such, as he has declared himself by it; as if it were an
obligation signed with his hand, and sealed with his seal, which should
constrain him never to depart from the exercise of Virtue, or as if it were a
continual renewing of the Protestation he has made, as well by the Figure, as
by the Motto of his D^vise, not to commit any unwo^thinesse, nor any thing
contrary to that conception of mind.

The efficacy of a Devise spreads it self yet further externally, serving as
an example to others; insomuch, as by its quaint conceptions and similitudes,
the Beholders are excited and enslamed to the search of Virtue, and to propose
to themselves some such gallant designs. It is not only useful to those that
are near us, but also to those that are further off; yea to those that shall
come after us, by leaving them a perpetual remembrance of the excellency of
wit, and comendable qualities of him that did compose or bear it: Besides, it
is a means, much more proper then either prose or verse, to make his friends or
confidents understand his secret intention: a Lover may use it, as the
Spokesman of his affection to his Mistres^e; a Master to his Servitor; a Prince
to his Officers, or Subjects: for the length of Poems, and prolixity of great
Discourses in books, often foil the Readers, when as the whole meaning of a
Devise is no sooner looked upon, but conceived by the intelligent Reader.
Moreover, a Devise presents it self to the eyes of all the world, in being
placed upon Frontice-pieces of houses, in Galleries, upon Arms, and a thousand
other places, whence it becomes a delightful object to the sight, even whether
we will or no, and by that means we are in a manner obliged to learn the
Conception of him that bears the Devise.

It Is true, this Art is one of the most difficult, that any wit that is acute,
and rich in invention can practice (according to the judgment of Paulus Jovius)
and does only appear facile to those that never did exercise it; or though
they have made some Essays of it, I do assure my self, their Devises were not
legitimate, nor their Rules observed: For Devises are not like those Vessels of
Earth, which are made as soon as the Potter has cast them in the Mould. Read
Hannibal Caro upon this subject, who writes his opinion to the Duchess of
Vrbain in these very terms. Devises are not things which are met with in books,
or which are made according to the sudden fancy of an Author; they often
require long meditation, and it seldom happens that they are created by a
Caprichio, or an extravagant sally of wit; it is true, such are sometimes better
then those, that have made us pumpe a longer time; but it belongs only to the
expert Professors of that Art, to be thus happy in the production of Devises.

My design in proposing all these difficulties has not been to withdraw good
wits from these neat Essays; but only to show that this Art has this common
property with the best and most excellent things of this world, that it is
difficult, and not acquired but by a long study.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Origin and Antiquity of Devises.
THose (whose scrutiny into the Origin of Devises soars highest) do derive it
from God himself, and affirm that he is the first Author of them, since he
planted the Tree of Life, or rather the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil in
the terrestrial Paradise, explaining himself by these words, NE COMEDAS.
Besides, in the old Testament in building the Tabernacle and the Ark, he
appointed the Figures which he would have to be engraven, with his own mouth,
as the Cherubins of Gold, Bells, Candlesticks, the Table and Altar of Cedar
(which is subject to no corruption) the Brass Grates about the Altar, the
Pomegranets upon the Borders of the High Priests Vestment, to signify Concord
and Union, and several sorts of Vessels, Instruments, precious Stones, Figures,
Colors, Vestments, and other things. In the New Testament, the Paschall Lamb
with this Motto^, ECCE QUI TOLLIT PECCATA MUNDI: The Lion, Ox, Eagle, and Man,
to signify the four Evangelists. It is there also where we see the Holy Ghost
denoted by the Dove, and our Savior Jesus Christ by the Pelican, who has
shed his precious blood for his young ones: we may also see him represented
there by the Sun, the Rock and the Lilly.

If the sourse of Devises have not so noble and ancient an Origin it must be
at least derived from the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, who by the forms
and figures of diverse Animals, several Instruments, Flowers, Herbs, Trees,
and such like things accoupled and composed together in stead of letters did
deliver their minds and conceptions. As when they would signify a vigilant
man, they would figure the head of a Lion; because (according to the
Naturalists) that Beast sleeps with his eyes open: When they would express an
acknowledgment of some good turn, they painted a Stork, and so of others;
whereof many examples are to be seen in Orus Apollo (curiously translated and
commented on by Causinus) Pierius, Porphirius, in the Fourth Book of Abstinence
from Meat, and elsewhere. And that which Poets faign of Proteus to have
transformed himself sometimes into a Lion; sometimes into a Bull; sometimes
into a Serpent, fire, water, and into a thousand other shapes, proceeded
without doubt from this, that he was learned in the Science of the
Hieroglyphics: This King (the most ancient of the Egyptians) did bear upon
his head sometimes the head of a Lion; sometimes of an Ox, or of some other
living Creature, to signify the conception of his mind, and the designs which
he had in hand.

Against this opinion of Andreas Palazzi, Bargagli affirms, that Devises have
no more resemblance with the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, then with those
of the holy Scriptures, which express unto us the mysteries of Religion, and
of all things sacred; nor does he allow, their Origin to be derivded from
Reverses of Medals; forasmuch as they did only serve to represent some
memorable thing, happening at that time, and had no design to manifest any
affections, or humane passions; whereas the Devise serves to discover to our
friends or equals the conceits of our minds, which we would not have known
to others.

As for my self, I am of opinion, that as all Arts and Sciences were not
perfected in their Infancy, but were completed by little and little: so these
Hieroglyphics and Symboles were a Species of that, which we call Devise: For
it is certain, that under these veiles lie hid some rare meaning, and that
those who first framed Devises had no other Idea then only that.

But (setting aside the Hieroglyphics) do we not see a great resemblance of
Devises, even from the time of the Theban War (which was 1300. years before
the Incarnation of our Savior) as Aeschylus no^eth, in his Tragedy, entitled,
The seven before Thebes, where (speaking of Capaneus) he says, that in his
Shield he had a naked man painted with a flaming Torch in his hand, and these
words written in Letters of Gold, JE BRUSLERAY LA CITE, I will burn the City.
The same Author (speaking of Eteocles) says, That he bore upon his Buckler or
Shield the picture of an armed man, placing a Ladder against a wall, with these
words, MARS MESME NE ME POURRA REPOUSSER DE LA MURAILLE, i. e. Mars himself
shall not repulse me from the wall. We see in Pindarus, that in the same War,
Amphiaraus bote a Dragon on his Shield. Stacius likewise writes, that Capaneus
and Polynices bore, the one an Hydra, the other a Spynx. The Ancients for the
most part made use of these kind of Devises in their Shields, and Cimiers, or
habiliments for the head, which is plainly seen in Virgil, Aeneid. 8. when he
numbers the people that came in the behalf of Turnus, against the Trojans.
Therefore in this I approve the opinion of Palazzi, and reject that of
Bargagli, though it be true, that all the rules of Devises are not there
observed; for in some, you may see humane figures and bodies without souls or
words: But these Censurers should have lived before those Ancients to have
prescribed them the Law. I am easily persuaded that if those inventions of wit
merit not the name of Devises, that they have at least, a great affinity with.
them, and that they were the Pettern by which ours were contrived. But (I
beseech you) shall we not approve of that which we read in Pausani^s concerning
Agamemnon, who going to the Trojan Wars, bore the head of a Lion carved upon
his Shield (to intimidate the enemy) with these words.

HIC PAVOR EST HOMINUM, MANIBUS GERIT HUNC AGAMEMNON.

This Agamemnon in his hands does bear.
To strike you mortals with a pannick fear.
For we may perceive in it some essential parts of a Devise; the figure taken
from nature, and without humane face, accompanied with words, and a sit
comparison, proposing a gallant design, and a particular conceit of wit. That
also which Caesar fixed on the Gates of his Palace, cannot be altogether
rejected by Bargagli, though he approve it not: 'Twas an Oken Crown, which the
Romans called Civique, to signify, that his affection toward the people was
so tender, that he made more account of the preservation of one Citizens life,
then of the destruction of many Enemies; That was at least intelligible in
those times, when all the world knew that the Civique Crown was given for a
Guerden to him that had saved a Citizen: do we not see that it declares a
conception, and proposes that which he desires to execute? Is not this design
commendable, and does it nor savor of Gallantry?

As touching the Hieroglyphics, and the Symboles of holy Scripture, which
Bargagli affirms to have no resemblance with our Devises; because by them
sacred mysteries and points of Religion were only proposed: will he banish
Piety from the Devise? will he that so noble and so excellent an invention
shall serve to no other end, but to express our a moro^s conceptions, our
hatred, joys, sorrows, friendship, ambition, and other humane passions? How
many Devises of Kings, Princes, and Persons of quality, do we see wholly
replenished with devotion? We have a number of Examples in Tipotius his
collection of Devises, which he has so learnedly and piously expounded. How
many mystical and sacred ones are there in his first Tome, as well of the Holy
Cross, as of the blessed Sacrament?

I confess Medals are somewhat more different, in that their scope was but to
immortalize the memory of Emperors, Consuls, and Republics, setting forth, as
in a Tablet, their most heroic actions and hopes, as being found that the
memory of them would continue longer in brass, silver, and gold, then in
Histories written upon paper; yet there are some of them that resemble our
Devises, as that of Vespatian, where there is a (...) in about an Anchor, as
who should say, PROPERA TARD^ It is true, this wants words, which are an
essential part of a Devise (according to the opinion of Bargagli) but as I
have already said, nothing is perfected at its first birth; besides, some
Italian Authors of no mean esteem, do admit in Devises a figure without words,
and words without a figure. Then searching nearer hand for the Origin of
Devises, let us observe with Paulus Jovius, that the ancient Knights and
Paladins of France (the memory of whom is not altogether fabulous) had each one
a particular Badg, whereby to express his humor or design. Renaldus of
Montauban bore a Lion barred: Ogier the Dane a scaling Ladder: Solomon of
Betaign a Chequer board: Oliver, a Griffin: Astolphus, a Leopard: and Cannes a
Faulcon, and so of others: As also the Knights of the Round Table of Arthur
King of Britain, and many others, whereof examples are to be found in all
ages, as we may read in Palazzi's Treatise of Devises; Nevertheless, I must
not omit the ancient Devise of a Prince sprung from the race of the French
Kings, which is of Charles, brother to Lotharius King of France, the first Duke
of Lorraine, that enjoyed that Dukedom ind pendent, and in respect of that
freedom and immunity, took for Devise an arm armed; issuing out of a cloud,
in the year 983. as Charles Estienne recites in his History of Lorrain.

Furthermore, we may find in Histories, that all Kings have had such like
Devises, ever since the reign of Barbarossa, under whom it was ordained, that
all Sovereigns should distribute marks of noble Families (which we call
Arm^e) to those gallant Spirits, which should render themselves famous, by
their heroic actions in the time of war: But since in this latter age, that
the use of Blazons has been in vogue, the fantastical inventions of Cimiers,
and those diversified pictures wherewith Escotcheons are beautified, are also
introduced, as we may see in many places, especially in ancient Churches. And
Paulus Jovius says, that above all Nations, the French are most curious in
these kinds of Devises, and that at the time of Charles the 8. and Jews the
12, passing into Italy, all the French Captains made use of them to adorn
their Escotcheons, and to enrich their Ensigns, Banners, Guidons, and Cornets,
whereby their Troops and Companies were distinguished. And from hence the
Italians learned the use of Devises, in the composure of which at this day they
appear to be the most ingenious.

CHAP. IX.
Rules for Devises.
WE are now entering into a Sea, little known to th^se of our Nation, where the
Sands are imperceptible, the shelvs level with the water, the current
troublesome, the tide uncertain, and the Coast infrequented: Therefore it is
requisite, we strike a part of our Sails, and steer on with a gentle gale,
till such time as we shall consult our guides, and take advise of the most
expert Pilots, and Master of our Ship, who has much more then we frequented
this Ocean.

Our guide shall be Paulus Jovius, who first enterprized this voyage; Ruscelli,
Palazzi, Contile, Ammirato, and other Italians shall be the Mariners I most
consult in this Navigation: But Bargagli (who last went this passage, and who
has with most diligence sought out the Coasts of this Sea, who made the Card,
most carefully observed all the dangerous passages, and has made a great
return by his imbarqment) shall be acknowledged for the most expert Pilot, and
sure Conductor of our Navigation.

We will therefore propose the tenants of the first, and compare their opinions
with the last, to conclude at length upon all matters, circumstances, and
conditions of Devises.

Paulus Jovius propounds five Conditions requisite in a perfect Devise.

1. First, a just proportion or relation of the Soul to the Body.

2. That it be not so obscure, as to need a Sybill to interpret it; nor yet so
plain, as the common people may comprehend it.

3. That above all things, it have a sweet appearance, which shall succeed, by
inserting therein either Stars, Sun, Moon, Fire, Water, green Trees,
mechanical Instruments, diversified, and fantastical Beasts and Birds:
Howbeit, I am of opinion, that colored figures are not receiveable in the
bodies of Devises.

4. That it must not have any humane figure.

5. And that the Motto (which is the soul of the Devise) be in a strange
language, or other then that which is used in the Country, where the Devise is
made, to the end, that the intention of it be a little removed from common
capacities.

A Devise requires five Conditions more; whereof the first is,

1. That the Motto be concise or brief, but not doubtful; insomuch, that the
soul shall be the more perfect, when it exceeds not the number of two or three
words, unless it be of an Hemisticke or whole verse.

2. It must be observed, that the body and soul (being very complete) do not
produce too ambitious a conceit, least he (for whom it is made) be accused of
vanity and presumption.

3. A Devise ought to relish somewhat of magnanimity, generosity, and subtilty.

4. It must satisfy the eye by the body, and yield content to the mind by the
soul.

5. Those Devises, which have but one only word or one syllable, are held by
this Author very absurd.

CHAP. X.
The opinion of Hieronomy Ruscelli.
RVscelli (contrary to the opinion of Paulus Jovius) says, that the Motto of
the Devise ought not to be called the Soul, though the figure represent the
body, As in all other subjects where there is a body, it does not follow that
there is always a soul, as in Music we may say, the Notes represent the
body, and the words are correspondent to the Soul: But if the Devise must have
a Soul, it would rather be the intention or signification then the words.

He distinguishes Devises into two kinds, the one with, and the other without
words.

Figures were heretofore more commonly joined to Devises then Mottoes; because
the figures were known to every one, but the Mottoes were not so generally
understood.

As for the opinion of those, who affirm, that the Motto ought not to be
called Soul, Ruscelli confirms it; for that, says he, otherwise it were to
admit of Bodies without Souls, there being Devises which have no Motto's, and
are nevertheless approved of. Notwithstanding, he concludes, that it would be
a very difficult thing to abolish the use of these two terms, or that ancient
manner of speaking of Body and Soul upon the subject of Devises; though in
truth the Motto be less then the soul of a Devise, then is the intention or
design of an Author.

According to the judgment of this Author, a Devise (to be true and perfect)
ought to have all the conditions following. It must be invented and composed
with conveniencie, quaintness, security, and to the glory of its Author.
Besides, he adds, that the Figure and the Motto are its necessary parts, the
one to allure the eye, the other to invade the mi^d* This is also Paulus Jovius
his opinion in his Fourth Consideration? But besides these Conditions, and
essential parts, it must have some qualities, which are proper unto it,
cleernesse and brevity, and above all, this last is of necessity requisite as
well in the Body as in the Soul: For the parts of the Body, or the
substantial Figures of the Devise, must not be more then two, nor must the
words exceed the number of three, unless it be to make use of an half verse,
or at the most to accomplish the whole one: However some Authors are not so
scrupulous, as not to admit of a verse and a half for their Motto, but surely
those are not commended, nor do they succeed well: forasmuch, as the great
number of words does confound the Motto with the Figure in such sort that those
Devises which are exposed and born ordinarily at Tournaments or Masks, would
not be distinctly known in this form by the Spectators. We may say the like of
those that are used upon Standards, Ensigns, Cornets, and Coins, in respect
of the little room wherein they are comprised. Therefore when the Motto is
short, the figure does discover it self more easily, and the words are better
retained in the memory; But if at first sight, they be not understood, the
knowledge of them is found out by meditation: And by reflecting the eyes of the
mind upon the Idea, which we there retain, we come at last to penetrate the
meaning of the Author.

For the precise number of one, two, or three figures, it must be understood of
different kinds or Species, and not of individuals: and for a perfect example,
I Will propose to you the Devise of Card: De Medicis, where he has many little
Stars and a Comet, which we nevertheless take but for two figures, because
those Stars without number represent but one only Species; As also in that of
the Duke of Mantua, the two Swans which fight against an Engle, are taken but
for the nature of the Swan. It may happen notwithstanding that in the self-same
Devise, there be four Figures of several Species, so well disposed and with
such relation each to other, that they may seem essential to the subject, and
by consequence equally necessary to the body of the Devise; And so we may
represent a Diamond upon an Anvile, with two hammers, beating upon it in the
midst of the fire, for so much as then the number of all those instruments is
determined by the unity of the action, which is equally common unto them, and
which only intends the breaking of the Diamond.

We are sometimes obliged (as well for ornament as for better expression) to
add to the Figure Landship, Sky, Earth, other Element, or such like thing, yet
without being said to exceed their precise number, As you may see in the
Devise, where there are two Columns, the one of a Cloud, the other of Fire,
with this Motto, ESTE DUCES, Be ye the Conductors, having over all a Heaven
whose Sun rested on the Column of the Cloud, and the Moon upon that of Fire, to
demonstrate more plainly, that two Columns served as a conduct to the people
of Israel, the one in the day time, the other in the night. This license is
permitted to Authors, which abuse it not, but use it with discretion; without
which, there is neither rule, nor Maxim so certain, that can succeed happily.

Against the particular opinion, of Paulus Jovius in his Fifth Consideration,
excellent Devises may be met with, that result from the conjunction of one
Figure with one sole word; so that they sort well together, and do not
signify one and the same thing; As in that known Devise of Festina lent: For
that were, to take two servants, to the end, that one might serve the other,
and not that both should serve the Master: For the Author of a Devise makes
choice of two subjects for his design: to wit, the figures and words, that they
may serve to convey to the eyes, ears, and thence to the mind, the fancy or
conception of him that composed or bears the Devise.

Those figures that require a diversifying with colors, are not to be used,
nor things that are hard to be distinguished; in which rank, we place certain
herbs which resemble one another, as Parsley and Hemlock, and some Birds, as
the Linnet and the Sparrow.

Those figures of Devises are excellent, which are taken from the Arms of some
Family: to which, something is either added, diminished or changed, according
to the subject that is in hand, and in pursuance of the design we have, in
favor of the person that bears that kind of Blazon.

Ruscelli condemns Paulus Iovius of ignorance in matter of Devises (though he
be otherwise a learned Historian) and principally for that he altogether
rejects from Devises, the figure of humane body, though elsewhere he
practiceth the contrary, by approving some of that sort inserted in his own
Treatise, and (amongst others) that of Lewis Sforce, where there is a
Blackamore, who with a Pistol kills a Lady; That which he himself made for a
Lord, his particular friend, where there is an Emperor upon a Triumphant
Chariot with this Motto, SERVUS CURRU PORTATUR EODEM, the Slave is carried by
the same Chariot; and the Devise of the Duke of Florence, with many others, by
which we may well perceive, that that Law, which the Legislator himself makes
no scruple to violate, is inconsiderable. Then is it in vain to pretend to
exclude humane figures by authority, since the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians,
the Medalls, as well of the Romans as Grecians, and finally all the Memorials
of Antiquity, are full of them; There is much less reason to debar the use
of them in Devises: For hwy shall it be lawful to make use of the Figures of
Plants, living creatures, and mechanical instruments, or other things wrought
by the hand of man, and shall yet be prohibited to use the figure of the man
himself, which is nevertheless the most excellent of all? It is true, it
would not be seemly to insert in a Devise, the figure of a man only clad after
the ordinary fashion, because that would be too common, but it would be more
fit to represent him disguised, as they do in Masks and Mommeries. This
Author approves of the figure of women in Devises, whether they be represented
naked or clothed, as also that of Nymphs, Satyrs, Terms, or such like
Divinities, which are not usual in our sight, and whereof the representation
may handsomely make up the body ^s of Devises, as we see in some examples, as
well Ancient as Modern.

Devises and Emblemes have this common resemblance with each other, that they
may be indifferently used with or without words; And their difference is taken
from this, that the words of the Emblem may demonstrate things universal, and
hold the rank of moral precepts, which may as well serve for all the word, as
for the proper author of the Emblem. This general application of the Motto, is
a great error in a Devise, which ought to be particular, and the words thereof
proper and suitable to the person only, in whose favor the Devise is made.
Nevertheless, this Condition hinders not, but that the Devise which has been
by me already used, may also serve another day to express the same
inclination, design or passion in some other person; yet we must not conclude
by this, that the Devises of Fathers ought to serve his Children, unless they
bear the same Arms, have the same inclinations, or be continued in the same
offices. So States, and some particular Families, retain still for their
Devises, the Colomnes of Hercules, the Golden Fleece, Saint Michael, and other
badges of honor.

The same Author pretends, that it is neither vice nor theft to appropriate to
ones self the Devise of one that is already dead, so that there be something
added or changed, according to the design in (...). Was it not with this
license, that a certain Pedant took (...) Devise which the deceased Robert
Estienne made for the Duke of Suilly, as then Grand Master of the Artillery?
Having therein placed an Eagle, holding* Thunderbolt, and these words, QUO
JUSSA JOVIS, As far as the command of Jupiter. This impudent Plagiary could
not be content to keep the Condition of that License, but without changing a
tittle, he took the boldness to apply it (as an invention of his own) to the
Marquess of Ros^y, son of the said Duke, and in his Fathers life time.

He observes also another difference between Emblemes and Devises, which is,
that in those, we may have many figures, but in these, only three.

CHAP. XI.
Of Mottoes, according to the opinion of the said Ruscelli.
MOttoes require the same qualities, as the Figures, that is to say,
Cleerenesse and Brevity, which must be observed, according to the circumstances
of time and subject, whereupon the Devise is made, as if it be only to be seen
at one time, at a Justing or Mask, then it must be plain and intelligible,
but if the Devise be for a longer continuance, then we must add some ornament,
grace or majesty, to render it less common.

The amorous and moral ones ought not to be so obscure (as Jovius would have
it) since they ought to be understood by the generality, otherwise they would
be fruitless, especially the amorous, unless the author desire, that the
Devise be not apprehended by any person, but his Mistress, and so of others.

I am of opinion with P. Jovius, that the Mottoes of Devises which are for
continuance, ought to speak in a strange language, and the amorous ones and
such as are for Tournaments, Maskes and Comedies, in a vulgar, or at least a
known tongue, since they are but for a short time, and are exposed to the view
of the unlearned.

The plurality of words does no less incumber the apprehension of the Devise,
then the great number of figures. It is a hard thing to express ones self by
one only word, 2 or 3. suffice to render a very exquisite Devise, and the more
it exceeds that number, the less gentile is it, unless it be to use an
Hemistick or whole verse, be it Greek, L^tine or any other strange language,
which is in respect that verses or measured sentences have a certain grace,
harmony and cadence, which cause them to be read with facility, and retci^^ed
with delight.

As for the connection of the figure with the Motto, we must take heed that the
words do not explicate the figure, but rather that the figure lead the reader
to the understanding of the words, and that the Motto, disunited from the
figure, may not have any signification. As in the Devise of the Duke of
Ferrara, (...), so all things. These words considered apart from the figure,
which represents Patience, signify just nothing.

We must also take heed, not to make any mention of the figure in the words, as
if in the body of a Devise there be the representation of a Mountain, in any
ease speak not of Mountain in the Motto.

The best Motto's are those which have no verb expressed, Provided the verb
be such as may easily be understood, without equivocation.

Devises are made to represent our selves or some other Person, dear and
considerable unto us for a Lady we love, for our Prince, or for some such
particular person; those which are made for others are more rare; but I do not
understand it a making for another when I frame a Devise for a person of
quality that requested it of m^, for I do^ then but give him the invention, and
lend him my labor: For a Devise ought not to acknowledge any other Master or
legitimate possesser, but the person in whose favor it is invented.

In Devises which we make for our selves, the author is signified, either by
the figure alone, or by the Motto alone, and further more out of the figure and
Motto both, that is to say, out of the whole Devise. He is represented by the
figure, when he feigneth the figure to speak for him, by saying that which he
would say, if he were in it its place; if there be two figures, the Author is
represented by one alone, or by both, which is done more rarely.

An Author expresses himself q^aintly by the Motto, when he feignes it to
speak, not to the figure, but to himself or to the people, as in this, where
there is the garden of Hesperides, the golden apples, and the dragon dead
before the door, with these words, YO MEJOR LAS GUARDARE, I Will guard them
better: For here he speaks not to the figure, but of the figure to himself, by
the Motto; sometimes he declares himself by speaking to the figure of the
Devise, as in that of the 2 Columns alleged before, ESTE DUCES.

When the Author himself is neither comprehended in the Motto nor in the
figure, we may then suppose, that he is excluded the Devise, and that he hears
another speaking to him, or giving him advise: As in the Devise, where there is
an arrow, which being directly in the middle of the white, cleaves the pin with
this Motto, (...), shoot thus.

There be others, by which we can neither conceive whence not to whom the
Author speaks, whether within or without the Devise; But it seems that the
whole Devise is indifferently addressed either to the people, or to the Author,
or to his Mistress, or some other, as the Temple of Juno Lacinia, whose Motto
is JUNONI LACINIae.

But the most perfect Devises are those, whose bodies and souls are taken as
well for others, as for the Author. As the Chariot of Phaeton with this Motto,
MEDIO TUTISSIMUS IEIS* Thou shall go securely in the middle, that is to say,
neither too high not too low: For it seems, the Author speaks to himself,
with a mind enclining to mediocrity, and by way of advise addresseth himself
to others. Thus we see that this Devise is very excellent in all her
properties, having a very recreative figure, a gentile Motto, an intention,
whereof the morality is very profitable, and an admirable address as well to
the Author as to others.

When the Motto is taken out of some approved or well known Author, it requires
the fewer words, provided the rest be easy to divine at, as in the Devise,
where there is a Tree, whereof one branch being cut off, another buds forth,
with this Motto, UNO AVULSO, one being plucked off: which being taken out of
Virgil, suffices forthe^ clar^tion of the figure, because the rest of the
Verse, NON DEFICIT ALTER, another is not wanting, is easily understood.

See here the most part of Ruscelli's conceptions upon the subject of Devises,
which I collected out of his Book, and have translated with all possible fid
lity.

CHAP. XII.
The opinion of Scipione Ammirato upon Devises.
WHosoever would compose a work, that may have the virtue and efficacy of a
Devise, must do it in such sort, as the body may have a connection with the
soul, that is to say, that the words may relate to the figure.

This Author accords with Ruscelli, that it imports not of what language the
words are, so they be pleasant and acute; nevertheless with Paulus Jovius, he
preferres the Latin Tongue above all others, as being that, which is most
generally known, and common to all Nations of the world: And for my own
particular opinion, I think that those Mottoes are much more exquisite, and
better accepted, which are taken out of some famous Author, as Virgil, Horace,
Catullus, Ovid, Lucan, or others. And it is in that kind of borrowing, wherein
the Devisors dexterity and subtility best appears, when he diverts the sense
of an ancient Author, and applies it properly to his own intention.

For the connection of the Motto with the Figure, he consents with Ruscelli,
that we must take heed that the soul of the Devise do not serve simply to
decipher the body, nor to explicate the Picture only, as if upon the
Representation of the City of Venice, we should write this word VENETIA. It is
best then to consider the Motto of a Devise, as the Major Proposition of a
Syllogism, and the Figure, as the Minor, from the conjunction of which, will
result the Conclusion, which is nothing else, but the meaning of the Author: So
that the Motto ought not to be the Interpreter of the Body, nor that, the
Interpreter of the Soul: only it is requisite, that from the conjunction of the
soul with the body, the Reader may draw the mystical sense, and discover the
intention of the Author, as by Hieroglyphics involved in the two essential
parts of a Devise.

He does not desire we should be so superstitious observers of the Rules, as to
lose the true and natural substance of the thing.

He agrees in opinion with all the other Authors, that as the soul of the
Devise ought to be conceived with choice, stately and significant terms; so
the body ought to have some sweet appearance, and to consist of a figure,
neither too common or abject, nor yet too far fetched or monstrous; Therefore we
are not to admit of any prodigious things nor unknown beasts, lest we make an
Anigma instead of a Devise: the Anigma being for the universality of people,
and not in particular for itself.

For the admiration, which a Devise ought to beget in the mind of the Reader,
does not depend upon extraordinary figures; but rather upon the connection of
the soul with the body, which ought to be seperately intelligible, in so much
as the result or composition of the two things may produce a third, mixed with
the one and the other.

As for the cleernes, which Rescelli requires in a Devise. This Author says,
that, as the Comedy ought to pl^ase both the eyes and ears of the common
people, as well as of the learned: So the Devise ought not to be so much
removed from the knowledge of the vulgar, but that it may give content to all;
Yet must we take heed that we use not things too vile and abj^ct, as a Kettle,
a Drying Pan, a dripping-pan a Chasing-dish, pair of bellows, and such like
instruments.

The conjunction and copulation of the Body with the Soul is very handsome,
when it is made by comparison, either of its like, greater, les^er, or
contrary. And this Comparison is not only made with this Particle (SIC) or
such like, but also by leaving it out, and to be understood with far more
grace. Wherefore Bargagli has reason to banish all particles of speech, which
serve to the reduction of a comparison.

But above all, he commends the encounter of words, alike in termination of
sound, and unlike in signification, as in this Motto, DEFFICIAM AUT EFFICIAM.
EFFERAR AUT REFERAM. There are Devises con^^sting partly in similitude partly
in dissimilitude, as for the (...) Asbestos is a kind of stone, which being
once set on fire cannot be extinguished.
Asbestos, PAR IGNIS, ACCENSIO DISPAR, there is like fire, but different
burning.

They are also made by contraries, and that is, when the Motto says the
contrary to what is seen in the ^igure, as for a Temple of Diana burnt, NOS
ALIAM EX ALLIS, We seek another fame elsewhere. I not only call that contrary,
which is directly opposite to the nature of any subject, as sweet to bitter,
but also every thing that is different, though it be not contrary, as in the
precedent example.

Some may be invented, by alluding to the proper names of persons, for whom
they are made, but certainly such are hard to be met with, in so much, that for
the most part, a Rebus or some idle fancy is made instead of a good Devise,
which the Author thought to have fallen upon: you may see many such examples in
Paulus Jovius.

When we put some figure in the body of a Devise, which of it self is not
sufficiently significative, we may add the name, as upon the Frontispiece of
the Temple of Juno Lacinia, we may put this Motto, JUNONI LACINIae, upon that
of mount Sion this other, MONS SION: so likewise upon the Temple of Honor, and
others. But if these Mottoes (which are not of the body of the Devise) do not
please, we may distinguish the Temples (which are the hardest figures to know)
by the image of that god o^ goddess to whom they are dedicated: And if we
fear to overcharge or perplex the body of the Devise with the portraicts of
Deities, we may decipher them, by the characters which are attributed, or by
such creatures as were anciently sacrificed unto them. Thus we know the Temple
of Janus by the keys, that of Jupiter by an Eagle, and that of Saturn by a
Sithe.

And this is the only means, that I approve for the distinction of Temples;
As for the inscription of the proper name, this usage was not allowable, but in
those times when painting was yet so gross, that the figures of Animals needed
the name of the kind to be known by, as is yet to be seen upon some old
Tapestries and Pictures.

When we use a Motto without a Figure, we ought not to call it the soul of a
Devise, but rather a facetious conceit, a witty saying, a Proverb, a Sentence;
as those pretty conceits, dictions or sentences, which Hipparchus, the seven
Wise men of Greece, and many other Moral Philosophers have delivered. In like
manner may we make a Picture without a Motto, as a Venus with shackles at her
feet, a Jupiter with three eyes, a Janus with two faces, and such like
Caprichio's, however signifying something; in which case we do not say we have
made a body without a soul, but rather a picture, a fancy, or such like thing.

Of necessity the Devise must have one part clear, and the other obscure, so
that it be without contradiction: For as in Poetry, especially Comicall, The
French Comedies are all in Verse.
which is intended for all sorts of people, the greater part of the Auditors
do easily judge it to be Verse, and not Prose; They know very well the sound
and cadence of Rythmes, and the sense of some parts of the Poem, which
pleases them most: But as for the conceited imaginations of the Poet, the
high-towring conceptions of his fancy, the descr^ption of passions, the force
of reasoning, the choice of terms, and the subtility of elocution: these are
not discovered, but only to the eyes and ears of the more learned O ators,
and Poets acquainted with that kind of Dramatick Poem. In like manner the
Author of a Devise is not obliged to frame it so, that it be understood by
every one equally; it shall suffice that the more simple do know the body of
the Devise, and that they clearly discern it to be the figure of a Fish, Bird,
Horse, Tree, Temple, Bridge, or such like thing, either natural or
artificial, for that only is capable of contenting their sight; whilst the
learned feast their understandings with the consideration of the propriety of
the creatures represented, and of the usage of the things artificial, until
they have found out the true subject of the comparison, and discovered the
Authors design, whose invention and subtility they will doubtless commend.

The body of a Devise is borrowed either from Nature or Art, or from Events:
From Nature you may take tame or wild beasts, birds and Fishes: from Art you
may borrow the instruments of all kinds of Arts, Vessels, Obelisques,
Triumphant Arcks, Sepulchers, Mechanical tools, and all that depends on the
hand of man. The bodies which are taken from Art are not (in this Authors
opinion) so beautiful, nor always and in every part so intelligible, as those
which are borrowed from Nature, who (to say truth) is Mother and Mistress of
all things, besides her jurisdiction comprehends all sorts of subjects, and
yields us a larger field of inventions. As for events, they are divided into
fabulous and historical: from the fable we derive all the fictions of Poets,
the Pegasus, Argus, Tantalus, the Rivers of Hell, Bellerophon, the garden of
Hesperides, and other imaginations of fabulous antiquity: And from History we
borrow the figures which depend upon the ordinance of institution of man, as
the Temple of Honor, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, the Temple of Faith, the
head of a slave with his hat on, King Hierous dog, who threw himself into the
fire after the death of his Master, and such like figures. Ludovico Dominichi
consents in opinion with Paulus Jovius in every thing.

See her the precepts which I have learnt from these worthy Seamen; disdain
not to fear also the Arguments of our Pilot, and by the way examine the reasons
of some other Authors, as of Palazzi, Frastaglato Intronato, Alexandro Farra,
Aruigio, and others, to the end that you may the more freely resolve to follow
the Rules, which are most necessary to the perfection of the Art of Devises.

CHAP. XIII.
The opinion of Bargagli.
A Devise ought to be almost like Poesy, or rather as a thing nobly vulgar, in
such sort that it may be understood without difficulty and with delight, not
only by the learned, but also by all those, who (besides a good common
understanding) have moreover the knowledge as well of things natural as
artificial, and of the languages which we use in the Motto; It imports not
much if Idiots or gross Ignoramusses do not at all conceive them, since such
dainties are not intended for vulgar appetites.

Nevertheless Devises ought not to be taken out of those Arts or liberal
Science, whereof the entire knowledge is reserved to the Professors or Artizans
themselves, unless we be obliged for complacence, to frame a Devise in the
behalf of one that has a particular knowledge of the Art of Science, from
whence the Devise should be taken.

Moreover, the learned Bargagli is of opinion, that the Comparison or
similitude is so necessary to a Devise, that the mind cannot joy or take
delight therein, if the Similitudes be wanting.

Ruscelli in his 6. Article also admits the Comparison as a part, wherein
consists the subtilty of a perfect Devise, for questionless no seemly ones can
be invented without comprehending any Comparison; But I intend here to propound
the rules and model of a Devise completed in all points.

And to that end we first banish the humane figure from this requisite
comparison, for as much as we cannot make a proper comparison of a man, with a
man, but it must be taken from things different either in the Genus or the
species. I know it well, that many have made use of the figures of Pagan Gods,
when they have taken the subject of their Devises out of the Fable, and truly
those figures do reasonable well to adorn the body of a Devise; yet it is better
not to use them at all, according to the reasons of Rargagli. He says then
that a man of Judgment, will never ground the conceit of a true and solid
thing upon that which is purely feigned and imaginary; seeing that we pretend
with so much ardour, to establish the conceptions of our brain, and to make
them pass for approved in all men's opinions.

He adds further, that is must be known and expressed as well by figures as by
words, and the figures ought to be taken for a proof of the conception, which
is formed upon the relation or similitude of a certain and true quality, which
they have in themselves; Besides that the object of the Devise is to treat
only of things unfeigned, to clear and prove them; And because the most noble
conceptions, of humane wit are of that nature, we ought to exclude all
fictions, and never to make use of them in Devises. Ruscelli, Contile, Andre
Palazzi, and Alexandro Farra, admit of no humane figure, unless it be
fabulous, monstrous or historical, because otherwise they believe, that a
Devise would resemble the Medall.

Some other Doctors do not think fit that the Devise be deprived of so noble
and excellent a thing, as the figure of a man, in favor whereof they urge many
seeming reasons, which I omit the more willingly, because I do not intent to
persuade others to that which I approve not my self.

Frastaglato Intronato permits in in case of necessity, whereto we may answer,
that things done by necessity, seldom or never succeed well, besides it
happens rarely, that a Devise receives any constraint, having a field of so
great extent, as all those things which Art and Nature do afford.

It Is true, Aristotle proves, that we may take comparisons from the humane body,
but he does not affirm them to be equally good with those which are borrowed
elsewhere. The very Poets take no Comparisons from the same Species, so long as
fancy affords them others of a different. So the Author that frames a Devise,
ought to ground it upon the most noble and sure Basis of Comparison, that can
be taken from a different Species.

The Author which compiled a discourse at Rome upon the Devise of the
Academicks, called Renovati, is yet more rigorous, in not admitting of any part
of humane body, nor hands, nor arms, nor heart, but surely that is too great a
scruple: For what grace can a hammer striking upon an Anvile have, unless a
hand be bestowed upon it? And how can we represent the winds (which serve for
bodies of very excellent Devises) if we be not permitted to add a head to
them? it were indeed to incur a great inconvenience, wherein a certain Pedant
vaunting a skill in that Mystery, as being professor of the 2 best languages in
the world, and reputed to have so prodigious a memory, that it consumed all his
judgment, as the Epitaph does witness, which is already prepared for him
before his death. This universal Doctor then, causing a Devise to be drawn by
an excellent Limmer (who understood as little the art of making them, as theend
whereto they tended) discovered unto him his intent to have the body of a Devise
drawn, whereof the Motto was, Quo FLANTE CORUSCANT, and the figure was burning
coals upon a Chafing Dish: And because it wanted the blowing of wind, (for the
expression of which he was much troubled) the Painter proposed the adding of a
little face, as it is usual in such cases. Apage, Apage, said this great
devisor, I will have no humane face; the Artificer in a merry and joviall
humor, answered him smilingly, Sir, I know no way more fit to represent your
intention, unless you apply unto it, the other part of the body that has no
face, and yet makes wind; At last he concluded to set a pair of bellows unto
it. Is not that (I pray) a figure of a goodly appearance and proportionate to a
gallant and magnanimous design? nor is it for that these figures have no
relation one with another, nor are derived from the same art of Kitchinry,
(well known to the Universities.) I give you this example, to let you see,
that that man is oft-times deluded that uses too much subtility; And this
passage is the more credible, in regard I had it from the self same Artificer,
who telling me of it, did then complain, that the Doctor had not to that day
paid him for his labor, according to his promise. I had not mentioned this
conceit, if the subject we handle had not engaged me to it. I could rehearse a
prank, no less unjust, then the other ridiculous, but that I have already
insinuated it under the title of Ruscelli's opinions, concerning the condition
that ought to be observed in appropriating to ones self the Devise of another
Author: It is there where I have made mention of the Devise, which my late
Uncle Robert Estienne did invent in honor of the Duke of Rosny, since Duke of
Suilly, grand Master of the Artillery, by whom he had the honor to be
beloved, it was then received with so general applause, that it was judged
worthy to be eternized in Gold and brass, and to say truth, it was stamped
upon all the Ordnance that were cast at that time in the Arcenall, embroydred
upon the Officers Cassocks, and upon the ornaments of the shops of Artillery:
It is not possible therefore that this new Devisor should be ignorant as well
of the name of the first Master, as of the common use of this Devise, however by
dissembling it, he did appropriate to himself the invention of it, and was so
bold, as to give it as an original, wholly and without alteration, to another
Lord that had the same command among the great Officers, of that Crown, and
who in that Kingdom held the place of its rightful poss^ssor.

Motto's are absolutely necessary in a Devise, though some Authors have held
the contrary, for according to their opinion the Devise being a kind of
Metaphor (which is in a manner nothing else but a Comparison) it needs but one
subject changed into another; But these Authors are deceived in this point,
since the figure of an Animal, plant, or such like subject, is of it self
indifferent to the signification of the particular qualities that the thing
represented may have; In so much that it ought to be determined by the Motto,
to some one of its qualities, that is to say, to that, which the Author intends
to attribute to the person, of whom he makes the Devise. From thence it
comes that the greatest confusion or difficulty in understanding some Devises
arises from the bodies being altogether naked an destitute of words, which
should distinguish their different proprieties, whence the conception, fancy
and invention of another may be justly formed.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Principal Causes composing a Devise.
A Devise (as a subject composed of a body and a soul) ought to have his
essential causes: the material is no other, but the figure of the bodies, or
the instruments of those things, which are inserted in the Devise.

The formal cause, which gives it life, is is the resemblance or comparison,
which (to express the Authors meaning) occurres in the natural or artificial
properties of the figure.

The final cause, is the signification or Comparison understood, by means
whereof we express more clearly, with more efficacy and liveliness, a rare
and particular conception of wit. But here we must observe, that these terms
of Singular and rare are due to the definition of Devise, for as much as a
Devise ought not to be made use of for the expression of trivial or vulgar
fancies, the invention being only to declare virtuous thoughts or heroical
designs with grace and subtility; And it is to the end that this kind of
conceptions may be held worthy to spring and grow in generous souls by the
power and efficacy which Devises have to ravish and excite the most noble
spirits, which way soever they comprehend them; and with so much the more ease,
by how much they shall discover the rarity and gentillesse of the Devise in the
conception.

The efficient cause, is the wit or understanding, disposed to know the
relations, similitudes and conformities which meet in the things figured; there
being nothing in this world, but has a conformity, resemblance or relation,
with other, though the subjects be more or less unlike.

It is not needful to produce any other reason for the formal cause of a
Devise: because we do not say that the Motto is the form, nor have we called
it the Soul, as Paulus Jovius and others have done; Seeing that as the proper
and substantial form of a living Creature is the Soul, and not the breath, or
tone of the voice, which he utters in token of his inward meaning, and to
express his affections or passions: So is it very certain that the
resemblance or comparison is the form of a Devise, and by consequence its life
and soul. And the Motto is but as the breath, or tone of the voice, which
declares the nature and propriety of the thing, whence the comparison is taken.
Therefore we may say that the motto (added to these four causes) is the
Isntrumental cause, which is made use of, to discover (by virtue of the words)
the proper quality of the figure, and by discovering it to distinguish the
other qualities, that have their being in it; In so much as the Motto
(considered alone by it self) by no means makes a Devise, as the Commentatour
upon Jovius would have it, who holds that a Devise may be framed of a Motto
without a body, and of a body without a Motto.

The end of a Devise (according to Ammirato, Contile, Aruigio, among the
Academicks of Bresce, Johan, Andre Palazzi, the Boleniam Doctor and Academico
Renovato) is nothing else but to express covertly by means of figures and
words a conception of humane wit. And some of these Authors say that it ought
to be expressed in such sort that it be intelligible to the learned, and hidden
from the illiterate.

To this purpose, I am resolved to make a small digression; for it seems to
me, that all Devises (as to the facility and understanding of them) ought not
to be handled in that manner. Paulus Jovius and some others do distinguish
them into Amorous and Heroic, and will, that under these two kinds, diverse
Species be contained. And truly there is no doubt, but that there are as many
sorts of Devises, as we have passions and inclinations. Therefore it is
needful to distinguish them, and to observe what we have already said, That
only some Devises ought to be known and intelligible to every one, and that
others ought to be more obscure or less common, according to the circumstances
of time, place, and persons for whom they are made, as if they be for
Tournaments, Masks, or such like, I am of Ruscelli's opinion, that the Devise
ought then to be clear and intelligible to all, and that the Motto may be in a
vulgar tongue, provided the words be well chosen, emphatick, or significative
and brief. The like may be said of Amorous Devises, unless the Author would
have his intentions only discovered to his Mistress or particular friends, in
which case the Devise may be made obscure, and he that bears it may reserve the
exposition to himself.

The moral Devises, which are not made for any particular person, but only
for instruction, ought to be so contrived, that every one may receive some
profit by them: Not that I approve the Mottoes of these to be in a vulgar
language, but I could wish them to be taken out of some good well-knowne
Author, and the least obscure that can be met with; for if they be put in a
vulgar tongue, for the foresaid reason of Ruscelli, (viz.) to the end that
every unlettered person may understand them; that would deprive us of another
benefit, which a moral Devise should bring with it, which is, to be understood
by the generality of men, and in that case, strangers (though learned) will not
comprehend it. Therefore it is better some of the unlearned should be deprived
of the understanding of your Devise, (by which also they would not be much
edified) then that all the learned men of foreign parts should be debarred
from the knowledge of it. I know well that an Author may compose Devises of
Love, Morality, or such like subjects, wherewith to adorn the chimney-peeces,
Closets, or Galleries of his house, with intention to have them understood by
his Compatriots; but this reason hinders not, the Mottoes being in an
universal language, because strangers (that shall visit you out of a curiosity
to see rarities) will take as much pleasure in contemplating the acuteness of
your wit, as in beholding the magnificence of your buildings, and your
countrymen will receive the same contentment, and no less profit, when they
shall be entertained by you with the exposition of the words.

We may say as much of those Devises which are made for Cornets, Ensigns,
Standards and Guidons, in regard we do not willingly bear arms at home, bat
rather make them known in foreign parts, where we ought to be very free in
making our courage appear, and to denounce some kind of terror by the gallant
designs of our Devises. And for that which concerns the Devises of Kings and
all sovereign Princes, it is of absolute necessity, that the Motto's (if
intended for seemly and profitable) be either in Latin or Greek, to the end
that the enterprises or heroical designs of those Princes (whose virtues are
very exemplar to all people) may be understood by the generality, by making use
of those ancient languages, which cannot receive any such alteration, as the
vulgar ones do, which (whilst the Academicks strive to reform) the common
people do daily corrupt, by the confusion of strange Idiomes. And we may with
so much the less difficulty, use these two Mistress tongues, by how much it
is most certain, that the body of a Devise, taken either from nature or art,
has the same proprieties and use in all Countries. I am also of opinion that
we ought not to make use of my other language in such Devises as are made in
these days for the Coins or Stamps of Princes and Communities, since they
serve instead of reverses of ancient Medalls, and are stamped in lasting
metal, to serve as tradition and historical memory to posterity.

A perfect Devise (as we have already showed) takes its essence from the
Comparison or Metaphor: these two figures of Rhetoric are only employed in
discourse, to give some light to those things, which of themselves have none:
and if they have any, to render it more perspicuous and delightful. Besides,
they serve to make themselves intelligible, not only to the learned, but to
all indifferently, and even to those, whose understandings are not so
cleere-sighted as others, to conceive the nature and essence of things, and it is
by this means, that those clouds are dissipated

As for the efficient cause of the Devise, I may say, that the knowledge, the
attaining of like subjects, and the conformity or relation which is found
amongst diverse things, may easily be effected, by a Wit that has great lights,
as well of nature, as of study or acquisition of Arts and Sciences, or that is
but meanly exercised in the propriety of many works and effects of nature.

Now the resemblances which meet in things, are either intrinsecall, occult,
natural and essential, or otherwise extrinsecall, manifest, artificial,
known and accidental.

Bargagli (considering the comparison, as an essential part of a Devise) does
not call those that are deprived of it by the name of Devises, but conceits
rather, or figurate sentences, in which rank he places that of Charles the 5.
of the two Pillars, with this Motto, PLUS ULTRA, and that of pens, with these
words, HIS AD AETHERA, as much as to say, that by the means of great Learning,
we acquire an everlasting fame, because he does not perceive any comparison in
these: But this is to be somewhat too rigorous, and by subjecting our selves
wholly to that rule, we lose many excellent conceptions of wit, which might by
some other means be effected. For this reason I grant that Devises made by
Comparison or Metaphor are the richest and most excellent. And accordingly we
shall treat of them at large, yet without rejecting or condemning the others,
when they are acute, gentile and magnanimous, and when they do not trespass
against the other general Rules, approved by all Authors.

As for the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, (which may be made use of in
perfect Devises) we must have a care not to use them as simply as the Egyptians
did, forasmuch as from those significations of things, which are not proper or
natural, we cannot draw any true similitude or comparison; besides, they
discover not any intention or enterprise that they had, but only something
already done, as by the figure of a Hat, they would show, that they had
enfranchised a slave, or some other person, for a reward: Even so by giving of
an Oaken Crown to a Soldier, they signified that he had saved the life of a
Citizen. Moreover, the greatest part of these Hieroglyphics are grounded upon
the ancient Customs and Ceremonies of their Religion, which is now (God be
thanked) altogether abolished by the light of faith, or is at least known at
this time, but to some few persons, whereas a Devise ought to be understood by
many. I admit that subjects taken from Hieroglyphics, and considered according
to their nature, and not according to the institution of men, are proper for
Devises. As if you consider a hat, as it is an instrument invented to keep off
the sun and rain, you consider it purely according to its nature; but if you
take it for a figure of liberty, you suppose then that either God or man have
already imposed this signification upon it. Hence it comes, that to artive
(with our Author) to the perfection of Devises, and to express the conceptions
of our mind, there is nothing so proper, so gentile, so powerful, nor so
spiritual, as those similitudes and relations, which we discover, walking in
the spacious fields of the wonderful secrets of nature, and qualities of
things, as also of the proper effects of our intentions, to find therein the
correspondencie of qualities natural, and usage of things artificial, with
your own thoughts; and herein consists as well all the grace of a Devise, as
the skill of him that makes it.

CHAP. XV.
Of Reverses of Medalls, and the difference between them and Devises.
IN the Reverses of Medalls, we may make use of Hieroglyphics, Fables,
Histories, and Customs of the Ancients, because Medalls are only made to
eternize, by the means of the metals of Gold, Silver, brass and copper, the
memory of the heroic Arts of Emperors, Kings, Commonwealths, States, and such
illustruous and praiseworthy persons, as well by their own virtue, as by the
eminency of their quality; Therefore I am of opinion, that some of those
things may be permitted in the Devises of Coins or stampes, which have a great
affinity with Medals, and wherein we ought not to be so scrupulous, as in other
Devises, nor so much subject our selves to the rules of the Italians, who have
not written of the Devises of Stampes or Counters, the use whereof is elsewhere
less known then in France: And it is perhaps for that reason that my deceased
Uncle Robert Estienne(who in his time was much esteemed for the invention of
Devises) was not always so strict an observer of their rules. And yet for the
Reverse of Medalls, in rejecting the Fable and some other inventions of the
Ancients, we may make use of the things themselves, and there is no doubt, but
they would succeed far better.

A Devise differs from a Medall or Reverse, in this, that the Devise is a
declaration of the thoughts by way of Comparison, taken from the propriety of
natural or artificial things; whereas a Reverse is generally, but a memorial
of things which are done and past, evidenced by figures, which simply represent
the fact, though there be some, which discover the quality of the wit; Besides,
the Devise is to demonstrate a rare and particular intent, not yet effected;
But the Reverse is to preserve the memory of some heroic act at heived by him,
whose picture is on the other side: So that the Devise regards only the
future, and the Reverse the time past. And again, a perfect Devise ought not
to admit any divine or humane figure, be it fictitious or fabulous, but in
Reverses both the one and the other may be received according to ancient
custom. Whereof see Examples.

Nor do I think that these rules be altogether necessary in the Devises of
Coins, in respect of the resemblance they have with Medalls, for we see many
wherein the illustrious Acts of Kings are graven, and many others wherein the
figures of false gods are made use of to good purpose; as the Devise which my
deceased Uncle made, after the late King Henry the Great of France, had reduced
the Duke of Savoy to reason: The Duke (who thought he had laid hold of a good
opportunity to quarrel with the said King during the troubles of France,
thereby to possess himself of the Marquisate of Salusses) caused Coins or
money to be stamped, where there was a Centaure trampling a Crown Royal under
his feet, with this word, OPPORTUNE, but soon after, that invincible Monarch
made him repent himself of his enterprise, and derided his foolish
presumption, when he poured his Forces into his Country, and in an instant
(forcing all his Towns) made himself Master of the whole Province, and
constrained the Duke to have recourse to his mercy. After that glorious
victory, to counter-ballance the Devise of the Duke, my Uncle invented this for
the stamps of the King about the year 1601. whereon we might see a Hercules
subduing a Centaure, with this word, OPPORTUNIUS: And truly this kind of
encountering of Devises is handsome, and I believe Bargagli himself would
approve it, for the differences that follow, they, may easily be admitted in
the Devise of Coins, to wit, that Hieroglyphics have no place in Devises, but
in Medalls: that in these the figures ought not to be named, as they are in
others. And that in Devises the words are absolutely necessary, but not in
Medalls.

Bargagli does not admit of any figures of Temples, Triumphant Arcks, or
Amphitheaters, though they are effects of Art. Nevertheless I am of opinion
with Scipione Ammirato, that they are very graceful in Devises, when they are
rightly applied, and so that the Temples be easily known of themselves,
without need of beating their names inscribed.

Contrary to the opinion of Ammirato and Contile, Bargagli would neither have
Devises drawn from History, Events, nor Fable: And Frastaglato concurs with
Contile, so that the application be made by comparison or similitude, and that
the History, Event or Fable be generally known. See Bargagli's Reasons.

As for me (says he) I can neither approve of the Fable, Events, nor History;
I cannot believe that another man's fancy can be perfectly expressed by the
proof of a particular action, which perhaps has never happened above once;
Therefore I hold, that he must draw it from things universal of their own
nature, and from Arts, which are daily renewed, and which continue, even till
they become immortal. Rhetoricians hold, that that proof which is made by
examples, is a very weak argument, as proceeding from particular things;
whereas the Induction (which is but a collection, or heap of many like
particulars) becomes as an universal nature, whereof the power is greater, and
the grace more conspicuous. In matter also of Devises, Historical events hold
the place of an Example, but natural qualities, and the usage of things
artificial, shall hold the place of Induction.

It Is true, this kind of perfect Devises is the most difficult to practice on,
and therefore not a work for every common wit, nor for those, who (to avoid
trouble) make use indifferently of all that comes into their fancy. And for
conclusion of this controversy, I am of opinion (with our Author) that we may
draw very excellent conceptions, as well from Fables as from History; but
those that shall be taken from Nature and Art, shall come nearest to perfection.

CHAP. XVI.
Observations for Devises, taken from nature and Art.
HAving already concluded, that the most proper and fruitful vein of the
world, from whence Devises may be drawn, is from Nature and Art; we must
observe, that there are two dangerous rocks, which (if not avoided) may easily
shipwreck our little vessel.

1. First then, in expressing our thoughts by signs taken from Nature or Art,
we must take heed not to intermixe in the same body of a Devise, Natural works
with Artificial, since they have no conformity at all each with other, nor
that we put in the same body, diverse Natural things accumulated one upon
another, nor diverse Artificial, which have no relation to each other. As for
example, a Dolphin embracing an Anchor, with these words, FESTINA LENT: This
is a Devise, which trespasseth against that first Maxim, bisides other visible
defects that it has, the Motto requiring no figure, it being intelligible
enough of it self, and making a complete sentence, it needed no figure to
express entirely the sense of the Author. Besides, those words are too common,
and have been so familiar in the mouth of Augustus Caesar, that at this day they
deserve not to be made use of in Devises. But the greatest fault that Bargagli
sinds therein, is the conjunction of a Dolphin with an anchor, which have no
relation to each other, for as much as the Anchor (having no other use then to
stay Ships) cannot have any other resemblance with the Dolphin, or any other
fish, except with the Remora, which (they say) is able to stop a Ship. And yet
it is not long since a recent Author made use of it in a Devise almost of a like
design; whether it succeed well, I refer my self to those, who having seen
it, are able to judge of the Copy, by the Original, and of the effects of an
ill pattern.

For example, of the unhandsomenesse of crowding many natural things together,
I will only instance the Devise of a Tortoise which has wings, with this
Motto of that most excellent Poet, Hanniball Caro, AMOR ADDIDIT, Love, has
added them. Is not this to compose a Chymera, and forge to ones self a
fantastical monster, by joining in one body the nature of a bird to that of a
beast? Whence you may gather what absurdity follows the conjunction of
natural with natural things, nor need you doubt but that the repugnancy of
many artificial things are no less insufferable.

2. You must have a care, that (in placing the figures of natural subjects)
you do not destroy their essential properties, or that (for expressing your
conceptions) you do not matte their proper quality, by abusing the use of
them, and that you drag them not as it were by the hair, wresting or
constraining them to come to your design, after the manner of that Author of a
Devise, where there is a Batt that looks steadily upon the Sun, contrary to
her nature, with this Motto, AD INS^ETA ^EROR, i.e. I force my self, to an
unaccustomed thing. Do you not see in this example, that the comparison is
taken from a false quality, which this Author attributes to the Batt, who can
by no means endure the rays of the sun? It Is true, this kind of false
supposition is permitted to Poets, (who have more elbow-roome, and whose
prosession is to feign and metamorphize at pleasure) but not to the Authors of
Devises, who are obliged to be strict observers of the truth.

Here we must also observe, that it is lawful to use the propriety of a
natural subject, be it animal, plant, fruit, or other thing, according to the
general approbation or received opinion of ancient Authors, though the
Modernes have lately discovered it to be false, because the comparison which is
grounded upon a quality, reputed true by the generality, though indeed it be
false, shall be more universally received, and better understood, then if it
were grounded upon a true property, which nevertheless were held false, and
which were altogether unknown to the greater part of the learned. Thus the
holy Fathers did use the comparison of the Phoenix to prove the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. We may also appropriate to this sense, the quality of the Bear,
who (according to the general opinion) brings forth her young ones like a lump
of flesh, without form or distinction of members, until with long licking,
she renders them perfect and polished; though Johannes Bodinus has lately
proved the contrary in his Historical Treatise. But for all that, it is not
lawful to make use of it, according to the known truth, without citing the
Author.

All that we have now said touching figures, borrowed from Nature, ought also
to be understood of those which are taken from Art; And we must take heed never
to alter the proper use of instruments, nor of such like things; As he that for
a Devise caused a yoke to be represented with this word SUAVE. For although
Jesus Christ said, that his yoke was sweet, JUGUM MEUM SUAVE, it does not
follow that the yoke signifies Empire or command, unless it be in a
Parabolicall sense, as that which our Savior then used, and whereof the usage
is much different from a Devise, for that this Comparison is taken, contrary to
the propriety of that instrument, for no beast that has born the yoke did ever
find it sweet, but rather sour, troublesome and ponderous.

As for the manner of drawing Comparisons from Arts, to the end to make an
impression or trial of some conception of our wit, we ought to take the
similitude from subjects, by drawing it, not from the accidents or defects
which are in them, but rather from the essential quality, which puts them
always in use, of by which they receive most commendation: we must also have a
care, if there be sundry figures of Art, that they relate to each other, and
tend to the same end.

We must not only avoid the using of a figure against its own nature, as the
Bat looking steadily upon the Sun, but also the attributing unto the figure
any quality, but what is proper unto it, though by chance it may sometimes so
happen, and seem probable. Nevertheless we may draw comparisons from
qualities, which are accidental to natural subjects, so that they discover
themselves by a like natural, ordinary and known way, as the talking or
prating of a Parrot, who strives to speak in imitation of man, which properly
is but an accident, whereof nevertheless we may make use in Devises, as of a
known and true thing. The like is to be practiced in making use of
instruments, in such sort as always to have regard to their proper use: And
it is against this Maxim that Contile has erred, who inserted a Ship arrived in
a haven between Rocks with this Motto, LABOR ET VIRTUTE, considering the Ship,
not having power to come to the haven of herself, needed some other means to
conduct her thither.

For the cleernesse of the Comparison, as the Mataphors ought no to be taken
from things too much removed, or which are less preceptible, then the subject
which we would have to be made known by them: So the Comparisons ought to be
drawn from things that are clear and intelligible, because the Devise is
only invented to discover and explicate the intention of the Author, or of him
for whom it is made, in the best most efficacious manner that may be.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that those things sometimes used, which have no
correspondence with the conceptions of the mind, as if we had a design to
express the care and affection that a Gallant Captain should have for the
safety and conservation of his Prince a Turtle dove would be figured, because
maturall love obliges that bird never to part from her company. A gentleman
that would testify that he could not live, without being conjoined to a Lady
whom he sued in the way of marriage, made use in his Devise of a Snake, with
this Motto, AUT JUNGI AUT MORI, Eeither to be joined or die, because the nature
of that Serpent is to have every part, so true a friend to each other, that
being cut or divided into several pieces, they easily join and reunite
themselves, so that her skin may but touch the skin that is cut: in which you
perceive well, there is no Coherence, since it is probable the gentleman was
never conjoined to the Lady because he sought her by the way of honor, whereas
the Snake cut in pieces had been joined and united before she was cut.

If we pretend to render a Devise perfect in all parts, decency and civility
must be observed, as well in the figures as in the words; For as the ears of
the virtuous are offended at obscene words, so are their eyes at an immodest
figure. Many Italians are guilty of this crime, whereof I list not to bring
examples, left by condemning incivilities and indecencies in Devises, I become
offensive to your eyes or ears. It shall suffice to take notice, that that
Author did incur a reproach, who caused a Cat to be represented hiding her
ordure, with this word, TEGENDUM, it must be hid. However my meaning is not
that it is necessary to reject or b^nish the instruments of any servile trades,
nor venomous or ugly beasts from Devises, so that the action represented, or
quality employed, be decent in the picture, and in the comparison, which the
Author intends by it. But if the Devise be to express it self in favor of
some renowned person, there must not be any abject instruments inserted, such
as Dripping-pans, Frying-pans, Chafingdishes, and Bellows, which would render
the comparison odious. And (tell me) would it not be a very ridiculous
invention to represent the dignity of a Grand Master of the Artillery by a
Chasing-dish, because the principal and essential effects of that charge
depends on the fire; and that the command of the Prince is like the bellows
that kindles that fire, and puts it in action against the enemies of the State?
By the supposition of this example you may judge how much it imports, the
intention or design of an Author to be demonstrated by bodies or figures,
which be proper and agreeable to the person.

The Arms of Families may very well be converted into Devises, and the Authors
who undertake these kind of Blazons, may give themselves some license, in
respect of the great difficulty there is in lighting upon some quaint conceit
of wit, especially in those, where nothing can be added or diminished; but in
this point we must observe, that whenever a Coat has many pieces alike, as
three Flower-de-luces, three Roses, three Cressants, Stars without number, and
the like; the Motto may be attributed to one only, as to a Flower-de-luce, a
Rose, a Cressant, a Star, because in this case the plural number is not
considered, but in substance, and in the representation of the same natural
quality.

A Devise may also be handsomely framed from two different Coats of Arms, as
of the Husband and his Wife, of two friends, of two Kings, of two States united
and confederate. Will you have an example of it, taken out of our Author
Bargagli? A Husband bearing Vnde in his arms, and his Wife Roses, gave
occasion to join them together in one Blazon, with these words, IRRIGATae
VIVATIORES, i.e. they are more lively when they are watered.

But if we put Mottoes simply upon Arms, which speak or address themselves
to God, to a Prince, or to the world, without having any relation to the
figure, that cannot by any means be called a Devise, only a Cimier.

By the way, let us observe with Bargagli, that his ingenuity must not be
condemned, who from the same matter (whereof others have made use) seeks new
qualities, which he expresses in another manner, and applies to new designs.

As for the bodies of Devises, it is good to be advertised, that there are many
things in nature, which neither draught, sculpture, nor painting it self can
represent, and therefore are of no use for Devises, though we might draw from
thence many pretty fancies; As from dull, and from the gravel which flies
carry under their wings, to the end they may not be carried away by the wind.

We must so order it, that things as well natural as artificial, be
represented in such exact manner, as that they may resemble the natural, as
near as may be, and it is for that reason, that Bargagli approves of the
immediate use of living things, and real instruments, without painting, in the
combats of Tournaments and at Masks, which are but of one days continuance.

The Allegory ought to have no place in the Devise, since this is a metaphor
continued or amplified, and that has neither the force, nor luster of a
metaphor.

Though the quantity or plurality of figures (which is necessary in the
composition of a Dtvise) be no part of its essence, but only an accident, it
is nevertheless expedient to know, that for the perfection of a Devise more
then three figures must not be inserted, unless all of them relate to one and
the same species, and be of the same nature and quality; such is that Devise
where we see an Elephant and a flock of sheep, with this Motto, INFESTUS
INFESTIS, i. e. offensive to the offending: For as much as all the individuals
which make up the flock are only inserted to show the proper nature of the
whole Species, and to express the natural simplicity of that creature. See
here my particular opinion against that of Bargagli, who does not regard the
number of figures, so they have some relation to each other, and serve to the
comparison: He holds also, that that Devise (whereof the body is composed of
three figures, necessary to the comparison) has a better appearance, then that
where there is only one; besides that, it is more difficult to appropriate the
quality of diverse bodies to one only soul, then to animate one sole body by
one Motto.

Bargagli rejects the opinion of those, who would have the body of a Devise not
to be otherwise represented then in black and white, and says, that this
practice is no where admittable, but in Deserts, where we can neither find
colors, nor workman of ability to draw them otherwise; therefore this Author
allows of all sorts of colors in Devises.

As for my part, I should be of his opinion, as to those Devises which are for
Tiltings, Tournaments and M^^ques, for Ensigns and Cornets; but for those that
are to be applied to Coins, or other subjects of metal or stone, which are
cast, molten, coined or carved, colors are utterly to be rejected, otherwise
we must make no Devises, whereof the body can be comprehended or known without
the help of colors, for to say truth, an absolute Prince (who has been long
Master of a Devise) will not only dispose it upon ombroidered Cassaques, upon
Chimney-pieces or Cabinets, but also upon his Coins, Marble-stones, Brass,
and other metals. Moreover, when colors are not requisite, nothing can hinder
the inserting of Devises in all convenient places.

We have already spoken of those ornaments, which we utterly reject in Devises,
unless they be hands, that hold some kind of thing according to custom, or
humane faces, to represent the winds, which would otherwise be very hard to
decipher.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Mottoes.
THe Motto serves for no other thing, but for a kind of Minister, interpreter,
or necessary instrument, to bring in the Comparison and to discover the quality
and propriety of the figure, in so much as the use of it, is in respect of this
Art, what Speech is to the nature of man, to express his thoughts.

Three things are to be considered in the Motto; What it ought simply to be
toward the proper figures of the Devise: What it ought to be in extracting the
quintessence, and demonstrating the natural or artificial proprieties of the
figure: And lastly, what it must be in regard of it self.

According to the opinion of Ruscelli and of many others, whom I find to be
guided by reason in this point, no figure of the body ought to be named in the
Motto; yet sometimes it is lawful to name some part of the body, as in that
Devise where there is a Ship with Sails and oars without any gale of wind,
with this Motto, ARRIPE REMOS, whereof the last term is necessary, to give to
understand, that when the one fails, we may make use of the other, that is to
say, of the oars. We may also name that part of the body, which is hidden in
the figure, and which the Pencill cannot express, as the Spring of a Gun, or
Watch, the Shaft of a Millwheel, the Axis upon which the Sphere of the world
moves, and so of diverse others, which we must use with discretion.

Also we must not make use of those terms, which demonstrate or decipher the
figures, that induce the readers inspection: It is therefore requisite that we
avoid some certain useless words, which derogate much from the grace and
neatness of a Devise, in which number are, HIC, HINC, HOC PACTO, QUI, QUae,
HOC, SIC, etc. especially when they are inserted for the illustration of the
Comparison, since the Reader (if not blinded with ignorance) may behold the
figures, call to mind their actions and discover their application, without the
help of these demonstrative terms.

Though a Devise may be called a Metaphor in some kind, and that this figure of
Phetorick is requisite thereunto, yet is there a difference between speaking by
Metapher and speaking by means of a Devise, because in speaking by a Metaphor
you demonstrate the thing, which you intend to signify, by the words only,
when as in discoursing by Devises, you explicate the matter partly by words and
partly by figures. Whereupon have a care that the expression of the quality of
the figure, which is done by the Motto, retain nothing Metaphorical, but that
it be altogether proper and pure, to the end you do not incur the reproach
of heaping Metaphor upon Metaphor no more in matter of Devise, then in the
composition of verse or Prose.

Now as Metaphorick and transported terms always appear to our understandings
with two significations, whereof the one is the proper and the other the
strange, externe and borrowed, by means of the Similitude, which it has in
common with the first: Even so may we say, that Devises present themselves to
our understandings with two significations; the one is, the natural quality,
or the usage of the thing represented by the figure; and the other is, the
meaning of the Author. Now to come to the apprehension of the Devise, we must
abandon the first signification, and discover the second, by means of the
resemblance, which the quality or usage of the thing figured has with the
conception of the Authors ^ancie. To prove that the Motto ought always to
speak properly, and to be taken in its first signification, we shall only need
to insta^ce the example of him, who caused a ball of Crystal to be
represented with this Motto, INTUS ET IN CUTE, i. e. within and upon the skin,
where this word IN CUTE is altogether Metaphorick, Cristall having neither
skin, nor any thing on the surface answerable to a skin, therefore it had been
more proper to have said, INTUS ET EXTRA, within and without. Nevertheless, we
may with discretion use a Metaphorical word, when by long use is rendeed so
familiar, that we receive it no longer, as transported from one sense to
another, but as proper to the subject we intend. This is that condition which
causes the phrase of Petrark to be approved, when he says, that he has seen
two lights weeping, VIDI LAGRIMAR QUE DUE BE LUMI; For certainly Lights shed no
tears; and it would be without ground, whosoever should attribute to a light
the capacity of weeping, if that word [Lights] were not commonly received to
signify the two eyes of a man, in such like discourse.

We ought to forbear the use of Synonima's, Connotatives, Epithets, and other
Adjuncts, for fear lest the Motto offend against that brevity, which is
requisite thereto; and for the same reason, two Verbs are never to be admitted
to discover the same conception of mind, unless one does not sufficiently
express the use or nature of the thing. Nor must we make use of those kind of
terms which Logicians call Abstracts and absolutes, virtue, vice, envy, mercy,
nature, knowledge, felicity, art, and such like substantives, which ought
rather to be expressed and demonstrated by the nature and usage of those things
which are figured in the body of the Devise, and afford matter for the
comparison.

For expression of the propriety of figures, and the meaning of the Devise, it
much imports, the Motto to be subtle, and that the Reader may comprehend it
with pleasure and perspicuity, endeavoring to out-reach the propriety of the
figure, and to serve into the very meaning of the Author; For he that should
only express the nature or usage of the figure, would not be capable of
touching the fancy of the reader so vigorously, as to leave a pleasant relish
behind it, nor of producing those other admirable effects, which ought to
accompany the understanding of a perfect Devise. Against this particular, that
Devise would much trespass, which for its whole body should only have a
Diamond, and for Motto these 2 words, MACULA CARENS, because this Motto would
only serve to declare simply the prerogative of this precious stone, for the
knowledge whereof the reader needed not any subtility or acuteness of wit.

As for the sense of the Motto, though it has been handled before, yet my
intent is to give you here the opinion of our Author, who haldeth, that the
Motto ought not to be too intelligible, nor yet too obscure, for as much as the
first excess would diminish much of the f^^ce, grace and quaintness of the
Devise, and the latter defect would in no wise discover the design or meaning
of the Author; As in the Devise of the Sun and a Sun-dyall, if there were but
these words, NI ASPICIATUR, the Reader could not conceive, that it is the
quality of the Sun, which leads to the intention of the Author, therefore the
word which is added unto it, NON ASPICITUR, is most proper and necessary
thereunto, because it renders it more intelligible, (v^z.) unless the Sun
reflect on the Dial, the Dial is not regarded.

The words are inserted in the Devise either by Prosopopoeia (which is a certain
manner of speech used by Rhetoritians, very efficacious to move and strike the
mind, by supposing that the words come from the very mouth of the things
figured) or by introducing a third person to utter the words in form of a
Sentence, discovering with acuteness of wit, the quality of the figure, which
composeth the body of the Devise. And as for the use of the Prosopopoeia, you
need not fear, to cause all kind of beasts, all mechanical instruments and
other things as well natural as artificial to speak, thouph they have no
Principle, faculty or organs proper to form words; And it is in respect that
Devises ought in some sort to imitate Poetry which does not only introduce
brute beasts, but also frequently causes inanimate things to speak, for
greater delight, to express the fancy better, and to persuade more powerfully.
But for the introduction of the person who bears the Devise, to speak in the
Motto, Bargagli forbids it, yet some other Writers do approve thereof; And for
my own part, I think that the choice of this introduction depends upon the
conceits and discretion of the Author.

The manner of drawing the conception out of a Devise, has never any vigor or
grace, when the words declare nothing of the quality of the body; And this is
only to be understood of those figures which are either borrowed from nature
or Art: As for those Devises which are drawn from Events, they appertain not
to this Rule.

The comparison derived from the quality of the figure, ought not to be
expressed in the Motto, otherwise it is to prove one obscure thing by another,
no less obcure then that; for as much as the propriety of the figure ought to
serve as a means to make the proof of a good conceit. You will comprehend the
practice of this Rule more easily, by the defects of that Devise, where the
words are, SIC DIVINA LUX MIHI, and for body, the figure of the herb called
Lotos, which has the property of rising out of the water, and of elevating it
self measurably, to the Suns ascent above our Horizon, and of sinking down
with the same proportion as that Planet declines toward, setting. The first
defect that I discover in the Motto of this Devise, is, that it does not in any
fashion explicate the property of the herb, which notwithstanding was
necessary, since it could not be demonstrated by the figure, that this Plant is
subject to follow the motions and exaltation of the Sun, rising and setting.
The 2 error is in this term (SIC) employed to reduce the Comparison, which is
not comprehended, but by the operation of the understanding, and not by means
of the words. Bargagli finds a third de^ect in it, in that the words are
uttered by the Authors own mouth: But for my part I dare not condemn it in
this point, since I have not as yet met with any other Author that has
disapproved it, but on the contrary, many able ones that have thought it fit to
be imitated. After so exact a censure, the Critic was obliged to reform that
example, and to propose unto us the same Devise without fault, substituting in
place of the precedent Motto, these words following, PBR ^E MERGO ET EMERGO, i.
by thee I sink and by thee I swim, where you may see the defects repaired, and
the qualities better expressed.

The Motto's of Devises are more facile in the 1. and 3. person, then in the 2.
But those also that can be taken both in the one and in the other, are far
better, because it seems the 3 person has something more sollid, sent^ntious
and grave, as the first carries with it something of more life and luster, which
discovers the design of the Devise, and strikes the readers understanding more
sprightfully, in that he seems to see and hear the thing it self, which
speaks by Prosopopoeja. But (to judge of this more exactly) the choice of
persons ought to be made rather according to the occurrences, and the quality
and usage of the things figured, then in pursuance of the tenor of ou^ Rules.

Palazzi is of opinion that the verb may be hansomly understood in the Motto's
of Devises, neither is it unseemly when it is expressed, nor likewise when there
are two, which serve for a more clear demonstration; the whole depends upon the
judgment and dexterity of the Author, and the occasion of it ought to be taken
from the quality of the figures, and the propriety or the language used therein.

Amongst all the moods of verbs, which we may use indifferently, as well as the
tenses. The Indicative or demonstrative mood is the most proper for a Devise,
the Imperative is sometimes used to very good purpose: But the Optative,
Subjunctive and Infinitive have neither certainty or constancy enough to
express our conceptions.

The Motto's that are formed by way of interrogation, have ordinarily more
vigor, then those which contain an affirmative proposition.

As for Adverbs, they may have place therein, to the number of two, but the
negatives are most becoming; as in the Devise of the Flame, NUNQUAM DEORSUM,
never downwards. Ruscelli does not approve of the Motto that is simply
negative, as for the full Moon, NON SEMPER EADEM, she is never the same. A
Motto may also be negative and affirmative both together, as JACTOR, NON
MERGOR, I am tossd, but not drowned, speaking of a Gourd, or a bottle made of
the emptied rind thereof, which swimmes on the water.

But setting apart these trivial searches into, and conditions of Motto's, let
us resume the manner of drawing with dexterity, by virtue of the Motto the
propriety and usage of the body of a Devise: Alexandre Farra and Barthelemy
Taegio consent, that if the words do but simple express the nature of the
thing represented in the Devise, they resemble those persons, whose lives being
deprived of the intellectual faculty, remain buried (as it were) in
corporeal senses, yet there ire many Authors that have not taken notice of
that defect in Motto's, no, not P. Jovius himself, as Farra observes, though
other wise, he deserves to be acknowledged for the Master of Devises, since he
was the first that treated of them: For amongst other Devises which he has
made, that of Alviano has this great error, where an Unicorne is seen,
touching the water of a fountain, and about him many venomous beasts, with
this Motto, VENENA PALLO, I dispell venom. And this is that Motto, which has
not the principal condition of a Devise, that is to say, that it should have
something more misterious.

In the third place, we consider the Motto of a Devise simply in it self, and
for that respect the words ought to be very brief, subtle and energeticall: We
are therefore to reject those words which are long, languishing, drayling and
vulgar, to the end, that the Motto received by the ear, may give a smart and
pleasing touch to the understanding of him that hears or sees it.

But as to the brevity of the words, the number cannot easily be prescribed,
because that depends upon the Judgment of the Author, and upon the subject
which he treats of, and intends to unfold, yet we may say that the Motto may
receive 4. or 5. words, and like wise a whole verse, according to the opinion
of Bargagli; But according to Ruscelli, Devises are so much the more removed
from perfection, by how much the Motto exceeds the number of 3 words, unless
the Authority of a great Poet, or the excellency of a rare and happy conceit
give you leave to make use of an Hemistick or whole verse, The number of the
words is then just and precise (according to our Author) when there is nothing
sur-zbounding in the Motto, nor of too much restraint, and when all concurrs to
the understanding of the Devise; yet so, as that we are sometimes permitted to
enlarge it to give a greater grace and quaintness to the discourse; But in a
word, the greatest slight and subtility of this Art consists in the brevity of
the words.

The order or situation of the terms is also considerable, because there are
some that are more suitable in one place, then in another, as well for the
sense, as for the cadence, and the fewer words you employ, the more careful
must you be to choose them pure, noble, acute and graceful: To bring them to
that perfection, it is good to communicate them to your friends, and to make many
reflections both of your eyes and mind thereon, and not to be scrupulous in
altering that Motto, which you have found to be good at other times, when you
meet with a better; This is that reformation which is practiced by the greatest
Poets, Orators, and all the Masters in this Art, who are not Idolaters of
their own conceptions.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of what language the Motto's ought to be.
THe opinion of Authors upon the choice of the language with we ought to make
use of in the Motto's of Devises are very different: for some hold, that the
language most proper for that purpose, is that which is most ancient, others
prefer that which flourishes in the greatest number of Authors, and which has
most authority, and some others attribute that property to the language, which
is most generally understood in all Countries, and is most in use among rare
wits. Contile commends the Spanish tongue above all others for love matters,
the Tuscane for pleasant and conceited Motto's, the German for heroic and
grave ones, the Greeks for fictions, and lastly the Latin for all sorts of
Motto's, especially for the serious and majesticall. But the opinion of
Bargagli (who condemns not the Judgments of others, though they be not
grounded upon my reason or solid authority) is very particular on this subject,
and admitts the use of all those Idiomes; For says he, that concise Motto
which we aim at, is to be taken out of that Language, where we meet with the
best words, the gravest sayings, the noblest proverbes or most proper terms to
declare the quality of the thing represented in the figure; so that the Motto
(in whatsoever language it be expressed) do immediately srike the mind of him
that reads or hears it, provided that the words which we borrow from one
language be defective in another, and that they have more energie and
signification in that language then in any other, which virtue in words may be
found out by the traduction or version of them. Yet I would not have an
unknown language admitted, nor one that is much removed from ordinary use, as
the Persian, Turkish, Muscovian, Polonian and the like, but rather the Latin
which is received through all the world, without adding the version in any
other language, because (according to the opinion of Bargagli) to expres^e one
^ancy by a multitude of words in the same Devise, is insupportable.

But for my part I cannot absolutely reject any of these opinions, only I find
it most proper to follow the mod common, which is that of the Latin, since
that tru^ly is the language which is most known, most pleasant, most
energique, and most authentic, of any other in all Europe* This Elogy which we
give the Latin, ought not to les^en the esteem, which we are to have of the
Greek, which is much more ancient, rich, and significative; And indeed we may
use it freely, when occasion presents it self, and yet more rarely, because it
is not so familiar, nor so generally understood as the Latin is. Besides that
as Bargagli desires the bodies of Devises to be drawn from Nature and Art,
because their qualities and usages are the same every where, and no ways
subject to change: So I could wish that the Motto's should be taken from the
Greek or Latin, in regard they are the Mistresse-tongues, which are best
understood by the learned, and generally of all men, and which can hereafter
receive no more alteration, since they arrived to the comble of their
perfection with the Roman Empire.

I commend much (with our Author) the use of Rhetorical figures in Motto's, as
those words which Counterpoint one another, which fall in a like cadence, which
end in a like termination, and which carry a like tone, though they have a
different signification, and so of others: For all these ornaments of discourse
and ways of speaking, do as much beautify and illustrate Devises, as
Orations, so that on the other side they retain the brevity required, and no
metaphorical term, according to the Rule which we have already prescribed.

Those Mottoes which are drawn from ancient Authors have more grace, more
virtue and authority, then those which we our selves invent; And yet there are
some modern ones, who have made us see, that the vivacity of their wit has
not been incapable of inventing and producing some themselves.

For borrowing from the Ancients, we must have a care that the Motto's be not
so maimed, as to leave an essential part of the subject to be understood or
divined at, as if all the world were obliged to know punctually the whole
Author, from whence the Motto is taken: This defect is noted in that Devise
where there is a Comet in the midst of many stars with this Motto, INTER OMNES.
For the Author of the Devise who had a Mistress called Julia Gonzaga,
pretended that the subtility of the Devise consisted in the sequel of these
words of Ovid, -- MICAT INTER OMN^S JULIUM SYDUS, the Julian star out-shines
the rest, so that if some words of the authority must be omitted, to conserve
brevity in the Motto, 'twould be better to cut them off in the head then in the
tail, that is to say, that the latter words should be rather inserted then the
precedent, here is an example of it. A gentle gale of wind blowing a fire, with
this Motto, GRANDIOR NECAT. Which is the end of one of Ovids verses,

LENIS ALIT FLAMMAS, GRANDIOR AURA NECAT, An easy wind nourishes the fire,
but a greater destroys it.

Now though I commend the dexterity of him that takes his Motto from some
famous Author, yet I cannot approve the impudency of some Modernes who make use
of the same Motto, which another Author of a Devise has invented, because that
is but to propose always one and the same thing, though the body of the Devise
be changed, whereas in borrowing the Motto from an ancient Author, you quite
change the nature of it, by appropriating it to the body of your Devise. We
must not likewise accuse him of theft, that makes use of the same body, which
another has heretofore employed, so that the conception be different, because
an Animal, plant, instrument or other thing which is represented in the body,
may be diverely considered in their qualities and sundry uses, whereof every
one may freely make use, and apply them to his intention.

It is not necessary that the sense be altogether completed in the Motto, for
it ought to give occasion of some kind of study to the Reader. From thence it
comes that in the Devise of the fish, which the Italians call Muscarolo, the
Latins Na^tilum, and the Greeks (...), this Motto, TUTUS PER SUPREMA PERIMA,
i. e. safe, both, at, top, and, bottom, would be more conc^se and subtle, if
the first word Tutus were cut off.

CHAP XIX.
From whence Devises are to be drawn.
AS for the places, from whence a perfect Devise may bedrawn, I am of
Bargagli's opinion, who approves it not to be taken from a like, a greater, a
less, a contrary, a like and unlike together, from a fable, history, events,
Hieroglyphics, and other places recited by Ammirat^, as from the cause to the
effect, from the effect to the cause, from the Genus to the species, and from
the species to the Genus, since in a word Nature or Art do afford subjects ^now
from whence to derive the Comparison, Similitude or Metaphor: Now these three
figures of Rhetoric have but the same end in substance, which is to
demonstrate the correspondence, conformity and resemblance, which is between
two different subjects, as the form of a Devise consists principally in the
finding out in the whole Universe a natural quality, or the usage of some
thing, which may correspond with and relate unto the propriety of our thoughts,
and conceptions of mind.

But if you ask me in particular a proper place, from whence you may frame a
subject of or matter for Devises, I shall refer you to good Authors, who have
written of the nature and propriety of Animals, Plants, Mineralls, precious
stones, of the parts of heaven and earth, of the Liberal Sciences, Mechanical
Arts and other subjects as well natural as artificial. It Is verily the reading
of such Treatises, which will discover to you some virtues or proprieties which
will easily relate to the intention of your Devises. This field is so ample,
and the harvest so great, that of one only subject, be it natural or
artificial, we may form not only one, 2, or 3 fancies, but also an infinite
number of Devises, as may be proved by the quantity which are made upon the
subject of those great Luminaries, the Sun and Moon, and which are many times
drawn simply from their proper parts, sometimes from those which have a
correspondence one with another, and sometimes from the virtues and influences,
which these Planets do diversely diffuse upon all inferior bodies. The like
may be practiced upon the subject of Arts and mechanical instruments.

For the choice of the Mottoes drawn from ancient Authors, we must regard the
words with great prudence, that they may be appropriated to our design, and
that (being added to the body of our Devise) they may form a spiritual and
delightful composition.

But besides the rich matters, which Art and Nature are able everlastingly to
furnish us with, we may yet draw other from the Apologues and fables of Aesope,
from sentences, Proverbes and Maxims of the Sages and moral Philosophers. Yet
observe that my meaning is not, that we should borrow from fables, the subject
of the fable, as the unfeathered Crow of Horace; but that we make use of the
proprieties of things which are met with in many places of fables, so likewise
for matter of sentences, I think it were good we only used those which are
enriched with Comparisons, and it is for this advantage that Proverbes deserve to
be preferred.

I will not speak here of the places where Devises ought to be fixed, for
though Ruscelli has treated amply thereof, that choice depends upon the
custom of every Country, and upon the will of those for whom they are made. It
shall suffice for me to observe, that they serve gentilely for a Scale, and (as
it seems to me) they are much more graceful then a man's proper Arms,
especially when the Devise is formed and grounded upon the subject of Letters
missive or of a Seal, as that of one named Blind in the Academie of the
Intronati, where there is a Dart or Arrow, with this Motto, IRREVOCABILE. It Is
true nevertheless that Devises of Seals are yet much more handsome, when they
are framed from the Arms of those that use them, for which purpose it is not
necessary to convert the whole Coat into Divises, but it suffices to take an
essential part of the Blazon, or that which may be reduced into a Devise.

Devises may also be put upon the Reverse of Princes Coins, and upon Stamps or
Counters, as it is frequently used in France, in which case they are exempted
from some of the rigor of our Rules, and in respect of their affinity with the
Medall, there is no doubt but they may as well notify an Heroic action of a
Prince, as demonstrate a gallant intention to be put in execution.

They are also very seemly on Ladies Pictures, for as that Table represents the
exterior part of the body, or the features of the face: Even so the Devise
represents the inclinations of the person or virtues of the Lady. And as the
instruments proper to every profession, are the places befitting a Devise, as
the Swords, Pistols, and Head-peeces for men of War: So (me thinks) the most
proper place for a Ladies Devise, is her Looking-glass: For it is no less
necessary for a Lady to contemplate her interiours, and examine the motions of
her soul, then to consider her visage, and preserve it immaculate; since by
the mirror she only sees the exterior quality of her face, whereas by the
Devise she discovers the inclination of her mind, and excites her self more
often to the exercise of virtue, or to the execution of some noble design,
whereof the Devise renews the memory, as often as she beholds it. And it seems
this custom may be conformable to the intention of Pythagoras, who ordained
that his Scholars should often behold themselves in a glass, to the end that
considering the beauty of their bodies, they might be equally careful to
imbolish their minds thereby to render them worthy of so fair an abode. Ladies
may also place their Devises on their Coaches, Cabinets, Beds, Hangings,
Cushnets, Carcanets, and on other parts of their ornaments and apparel.

Though we have disapproved all kind of ornaments for the bodies of Devises,
because they may encomber the figure; and though we admit of an hand to hold
something with greater grace, as we have already observed; yet notwithstanding
I approve the inserting for ornament round about the Devise, between the body
and the edge, some Garlands or Coronets, some Chaplets and Bordures; For
example, you may use a wreathe of Myrtle for Amorous, of Laurel for Heroic,
of Cypress for mourning Devises, and so for others; so that within the
branches we leave a certain space for a commodious insertment of the words.

There are some kind of Devises, which can in no wise merit the title of
Perfect; in which number maybe the calumnious, which are forged against the
principal end of a legitimate Devise; those that by a simple Metaphor discover
the conceit of an accident already happened, without demonstrating any virtuous
proposition, or noble design to be put in execution; and those also whereof
the conception is purely of a thing present. We must nevertheless except the
Devises of stampes or Counters, which change every year, either in declaring
the heroic design, which the Prince intends that present year to put in
execution, or rather presenting to men's eyes, that which the same Prince has
already atcheived of more glory the year precedent.

As for Devises of detraction, though they should be formed according to the
tenor of our Rules, they ought to be utterly rejected from the number of the
perfect, since the Author does thereby neither propose a virtuous subject to
imitate, nor any laudable design to execute, besides they are oppugnant to the
Etimologie of the word Devise, which in Italian signifies an enterprise, and in
French, a design, without having respect to the particular term of Devise,
whereof the signification is of a greater extent in the French tongue, and by
consequence affords a greater liberty or license: For deriving it from this
word ( Deviser) which, (according to the example of Sieur du Belley) is taken
to depaint the natural disposition, or describe the conditions of any one, it
might include the calumnious Devises, as well as those which regard the time
present, pad, and future.

Devises may with equal commodity as well relate to the name as to the Arms
of the possessor, so that those which allude to the name be not taken from some
signification too much remote from common sense or ordinary use; as the names
whereof the Etimologie is drawn from the Greeks or H^brewes. And for a
pregnant example take that of a noble Gentleman called FORT-ES-Cu, i.e. Strong
shield, who caused a Spartane Buckler or shield to be represented alluding to
his name with this Motto, (...), an ancient and famous saying of a Lacedemonian
mother to her son, when she delivered him a Shield going to the war, and is
as much as to say, Son, either bring back this shield, or be thou brought
back thy self (dead) upon it. Again, the great Constable Colonna being
received into the Academie of the Humoristi in Rome, used for his Devise an
egg with drops of dew upon it, drawn up by the beams of the Sun, with this
Italian Motto, IL SUPERFLUO, expressing thereby, that he was a superfluous
member of that great and famous Academie of the Humorists, where you may
observe the body of this Devise to allude well by the humor or moisture of the
dew to the name of the Academie.

CHAP. XX.
Which are the best Devises, either those which are taken from Nature, or those
which are drawn from Art.
THough I approve those Devises whch are taken from Art, yet I set a greater
value upon those which are drawn from Nature, because this is as it were the
Mistress of the other: Besides, Nature is subject to no change, continuing
still the same; whereas the instruments and effects of Art depend upon the
fancy of men, and have diverse usages, according to times and new inventions,
there being some which are not known but in some certain Countries and in
particular Towns only. I conclude in a word that all the excellence and
virtue which we find in things artificial receive their origin from Nature,
whereunto the nearer Art approaches, so much the more prefect and excellent are
its operations. Whence it comes that the bounty of nature is known to be
essential and solid: Contrariwise that of Art appears every day inconstant
and accidental to the subject. Bargagli is pleased to produce some reasons to
prove, that in matter of Devises, things artificial are more valuable then
subjects natural. But for my part, I judge the dec^sion of this Problem no
ways requisite to a Treatise of Devises; since all Authors agree, that we
serve our selves indifferently both from Art and nature, and likewise from both
together extreme gentil^ly, though those which are severally composed of the
one and the other are the choicest. Bargagli will have it, that those Devises
which we draw from Art and Nature together are to be ranked in the number of
artificial; because that part of nature, which is in the body of the Devise,
were not able of it self to produce the effect, whereof the Comparison is
made, by means of which we endeavor to discover our meaning; for so much as
things take their denomination either from their end or from their form.

Now for as much as Ciphers have some affinity with Devises, I have (for
distinction sake, and to preserve the Reader from falling into the
inconvenience of making a Cipher or a Rebus instead of a Devise) here
translated what Palazzi has delivered upon this subject.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Ciphers according to Andreas Palazzi.
Ciphers are principally of 2 kinds,(to wit) of Actions and of words.

Ciphers of actions are such as that of Tarquin Superbus, who made no other
Answer to the Ambassador sent on the behalf of his son, but only in his
presence whipped off with a wand the heads of the highest Poppies in his Garden,
giving him to understand, that the chiefest Citizens should be so dealt with.

Those of words: some are simply of words, as those which compose a certain
Iargon, or gibberish understood by none but by themselves: Others are made of
words written: of these some are called Ciphers, in respect of the matter, with
which we write, as with Sal-armoniack, juice of onions, juice of Lemons, and
many other secrets, too long to recount, wherewith Letters are written, some of
which are not legible but by help of the fire, others in water, others in a
looking glass: others are called Ciphers in respect of the matter upon which
they are written, (...) Histicus did who, having caused a Slave to be shaved,
wrote upon the skin of his head, then letting the hair grow till the writing
could be no longer descerned, sent him to Aristagoras, advertising him to shave
the said slave De-novo: And that also which the Spartans made use of, which the
Greeks call Scitala, as Plutarque writes in the life of Lisander. And likewise
the invention of Dumaratus, who wrote upon 2 Tablets and then covered them with
wax, as Herodotus relates in the end of his 7. book: sometimes we call those
things Ciphers, which are shrowed under the obscurity of words or misterious
sense, such are Aenigma's, as this of Sampson, Out of the eater came meat, and
out of the strong issued sweetness. And that of Valla* We have not lost one of
the animals that escaped our hands, and we have lost those we did light upon.
Here is another of Jacques Torelly Fano. Vulcan begot me, Nature brought me
into the world, the Air and Time have been my Nurses, Minerva enstructed me,
my force is great, and proceeds from a small substance, three things furnish me
with body and nourishment. My Children are destruction, ire, ruin, and noise.
By this signifying the Artillery.

Finally, there are others also called Ciphers, in respect of the matter
whereof they are written, of which one kind are with figures and the other
without. Ciphers without figures are those which in these days Ministers of
State, Princes and Kings do make use for writing their secrets and
negociations, according to their occasions, but principally in time of war; And
there are Ciphers made by new and unknown Characters, such as Cicero used,
every Character whereof signified an entire word, as P. Critus and Valerius
Probus do testify, like those used by the Jurisconsults: when instead of
digests they make use of a double ff^the letter L. for Law, this mark (...) for
Paragraph, and so of others.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Sentences and Rebus.
A Sentence is a plain Conception or saying of some particular thing or
person, to express his passion, the state wherein he is, his desire, or some
cert^^ne propositi^, as the Spartan Bueller with these words, A^T CUM HOC, AUT
IN HOC, i.e, I will live with it, or die on it.

Those Devises which are deprived of Comparisons are no other but Sentences or
figu^^^ Conceptions, As this of Penn^s, HIS AD AETHERA, i.e. I shall by them
acquire an immortal renown, or by them I shall raise my self even to the
heavens.

Behold here the difference between figured Sentences and figured Ciphers. The
Author makes no other use of the figures which he proposes, but to express one
or more names: And the figured sentences and conceptions serve to demonstrate
the intention of the Author, by the signification of things inserted in the
figure, and by the words of the Motto, which explain them, as in the before
mentioned examples. Ciphers are but the works of inferior wits, unless some
able man do sometimes make of them for his pleasure. Some have been desirous
to prescribe Rules for them, s^ying, that besides the figure, they should have
some words, which were to be a distinct thing from the figure, and that from
them joined to the quality of the thing, we should draw the (...), ^s in these
examples. First of a false Diamant with th^se words, POUR QUOY M'AS TU
DELAISSE? the meaning th^r of being DY-AMANT FAUX, POUR QUOY M'AS TU DELAISSL^
False lover, why have thou forsaken me? 2. A Lady called (...) her servant, he
in passion expresses himself with this figur^ 66* and these Italian words, PER
CHE M^ FAI MORIRE, which words add^d to the figure 66. SE SANTA SEI, conclude,
SE SANTA SEI, PER CHE MI FAI MORIRE? that is, if thou be holy (as thy name
imports, and the figure 66) why do thou kill me? Thirdly, Mary Queen of
Scotland, Gran^m there to H^^M; j ^^y th t now is, was presented by Francis the
second of (...), (^hen Suitor, but afterward her husband) with a rich Tablet
of gold, in which was her picture exquisitely d^awne, and which (being besides
enriched with many precious stones) had on the one side a fair Amatist, and
under it as fair an Adamant with this Motto, AMAT-ISTA ADAMANTEM, i.e. She
loves her dearely-beloved, alluding also to the names of the stones. For my
part I hold these to be the same things, or but little differing from the Rebus
of Picardy.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Cimiers of Arms.
C^miers derive their name from nothing else, The Motto and Creast of a Coat of
Arms being simply put together without relation to each other, make that which
we (from the French) call a Cimier: But if the Motto relate to the Creast or
figure, and out of both arise a Comparison, then it is properly a Devise.
but from the name of the place they are set, that is to say, upon the Cimier
or summet of the Tymbre or Helmet.

There are some without words, and others accompanied with words. We may see
plenty of examples upon the Arms of the French Lords, Italians, English and
other Nations, but particularly the Germans, whereof few are without them,
wherein they make use of all sorts of Animals, and plants, as also of humane
figures, as of wild men, Sirens and others. Most draw them from some part of
their Arms, which they enrich with a Motto, Devise-like, according to their
Fancies.

APR. 26. 1646. Imprimatur, NA: BRENT.

FINIS.

