ESSAYS UPON SEVERAL SVBIECTS: Not unworthy consideration in these times.

Communicated by LETTERS to private Friends, and at their request to the
Public.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti. --
LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes for Edward Husband, at the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, 1651.

ESSAY I.
THe Disputes concerning Jurisdiction in matters relating to the Church, have
been so various, that they have much shaken the peace of the State; whilst many
making it a great part of their Religion to contest for power, have almost
altogether destroyed the power of Religion. The strife amongst the Disciples of
our Savior [ Who should be the greatest] seems not yet to be ended; and though
we all profess our selves to be servants of that Master, whose kingdom is not
of this world, yet those who in a more peculiar manner bear his cognizance,
think it is not enough for them to reign with him hereafter, unless they may
be admitted to exercise some jurisdiction for him here below; the way to keep
the government upon his shoulder is (as they suppose) to put it into their
hands. Yet since they seem to claim no power herein, but what they pretend to
derive from Christ, who is confessed by all to be the head of the Church, the
truest ground we can take to clear these Disputes, will be to examine the
power which Christ attributes solely to himself over his Church, and that
wherein he uses the Ministry of others, and how far the Magistrate is
concerned therein.

The actions then which Christ exercises solely and immediately over his
Church, refer either to the beginning or end of his Kingly Office. To the
beginning belongs his Legislative power, not only in the more plain
promulgation of the Law, and the freeing of it from corrupt interpretations,
but in the constitution of the Evangelicall Ministry and Sacraments, by the
abolition of the Jewish rites. To the end relates that definitive Jurisdiction,
whereby at the last day he shall condemn the wicked, and absolve the godly,
and so deliver up the Kingdom to his Father. These Christ executes only by
himself. Those actions wherein he uses the Ministry of others, have relation
(as I may so speak) either to the outward, or the inward man; To the inward
man, when by the power of his Spirit accompanying his Word, he illuminates the
understanding, etc. Hence it is, because the work of Ministers and others
herein, is subservient to the actions of God, who is the principal cause, or
rather his work in and by them, the effect which belongs to the chief agent is
sometimes applied to the instrument, and so they are said to save men, to remit
sins, etc. The actions which relate to the outward man, consist in the
defending and protecting of his Church from Enemies and in the right ordering
and ordaining of whatever may make for the better propagation and establishment
hereof.

And here begins the Dispute concerning the Discipline Christ has left for the
government of his Church, and by whom it is to be administered. To omit the
several contests hereabouts, so full of passion and interest, that if Gods
love to his Church had not been greater to preserve it, then the devils malice
is, or can be by these divisions to destroy it, it had been long since torn
in pieces, which yet remains but in a shattered condition. It will not be
impertinent I conceive, after all these stirs, calmly to inquire, Whether
Christ has left such a particular Discipline or form of Government, as his
Church in all ages and places is to observe. I presume the rather to propose
this, because the Scripture seems to speak hereof in general terms only, as,
Let all things be done decently and in order: and that we find some offices, as
that of Widows in the Apostles times, which I know none that plead for now: and
other customs, as saying Amen in Prayer with an audible voice: teaching or
prophesying with the head uncovered, the contrary whereof is practiced by the
Ministers of the French Churches, with other things that might be instanced
in, which seem of Apostolical institution, and yet the practice thereof
continued not long in the Church. Besides, the Reformed Churches differ herein
much amongst themselves. Though the Church of Geneva holds, that Christ has
instituted four Orders for the government of his Church, Pastors, Doctors,
Elders and Deacons, yet they seem as the French Churches to confound the office
of Elder and Deacon, amongst whom, and the Churches of Holland, there is that
difference in Discipline, that those French Churches that are there, have their
Consistories and Synods apart. Whence we may infer, there may be a unity in
Doctrine, where there is not an uniformity in Discipline; though the garment of
Christ be without rent or seam, yet that of the Church may be of diverse
colors. And if we should admit that Christ has left a freedom and latitude
to his Church herein, which we must do, or condemn all the Churches of God
that have been hitherto, since they have in all ages differed herein more or
less. What needs all this ado? Why do not we rather strive to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, then endeavor an impossible
uniformity of what we can never reasonably expect. It will more concern us by a
true faith to assure our selves that we are members of Christ, and consequently
a part of the true Church, then to be entangled any longer in these Questions,
wherein though most make such peremptory divisions, according to the interest
they have espoused, whoever seeks impartially to be resolved, will find little
satisfaction, but possibly conclude, that as to the rites, and most things
relating to the outward government of the Church, God has prescribed no such
certain constitution, as many pretend, but has left them to be ordered
according to the rules of Christian prudence and charity. And this appears to
me most consonant both to truth and reason; for as when God made choice of the
Jews for his peculiar Church, he particularly prescribed the rites and
Government to be observed by them, fitted no doubt to the Genius and nature of
that people, so now, that he has diffused his Church over all nations, and
that his worship, the shadows being took away, consists only in Spirit and
truth; the prescribing of outward forms and discipline seems not so much to be
the intent of the Gospel, as those that are most interessed therein, after they
have made them matters only of their own cognizance, would put into our Creed.
Sure I am, most Christian States have understood it so, as will appear if we
look upon the Histories of the times past, or the constitutions of their
government at present, who have ever looked upon the Church as contained in the
State, and therefore have ordered all Ecclesiastical persons and functions
according to the Civil sanctions. Wherever then we find the Word of God
faithfully preached, and the Sacraments duly administered, we need not doubt
but Christ has his Church, though we may imagine many defects otherwise in
point of Discipline, which, whilst we amend whatever we know to be amiss in
our selves, we must leave to be reformed by those who have the power
committed to them, and who they are is the next Enquiry.

The thirst of Power and Government where it once takes is unquenchable,
Ambition is a disease which is rather heightened then cured by Physic. What
stronger preservative can be prescribed against this poison, then the example
of our Savior in his life and doctrine? and yet what high towers of Pride has
he that styles himself his Vicar built upon this humble foundation? Let us
then take heed, lest by pretending to advance the Scepter of Christ, we put a
Reed into his hand, and by pleading for our own power ruin his. Since
therefore the Church of God amongst us consists of Christian Magistrates, as
well as Ministers and People; let us in the first place consider the
Magistrates power and office; whose function, unless he fail of his duty,
either as a Magistrate, or a Christian, must needs extend to the care and well
ordering of all things whereby we may lead as well a godly as a peaceable life.
By the law of nature we know the same man might be, and often was both King
and Priest, the office of Priesthood was still annexed to the Primogeniture in
that most equal government of the Patriarchs over their families and
descendents. And when by Gods positive law the Leviticall Priesthood was
instituted, some relics of the ancient custom still remained, the fathers of
families were to slay the Paschall lamb, and any that was skillful therein
might circumcise; the gift of Prophecy, which might seem more peculiar to the
Priesthood, was sometimes bestowed upon their Kings, and as often upon private
persons as their Priests. And here it might be enquired, whether under the
Gospel the office of Supreme Magistracy, and a Pastoral charge might be
performed by the same person? which though we should deny, would nothing
prejudice our assertion, Imperantis non est imperata facere, sed imperando
jubere ut fiant. Magistrates may well enough take care that Ministers perform
their duty, and that all things relating to Religion be duly administered,
without undertaking the particular functions themselves. Hence it is, that they
are called, Pastorum pastores, and custodes utriusque tabulae. Nor does the
luster of Supreme Authority ever appear more glorious then when it shines forth
in the due care and ordering of religious matters, which either are or ought to
be chiefly regarded. The Roman Emperors accounted the office of Pontifex
Maximus too great to be imparted to others, and the best of Christian Princes
have rather esteemed it their duty, then any intrusion, to take cognizance of
things pertaining to Religion. If some have been more remiss therein then
others, their neglect cannot prejudice the right of those that come after them.
Those then are too uncivil with their Superiors, that whilst they make their
own functions to pass for such solemn and and sacred things, afford them only
a Civil title. What, not their office too of divine institution? may not those
that are nursing Fathers of the Church see that the children have bread? If the
Bishop of Rome under pretense only of being Christ's Vicar has assumed so much
power in the Church, may not they that are truly his Vicegerents, see that all
things be administered according to his direction? And as their authority is
divine because they are Magistrates, so we must allow their Acts to be
something more then Civil or profane (as they are usually styled) if we have
but so much charity as to take them for Christians. All Rivers lose their name
when they come once to be emptied into the sea, and whoever gives up his name
unto Christ, must be content only to bear his image and superscription, his
whole man and all his actions are, or ought to be then truly Christian and
holy. And as the Magistrate cannot say this or that he may do, as a
Magistrate, but not as a Christian, since the tie of his Religion being the
highest, swallows up all other relations, and gives the denomination to all his
actions, so ought not any ingenuous man by such poor shifts and distinctions,
for the compassing of I know not what pretended authority, either teach the
Magistrate to neglect his duty, or others to contemn his power. But is not the
Magistrate within the Church, and does not the Pastors office extend to him, as
well by the preaching of the Gospel, as by the exercise of the power of the
Keys? It Is true, he is, but we must not then make the Church such a thing, and
afterward give it that power as many do, nor may the Pastors by the
exercising of their Ministerial function, thereby more pretend to advance
their authority or office above his, then the Physician by curing him as well
as others, or the Surgeon, by lancing his wounds, or if need be, by cutting
off some rotten member. Some object further, the inconveniences that would
follow, if the Magistrates authority were thus far admitted, which yet by
dividing the power, cannot but be far greater. And when all is said, the
several pretenders hereunto are Men, not Angels, from whom, as the Church may
receive good, so it cannot be altogether secured from evil, because they are
neither infallible in their judgments, nor unbyassed in their affections. Nor
ought the fitness and ability which some pretend for the Ministers managing of
Church affairs divest the Magistrate of his right: it is fit, and 'twas a good
wish of him, ut sapientes regnarent, aut regnantes saperent, and yet we must
not expect, to have none Statesmen but Lawyers, or Kings but Philosophers
only. Neither may the difficulty or abstrusnesse to judge of points in Religion
(as some would make us believe) dethrone the Magistrate from his office, or
deter him from his duty. Every Christian is a competent Judge of these, and
ought to pass sentence upon the profoundest Doctor, in trying his most subtle
reasonings by the touchstone of Gods Word, as far at least as concerns
himself. If Paul when he was questioned concerning the Resurrection of the
dead, appealed to Caesar's Tribunal, before whom (he says) he ought to be
judged; how can we be so dis-ingenuous, as to refuse that to the Christian
Magistrate, which the Apostle gives to a Heathen Emperor? And certainly if
Magistrates would but consider, that Religion is the power of their Power, and
that which ought to govern their Government, they would with David make Gods
law, their study, that they might thence learn to be wiser then their Teachers,
and so avoid the imputation of incapacity or ignorance to perform that which
ought to be their chief Art. And if conscience move them not hereunto (me
thinks) Policy should; if we were strangers to our own times, other ages would
tell us how dangerous it is for the Supreme Magistrates to suffer the great
things of Religion to pass out of their hands. Sacerdotum ea sunt ingenia, ut
ni pareant, territent, and multitudo vana Religione capta melius vatibus quam
ducibus paret. By this we may see, that the Magistrate is Gods Minister too for
our good, as well in spiritual as temporal matters, and that as he ought to
see all things duly observed and performed that God has prescribed in his
Word, so it is his right to determine and ordain whatever may make for the
advancement of Religion in relation either to Offices or Persons, Civil or
Sacred (as they are usually styled) in the administration of the whole policy
or government of Christ's visible Church, within the circuit of his
jurisdiction. The Ordinances of the Church of Geneva, where the ignorance of
many in this point has took sanctuary, will teach us thus much; for the
Magistrates have stamped their authority upon them in these words, Nous
Syndiques, petit, et grand Conseil de Geneve, etc. apres avoir en de Pasteurs
et Ministres de cette Eglise advis, conform a la parole de Dieu, etc. avons
ordonne et establi de suivre eu nostre ville et territoire la Police
Ecclesiastique qui s' ensuit. The whole constitution of their policy was from
the Magistrate, all the Ministers had to do in it, was to give their advice
only; so likewise if any difference arise among the Ministers in matters of
doctrine, or that they be scandalous in their lives, the last Appeal is made to
the Magistrate, who has reserved to himself the final judgment and
determination thereof. Their neighbors the Suissers are something more strict
in the managing of their authority, even to the imposing upon their Ministers
that respect to their Magistracy, that they are not so much as to take notice
in the pulpit of any failings in the execution thereof, without acquainting
them therewith first in private, as understanding well enough the strange
effects that such discourses may produce, no less to the vilifying of the
Magistracy, then the Ministry too at last. If the Magistrates power then be
of this extent, we that are Christians can do no less then pray, as the
Heathens did for their Emperor, ut Deus ipsi intelligentem divini humanique
juris mentem det, and that God would enable him with all graces fitting so
great a function, whose performing of the great duty God has laid upon him
herein, will more truly advance, then lessen the Ministers office, which is
next to be enquired into.

He that has heaven for his throne, and the earth for his footstool, is
pleased to call the Church his House, where for the better ordering of all
things, he has placed some as Stewards and Overseers of the rest. Not to speak
of those who were endowed with more extraordinary gifts for the performance of
their spiritual functions, as the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, those we
find frequently mentioned in Scripture, as the ordinary Dispensers of the
mysteries of God, are sometimes called Bishops, sometimes Elders, Pastors, or
Teachers, and these seem to import one and the same office or charge, otherwise
I do not rightly understand St. Luke in the 20 of the Acts 17. where St. Paul
sends from Miletus, to call thither the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, whom
in the 28. ver. he charges to take heed unto themselves, and to all the flock,
over which the holy Ghost has made them Bishops or Overseers: nor yet St.
Paul, Tit. 1.5. where he speaks of leaving him in Crete to ordain Elders in
every Church, and immediately infers, that a Bishop (the same that before he
had called an Elder) must be blameless, etc. the distinctions which were made
in after times, and upon what grounds, are too large to be mentioned here. In
the Ministers charge we may consider, 1. The institution of the office it
self, and this derives only from Christ, from whom they receive their
commission. 2. The application of this office to a certain person, and this we
usually call Ordination, which after due exmination both of life and doctrine,
is wont to be performed with prayer and fasting by the Pastors themselves. 3.
The designation or election of a person to a certain place; and this we find
diversely managed in several ages, according to the exigents of times and
occasions, nor can there be any certain rule prescribed herein. Sometimes the
Church it self claimed the right of electing their own Pastor, at other times
the Pastors solely disposed of elections, and many times it so falls out, that
to avoid popular confusion and faction, the Magistrate has been constrained to
assume this part only to himself, as it does belong to him.


Lastly, to confirm the Minister in the exercise of his Pastoral cure, and to
give all freedom and encouragement to the discharge thereof. Nor must that
large commission which our Savior has given to the Dispensers of his Word and
Sacraments, make them in the least manner to exceed their bounds. The Church
cannot well enjoy hers, unless Caesar have his; all the power they can pretend
to is for edification, not destruction, directive only and persuasive, no ways
coactive. If Christianity were to be enforced, what Armies would be sufficient
to make the world believe in a crucified God, and a self-denying Religion? If
this were not set upon men's minds by the power and demonstration of the Spirit,
the demonstration of all other power would be to little effect. The power of
the Keys in binding and loosing so much insisted on, is no more then to
declare, that heavens gates are open to the penitent, and shut to the obdurate,
they cannot bless those upon whom God will pour out his curses, nor curse
those he is pleased to bless, they are Ambassadors only for Christ, and have
nothing to deliver but what he is pleased to command. Nor must
Excommunication, and the delivering up of men unto Satan, which has made such
a terrible noise of late, make us to apprehend, that Ministers are armed with
thunder and lightning, or that they can command fire from heaven to destroy all
those they take for Samaritans. We care not many times what we say or do when
we are a little angry, and that our own interest is concerned, otherwise we
should not look upon delivering men up to Satan for so ordinary a business as
many would make it. That which the Apostle did in this case seems to have had
something of the miracle in it, and so is understood by most of the Ancients,
and many learned Moderns too; and being so, ought neither to be made a rule or
example. As for Excommunication, by whom, and how it is to be managed, would
require a larger Discourse then this occasion will permit. That part of it which
consists in the debarring of men from the assembly of the Saints, and
participation of the Ordinances, has nothing of force or coaction in it, those
that will may contemn it, it is only a punishment to them that apprehend it so,
and desire to be reconciled, the concomitants or consequence thereof, as
depriving men of their civil interest, or liberty upon it, is merely Politic.
Nor is it conceived to be of that necessity or use, but in some cases it may
and ought to be forborne. We may as well be too severe as too remiss, and by
pleading too much for the exactness of discipline endanger the doctrine of the
Church. If by our meekness we cannot gain those that are contrary minded, we
ought with patience to endure them, and with fervency to pray for them, till it
shall please God either to reform or remove them. Which we shall the more easily
be persuaded to, if we consider that many are saints in Gods Calendar, that are
not so in ours, many fall into enormous sins, that are as angry with themselves
for it, as we can be, and whose virtues, though we observe nothing but their
imperfections, do much preponderate their vices, and it may be our graces too.
What though the tares grow in Christ's field, and impure vessels be seen in his
Temple, let us endeavor to (...) our selves as pure as silver refined, and to
(...) as the wheat which he will gather into his Gar^e^. All things are pure
to the pure, a pious conscience is not polluted by the impiety of others, nor
are the holy mysteries defiled, because wicked men approach them with unwashen
hands. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, not me. Thus we see the Pastors office in all its parts is only
Ministerial, it contains nothing of Magisteriall power or force, it governs
only by serving, and commands by persuading. All the Jurisdiction it can claim
is in the hearts and spirits of men, by that Word which is powerful and mighty
through God for the breaking down of the strong holds of sin only, and for the
bringing into captivity every proud and rebellious thought. And whilst
Ministers shall make it their only duty to divide the Word aright, without
seeking to divide the power any longer with the Magistrate, the people will more
easily learn their duty and respect to both, and that threefold cord of mutual
love betwixt the Christian Magistrate, Minister and people will be better
twisted and a due Harmony amongst all the parts and members both of Church and
State sweetly preserved; Which God Almighty grant!


ESSAY II.
SIR,
SInce you are pleased to command my opinion concerning the lawfulness of
entering into the present Engagement, and how far I have satisfied my self
therein, I shall presume to impart to you my thoughts with all freedom. I must
confess I have endeavored (as I doubt not you have done) the best I could to
inform my self from what I could recover in print upon this subject, but what I
have yet met with, seems to contain so much of prejudice and pre-engagement
otherwise, that I am almost resolved to seek no further resolution thence,
being loath in the least manner to subject my conscience to the passion or
interest of others. And first I cannot but sadly reflect upon the condition of
the times wherein we live, when the foundations are thus removed, who knows
what he may righteously do? But since God has reserved us for these times,
we cannot do better then to inform our judgments, so as to prepare our minds
to pass through them with the greatest content to our selves, and advantage to
others that we can, and to take heed lest avoiding the plausible compliance of
most in application to the present powers, let their commands be what they
will, we be not too passionate on the other hand in forestalling our
judgments from that impartial deliberate debate we ought to make within our
selves in things of such consequence. We are not in the place of God to dispose
of the events of affairs, and since things are fallen out so contrary to our
expectation, and possibly endeavors too, we ought to consider rather what may
concern us in this present juncture of affairs* then what may seem to be
required of us as to former relations, which possibly upon due examination may
seem expired. At the beginning of our troubles we know what appeals were made
by King and Parliament, both to God and the People, and the sword being laid
hold on to decide the controversy, many good men were at a stand what to do,
who certainly if they had been left to themselves, being not convinced of the
necessity the Parliament then had to defend themselves by force, would have
desired (what many now do) to have sat still, but the dispute grew so high,
that all of considerable interests were involved with the one party or the
other, and the principles of government being divided amongst themselves (for
so they appeared to all, unless to such as would have, or endeavored to make
the Monarchy absolute) every man seemed let loose to follow that side which he
conceived to be most just. And when it was expected (the Kings party having
lost all their force, but little of their affections to maintain their cause)
that an accommodation should be made with the King, we know what was first
attempted against the Army, who whether they might think their service too
great to be requited by the Parliament, I know not; sure I am, the Parliament
then seemed more willing to be rid of their Benefactors, then to acknowledge
the great benefit they had done them; and in a short time the jealousies grew
so high, and the apprehensions of the Army so strong, that the end of their
disbanding, was to be the beginning of their ruin, and with them (as they
imagined) if not of the greatest, yet of the best part of the Nation, and
possibly of those too who were the forwardest to effect it, that they resolved
to make use of that power God had put into their hands, and that the present
necessity wherein they and their friends were involved, did call upon them to
join themselves with those of the Parliament whom they accounted truest to
their trust, though the major part opposed them, that they might thereby hinder
the conjunction intended with the King, and consequently with his party, which
was laid hold on by many, in hope thereby to make way for their own honor and
preferment, and the ruin of the Army and their Abetters. This consideration
seemed then so important, that to preserve the form and being of the
Commonwealth, there was need of stronger physic then the usual formalities
observed in other cases would admit, and that if the Elements did change their
place to avoid vacuity, which would cause a destruction in nature, they thought
the Laws of civil affairs might admit of some dispensation; and though the
attempting what they did, might seem to cross some particular constitutions,
yet 'twas hoped it would be looked upon by all indifferent wise men as
corresponding to the general and ultimate end of all forms and constitutions
of Policy and government, the preservation of Justice, and good men that should
be protected thereby. And looking upon the King as having forfeited all his
interest by his carrying on the War to the utmost of his power, in his
continued application to those persons and counsels which have been so
destructive to the Nation, and that he was so far from giving any satisfaction
to God or them for those Rivers of blood which had overflowed the three
Kingdoms, (which must either be put upon His, or the Parliaments account) that
they could not perceive any reasonable security for the future, but that the
restoring of him to his power, would be the reducing of the Nation to us former
or worse miseries, they thought it just having him in their power to proceed
against him as they did, and to exclude his posterity for that forfeiture he
had made: And because neither they nor others could subsist, or hope to be
protected in their lives and properties, without the benefit of the Laws, and
an established government submitted unto by all that hope for protection
thereby, they declare for such a constitution as they conceive the times most
capable of. I cannot but admire the providence of God in the whole progress of
our affairs, in crossing the designs and expectation of the most wise and
Politic, and though we are told that miracles are ceased, yet sure he does
wonders every day. No doubt but the courses that have been took to avoid ruin
and destruction, seemed the only way to incur it to those that thought
themselves the quickest sighted in State affairs both at home and abroad. The
opposition was not small which was threatened here at home, but the difficulties
that were to be encountered with in Ireland, and in all probability in Scotland,
seemed insuperable, though other Nations would be persuaded to look on, which
yet in reason could not be expected. And to speak truly, I should rather desire
to spend my thoughts in contemplation of those great changes God has wrought
amongst us, and in the acknowledgment of his great mercies that we are not
consumed by them, then adventure to justify all that has been done in order
thereunto* however, I am not to condemn all that I cannot justify, nor dare I
presume to intrude upon the censure of those things that are above my sphere.
If I had contributed my endeavors to this great change God has wrought
amongst us, I would produce my reasons for my acting therein, but seeing it
has been carried on by others, notwithstanding all the opposition to the
contrary hitherto; I had rather calmly debate with my self, how I might
conscientiously enter into the Engagement, then by my own frowardnes give
occasion to others to destroy me. Not to insist therefore upon that which some
object, viz. former Oaths and Engagements, wherein they seem not so serious as
they ought to be in such pretenses, the interest of those they allege them
for, requiring more of the hand then tongue at this time, since their power and
Kingdom is of this world, those that would be thought to be so much their
servants, ought now, if ever, in all likelihood to fight for them; that which
you seem most to desire is, that you might be forbore for being called upon to
act with the present power (which you conceive the Engagement implies) though
you seem to promise to act nothing against it. It were to be wished that all
acts of policy were so tempered with piety, that they might command obedience
from good men rather by their equity then penalty, and that the necessity of
this change might appear so evident, and the equality and justice of the
government such, that there might be no place left for gainsaying. But we seem
to be fallen so far into the dregs of vice, that we are not capable of the best
constitution; we must not expect to be governed by angels in this world,
though we were better men then we are. What if things be not so well as we
could wish, we cannot make them better by doing nothing, it may be they had
been worse if most had had their desires. If the prima mobilia of government be
so violently whirled about, the inferior orbs can have little rest. Nor can we
expect, unless we prepare to live in some hermitage, but as we are sharers in
the Public interest less or more, so to act likewise some part therein.
Those that are possessed of the power will tell us, that if we are not for them
we are, or intend to be against them, and we are able to tell our selves, that
we cannot be Members of any civil association, but we must needs acknowledge
a head. If we judge the power that is now claimed by those that are over us to
be usurped and unjust, why do not we endeavor to re-instate those we conceive
to be the right owners? but if that be beyond our power, sure no one can judge
himself obliged to an impossibility, nor can any one think those subjects
disloyal, who having made all posble resistance, yield at last to the
stronger. That power seems to be ceased, and consequently all Engagements to
it, that has no ability to protect those it claims alleagiance from, nor they
any means left to defend it, they are the powers in being we are commanded to
obey. Nor do those that do the most willingly comply with the present power
allege any thing more rationally for their engagement to it, then their
protection by it. I have not time strictly to examine what the more angry sort
of men object against the matter of the Engagement, their chiefest strength
seems to lie in this, that they suppose the acquisition thereof to be unjust,
and consequently they that engage to it own that injustice, and are guilty of
the wrongs thereby done to others. If that before hinted be not sufficient to
answer this objection, let us consider, that upon this ground it will be hard
to submit to any power whatever, since seldom any enter into power but by the
dispossessing of others, and the losers will still have some cause to complain.
Besides, we are not competent Judges herein, nor are there any Courts erected
to try such titles* if we have a mind to dispute this, it must be rather with
arms them arguments, we can expect to receive no other answer to such
objections, then to be made sensible they do not bear the sword in vain. It Is
the exercise of the government, not the title of the Governors, that most
concerns us that are Subjects, they are to answer this to a higher power, not
to those that are below them. Briefly, though the Government be not such as we
could desire, or as we have promised to make it; yet since the Kingdoms of the
earth are the Lords, and he gives them to whom he pleases, and that our vows
or Engagements cannot prescribe to the Almighties providence, let us submit to
his overruling hand; and unless we desire to live alone in the world, or in
continual war, resolve that we must acknowledge some power, from which upon our
alleagiance we may expect protection, wherein the end and essence of all
government seems to consist. I am afraid lest I have given you more trouble
then satisfaction by this Discourse, which yet I hope you will favorably
interpret, the rather because my particular obligations to you have put me upon
this task, and that my private condition has hitherto suffered me to remain
more dis-ingaged then you can be, however I have endeavored to inform my self
the best I could, that I might either upon just grounds altogether decline the
Engagement, or when I should be called upon, as freely take it, as I now
subscribe my self

Your --
December. 5. 1649.
ESSAY III.
SIR,
IF these times abounded as much in acts of piety, as they do in discourse of
Religion, if the Reformation which has dwelt so long in men's mouths, had but
sunk into their hearts, and appeared in their lives, we should then truly feel
that happiness, which we have but for the most part all this while fancied,
and quitting the cloud embrace that Goddess, whose native beauty cannot but
ravish, since so many have been enamored with her picture only. Holiness is
so attractive that her very Enemies desire to shroud themselves under her
wings, and to cover the ulcers of their vicious lives with her garment. The
Scribes and Pharisees loved to sit in Moses chair, and Machiavilians think they
never put off their Politics better then in Christ's School; if they can but
counterfeit Jacobs voice, they hope to pass well enough with Esaus hands.
Hence it is that may have made Religion a temporal interest only, and under
the specious title of godliness drive on those wicked designs which might
make a modest heathen to blush, giving us in stead of the real demonstrations
of true piety, outward forms only, or else a company of packt words and
canting language, more becoming a charm then true devotion. That we may not
therefore either deceive our selves or others, or think we come to act our
parts in this world as Mountebanks upon a stage, where the most mimicall
bablers pass for the most sufficient men; we must know that Religion is not a
common place of terms and notions, it dwells not in the clouds of aerie fancy,
and sublime speculations. If it swim only in the head, without taking root in
the heart, it may send forth leaves, but it bears no fruit, or if any, like
those apples which were fair to look upon, but being touched, fell to powder.
The life of holiness is most conspicuous in the holiness of men's lives. No
sooner does Gods Spirit move upon our souls, but we bring forth abundantly all
good works. The least sparkle of divine light that kindles in our minds, burns
as well as shines; if it do not warm our affections as well as enlighten our
notions, we may justly suspect it is some ignis fatuus, no ray that is darted
from the Sun of righteousness, or the Father of lights. And irreligious
holiness will profit us nothing, they are really wicked that are but virtuous
in words and show only. It will not therefore be impertinent briefly to
consider the influence that Religion ought to have upon all our actions, and
how we may rather live, then talk devoutly.

Religion then, if it be true, as it believes all that God reveals, so it
obeys in all that he commands [his commandments are exceeding broad, and we
shall not be ashamed, when we have respect unto them all]. There is a
concatenation of virtues and graces as well in Divinity as Morality, he that
pretends but to some few of them has none at all. The two Tables make but one
law, and though they be first and second in regard of the object of which they
treat, the worship of God, and love of our Neighbor, yet they ought to be one
and the same in our observation. Nor must we think that this Law published on
Mount Sinai is any other then the Law of Nature, which the Scripture calls the
Law written in our hearts, and which every one might read, were not the
characters so defaced by sin and corruption. This, as it is most agreeable to
right reason, so we find lively impressions thereof in many actions of the
Heathens, which, because they seemed to fail, either in the principle which set
them awork, or in the end which they aimed at, some pass over only with the
title of splendida peccata, but how rightly, I intend not here to examine. Sure
I am, this is the divine unalterable law which Christ came to fulfill, and which
by the finger of his Spirit he writes afresh in the hearts of all those that
belong to him. The Gospel it self is nothing but this law illustrated, and this
law nothing else but the Gospel obscured. The Religion of the Jews was the same
with that of Adam, Noah, and the other Patriarchs, and ours with both, the
difference only this, that we enjoy a cleerer light of that day which Abraham
rejoiced so much to see; the various rites and ceremonies with the different
manner of Gods manifestation of himself to us and them, though it may seem to
argue a difference of Religion to those, whose Religion is nothing but fashion
and ceremony, or a form of words, it cannot to any, who shall consider that
Christ was the lamb slain from the beginning of the world, (by faith in whom
they are saved as well as we) and that the same law was a rule to all, and must
be unto the end of the world. And this as it is sometimes called the Law of
Nature, so more usually with us the Moral Law, because it is the rule of our
actions and manners, and that part thereof which teaches us the duties we owe
each to other, goes mostly under the name of universal justice, a virtue so
comprehensive, that it includes all the rest, so diffusive, that it extends to
all the actions that concern either our selves or others. And though many
self-seekers please themselves only with the name of godly, as if it were a
silly and dangerous thing to be just withal; yet we shall find at last, if
justice be wanting, our fained godliness will stand us in little stead, though
it may gain us applause with men, it will but add to our further condemnation
with God. The greatest Saints have been mostly by themselves, and too often by
others accounted the greatest sinners. Since those that are wicked are loath to
give to good men the title of godly, they must be careful how they attribute it
too much to themselves, lest they be conceived to have something of the
Pharisee. Humility is the truest character of a Christian, it contends not
about words, nor is ambitious of great names. Though it be all one to be just
as holy, yet we find the Just-man more often mentioned in scripture then the
godly, to show us that it is but a vain pretense to be pious unto God, unless
we be just unto all. And since Justice is that virtue, whereby we render
unto every one what belongs to him, let us consider all the relations we have,
whether private or public, all the duties we owe to our Superiors, Equals or
Inferiors. And if we acquit our selves herein as good and just men, we shall
thereby more truly advance the work of Reformation, and add a greater luster
to Religion, then by all the devices that either ignorant, or Politic
hypocritical men have invented hitherto, which that we may all perform is,
and ever shall be the earnest prayer of

SIR Your --

ESSAY IV.
SIR,
MAny sad complaints there are abroad in the world of the diseases both of our
Church and State, and though both have lain a long time almost bedridden, yet it
has been their fate hitherto to meet oftener with Empericks then Physicians,
with such who understand better to gain advantage by their distempers, then
honor by a seasonable and skillful cure. This seems to invite every one to
contribute as well the best of their thoughts as prayers to find out some means
(if possible) for a recovery; and though our disease be like a Hectique fever
(easy at first to be cured, though hard to be found out, but afterward more
easily discerned, then remedyed) yet sure there is a balsame for every wound,
which though we cannot always be so happy as to recover, we must endeavor at
least to attain, unless we have a mind to perish as well by our own folly as
weakness. To omit the several oppressions in civil and sacred things, which
seem to have occasioned our troubles at first, together with the causeless
complaint of the present burdens, which no one can rationally expect to be
removed, till our own distempers, and the implacable Enemies of this State both
at home and abroad be better quieted, there is nothing at present which seems
more worthy of the serious consideration of all that are truly pious and
discreet, then to find out some effectual means how to unite the several
factions in matter of Religion at home, and then how to secure our Religion
from those that would destroy it from abroad.

Every natural body desires as much its unity as entity. She was the true
Mother of the Child that would not have it divided. We depart as much in effect
from Christ and his doctrine, as we separate each from other. Those Members
that have not a communion amongst them selves, have no union at all with the
head. Since therefore all division in matters of Religion is very irreligious,
it will concern us, as much as our souls are worth, which we may as well lose
for want of charity as faith, to endeavor the making up of these breaches,
which might possibly be effected, if setting aside matters of less moment and
circumstance, we would intend those things that are really fundamental, and
essentially required of every Christian; which as they are few, so are they
clear and obvious to all that desire to know the truth. Those things which are
necessary to eternal life as well as our temporal livelihood, are near at
hand, if we delight only in curiosities they will cost us deerer. 'Twas well
said of one, that he liked the world as God made it, but not as men have made
it: If we behold Religion in that native simplicity and beauty wherewith God
has attired her, we cannot but fall in love with her, but if we look upon the
dress which the passions and interests of men have put upon her, all her
comeliness is gone, we shall then have much ado to know her face through the
painting, and be forced to acknowledge her self to be the least part of that
which she seems to be. How many do still take the glistering shows of humane
inventions for true piety, and cry up the Idea's of their own brain for
patterns in the Mount. And it were well if they might pass for such with
themselves only, and that they would not be angry with others, who have not so
easy a faith, as to take all for Gospel that they fancy. It has been a great
policy in the Church of Rome, first to invent what might make for their
temporal interest, and afterward to set their Doctors a work how to make it a
part of their Creed: it were well if we had kept a great distance from Rome in
this, as we pretend to do in other things, and that we had not endeavored more
to serve our selves then God in many late undertakings for Reformation. We pray
daily that Gods kingdom may come, but in stead of that dominion and Empire he
ought to exercise in our hearts and lives, we erect other thrones, and
endeavor to make his scepter rather externally politic, then inwardly
powerful. If we would then have Christ to reign, and the government to be
rightly settled on his shoulder, let us at last ingenuously confess what we
cannot conscientiously conceal, That the Kingdom of God is only righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; it consists in the inward man of the
heart, in the subduing of our corruptions, and the conforming of our lives to
that humility and self-denial that shines in the life and doctrine of our
Savior. The external rites and discipline so much insisted upon, are rather
the garments then either body or soul (any essential part) of Religion, which
upon diligent enquiry we shall find in all ages to be shaped according to the
infancy and growth of several Churches, and still conforming less or more to
the civil constitutions. And this being once acknowledged, as it needs must
be by all, who love the truth in sincerity, and that have not pawned their
wits and conscience to maintain some by-interest; what hinders but that this
envious wall of Partition being broken down, all that take Christ for their
head, may unite together as members of the same body, and pursue the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace? Let the Machiavilians of this world study how
to divide and reign, Christians ought to practice how they may unite and obey,
the discipline of mutual love will more advance their cause, then all the love
they have hitherto showed for Discipline. And this being once concluded, the
next task will be calmly to debate and agree amongst our selves what the
fundamentals of Religion are, which might be brought sure into a narrow
compass, and so clearly expressed that all might understand them. Certa semper
sunt in paucis, and quicquid ad salutem Christianorum necessarium est, quicquid
nos meliores beatioresque facit, in aperto ponitur. And these being assented
unto, Why should we too curiously search after those things which we may more
safely be ignorant of* Why should we be angry with all those, who though
they agree with us in the principles, differ sometimes in the conclusions and
superstructures? All have not the same means or measure of understanding. Some
men's errors accompanied with meekness of Spirit, deserve a better censure then
the truth which others utter in proud and contemptuous language. At least let
us avoid all names of faction, especially that odious name of Heretic, which
seems to declare an open war to those we fix that brand upon, and alarums all
their force to retort that dart upon the face of those that first cast it. Thus
pursuing the truth in love, we shall more easily convince the gainsayers, then
by all the anathema's and fulminations that are usually darted out upon them;
and if we cannot be so happy as hereby to convince the Papists, and other
declared enemies of our Church and State, we shall at least by this our union
prevent their designs, and obtain that peace which we have so long expected,
and is most earnestly desired by

SIR, Your --

ESSAY V.
SIR,
IT is no unusual thing for those to complain of the times, of whom the times
have most just occasion to complain. We cry out against those distempers which
we our selves have caused, and do much wonder that the times are so bad, when
we see men daily grow worse. If this present age had brought forth no new
monsters of iniquity (of which it is too frutfull) the acting over anew the
transgressions of the former (though under better names but many times in a
worse manner) might justly cause us to apprehend, that the dregs of that cup of
vengeance, which has already been poured out upon us, are yet behind. Amongst
other synptoms of future calamity, there is none seems to pretend more
disaster, then that emulation and hatred which yet reigns amongst all parties;
whilst many account their private envy part of the public good, and think they
never prosecute Gods cause better, then when they persecute each other. So full
are most of themselves, that they are empty of all charity to others, and think
they never approach God nearer, then when they keep their Brethren at the
greatest distance. Many are like him that would measure all his guests by
himself, and if they exceeded in stature, would cut them shorter, if they were
less, would stretch them upon the Tenters. We are no less tyrannical to men's
opinions then he was to their persons, we arreign them all at the bar of our
own judgments, and pass a final condemnation upon them, according to the bare
verdict of our own fancies. Al is terra incognita, that lies beyond the line of
our discovery, and whoever lives not in all points as we do, must be
accounted no less then a Barbarian. If others virtues seem to outshine ours,
we endeavor by all means to obscure them, and if their candle burns dimmer,
we are not content till we have quite put out their light. What the Heathens
were wont to say heretofore of the Christians, See how they love each other!
most that pass for Christians may now more truly say of many of the Heathens
in comparison of themselves, How sweet is revenge to some men's taste! how
ingenuously wicked are they! appearing then well-affected, even when they are
most malicious, and thinking their particular condition too mean to repay their
private grudges, adventure to put them upon the public score. The diseases of
this kind that reign among us, we may rather suspect to have been caused, then
ever hope to be cured by the receipts of Machiavel; his Divide and impera (as
if the Kingdoms of this world were to be maintained as the Devil does his, by
strife and division) seems to weigh more in our practice, then that of our Lord
and Master (which he makes the badge of his Disciples) to love one another. If
we desire then truly to approve our selves to be Christians (and we should be
very angry at any that would censure us for other) let us divest our selves of
malice and detraction, and put on the garment of charity, which will cover the
nakedness of our former actions, and make us comely in the eyes of God and man.
What can we see in our selves, that we should so much admire, or in others,
that we should so much blame? the best of men, if we look upon the worst of
their actions, will appear something menstruous, and the worst of men for ought
we know are not so bad, but they are still capable of Gods grace, and may be
better by our loving assistance. Where the Spirit of God reigns, there is love
and peace, he descends in the shape of the Dove, not of the Vulture; and where
his grace dwells, it is most diffusive; if it be not like that stone which
converts all to gold, we may be assured nothing shall be defiled by its touch.
True Religion makes men more charitable, not more censorious, it confines not
the free grace of God to any particular persons or factions, nor endeavors to
impale that Spirit in any one orb or circuit, that blows where it lists. If
we are commanded to love our enemies, I know not any that we are permitted to
hate. And certainly love is the most noble revenge we can take even of our
enemies. By retaliation of wrongs we can but be their equals, in this we are
still their superiors, and may hope not only to conquer, but to indear them to
us at last. Nor is there any way so safe as this, we have the security of
heaven engaged for our protection, and if we can but bring our spirits to this
temper, may be assured that Gods angels will pitch their tents about us. And
thus passing an Act of oblivion in our own breasts for all the injuries we have
received from others, and overcoming of evil with good, we shall make both our
selves and others much better, and with our own peace procure (at least as much
as in us lies) the general peace of the nation, the establishment whereof he
most zealously affects, that is

Sir, Your --

ESSAY VI.
SIR,
IF custom did not pass for a law, the laws against many abused customs
would more easily pass. Those errors which can plead prescription are hardly
reformed, nor must we think a short time sufficient to remove the vices which
have continued for many ages. I do not so much wonder at those who contend for
the observation of Christmasse (as we commonly call it) and other usual
Festivalls) as at their quickness that would blow them away with one breath.
Nature never introduces the form, but she first prepares the matter. If the
minds of men were sufficiently molded for better impressions, it would be more
easy to take away the old leaven, but we must expect to have that done by
degrees, when it shall please God by the gentle breathings of his Spirit to
blow away that animosity and bitterness which yet reigns in men's minds. When
the Athenian Lawgiver was asked whether he had given them the best laws, he
answered, the best of those they were capable of. And it was objected to Cato
himself, that he did many times more hurt then good by speaking in the Senate,
as if he had been rather in an imaginary Platonic commonwealth, then such a
corrupt vicious one, as theirs then was. He is the best Artist that applies
his work to the matter, not he that pretends to make the most curious statues
of the crookedest timber. The crookedness of men's minds in this age is such,
that he must be a God that would bring in an universal Reformation all at
once. It will be then requisite to consider the temper of the people, and what
they are susceptible of, as well as the nature of that we desire to introduce
or take away. There has been enough (if not too much) already hinted
concerning the former: as to the latter, we shall find the civil as well as
the religious part (if I may so speak) of these Festivalls much insisted on.
The first is a strong advocate for the second, the entertainments and
recreations wherewith they are usually accompanied, have made them more
gracious; and we need not wonder since so many make their gain to be
godliness, if some would have their pleasure also to pass for such. The best
way to convince those of the errors of their judgment, that plead so strictly
for the observation of these Holy times (as they are pleased to call them) were
to find out some means how to reform the errors of their lives; but that being
so difficult, where men generally are fallen into the dregs of vice, let us
briefly consider what is commonly said for the religious part of them. And here
the long continuance of some of them at least, amongst Christians of all ages,
is much pleaded for, and the famous contests about their punctual observation
(especially that of Easter, between the Eastern and Western Churches) not a
little insisted on. What was judged lawful for the Christians of those times,
they conceive ought not to be condemned as superstitious now; and the many
abuses that later times have brought upon them, which were not of the original
institution, might (as they suppose) more easily be removed, then the thing it
self utterly, and at once abolished. There was the Freewill offering, as well
as the Daily sacrifice in the Temple; and they presume there may be a liberty
for Christians, to set apart some days for a more particular memorial of
Christ's Incarnation, etc. though there be no express command for it in
scripture, if there be none against it. They instance further, that they are
so far from attributing any sanctity to these times as such, that they think
no day amongst Christians ought to be accounted holy of it self, otherwise
then in relation to those exercises of piety that are performed therein. And
they much wonder (which is not slightly to be past over) that all observation
of these times is strictly forbidden as superstitious, when a kind of Judaicall
observation of the Sabbath seems to be enjoined as sanctimonious. It would be
tedious to repeat what may be said in these contests, if we desire our own or
others satisfaction herein, let us be careful how we impose a necessity, where
God has left us in an indifferency. The Apostle tells us, That he that regards
a day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not a day unto the Lord
he does not regard it, and why we should be more severe then he, I know not. If
we look upon the observation of days as part of the Ceremonial law, which is
now abolished, why do we attribute a sanctity to the Lords day more then to
any other, further then as it is designed for our meeting together to hear Gods
Word, and perform other acts of devotion? If we understood rightly the body and
substance of our Religion, which is Christ, we should not dwell any longer in
these shadows, nor would we neglect the greater things of the law, which are
Justice and Judgment, whilst we spend so much time about tything of Mint and
Cummin, in pursuance of small matters, which would follow of themselves, if we
could once be so happy as rightly to establish things of moment. I shall
trouble you no further at present, but only to crave pardon for intrenching too
much on your time, in presenting you with this slight Discourse of the times,
ever remaining.

SIR, Your --

FINIS.

