A COPY OF A LETTER FROM SIR MAURICE EUSTACE Out of Jreland, and to a worthy
Gentleman, a member of the House of Commons, concerning diverse passages in the
Parliament there.

ALSO, Another Letter from Mr Bacon Drum-major, to Colonel Gibson of many
desperate and resolute exploits of English Soldiers, worthy all men's knowledge.

July 13. 1641.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Edw. Husbands and John Frank. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter from Sir Maurice Eustace out of Ireland, to a worthy
Gentleman a member of the house of Commons, concerning diverse passages in the
Parliament there, etc.
SIR, your last dispatch of the sixth of this Month, came to my hands in the
absence of Master Arthur Jones, who was gone with the Army to Connagh But I
dispatched it after him. Upon Tuesday last both houses of Parliament here did
meet, And that day we expelled out of our house by one order, as many of our
house as were endicted of Treason or known in actual rebellion, which upon
search were found to be 46. and so many were cut of from us by one blow as
unprofitable and canckerd members. The next day being Wednesday we passed an
ordinance in our house that none should be of the house this Parliament or in
future Parliaments, but such as should take the oath of supremacy and the same
day as many as were, in the house took the oath which, will make a greater
slaughter whenever we meet, then the former did; And this day being
Thursday, both Houses have agreed upon a Petition, to have all the penal Laws
of force in England against Recusants, to be enacted here with some severe
Laws to be added unto them; And what the consequence of this will be, you may
Imagine, I am sure if the effect thereof be granted, it will either make both
Nations one or it will be an everlasting wall of separation between them; God
direct all for the best. This is all that I have for the present to acquaint
you with, I am your most assured friend

Mau. Eustace.
24. June 1642
Dear friend, since my last Letter, I have bin from Dublin this two months at
a Town called Trim, which sir Charles Coore took in and the day before we came
up to this town of Trim, the rebels with three thousand foot came to take it
in, Sir Charles Coore having not above four hundred foot and horse; then Sir
Charles fell out of the Town, killed many of the Rebels, and forced the rest
to flight. We lie one half of our Regiment in Trim* in Garrison, with three
Colors more of my Lord Generals Regiment, a troop of Horse of the Governors
Sir Richard Greenfields, a Troop of Dragooners, under the command of Captain
^^ite; this Town is twenty miles from Dublin. Since we came to Trim one
Wisely of the Dighon yielded his Castle up to us, standing to the Kings mercy
where he and all that were in it had free quarter for their lives but turned
all to shift for themselves not having any thing more then the Clothes to
their backs: since that Wisely was found faulty against the State and banished
our Town of Trim, turned out of the ports, he one way, and his wife my Lady
Foard another with their children, there we left, in the Castle of the Dinghon,
a* Garrison which two miles from Trim. On the 12. of June there was commanded
men out of every Company in the Town that went out under* the Command of
Captain George Vain who Commanded the foot, the horse under the Command of*
sir Richard Grinfield our governor of Trim we went to hem them in till our
Ordnance came to us, this Castle was called Linches of the knock, a maine
strong Castle well provided. We besieged this Castle four days, where we have
lost, and have had shot Dyvers men where the rebels scornd any quarter for
they would neither give quarter nor take quarter, Calling us English dogs, and
English rogues, and pillaging rogues, and Parliament rogues, and told us they
fought for the King, and we fought against the King. Upon the 13. day of June
came our Ordnance from Dublin, they that came to us were but Fieldpieces, they
were not for battery; we made many shot with them, but they jeared us then
worse then before; We made many approaches upon it, thinking to have spring
some part of the well by undermining it, but they heaved such great stones down
upon us, killed some of our men, and hurt others, that we could do no good
that way for their stones and scalding water, then a Gunner making shot at a
window, forced the frame of the window into the house; Then our men, my Lord
Generals, and part of my Lord Jones, that lay a mile from us, being commanded
as well as we, under the command of Colonel Monk, and Lieutenant Colonel
Kirk fell on to this breach, making a Skaffold up to the window, where the
Rebels and our men were at push of Pike* a long time Lieutenant: Colonel Kirk
was shot in the back, who lies very sore hurt; And Colonel Monk shot quite
through the Hat, and mist his head, thanks be given to God Captain Vain, and
Lieutenant Konnocke entered the Castle with diverse Soldiers where he was
quickly forced to come out again (for the rogues had set the Castle on fire)
else they had been choked with the smoke, the rogues got to the top of it
into the four corners of this stone castle; many of them were burnt; the next
morning all that were alive cried for quarter, which was some sevenscore
persons, men, women and children, most of the women and children had quarter,
but the men came out of the Castle gave up their arms; We stripped 60. of these
rogues, and then killed them, leaving them unburied, and buried our own men;
they were commanded by one Lieutenant Plunket, Collonell Plunkets Captain,
Lieutenant of the Rebels, which is within seven miles of us at the Castle of
Longwood: my Lord of Tremblestone one of the Rebels lying in Tremblestone
Castle, within a mile from Trim, hearing we had taken this Castle, run away,
and left his Castle for fear. There we have another Garrison in that, and the
Rebels a mile from that, run away that night, and fired the Castle of Kilbride,
for fear of our Army, which is gone out for 14. days march into the Country.

The 23. of June there went a party out of Trim to range the woods, where we
found diverse of the rebels but they run away, there we took a hundred good
head of beasts, besides horses and sheep, the same night 50. musketeers fell
out of Trimblestone Castle a mile from their garrison and took 100. and 50.
head of Cattle from the rebels the enemy pursued us, but could do no good
for we brought them to the garrison I pray when you wright direct your Letters
in Collonell Gibsons name for him, who is at this time his Drum-Major and yours
to command John Bacon

From Trim this 29. of June
FINIS.

