ELEGIES On the much Lamented Death of the Honorable and Worthy Patriot,
FRANCIS PIEREPONT, Esquire. Third Son of the Right Honorable ROBERT, EARL OF
KINGSTON, Who dyed at Nottingham the 30th. day of January, 1657/8.

Printed in the Year 1659.

TO THE HONORABLE THE LADY Alisamon Pierepont.
MADAM,
WHen Debtors all have brought their hasty Crop,
You well may wonder at my tedious stop:
I Am angry at my self, and think to pay,
But straight an inward whisper bids me stay.
It Is conscience tells me that I owe too much;
Great Debts are slow, and mine I Am sure is such.
This Tortoise pace is properly my own,
Who in this kind can show no current coin.
Nature lent me not one propitious Muse,
And since I had the Schools farewell, I use
With Poets at no time to hold commerce:
It Is indignation now, that dictates Verse.
What may seem sharp, let then imputed be
To that unruly Passion, not to me.
What Is dull and flat, you may call truly mine;
That is the mark which proves it genuine.
If ought be thought, beyond the Moon; know I
A Star for subject have, that is pierced the sky.
Then take them, Madam, read, weigh, and excuse;
If others snarle, and censure, say but thus,
The Author tempts his Stars beyond their light,
To offer up a Duty in my sight,
Who knows his obligations, and must say,
All falls far short of what He ought to pay.
O. P.

MEMORIAE VIRI ILLUSTRIS FRANCISCI PIEREPONT, Nobilitate, doctrina, pietate,
suavitate-morum, and fortuna florenti.
O Nulli proavis and nobilitate secunde!
Sed placida cunctis humilitate minor,
I sursum, magno dextram conjunge Magistro,
Quo major nullus humiliorque fuit.
Qui potuit miro summus licet incremento
Humilitate suum nobilitare decus.
Te Domini mites animos, moresque sequutum
Haud dubie Domini gloria dia beat.
Summo virtutis ejus admiratori apposuit Ludovicus Molinaeus, Historiarum
Professor.

Upon the sensible loss of the Honorable FRANCIS PIEREPONT, Esquire. who departed
hence Jan. 30th. 1657.
BLUsh! Blush remorsless Parcae! Was not your Names
Antiphrasis confirmed enough, till Fames
Sad Trumpet tells the World, a Potentate,
A Pillar of the Church, a Prop of State
Is wholly sunk? Forced by what fatal Must,
Cut you at once the thread of Great, Good, Just?
This speaks your envy to Mankind, for we
Could draw by Him Virtues Epitome.
List; worst of the three Daughters of the Night;
I must proclaim thy everlasting spite.
The have robbed me of a Noble, Learned Friend,
With whom no precious hour I e're could spend,
But some increase of Knowledge in me wrought,
Some favor heaped, or else some Virtue taught.
For would I what was vain and idle fly?
'Twas then enough to keep him company.
Was Good my thirst? His Soul did it display
By a most gentle, and familiar way:
And in His noble body thus inshrin'd,
Nobility it self has far out-shin'd.
He sucked no Sophismes from the Schools, to raise
Sins Dark-Lanthorn, our purblind Reason's praise
(That Ignis fatuus, which 'twixt Good and Bad,
Cursed Mortals in a mist has always led.)
Above the Soul's essential Faculty,
That bright, first-breath'd Lamp of Innocence:
But did eclipse the Badge of humane fall
With Science purely Intellectual,
Which owned Gods Type, and in His Cask of Clay
Enjoyed the Virgin Light of its first day.
His private Alms he always strove to smother,
One hand in them was stranger to its Brother:
His public Deed's but a Record to show
What Governors of Hospitals should do;
Improve the Patrimony of the Poor,
Not pocket up their Rents, but give them more.
He taught, not bound His Offspring Charity,
Who then is her self when in full Liberty.
Would Rich men then in Pierepoint's footsteps tread,
The poor need not to ask or cloths, or bread.
He could Astraea's Sword directly weild,
Knew whom to punish with it, whom to shield.
The Balance He 'twixt all could evenly poize,
To charm their discord, and their jarring noise.
He loved the ancient Scripture-Hierarchy,
The Ruling-Elder with his Presbytery:
But when high Northern blasts by the root had torn
Those ever-virid Yews, and almost born
The tottring Temple down; He helped to shroud
Their naked Members under Jonah's Gourd.
And in the spite of Critics, He Would rather bear
A Soloecisme in Church, (Lay-Presbyter)
Then see it, Monster-like, without a Head.
But now He Is Dead! that Pious man is Dead!
Dead did I say? Oh false Opinion!
Pure Gold's not subject to corruption.
The skilful Artist to delude the eye,
Can, by a mixture of crude Mercury,
Turn it to dust; and with as easy slight,
By Vulcan's help, cast it again more bright:
But though he sweat, puff, blow, and try his all,
He finds that body Homogeneal.
Call then the Sons of Art, they will thus the Process read
In proper terms:
This now innobled Lead
A vessel's of Almighty-Chymistry.
The Body separate from its Soul, which we
Saw locked with Hermes seal from mortals eyes,
Great Piereponts body, now Fermenting lies
In Natures prouder womb, where't shortly must
By Saturns cold be fixed in noble dust:
Whence when the fiery Trial it has run
'Twill rise more glorious than the morning Sun,
To re-invest its widdow-soul from ground,
Called up by the last shril Trumpets joyful sound:
And jointly Both new linked inseparably,
Present their claim to Immortality.
Then style't not Death, which the first step must be
To lift us up to our Eternity.
Here Is comfort, Madam, be not a la mort,
Your longer stay casts you not one day short.
Your Husband should go first, but in this wheel
You and we all tread closely on his heel.
O. Pottlintun.

An Elegy expostulating Deaths arrest upon my Honorable, dear, and noble
Friend, Mr. Francis Pierrepoint Esquire,
Avaunt, grim Sergeant, with thy grisly Face,
Be gone, I Will break thy bald pate, and thy glass
If the entrest here; this is no common ground
Thou Rogue, thou treadst on, no, it will be found,
The Lord of the soil thou seekst for is of Fame
Above Arrest; know any of the name
Of Pierrepont Debtors? It Is a name we know
For Wealth, for Learning, and for Wisdom too
The Nation boasts of; (besides high descent
Which others have, which all the other want.)
Such as have seen the Vatican at Rome, Lord Marquess.
Mr William Pierepont.
Mr. Fran. Pierepont.

Say Pierrepont lives the Vatican at Holme.
States who fetched Wisdom from the men of Greece,
Confess one Pierrepont then the seven more wise.
Whilst all of all sorts do attest this truth,
Second to none, is third Brother to both:
And dare thou arrest him? He can retain
The greatest scholar, and the wisest man
(Advocates of his own house) to plead his cause
Besides his Inno^ence and our just Laws.
Thus for my Friend, expostulating I
(Maugre my threats) was made me this reply,
Pale death with equal foot attends the door
Of Palaces and Cottages full poor,
By statute Law there is an appointed day
When rich as poor Dame Natures debt must pay.
The great, the good, the just, the wise, the high,
Princes and Pierreponts too, they all must dye.
And must he die then? rather is he dead
Was there no Proxy to appear in's stead?
Might not one poor Debt be forgiven him,
Who many a poor man's Debt had often forgiven?
It Is paid, it is paid. Then Reader pass not by
But pay a Tear, if not an Elegy
As tributary to his noble Hearse,
Whose name will stand in Prose as well as Verse:
And needs no Poet to proclaim him good
In words rather expressed, then understood.
Whilst ^ho him understood knew him a man
Meek, not Morose, though Presbyterian,
Had only such been trusted with that key
Good men had all been for Presbytery;
Though vast in parts, and Patrimony rather,
H' appeared a giving, then a gifted Brother,
And yet his gifts were high enough to reach
As far to judge, as any man's to preach.
Grace crowned his gifts; glory now crowns his graces:
Heaven with supplies fill up such vacant places.
Sic cecinit Lachrymans; Sic Lachrymans precatur. G. Pigot.

Upon the much lamented Death of the Honorable FRANCIS PIEREPONT Esquire,
EAch Debtor has been called his dues to bring,
Of just acknowledgements an Offering
To make upon the sad and mournful Urne
Of this Beloved Saint, shall others mourn,
Much less concerned then I? I silent stand,
Whom you when living might of right command,
To whom I ought of Love, and service more,
Then if my All was sold would pay that score.
Dame Natures Debt, or yours, I know not whether
The greater, but like to be cleared together
So great a sum requires a longer day,
I now the Interest alone can pay.
But why so long, ere that comes in my Muse?
Oh! blame me not, hark to my just Excuse:
My Plumes have been so steept in tears, that I
Could not til now get wing, neither so high
As others can I soar; I Have only breath
To crawle upon the ground, and chide with Death,
Who has bereft me, and not me alone,
But even the Church, and Commonwealth of one,
Whose parts and virtues will eclipsed be,
If my dull pen set forth his Elegy.
I Will only hint, what in a larger story.
More fully may be spoke of Piereponts glory.
Nature being lavish to 'm with art did strive,
Which longest should his name preserve alive.
Heralds he left his birth to tell, did scorn
That, as below a person Heaven borne.
Heroic Acts not words, spoke his Descent,
His Freindship real was 'bove Complement,
His noble spirit decked with humility,
His humble soul inrich't with Majesty,
His Justice gave to every one his own,
His Wisdom saved his. His Charity was sown
In each fit soil. His Piety was free,
From common errors, or State policy.
Pious and politic, rare in our State,
These in a Statesman should concenterate.
Hold Muse, the Field is large, should over run
Thy self, can thou add Luster to the Sun?
Darken it thou do, its time now to retire
Sigh out thy remnant days, observe, admire
What cannot by the loftiest style b'exprest,
Labor to imitate, lets not disturb the rest.
Of this dear soul, with thy Caelestiall Graces
^le repone te in Heavens embraces.
Collonell White:

Upon the much lamented Death of the Honorable Francis Pierrepont Esquire,
Well may I be ashamed and blush that in
This Worthies praises I have silent bin,
When others trumpets sound so loud, that I
Might (though unfit to speak) an Echo be;
But grief that's great vents slowly, first it will
Utter it self in briny tears, which still
The Pen may steep in, that strives to express
What it is to want so great a happiness,
As I and more enjoyed, whilst the Sun shone clear
Now (alas!) set in this our Hemisphere.
Pardon then Reader (when it is so great worth)
If my dull Muse fall short in setting forth.
In such a public cause, it is I see,
Hard to speak full, as hard to silent be.
O! how my grief renewes, while each fresh thought
Of him, (clothed with a sigh heart-deep,) breaks out
In broken Language, that the World may tell
My loss, but only they that feel't can spell
My meaning out, but lest the torrent should
Too soon dry up, I cannot but behold,
How the Wound bleeds afresh in's consorts eyes,
Whilst she think's on her dearest's Obsequies;
As the widowed Dove deprived of her Mate
To greive is all her joy, to mourn her State:
Her tears her daily bread are, as if he
(Who in one moment ceased for to be)
Was by the all wise creator, (who in vain
Does naught) each minute given and taken again
Her loss so great, as he that does it view,
May think what Poets feign, might here prove true;
With Grief one turned quite into a stone:
Nature would yield, indeed, it is grace alone
Makes this a fiction; yet the sword cuts deep,
And when God strikes, then it is grace to weep:
Excuse her passion then, because her head,
Her joy, part of her self, her Husband's dead.
Death only could that knot unty, where Love
Informed two bodies with one soul, to prove
There was not Freindship here, but unity.
And he, though dead, lives in her memory,
And still will live: His name's not writ in the sand:
A nobler Tomb inshrines him, whose command
Ore each rebellious passion showed how far
He did excel what common Mortals are.
Though high, yet humble, high in parts, not pride;
His power great, his pity nere denied,
The poor man's suit, who ere had cause to say
He came complaining, that went sad away?
Learned in what was worth his study; and that
His chief delight was to communicate.
Thus virtue, that in's greener years did lie
Sown in his heart, grew to maturity;
Till's Harvest came, when he full ripe, from us
Was take'n and laid amongst what is precious
In Gods peculiar store house, where he stays
Waiting to see those long expected days,
When what death parts, shall reunite, and then
No night that joy will overcloud again.
George Fisher.

On the lamented Death of the truly Honorable Francis Pierepont Esquire.
TO thy dear memory, blessed Soul! I pay
This humble tribute; though in such a way
As rather does proclaim my want of skill,
(That n'ere set foot on high Pernassus hill,)
Than thy great merit. Grief knows not the art
To break that silence which might break an heart.
My deep Resentments of thy noble Love,
And faithful freindship, I so often did prove,
With all those Heavenly virtues did inspire
Thy generous breast, with more than common fire
I feign would utter, and thereby engage
The cold attempts of a declining age,
Which may admire thy Candor but despair
To match that copy thou have drawn so fair:
Whom not our words, as thy own worth, commends
Dear to thy God, thy Country, and thy Friends.
But why do I in vain strive to rehearse
Thy praises in the ligatures of Verse?
I Will leave that work most worthy to be done
By those in words that not in numbers run,
Whose task does lead them in a style more free,
T'instruct the world how much it lost in thee.
In whose example it might plainly read
Their Doctrine; and find out the way will lead
To be both great and good; whole life could teach
What men should do, or what themselves did preach.
Vere Harcour^

To the never dying Memory of that thrice Noble person and patriot, the
Honorable Francis Pitrepont Esquire Who departed this Life at Nottingham the 30th.
day of January, 1658.
It Is somewhat to be Nobly borne, and much
I'inherit thousands by the year; what such
A Birth, and birthright speaks, in the world appears
By the homage paid on all hands unto Peers,
And their Coequalls; whom all men adore,
As supreme powers: and to say no more,
Such civil Adoration is their Due,
Which bids that monstrous Parity Adieu,
That All-confounding Monster, whose lean Iaws
Gape wide to swallow both estates and Laws.
Long may the Grandieur of this Nation be
Stockt with such Gentry and Nobility,
As share the glory of their An'cestries,
And carry it on to their posterities.
But yet all this at highest speaks but low,
A worldly glory at the best; a show
Of earthly influences, which altogether
Cannot exceed the Line of this life: neither
Add one cubit to a better. See 'm
Nothing'd in death to us, us so to them.
It Is sad when great ones have no other birth
TO ennoble them, than what they have from the earth;
Better unborne, then not be borne again;
The new birth is the noblest: there is a vein
Of blood runs in the heart of the Beleiver
Bespeaks him Heavenly borne; and never
Does that Birth fail. So borne does never dye,
But has in death, Life to all eternity.
How glorious then must he be, to whose Hearse
We sadly pay the Tribute of this Verse?
Whose Noble Lineage, Great Estate, and all
Co^tentments flowing from them, he could call
Things on this side true Happiness. Elsewhere
He sought, and found that Happiness which never
Shall end or fade; and whose Foundation
The eternal Spirit laid in Regeneration.
True Saving-grace, the Diamond in the Ring,
Shined bright in his sweet Nature: Every thing
Had such a gracious luster in Him, as
The Good appeared still with the Great, and was
Above it rather. His Humility
Exalted him. Greater you could not see
Lodged in a Noble breast. His spirit might
Be read in's habit; void of Pride, and quite
Another thing than vain. Without ostent
Both; for the one was as the other meant.
That holy heat of Love, which in his breast
Faith had enkindled, He with warmth expressed
In's, dear affections to Gods Ordinances,
His Ministers and People. His observances
Of holy Duties, private and personal,
Graced with his walking answerable, were all
Fair evidences at the least of his
Sincerity, never to fall short of bliss.
Bring forth the person, rich, poor, old, or young
Can justly say, He ever did him wrong.
Methinks I see the Country round about
In a bemoaning Posture, groaning out
Their sighs; with this condoling Sympathy,
We have lost our Patriot; and he is mist already.
Methinks I hear the City making moan
One to another, our best Neighbor's gone.
The Ministry especially; we have lost
A Stay, a Prop, a Patron, and almost
Our selves in losing Him; who was indeed
Our Friend, and still we found him so at need.
A Friend to Truth and Peace, but no divider,
That healed our Breaches, never made them wider.
How full of Bowels to the Poor? What day
Passed without works of Mercy to them? Nay
Scarce any Meal, but at his Gates he fed
Whole troops of hungry souls with daily bread.
When Winters cold, or blustrings made their stay
At's Gates less comfortable; he would say
Let in the Poor, and serve 'um. If he saw
Any among them naked, he would draw
Out his compassions to them, and command
Clothes to be put upon them: His own hand,
Rather than fail, would do it. How the knel
These rang at's Death out-groan'd the Passing Bell.
To none an enemy, but to those whose sin
Proclaimed them to be so to God: Wherein
He could not hold, but with an holy zeal
Brake forth, and sometimes ring an angry Peal.
An innocent in doing ought was evil,
A very bungler in the works of the Devil.
A soul fitted for Heaven, where glorious Grace
Triumphs with him in's ever-mansion place.
His dearest Consort then may not return
Her comforts back again upon his Urn
With showers of Tears which still dissolve afresh
With thought or mention of his Name: Much less
Nothing her self with grief. A greater Honor
Cannot in this life be conferred upon Her
Then this of Hers, that she did once possess
All in her dear'st save endless Happiness.
John Viner, of Westminster.

In obitum Nobilissimi ac vere cordati viri Francisci Pierepont, Armigeri, etc.
PLurima jam strages agrum confecerat orbem,
Nunc and edax multo funere pinguis humus,
Exemplo quatiente animos, cum nuncia fati
Tristis, ad exitium tota parata fores,
Pulsaret faciles non immortalis Amici,
Supremam Domino claudere jussa diem.
Prodit huic Genius, volucris custodia vita,
Ac cupit intrantis sistere posse gradum.
Non patet haec (inquit) sceleratae janua turba:
Improbus haud nostras ausus adire domos.
Non hic contemni se laesa potentia coeli
Questa est indignis exagitata modis.
Hic male confictum nec Religionis amorem
Impietas prae se far superba solet.
Hic nemo socium vix cautum, pessimus art,
Prodidit, intactam dissimulando fidem.
Pauperis oppressi non hinc penetralia clamor
Vindicis assuevit sollicitare Dei.
Nullius hic famam mendaci lividus ore
Polluit indoctus censor honesta loqui.
Nulla caperatam faedat nubecula frontem,
Si forte alloquiis auris amica vacat.
Non musis invisa domus, non grata socordi:
Compositos juvenes non tulit iste locus:
Nec sunt haec Domini crudelis inhospita tecta,
Prompta sed officio gratia fratris adest.
Ergo alio concede, tuis nunc parce sagittis,
Laethalis senibus findat arundo latus,
Aut quibus indignas animas sua corpora gestant;
Hic virtus, Pictas, nobilitatis bonos.
Hunc vinum posci^ ^^^le^, hunc uxor; amici;
Hunc cives, dives, pauper ubique jacens,
Quam voluit Christi nova nupta puerpera membrum,
Laetetur secum, quodque simul doleat;
Vota nihil prosunt; lachrymae nihil; impigra telum
Mors jacit, and medium guttur utrinque ferit.
Per jugulos humor funesto spargitur aestu
Noxius, allisi pectoris ima gravans:
Donec pars melior, seeds pertaesa priores,
Ac gaudens coelo liberiore frui;
Dum nequit ulterius molem sufferre cadentem,
Quae, male conceptis ignibus usta, tumet;
Incola carceribus displosi corporis ardens
Emicat, angelicis associanda choris.
Jam fatis defuncte, Deo qui charus, ab alto
Subjectam faelix despice victor humum;
Ac tutos sponsi thalamos ingresse boati,
Convivae nivea cingito vest latus.
Caelicolumque pie prima te class repone,
Dum subit infernas impia turba domos.
The same in English.
GReat was the havoc Death had made,
Whilst every where men dread a shade:
The famished ground was then full fed
With a rich feast of bodies dead;
What time that breathless Post of Fate
Knocks at our friends attentive gate,
With hasty summons to invite
The man to bid the World goodnight.
The watch, that had the guard that day,
Prevents his speed, and bids him stay;
Then holding parley, know (said he)
From lewd companions we are free.
No horrid crimes this house does hide;
Nor is that Heaven-assaulting Pride,
Which vainly scorns the powers above,
Charged here; nor the dissembled love
Of pure Religion made a paint
To wash and falsify a Saint.
Nor may a Judas here commend,
Kiss and betray his fearless Friend.
The oppressed Poor's vindictive cries
Do not from hence to heaven arise.
Detracting envy here must raise
No damps to poison others praise.
No sullen cloud cast over the face
Obscures the entertainers grace.
Which did the Muses so far take,
As made them frequent visits make;
And bless the place from drowsy Fools,
That fill the seats in Bacchus Schools:
Yet hospitable kindness feasts
The civil ever-welcome guests.
Then pass us by, and aim thy darts
At withered and out-dated hearts.
Or let thine arrows find out those
Whose brutish corpse like Souls enclose!
Must Virtue, Grace, and noble Birth,
Descend into sepulchrall earth?
And the dear consort of his life
Be now a Widow, not a Wife?
And must that stock be now cut down,
Whose branches are so fairly grown?
Let theirs, let Friends, and Neighbors tears
Both rich and poor prolong his years!
How faign would Christ's black comely Bride
This flower might still uncrop'd abide;
That they might smile and droop together,
Or in Serene or Cloudy weather!
Tears have no force, nor wishes power
To intercept the fatal hour.
Death's deaf to all, soon strikes a note
That sounds harsh from his wounded throat.
Now the fell humor does infest
The troubled region of his breast,
So long, till the diviner Form,
Not able to ride out the storm,
Fain in safe harbor would retire,
And quit the Bark, which all on fire
Is soon blown up, and forced to Land
Her Pilot on the Ethereal strand.
Unbody'd Saint now safely rest,
From the foul worlds black tempests blessed:
And in the Bridegrooms closet dress
Thy self with Robes, that may confess
A richer glory and more white
Than his that does eclipse the light!
With crowned Elders then repose
Thy pious self; while graceless foes
Sail down the Stream, the Port forsake,
And perish in the Inferal Lake.
S. Brunsil.

In obitum celeberrimi viri Francisci Pierepont Armigeri, Carmen funebre.
O Si vel pietas, vitae candorve moverent
Supremos Divos, Tartareasve domos!
Si summum Ingenium, studiumque notabile cursum
Fatorum potuit sistere, vivus adhuc,
Et gra^us vivis, mortis contempserat iram
Pierepont, verus Nobilitatis honos.
Sed durae nimium Parcae nec talia curant;
Fatorum rabiem sistere nemo queat,
Thus Englished.
O That these links of Noble Birth, high Parts,
Candor that gave him interest in all hearts;
Bounty enlarged, unsoyl'd integrity,
Wel-temper'd zeal, wel-fixed piety
Had made a chain to have tied The Immortal guest,
His Heaven-born soul to the Mansion of his breast!
Then the much loved Pierepont still should live,
By's own Embalming self-preservative;
We should not then sit down by weeping cross,
Computing his great worth, and our great loss:
This's all we say to make the reckoning even,
He though thus good, was not too good for heaven.
Laurence Palmer.

On the Death of that Honorable and worthy Patriot, FRANCIS PIEREPONT, Esquire. Sic
flevit Z. C.
IF to be deeply wise, and honest too;
If to know well to speak, and well to do;
If to be learned, and the learned's friend;
If much in Alms, nothing in Pride to spend;
If to grow rich on his own Patrimony,
Without the loss, or grief, or curse of any;
If to profess Religion, and withal
Not to be dangerous, or schismatical;
If to be noble at the old Herald's rate,
And humbler far than those of the mushroom's date;
If to be both in love and blood most near
To the great Aesculapius, Dorchester;
If to be Parent, Master, Husband, all,
As each relations rule does strictly call;
If to attain that heavenly art, to end
And umpire strifes, and yet lose neither friend;
If these may be esteemed a good man's glory,
They were constellated in Pierepont's story:
And if these lost at once can make the world
Wisely consider her last sand is running;
(Cause such a prop and pillar down is hurled)
We need no Sedgwick to tell us [Doomesday's coming.]
Zach. Cauderey.

On the death of the Honorable Francis Pierepont Esquire. Third Son of the Right
Honorable, Robert Earl of Kingston.
BUt is he dead? can I believe
That he should dye, and we should live?
Methinks we may the knot untie,
Better to live, fitter to dye.
Death I see does wisely choose
The Gold, but does the dross refuse.
If each place had had its right,
Thou long since had bid's goodnight:
But now thou art gone, in doubt are we,
Whether to joy, or grieve for thee.
Our loss is great, greater thy gain,
Our comfort does exceed our pain:
He that writes thy sad Elegy,
Shows more love to himself, then thee.
Blessed soul! I can no more relate
Thy life past than thy present state:
My Pen can only blot the story
Of thy life, and of thy glory.
Our all is unwelcome courtesy,
At best, but wel-meant injury.
Long may thine live, and forward grow
In Grace, and Goodness, for to show
The world, that as they bear thy name,
They are heirs also of thy Fame.
Sam. Pickring.

Upon the praemature and much lamented death of of the Honorable Francis
Pierrepont, Esquire. deceased January 30, 1657.
AH! Why so fast, great Sir? the soul that was but sent
A while ago, so soon to quit its Tenement,
And leav's, is sad and strange to us; such sudden flight
Does cloud our day, and turn it to a darksom night;
And thus it needs must do, for though some Stars appear,
Yet when the Sun is set, it is night in the Haemisphere:
And so it is with us, for since our sad deprival
Of thy self, where is thy Compeer, or thy Rival?
If to thy birth we cast our eyes, thou wast of them
Whom well we may call Surcles, shot from noble stem,
In glistering beams of Honor, thou did brightly shine,
And virtues Pearly Chain, to deck thee, it was thine.
With all the gifts and richest ornaments of nature
Thou wast stored, which might adorn and bless a creature:
The several parts of happiness which scattered be
In others, all concentred were, and met in thee.
Then why so fast away, since to make up thy bliss
All things did thus concur? O sure the cause was this,
The little Commonwealth of man, like greater States,
Has some certain periods set, and hidden fates,
Heaven's Statute Law stands vnreverst, that all must die;
But how, or where, or when, we have no certainty.
Sam Cottes, of Colic.

Upon the much lamented death of the Honorable Francis Pierrepont, Esquire.
WHen Sun is set, the Stars by their faint light,
Serve only for to show us that it is night.
Change but the Scene, it is we, who now attend,
The doleful Funerals of this noble friend.
Whose presence made it day with us, we knew
No night, till he bad us and the world adieu.
Surviving friends cannot (though joined) repair
Our loss, only tell us how poor we are.
Strangers that live at distance can no more
Conceive of it, then we our selves before
It did befall us, still so senseless does
Enjoyment make us of what is precious:
But now quick-sighted sorrow hasts t'indite
His Epitaph, and dictates thus to write.
Here lies the glory of his kind,
The sweet composure of whose mind
Won all that knew him, such it was,
So mild, in it, as in a glass,
Others, who would behold, might see
Not what they are, but ought to be.
Whom Learning had its Patron (sad
That we can only say it had.)
In whom impartial Justice knew
To distribute to each his due.
Happy in reconciling those,
Whom pride, and passion had made foes.
A constant hearer of the Word:
Though great, he owned a higher Lord.
Whose zeal and prudence you might see,
In his well-governed Family.
Stay Reader, all is not here expressed,
But silent grief sighs out the rest.
Richard Grant.

On the much lamented death of the truly Honorable Francis Pierepont, Esquire.
IS mourning grown a fashion? and a Hearse
Become the common subject of a Verse?
Are th'Muses all close Mourners? and are Tears
The only Pearls which they of late do wear,
And drop for Beads over their Graves, to whom
In Pilgrimage Poetic feet do come?
No wonder then, great Sir, if at your Shrine
The Muses should turn Vo'tries, and combine,
There to lament the loss which they sustain
By your sad death; whose sacred Urn contains
Those precious Relics, which may justly call
For their attendance at your Funeral.
Mahomets Tomb may unfrequented lie,
Whilst yours is visited by passers by;
Over which to drop our Tears in Verse will be,
Devotion now, instead of Poetry.
Does virtue now prove fatal? Is It a sign
A Star is falling, when it does outshine
It Is bright Colleagues? does a more glorious light
Only portend a sad approaching Night?
Do Pearls dissolve the soonest? and they die
Fastest, who best deserve to multiply
Their days among us? Do the highest Spears
Finish their course in the least term of years?
Or have the greatest Orbs, as well's the least,
The Earth their Center and the place of rest?
Did these things seem so strange to us, that you,
Great Sir, are fain to die to prove them true?
But if our knowledge at no meaner rate,
Can purchs'd be out of the hands of fate:
Than by your loss, we would rather much remain
Ignorant still, than at such cost obtain
A demonstration. Could none else be,
To us, a pattern of mortality?
But he whose life was so much prized by those,
Who value men by real worth, not shows;
And can distinguish by converse with one,
Right watered Diamonds, from a Bristol Stone.
Such those knew you to be, who knew you best,
Whose worth was greater then the vulgar test
Could reach to comprehend; they only knew
So much as to admire, 'twas not one view,
Or two, or more, made by a vulgar eye,
Would serve to take your elevation by.
You loved not to expose your self too much
To common view, that you reserved for such,
As could discern where the distinction lies
Between pretenses and true Piety.
You scorned to prostitute Religion to
The lusts of men, as now too many do,
Whose consciences are weather-wise, and go
Round with the quarter where the wind does blow.
Your blood received a nobler tincture from
Your great endowments, then by what did come
Down from your Ancestors; whose virtues too
Had the same Chanel with their blood to you.
Next to your noble Brother, whose great worth,
Have set a Copy to be transcribed forth
By all great Persons; they may learn by you
How to be Noble, Wise, and Learned too.
Edward Stillingfleet, Fellow of St. John's Coll. Cambr.

On the much lamented death, etc.
MY coal-black Muse presents, gives fire
Just in my bosom, founds retire
To levity. More zealous thence
With sense of loss, and loss of sense
Proceeds to tell how that of late
(Such was her passion) Church and State
Had lost a light. So she refuses
To be profane amongst the Muses.
Such influences Subjects grave,
Upon a Poets vein may have,
Especially when they are noble dust,
Religious, Charitable, Just,
Learned and Politic, such compositions,
Without tautologies and repititions,
Can never be pressed; the Book of Life
Is able to decide the strife.
O horrid graves, ye can retain
But what is your own, no Pierreponts brain.
I summon every heart and hand
Within the bounds of Holy Land
T'unite their forces, let them know
They Have lost a leader, and that now
The Church, since she is grown more old,
Must learn to go without a hold.
Arthur Squire.

On the memrry of the honorable Francis Pierrepont Esquire. (third Son to the right
Honorable Robert late Earl of Kingston) who exchanged this life for
immortality, January 30. 1657.
IF any ask the reason, why so late
My Muse a mournful song does meditate,
I Will answer at the first, she was struck dumb
With petrifying stupor: Let her come
To recollect her self, her sighs and tears
Will amply show the high respect she bears
To inshrin'd virtue and Nobility,
Derived higher then Natures Pedigree.
Hence is 't that brokenly she Versifies:
(Words in deep sorrow ca^^'t be heard for cries.)
Copartnership alleviates sufferings;
From sympathy a much less trouble springs:
But here such losers are both Church and State,
They scarce suffice each to lament her fate,
When such as thou, great soul, are snacht away,
And so both robbed on the same dismal day.
So that if we lament a Senator
Most sage and faithful, or a Warrior
Steeled with true valor: While we condole
The maimed Republic, the Church (as if our soul
Were too much soakt in Politics) cries out,
Alas! How is it that you look about
With careless minds? Is It nothing that I want
When such a pillar's shrunk? who was not scant
In any point, whereby to introduce
Religions power into his households use.
^or only acting in a narrow Sphere,
Comes forth in public, fitter to act there.
Doctrine (methinks) and Discipline contend,
Which have in Pierepont lost the greater friend:
Uncertain, which most, truths complexion,
Or orders symmetry took his affection.
Which truly noble Candor, we in vain
May look and wish for, not call back again;
Nay rarely find in any Mortal breast,
Hence't comes to pass our friend is gone to rest.
An Ostracism ejects him out of the World,
Which can no longer bear virtue installed
In state majestic; but soon tenders up
To Heaven, the overflowing of its cup.
John Tuckney. C. C. J.

Upon the Death of the Honorable Francis Pierepont, Esquire. etc.
SHall I be forced to dip my Pen
In tears, and scrible mortal men?
Who being mortal, do but nibble
At highest things, and therefore scrible.
If any thing such subjects might
As these teach mortals how to write,
Make them more perfect, and confess
Such copies never could do less:
But here is the judgment, most men hate
Such a Text-hand to imitate.
I have heard great Sirs vainly boast
Of Riches, Honors, and their host;
I Have seen that man of merit sit
In Rome, and biting on his bit
In state, as if by Axiom true
He would prove Paradise as due,
Poor Majesty; compared to some
Who knew all those no life to come.
I have known the learned Rout so puffed
When they (as wind) have knowledge snuft,
Who in their Rapsodies have been
To the third Heaven near a kin;
Yet when that pale-faced hag did lower,
And summon them to flit their bower,
Could not dispute; No death to dye,
He dyed to live, this was the cry
Of him whose language yet does warble
Through the cruel, spightful Marble
(As you pass by, hark how it breaks
Your hearts, when he being dead, yet speaks.
His honor does invite a stand,
And every Passenger command
To know himself. Let no man spurn,
Though never so Noble, at his Urn,
Except they have a mind to dim
Their Honors by dishonouring him.
And while they do his corpse infest,
Like silly birds defile their nest.
But he who thought all this a bubble
TO have only birth, began to double,
The same with Learning and her charms,
Which well became a Talbots Arms,
And finding fruitful Helians Font,
He sucked it, like a Pierepont.
All Coats of Arms so thick, so old,
Without this lining, are but cold.
His moral virtues do present
To us a richer monument;
Prudence her self she did abhor,
Not to make him a Senator,
Love to his Country made him stand
Obedient to her strict command:
He might have chus'd, but that the beauty,
Which does complexion such a duty,
Soon moved his temper; 'twas his food
To have occasion to do good,
Without requital, and if a crime
Not to grow richer by the time;
I blame him that he did so halt,
Let this be put in for a fault;
But above all that which did throw
The greatest luster on his brow,
That which did crown his temples round,
And heaved his soul above the ground,
It was the image of his God,
To some a countenance, some a rod
That shone in him, let Church, let State,
Let family, Arts all bear the date,
Since that they lost him. Such a day
(Say Nottingham) here did they lay
His careful head, and such a night
(O dismal!) rent him from our sight.
And when you have bedewed his hearse
With many a doleful, blear-eyed verse:
Return, and as you softly walk
Confess your grief, your stones will talk.
If you say nothing, and conclude
'Twas you, not they that were so rude.
FINIS

