A VOICE FROM HEAVEN TO THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.

With Additions.

Printed in the Year, 1653.

Psalm. 119. 89.
For ever O Lord thy word is settled in heaven.

Jo. 12. 29.
Some said it thundered, others said an Angel spoke, Jesus answered and said,
Ver. 30, 31.
This voice came not because of me, but for your sake. Now is the judgment of
this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. Ephesians. 2. 2.


Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, Psa. 102. 13.
for the time to favor her, Psa. 119. Ver. 126.
yea the set time is come.

It is time for thee O Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law.

Psa. 132. Ver. 8, 9, 10.
Arise O Lord into thy rest, thou and the Ark of thy strength, let thy Priests
be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints shout for joy, for thy
servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine anointed.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, these things have been under a bushel these nine months,
so that I was in travail until now, as you see my condition, Jer. 30. 6, ^,
8, 9. to bring forth a King, even to raise up David. I complained unto many,
but I found no assistance, Mat. 5. 14, 15, 16.
how I might set forth this light to all that are in the house; and especially
to them that are in the House of Parliament, and to print it, that it might no
longer lie upon my conscience* as a heavy burden, but appear generally before
the world, until at last being overwhelmed with sorrow, I made my complaint
unto God, who in an extraordinary manner, within twenty four hours did send me
help, and therefore I praised God and admired his providence in these things.
And now beloved, I present these things unto you, which are no ordinary things.
And (as they came to me from God, which caused me to tremble at his Word, Isa.
66. 2. 5.) so I wish ye would seriously receive them. For I must needs confess
we do not read the Scripture, nor look into it with that holy reverence, as is
requisite for so great a word of Majesty, but play with it as with a Pamphlet,
that is to day, and to morrow is cast aside, so that it is turned to
wantonness, and vain pleasure more then purity, and powerful practice. And
therefore I beseech you hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
Word, Isa. 66. 2. 5. And to the rest I say, Be ye not mockers; lest your bonds
be made strong, for I have heard from the Lord God of Hosts, Isa. 28. 21 22.
a consumption even determined upon the whole earth.

Arise Evans.

A VOICE FROM HEAVEN, TO THE Commonwealth of England.
WElbeloved, though I have not expressions fitted for all sorts of people to
declare my matter intended, yet my desire is, That all might understand me,
that the highest would bow down his ear, and the lowest strive to understand
also. I hope you will take what I shall make out in plain terms with good
will, and not expect, nor respect the fine phrases of complements, but truth,
though in a mean habit, will (I hope) by you be judged worthy of love and
acceptance. And to vindicate my self against every spirit that shall rise
against me, I will show ye, First, that I have taken the Engagement, that is,
To be true to this Commonwealth, as it now stands, without a King, or House of
Lords. Now if I should be silent, and see the great evil that I see coming
upon this State and Commonwealth, and not give timely warning, that in some
measure by repentance it might be prevented, I should be false to the
Commonwealth.

Therefore I do discharge my conscience in faithfulness to it, because I am
bound by the Engagement so to do, so my conscience does witness to me, which
conscience of mine by Gods assistance, I shall keep clear, by declaring unto
you the truth that is opened to us in the word of God for us to take notice of
it, that we may know the truth, and be assured that God does manifest it, to
the end that all might be inexcuseable, upon the day that is coming; because
there is a day nigh at hand, Act. 17. 31.
in which God will judge the world, John 12. 48.
by a man which he has appointed by the word of Jesus Christ, in
righteousness. John 14. 25, 26.
And this man is not Jesus, but a man ordained, appointed and sent, by the
Father, and his Son Jesus; Joh. 15. 26
who in righteousness will judge, Joh. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and make war. And this man will be known by his rising from the dead, not in
that body that he died in, but in a body of his own seed, Rev 19. 11.
in which he will rise and reign for ever. And not only so, Act. 17. 31.
but the Lord Jesus will reign in him for ever and ever. 1 Cor. 15. 38.
So that all this is done, for the glory of the Lord Jesus, the fulfilling of
his promise, the manifestation of the true rest for his people, Joh. 16. 13,
14, 15.
who are yet tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, and without rest:
Ephesians. 2. 12. 13, 14.
Neither would I have you to mistake me, as if by this, I said that there is no
resurrection, Heb. 4. 7, 8.
but what is here mentioned; For I shall show you hereafter the true faith
which I believed. But here I show you, that this is a singular resurrection, to
a person offered up among the Gentiles, as that was of Jesus among the Jews.
And of both these, the Apostle speaks, Romans 15. verse 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14,
Here is the hid wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the Parliament knew,
for had they known it, they would not have put the King to death, 1 Cor. 2. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
15, 16. Where first he shows that the coming of Jesus, and the offering of him
up, was to fulfill the promise made to the Fathers of the Jews Nation: and
after speaks of a person to reign amongst the Gentiles; Isa. 11. 10, 11.
and of their offering up of him: Isa. 33. 22.
and he that is offered up, must be no less than a King. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 23.
Of this King there is much spoken in Scripture, he must be also of the root of
Jesse, Mat. 25. 34.
not by a carnal generation, but begotten of immortal seed by the blood of
Jesus. Joh. 6. 54, 55, 56, 57.
And on this King, Jesus lays so much honor in the Gospel, and of this King
he says, Heb. 10* 12. 13.
that he will raise him up at the last day. And Jesus when he ascended, sat at
the right hand of God, expecting till this King came, to subdue all the enemies
of Jesus under his feet. Heb. 2. 7, 8, 9.
For all things were not subdued to Jesus; though he were crowned in the
Apostles time, yet not in possession of his Kingdom till this King came. Rev.
11. 15, 16, 17.
This is that King of Kings, that Jesus holds forth; this is that King that
overcomes, 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15, 16.
and therefore possesses all things that overcame, and is taken into the
Throne of Jesus, Rev. 21. 7.
to sit with him, as Jesus overcame, and was taken into the Fathers Throne.
Rev. 21. 5.
This indeed is the third person, Rev. 3. 21.
and whosoever speaks against him shall never be pardoned, Mat. 12. 31, 32.
because that on him the Holy Ghost is fully manifested, that all the Scripture
is opened and fulfilled in him, and Jesus fully magnified by this person. For
the King is the Ensign of God that is set up the second time, to bring all
Nations to the faith of Jesus, Romans 3. 26. but especially all the Jews, Isaiah
11. 10, 11, 12. Isai. 59. 19, 20. Romans 11. 25, 26. Heb. 9. 28. Ecclesiast. 4.
15. 16. and the King is called by nomination the Holy Ghost, because he is the
special great messenger of the Trinity, John 14. 26. The Holy Ghost is so full
in him and upon him, that it gives its name to him; as we call a cup that is
full of wine, saying, give me the wine, or give me the cup, in sense is to be
understood the same thing. So the King is sent to us under the name of the Holy
Ghost, because he was full of it: but indeed properly the Holy Ghost is the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew 1. 18. 20. Luke 1. 35. And
therefore the Holy Ghost is called the first and the last, Revel. 22. 13.
because under that name he begets Jesus Christ, Matthew 1. 16. 20. Luke 1. 35.
and seems to be elder or before Jesus; and under that same name he seems to
be younger and after Jesus, and so sent John 14. 16, 26. John 15. 26. John 16.
13, 14. and these mysteries are riddles to the world, but to the Believers they
are evident, Psalm. 21.
John 14. 17. 26. there is more honor laid in Scripture upon this King, Read
all this Psalm
than my tongue or pen can utter, though I see it in abundance. This King
overcame all by his Faith in Jesus Christ, which faith he defended by his
sufferings, Heb. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10. 12.
through which sufferings he is perfected, and become greater then the greatest
Conqueror of all the Kings of the earth, Romans 8. 36, 37.
and in time to come, they shall all submit unto him, Zac. 14. 9, 10, 11, 12.
for God has made him King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. For the appearing of
Jesus Christ in him is to give rest to the people of God, Heb. 4. 7, 8, 9.
and his law shall go forth into all the earth. And all the earth shall be
gathered into one judgment to worship God, Isa. 2. 3.
according to the rule that this King left to them, Zeph. 3. 9.
and sealed it with his blood; Joh. 3. 33.
according to the appointment of God, Joh. 16. 13. 26.
and our Lord Jesus Christ. For it is the rule of the Spirit of truth which
Jesus promises to lead men into all truth. Eze. 39. 8.
And now the promise is fulfilled, Jer. 13. 19, 20.
and the Comforter is come, and the true way is perfectly known this very day:
Jer. 30. 23* 24.
and the wicked shall fall in the way that they have chosen, and the righteous
shall willingly come to the way of the truth, Hos. 14. 9.
and the wicked shall do wickedly, Psalm. 110. 2, 3.
none of the wicked shall understand the truth. These wicked are not profane
wicked, Dan. 12. 3. 4, 10.
I mean Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremasters, Liars, Sabbatt-breakers, and the
like irreligious persons; but these wicked are such as think themselves
otherwise, and the only holy, Pro. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14.
and to have most understanding; and from a false confidence, do act in these
times against the truth, Dan. 12. 3, 4.
and will never be persuaded, but they are the wiser sort of men. But the wise
and righteous shall understand the judg-truth and believe it; and they shall
shine as the stars, and turn many to righteousness, who were before profane.
Mal. 4. 2, 3
And their knowledge shall be increased, for the Sun of righteousdesse will
shine upon them. For Jesus does shine upon him, and give him of his light. And
they shall tread down the wicked, Psa. 92. 7.
that they shall never rise again, or their wickedness will be seen and
abhorred of all men: and their carcasses shall be as dung upon the earth; 2 Timothy 3. 3. 8, 9.
and they shall be eaten of worms, and devoured with the fire of their own
anger, Isa. 66. 24.
they shall never be able to help themselves. Mat. 24. 15.
And now is the time that ye shall return and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, Mal. 3. 18.
that ye may know who is righteous, and who is wicked; who serves God, and who
serves him not, and what is the true way of Gods worship. Of this I shall
speak if God permit, and clear it out to your understanding, with the uttermost
of my ability, for the salvation of your souls and bodies, and all that ye
have. For I believe ye shall see more trouble upon this land suddenly, then
has been any time heretofore.

All the Prophets of God prophesied mystically; and the groundwork of all the
Prophets is the speech of Noah to his Sons, Jesus blessed in Shem.
Genesis 9. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. where he curses Ham for his rebellion
against him, and blesses Shem and Iaphet, who honored him. Jesus Christ is the
God of Shem, and lineally descended of Shem, and conquered all the rebellious
seed of Ham, K. Charles also blessed in Japhet.
by his sufferings, Colossians 2. 14, 15. and King Charles is that seed of
Japhet, who by his coming in to Jesus Christ, and suffering for his truth,
brings the rebellious seed of Ham to such an eternal servitude, that they
shall not rise again. All this the Prophets foresaw, and declared mystically,
which mysteries could not be opened till King Charles came and finished his
course. And at this time all the mysteries are fulfilled, as ye have it,
Revelat. 10. 7. thus, In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he
begins to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared by
his servants the Prophets. Again, a Prophet of our Nation noting to us the
time, says more clearly to the same purpose thus. Coroni mab. Ann. iw. diwedde
u drogan. In English thus. The Son* of Anne Crowned will finish the Prophecies.
Ye have this prophecy cited in Master Lillies book, called Monarchy, or no
Monarchy, and he does acknowledge it to be spoken of King Charles his
Coronation. Though Lilly brings it to prove that there should be no more Kings
here in Britain, but he erreth. For the said Prophet says, that all the
prophecies are fulfilled in King Charles, called by him Mab. Ann. or the Son
of Anne, that we might know the time of the seventh Angel. And that now there
shall be a rule and a Kingdom that shall subdue all, and shall stand for ever
under The Jews look for such an one as ye see in Manasseh Ben Isreal's book,
called the hope of Israel; and sent to the Supreme power of England. An. 1650.
one to call and deliver the ten Tribes, and their hope as true, for as Isaiah
says, Isa. 59. 20. the Redeemer shall come to Sion; that is, to the Elect
Jews, but say you, from whence shall he come to Sion? the Apostle tells you,
Romans 11. 25, 26. he shall come out of Sion, to Sion; hence ye may see, that
from the Elect Gentiles, our deliverer, or Redeemer, Charles the Son of Charles
Stuart by name, comes to the Elect Jews, to deliver them from the power of
darkness, and to bring them to Jesus Christ, and eternal life. And by the
star that did appear at his death, it is evident, that God would have you know,
that Charles Stuart is that day star to bring the Jews to Jesus; as the Star
brought the wise men to Jesus, Mat. 2. 9. which Star is promised to the
Gentiles, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and especially is promised to him, that overcame by his
sufferings to keep and defend the Church of God, Rev. 2. 26, 27, 28.
King Charles, and his seed, whose seed by the works of God shall appear to
have an unquestionable Sovaraignty over all the earth* Heb. 11. 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29.
That can never be shaken again. Of this construction the Scripture is full,
and M. Lillies Prophets wrested by him, do intend the same thing with the
Scripture; for all the Kingdoms of the earth at the sound of the seventh That
is of our Lord Jesus, and of his anointed Charles; for Christ is a Greek word,
which in English is anointed.
Angel, became one Kingdom of Christ, Revel. 11. 15. and the word Jesus is
left out there, and also Revel. 20. 4. now Christ has a new name, that is
Charles, Revel. 3. 12. so that Charles is the Christ of Christ. For so it
signifies, Revel. 11. 15. where it is said, the Kingdom of our Lord JESUS, and
of his Christ, CHARLES: And again says Jesus, I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. 6. and this is clear by many places. And though the word
Charles is not in all the Scripture, any more then Jesus in the Old Testament,
named: yet we find marks by which they are signified, that we might know them
from all others, at the appearance of their persons to the world. The Son of
Anne was King Charles. I saw the star on the day that King Charles came to Paul's
to give thanks to God for the Queens safe deliverance, at ten a clock in the
morning, being a clear day; and the Star was near the Sun. Let none oppose it,
when Scripture speaks, when a sign from heaven speaks and declares his
righteousness according to the Scripture; Psalm* 97. 3, 4, 5, 6. Mat. 24. 3.
And this Prophet does so agree with that of Rev. 10. 7. as if it were the same
Angel sent afterward to certify of the time, when the seventh Angel does
sound. And it is now; which in Scripture is called the end of the world; in
regard of the great alteration, destruction, persecution* to come into the
world, as if all things were destroyed, and made new again. Diverse of the
Prophets of the Old Testament spoke of the end, as in Dan. 11. 27. 30, 31, 32,
33, 34, 35. Dan. 12. 8. 13. Hab. 2. some of them call it the day of the Lord, a
dark day, a great, and notable day, a gloomy day, a day neither light nor dark.
Amos 5. 18, 19. Joel 2. 31. Zeph. 1. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Zach. 1. 14. 6, 7, 8.
a day of decision to decide the long controversy, between the seed of the
Serpent* and the seed of the Woman. It is also to be observed how the Prophet
against this time of decision sends a Proclamation to the Gentil^s, invites
them to come to this great work to fight, and end the controversy, and bids
them beat now their plow-shares into swords, and pruning hooks into spears,
Joel 3. 9. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and after the victory is obtained, then the
Prophet Isaiah and Micah, in the same words, bids them beat their swords into
plow-shares, and spears into pruning hooks, for they shall learn war no more*
Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. Micah 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. and it is called a day of Judgment,
given to the Saints, that they may possess the Kingdom for ever and ever,
Dan. 7. 22. In the new Testament there also is much spoken of the end, Mat. 24.
6. 13, 14, 15. and now the end is come, the abomination of desolation stands
in the holy place, that is, every foolish man gets up into the Pulpit, and
powers out his folly: Now the false Christ's and false Prophets appear, every
one would feign himself to come in the name of the Lord, as if he were sent
indeed, and none but he a^ight. One sets up his way, another says as much, and
sets up his way, so that you may see, what times we live* in by these
appearances. The Independent says, here is Christ, the Presbyterian says, Lo
here is Christ, the Anabaptists says, Lo here is Christ, and so all other
Sects cry. Now consider the words of the Lord Christ, by which you may know
that none of the ways now tolerated, and in such great esteem is the way of
salvation, neither shall they be saved that continue in any of these ways, for
at this time, when all men are suffered to be of what Religion they please; yet
you shall find that the faith of Gods Elect is forbidden, and true Religion
with the professors thereof according to the words of Christ persecuted and
driven from their habitations, for the Elect must endure and fly, until the
Lord come as lightening to lighten the earth, to give them hope, and assured
knowledge that Judgment is coming upon their persecutors, for you know that we
are exhorted by Christ, to compare what we see in his Word with the things done
in our times, for he gives us true signs, and then says he, when ye see these
things begin to come to pass, know that your redemption draws nigh. And
again, by these signs you may know which is the faith of Gods Elect, who are
the Elect of God, and where this faith is found, At the appearance of Jesus
Christ, there was a division amongst the people, some said of him, we know this
man whence he is, but when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is, Joh. 7.
26. 27. others said Christ came of the seed of David, of the Town of Bethlehem,
a place well known to them, Joh. 7. 40. 41, 42, 43. now the reason of this
division was the Scripture, for Isaiah says, Isa. 33. 17. their eyes shall see
the King in his beauty, and the land that was very far off from them. And again
Isa. 30. 27. says, the name of the Lord comes from far, and David says,
Psalm. 48. 2. that this land was on the sides of the North: and so in Ezekiel. 38.
2. 6. that this chief Prince of the Gentiles should come from the North
quarters; so Esdtas their last Prophet, 2 Esd. 13. 7. who saw the land in a
vision, but could not come to know the region, so that none of them could name
the Country and City where this great appearance should be, and John gives it
a name in regard of the great evil done in its darkness. Sodom and Egypt,
Rev. 11. 8. but in regard of the light that would come forth out of its
darkness, he calls it new Jerusalem, Rev. 3. 12. Rev. 21. 10. holy Jerusalem,
so that London and Britain was not known unto them by name to be the place
where these great works should be done, as it is seen this day, for the signs
declare the times and place, Mat. 16. 23. Luke 12. 54, 55, 56, 57. therefore ye
are to observe the signs of these times, and to compare them with Scripture.
Tit. 1. 1. Mat. 24. 13. 16. 20. 27. Mat. 24. 15. 32, 33. Mar. 13. 7. 8. 14.
28, 29. Luke 21. 28, 29, 30, 31.

First the Faith of Gods Elect is where the abomination reigns, though under
persecution, that is clear, Mat. 24. 15. Here under this state we see the
abomination, therefore here are the faithful found.

Secondly, the abomination cannot be said to reign but in one certain country
where the Elect are planted, Namely Judea signifying England.
and if possible the abomination should have his full time, no flesh should be
saved, Mat. 24. 22. And it is evidently seen, that the abomination reigns
here in England, therefore if the Elect be destroyed here, there is no more
seed left to propagate, Isa. 1. 9.

Thirdly, consider there is but one way of salvation, but many false ways, 2
Pet. 2. 2. and he that endures in that way continually, notwithstanding what
he may suffer for it, he shall be saved, Mat. 24. 13.

Fourthly, consider, that when every other way is tolerated, then this true way
is persecuted and forced to fly, Mat. 24. 15. 16. 23. 25. 26.

Fifthly, I acknowledge God has his Elect over all the earth; and that he will
send his Ministers to gather them into this only way of salvation, Mat. 24. 31.
but now there is no Elect visibly seen, save these of the Church of England;
and all the Elect must come to unity with these, in form of worship, doctrine,
and discipline, before they can be justified and saved.
consider, that the false ways at this time are far more glorious then the way
of truth, and so prevalent, that if it were possible, they should deceive the
very Elect, Mat. 24. 23, 24, 25, 26.

Sixthly, consider, that the Elect are no where else but here in England, and so
tied to this place, that if the faith of Gods Elect were destroyed here, there
should be none saved, Mat. 24. 22.

Seventhly, consider, that if the faith of Gods Elect were any where else
found, it could not be subject to dangers, as it seems to be, for if it were
destroyed here in this land, we should find it in some other. But the case is
not so, for he does specify a certain place by the name of Judea, Mat. 24. 16.
where these things shall be seen, and it is evident that Judea to be here, for
here the signs are seen, England is the place, therefore here and no where
else is this faith found. And it is evident to be the faith of King Edward,
Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles, and if destroyed here, where else to
be found?

And to show you, that the Romish Faith now is not the Faith of Gods Elect, it
was determined that some should depart from the faith before the day of God
came, 2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3. and accordingly they have departed, as you may see
their actions noted unto us, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. by their forbidding their
Priests to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which things they do.
And after their departing it was determined that there should be a reformation
in the Church made by public authority according to the mind of God, which
reformation or form of worship is called a form of godliness; and the authors
of that form are justified and called good men, 2 Timothy 3, 4, 5. And then it was
decreed that a company of Traitors should come and deny the power of this form,
and say the form is not of power to make men godly, and this you may see in 2.
Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

And they are compared to the Sorcerers of Egypt, because they withstand this
form, and the authors of it, as those Sorcerers did Moses; who was also sent
of God, and gave the Law. And these men privily conspire against the truth,
according to the word, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy
3. 6. Jude 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and from the conspiration of these men comes the
abomination that makes desolate, and now reigns: and as the time of the
Papists departing from the faith, is called the latter times, 2 Timothy 4. 1. So
the time of these are called the last days, 2 Timothy 3. 1. so that all comes to
pass in order according to the Word and knowledge of Christ. And if you
consider how God is a God of Order, and would have all things done by lawful
authority given by himself; you may see upon the Papists departing from the
Faith, God removed the power from Rome to England.

First Luther falls out with the Pope, writes against him, endangereth the
Faith, and the Pope is not able to help himself.

Secondly, upon this King Hen. 8. writes against Luther, overthrows him, and
defends the Faith.

Thirdly, upon this the Pope, who should have defended the Faith, because it
was his proper office, gives the title from himself, to King Hen. 8. and calls
him the Defender of the Faith.

Fourthly, upon this the King would marry, the Pope would not let him marry.
The King did marry, the Pope excommunicates him for it. The King by virtue of
his Title, Defender of the Faith, defends himself against the Pope, calls a
Parliament, casts out the Pope, and begins to reform all things according to
the Word of God; and this Parliament are called good men, 2 Timothy 3 3.

Fifthly, King Edw. 6. by virtue of the same title calls a Parliament, and they
give the form of godliness to the Church, purely and perfectly according to
the mind and word of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, Queen Mary takes in the Pope again, then the Martyrs stand up, and
seal the true Faith with their blood, confessing the goodness of God to his
Church, and triumphing in the flames with joy over their enemies; for the
Elects sake.

Seventhly, Queen Elizabeth comes out of her troubles, lightens the earth with
her goodness and glory, as if the daughter of Sion were risen from the dead,
Isa. 60. 10. 16.
to the great comfort of Gods Elect.

Here you may see how God preserved the Faith, removed the authority, reformed
the Church, by a public power; for it was determined of Christ, Isa. 43. 23
that when Princes were subjected to the Faith, they must have care of his
Church as nursing Fathers, Mat. 24. 23, 24, 25, 26.
and reform it, when need requires by their public authority: and whatsoever
is done by private rebellious Subjects in private against authority, though
they pretend to follow Christ and his Apostles in it, and think that a good
warrant, yet it is damnable, condemned by Christ and his Apostles; for says
he, go not to the Desert, nor to the secret Chambers, nor here nor there to
seek me, for I will be of no such rebellious conspiring society: 2 Pet. 2.
For he saw that the abomination of desolation would begin in such private
meetings. Jude 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
And the Apostles say, they shall privily bring in damnable heresies, and in so
doing, oppose men dignified with the power of Christ; and for so doing they
shall be destroyed in eternal fire, and have their wages in hell for ever.

Now concerning King Henry 8. some will say, Heb. 12. 16, 17.
might not the Pope take the title again from him, upon his revolting from the
Pope? I answer no, Genesis 25. 31, 32, 33, 34.
for the chief gift once given, cannot be recalled, for God goes along with it.
And he that receives the gift, is by virtue thereof made more able then he that
gave it; Genesis 27. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
so that he that gave it, has no power to command him to give it again, and
this I shall prove to you. Esau parted with his gift as the Pope did, and would
have had it again, but could not, though he sought It of God with tears. And
though Jacob in a subtle way deceived his Father Isaac, to get the power and
blessing from him, yet his Father Isaac could not help it, though he trembled
when he came to know what he had done. Oh says he to Esau, I have made him thy
Lord, and done thus and thus unto him, it must be so now; what can I do for
thee? as if he should say, I am disabled, I have given all away from me; and
all was but a few words said by Isaac to Jacob, yet there was such power in
those words, that Isaac nor Esau, with all they could do, could not help
themselves against Jacob.

Thus much for a Preface. But my matter intended is shorter and more powerful.
For you shall see all things set down in the Scripture, as they came to pass
since the beginning of this Parliament, to this very day, and what is to come
to pass hereafter upon this Nation. And you shall see all this in the eighth
and nineth Chapters of Amos; who first speaks of the End (that was) the
beginning of this Parliament (and the ruin of the Kings Court) and then speaks
of everlasting ruin to this State; 2 King 14. 23. 27. 28.
and the renewing of the Kings Court, Amos 1. 1.
and enlarging of his power over all the earth; Amos 7. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13 14.
15.
and this you shall see verse after verse, as all things things come to pass
hitherto in order.

And now if you consider, Acts 15. 15. 16. 17. 18.
you shall find that the prophecy of Amos, which he prophesied against Jeroboam
the Son of Ioas, was not fulfilled upon him; Rom 2. 28 29.
for he prospered all his time, but it was to be fulfilled amongst the Gentiles
And therefore the Apostle James alleges this Prophecy as a thing belonging to
the Gentiles, Romans 9. 6. 7.
and gives this note, Gal. 6. 16.
says he, Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world;
as if he had said to us, The things that are now in doing amongst you, were
known to God of old, as is declared by his Prophet Amos. For though this
Prophet as others does speak to Israel, yet it belongs to the spiritual
Israel, as many more also did, and the Apostle does so interpret the
Scriptures, etc. Now shall I show you the meaning of these two chapters, the
eighth and nineth of Amos.

AMOS 8.
In ver. 1. 2. God says to Amos, what see thou? Amos answers, a basket of
Summer fruit, that signifies the harvest is come, the generation of the world
is ripe in sin, fit to be cut down. Then says God, the end is come upon my
people, I will not pass by them any more, as if he said, I will cut them down
now they are ripe.

In ver. 23. ye have the first work this Parliament did, that is, the taking
down of the Bishops and Cathedralls, signified by these words; The songs of the
Temples shall be howlings in that day. Here you see Judgment begins at the
house of God, as ye have it in Ezekiel. 9. 6. the 1 Pet. 4. 17. and ye have also
there the dealing of our Diurnalls, which say many times, we got such a strong
hold, and killed so many hundred men, and we lost but five men; but God says,
this is their policy, they lost more, and they concealed it: and it is
signified in these words, there shall be many dead bodies in every place, and
they shall cast them forth with silence.

In ver. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. ye have the sins and cause why the judgment is come,
set down, and that it is not for any fault found in the public worship of
God, but for covetousness, hardness of heart toward the poor, and the
deceit of the people, and their neglect in the worship of God. For the same
cause there is a general rising throughout the Land, and the Kings party
utterly overthrown.

The Jews judgment is right, as you may see Sec. 26 of the hope of Israel.
They say, that their Messiah, or deliverer should die in the last war of Gog
and Magog, and rise again to be glorious and victorious.
In ver. 9. ye have the Kings untimely death signified by the Sun going down at
Noon, for the Sun signifies the King, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Mal. 4. 2. Genesis
37. 9, 10.

Isa. 35. 8, 9. 10. the book of Common Prayer is promised, and is called, The
way of holiness: And because of the abundance not only of the Jews
Ceremonies, but also of Papists ways: so that a wise man may lose himself in
them. But says be of this way of worship, the way faring man, though a fool,
shall not err therein, because there are but a few things to be done, and
plain direction for every thing, Jews, Turks, Papists, Presbyterians,
Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, leave your pernicious ways, and come to
this only way of truth, where you shall find rest, 2 Pet. 2. 2. Heb. 4. 7, 8,
9. Isa. 35. 8.
In v. 10. ye have the great mourning for the Kings death, and a wrathful
indignation declared by way of revenge upon the enemies at last.

In ver. 11, 12. ye have the form or worship or Common Prayer book taken away,
so that the Elect cannot hear it read any where; which book is called, the
words of the Lord, and the word of the Lord; and by this you may know, that
book to be the only true form appointed of God before hand, the rule of the
spirit of truth, the which rule Jesus foresaw, and promised to send the spirit
to give it: for he knew by this word that I do now open unto you, that there
was a rule to come forth, and the form of it in all things, was a secret
thing, kown to none but the Father, therefore Christ commits the directions of
the Church, in the true worship to the spirit, so that until this time the
Church is tossed to and fro, because there was no rule known till now, Ioh. 16.
13. and now ye are come to a perfect rule, given by a perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 13,
14.

In ver. 13. ye have the constancy of the Kings party to their Religion and
King, Rev. 14. 4. and their thirsting for their Religion and King again.

In ver. 14. ye have the States party up, signiby the sin of Samaria, the God
of Dan, the manner of Bersheba, Hosea 8. 5, 6.
all which were Idols. But says he, 1 King 12. 28, 29.
they shall fall, and never rise again, implying thus much, that the King and
his party, though now down, shall rise again, and stand for ever.

AMOS 9.
In v. 1. the King is risen again, and stands upon the altar, that is, the
Scaffold, where he suffered, And here is his Resurrection set down Amos (...)
and offered himself, there he triumphs, and commands to smite Lintell,
that is, the Speaker of the House of Parliament, and cut them all on the head,
and slay the last of them all: this is said of the Parliament, to show that
they shall not escape the hand of this mighty Lord. Rev. 20, 7 8, 9, 10, 11 12,
13, 14, 15. now the former part of this, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. was the
state of the Church from Constantine the great his time, until the Church was
persecuted again by the Romish Heresies, which was the cause that God took the
sword from thence; and put it in King Hen. 8. hand, to defend the Church as
before mentioned.


In ver. 2, 3, 4. ye see, there is no place in hell nor in heaven, nor in the
top of the mountains, nor in the bottom of the Sea, nor any where else for
them to escape his hands, but he pursues them, and takes them.

In ver. Compare this 5. ver. with Amos 8. ver. 8. where you have the same
words in effect, only there is added in the said 8. verse, and they shall be
cast out: which words in Isaiah 66. ver 5. are plainly opened, which I besecch
you read and observe.
5. ye have a general rising caused by his hand, throughout the whole land,
and the Parliaments party utterly overthrown.

In verse 6. ye have the glorious building of the King in the heavens, above
all the Kings of the earth, and the power he obtained by his sufferings; and
his glorious name next to Jesus, as being his most excellent servant of all
others.

In the 7. verse ye have the wrath of God declared against the Parliament for
their killing the King, and destroying the Kingly power, by which God delivered
them from the bondage of Popery, and he looks upon them as black children of
Ethiopiaus for these ungrateful acts.

In verse 8, 9, 10. ye have Gods wrath upon the whole Kingdom, he tells them,
that those who depend upon their power, and think they can prevent the evil,
that it shall not overtake them; says he, they shall surely perish, but the
rest he will save; as wheat is winnowed and saved; and taken from the chaff.

In verse 11, 12. ye have the Kings Tabernacle, or Court see up again, and his
Kingdom Enlarged over all the earth.

In verse 13. ye have the King and his party taking all again from the
Parliament and their party; signified in these words, The plowman shall
overtake the reaper; and the treader of grapes, him that draws forth that which
is not his own. For the King coms from the altar, and gives commission to the
treader of Grapes (that is) some one of his seed that shall reign: to cut down
the Grapes, (that is) the party now standing, as you see both parties. The
Reapers first, and the treader of Grapes after, gets the victory. Rev. 14. 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

In verse 14, 15. ye have the King and his parties captivity ended, etc. Their
building and planting, and their enjoying of the fruits of their labor, and
the promise, that they shall possess their land, without any molestation
hereafter, for ever and ever.

And now I beseech you look upon this Scripture, and lay it to heart, and
consider how ye have seen before your eyes, this 8. Chapter of of Amos
fulfilled, as I have interpreted it unto you, and you see there the rule to
worship God by, all which is made plain for you to see as well as I, that you
may be saved.

I beseech you also to lay to heart, and consider this nineth of Amos, where
you may see perfectly according to the promise of Christ, the things to come,
Ioh. 16. 13.

Never had people the like showed them, as ye have now so plain from these two
Chapters. O take heed that ye slight it not, but make use of it for your
salvation! For if ye be cut down, and cast into the winepresse of the
fierceness of the wrath of God almighty, ye are undone for ever, and ye may
see how to prevent it, Rev. 14. 18, 19. Rev. 19. 15. by what has been spoken.

And this I say to the Parliament, to the Army, and to all others, Do the work,
for it must be done. Be ye valiant, set up the King, for if Forraigners do it,
ye are undone. And you may see it will be done by a strong power.

I have also some things to show you out of the first of Isaiah, and it chiefly
concerns this City of London, which in regard of its action, now, is called
Sodom and Egypt, Isa. 1. 10. Rev. 11. 8. and that it was a faithful loyal
City in the time of Queen Elizabeth, when she was received by the Citizens out
of the Tower, and with joy accompanied to Westminster; and though now this City
be an unfaithful harlot, yet she shall be restored again to her former
faithfulness. Of this I shall in brief show you.

Isaiah 1. ver. 1. to ver. 10. ye have the King and his party signified with
their condition that now they lie in, brought upon themselves by their sins:
and this Parliament being Executioners of Gods judgments upon them, yet they
are owned of God as his Elect, of which he will save a remnant.

In ver. 10. ye have the word directed to you Rulers of London in these words,
Hear the word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give care to the Law of our God
ye people of Gomorah.

In ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. God does reprove you sharply for coming to his
presence, and doing such things by which ye think to please him, as your days
of humiliation, your days of thanksgiving, your solemn private meetings. But
God abhors these from you, saying he will not hear you, for your hands are full
of blood, as if he should say, ye break the right proceeding of this
Parliament, by suffering tumults at the beginning to go to Westminster, to the
Parliament, and wrest judgment, therefore upon you lies the blood that has
been spilt all this time. Exo. 23. 2.


In verse 16, 17. ye have the law promised, in verse 10. being these words,
wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doing, from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, right the oppressed,
plead for the widow, judge the fatherless, which widow is the Queen, and the
fatherless are the Kings children, which ye are to right, and plead for, if
you will obey the voice of the Lord, for he says not widows, but widow, as
ye have it also in the 23. verse of this chapter.

In ver. 18. ye have the promise annexed to the performance of this law, in
these words, though your sins be like scarlet, they shall be white as snow,
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

In ver. 19, 20. ye have your choice, whether you will do this law or no, with
a promise and a threatening, in these words, if ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the fruit of the Land: But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

In verse 21. 22. the Lord laments the fall of London from its former state;
saying, how is the faithful City become an harlot? it was full of Judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers: thy silver is become dross,
thy wine mixed with water.

In verse 23. 24. he charge the Rulers with Rebellion, Thievery,
Covetousness, and giving a hint at what he required before, in verse 16, 17.
says he; they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow
come unto them: and because of this neglect, Ah! says God with indignation, I
will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.

In verse 25. 26. to the City of London, hesaith in these words, and I will
turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all
thy tin, and I will restore thy Judges as at the fiast, and thy Councillors as
at the beginning, meaning King Henry, King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth's time;
afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City.

In verse 27. he says of the Church now under persecution, Sion shall be
redeemed with Judgment, and her converts with righteousness.

In verse 28. 29. 30. 31. ye have again the transgressions mentioned, and that
ye shall hereafter be ashamed of this Parliament which wa desired of many, who
thought it would be for their building and flourishing; which Parliamen is
signified there by Oaks for strength, and by a garden for flourishing. But
says he of this Parliament, it shall be as an oaken leaf that fades, and as a
garden that has no water, and the strong shall be as Tow, that is the
Parliament, and the maker of it, as a spark, that is their party, and they
shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

It is here plain to be seen in these chapters, Amos the 8. and the 9. and
Isaiah 1. verse after verse, what this Parliament has done; and what is
decreed upon them, I know not how to help them, except they repent. And now I
will show my petition unto them.

To the most Honorable high Court of Parliament at Westminster.
The humble Petition of Arise Evans, dwelling in Black Friars, desiring your
attentive reading of all, and your serious Consideration of it.
HUMBLY SHEVVVNO,
THat the Petitioner having taken the Engagement, will without doubt be true to
it, and to the utmost of his power be a means to save the Governors, though
the Government fall; which fall, in the eyes of men is impossible, in regard of
outward provision. But the Petitioner seeing this State by the spirit of God,
says it is impossible for it to stand, and its time is limited very short,
which (if the Petitioner find acceptance) it shall be manifested unto you; he
being pierced through with sorrow for you to his very heart, at the
apprehension of it; seeing no way to prevent the judgment but the way of
peace. And humbly to give your Honors a glimmering of what he sees determined
upon you. He beseeches you to consider Amos 9. where first you shall see
Lintell the Speaker of your house smitten, and the last of the house also
signified, and what follows to the 10. verse, and from that to the end, you see
the Kings Tabernacle, or Court built again. Here is but a touch for you, and
God does not desire to slay men, who are his creatures, but to slay sin;
neither will God save men in their own ways by their sword, Zac. 4. 6.
but by his spirit. Now if the Petitioner find acceptance, he shall by this
Declaration free himself from the blood of all men. Ezekiel. 2. 17 18, 19.


May it please your Honors to send a Clark to the Petitioner, that he may
communicate to you by his knowledge the great things of God pertaining to your
salvation, and at large open the Scriptures; where you shall see the secrets of
times disclosed, your actions discovered, the things past, present, and to come
revealed, and your only way of salvation showed. And without pride the
Petitioner says, he is assured by Scripture, by Visious, by many other
infallible signs agreeable with Scripture, that he only is appointed of God,
and none but he on earth can show the like, and administer unto you the
knowledge of salvation. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Setemb. 1. 1651. Arise Evans.

This Petition was delivered upon the day dated abovesaid, to the Honorable,
Sir Gilbert Pickering, a Member of the House of Parliament, and the Council of
State. Who promised to show it to some of the House, and afterward told me that
he had shown it, and that then it was with the Lord General. So that it was
published to them so far as possibly I could. I have also given the Exposition
of the eighth and nineth of Amos to Mr. Hugh Peter:, with other notes of the
same purpose to him, but my request is not regarded. I did also direct to the
Honorable Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen these things, and delivered them on
the 24. of November. 1651. and received them again from Alderman Andrews the 28.
who bad me advise with some Divines about them, and get them printed.

I have also delivered these things to the Lord General Cromwells own hands,
and he had them three days also.

And now I beseech you all consider that what I say unto you of my own words, I
say it with love and humility as to men, whom I honor in regard I believe you
would willingly fear God, and do his will. But what I say of you from
Scripture, I do it in faithfulness to you, that ye might fear God and do his
will, of which ye are as yet ignorant. For though ye have thousands of
instructors, yet the spirit of illumination and instruction is with me alone:
and there is a darkness upon all your Divines and Prophets at this time, Here
I do not mean the Bishops and faithful Ministers of the Church of England, but
I mean all others generally that pretend themselves to be Divines, or Ministers
and Instructors.
as you may see in Micah 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. and verse 8. these words are fitted for
me to speak unto you. But truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the LORD,
and of judgment, and of might, to declare to you your sins. The Author being a
Prisoner at the Gatehouse Westminster in 1637. for foretelling what befell the
King. It was demanded by some, why the Author did escape well, seeing Pryn,
Bastwick, and Burton, were so severely dealt with? And it was answered, That
what the Author did, was from Conscience to forewarn the King, but what they
did, was found to proceed from malice, to raise a party against the King. So it
seems, then there was Liberty of Conscience allowed to men in its true being,
when it was found distinct from malice.
And 19. years ago, I did declare the thing that came upon the King and his
party. I was not then regarded, because there was a necessity that all things
should come to pass, as they did, else how should the Scripture have been
fulfilled? and truly yet I may strive to warn, but I know all will not believe
me, notwithstanding for the Elects sake, who I know not but by their
conversion, I must warn all, for that is my work; and it is Gods to persuade the
hearts of men to believe what I say.

And this I understand concerning my self, I am a man to whom God has given
foreknowledge, which I declare with all humility, love and respect. 1635.
But I find that when it is not regarded, then immediately judgment follows, as
the Kings party, and afterward the Presbyterian (who not only slighted my
love, but also imprisoned me at Newgate, brought me before the Bar in the
Old-Bayley, 1646.
and would have had my life, if God had not been on my side) have found it to
their costs. So now the same judgment and a heavier, attends the contemners of
this truth.

Therefore I thought my self bound in conscience to make these things known, to
them whom it chiefly belongs to, that is, generally the Commonwealth, in love:
and to clear my self from blood. Being more satisfied with a good conscience,
and perhaps the hatred of many, then to flatter them against my conscience, to
obtain a great reward.

I know every one is more able then I to write, and can make their matters good
against me, to seduce you, and gloss it over with pieces of Scripture. But I
say unto you, if any can bring you so much Scripture together, that declares
the things past, present, and to come, as ye have seen the things past done
before your eyes, and that makes all things so clear, and easy to be
understood, as this (...) and speaks to the purpose, as Amos 8. and 9. Isaiah
1. of all, first and last. I say if any shall do so, by Scripture, for the
justifying of this matter, then look upon it, and judge between us.

Poor Protestant, thine enemies glory against thee, because of the Scripture,
counting thee ignorant, and not to have such interest as they have in God, and
in Scripture. Be not dismayed, for in the thing wherein they deal proudly thou
art above them, Exodus 18. 11.
But if ye find none such, then rest in this, and remember the true Religion is
that of K. Ed. 6.

Q. Elizabeth, K. James and K. Charles, which truth according to the
appointment of God, is now cast down to the ground, Dan. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Isa. 56. 14, 15, 16, 17. and will, by the power of God be set up again; and
this truth will triumph over all the earth, and put down all rule and authority
under its feet. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. So that all shall be subject
unto it.

The Reformation of Luther in Germany, of the Calvinist, and Hugonit in France,
of John Knoxe in Scotland, of Anabaptist, Brownist, or whatsoever else, are but
rebellious rules, like the rods of the Sorcerers of Egypt, which were devoured
by the rod of Aaron, Exodus 7. 9, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
10, 11, 12. so they all shall come to naught, for the Apostle foresaw by the
Scripture that there was but one King, and one Rule to be over all the earth,
Zech. 14. 9. Zeph. 3. 9. and therefore they had an eye to that, when they
wrote, as you may see in 1 Pet. 1. 1. who wrote to men of diverse countries
under diverse Kings. And when he comes to that point, submit your selves, etc.
he does not say, whether it be to the Kings, as supreme, or to Governors, as
to them that are sent by them, etc. But he says, submit your selves, etc.
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him. etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 7. So that you may s^e his meaning is not,
that men should submit unto all Kings in all things; but unto one King in all
things they are to submit: and this King they must honor and obey For the
Apostles saw tha^ God would hold forth a King at last, whose Laws should be
right according to Gods mind: and therefore the Apostle does press all men in
point of obedience, to this King in all things, 1 Pet. 2 3

And this King, Rev. 14. 18.
or Angel, is said to come from the altar, Rev. 13 13.
and to have power over fire, which fire shall consume the corruption of the
world. For this King has the true power over fire really, and not as the
wicked one, who is said to bring down fire from heaven in the sight of men,
making men see things, that are not really done, as Juglers cousen. And of this
King and this altar, you have the Prophet Isaiah speaking, Isaiah 19. 19, 20.
who calls him a Savior and a great one, giving to understand, that he is not
the Savior and the great one, even Jesus, but one empowered by him, who
suffered this altar or scaffold in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11. 8.

And this King is that Lion, who by his sufferings opens all the secrets both
in the New and Old Testament, Rev. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 14. 5, 6.
Here is work for you that are the Ministers of God, that keep your first
station, Preach these truths unto the world, great will be your glory thereby.

And you that are in the faith of Gods elect, and the elect of God, put on the
bowels of compassion, edify one another in your most holy faith, and adorn it
with a holy life. and ye that are our of this faith, know that though ye wash
your selves with snow-water, ye cannot be saved.

And now to say something concerning the Kings life. The King all his time,
until at last had a stammering in his speech, like Moses, Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12
therefore acknowledging his infirmity, he spoke but seldom, yet when he spoke
none could say more to the matter, for he drove the nail to the head.

But when he had lost his army, and came to dispute for the justness of his
cause, God loosened his tongue, and he spoke fluently, as many can witness.

First, when he went for shelter, into the Scots army, Mr. Henderson, the
greatest Champion Minister in Scotland, slew himself in disputing and striving
with the King.

Secondly, Mr. Cook, that drew his charge, in his charge against the King,
calls him a second Solomon for wisdom.

Thirdly, Mr. Lilly, in his book called Monarchy, or no Monarchy, is forced to
say of the King, He was a man inclined to no vice.

Fourthly, the Plea for the Commonwealth of England, and Colonel Joyce says,
that the King was of a far more excellent spirit than M. Love, who was the most
valiant Minister in all England, and suffered for it.

Would ye have an able wise, faithful, wise, undefiled, good spirited, perfect
man, in all things justified of God, of men, of his most deadly enemies? Look
upon K. Charles, he is so justified of all.

Again consider his great faithfulness, as he was was engaged to defend the
faith and church of Christ committed to his trust at his Coronation; after he
lost his Armies and three Kingdoms, and was in the custody of the Parliaments
Army, he might have had his three Kingdoms again restored to him, upon terms
destructive to the faith and Church of Christ; but rather then so, he chooses
to lose his Kingdoms, and also his life, for the defense of the faith and
church committed to his trust, who ever did the like, and what glory is too
great for such a King?

Again consider, how perfect his love was, not only to his friends, but also to
his most deadly enemies, who took his life and Kingdoms from him, I mean you
Soldiers. So far was he from seeking revenge upon you, for all you did against
him, that he praises you for gallant valiant men, and wishes that he had had
such men, as ye may see in his book and last speech to his Son, and therefore
ought not you in equity to requite him with the like love? and though you
cannot give him his life again, yet to be a means to cause him that is his name
to reign. For you see by the Word of God that he must reign, and will not you,
now you see it is right, be the instruments to bring it to pass?

There be two Commandments that sound in mine ears continually: One is this,
Thou shall not fellow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a
cause to decline after many to wrest judgment, Exodus 23. 2.

The other is, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. My
silence is a sin unto me. I should hate you, if I did not tell you the truth.

The States flatterers say, that the power is radical in the people, derivative
in the Parliament. But the word of God says, that the power is radical in
God, derivative in Kings, and that promotion comes not from the East, nor from
the West, that is, from any people, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and
sets up another, Psa. 75. 5, 6, 7. and by me Kings reign, Pro. 7. 15, 16. Power
belongs to God, Psa. 72. 11. For this cause Melchisedeck is said to be from all
eternity, lest any should argue and say that he had his Kingly power from men,
Heb. 7. 1, 2, 3.

For a man to make a thing better than himself, and then fear, honor, and obey
it as his God, is the grossest idolatry, and men do so, when they claim the
power to set up rulers, Hos. 8. 4, 5, 6. for men to make themselves gods is
idolatry. Rulers are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. therefore those people are
idolaters that take upon them to set up Rulers, for themselves, and God will
require it.

Again I say* that power which is of men, is opposite to that which is of God,
neither can both stand together. Christ says (intimating the power of John
Baptist) Luke 1. 77. was it from heaven, or of men? Mat. 12. 25. is all one as
if he had said, Is it from heaven, or of hell? for what is opposite to heaven
but hell? again says he, Act. 5. 38, 39. if this Council be of men 'twill
come to naught, but if it be of God it will stand, is all one as if he had
said, if it be of the devil it will come to naught, but if it be of God it
will stand; for what is opposite to God but the devil?

Some will say, there is no power but of God, Rom 13. 1. Therefore the States
power is of God. I answer, that which is of men, is not of God: The States
power is of men, therefore not of God, but in this sense 'is of God. God by his
foreknowledge did foresee this State; and permitted it to continue so long.

But that God is the author of this State is denied. For it is clear, that the
Dragon gave him (that is) the Beast or State, his power, and his seat, and
great authority, Rev. 13. 2. Therefore they have not their authority or power
to act, of God; but they have their power permitted, to continue so long a
time, as the devils had a time, which they claim, Mar. 1. 24. Mat. 8. 29. But
Paul understood that the power of the Romans was of God, for it was enclosed in
Caesar, and Caesar was a King, John 19. 12. 15. and Paul calls him the Minister
of God, Romans 13. 4. because he had not his power of men, but of God. But says
he, the powers that be (Romans 13. 1.) hence you draw your conclusion, that the
States power is to be submitted to, though it be of men. I say no, for he
speaks there of the power which is of God, a Kingly power: and all the stop in
these words, the powers that be, is in regard Caesar was not a Christian but a
heathen; and therefore not altogether right, yet he calls him the Minister of
God, in regard his power was of God, and not of men; therefore thus much the
Apostle says here, that the power that is of God, and not of men, you must
submit unto, in outward affairs, though the King be a Heathen: and whereas he
says, ( Romans 13. 1.) there is no power but of God; he does absolutely deny
this power, as it is now the States power, to be any thing else, but a juggling
show of Satan, admired at by them that perish, as he defines it, 2 These. 2. 8,
9, 10. it has all power in show, yet it is but a deceiveable lying wonder, of
no substance. As Juglers make us believe they have many rare things, but when
we need such things, alas, there is nothing at all. Now the power that is of God
always descends from heaven, as you may see, Rev. 10. 1. Rev. 11. 1. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. Rev. 18. 1. Rev. 20. 1. intimating that it comes from God alone. But the
other power is said always to ascend out of the bottomless pit, ( Rev. 9. 2.
3. 11. Rev. 11. 7.) out of the sea, out of the earth, Rev. 13. 1. 11. it still
comes from beneath, which signifies it comes from the local and vulgar people,
whose ignorance is set forth by a Gulf or bottomless pit, which know nothing
in comparison of God, what is good for themselves; therefore the power that is
of men, that is, of the Dragon, or of the Beast, or of the devil, is one and
the self-same thing, and the different terms given to it, is only to
illustrate, and show the evil of it. Therefore I conclude, that this State is
that Beast, ( Rev. 13.) and I will prove it thus.

1. The Beast had a seat of great authority ( Rev. 13. 2.) so has this State,
for it has judged and condemned a King, and put him to death, by that seat
ordained for their honor, I I mean the High Court of Justice, so called.

2. The Beast beheaded them that were most eminent in opposing him, ( Rev. 20.
4.) so did did the State behead all, that by the sentence of the said High
Court suffered death.

3. The Beast is not one man, but a great number of men compact together ( Rev.
13. 18.) So the State is a great number of men, of equal authority.

4. The Beast is said to change times and laws ( Dan. 7. 25.) so do the State:
they will have no Christmas, no Easter, no Whitsuntide, and the ancient Laws
and Customs of England they change.

5. The Beast by the successes of his wars, is wondered at by all that worship
him, ( Rev. 13. 4.) so this State is wondered at for his wars, and prosperity
therein.

6. The Beast opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped. So that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God, 2 These. 2. 4. Now I must speak of the Pope, that he
comes very near this mark; for when a King does not comply with the Pope, he is
murdered, or poisoned by some of the Popes adherents. But the Pope seems as
Pilate, ( Mat. 27. 24.) to wash his hands from the blood, and if they be found
that commit the murder, they suffer death and are not protected.

Here the Pope does the same thing, but he does it not to glory in before the
world; and to justify or show himself a God thereby, for he does it privately,
neither is it done to any whom the Pope does acknowledge himself inferior to;
but only to such Kings, or persons, as did acknowledge the Pope their superior
once. But this State, who first reverenced the King as was due, and afterward
erected a Tribunal on purpose; and bringing him before it; condemned to die by
a law, glorying in it before the world, that what they did, God did, and that
none ever did the like before, neither could any do the like, but God; is the
same that sits in the Temple of God, and shows it self to be God. For the
Parliament house, where they now sit, was a church or chapel, founded by King
Edward the 3. as may appear by diverse ancient Records. Here you may see, there
are consecrated or dedicated places now; and that, that place must needs be the
Temple of God where the Beast sits, 2 These. 2. 4. And ye have the same Temple
mentioned, ( Rev. 11. 19.) Rev. 14. 15. 17. Rev. 5. 8. I do not hereby excuse
the Pope, only I show you, that this State is the little Horn, that exalts it
self highest, Dan. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. Dan. 7. 8. which by the Fathers is called
the great Antichrist.

7. The Beast had horns like a Lamb, but spoke like a Dragon. ( Rev. 13. 11.)
So the State are meek men like Lambs, in outward appearance, but in their
Votes, Dragons, speaking against the most HIGH, his will, and power, and
Kingdom. And many other marks I could show you, but I shall here forbear.

You that look for Christ's personal reign here on earth; know, that it shall
be in the Kingly power established here again, when this State is dissolved.
You that look for the conversion of the Jews, know that the aforesaid King is
the means appointed by God to effect it. You that would know how long this
State shall flourish, ( Dan. 7. 25.) a time, times, and the dividing of time, (
Dan. 12. 6. 7.) a time, times, and a half, ( Rev. 12. 14.) a time, times, and
half a time. John gives us this above in the same words, as Daniel does, and
then interprets it unto us ( Rev. 11. 2. Rev. 13. 5.) to be 42. months, and
that in plain, is three years and a half; therefore in September next, 1652.
if not before, look for mishaps to the States affairs. Now I commit you all to
God, who is only wise, and knows all his works, and can save beyond man's
expectation. Three years and a half it does begin from the date of that Act,
for to do all in the name of the Common wealth. And lest you think that nothing
remarkable came to pass in September last, not to matter your scuffling with
the Dutch, but to show in a new thing, the threatening band of God upon you,
from a Nation by which God punished this Land once before; I mean, the Danes
stopping your ships, your sending a Fleet of men of War to demand them, yet to
no purpose; And God at their return destroys the greatest of your men of War,
and brings them all so near their end, that the mind of God might easily be
read therein, on the last of September it was done; So by his delay God would
have you repent and set up the King. Here was a severe Judgment shown upon the
head Ship, yet mercy in saving so narrowly the rest, to see if this mercy might
draw you to repentance; but if not, look for Judgment without Mercy hereafter.


There is another book of the Authors that will come forth shortly, being a
Narrative of his life, the manner of his Calling and Visions.

Postscript.
I Beseech you consider seriously Rev. 17. where ye have the State of Rome, and
the State of England interwoven till you come to ver. 12. for I find this State
to be the worst part of Popery risen up in another shape.

First, consider Rev. 17. 12. Here are ten Kings, yet have no Kingdom, he does
not say in the plural number, Kingdoms, but in the singular, Kingdom, these
says he, receive power as Kings, at one hour with the Beast.

From this place it is evident, that these ten are noble persons, or men of
power, in regard of their compliance, and giving their strength to the State.

Ver. 13. Received power to be as Kings that same hour, when England was made a
State.

Ver. 14. Ye have these ten make war with the Kingly power.

Ver. 15. Ye have the State sitting over Nations and Tongues, that is, over
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland.

Ver. 16. 17. These ten great ones which were the making of the State shall now
hate her and make her desolate. * These ten have already brought the Whore to
nothing, that is, the Mountain Parliament is become a Plain before them, and
now they reign. And I am sure there is a Zerubbabel among them that hates
confusion, who will bring in the King signified by the Headstone, Zach. 4. 7.
but which of the ten this Zerubbabel is, the Lord he knows.
For, says he, God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree,
and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled.

Consider then, these ten have interest but in one Kingdom called their
Kingdom, Rev. 17. 17. Now the Kings that are under the Pope, are proper Kings;
and have each of them a Kingdom; so that if he had means such Kings, he would
have said Kingdoms; neither can it be meant of these proper Kings, that they
received their power at one hour with the Pope, for they came to their power,
some by conquest, some by blood, some at one time, and some at another.

Therefore I beseech you once more seriously to consider this rlace, and
remember what the Evangelist says before it, Rev. 17. 9. Here is the mind
which has wisdom.

Ezekiel. 21. 26. 27. Speaking of the power, says he, I will overturn, overturn,
overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I
will give it him.

Now these three overturns in Rev. 8. 13. are called three woes, that follow
the voice of the 5. 6. and 7. Angels, Rev. 9. 1. When the 5. Angel sounds, you
see Essex falls from the King, and opens the way of rebellion: as I foretold
the said Earl, he should do before this Parliament began. And this woe ruinates
the Protestant party, till ye come to ver. 12. where he says one woe is past.

And ver. 13. 14. the 6. Angel sounds, and four Angels that were bound were
loosed. This signifies the tolleration and liberty to all sorts, to preach. And
now independency gets up, and this second woe falls on the Presbyterian party,
until you come to Rev. 11. 14. where he says, the second woe is past, and
behold the third woe comes quickly.

Rev. 11. 15. the seventh* Angel sounds, and then the King and Protestant
party gets the power again gloriously. And this third woe falls on the
Independent party.

So that after 3. woes, or 3. overturnes, the Crown comes to him, whose right
it is by a decree of God, Ezekiel. 21. 27. And the purpose of God shall stand,
according as he has sworn, Isa. 14. 24. And what is decreed against it shall
not stand, Isa. 28. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things,
2 Timothy 2. 7.

FINIS.
To His EXCELLENCY, THE Lord General Cromwell, AND His Honorable Council of
the Army at White Hall: The Petition of Arise Evans, living in Blackfriars,
desires in Gods glories behalf, the Kingdoms behalf, your Honors behalf, and
the whole Worlds behalf: That you would with your Most serious thoughts
consider these few lines following.
Humbly showing,
THat the Petitioner, having the knowledge of Gods secret Counsel, being
called thereto, has declared it freely to all, these 19* years, as you may see
in his Book called [A Voice from Heaven,] written in the year 1651. and
directed to the Commonwealth of England: And also further the preparation of
God in him to the same purpose from his Nativity to this time: And the effects
thereof you have also in his Book called [An Eecho to the Voice from Heaven,]
written in 1652. In which Books is sufficiently showed Gods determination by
the actions God has done, in fulfilling the words of your Petioner, from the
date of the said Books to this time, and you may conclude God will fulfill the
remainder thereof, so that, as sure as the Parliament is dissolved, so sure
shall the King come to his Throne, as it is sufficiently proved in the
aforesaid Books: And indeed if your Honors look into your Petioners Works, and
seriously read his Books, you shall find that he would not turn water into
blood, or smite the earth with a curse, Rev. 11. 6. as it has already been
done by these unnatural civil Wars, but rather would turn blood into water,
and water into wine, to cherish the heart of the sorrowful: And that the
waters and tears of repentance might wash away the guilt of blood, and become
wine of consolation to this Nation, in their union with their KING; without
which conjunction to their native and right KING, there is no hopes of peace,
certainty, and safety to this Nation.

Most Noble Worthies, whose actions are glorious, though yet imperfect, the
great Mountain Parliament is become a plain before you: Next in order the KING
is to be exalted, signified by the head-stone, as you see Zach. 4. 7. Crown all
your actions by setting him up, and be glorious for ever: For I am sure, if you
speedily proclaim him KING, you will glorify God thereby, and save an Ocean of
English blood from being spilt, and have such conditions of perfect peace from
GOD and the KING, that you and your seed may be his glorious Nobles for ever:
And therefore, because time is short, use your Jewel for the best advantage,
while you have it, lest you lose it, as the said Parliament did, for want of
using it aright, according to the Petitioners instructions.

The Petitioner does humbly desire your Honors to set up the KING upon his
throne, ( Charles Stewart by name.) Do this and live for ever, 1 John 2. 17.
John 11. 26.

He humbly desires you also to read these said Books.

May 16. 1653. present. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
I Did not think to put this Petition into print so suddenly, but that I find
the general spirit of the Nations, and men of all sorts of judgments
exceedingly disquieted, as not knowing what to do at this time, but crying to
me, as if they expected that God will do some great things by me for the
settlement and peace of this Nation: It is truth, I dare not deny it, and to
Gods glory be it spoken, that I have received Talents from him which I must not
hide, but show to all how far God is pleased to proceed how far God is pleased
to proceed in his work by me; beseeching all men to look unto him, who is the
Man of Peace to them, I mean King CHARLES: Every one says to me, why do not
you, who have this wisdom of God, go to the General and show him the way, and
to the Council to show them these things? Alas! I am at too far a distance
from them, for to be heard by them: Men in such places cannot hear such a low
voice as mine is; It must be a general Petition of the whole Nation joined
together as one man, that they will hear: Therefore I could wish that the
Soldiery did but hear a voice behind them, saying, Return to your first
Principles: You went out to fight for King and Parliament, but now there is
none: I know that God will bring in the King again, and my hearts desire is
that I might persuade men that the Kings coming to his Throne might be without
bloodshed, and that no party should any longer retain a spirit of revenge; And
to set you in a way of composure, I could wish, that all (both Soldiers and
others) would Petition our worthy Senators, to make their peace with the King,
and to receive him upon good and glorious terms, for the King, and subjects:
For if the King come in by the sword, you will become Slaves, and force him to
use tyranny: For Tyranny is a fit punishment for Rebels; neither would I have
any to Petition our Worthies with kisses, or fine words, as Judas came to our
Savior, that had his band of men to second him, or as at the beginning of
these times the Scots Presbyters and Covenanters came with their Petition on
their Pikes-points to our late King: Let not men presume to do so now, be their
party never so great: For though now they think that the Authority has a
dependency upon them, and that there is no Authority left save that: Yet there
is a spark of fire remaining (as it were) under the ashes, which is able at an
instant to devour them all.

Therefore I beseech you, Petition in simplicity and fingleness of heart, to
desire the General and his Council to make their addresses to the King for
peace, and ye that do this, look for life eternal: And I beseech you again (
most noble Worthies) receive all alike, and do not countenance, or
discountenance any, for this notion, or for that notion, or think, that
Religion is only words, but rather deeds of common charity, and let not any be
prided, or exalted above their Brethren with a conceit of conquest, but know,
that such a mind shall be abased; and that according to our Christian rule, he
that suffered most is the greatest Conqueror: For a subject cannot conquer his
King but by suffering meekly, and a King suffering meekly by the hand of his
people according to the mind of his King, was appointed to be Heir of the
world, Rev. 21. 7. I have a bloody Vision to show, but I look upon it as Gods
threatening hand, being persuaded, that if we repent, and shed tears for our
Rebellion and evil deeds against God and the King, we shall not bleed, nor
shed blood: For why may not God bring the King to his Throne, and maintain our
peace, as well in that time, as he did when the Parliament was dissolved: And
to men I say, he that is valiant and has an innocent intention may do much.
And the Lord bless all such. Amen.

May 20. 1653. ARISE EVANS.

THe bloody Vision I speak of, was seen January 21. 1652. by one Mr. Farly, who
lived in Drury Lane, at the upper end thereof, at the sign of the Horse-shoe,
but being terrified thereby, he immediately after went to Virginia, I have it
as it was written by his own hand, who after he had seen the Vision could not
rest, but went from place to place to seek an interpreter of it, until by the
providence of God at last he came to me, and after he told me the Vision, and
that I gave him to understand what God did signify to us by it, he wrote it,
and left it to my disposal, as by Gods providence I should be persuaded,
directed, and permitted to publish it.


