Sir JOHN EVELYN HIS REPORT FROM THE Committee, Appointed to consider of the
Printing of the Lord Digbyes Speech concerning the Bill of Attainder of the
Earl of Strafford.

Whereunto is added the Order for the burning of the said Speech.

Printed, Anno 1641.

Die Martis. 13. Iulij. 1641.
Resolved upon the Question.
THat the matter of my Lord Digbyes Speech shall be first taken into
consideration.

Resolved, etc.
That the Lord Digbyes Speech spoken at the passing of the Bill of Attainder of
the Earl of Strafford, contains in it matters untrue, and scandalous, as they
have referrence to the proceedings of the Committees of the Lords House, and to
the Committes of this House, and to the evidence of the witnesses produced in
that Cause.

Resolved, etc.
That the publishing of that Speech by the Lord Digby, after a Vote past in
this House, upon the said Bill, and offense taken to it, and the same
questioned in the House, is scandalous to the proceeding of this House, and a
Crime.

Resolved, etc.
That the publishing and Printing of the Speech spoke by the Lord Digby, at the
passing the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, is scandalous to the
proceeding of his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved, etc.
That Sir Lewis Dive, and John Moore, are both delinquents in the publishing,
and Printing of the said Speech of the Lord Digbyes.

Resolved, etc.
That Thomas Purslow, the Printer of the said Speech is a delinquent in
Printing of it.

Resolved, etc.
That this Book thus Printed, deserves the brand of this House, and shall be
burnt publicly by the hands of the common Hangman.

Resolved, etc.
That those Books shall be burnt on Friday next, some in the new Palace at
Westminster, some in Cheap Side, and some in Smithfield. And order to this
purpose are to be sent to the Bail^ff of Westminster, the Sheriffs of London,
and M^ddl^sex, respectively to see them burnt accordingly, and the Stationers,
and all others are required to bring in the Books, that they may be all burnt.

Resolved, etc.
That a Committee shall be appointed to prepare these Votes that concern the
Lord (...), to be transmitted to the Lords, and to present them so prepared, to
this House.

Die Martis 13th. Julij, 1641.
WHereas on the one and twentieth of April last past, there was a Speech
spoken in the House of Commons, at the passing of the Bill of Attainder,
against Thomas Earl of Strafford, by the Lord Digby, then a Member of the said
House: The which Speech contained in it matters untrue, and scandalous, as they
have reference to the proceedings of the Committees of the Lords House, and
this, and to the evidence of the Witnesses produced in that cause. And whereas
the said Speech was published by the Lord Digby, after that the said Bill of
Attainder was past by Vote in this House; and after that, great offense was
taken to the said Speech, and the same questioned in this House, to the
scandal of the proceedings in this House; and is since come forth in Print, to
the scandal of the proceedings of his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament.
It is therefore this day ordered by the said House that all the said Books so
Printed, shall be publicly Burnt on Friday next at Ten of the Clock in the
Morning; part of them in the new Palace yard at We^^minster, and the other
part of them in Chea^side, and the rest in (...), by the hands of the common
Hangman. And to this purpose the Bailiffs of Westminster, the Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, respectively are hereby required, to be assistant to the
effectual execution of this Order, and see the said Books burnt accordingly.
And it is also ordered by the said House, that the Master and Wardens of the
company of Stationers do their uttermost endeavors to collect all the said
Books into their hands, remaining now dispersed amongst their Company, or with
others, and forthwith deliver them to one of the Sheriffs of London to be
Burnt, according to this Order. And all others who have any of the said Books
in their hands, are hereby required forthwith to deliver them to one of the
Sheriffs of London, or Bailiff of Westminster (as they will undergo the
displeasure of this House in doing the contrary) for to be Burnt according to
this Order.

H. Elsyng Cler. dominus Com.

FINIS.

