Trials per Pais; OR, THE LAW, CONCERNING JURIES BY Nisi-Prius, etc.

Methodically Composed for the Public Good, in the 16th Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc.

By S. E. of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

Per testes solum, lex ipsa nunquam litem dirimit, qua per Juratam xij. hominum
decidi poterit. Cum s^ modus iste ad veritatem eliciendam multo potior, and
efficatior, quam est forma aliquarum aliarum legum orbis. Fortescue, cap. 31.
London, Printed by John Streater, James Flesher, and Henry Twyford; The Assigns
of Richard Atkyns, and Edward Atkyns, Esquires, 1665.

The PREFACE.
THE Philosopher could not see a man unless he hear him speak. Loquere ut
videam; Speech is the Index of the Mind, and the Mind only discriminates the
Man: For, although an Idiot who has but the shape of a man, may with silence
so hide his folly, that strangers to his Manners cannot discern him from a
Sophister; Yet, doubtless, Silence is the greatest Enemy to Learning, the Grave
wherein oblivion buries the Parts and Knowledge of the bravest spirits.

Wherefore Learned Salust, from this takes his Exordium; Omnes homines qui sese
student praestare caeteris animalibus, summa open niti decet, ne vitam silentia
transeant, veluti pecora, Those men who would excel Beasts, should labor that
their lives might not pass in such silence, as Beasts do. It seems he deemed,
that man little inferior to a Beast, who acted nothing to prolong his Memory;
For this he held to be the duty of every man, saying, Quo mihi rectius esse
videtur, ingenii quam virium opibus gloriam quaerere; and quoniam vita ipsa,
qua fruimur, brevis est, memoriam nostri quam maxim longam effiiere. In my
opinion, it is far better, to acquire Glory by the Riches of Wit, then strength;
and because our lives are short of themselves, we should endeavor by
Ingenuity, to eternize their memory.

And to effect this, Nulla dies sine linea.
Nulla dies abeat, quin linea ducta supersit; No day should pass over our
heads, wherein we should not act some memorable exploit: Men should not live
like Snails, never stirring out of their Houses; but be active (I mean not
busybodies in other men's matters, but) in their own Callings, of which the
wise Cato tells us, Every man should give a reasonable account; And if we
believe the famous Seneca, Nihil est turpius quam grandis natu senex, qui
nullum habet vitae suae argumentum, quo diu se vixisse dicat, praeter aetatem.
Nothing is more unworthy, than an old man, who has nothing to show for his
Antiquity, but a Gray-Beard; who is no sooner dead, than forgotten, long before
he is half rotten; yet who is so apt to deride the Endeavors of other men, as
this ancient Ignoramus, whose wrinckles in his face, worn-out looks, and many
years sway more with the vulgar people, than all the Arguments of Law or
Reason: Had Seneca been such a silent Momus, the World would never have been
blessed, with his so learned Works. And doubtless, writing Books is needful in
no Science more, than in the Law; For without Books, how would the Lawyers do
for Arguments at the Bar, or Resolutions at their Chambers: Whence the Oracle
Sir Edward Coke pronounces this, Omnes debere Juris-prudentiae libris
componendis animum adjicere; That all men ought to addict themselves to the
Composing Books of Law; some to the Reporting of the Judgments and Resolutions
of the Judges, who are Lex loquens; and some to the collecting of these Cases
and Resolutions, methodizing, and fitting them for some particular purpose, as
Littleton, Standford, Fitzherbert, Crumpton, Perkins, Finch, etc. and indeed,
most of the Law Books extant, if not all, (setting aside the Reports) are
nothing else, but Collections out of others. This I speak, not in derogation of
them, in the least; for as it is equally, if not more laborious; so it is full as
glorious, Judiciously to cull out authentic Cases, out of the Volumes of the
Law (where so many are no Law), and rightfully place them in a particular
Treatise, as it is to report the Judgments and Resolutions from the mouth of
the Court; for the Reporter is but the Courts Secretary, and Cook's Institutes
merit as much as his Reports; And Ash's Tables, Fitzherbert, and Brooks's
Abridgment, are as useful as the Year Books themselves, of which kind of
Collections, one Elegantly thus breaks out, Quo quidem beneficio, haud scio,
aut aliud aut legum Candidatis magis gratum, aut Reipublicae magis commodum,
aut divini honoris illustrationis magis idoneum, vel cogitando quidem consequi,
quisquam poterit. Then which benefit I know not, whether any man can even
imagine another, either to Lawyers more grateful, or to the Commonwealth more
profitable, or for the illustration of divine honor more fit. For with the
least labor, a small price, and little time, they present you with those
Resolutions, and Judgments which lie scattered in the voluminous Books of the
Law; which would otherwise cost much time, pains and charges, to find out. The
thoughts of which public good, first gave life to these Endeavors of mine: Not
that any one should in the least imagine, that I am so guilty of vain
ostentation, as to believe, that my Parts or Abilities can perform any thing in
this kind, like other men: No, Ipse mihi nunquam Judice me placui.

I could never yet please my self with my own labors, much less are they
worthy to please others, haud equidem tali me dignor honor. However, when I
consider, that no man has yet written particularly concerning this Subject,
and of what general use it is, I doubt not, but that this Treatise will
receive a favorable construction from most men, and a plausible acceptance
from others.

The Use of the Book.
The use of it, is, in a manner, Epidemicall; since men's Lives and Estates are
subject to that Trial per Pais, here demonstrated; but in particular, the
Practisers at Law, (especially Atturneys, Solicitors, Clerks, etc.) and all
Jurors, (for whose directions it is of singular use) are chiefly concerned
herein. But I will not hang a Bush out, to invite, and prepossess your
Judgments, Vincat Utilitas. The profit which every ingenious Reader shall
gather out of it, will speak more for it, than the best Eulogical Preface.

And for my own part, I profess my self to be Philomathes; but can plead no
other Plea, than Not guilty, to Polymathes. I must confess, never any man took
a Law-Book in hand, with greater affection to it, than I; and notwithstanding,
the hard-favoured objections, which some men cast upon it, I really think the
study of the Law, to be the most pleasant Study in the World. And he which
delights in the study of any other Art or Science, must consequently be
delighted with this. For the knowledge of the Law, as Doderidge says, is most
truly styled Rerum Divinarum humanarumque scientia, and worthily imputed to be
the Science of Sciences; for therein lies hid, the knowledge of every other
Learned Science.

So that he which gives himself to the study of Divinity, may here fill himself
with holy and pious Principles of Divine Laws: For, Fortesoue, cap. 3.
Lex est sanctio sancta, jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria; sanctum
etenim oportet, quod esse sanctum definitum. The Law is a holy Sanction, or
Decree, commanding things that be honest, and forbidding the contraries: Now
the thing must needs be holy, which by definition, is determined to be holy. So
that in this respect, says Fortescue, men may well call Lawyers, Sacerdotes,
that is, givers, or teachers of holy things. For the Laws being holy, it
follows, that the Ministers, and setters forth of them, must be givers of
holy things; and so by interpretation, does Sacerdos signify; and doubtless,
he which duly considers those Rules of Theology, which lie scattered throughout
the whole body of the Law, must needs conclude our Laws to be Commentaries
upon the Old and New Testament; and do so much bear the Image Legis Divinae,
that they may well be attributed to the Most High.

The Rules of Grammar, Philosophy natural, Political, Oeconomick, and Moral;
as also the Grounds of Logic, both from the Predicable, and Predicament, etc.
and of other Arts, and Sciences, so much abound in our Books, that the very
reading of the Law, will make a man Master of any of those Sciences.

And since Rhetoric is Ars ornate dicendi, and consists of those two parts,
Elocution, and Pronunciation.

How can we read in our Law Books, those Learned Arguments, Elegant Speeches,
and Judgments pronounced with such Eloquence of words and matter, and not
conclude, that Rhetoric is the Glory and Grace of a Lawyer. Though some (not
gifted that way) would persuade us, that the Law has little relation to it.

If any man be delighted in History, let him read the Books of Law, which are
nothing else but Annalls and Chronicles of things done and acted from year to
year; in which every Case, presents you with a petite History; and if variety
of matter does most delight the Reader, doubtless, the reading of those Cases,
(which differ like men's faces) though like the Stars in number, is the most
pleasant reading in the World.

I thought to have expatiated my self in this Eulogicall Commendation of the
Study of the Law; But when I consider the Glory of the thing it self, I think
it but in vain to light the Sun with Candles; and as no Arguments will persuade
one to love against Nature, so he whom the rarity of the Law it self cannot
invite to study it, will never be forced to it with the fist of Logic, or
other persuasion: Wherefore it is now time to expose my self to the Censure of
the Reader, who always judges according to his capacity, or affection; for
which cause, if I was to choose my Reader, I could wish with Caius Lucilius,
Quod ea quae scribo, neque ab indoctissimis, neque a doctissimis legi, quod
alteri nihil intelligerent, alteri plus fortasse, quam ipse de se. That this
Treatise might not be read, of the most Learned, nor of those who are not
learned at all, because these understand nothing, and the others more perhaps
than my self.

However, I put this Request to all, Ut si quid superfluum, Bracton. li. 1. fo.
1.
vel perperam positum, in hoc opere intervenerit, illud corrigant, and
emendent, vel Conniventibus oculis pertranseant; Cum omnia habere in memoria,
and in nullo peccare, divinum sit potius quam humanum: That if any thing be
superfluous, and placed amiss in this Work, That they will either correct and
amend it, or without carping connivea^ it; since to remember to do all things
right, and nothing amiss, is rather the part of a God, than Man: wherefore let
him which never offended, cast the first stone.

S. E.

To the Reader.
I Thought to have made a Table to this Book; but when I considered the
particulars hereof were collected under general Heads, and Titles; and the
matters therein pointed to, with Marginall Notes; I concluded to present you
only with the Contents of the Chapters; but would advise you, not to rely
altogether, upon the view of the Contents: For what you cannot find there, you
may perhaps find in the Chapters at large.

ERRATA.
SOme Errors have risen from the Press; for instance, fo. 133. where D. is the
last letter of the line in the Margent, add where the Trespass was committed in
the County of S. Likewise the false pointing in some places, may seem to alter
the sense: as a Comma being put for a Period, etc. But the Reader having long
since espoused Jurisprudence; and thereof got Issue a good Judgment, is bound
per la Courtesy dengleterre, to amend, or wink at such misprisions. pa. 17.
line 19. for Cro. 2. read Cro. 1. p. 76. l. 3. add in Civitate Westminster. next to
Margaretae. p. 163. l. 11. for Aliens, r. English. p. 142. l. 1. add in next
be. fo. 210. at the end of the Title of the 14th Chapter, it should be, An
Amercement affered by the Jury. fo. 223. li. last, for offered, read afferred.

A Summary of the Contents of each Chapter in this Book.
Cap. 1. Fol. 1. THe Derivation of the word (Jury). The Definition, Antiquity,
and Excellency of Juries, by way of Preface. Cap. 2. fo. 5. Of an Issue; and
the diverse sorts of Trials thereof; and when a Trial shall be by a Jury, and
when not: when by Certificate, when by Battle, and when by an Almanac, etc.
What Issue shall be first tried per Pais; what shall be tried by the Court; and
what by examination of the Attorney, Sheriff, etc. Cap. 3. fo. 24. Of a Venire
facias; To whom it shall be directed; when to the Sheriff, when to the
Coroners, when to Essiors, and when to Bailiffs. Cap. 4. fo. 38. What faults in
the Venire facias shall vitiate the Trial, what not; when a Venire facias de
novo, shall be awarded; when several Ven. fac. When the Ven. fac. shall be
betwixt the party, and a stranger to the Issue. Who may have a Ven. fac. by
Proviso, and when. Cap. 5. fo. 50. Why the Ven. fac. runs to have the Jury
appear at Westminster. though the Trial be in the Country; Of the Writ of Nisi
prius, when first given, when grantable, when not, and in what Writs of the
Tales, at common Law, and by Stat. Where, when the Transcript of the Record of
the Nisi prias, differs from the Roll, whereby the Plaintiff is nonsuited, he
may have a Distringas de novo. Cap. 6. fo. 64. Of the number of the Jurors, and
why the Sheriff returns 24. though the Venire facias mentions but 12. If he
returns more or less, no Error; and of the number 12. Cap. 7. fo. 68. Who may
be Jurors, who not; who exempted, and of their Quality and Sufficiency. Cap. 8.
fo. 75. Concerning the Visne, from what place the Jury shall come, etc. Cap. 9.
fo. 99. The Law concerning Challenges, very necessary to be known of all men.
Cap. 10. fo. 131. Of what things a Jury may inquire, when of espirituall, when
of things done in another County, or in another Kingdom; when of Estoppell, and
where not; when of a man's intent, etc. Cap. 11. fo. 137. Concerning Evidence to
be given to a Jury. What Evidence will maintain the Issue, and what not. Of
Witnesses, etc. Cap. 12. fo. 154. The Juries Oath; Why called Recognitors in an
Assise, and Jurors in a Jury. Of the Trial per medietatem linguae; when to be
prayed, and when grantable. Of a Trial betwixt two A^iens, by all English. Of
the Ven. fac. per medietatem linguae, and of Challenges to such Juries. Cap.
13. fo. 164. The Learning of general Verdicts, special Verdicts, and Verdicts
in open Court; and where the Inquest shall be taken by default, etc. Cap. 14.
fo. 210. How the Jury ought to demean themselves, whilst they consider of
their Verdict; when they may eat and drink, when not; What misdemeanor of
theirs will make the Verdict void; Evidence given them, when they are gone from
the Bar, spoils their Verdict: For what the Court may fine them, and where the
Justice may carry them in Carts, till they agree of their Verdict. An amendment
affected by the Jury. Cap. 15. fo. 224. What punishment the Law has provided
for Jurors offending; as taking reward to give their Verdict. Of Embraceors.
Decies tantum. Attaint: Several fines on Jurors. What Issues they forfeit, and
of Judgment for striking a Juror in Westminster.
Trials per pais.
CAP. I. The Derivation of the Word (Jury.) The Definition, Antiquity and
Excellency of Juries, by way of Preface.
JUrie (Jurata) comes of the French word ( Jurer. i. e. Jurare. Vid. Cap. 1^.
Jurie.
) And metonymically signifies in Law, those 12 men who are sworn Judges in
matters of fact, evidenced and debated, by Witnesses, before them: I call them
Judges, because, as the Pleadings, of Sergeants and Counselors at Law, do
serve only Ad illustrandum; ('it is the property of the Court, Jus dicere.) So
the testimony of Witnesses, only illuminateth the Question, It Is in the power
of the Jury to determine the fact, upon an Evidence Pro, and Co^; According to
those common Adages, Ad questionem Juris respondent Judices; Ad questionem
facti respondent Juratores: Though, as the Judgment of the Court ought to be
guided by the Law; So, is the Verdict of the Jury, by the Evidence.

The Antiquity and excellency of Juries.
I will but only dip my pen into that fathoml^ss depth of praises, which belong
to the right use of Juries; Those silver drops which flow from their Eulogies,
would soon drown, (and so make barren) the most fruitful Author, even with
redundancy of matter: Such showers must fall into the Ocean; they cannot be
received, in such small rivulets, as I have contracted my self to. Their
Antiquity proclaims them venerable, For (as Com. upon Littleton, fol. 155. vid.
l b. 3. 8. Preface.
Cook desires you) hear what the Law was before the Conquest. In singulis
Centuriis Comitia sunto, atque liberae conditionis vici cuodeni aetate
superiores, una cum praeposito sacra tenentes juranto. etc. Lamb. verb.
Centuria.
And Cambden (in his Britannia page 153.) Corrects Polidor Virgil, saying,
Whereas Palidor Virgil writes, that William the Conqueror first brought in the
Trial by 12. men, there is nothing more untrue; For it is most certain and
apparent, by the Laws of Etheldred, that it was in use many years before. etc.

Their general use (being the only tryers of Chooses in fait, The use of ^ries.
almost in all Courts throughout England) speak them a public good; And what
answer shall I make to the Princes, vehementer Admiror. Fortescue, cap. 28.
Videlicet, Wherefore are not Juries used in other Countries, if they are so
good? But that of Fortescue, the Learned, who best could tell, Scil. That other
Countries can scarce produce one Jury, so well accomplished with Wealth and
Ingeny, as one County, nay one Hundred, can in England.

But not to dwell in the Porch of Florishes, I will address my self to the
Gravity of the Law, where you must not so much expect the flash of Rhetoric,
as the light of Reason; No, the Law knows best how to express her self, in her
own terms, wherefore all other Sciences must learn, with reverence, to keep
their distance, And (as the Golden Finch Finch. ca. 3.
sings) be glad to have their sparks, raked up in her Ashes.

and since an Issue is praevious, and the matter of a trial, I shall first
give you the description thereof, and then touch upon the several Trials
allowed by the Law, for discussion of the truth.

CAP. II. Of an Issue, and the diverse sorts of Trials thereof: and when a Trial
shall be by a Jury, and when not; when by Certificate, when by Battle, and
when by an Almanac; what Issue shall be first tried, Per Pais; what shall be
tried by the Court; and what by Examination of the Attorney, Sheriff, etc.
ISsue, exitus, says Cook 1. Com. fo. 126. Omnia unum aliquem sortiuntur
exitum, vel per patriam, vel per Judices terminandum. Finch. Epistle.
is a single certain and material point, issuing out of the Allegations, and
Pleas, of the Plaintiff and Defendant, consisting regularly upon an
Affirmative, and Negative, to be tried by 12 men; and it is twofold, Scil.
either special, as where the special matter is pleaded, or general; as in
Trespass, not guilty: in Assise, null tort, null disseisin, etc. And as an Issue
natural comes of two several persons, so an Issue legal, issues out of two
several Allegations of adverse parties.

And to give you likewise his Definition of Trial, Trial.
It is to find out, by due examination, the truth of the point in Issue or
question between the parties, whereupon Judgment may be given; And as the
question between the parties is twofold, so is the Trial thereof; For either
it is question Juris, (and that shall be tried by the Judges, either upon a
demurrer, special Verdict or Exception, Note, that upon a demurrer to part, and
Issue to part, though it is the best way to give Judgment upon the quaestio
juris first, yet the Court may try the quaestio facti first, at their
discretion. 1 Inst. 72 125. Lach. 4.
For Cuilibet in sua art perito est Credendum, et quod quisque noverit in hoc
se exerceat. Or it is quaestio facti, And the trial of the fact is in diverse
sorts; First, chiefly, and most commonly, by a Jury of 12 men, (of which kind
of Trial, my intention is principally to treat in this Book.) But because it
is necessary to be known, that there are many ways, allowed by the Common Law,
to try matters of fact, besides this by Juries: I will here repeat some of
them; And for this, first hear the Oracle, who tells you, 1. Com. fol. 74.
that he read of six kinds of Certificates, allowed for Trials, by the
Common Law.

1. Trials by Certificate.
The doing of service by him that holds by Escuage in Scotland, was to be
tried by the Kings Marshall of his Army, Person Certificat en escript south son
seal q^ serra mis a les Justices, says Littleton.

2. If it be alleged in avoydance of an Outlawry, that the Defendant was in
prison, at Bordeaux, in the Service of the Mayor of Bordeaux, It shall be tr^ed
by the Certificate of the Mayor of Bordeaux.

3. For matters within the Realm, The Custom of London shall be Certified, by
the Mayor, and Aldermen, by the mouth of the Recorder. vide apres 17.

4. By the Certificate of the Sheriff, upon a Writ to him directed, in case of
Privilege, if one be a Citizen or forreiner.

5. Trial of Records, by Certificate of the Judges, in whose Custody they are
by Law. All these be in temporal Causes.

6. In Causes Ec^lesiastical, as loyalty of Marriage, general Bastardy,
Excommengement, Profession: These and the like are regularly to be tried by the
Ce^tificate of the Ordinary. apres vide 16.

Records.
7. Matters of Record shall be tried by the Record it self, and not per Pais.
And for this Reason, Why there needs no visne, where Letters Patents were made;
otherwise in pleading Deeds.
in pleading of Letters Patents, the place need not be alleged, where the
Letters Patents were made, because the Defendant cannot plead null tiel Record,
but must plead, non concessit, and then the Jury shall come from the place
where the Lands lie. Vide, li. 6. fo. 15. 1 Com. 117.260. Plo. Com. 231. But
upon a Non est factum pleaded to a Deed, there must be a place alleged where
the Deed was made, because (though the Deed, as to the matter of Law, be
tryable by the Court, yet) the sealing and delivery thereof, and other matter
of fact, must be tried by the Jury; so that in this case of a Deed, there is a
Trial per Pais, and by the Court. 1 Com. fo. 35. vide apres. 18.

8. A Peer of the Realm. i. e. a Lord of the Parliament, Peers.
shall upon an Indictment of Treason, or Felony, misprision of Treason, and
misprision of Felony, be tried by his Peers without Oath, 1 H. 4. 2. But in an
Appeal at the Suit of the party, he shall be tried per probos and legales
homines Juratores. 10 E. 4. 6. etc. because that is not the Kings Suit, but the
parties. Vide, li. 9. 31. Le case del abbot de Strata Mercella. And in a
Praemunire, his Trial shall be per Pais. Bolstr. 1. part 198. Dutchesses,
Countesses, or Barronesses, although married, shall be tried, as Peers of the
Realm are, but so shall not Bishops and Abbots. Stam. 153. 20 H. 6. 9.

9. Customs of Courts, etc. tried by the Judges.
The Customs and usages of every Court shall be tried by the Judges of the same
Cout, if they are pleaded in the same Court, ib. and many other things are
tried by the Judges, as the reasonableness of a fine of an offender or upon
surrender of a Copyhold Estate; and so it is of Customs, Services, and also
of the time that a Tenant at will shall have to carry away his Goods: And these
Cases come under the Rule, which makes matter of Law to be tried by the Judges;
Vide 1 Com. fo. 56. And in some Cases matter of fact shall he tried by the
Judges, as if the Plaintiff appe^r by Attorney in Court, and then the Defendant
pleads that the Plaintiff is dead; If one appears, and says, that he is the
Plaintiff, whether he is, or not, shall be tried by the Judges, li. 9. 30. So
the nonage of an Infant, generally, and Maihme, by inspection of the Court.
But in many Cases, Infancy shall be tried per Pais, as if an Infant appear by
Attorney, in Error, this shall be tried per Pais, Bulstr. 1 part 131.
li. 9. 31. and so it is in an Aetate probanda.

10. Trials by Witnesses.
There are many Trials allowed by the Common Law, by Witnesses only, without
a Jury, as of the life and death of the Husband in Dower, so the proof of a
Summons, or the Challenge of a Juror, must be tried by Witnesses; and
regularly, the proof ought to be by two or three Witnesses, 1 Inst. 6. and
diverse other things must be tried by examination of the parties and Witnesses,
as the Trial by Wager of Law, etc. Finch 423.

11. Duke or no Duke, Dukes, etc.
Earl or no Earl, Baron or no Baron, shall be tried by the Kings Writ. lib. 5.
35. lib. 6. 53. But Duchess or no Duchess, etc. by marriage, shall be ^ryed
per Pais, because the marriage is matter of fact.

12. In a Plea del alien nee, the League League.
between the King, and the Sovereign of the Alien, shall be tried by the Record
of the Chancery, for every League is of Record. lib. 9. 32.

13. If a Manor be ancient demene, or not? Manor.
It shall be tried by the Book of Doomesday, which is in the Exchequer. But
whether certain Acres be parcel of such a Manor, or no, it shall be tried by
the Country. ib.

Courts not of Record.
14. The proceedings of a Court, which is not of Record (as the County Court,
the Hundred Court, the Court Baron, etc. shall be tried by the Country, and not
by the Rolls of the Court, because they are no Record. ib. Co. Lit. 117. b.

Wills and Administration.
15. Whether the Ordinary committed Administration to the Plaintiff, or whether
the Testament was proved before the Ordinary, or whether suc^ a Will, be the
Will of the party, or whether he dyed intestate, or not? In all these Cases,
the trial shall be p^t Pais, because probate of Will, and Constituting
Administrato^s, did not belong to Ecclesiastical Judges originally, but were
given to them of late. But the trial thereof is left to the Common Law, and
was not given to them. lib. 9. 32. 40.

Plo. Com. 267. Special Bastardy.
16. In an Action upon the Case for calling one Bastard, the Defendant justified
that the Plaintiff was a Bastard: And it was awarded that this should be tried
per Pais, and not by the Ordinary, Hob. 179. Devant. 6. And so a Plea that the
Plaintiff was born at such a place before marriage, this is special Bastardy,
and shall be tried per Pais. Plo. 14. Dyer 89.

17. When an Issue is taken, whether a Custom or no Custom in London, Customs
of London.
If the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens be parties or interessed in the Action,
This Custom shall be tried by a Jury, and not by the Certificate of the Mayor
and Aldermen, by the Recorder. Hob. 85. Day and Savadges Case. Devant. 3.
Styles. 137. Moor 871. vide apres tit. Visne.

18. Matter of Record, mixed with matter of Fact.
A matter of Record bring mixed with a matter of fact, shall be tried per Pais,
and not by the Record. Hob. 244. Peter and Staffords Case. Devant. 7.

19. In Writs of Right, Trials by Battle.
and Appeals that touch life, Trial may be by Battle, or by Jury, at the
D^fendants choice; The Battle, in a Writ of Right, must be by Champions, (who
must be Freemen.) But in an Appeal, it must be in proper person. The Champions,
in a Writ of Right are not bound to fight longer than until the Stars appear;
and if the Champion of the Tenant can defend himself until then, the Tenant
shall prevail: The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, are Judges of the
Battle, in a Writ of Right; and the Judges of the Kings Bench in an Appeal of
Felony; It seems they seldom or never killed one another in this trial of
Battle, for their Weapons were but Batoones, and he that was vanquished, was
presently upon Proclamation made, to acknowledge his fault, in the Audience of
the People, or else to cry Cravent in the name of Recreantise, etc. and upon
this, Judgment was to be given, and after this the Recreant should amittere
liberam legem, that is, should become infamous, etc. 2 Institutes 247. Finch.
421. lib. 9. 31. Mirror of Justice 161. 162, etc. 1 Inst. 294.

20. In a Writ of Disceit, Recovery by default.
upon a Recovery by default, The Trial shall be, If the Judgment was given
upon the Petit Cape, by the Summoners, If upon the Grand Cape, by the
Summoners, per nors, or velors, and not per Pais; So if a Recovery by default
in a real Action be pleaded, to which the other says, Nient Comprise, Nient
Comprise.
this shall not be tried per Pais, but by the Summoners and Veiers, lib. 9. 32.

21. Wager of Law.
In debt upon a simple Contract, Detinue, etc. The Trial may be by Wager of
Law, or per Pais, at the Defendants Election. But when the Defendant wageth his
Law, he ought to bring with him eleven of his Neighbors, who will avow upon
their Oath, that in their Consciences he says true, so as he himself must be
sworn de fidelitate, and the eleven de Credulitate. Ib. Finch 423. and 1 Inst.
295. you may read excellent Learning concerning this Trial.

22. If Profession Profession.
be denied, it shall be tried by the Court Christian; But if the time of the
Profession be in Issue, this shall be tried by the Country. lib. 4. 71. So
though an Inrollment, Inrollment.
or other matter of Record, cannot be tried per Pais, yet the time when the
Inrollment was made, may be tried per Pais. Appearance.
So whether the party appeared in such a Court, Sheriff.
or on such a day, etc. shall be tried per Pais. Cro. 3. part. 131. So whether
one was Sheriff such a day or not. Cro. 1. part. 421. Admission, Admission. etc.
Institution, Plenarty, and Ability of the Parson, shall be tried by the
Bishop. But Induction shall be tried by the Country, Plenarty.
and so shall Avoydance by resignation. Dyer 229. Moor 61. and void, or not
void shall be tried per Pais, 1 Inst. 344. And Plenarty, if the Clerk be dead,
Mirror of Justice 324. li. 6. 49. The Cause of refusal of a Clerk by the
Bishop, Lib. 6. 49.
shall be tried by the Metropolitan, if the Clerk be living; but per Pais, if
he be dead. l. 5. 58.

Ideocy.
23. An Idiot, found so from his Nativity by Office, may come in person in the
Chancery, before the Chancellor, and pray that before him, and such Justices or
Sages of the Law, which he shall call to him (who are called the Council of the
King), he may be examined, whether he be an Idiot, or no; or by his friends he
may sue a Writ out of Chancery, retornable there, to bring him into the
Chancery, Ibidem Coram nobis, and concilio nostro examinand. lib. 9. 31.

24. If it be in question, whither the Sheriff made such a retorn or not,
Sheriff.
It shall be tried by the Sheriff if whether the Undersheriff made such a
Retorn or not, it shall be tried by the Undersheriff; If the question be,
whether such a one be Sheriff or not, It shall be tried by the Examination of
the Sheriff, yet he is made by Letters Patents of Record, and therefore it may
be ^ryed by the Record. ib. Cro. 2. part. 421.

25. If an Approver say, Durer.
that he Commenced his Appeal before the Coroner per dures, this shall be tried
by the Record of the Coroner; and if it be found that he did it without dures,
he shall be hanged, ib. Corone br. 75.

26. The Trial, whether a Statute Statute.
showed before, be the true Statute or not, shall be by the Examination of the
Mayor, and Clerk of the Statutes, which took the Statute, and not per Pais, ib.
whether a Statute has two Seals or not, shall be tried per pais, Leon. 1 part.
228, 229.

27. In Assise the Tenant said, that the Lands were taken into the Kings hands,
this shall be tried by the Examination of the Escheator. Escheator.


Certificate.
28. If one in avoydance of an Outlawry, allege that he was in Prison at
Bordeaux, ultra mare in servitio Majoris de Burdeux, this shall be tried by the
Maior's Certificate; and in such like Cases, other Trials shall be by the
Certificate of the Marshall of the Host, and by the Captain of Calice, and also
by Messenger, Messenger.
of a thing done beyond Sea. Ib.

29. At the Petit Cape, Petit Cape.
the Tenant said that he was imprisoned 3. days before the default, and 3.
days after, this shall be tried by the Examination of the Attorney; Nient
Attach. per. 15. jours in Assize shall not be tried per pais, but by
examination of the Bayley. Bayley.
Ib.

30. It seems an Almanac Almanac.
is so infallible, that it has countervailed the Verdict of a Jury, For in
Error of a Judgment given in Lynne, The Error assigned was, that the Judgment
was given at a Court held there on the 16th day of February, 26 Eliz. and that
this day was Sunday, and it was so found by Examination of the Almanacks of
that year, upon which it was ruled, that this Examination was a sufficient
Trial, and that a Trial per pais, was not necessary, although it were an
Error in Fact; and so the Judgment was reversed. Cro. 1 part. last pub. fo. 227.

31. Ordeale.
In ancient times there was a Trial in Cryminall Causes called Ordalium, for
upon Not guilty pleaded, the Defendant might put himself upon God and the
Country (as is the ^^e at this day) or else upon God only, and then if he was a
Freeman, he was to be tried per ignem, that is, he was to pass over Noven
vomeres ignitos nudis pedibus, and if he was not hurt by this, then he was to
be acquitted, otherwise condemned: and this was call d Ju icium Dei; But if he
was a slave, then his Trial was to be per aquam, and that diverse ways, which
all appear in Lambard, verbo Ordalium. From which kind of Trial, I presume we
still retain this expression of an innocent person, That he need not fear fire
or water: This manner of Trial was first prohibited by the Cannons, then by
Parliament: The Trial by Battle Battle.
is likewise prohibited by the Cannons, but not by Parliament, as you may read
in the ninth Report, fo. 32. and in the Authorities there cited, which I
therefore omit to recite here, (th ugh I have the Books by me) and ^o in this
whole Treatise, where I refer you to a Book, I shall not s^t down the
Authorities cited in that Book, which will avoid prolixity.

32. When the matter alleged, extends to a place at t e Common Law, and a
place within a franchise, Which Trial shall be first.
it shall be tried at the Common Law. 1 Inst. 125.

33. All matters done out of the Realm of England, concerning War, Martial
Affairs.
Combat or Deeds of Arms, shall be tried and termined before the Constable and
Marshall of England, before whom the Trial is by Witnesses, Witnesses or
Combat.
or by Combat, and their proceeding is according to the Civil Law, and not by
the Oath of 12. men, 1 Just. 74. 261. Wherefore if the Kings Subject be killed
by another of his Subjects in any foreign Country, The Wife or Heir of the
De^d, may have an Appeal before the Constable and Marshall, who sentence upon
the testimony of Wit^esses or Combat. ib. So if a man be wounded in France, and
dye thereof in England. ib.

It is worthy our observation, What Issue shall be first tried.
to take notice when there are several Issues, which of them shall be first
tried; And for this you have already heard, that where Issue is joined for
part, and a Demurrer for the Residue, the Court may direct the Trial of the
Issue, or judge the demurrer first, at their pleasure, though by the opinion of
Doderidge. Latch. 4.
It is the best way to give Judgment upon the Demurrer first, because when the
Issue comes afterward to be tried, Damages.
the Jury may assess damages for the whole.

Plea to the Writ.
In an Action against two, the one pleads in abatement of the Writ, the other to
the Action; the Plea to the Writ shall be first tried, for if that be found,
all the whole Writ shall abate, and make an end of the business; for the
Plaintiff ought not to recover upon a false Writ. 1 Inst. 125.

In a Plea personal against diverse Defendants, Plea to the whole, first tried.
the one Defendant pleads in bar to parcel, or which extends, only to him
that pleads it: And the other pleads a Plea which goes to the whole: the
Plea, that goes to the whole, (that is) to both Defendants, shall be first
tried, because the other Defendant shall have advantage thereof; For in a
personal Action, the discharge of one, is the discharge of both.

As for example if one of the Defendants in Trespass, pleads a Release Release.
to himself (which in Law extends to both) and the other pleads not guilty,
(which extends but to himself) or if one pleads a Plea which excuses himself
only, and the other pleads another Plea which goes to the whole, the Plea
which goes to the whole shall be first tried; for if that be found, it makes
an end of all: And the other Defendant shall take advantage hereof, Discharge
of one discharges both.
because the discharge of one, is the discharge of both. But in a Plea real it
is otherwise, for every Tenant may lose his part of the Land; As if a Praecipe
be brought as Heir to his Father against two, and one pleads a Plea which
extends but to himself, and the other pleads a Plea which extends to both, as
Bastardy in the Demandant, and it is found for him, yet the other Issue shall
be tried; for he shall not take advantage of the Plea of the other, because one
Ioyntenant may lose his part by his misplea. ib.

CAP. III. Of a Venire facias; To whom it shall be directed; when to the
Sheriff, when to the Coroners, when to Esliors, and when to Bailiffs.
H^ving given you the Epitome of what Trials are allowed by the Common Law, and
what shall be tried per pais, and what not; we shall now a^ply our selves more
particularly to the Trial by Juries: And because a Venire facias is the
foundation and Causa sine qua non, of a Jury, (I mean in Civil Causes; for in
Criminalls, as upon Indictments, the Justices of Goal Delivery, give a general
Command to the Sheriff, to cause the Country to come against their coming; and
take the Pannels of the Sheriff without any process directed to him, yet
process may be made against the Jury, though it is not much used. Stamford,
Plees del Corone, 155.) I will first recite the Writ, in terminis, the rather,
because I intend to order my Discourse, according to the method of the Writ.

Rex etc. Vic. B. Salutem. Precipimus tibi quod venire facias Venire facias.
Coram Justiciariis nostris de Banco apud Westminster. tali die, duodecem liberos and
legales homines de vicenet. de C. Quorum quilibet habeat quatuor libras terre,
tenement. velreddit. per annum ad minus, per quos rei veritas melius sciri
poterit; Et qui nec D. E. nec F. G. aliqua affinitate attingunt; Ad faciend.
quandam Jur. patrie inter parts predict. de placito, etc. quia ^am Idem D.
quam predict. F. inter quos inde contentio est posuer. se in Jur. illam. Et
habeas Ibi nomina Jur. illorum and hoc breve T. etc.

This is one of those Latin Letters, (as Finch terms them, fo 237.) which the
King sends with Salutation, to the Sheriff. But withal Commands him, that he
cause to come twelve free and lawful men of his County, to resolve the question
of the fact, in dispute between the parties, upon the Issue; and it is a
Judicial Writ, issuing out of the Record, for Plaintiff or Defendant, after
they have put themselves upon the Country: for upon the words Et de hoc ponit
se super patriam, by the Defendant, Or, Et hoc petit quod Inquiratur per
patriam, by the Plaintiff, and Issue joined thereupon, the Court awardeth the
Venire facias, vid. Ideo fiat inde Jurat.

Sheriff.
And first, you see it is directed Vice Comiti, i. e. to one who is Vice
Comitis, and has the Regiment of the County, instead of the Earl of that
County, to whom once it did belong: As we are taught in the Mirror, Chap. 1.
Sect. ^. Scil. That it appears by the Ordinance of ancient Kings before the
Conquest, That the Earls of the Counties had the Custody or Guard of the
Counties; and when the Earls left their Custody or Guards, then was the Custody
of Counties committed to Viscounts, who therefore are called Vice Comites.

What great Repose and Trust both the King and Laws put in this great Officer,
The Oracle tells you, What Trust in the Sheriff.
1 Inst. 168. That he is Shireve, that is, p^aefectus Comitatus, Governor of
the County; For the words of his Patent be, Commissimus vobis Custodiam
Comitatus nostride, etc. And he has a threefold Custody, triplicem Custodiam,
viz. first, Vitae Justiciae, for no Suit begins, and no Process is served but by
the Sheriff, And he is to return indifferent Juries for the trial of men's
lives, Liberties, Lands, Goods, etc. Secondly, Vitae Legis, he is after long
Suits, and chargeable, to make Execution, which is the life and soul of the
Law. Thirdly, Vitae Reipublicae, he is Principalis Conservator pacis, within
the County, which is the life of the Commonwealth, for Vita Reipublicae Pax.

To whom the Venire facias ought to be directed.
Yet notwithstanding the height and Latitude of this great Officers power and
trust, The Law adjudges him in many Cases not capable, to do so much as return
a Jury; For if he be of kindred by nature, or of affinity by Marriage to any of
the parties, or (that I may say all, in a little,) if he be not as indifferent
almost in all respects he is, whom the Law allows to be a Juror, he ought not
to meddle with the retorning of the Jury. But the Venire facias shall be
directed to the Coroners, Coroners.
(or to some of them, if the residue are not indifferent) who in that Case are
vice, Vice Com. And if the Coroners are not indifferent, Forrescue, cap. 2. 5.
then the Venire shall be directed Ad 2 Electores, that is, to two whom the
Court shall choose and deem fit to retorn the Jury; And to the retorn of these
Elisors or Esliors, Esliors.
ab Eligendo, no Challenge Challenge.
will be admitted. Bro. tit. Venire facias 14. as to the Array; But to the
Polles, 1 Inst. 158. If one of the Sheriffs of London Sheriff of London.
be a party, then the Venire may be directed to the other Sheriff, If the Under
Sheriff be a party, yet the Venire may be directed to the Sheriff, with this
Proviso. Quod sub Vic. tuus in in nullo se intromittat cum executione istius
brevis. 18 E. 4. 3.

Judicial Writs (say Cook and Sanders, Plo. 74.) may be directed to the
Coroners; As the Venire facias, where the parties are at Issue; there, upon the
surmise of the Plaintiff, that the Sheriff is his Cozen, and upon prayer that
the Venire be directed to the Coroners, Coroners.
for avoydance of his own delay that might happen by the Challenge of the
Array, The Defendant shall be examined whether it be true, or not, and if he
confess it, then the Venire shall be awarded to the Coroners; for then it
appears to the Court by the Defendants confession that the Sheriff is not
indifferent; Examination.
But if the Defendant denies it, then the process shall be awarded to the
Sheriff, because the Sheriff's Authority and profit shall not be taken away,
without cause apparent to the Court; But if the Defendants will allege any
such matter, and pray a Venire facias to the Coroners, there the Plaintiff
shall not be examined, neither shall such allegations be allowed, because
delays are for the Defendants advantage, The Defendant may not have a Venire
facias to the Coroners.
and the Defendant may challenge the Jury for this cause, and so is at no
prejudice.

And see in term. H. 3. H. 7. fo. 5. placit. ult. In a quare Impedit, where the
Defendant showed how the Sheriff was Cozen to the Plaintiff, and prayed a Writ
to the Coroners, but it was denied him upon the same Reason. Fitz. tit.
suggestion placit. 8. br. Challenge. 153.

Venire facias once directed to the Coroners, shall not be to the Sheriff
afterward.
When the Process is once awarded to the Coroners, for a default in the Sheriff,
if there be a new Sheriff made afterward, who is indifferent, yet the Process
shall not revert, but continue to the Coroners pendant le plea. 14 H. 7. 31.
bro. tit. Venire facias. 17. So the Entry is, Ita quod Vice comes se non
intromittat. 18 E. 4. 3.

And therefore where the Sheriff ought not to retorn the Venire, Sheriff shall
not return the Tales, where he cannot the Venire faciar.
he cannot retorn the Tales; For in Error in the Exchequer Chamber of a
Judgment in the Queen's Bench, the Error assigned was, because the Venire
facias was awarded to the Coroners, for Consanguinity in the Sheriff; and it
was returned by the Coroner, And afterward a Tales was awarded, and it was
returned by the Sheriff, and it was tried, and a Verdict given, and Judgment.
And for this c^use held to be Erroneous, and not aided by the Statute of 32 H.
8. or 18 Eliz. Wherefore the Judgment was reversed. Cro. 1 part. ult. pub.
574. bro. tit. octo. tales 9.

I will instance one Case more in the same Reports, fo. 586. because it is very
full in the point. After Issue in Trespass, the Plaintiff for his expedition
surmised, that he was Servant to the Sheriff, which being confessed by the
Defendant, the process was awarded to the Coroners, and after Verdi^, Where the
Coroner returns the V^nire facias, he ought to return the Tales.
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Tales de Circumst^ntibus was
awarded, and returned by the Sheriff; which was held by the whole Court to be
good cause for Staying the Judgment: For it is a mis-ryall, not aided by any of
the Statutes; for process being once awarde to the Coroners, the Sheriff
afterward is not the Officer to return the Jury, no more than any other man.
And process ought always to be returne^ by him, who is an Officer by Law to
return it, otherwise it is merely void; But afterward upon view of the Record,
it ap^eared that the Tales was returned by the Coroners, No name to the Return.
and their names annexed thereto, wherefore it was without further question.
But the Court said, if their names had not been annexed to the Tales, yet it
had been well enough; for they be annexed to the first Panel, And it shall be
intended, that the right Officer returned it, and the usual course is, That to
such Tales there is not any Officers names subscribed, and yet it is good
enough; for it is not within the Statute of York, which appoints that the name
of the Sheriff should be subscribed; But it was moved, that the Record of the
Postea is, that the Tales were returned by the Sheriff; But the Court held,
that it was amendable, and it was done accordingly, and the Plaintiff had
Judgment.

But if the Venire be awarded to the Coroners, for default in the Sheriff, and
they do nothing upon the Writ, then I suppose, Venire facias to the Sheriff,
after one awarded to the Coroners.
upon a default discovered in the Coroners, de puisne temps, the party may show
this to the Court, and have a Venire awarded to the Sheriff, (if there be an
indifferent one made in the mean time) er else to Essiors, and sic e converso.

In Error of a Judgment in Chester, the parties being at Issue, Venire facias
to the Coroners, after one to the Sheriff.
a Venire was awarded to the Sheriff. And at the day of the Return, it was
entered Quod Vice comes non misit breve. And then the Plaintiff prayed a Venire
facias, to the Coroners, for Cousinage betwixt him and the Sheriff; which was
awarded accordingly, and at the day of Trial, the Defendant made default, and
thereupon, Judgment, Error was assigned, because that after the Plaintiff had
admitted the Sheriff to execute the Writ, he could not pray a Venire facias to
the Coroners, without some cause de puisne Temps, sed non allocatur, because
there was nothing done upon the first Writ. And the Defendant having made
default, it was not material. Cro. 1 part. ult. pub. 853.

But the Defendant might have demurred to this Prayer; No Venire facias to the
Coroners, after one to the Sheriff.
For if the Plaintiff pray a Venire facias, to the Sheriff, he shall not
challenge the array, nor have a Venir^ afterward to the Coroners, because the
Sheriff is his Cozen, or for any other principal Challenge whereof he might by
common intendment have Conusance, when h^ so prayed the Venire facias; for upon
showing this Cause at first, h^ might have prayed Process to the Coroners; But
for a principal Challenge, of which by common intendment, the Plaintiff could
not know at the first, as that the Defendant is of kindred to the Sh^riff, etc.
he may afterward challenge the array, when they appear, or if the Sheriff does
nothing upon the Writ, he may pray a new Venire to the Coroners. 15 H. 7. 9.

If the Plaintiff prays a Venire facias to the Coroners, If the Defendant
d^nies the Plaintiffs suggestion, he shall have no b nefit of it by Challenge.
because he is of kindred to the Sheriff, if the Defendant will not confess
this, but denies it, this shall be entered, and the Defendant shall not
challenge the Array for this Cause afterward. br. tit. Venire facias 21. and
23.

If a Venire facias be awarded to the Coroners, By Consent, the Venire facias
may be directed to a wrong Officer.
where it ought to be to the Sheriff, or the Visne comes out of a wrong place,
yet if it be per assensum partium, and so entered of Record, it shall stand, for
omnis consensus tollit errorem. 1 Inst. 126. li. 5. Mistryall without such
consent.
36. But if it be directed to the Coroners, where it ought to be to the
Sheriff, without such consent of parties: This is an insufficient Trial, not
remedied by any Statute, except it be upon an insufficient suggestion, and then
the Stat. of 21 Jac. 13. helps it.

Upon suggestion that the Plaintiff and the Sheriff, Venire facias to some of
the Coroners.
and one of the Coroners are of kindred to the Plaintiff, or Defendant, or upon
any other suggestion which contains a Principal Challenge, the Venire facias
may be directed to the other Coroners. Dier. 367.

Error of a Judgment in Northhampton, because in Northampton the Court being
held before the Mayor, and two Bailiffs, Bailiffs.
the Venire facias upon the Issue was awarded to the two Bailiffs, to return a
Jury, before the Mayor and Bailiffs, Secundum Consuetudinem: which being
returned, and Judgment given, the Error assigned was, because the Bailiffs
being Judges of the Court, could not also be Officers, to whom Process should
be directed, there being no Custom that can maintain any to be both Officer
and Judge. But all the Court (absente Hide) conceived it might be good by
Custom. And that it is not any Error, for the Judges be not the Bailiffs
only, but the Mayor and Bailiffs; and it is a common course, in many of the
Ancient Corporations, where the Bailiffs are Judges, Judge and Officer to
return Writs.
or the Mayor and they be Judges; yet in respect of executing Process, they be
the Officers also. And one may be Judge, and Officer dive^sis respectibus, as
in Redisseisin, the Sheriff is Judge and Officer: Whereupon Judgment was
affirmed. Cro. 1 part. 138.

In Trespass and Assault laid in the Court, Venire facias to the Garden of the
Palace of Westminster.
to be at the Palace of Westminster. It was adjudged, that the Venire facias shall
issue al Garden del Palice, and not to the Sheriff of Middlesex. Bro. tit. Ven.
fac. 31.

CAP. VI. What faults in the Venire facias shall vitiate the Trial, what not,
when a Venire facias de novo, shall be awarded; when several Ven. fac. When
the Venire facias shall be betwixt the party and a stranger to the Issue; Who
may have a Venire facias by Proviso, and when.
Ve^ire facias, why the Writ so called.
WE have now showed you to what Officer the Venire facias shall be directed;
The next step in the Writ is Precipimus tibi quod Venire facias, Which words,
Venire facias, are the most effectual words in the Writ, and therefore they
give the denomination to the whole Writ. And here opportunity is offered us, to
speak something of a Venire facias in general. I am not ignorant how our Books
swarm with Cases which arise from the defects in this Process, and how that
Verdicts have been set aside, Judgments stayed, and reversed, for want of
sufficient Returns, misawarding, disagreement with the Rolls, discontinuance,
and many other faults in this Writ. But the Statutes of Ieofailes (especially
the Statute 21 Jacob. cap. 13.) have pardoned (as I may so say) these
enormities; As, Statute of Jeof isles. 21 Jac. 13.
the awarding this Writ, hab. Corpora, or distringas to a wrong Officer, upon
any insufficient suggestion, or by reason the Visne is in some part misawarded
or sued out of more places, or of fewer places than it ought to be, so as some
place be right named, The misnaming of any of the Jury, either in Sur-name, or
addition of any of the said Writs, or in any Return thereupon, so that upon
examination, it be proved to be the same man that was meant to be returned; or
if no Return be upon any of the said Writs, so as a Panel of the names of the
Jurors be returned, or annexed to the said Writ; or if the Sheriff or Officers
name, having the Return thereof, is not set to the Return of any such Writ, so
as upon Examination, it be proved that the said Writ was returned by the
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or such other Officer. In all these Cases, the
Judgment shall not be stayed, nor reversed for these defects.

But this Act does not extend to any Writ, Declaration, or Suit of Appeal of
Felony, or Murder, nor to any Indictment, or Presentment of Felony or Murder,
or Treason; nor to any Process upon any of them; nor to any Writ, Bill, Action,
Popular Actions, etc.
or Information upon any popular, or penal Statute: Wherefore since
Informations, and popular Actions are grown so frequent, the Attorneys, etc.
herein had best beware of these Jeofailes.

By this Statute, many defects are remedied, which were not by the Statutes of
32 H. 8. Cap. 30. and 18 Eliz. Cap. 14. yet all are not; for this Act only
helps the mis-naming of a Juror, in Sur-name, or addition, Christian name
mistaken in the Venire facias, incurable.
and says nothing of his Christian name: wherefore I conceive the Law in
Codwells Case, in the fifth Report, remains as it was then; which is, that if a
Juror be mis-named in his Christian name, on the Venire, though he be named
right in the Distringas, and Postea, yet this is ill, and not amendable; and
with this agrees, Goddards Case, Cro. 2. part. 458.

And since the Court ( Cro. 1 part. fo. 203.) doubted thereof, Christian name
right in the Venire facias, and wrong in the Distringas.
I may well put the Question, if a Juror be right named upon the Venire, and
mis-named in his Christian Name, in the Distringas, etc. whether this is
amendable, or not; without dispute, it is not by the Statute 21 Jacob, for that
only helps the Sur-name. But with Reverence to the Courts doubt, I conceive
clearly, it is h^lpen by the Statutes of 32 H. 8. and 18 Eliz. as a
discontinuance of Process; and I may with the more confidence believe it,
because in Codwells Case aforesaid, where in the Pannell of the Venire, a Juror
was named Palus Cheale, and in the Distringas, etc. he was right named Paulus
Cheale, and so because he was mis-named in his Christian Name, in the Venire,
Judgment was arrested. But it is there adjudged, that if he had been well named
on the Venire, and mis-named upon the Distringas or Postea, then upon
Examination, it should be amended. But the Countess of Rutlands Case, lib. 5.
42. is express in the point, and so is Cro. 3. part. 860.

And it is to be known, that in most Cases, where the Venire facias, Hab:
Corpora, or Distringas be defective, they are to be amended; but if the Malady
be so fatal in the Venire, that it causes a Mistriall, (as in the mistake of a
Jurors Christian Name, or where a Juror not returned is sworn, etc.) then the
Verdict is to be set aside, and a Venire facias de novo, Venire facias de novo.
to be awarded; and so was it to be upon those mistakes, (now amendable by the
Statutes,) before the making thereof. And where a Jury gives a Verdict which
is accepted, and recorded by the Court, One Jury shall not try a cause twice.
be the Verdict perfect or imperfect, the Jurors are discharged, and shall
never try the same Issue again upon a new Nisi prius. But if the Verdict be so
imperfect, that Judgment cannot be given upon it, then the Court shall award a
Venire facias, de novo, to try the Issue by other Jurors. li. 8. 65. Bulstr. 2
part. 32.

In Yelvertons Reports, fo. 64. Album breve, the County left out in a Veni^e
facias.
the Case is, That a Venire facias was made Vice-Comiti, (leaving out) Salop,
for which there was a blanck le^t in the Writ. But re vera, it was returned by
the Sheriff of Salop. In Arrest of Judgment it was alleged, that the Venire
facias was vicious for this cause; But Gaudy said it should be amended, And by
Fenner and Williams, It is as no Writ, because it is not directed to any
Officer. And then it is aided by the Stat. of Jeofailes, For it might rather be
called a blanck, then a Writ, because it was directed to no Officer.

Several Venire facias.
In Cases where there are several Defendants, who plead several Pleas, the
Plaintiff may choose either to have one Venire facias for all, or several, for
every one of the Defendants; But (if you will be ruled by Stamford) the surest
way is to have a Venire facias against every one, and then one cannot have
benefit of the others Challenge: neither shall the death of one abate the
Venire facias against the other; (This he speaks of in Appeals) but if the
Court once award a joint Venire facias, you cannot have several Venires
afterward, though there be nothing done upon the first; except it be upon
matter de puisne Temps, as the death of one of the Defendants, etc. li. 8. 66.
li. 11. 5. 6. Stamf. 155. bro. tit. Venire facias 2. 35.

But now it is the usual course to have but one Venire facias, One Venire
facias in several Issues.
upon several Issues, though against several Defendants, Cro. 3. part. 866.
hob. 36. 64. And so usual, that the Court declared, Cro. 2. part. 550. That
there never shall be several Venire facias to try several Issues in one
County; For what need the Plaintiff trouble himself, and the Country, with
several, when one Jury will serve his turn; Et frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora. But other wise, if it be in two Counties. Cro. 3.
part. 866.

After Issue joined by two Defendants, if one of them die, Venire facias
between the Plaintiff and 2. Defendants where one is dead.
and then a Venire facias is awarded betwixt the Plaintiff, and both the
Defendants, and so in the Hab: Corpora and Distringas, yet this shall not
vitiate the Venire facias, etc. to make Error, because though one of the
Defendants be dead, yet the other being alive, it is sufficient. And there
needs be no surmise in Judicial Writs, No surmise in Judicial Writs of death
in one of the parties.
that one of the Defendants is dead; It is time enough to show it to the Court
at the day in banck. Cro. 1 part. 4. 26. But if there be two Defendants, and
the Venire facias be but against one of them, it is Error, 7 H. 4. 13. and bro.
tit. ven. fac. 11. Cro. 1. part. 426.

Venire facias dated before the Action brought.
If the Venire facias bears date before the Action brought, or varies from the
Roll, yet it is aided by the Statutes of Jeofailes. Cro. 1. part. 38. 90, 91.
203, 204. Miscontinuance or discontinuance, or misconveying of Process, is
aided by 32 H. 8. 30. The want of any Writ Original or Judicial, Jeofailes.
defaults in their form, and insufficient Returns thereupon, are aided by 18
Eliz. 14. Cro. 3. part. 259. But you must have a care the Venire facias be not
faulty in any other matters of Substance; for if the parties names be mistaken,
Parties names mistaken in a Venire facias.
or the Issue, as if the Issue be ne unques Executor, and the Venire facias be
in placito debiti, etc. this is a Mistryall. Mistryall.
Cro. 2. part. 528. So it is, if the Venire facias be in placito
transgressionis, where the Action is in placito transgressionis, and ejectionis
firm. This in sawarding of Process is not aided by any of the Statutes, and
better it was, that there had been no Venire facias at all in such a Case; No
Venire facias helped.
for then the Statutes would have helped it. Cro. 3. part. 622.

In some Cases a Venire facias shall be awarded to make an Enquest betwixt a
stranger to the Writ and Issue and the party. Venire facias between a party and
a stranger.
I will instance but in one, and that is upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 6.
If a Tenant being impleaded vouch to warranty and the Vouchee denies the Deed,
or other cause of the Warranty, etc. That the Demandant may not hereby be
delayed, he may sue out a Venire facias to try the Issue between the Tenant and
Vouchee.

Inquest at whose request.
Inquests in Pleas of Land, shall be as well taken at the Request of the Tenant,
as of the Demandant. 2 E. 3. cap. 16. If the Plaintiff, or Demandant, defisteth
in prosecuting his Action, Venire facias by Proviso.
and brings it not to Trial, then the Defendant, or Tenant may sue forth a
Veni. facias with a Proviso, which is to no other end, but that the Sheriff
should summon but one Jury, if the Plaintiff also should have brought him
another Writ, to the same purpose; And although, (as my Lord Dyer says, fol.
215.) the granting of this Venire facias, etc. with a Proviso, depends much
upon the discretion of the Court, yet for the greater part, it is not grantable
for the Defendant, unless when he is actor as well as the Plaintiff, or unless
there be a default, and Laches in the Plaintiff; therefore there can be no
Trial by Proviso against the King (unless with the Attorney Generall's
consent,) because no dedefault, or Laches can be imputed to the King: But an
avowant in Replevin, Proof presently after Issue joined.
may have a Venire facias with a Proviso, immediately after Issue joined,
because he is actor, and in nature of the Plaintiff.

But note the Nota (in Stamford's Pleas, del. Coron. fol. 155. How the
Plaintiff may stop the Defendants Proviso.
) That if by negligence of the Plaintiff, the Defendant sues a Venire Facias
with a Proviso, yet the Plaintiff may at his pleasure stay the Defendant, that
he shall not proceed in his Process; in praying a Tales, upon the Defendants
Process, as it appears T. 15 H. 7. fol. 9. And the Defendant shall nevet be
received to pursue this Process with a Proviso, so long as the Plaintiff
persues, or is ready to pursue, as appears, Mich. 14 H. 7. fol. 7.

And seeing the Tales men Tales men.
offer themselves to us, we will tell them upon what account t ey come, before
they thrust themselves into the Inquest, commonly for the love of eight pence;
but it may be, to do some of their Neighbors a shrewd turn.

CAP. V. Why the Venire facias runs to have the Jury appear at Westminster,
though the Trial be in the Country. Of the Writ of Nisi prius, when first
given, when gran^able, when not, and in what Writs. Of the Tales at Common Law,
and by Statute. When the Transscript of the Record of the Nisi prius differs
from the Roll, whereby the Plaintiff is nonsuited, he may have a Distringas de
novo.
But to observe the Method of the Writ, the next words are Coram Justiciariis
nostris de Banco apud Westminst. tali die. And here first of all, you may ask
me to what purpose the Sheriff is commanded to cause the Jury to come to
Westminster, when they are to try the Cause in the Country, and in truth are
not to come to Westminster. I must confess the resolution of this question is
not unnecessary: wherefore we must know, that originally, before the Writ of
Nisi prius was given, the purpose for which the 12. Why the Venire facias is to
have the Jury appear at Westminster.
men were to be summoned upon the Writ of Venire facias to come to Westminster,
was, that contained in the Writ, videl. Ad faciend. quandam Juratam; for then
was the Trial ^ntended to be there, if a full Jury appeared; if not, then a
Hab. Corpora, (with a Tales sometimes annexed to it, the form whereof you may
see in the Register) and if they did not appear at the Return in the Hab.
Corpora, then went out the Distringas. Hab. Corpus.
This I speak of the Common Pleas: Distringas.
But the course of the Kings Bench, and Exchequer, is, after the Venire facias,
to have a Distringas, leaving out the Hab. Corpora. Trials then were all at the
Bar. (I speak not of Assizes.) But now, because Jurors did not use to appear
upon the Venire facias, it being without penalty; Trials at the Bar, Trials at
Bar.
are appointed upon the Hab. Corpora, and Distringas, because the Jury will
more certainly appear at the day in the Distringas, through fear of forfeiting
Issues: which the Sheriff returns on the Distringas, not on the Venire facias.
By the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. No Jury shall be compelled to appear at
Westminster, for the Trial of an offense (upon any penal Law) committed above
30. Where a Jury is no^ compellable to appear at Westminster.
miles from Westminster, except the Attorney General can show reasonable cause
for a Trial at Bar.

Thus it was at Common Law, before the giving of the Writ of Nisi prius, when
all Jurors, together with the parties, came u^ to the Kings higher Courts of
Justice, where the Cause depended; which (when Suits multiplied) was to the
intolerable burden of the Country, 27 E. 1. cap. 4. wherefore by the Statute
of Westminst. 2 cap. 30. A Writ of Nisi prius, Nisi prius, when first given,
and wherefore.
was first given; And that, in the Venire facias, as we may see in the form of
the Writ there mentioned, Scil. Praecipimus tibi quod Venire facias coram
Justiciariis nostris apud Westmon. in octabis, Sancti Michaelis, nisi talis and
talis tali die and loco ad parts illas vene^int 12. etc. By which Writ it
appears, that the Venire facias was not returnable, till after the day of the
Nisi prius. N^si prius in the Venire facias.
But the mischief thereof was so great, partly in respect that the parties not
knowing the Jurors names, could not tell how to make their Challenges, and so
were surprised; and partly, in respect of the Jury, who were greatly delayed by
the Essoyns of the parties, that by the Statute of 42 E. 3. cap. 11. It is
Ordained, That no Enquest, but Assizes and deliverances of Goals, be taken by
Writ of Nisi prius, nor in other manner, at the Suit of the great or small,
before that the names of all them that shall pass in the Inquests be re^u^ned
in the Court. The names of the Juro^s must be returned into the Court before
any Trial, and why.
And their names must be returned upon a Panel annexed to the Venire facias,
so that either party may have a Copy of the Jury, that he may know whom to
challenge; And the Jury not coming upon the Venire facias, make a feigned
default, which warrants the Distringas, etc. unless they appear at the day of
the Nisiprius.

So that by what has been said, you may perceive to what purpose, It is in the
Courts discretion, whether to grant a Nisi prius, or not.
the Sheriff is commanded to cause the 12. men to come to Westminster, though
the Trial be in the Country. And that, ad faciend quandam Juratam, because it
is in the discretion of the Court, whether to grant a Writ of Nisi prius, or to
have a Trial at the Bar; And for t^is, the Duke of Exeter being Plaintiff in
Trespass, a Nisi prius was prayed for the Duke, and it was denied, for that the
Duke was of great power in that County. And if the Trial should be had in the
Country, inconvenience might thereupon follow, as you may read, 2 Inst. 424.
and 4 Inst. 161. Nay in some Cases, (as if the Cause require long examination,
When the Court cannot grant a Nisi prius.
etc.) it is not in the power of the Court to grant a Nisi prius; if the King
please: For in such Cases, as it appears by the Writ in the Register, 186.) the
King by his Writ may restrain, and command the Justices, that they shall not
award any Writ of Nisi prius, and if they have, that they supersede it. F. N.
B. 240. 241. No Nisi prius shall be granted where the King is party, Where the
King is concerned.
without especial Warrant from the King, or the Attorney Generals consent.
Stamf. 156. F.N.B. 241. 4 Inst. 161.

And now since the Nisi prius (for so it is called, Nisi prtus, why so called.
because the word prius is before venerint, in the Distringas, etc. which was
not so in the venire facias, upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 30. before
rehearsed,) must not be in the venire facias, because the names of the Jurors
are to be returned to the Covet, before the granting of the Nisi prius;
therefore the Nisi prius is now in the Hab. Cor. and Distringas. And if the
Sheriff return not a Panel of the Jurors, No Nisi prius before the Venire
facias is returned.
upon the venire facias, there shall be no Nisi prius upon the Tales, until a
Panel be returned. 27 H. 6. fol. 10. 1 H. 5. fol. 11. which brings me again to
speak of the Tales.

The Tales at Common Law.
A Tales is a supply of such men, as were impanalled upon the Return of the
venire facias, grantable, when enough of the principal Pannell to make a Jury
do not appear, or if a full Jury do appear, yet if so many are challenged, that
the residue will not make a Jury, then a Tales may be granted. And this at
Common Law was by Writs of December tales, Octo tales, etc. (out of the Kings
Courts) one of them after another, as there was need, until there was a full
Jury. But now by the Statutes of 35 H. 8. 6. 4. 5. P.M. 7. 5 Eliz. 25. and 14
Eliz. 9.

The Justices of Assize, Tales by Statute.
and Nisi prius, at the Request of Plaintiff, or Demandant, Defendant or
Tenant, or of the prosecutor tam quam, (if two, more, or but one of the
principal Panel appear at the day of Nisi prius,) may presently cause a
supply to be made of so many men as are wanting, of them that are there present
standing about the Court; And hereu^^n the very act is called a Tales de
circumstantibus.

But since none can come after the Reporter, observe with me his Nota Lecteur,
in his 10th Report 104. That at Common Law, in the granting of a Tales, five
things are to be considered, 1. The time of the granting, etc. thereof. 2. The
number of the Tales. 3. The order of them. 4. The manner of Trial, that is,
where, by them with others, and where, by them only. 5. The quality of them is
to be considered.


As to the first, 4 things are likewise to be considered,

1. That the time of granting them, is upon default of so many of the principal
Panel, that there cannot be a full Inquest.

2. That at the time of granting them, the principal Array stand; for Tales
are words similitudinary, and have refe^ence to the assemblance, which then
ought to be in esse; and therefore if the Array be quashed, or all the Polls
challenged and treited, no Tales shall be awarded, for then there are not
Quales, but in such a Case, a new venire f^cias shall b^ awarded. But if at the
time of granting the Tales, the principal Panel stand, and afterward is
quashed as aforesaid, yet the Tales shall stand; For it suffices if there were
Quales, at the time of granting the Tales.

3. It is to be observed, that he which is merely Defendant, cannot pray a
Tales, till the Plaintiff has made default.

4. In some Cases, a Tales shall be granted after a full Ju^y appear and is
sworn, as if a Jury be charged, and afterward before a Verdict given in Court,
one of them die, a Tales shall be awarded, and no new venire facias, and so if
any of the Jurors impannelled die before they appear; and this appears by the
Sheriffs retorn, the Pannell shall not abate, but if there be need, a Tales
shall be awarded. And the time for Challenge, and trial of the Tales, is after
the principal Panel be tried; and if the principal Panel be affirmed, the
same tryors shall try the Tales; But if it be quashed, then the two tryers of
the principal, shall not try the Tales.

As to the second, to wit, the number, two things are to be observed.

1. That in all Cases, the Tales ought to be under the number of the pri^^ipall
in the venire facias, (unless in Appeals) as in Attaint, under 24. and in
other Actions where the venire facias is of 12. under 12. And the Reason
wherefore more than the number may be granted in Appeals of the Plaintiffs
part, is, because the Defendant may challenge peremptorily; and if default be
in the Plaintiff, then the Defendant may pray a Tales, and the Reason is in
favorem vitae. and that he may expedite and free himself from vexation, and the
question of his life, for fear that his Witnesses should die.

2. That the number ought always to be certain, as 10. 8. 6. or 4. etc. But
now by the Statute of 35 H. 8. a Tales de Circumstantibus may be granted, as
well of an uncertain, as a certain number, and that by force of these words in
the Stat. 35 H. 8. So many, etc. as shall make up a full Jury.

As to the third, to wit, the Order, It is to be known, that always in every
new Tales, the number shall be diminished, as if the first be 10. the second
shall be 8. and so always less. But if the Tales awarded be quashed by
Challenge, you may have another of the same number.

As to the fourth, to wit, the manner of Trial, that is commonly by them with
others; but by them only, when after the granting the Tales, the principal
Panel is quashed, then the Trial shall be only by the Tales; or if the Tales
do not amount to a full Enquest, another Tales to supply the former, may be
granted.

As to the fifth, to wit, Therefore if ^he Venire facias be not de medietat.
linguae, the Tales cannot. 3 E. 4.12.
the Quality of the Tales, they ought to be of the same quality as the Quales
are; and therefore if the first be per medietatem linguae, of English and
Aliens, so ought the Tales to be, so if the Principal be out of a franchise, so
if the Venire facias be directed to the Coroners, so ought the Tales; and all
things which are required by the Law, in the Quale^ are required in the Tales:
as yo^ may read in the aforesaid Statutes. vide, Stamf. Plees del Coron^ fol.
155.

Where a Iuror is withdrawn, when the Plaintiff intends to bring the Cause to
Trial again, he may have a Distringas, etc. with a Dece^ Tales.

By the Statute of 23 H. 8. ca. 3. If there be not enough sufficient
Freeholders as are required in an Attaint, Attaint.
in the County where such Attaint is taken; a Tales may be awarded into the
Shire next adjoining.

If the Transcript of the Record of the Nisi prius be mistaken, and not
warranted by the Rolls, for which cause the Plaintiff becomes nonsuit, he may
have a Distringas de novo, Nisi prius amendable.
upon motion to the Court, and the Postea shall not be recorded, Cro. 1 part.
204. For there is but a Transcript of the Record sent to the Justices of Nisi
prius. Justices of Nisi prius, and Justices of Assise.
First they were Justices of Assize, and therefore they retain that name still,
though Assizes are very rarely brought: For this common Action of Ejectment
has Ejected most real Actions; and so the Assise is almost out of use.

CAP. VI. Of the number of the Jurors, and why the Sheriff returns 24. though
the Venire facias mentions but 12. If he returns more or less, no Error, and
of the number 12.
NOw for the Quales: and these you see for number, must be 12. by the Common
Law, D. and St. fo. 14. for quality, liberos and legales homines. And first of
their number 12. And this number is no less esteemed of by our Law then by Holy
Writ; Of the number 12.
If the 12 Apostles on their 12. Thrones, must try us in our eternal State,
good Reason has the Law to appoint the number of 12. to try our temporal. The
Tribes of Israel were 12. the Patriarchs were 12. and Solomon; Officers were
12. 1 King. 4.7. Therefore not only matters of fact were tried by 12. But of
ancient time, 12. Plow. Com. in proaemio. 12 Judges.
Judges were to try matters in Law, in the Exchequer Chamber, and t^ere were
12. Counselors of State, for matters of State; And he that wageth his Law,
must have 11. others with him, which think he says true. Less then 12. in
Inquests of Office.
And the Law is so precise in this number of 12. that if the Trial be by more
or less, it is a Mys-triall; But in Enquests of Office, as a Writ of Wast,
Finch 400. 484.
there less than 12. may serve. F.N.B. 107. c. and in Writs to inquire of
Damages, the just number of 12. is not requisite, for they may be over or
under; And although there can be no Verdict, but by 12. yet by ancient course
and usage, (which as my Lord Cook tells you, makes the Law in this Case, 1
Inst. 155. Why the Sheriff returns 24.
) the Sheriff is to return 24. And this is for expedition of Justice; for if
12. should only be returned, no man should have a full Jury appear or sworn, in
respect of Challenges, without a Tales, which should be a great delay of
Trials; And for this cause at common Law, 'twas Error if the Sheriff returned
less then 24. But now it is remedied by the Statute of 18 Eliz. as a
mis-return, If the Sheriff return less then 24. it is no Error.
see Cro. 1 part. 223. li. 5. 36, 37. By which Books it appears, that if the
Sheriff return but 23. etc. it shall not vitiate the Verdict of 12. No, though
a full Jury do not appear, so that the Trial is by ten of the principal Panel,
and two of the Tales, notwithstanding Maynards Opinion to the contrary, and
Cro. 3. part. 587. The Sheriffs used to summon above 24. Must not return above
24.
Scil. effrenatam multitudinem, but now they are prohibited by Statute, to
summon above 24. Westminster. 2. cap. 38.

Where there must be 16. and 24. in a Jury.
To make a Jury in a Writ of Right, which is called the Grand Assize, there must
be 16. Scil. four Knights, and 12. others; the Jury in an Attaint, called the
Grand Jury, must be 24. Firch 412. and 485.

When Process used to be made out against the Witnesses in Carta nominat. to
join with the Jury in Trial of the Deed, Where Witness join with the Jury; the
number is uncertain.
then the number was uncertain, according as the number of Witnesses were in
the Deed: wherefore no attaint lay, if the Deed were affirmed, because more
then 12. joined in the Verdict. But otherwise, if the Deed was not found,
Cannot prove a Negative.
because Witnesses cannot prove a Negative. F. N. Br. 106. h. 1 Inst. 6. 2
Inst. 130. etc.

If 12. are sworn, and one of them depart by consent, another of the Panel may
be sworn, Juror departs; and another sworn by consent.
and join with the other 11. in the Verdict. 11 H. 6. 13.

In Error upon a Judgment in Cornwall, A Jury of 6.
because the Trial was but by 6. adjudged that it was erroneous, though it was
returned secundum consuetudinem ibidem ante, etc. for such Customs are against
Law, unless in Wales, which are permitted by Act of Parliament. Cro. 1. part.
259.

CAP. VII. Who may be Jurors, who not; who exempted; and of their Quality, and
Sufficiency.
Jurors must be Liber.
SO much for their number, next their Quality is to be considered; And for this,
the Writ informs you who they ought to be, 1. Liberos, that is, Freemen, not
Villains, or Aliens, and that not only Freemen, and not bond; but also those as
have such freedom of mind, that they stand indifferent, without any Obligation
of Affinity, Interest, or any other Relation whatsoever, to either party;
sometimes the word Probos, Fortescue. cap. 25.
instead of Liberos, is attributed to them; they are both good Epethites for a
Juror, but I esteem the first most significant.

2. They ought to be Legales, Legales.
not outlawed, not such as have lost Liberam legem, or become infamous, as
Recreants, persons attainted of Felony, false Verdict, Conspiracy, Perjury,
Praemunire, or Forgery upon the Stat. of 5 Eliz. cap. 14. and not upon the
Statute of 1 H. 5. 3. Not such as have had Judgment to lose their Ears, stand
on the Pillory or Tumbrel, or have been stigmatized or branded, nor Infidels,
neither can any such be Witnesses, 1 Inst. 6.

3. Homines; A Jury of Women.
they ought to be men, (yet there shall be a Jury of Women to try if a Woman be
Enseint, upon the Writ de venire inspiciendo,) But what kind of men these
ought to be, is worthy to be known. And for this, some men are exempted from
serving in Iuries, in respect of their Dignity, as Barons, and all above them
in degree; Exemption of Juries.
Many are exempted by the Writ de non ponendis in Assisis. F. N. B. 166. as
aged persons 70. years old, and many others are exempted, as Clerks, Who are to
be exempted from Juries.
Tenants in ancient Demesne, Ministers of the Forest, (out of the Forest):
Coroners, Enfants under the age of 14. years, Officers of the Sheriff, sick
de^crepio^ men, and such as are exempted by the Kings Charter: yet in a Grand
Assize, preambulation, Attaint, and in some other special Cases, such men as
are not exempted by reason of their Dignity, shall be forced to serve,
notwithstanding their exemption in other Cases. See Daltons Office of Sheriffs,
fo. 121. 52 H. 3. cap. 14. 2 Inst. 127. 130. 378. 447. and 561. Counselors,
Attorneys, Clerks, and other Ministers of the Kings Courts, are not to serve on
Iuries; But I find one Jury made of Attorneys of the Common Bench, and
Exchequer, In a Case brought upon a Bill in the Exchequer, by Sir Thomas Seton,
Justice against Luce C. for calling of him Traitor in the presence of the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer. A Jury of Attorneys.
And this Jury of Attorneys gave the Justice one hundred marks damages. 30
Assize 19.

4. De vicenet. de C. It is not sufficient that they dwell in the County, but
they are to be of the Neighborhood, Nay, le plus prochenies, Visne.
to the place of the fact, as by Artic. super, cap. 9. it is appointed They
must be most near, most sufficient, and least suspicious, ib. as I shall show
hereafter.

5. Sufficiency of Jurors.
Quorum quilibet habeat quatuor libras terre, tenement. vel reddit. per annum
ad minus; This is their sufficiency, where the debt or damages (or both
together, 1 Inst. 272.) amount to 40 Marks or above; The sufficiency of Jurors
in other Cases of lesser moment, is still left to the discretion of the
Justices, Fortescue, cap. 25. who, (experience tells us) never require Jurors
under 4 li. per annum, according to the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. before
which, men of 40 s. per annum, served; But neither this, nor the Stat. of 35 H.
8. extend to Juries in Cities, Towns Corporate, or other privileged places, or
in the 12. Shires of Wales, so that there they shall be returned, as before
they lawfully might have been; for the Jurors sufficiency in Attaints, see the
Statutes, 15 H. 6. 5. 18 H. 6. 2. and 13 H. 8. 3.

It is the general course of the World, to esteem men according to their
Estate; For Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in arca, Tantum habet et fidei;
And sure I am, the makers of this Law, had cause enough to do so, in this Case;
for if men of less Estates should serve in Juries, such Fellows would only be
shifted into Enquests, as had more need to be relieved by the 8 d. then
discretion to sift out the truth of the fact: It Is hard to act an unbyassed
Jury now; But surely, less rewards would sooner bribe and bias meaner men,
than these. Therefore least poverty or nec^ssity should tempt: Every Juror must
have 4 li. per annum, as aforesaid, of Freehold, out of Ancient Demesne. And
the Court may in matters of great consequence, Jurors of above 4 l. per annum.
direct a Venire facias, for a Jury of above 4 l. per annum, a piece, but not
under Cro. 2. part. 672. But in such Cases (every one knows) the Court most
commonly orders the Prothonotary to choose 48. out of the Sheriffs Book of
Freeholders, of the most substantial men in the County, and the parties strike
out 12. a piece, then the Sheriff returns the rest.

Et qui nec D.E. nec F.G. aliqua affinitate attingunt, the Law is very
cautelous, Jurors must not be of affinity to the parties.
in not leading men into temptation: Therefore least kindred and Affinity,
should wrong the Conscience to help a friend, our Ju^ors must not be related to
any of the parties; And for this Reason likewise, the Statutes provide, that no
man of Law shall ride Judge of Assize, or Jail-delivery in his own Country. 8
R. 2. 2. 33 H. 8. cap. 24. But because most things concerning the Quality and
Sufficiency of Jurors, will come more properly under the Title Challenge, I
will refer you thither; And first, observe more particularly, De quo vicinet.
the Jury ought to come.

CAP. VIII. Concerning the Visne, from what place the Jury shall come, etc.
VIcinetum is derived of this word Vicinus, Visne.
and signifies Neighborhood, or a place near at hand, or a Neighbor place,
where the question about the fact is moved. And the most general Rule (says
Coke, 1 Inst. 125.) is, That every Trial shall be, out of that Town, Parish, or
Hamlet, or place known out of the Town, etc. within the Record, within which
the matter of fact issuable is alleged, which is most certain and nearest
thereunto, the Inhabitants whereof, may have the better, and more certain
knowledge of the fact.

And if the fact be alleged in quadam platea vocat. Kingstreet in parochia
sanctae Margaretae in Com. Midd. In this Case the Visne cannot come out of
Platea, Parish.
because it is neither Town, Parish, Hamlet, nor place out of the
Neighborhood, whereof a Jury may come by Law; but in this Case, it shall not
come out of Westminst. but out of the Parish of St. Margaret, because that is
the most certain. But therein also it is to be noted, that if it had been
alleged in Kingstreet, in the Parish of St. Margaret, in the County of
Middlesex, then should it have came out of Kingstreet; for then should
Kingstreet have been esteemed in Law a Town: For whenever a place is alleged
generally, in pleading (without some addition to declare the contrary, (as in
this Case it is) it shall be taken for a Town. Town.


And albeit parochia Parochia.
generally alledge^ is a place uncertain, and and may (as we see by experience)
include diverse Towns; yet if a matter be alleged in parochia, it shall be
intended in Law, that it contains no more Towns than one, unless the party do
show the contrary. More. 55^.
But when a Parish is alleged within a City, there without question the Visne
shall come out of the Parish, for that is more certain than the City.

If a Trespass be alleged in D. and null tiel ville is pleaded, the Jury shall
come de Corpore Comitatus. De Corpora Comitatus.
But if it be alleged in S. and D. and null tiel ville de D. is pleaded, The
Jury shall come out de vicineto de S. For that is the more certain; so if a
matter be alledgd within a Manor, Manner.
the Jury shall come de vicineto Manerii. But if the Manor be alleged within
a Town, it shall come out of the Town, because that is most certain, for the
Manor may extend into diverse Towns. And all these points were resolved by all
the Judges of England, upon Conference between them, in the Case of John
Arundell Esquire; indicted for the death of William Parker.

De Corpore Com.
Where there may be a special Visne, the Trial shall never be de Corpore
Comitatus. Leon. 1 part. 109.

In a real Action where the Demandant demands Land in one County, Heir tried
where the Land lies, where not.
as Heir to his Father, and alleges his Birth in another County, if it be
denied that he is Heir, it shall not be tried where the Birth is alleged, but
where the Land lies; For there the Law presumes it shall be best known who is
Heir. But if the Defendant make himself Heir to a Woman, (for that is the
surer, and more certain side, and the Mother is certain, when perhaps the
Father is uncertain) and therefore there it shall be tried where the Birth is
alleged, Cro. 3. part. 818. Cro. 2. part. 303.
because they have more certain Conusance, then where the Land lies.

And so it is where Bastardy Bastardy.
is alleged, the Trial shall be in like Case, Mutatis Mutandis.

If the man plead the Kings Letters Patents, Non concessit where the Land lies.
and the other party plead non concessit, it shall not be tried where the
Letters bear date, for they cannot be denied, but where the Land lies.

Every Trial must come out of the Neighborhood of a Castle, Manor, Town, or
Hamlet, Visne.
or place known out of a Castle, Manor, Town or Hamlet, as some Forests, and
the like, as before.

Every Plea concerning the person, Plaintiff, Where the Writ is brought at
Common Law.
etc. shall be tried where the Writ is brought.

When the matter alleged extends into a place at the Common Law, and a place
within a Franchise, it shall be tried at the Common Law.

Matters done beyond Sea, may be tried in England, and therefore a Bond made
beyond Sea, Matters done beyond Sea, how tryable in England.
may be alleged to be made in any place in England, if it beat date in no
place; But if there be a place, as at Bordeaux in France, then it shall be
alleged to be made in quodam loco vocat. Bordeaux in France, in Islington, in
the County of Middlesex, and from thence shall come the Jury, 1 Inst. 261. Lach
4. and 5. So if the Tenant plead, that the Demandant is an Alien Alien.
born, under the Obedience of the French King, and out of the Legiance of the
King of England; the Demandant may reply, that he was born at such a place in
England, within the Kings Legiance, and hereupon a Jury of 12. men shall be
charged; and if they have sufficient Evidence that he was born in France, or in
any other place out of the Realm; then shall they find, that he was born out
of the Kings Allegiance. And if they have sufficient Evidence that he was born
in England, or Ireland, or Jernsey, or Jersey, or elsewhere within the Kings
Obedience, they shall find that he was born within the Kings Legiance: And
this has ever been the pleading, and manner of Trial, in that Case. So of
other things done beyond Sea, Things done beyond Sea.
the adverse party may allege them to be done at such a place in England, from
whence the Jury shall come, and in a Special Verdict, Lib. 7.26.
they may find the things done beyond Sea. Ib. lib. 7.26.

So when part of the act is done in England, and part out of the Realm, Part
without the Realm, and part within.
that part that is to be performed out of the Realm, if Issue be taken
thereupon, shall be tried here by 12. men, and they shall come out of the place
where the Writ or Action is brought. Ib. lib. 6.48.

Error, Full age tried where the Land lies.
for that Judgment was given by default against the Defendant, being an Infant,
Issue was taken that he was of full age. And Godfrey moved, whether the Trial
should be in Norfolk, where the Land was, or in Middlesex, where the Action was
brought. And the Court held, that it should be tried in the County where the
Land lay; and Tanfield said, It was so adjudged in the Kings Bench, between
Throgmotton and Burfind. Cro. 3. part. 818.

If the Venue arise in two Counties, the Jury upon 2. Venire facias, shall come
from both, This is called a Joynder of Counties. Finch. 410.
6. out of one County, and 6. from the other. Cro 3. part. 646. but by consent
of parties, entered upon Record, it may be by 5. out of one, and 7. from the
other, Jury out of two Counties.
as appears, Cro. 3. part. 471. where in Replevin, the Defendant avows for
damage fesant; The Plaintiff by his Replication, claims common by prescription
in loco quo, etc. being Broadway in the County of Worcester, appurtenant to his
Manor of D. in the County of Gloucester, and Issue thereupon, and 2. Venire
facias awarded to the Sheriffs of the several Counties, and now 7. of the
County of Worcester appeared, and 5. of Gloucester. And although there ought to
have been 6. sworn of each County, to try that Issue, as appears 49 Ed. 3. 1.
31 H. 8. 46. yet by the assent of the parties, those 12. who appeared, by
advice of all the Justices, were sworn, and tried the Issue. And it was
commanded, that this Assent should be entered upon Record; for otherwise it
would be a strange President.

In an Action of Trover, apud Paxton in Com. Hunt. the Defendant pleads a
Bargain and Sale, apud Royston in Com. Hertford, Covenant in P. to sell at ^.
tried at P.
in the Market there, whereby he after converted them, apud P. in Com. Hunt,
The Plaintiff says, that he was possessed of those Goods, apud. P. in Com.
Hunt. and that J. S. there stole them from him, and by Covenant betwixt him and
the Defendant, at P. in Com. H. he sold them to the Defendant, as he has
pleaded: The Issue was upon the sale made by Covenant. etc. And it was tried in
the County of Hunt. and found for the Plaintiff. And it was moved to be a
mis-tryal; for it ought to have been by a Jury of the County of H^rtford, or at
leastwise by a Jury, of both Counties; But it was adjudged to be well tried,
because the sale is confessed, and the Issue is upon the Covenant alleged in
Hertford, Cro. 3. part. 511.

Usurous Contract in another County.
In Debt upon a Bond in London, the Defendant pleaded an usurious Contract in
the County of Warwick; the Plaintiff replied, that the Bond was made upon good
consideration, Absque hoc, that it was made for such usurious Contract: the
Trial shall be in the County of Warwick; A Dures shall be tried there, not
where the Action is brought.
for the Bond is confessed, and the usury in Warwick is only in question; so if
the Issue be, whether the Deed were made by Dures, the Trial shall be where the
Dures, and not where the Deed, is supposed to be made. Cro. 3. part. 195.

Where Issue is taken upon a surrender, Surrender.
it shall be tried where it was alleged to be done, and not where the Manor
is, of which the Copyhold is holden, Ib. fo. 260. Br. tit. Visne. 114.

In an Assumpsit laid at London in Warda de Cheap, Ward or Hundred, no good
Visue.
the Venire was De parochia. de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap, whereas no Parish
was mentioned before in the Count, and adjudgad that the Venire was ill laid in
the Count, for a Venire facias may be of a Town, Parish, Manor, or other place
known, but not of a Hundred or Ward, ib. and so it is adjudged, ib. Cro. 1.
part. 165. for the Ward in a City, is but as the Hundred in a County.

Where the Visne is laid to be at a City, City.
in an Action brought in a superior Court, or within the City, though it be
both a City and County, the Venire facias may be de vicinet. Civitatis Lach.
258. Though it has been held not good, but that the Venire facias must be de
Civitate, leaving out Vicinet. as you may read in Stamf. 155. But now the Case
in Cro. 2. part. 308. and Bulstr. 1. part. 129. say, that all Venire fac: are
awarded de vicinet. Civitatis, which is intended as well de Civitate it self,
as de vicinet. infra Jurisdictionem of the City. And so it is, Styles 2. March
125.
de vicinet. Civitatis, or de vicinet. or de Civitate Coventry, Eborum,
Norwich, Sarum, Bristow, Exon, and all other Cities which are Counties in
themselves; In all places besides London, London.
no mention is made of the Parish or Ward; Ib. 493. But in London, the Parish
and Ward is mentioned. And therefore it was adjudged, Cro. 2. part. 150. That
it was not good to allege any thing done in London generally; But it must be,
in what Parish, from which a Venire may be; But where a thing is laid in a
City, in alta Warda there, and the Venire facias is from the City City.
only, it is well, because it shall be intended there be no more Wards in the
same City. Cro. 3. part. 282.

A Venire facias was awarded from T. and not de vicinet. de T. and for this
cause resolved to be ill, De vicinet. out, ill.
and not amendable. Cro. 2. part. 399. Bro. tit. Ven. fa. 8.

If the Issue be Si rex Concessit per literas patentes, Where the Land lies.
The Trial shall be, as has been said, where the Land lies, and not where the
Patent was made, because the Patent is of Record; and if it be traversed, it
shall be tried by the Record, and therefore the Issue being upon non Concessit,
the Issue is not upon the Patent; but where the Issue is upon non Concessit, or
non dimisit, of a thing which passes by Deed, the Trial shall be where the
Grant or Demise is alleged: But of a Feoffment, or Lease for life pleaded,
the Issue being non Feoffavit, or non di^isit, Livery ought to be made, and
therefore the Trial shall be where the Land lies. Cro. 2. part. 376. 3. part.
259.

Where the offense is laid in the Count to be in one County, and the
Justification in another County, and the Plaintiff replies, Where the Action is
laid in one County, and the Justification in another, the Trial shall be where
the Justification is.
de injuri^ sua propria, etc. The Visne shall be where the Justification is
alleged; As, one Example for all, to illustrate. In an Action upon the Case,
for words supposed to be spoken at Bridg-North, in the County of Salop, the
Defen^ant pleads, that he spoke them as a Witness upon his Oath, upon an Issue
tried at Chard, in the County of Somerset. The Pl^intiff replies de son tort
demesne, etc. And thereupon it was tried by a Venire facias of Bridg-north, And
Error thereof assigned, because it ought to have been by a Visne of Chard,
where the Justification arose, and it was held clearly to be a mis-tryall; and
not aided by the Stat. of Jeofailes, wherefore the Judgment was reversed. Cro.
3. part. 468. 261. 870. More 410.

In an Action of the Case against a Sheriff, upon an escape in London, and the
Arrest laid to be in Southhampton; adjudged, Where the escape was, and not
where the Arrest was.
that the Visne shall be where the escape was, because that is the ground of
the Action, and not where the Arrest was. Cro. 3. part. 271.

In Debt upon an Obligation, payment was pleaded, apud domum mansionalem
Rectoriae de Much-Hadam, and the Venire facias was de vicineto de Much-Hadham,
where it ought to have been de vicinet. Rectoriae de Much-Hadam; but it was
adjudged good, because Much-Hadam is here intended a Vill. Ib. 804. So you see,
that where a thing is alleged to be done at the Capital House Rectoriae.
of D. there the Venire shall be of D. For that is intended to be all one with
the Vill. but where it is at the Castle of Hartford, etc. Castle.
There the Venire facias shall not be de vicineto de Hartford; but de Castro de
Hartford, for Castrum Hartford. is intended a distinct place by it self, and so
of all Castles. Cro. 2. part. 239. More 862.

Where the Issue is not parcel of the Manor Manor.
of D. or the Custom of a Manor is in question, the Venire ought to be of the
Manor. Hob. 284. Cro. 2. part. 327. If the Manor be laid to be in a Vill. the
Venire facias may be of the Manor in the Vill. as de vicineto manerii de
Stansted Hall in Windham. Cro. 2. part. 405. More 851. Arundels Case. li. 6. 14.

In the Common Bench, in Trespass, for taking away a Bag of Pepper, the
Defendant justified as Servant of the Mayor and Commonalty of London, for
Wharfage due to them, by the Custom of London, which the Plaintiff refused to
pay. The Plaintiff replied, that the Custom did not extend to him, London.
because he was a Freeman of the City, and ought not to pay Wharfage, to which
the Defendant re-ioyned, that the Custom extended to him, as well as to
strangers; upon which, Issue was joined.

Resolved, 1. That the Issue should be tried per Pais, not by the mouth of the
Recorder, Recorder.
because he certifies nothing, but what the Mayor and Aldermen direct, who are
concerned in the cause.

2. That the Venire facias should not be awarded to the Sheriffs of London, nor
Middlesex, because the Trials there, are by Freemen. Where the trial shall be
by the County next adjoining.
But it shall be to the County next adjoining, viz. to the Sheriff of Surry. So
where any City is concerned, the venire facias shall not be directed to the
Officers of the City, but to the County next adjoining. Hob. 85. Styles 137.
More 871.

Where a Man lends a Horse to another to till his Land, Where a man lends his
horse in one place, and he is spoiled in another, Visne where he is spoiled.
and the Horse dies with excessive Labor, the Visne shall be from the place
where the excessive labor was, and not where the delivery was. More 887. vide
Hob. 188.

Promise in one place, and breach in another. Visne guided by the Issue.
Where a promise is laid in o^^ place, and the breach in another, t(...) Visne
must be according to the ev^^ of the Issue, whether it be taken upon the
promise, or breach. B^^ if no place be alleged for the breach, and Issue be
taken upon it, t^^ Visne must be from the place of the promise, which shall be
intende^ right, where the contrary appears not, see Godbolt 274.

Easter 39 Eliz. In the Kings Bench, Trespass, Assault and Battery, (...)
Wilts, continuing the Assault i^ Middlesex, and adjudged that the Jurors shall
come out of both Counties. More 538.

Misnomer.
The name of a Manor, or Land, or other local thing, shall be tried where it
lies, because it is local; but the name or a^dition of a person, shall be
tried where the Action is brought, because this is transitory. Bro. ut. Visne
7. lib. 6. 65.

In Covenant upon an Indenture of Demise of the Rectory of Stoken Church, in
the County of Oxford. That the Defendant had good Power and Authority to
demise: Where the Land lies.
The Inden^^re was alleged to be made at London, and the Venire facias was
awarded to the Sheriff of Oxon, and this being assigned for Error, Judgment was
affirmed, and this adjudged to be good. More 710. because the Rectory was in
Com. Oxon. Vide, page 45.

Where the Parish Parish.
is named by way of denotation, or explanation of the place, where the Fact is
alleged to be done, as at the Parish Church of Hauk-hucknol, there the Venire
facias shall be of the Town, not of the Parish. Bulstr. 1 part. 60. 61.

If the Fact be alleged in Kingstreet, Town.
in the Parish of St. Margar^^, in Com. Mid. You have already heard that the
Visne shall be from Kingstreet, because it is intended to be a Town; but where
it is alleged to be done at the Gray's Inn Hall, or Lincolns-Inn-Hall, etc.
Holborn, the Visne shall be from Holborn, which is the Town; i^ as Yelverton
said, Inns of Court.
it was never hea^^ of any Venire facias to be had of (...) of the Inns of
Court, Bulstr. 2. p^^. 120. Not from house or hall.
especially of the Hall, beca^^^ it cannot be of a House, much le^^ of a Hall.

In Ejectment upon a Demis^^ made at Denham of Lands in par^chia de Denham
predict. The Visne may be of Denham, or of the Pari^^ of Denham, because Denham
and Parochia de Denham predict. are all (...) by intendment of Law. Bulstr. 2.
part. 209. More 709. Hob. 6. B^^ when it appears by the Record, o^ is intended
that the Parish Parish.
is mo^^ spacious than the Town, as the Case in More 837. where in Ejectment
the Lease was alleged to be made at Bredon, of Tithes in W. and W. Hamlets
within the Parish of Bredon, there the Venire facias un^^ not be of Bredon, but
of the Parish, because it appears, that the Parish extends further than the
Town. Hob. 326.

Where an Action of Debt for Rent, For Rent where the Land lies, and when not.
is brought upon the privity of the Contract, by the Lessor, as against the
Lessee, or his Executors, for Arrearages due in the lifetime of the Testator,
the Visne may be laid in any place; but where the Action is brought upon the
privity in Estate, as against the Assignee of the Lessee, or his Executors, for
Rent due after the Testators death, the Visne must be, where the Lands lie.
Lach misprinted, 197. li. 3. 24.

Walkers Case, Debt for rent of Land in another County.
in Debt upon a Lease of Land in another County, Nihil debet, shall be tried
where the Action is brought. Br. tit. Visne 119. Vide, page 93.

In Replevin brought by Strede, against Hartly, for taking a Distress at
Baildon, the Defendant made Conusance as Bailiff, because that Iocus in quo,
etc. was holden of W. H. as of his Manor of Baildon, and upon Issue, horse de
son fee, the Venire facias, was de vicineto de Baildon; and upon motion that
the Venire facias ought to have been, as well from the Manor, as the Town. The
Court adjudged it to be well enough, for that the Court shall not intend the
Manor Manor.
was larger than the Town, because it does not appear so to be, though possibly
it might, as like the Case of Town and Parish. Hob. 305. 326.

If the Sheriff return that there are no Freeholders of that Visne, Visne next
adjoining in what Cases.
or if the Visne be where the Kings Writ runs not, as in the Cinque Ports, etc.
or in a place where the men are privileged, from serving on Juries out of that
place, as the Isle of Ely, etc. the Plaintiff may pray a Venire facias of the
Visne next adjoining, and if the Visne be in Wales, Wales.
(ou b^iefe le Royne Court) the Venire facias shall be directed to the Sheriff
of the next English County, to cause the Jury to come De propinquiori Visne of
his County, to the Visne in Wales adjoining. Fitz. Abridg. tit. Visne 8.
Jurisdict. 24.

If the Visne is in some part misawarded, Visne misawarded in part.
or sued out of more places, or fewer places than it ought to be, so as some
place be right named, this is aided by the Statute of Jeofailes, which has
ended the differences, in many Cases reported in our Books, concerning this
point, wherefore I purposely omit them.

Error, Infamy, where the Land lies.
for that the Iu^gment was given by default against the Defendant, being an
Infant, upon Issue that he was of full age, adjudged, that the Trial should be
in Norfolk, where the Land was, and not in Middlesex, where the Action was
brought. Cro. 3. part. 818.

If the Visne comes from a wrong place, May be out of a wrong place by Consent.
yet if it be per assensum partium, and so entered of Record, it shall stand for
Omnis Consensus tollit errorem. 1 Inst. 125.

CAP. IX. Challenges.
YOu have already seen of what Visne the Jury ought to be: The next thing to be
considered, is concerning Challenges. And f^r this, I shall present you with my
Lord Cooks Collection. 1 Inst. 156. The rather because he has taken more pains
in the gathering and methodizing this Learning, then any other one point
whatsoever; And I know no Reason, wherefore I may not as well use his method,
for the perfection of this Treatise, as he has used other men's method and
matter, (especially Perkins, whom he seldom cites) for the perfection of hi^:
Judgment has the pre-eminence of Invention, and the Law hates nothing more
then Innovation; wherefore I shall follow his method in the description of a
Challenge, omitting the Book Cases, and Authorities cited by him.

Challenge Challenge.
is a word common as well to the English as to the French, and sometimes
signifies to claim, and the Latin word is vendicate; sometime in respect of
revenge to challenge into the field, and then it is called in Latin, vindicare
or provocare; Sometime in respect of partiality or insufficiency, to challenge
in Court persons returned on a Jury. And seeing there is no proper Latin word
to signify this particular kind of Challenge, they have framed a word
anciently written Chalumniare, and Columpniare, and Calumpniare, and now
written Calumniare, and has no affinity with the verb Calumnior, or Calumnia,
which is derived of that, for that is of a quite other sense, signifying a
false accuser, and in that sense, Bracton uses Calumniator Calumniator.
to be a false accuser: but it is derived of the old word Caloir, or Chaloir,
which in one signification is to care for, or foresee. And for that to
challenge Jurors, is the mean to care for or foresee, that an indifferent trial
be had, it is called Calumniare, to challenge, that is, to except against them
that are returned to be Jurors, and this is his proper signification: But
sometimes a Sommons, Sommonitio is said to be Calumniata, and a Count to be
challenged, but this is improperly. And forasmuch as men's lives, Fames, Lands,
and Goods, are to be tried by Jurors, it is most necessary that they be Omni
exceptione majo es, and therefore I will handle this matter the more largely.

Challenge is twofold.
A Challenge to Jurors is twofold, either to the Array, or to the Polls: to the
array of the principal Pannell, To the Array.
and to the array of the Tales. And herein you shall understand, that the
Jurors names are ranked in the Panel one under another, which order or ranking
the Jury is called the Array, and the Verb, to array the Jury, and so we say
in common speech, Battle array, Array.
for the order of the battle. And this array we call Arraiamentum, and to make
the array, Arrairare, derived of the French word Arroier; so as to challenge
the array of the Panel, is at once to challenge or except against all the
persons so arrayed or impannelled, in respect of the partiality or default of
the Sheriff, Coroner, or other Officer that made the Return.

And it is to be known, Principal Challenges.
that there is a principal cause of challenge to the Array, and a challenge to
the favor: principal, in respect of partiality, as first, if the Sheriff or
other Officers be of kindred or affinity to the Plaintiff or Defendant, if the
affinity continue. Secondly, If any one or more of the Jury be returned at the
denomination of the party, Plaintiff or Defendant, the whole array shall be
quashed. So it is if the Sheriff return any one, that he be more favorable to
the one than to the other, all the array shall be quashed. Thirdly, if the
Plaintiff or Defendant have an Action of Battery against the Sheriff, or the
Sheriff against either party, this is a good cause of challenge. So if the
Plaintiff or Defendant have an action of debt against the Sheriff, (but
otherwise it is, if the Sheriff have an action of debt against either party) or
if the Sheriff have parcel of the Land depending upon the same Title, or if the
Sheriff or his Bailiff which returned the Jury, be under the distress of either
party; or if the Sheriff or his Bailiff be either of Counsel, Attorney, Officer
in fee, or of Robes, or servant of either party, Gossip, or Arbitrator in the
same matter, and treated thereof. And where a subject may challenge the array
for unindifferency, there the King, being a party may also challenge for the
fame cause, as for Kindred, or that he has part of the Land, or the like; and
where the array shall be challenged against the King, you shall read in our
Books.

By default of the Sheriff, as when the array of a Panel is returned by a
Bailiff of a Franchise, and the Sheriff return it as of himself, this shall be
quashed, because the party shall lose his challenges. But if a Sheriff return a
Jury within a Liberty, this is good, and the Lord of the Franchise is driven to
his remedy against him.

If a Peer of the Realm, Where there must be a Knight returned of the Jury.
or Lord of Parliament be demandant or Plaintiff, Tenant or Defendant, there
must a Knight be returned of his Jury, be he Lord Spiritual, or Temporal, or
else the array may be quashed: but if he be returned, although he appear not,
yet the Jury may be taken of the residue. And if others be joined with the Lord
of Parliament, yet if there be no Knight returned, the array shall be quashed
against all. So in an attaint, there ought to be a Knight returned to the Jury.

And when the King is party, Where the King is party.
as in travers of an Office, he that traverseth may challenge the array, as
hereafter in this Section shall appear; And so it is in case of life: And
likewise the King may challenge the array, and this shall be tried by Tryors
according to the usual course. The array challenged on both sides shall be
quashed.

And if two estrangers make a Panel, and not in favorable manner for the one
party, or the other, and the Sheriff returns the same, the array was challenged
for this cause, and adjudged good.

If the Bailiff of a Liberty return any out of his Franchise, the array shall
be quashed, as an array returned by one that has no Franchise shall be quashed.

Challenge to the favor.
Challenge to the array for favor: He that takes this, must show in certain
the name of him that made it, and in whose time, and all in certainty: This
kind of Challenge being no principal challenge, must be left to the discretion
and conscience of the Triors; as if the Plaintiff or Defendant be Tenant to the
Sheriff, this is no principal Challenge, for the Lord is in no danger of his
Tenant, but e converso it is a principal Challenge; but in the other he may
challenge for favor, and leave it to trial. So affinity between the Son of
the Sheriff, and the Daughter of the party, or e converso, or the like, is no
principal challenge, but to the favor; but if the Sheriff marry the Daughter
of either party, or e converso, this (as has been said) is a principal
Challenge, For the King.
or the like. But where the King is party, one shall not challenge the array
for favor, etc. because in respect of his allegiance, he ought to favor the
King more. But if the Sheriff be a Vadelect of the Crown, or other meniall
servant of the King, there the challenge is good, and likewise the King may
challenge the array for favor.

Note, upon that which has been said it appears, To me Array.
that the challenge to the array, is in respect of the cause of unind^fferency,
or default of the Sheriff or other Officer that made the Return, and not in
respect of the persons returned, where there is no unindifference or default in
the Sheriff, etc. for if the challenge to the Array be found against the party
that takes it, yet he shall have his particular challenge to the Polls.

In some Cases a Challenge may be had to the Polls, and in some Cases not at
all. To the Polls.
Challenge to the Polls, is a challenge to the particular persons, and these be
of four kinds, that is to say, Peremptory, Principal, which endure favor, and
for default of Hundredors.

Peremptory, this is so called, because he may challenge peremptorily upon his
own dislike, Peremptory Challenge.
without showing of any cause, and this only is in case of Treason or Felony,
in farem vitae; and by the common ^aw, the prisoner upon an Endict^nt or
Appeal, might challenge ^hirty five, which was under the ^^her of the three
Iuries; but now the Statute of 22 H. 8. the number (...) reduced to 20. in
petite Treason, ^urder and Felony; and in Case of ^^gh Treason, and Misprision
of high Treason, it was taken away by the Stat. of 33 H. 8. but now by the
Stat. of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary, the Common Law is revived for any Treason, the
prisoner shall have his Challenge to the number of 35. and so it has been
resolved by the Justices, upon conference between them in the Case of Sir
Walter Releigh and George Brooks: But all this is to be understood when any
subject that is not a Peer of the Realm, is arraigned for Treason or Felony.
But if he be a Lord of Parliament, and a Peer of the Realm, and is to be tried
by his Peers, No Challenge of Peers.
he shall not challenge any of his Peers at all, for they are not sworn as
other Jurors be, but find the party guilty or not guilty, upon their Faith or
Allegiance to the King, and they are Judges of the fact, and every of them does
separately give his Judgment, beginning at the lowest. But a subject under the
degree of Nobility, may in case of Treason or Felony, challenge for just cause
as many as he can, as shall be said hereafter. In an appeal of death, against
diverse, they plead not guilty, and one joint Venire facias is awarded, if one
challenge peremptorily, he shall be drawn against all. Otherwise it is of
several Venire fac.

Note, that at the common Law, before the Stat. of 33 E. 1. the King might have
challenged peremptorily without showing cause, but only that they were not good
for the King, and without being limited to any number, but this was mischievous
to the subject, tending to infinite delays and danger. And therefore it is
Enacted. Quod de caetero licet pro Domino Rege dicatur quod ju^ores, etc. non
sunt boni pro Re^^ non propter hoc remaneant in^^sitiones, etc. sed ass^gnent
certam ^^sam calumniae suae, etc. whereby (...) King is now restrained.

Principal, so called, Principal Challenge to the Polls.
because if it is found true, it stands sufficient (...) it self, without
leaving any thing (...) the Conscience or discretion of the Triors. Of a
principal cause of challenge to the Array, we have hi^ somewhat already; now it
follows with like brevity, to speak of principal Challenges to the Polls,
(that is) severally to the persons returned.

Principal Challenges to the Poll may be reduced to four heads. To the Polls.
first, Propter honoris respectum, for respect of Honor: Secondly Propter
Defectum, for want or default: Thirdly, Propter Affectum, for affection or
partiality; Fourthly, Propter Delictum, for Crime or Delict.

First, Propter Honoris respectum As any Peer of the Realm, Principal Chall
nges to the Polls.
or Lo^^ of Parliament, as a Baron, Viscount, Earl, Marquess, and Duke, for
these in respect of Honor and Nobility, are not to be sworn (...) Juries; and
if neither party will challenge him, Propter honoris respectum.
he may challenge himself; for by Magna Charta it is provided, Quod nec super
eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, aut
per legem terrae. A Peer may challenge himself.
Now the Common Law has divided all the subjects into Lords of Parliament, and
into the Commons of the Realm. Peers and Commons.
The Peers of the Realm are divided into Barons, Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses
and Dukes; The Commons are divided into Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens,
Yeomen, and Burgesses: And in Judgment of Law, any of the said degrees of
Nobility are Peers to another: As if an Earl, Marquess, or Duke, be to be tried
for Treason or Felony, a Baron, or any other degree of Nobility is his Peer. In
like manner, a Knight, Esquire; etc. shall be tried per Pares, and that is by any
of the Commons, as Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, or Burgesses; so as when any of
the Commonsis to have a Trial, either at the Kings Suit, or between party and
party, a Peer of the Realm shall not be impannelled in any Case.

Secondly, Propter Defectum. Challenge Propter defectum.


1. Patriae, as Aliens born.

2. Libertatis, as Villains or Bondmen, and so a Champion must be a Freeman.

3. Annui sensus. i. liberi tenementi. First, See before, Quorum quilibet
habeat, 4 l. etc.
what yearly Freehold a Inter ought to have, that passes upon Trial of the
life of a man, or in a Plea real, or in a Plea personal, where the debt or
damage in the Declaration amounts to 40. Marks, Vide, Littleton, Sect. 464.
Secondly, this Freehold must be in his own right, in Fee-simple, Fee tail, for
term of his own life, or for another man's life, although it be upon condition,
or in the right of his Wife, out of ancient Demesne; for Freehold within
ancient Demesne will not serve, but the debt or damage amounts not to 40.
Marks, any Freehold suffices. Thirdly, he must have Freehold in that County
where the cause of the Action arises, and though he has in another, it
suffices not. Fourthly, if after his return he sells away his land, or if
Cesty que vie, or his Wife dies, or an entry be made for the condition broken,
so as his Freehold be determined, he may be challenged for insufficiency of
Freehold.

4. Hundredorum: First, by the common Law in a Plea real, mixed, and personal,
Challenges propter defectum hundredocum.
there ought to be four of the Hundred (where the cause of Action arises)
returned for their better notice of the cause; for Vicini vicinorum facta
praesumuntur scire. And now since Littleton wrote, in a Plea personal, if two
Hundredors appear, it suffices; and in an Attaint, although the Jury is
double, yet the Hundredors are not double. Secondly, If he has either Freehold
in the Hundred, though it be to the value but of half an Acre, or if he dwell
there, though he has no Freehold in it, it suffices. Thirdly, if the cause of
the Action rises in diverse Hundreds, yet the number shall suffice, as if it
had come out of one, and not several Hundredors Hundredors.
out of each Hundred. Fourthly, if there be diverse hundreds within one Leet or
Rape, if he has any Freehold, or dwell in any of those Hundreds, though not in
the proper hundred, it suffices. Fifthly, if the Jury come de corpore
Comitatus, or de proximo hundredo, No Hundredors.
wh^re the one party is Lord of the Hundred, or the like, there need be no
Hundredors be returned at all. Sixthly, if a Hundredor after he be returned,
sell away his Land within that Hundred, yet shall he not be challenged for the
Hundred, for that this notice remains; otherwise as has bee^ said for his
insufficiency of Freehold, for his fear to offend, and to have Lands wasted,
etc. which is one of the Reasons of Law, is taken away. Seventhly, he that
challenges for the Hundred, must show in what Hundred it is, and not drive the
other party to show it. Eighthly, his Challenge for the Hundred is not
simpliciter, but secundum quid; for though it be found that he has nothing in
the Hundred, yet shall not he be drawn, but remain praeter H. that is, besides
for the Hundred, and albeit he dwells, or have Land in the Hundred, yet must
he have sufficient Freehold.

Challenges propter affectum.
3. Propter affectum: And this is of two sorts, either working a principal
Challenge, or to the favor. And again a principal Challenge is of two sorts,
either by Judgment of Law, without any Act of his, or by Judgment of Law upon
his own Act.

And it is said that a principal Challenge Principal Challenge.
is, when there is express favor, or express malice. First, without any Act of
his, as if the Iuror be of blood or kindred to either party, Consanguineus,
which is compounded ex Con and sanguine, quasi eodem sanguine natus, Kindred.
as it were issued from the same blood; and this is a principal challenge, for
that the Law presumes that one Kinsman does favor another, before a stranger,
and how far remote so ever he is of kindred, yet the Challenge is good. And if
the Plaintiff challenge a Juror for kindred to the Defendant, it is no
Counterplea, to say that he is of kindred also to the Plaintiff, though he be
in a nearer degree. For the words of the Venire facias, forbids the Juror to
be of kindred to either party.

If a body politic or incorporate, Bodies Politic.
sole or aggregate of many, bring any Action that concerns their body politic
or incorporate, if the Juror be of kindred to any that is of that body
(although the body politic or incorporate can have no kindred, yet) for that
those bodies consist of natural persons, it is a principal challenge. A Bastard
cannot be of kindred to any, and therefore it can be no principal challenge.
And here it is to be known, that Affinitas, Affinity Affinity.
has in Law two senses. In his proper sense it is taken for that neerness that
is gotten by marriage, Cum duae cognationes inter se divisae per nuptias
copulantur, and altera ad alterius fines accedit, and inde dicitur Affinis. In
a larger sense Affinitas is taken also for Consanguinity and Kindred, as in the
Writ of Venire facias, and other where. Affinity, or Alliance by Marriage, is a
principal Challenge, and equi^alent for Consanguinity, when it is between
either of the parties, as if the Plaintiff or Defendant marry the Daughter, or
Cousin of the Juror, or the Juror marry the Daughter or Cousin of the Plaintiff
or Defendant, and the same continues, or Issue be had. But if the Son of the
Juror has married the daughter of the Plaintiff, this is no principal
Challenge, but to the favor, because it is not between the parties. Much more
may be said hereof, sed summa sequor fastigia rerum.

If there be a Challenge for Cosinage, Cosinage.
he that takes the Challenge must show how the Juror is Cousin. But yet if the
Cosinage, that is, the effect and substance be found, it suffices; for the Law
prefers that which is material, before that which is formal.

If the Juror have part of the Land that depends upon the same Title.
Depending on the same Title.


If a Juror be within the Hundred, Leet, or any way within the Seigniory,
immediately, or mediately, or any other distress Distress.
of either party, this is a principal Challenge. But if either party be within
the distress of the Juror, this no principal Challenge, but to the favor.

If a Witness Witness.
named in the Deed be returned of the Jury, it is a good cause of Challenge of
him. So it is if one within age of one and twenty be returned, Infant.
it is a good cause of Challenge.

Challenges arising from the Jurors own Act.
Upon his own Act, as if the Juror has given a Verdict before, for the same
cause, albeit it be reversed by Writ of Error, or if after Verdict, Judgment
were arrested. So if he has given a former Verdict upon the same Title or
matter, though between other persons. But it is to be observed, that I may
speak once for all, that in this or other like Cases, Former Verdict.
he that takes the Challenge must show the Record, if he will have it take
place as a principal Challenge, otherwise he must conclude to the favor,
unless it be a Record of the same Court, and then he must show the day and
term.

So likewise one may be challenged, Indictment.
that he was Inditor of the Plaintiff or Defendant, either of Treason, Felony,
Misprision, Trespass, or the like in the same cause.

If the Juror be Godfather Godfather.
to the Child of the Plaintiff or Defendant, or e converso, this is allowed to
be a good Challenge in our Books.

If a Juror has been an Arbitrator Arbitrators
chosen by the Plaintiff or Defendant, in the same cause, and have been
informed of, or treated of the matter, this is a principal Challenge. Otherwise
if he were never informed nor treated thereof; and otherwise if he were
indifferently chosen by either of the parties, though he treated thereof. But a
Commissioner chosen by one of the parties, for examination of Witnesses in the
same cause, is no principal cause of challenge; Commissioner.
for he is made by the King under the great Seal, and not by the party as the
Arbitrator is, but he may upon cause be challenged for favor.

If he be of counsel, Counsel.
Servant, or of Robes, or Fee, or of either party, it is a principal Challenge.

If any after he be returned, Eat or drink at the parties charge.
do eat and drink at the charge of either party, it is a principal cause of
Challenge, otherwise it is of a Trior after he be sworn.

Action brought either by the Juror against either of the parti s, Actions of
malice.
or by either of the parties against him, which may imply malice or
displeasure, are causes of principal Challenge, unless they be brought by
Covyn, either before or after the return; for if Covyn be found, then it is no
cause of Challenge; other Actions which do not imply malice or displeasure, are
but to the favor, as an Action of debt, etc. More 3.

Parson and Parishes.
In a cause where the Parson of a Parish is party, and the right of the Church
comes in debate, a Parishioner is a principal Challenge. Otherwise it is in
debt, or any other Act^on where the right of the Church comes not in question.

If eit^er party labor the Juror, and give him any thing to give his Verdict,
To labor the Jury.
t^is is a principal Challenge. But if either party labor the Juror to appear,
and to do his Conscience, this is no Challenge at all, but lawful for him to do
it.

That the Juror is a Fellow Servants Fellow Servant.
with either party, is no principal Challenge but to the favor.

Neither of the parties can take that Challenge to the Polls, To the Polls.
which he might have had to the Array.

Note, if the Defendant may have a principal cause of Challenge to the Array,
if the Sheriff return the Jury, Venire facias to the Cor^ners.
the Pl^intiff in that case may for his own expedition, allege the same, and
pray Process to the Coroners, which he cannot have, unless the Defendant will
confess it; but if the Defendant will not confess it, then the Plaintiff shall
have a Venire facias to the Sheriff, and the Defendant shall never take any
Challenge for that cause, and so in like cases. But on the part of the
Defendant, any such matter shall not be alleged, and Process prayed to the
Coroners, because he may challenge the Jury for that cause, and can be at no
prejudice.

Challenge concluding to the favor, Challenges to the favor.
when either party cannot take any principal Challenge, but shows causes of
favor, which must be left to the conscience and discretion of the Triors, upon
hearing their evidence to find him favorable, or not favorable. But yet some
of them come nearer to a principal Challenge then other. As if the Juror be of
kindred, or under the distress of him in the reversion or remainder, or in
whose right the Avowrie or Justification is made, or the like: These be in
principal Challenges, because he in Reversion, remainder, or in whose right
the Avowry or Justification is, is not party to the Record; otherwise it is, if
they were made parties by aid, R^script, or Voucher, and yet the cause of
favor is apparent; so it is of all principal causes, if they were party to the
Record. Now the causes of favor are infinite, and thereof somewhat may be
gathered of that which has been said, Favor.
and the rest I purposely leave the Reader to the reading of our Books
concerning that matter. For all which the rule of Law is, that he must stand
indifferent as he stands ^^sworn.

The Subject may challenge the Polles, where the King King.
is party. And if a man be outlawed of Treason or Felony, at the Suit of the
King, and the party for avoiding thereof alleges imprisonment, or the like,
^t the time of the Outlawry, though the Issue be joined upon a collateral
point, yet shall the party have such Challenges, as if he had been arraigned
upon the crime it self, for this by a mean concerns his life also.

Propter delictum, As if the Juror be attainted or convicted of Treason, or
Felony, Challenges propter delictun.
or for any offense to life or member, or in attaint for a false Verdict, or
for perjury as a Witness, or in a conspiracy at the Suit of the King, or in any
Suit (either for the King, or for any subject) be adjudged to the Pillory,
Tumbrel, or the like, or to be branded, or to be stigmatique, or to h^ve any
other corporal punishment whereby he becomes infamous, Infamous.
(for it is a maxim in Law, Repellitur a sacramento infamis) these and the
like are principal causes of challenge. So it is if a man be outlawed Outlawed.
in trespass, debt, or any other action, for he is Exlex, and therefore is not
legalis homo. And old Books have said, that if he be excommunicated, he could
not be of a Jury.

See the Statutes of W. 2. and Artic. supra cartas, what persons the Sheriff
ought to return on Iuries. Who ought to be on Juries.
And see F.N.B. breve de non ponendis in Assesis and juratis; and the Register
in the same Writ. And see there what remedy the party has that is returned
against Law.

It is necessary to be known the time when the challenge is to be taken. At
what time Challenges must be taken.
First, he that has diverse challenges, must take t^em all at once, and the Law
so requires indifferent trials, and diverse challenges are not accounted
double. Secondly, if one be challenged by one party, if after he be tried
indifferent, it is time enough for the other party to challenge him. Thirdly,
after chal^^nge to the Array, and trial duly returned, if the same party take a
challenge to the Polls, he must ^^w cause presently. Fourthly, so if a Iuror be
formerly sworn, if he be challenged, he must show cause presently, and that
cause must rise ^^^ce he was sworn. Fifthly, when the King is party, or in an
appeal of Felony, the Defendant that challenges for cause, must show his cause
presently. Sixthly, If a man in case of Treason or Felony, challenge for cause,
and he be tried indifferent, yet he may challenge him peremptorily. Seventhly,
a challenge for the Hundred must be taken before so many be sworn, as will
serve for Hundredors, Hundredors.
or else he l^seth the advantage thereof.

In a Writ of Right, Writ of Right.
the grand Jury must be challenged before the four Knights, before they be
returned in Court; for after they be returned in Court, there cannot any
challenge be taken unto them.

Nota. The Array of the Tales shall not be challenged by any one party, The
Array of the Tales.
until the Array of the principal be tried; but if the Plaintiff challenge the
Array of the principal, the Defendant may challenge the Array of the Tales.
After one has taken a challenge to the Poll, he cannot challenge the Array.

Now it is to be seen how challenge to the Array of the principal Panel, or
of the Tales, or of the Polls shall be tried, and who shall be tryors of the
same, and to whom process shall be awarded.

If the Plaintiff allege a cause of challenge against the Sheriff, the process
shall be directed to the Coroners, Coroners.
if any cause against any of the Coroners, process shall be awarded to the
rest, if against all of them, then the Court shall appoint certain Elisors,
Elisors.
or Esliors (so named ab eligendo) because they are named by the Court, against
whose return, no challenge shall be taken to the Array, because they were
appointed by the Court, but he may have his challenge to the Polls. Note, if
process be once awarded for the partiality of the Sheriff, though there be a
new Sheriff, yet process shall never be awarded to him: for the entry is, Ita
quod vicecomes se non intromittar. But otherwise it is, for that he was Tenant
to either party, or the like.

If the Array Array.
be challenged in Court, it shall be tried by two of them that be impannelled
to be appointed by the Court: for the tryors in that case shall not exceed the
number of two, Two Tryors.
unless it be by consent. But when the Court names two for some special cause
alleged by either party, the Court may name others; if the Array be quashed,
then process shall be awarded, ut supra. If there be a demur to a challenge,
Demur to a Challenge, how determinable.
the Judge before whom the cause is to be tried, may determine it, or adjourn
it to be heard another time. Styles 464. Vide Bulstr. 1. part. 114.

Array of the Principal and Tales.
If a Panel upon a Venire facias be returned, and a Tales, and the Array of the
principal is challenged, the tryors, which try and quash the Array, shall not
try the Array of the Tales; for now it is, as if there had been no appearance
of the principal Panel; but if the tryors affirm the Array of the principal,
then they shall try the Array of the Tales. If the Plaintiff challenge the
Array of the principal, and the Defendant the Array of the Tales, there the
one of the principal, and the other of the Tales shall try both Arrayes. For
other matter concerning the Tales, see in Cokes Reports matters worthy of
observation. When any challenge is made to the Polls, two tryors shall be
appointed by the Court, and if they try one indifferent, Two Tryors.
and he be sworn, then be and the two tryors shall try another: an^ if another
be tried in^iff^^ent, and ^e be sworn, t^en the two tryors cease, and the two
that be sworn on the Jury shall try the rest.

If the Plaintiff challenge ten, Trial of Challenges.
and the Defendant one, and the twelfth is sworn, because one cannot try alone,
there shall be added to him one c^allenged by the Plaintiff, and the other by
the Defendant. When the trial is ^o be had by two Counties, the manner of the
trial is worthy of observation, and apparent in our Books. If the four Knights
in the Writ of Right be challenged, they shall try themselves, and they shall
choose the grand Assize, and try the challenges of the parties. If the cause of
challenges touch the dishonor, or discredit of the Iuror, Juror examined.
he shall not be examined upon his Oath, but in other cases he shall be
examined upon his Oath, to inform the tryors. If an Inquest be awarded by
default, the Defendant has lost his challenge; but the Plaintiff may challenge
for just cause, and that shall be examined and tried.

Wheresoever the Plaintiff is to recover per visum juratorum, View.
there ought to be sir of the Jury t^a^ have had the view, or known the Land in
question so as he be able to put the Plaintiff in possession, if he recover.

Challenges.
In Proprietate probanda, and a Writ to inquire for waste, the parties have been
received to take their challenges. But passing over many things touching this
matter, I will conclude with the saying of Bracton, Plures autem aliae sunt
causae recusandi juratores, de quibus ad praesens non recolo, sed quae jam
enumeratae sunt, sufficiant exempli causa.

CAP. X. Of what things a Jury may inquire; when of espirituall; when of things
done in another County, or in another Kingdom; when of Estoppels, and when not;
when of a man's intent.
THe next words in the Writ, which have not yet been taken notice of, are
these, perquos rei veritas melius sciri poterit; And this is the chief end of
their meeting together: Ex facta ja^ oritur.
No Court can give a right Judgment, unless the truth of the fact be certainly
known; and to find out this truth, no way is like to this of Iuries: f^r they
do not only go upon their own knowledge, though they are Neighbors to the
place where the question is moved, and so are presumed to have a better
knowledge of the fact, then any others; For vicinus facta vicini presumitur
scire; But least this presumption should fail, the Law allows other Evidence
to be given to them, by which, they may more certainly and confidently, give
their Verdict of the Issue, which is meant by this word Rei.

And here, it will not be amiss to give you a brief description, de quibus
rebus, what the Enquest may inquire of, and find;

Of the Law.
Wherefore, though it be true, that a Jury shall not be charged, nor meddle with
a matter of Law, and if they do, and find it, their Verdict as to this shall
be void, yet daily experience (as well as Littleton, Sect. 368) tells us, that
they may take upon them the knowledge of the Law, and give a general Verdict;
though to find the special matter is the safest way for them, because, if
they mistake the Law, they run into the danger of an Attaint. In many cases,
the Jury are to inquire of the knowledge and intent of a man, Of a man's intent.
as where the Nar. is that the Defendant kept a Dog which killed the Plaintiff^
Sheep, Sciens canem suum ad mordendas oves consuetum; there though Sciens be
not traversable, yet the Jury upon Evidence must inquire of it. lib. 4. 18.

In some Cases, Of spiritual things.
a Jury may try and find a spiritual thing, as a Divorce, Matrimony, etc. and
must take notice thereof, upon pain of Attaint. lib. 4. 29. lib. 9. lib. 7 43.
In Trespass Quare Clausum fregit, in the County of D. upon not guilty, If the
Jury find the Defendant guilty in the County of S. their Verdict is void. But
if they find him guilty generally, an Attaint lies. Finch 400.


The Jurors of one County, may find any transitory things done in another
County: Nay sometimes they must find local things in another County, as if
the Heir pleads ^iens per descent, and the Plaintiff replies, Assets in a
Parish and Ward within London, the Ju^y may find Assets in any County; In the
same c^se against an Executor, who pleads ple^e administravit, the Jury may
likewise find Assets in any part of the World; Of things done in another
County, or Country.
And the Reason is, because the place is only named for necessity of trial.
But where the place is part of the Issue, it is otherwise. And therefore if I
promise in one place to do a thing in another, and Issue is upon the b^each,
the Jury ought to come from the place of the breach: But if I promise in
London, to do a thing at Budeaux in France, and Issue upon the breach, yet this
shall be tried in London for necessity, because otherwise it would want trial,
and the Jury must inquire of the breach at Bordeaux. But if I promise in
France, to do a thing in France, so that both Contract and performance is
beyond Sea, this wants trial in our Law. lib. 6.47. li. 7. 23. 26. 27.

The Jury may find Estoppels, Estoppels.
as the taking of a Lease of a man's own Land, by Deed indented; or the
deli^ery of a Deed before the date, as in Debt by an Administrator upon a Land
dated 4 Aprilis, 24 Eliz. The Defendant pleaded, that the Intestate dyed before
the date of the Obligation, and isint nient son fait, upon which they were at
Issue, and adjudged that the Jury might find that the Bond was delivered the
3d of April, because they are sworn ad veritatem dicendum; though the parties
are estopped to plead a Deed was delivered before the date; but they may plead
a delivery after the date, because it shall never be intended, that a Deed was
delivered before the date, but after it may.

But if the Estoppel, Estoppels.
or admittance be within the same Record, in which Issue is joined, then the
Jurors cannot find any thing contrary to this, which the parties have
affirmed, and admitted of Record, though it be not true: For the Court may give
Judgment upon matters confessed by the parties; and the Jurors are not to be
charged with any such thing, but only with such, in which the parties vary.
li. 2. 4. li. 4. 53. Co. Lit. 227.

The Jury may find Deeds, or matter of Record, Records not showed.
if they will, though not showed in Evidence. Finch 400. They may inquire of
things done before the memory of man. lib. 9. 34.

The Jury may find a Warranty, Warranty.
being given in Evidence, though it be not pleaded: Nay the Jury may find
that, which cannot be pleaded, as in Trespass, upon not guilty; The Jury may
find that the Defendant leased Lands for life, upon Condition, and entered for
the Condition broken: Though this cannot be pleaded without Deed, yet the Jury
may find it. Lit. Sect. 366.

But this matter comes more properly under the title Evidence; wherefore we
will proceed to that.

CAP. XI. Evidence.
EVidence, Evidence.
Evidentia; This word in legal understanding (says Coke 1. Inst. 283.) does
not only contain matters of Record, as Letters Patents, Fines, Recoveries,
Inrollments, and the like, and writings under Seal, as Charters and Deeds, and
other Writings without Seal, as Court-Rolls, Accounts, and the like, which are
called Evidences Instrumenta. But in a larger sense, it contains also
Testimonia, The Testimony of Witnesses, and other proofs, to be produced and
given to a Jury for the finding of any Issue, joined between the parties; And
it is called Evidence, because thereby the point in Issue is to be made evident
to the Jury: Probationes debent esse evidentes (id est) perspicuae and facile
intelligitur.

And this Evidence (with Bracton) we may term probatio duplex, viz. viva, as
Witnesses, viva voce; and Mortua, as by Deeds, Writings, and Instruments; and
violenta presumptio, in many cases, is plena probatio, and therefore if all the
Witnesses to a Deed be dead, then the Deed shall receive Credit, Presumption.
per collationem sigillorum Scripturae, etc. but especially, if there has been
a continual and quiet possession; which is a violent presumption. 1 Inst. 6.
for no man can keep his Witnesses alive.

Men that are so branded with Infamy, that they cannot be Jurors, (for which
see before, who may be Jurors) cannot be Witnesses; The Wife cannot be a
Witness for, or against her Husband, Who may be Witnesses.
neither can the party to the usurious Contract, be a Witness against the
Usurer, in an Information upon the Statute of Usury. But Kinsmen never so near,
Tenants, Servants, Masters, Counselors, and Atturneys, etc. ^ay be Witnesses.
A Counselor, may be a Witness to the Agreement, etc. but not to validity of an
assurance, nor to the Counsel he gave. March. Rep. 43. If a Witness being
served with Process, and having money sufficient to bear his charges, (or
less, if he accept it) do not appear to give his testimony, he forfeits 10 l.
to the party dampnified, and must recompense his damages. 5 Eliz. 9. If a
Witness commit wilful perjury, he loses 20 l. shall be imprisoned 6. months
without bail, stand in the Pillory, and be disabled to be a Witness; so shall
the suborner, who procures the perjury. 5 Eliz. 9.

Records Records.
prove themselves, and cannot be proved by Witnesses; but Copies of them must,
and are good Evidence; and so may any thing done in the County Court,
Court Baron, or Hundred-Court, etc. be proved by Witnesses.

A Fine, Fine.
or common Recovery, may be given in Evidence, though it be not under the great
Seal, or Seal of the Court, and without vouching the Roll of the Recovery; and
the part indented is the usual Evidence that there is such a Fine, though they
which saw the Fine, are also good Evidence. Plow. 410. Styles 22.

Depositions Depositions.
in the Ecclesiastical Court cannot be given in Evidence, though parties be
dead. March 120. A Defendants answer in an English Court, is good Evidence
against him, but not against others. Godbolt, 326. Where the Evidence proves
the effect and substance of the Issue, it is good.

As upon plene administravit, if it be proved that the Execution has goods of
the Testators in his hands, Assets.
he may give in Evidence, that he has paid of his own money for the Testator,
to the value of those goods. Co. Lit. 283.

So if a Lease Lease.
be pleaded, a Lease upon Condition is good Evidence. H. 8. 20. because the
Genus com^rehends the Species. So of a Feoffment pleaded, a Feoffment upon
Condition, or a Fine which is Feoffment of Record, is good E^^dence. 44 E. 3.
39. A special Agreement, is evidence for an agreement. Plo. 8.

But if a Feoffment Feoffment
be pleaded in Fee, upon Issue non feoffavit modo and forma, a Feoffment upon
Condition is no Evidence, because it ^oth not answer the Issue; and ^heresoever
Evidence is contrary to the Issue, and does not maintain it, the Evidence is
not good. 11 H. 4 3. Feoffments 41.

Upon an Assumpsit to the Husband, an Assumpsit Assumpsit.
to the Wife, and his agreement, is good Evidence. 27 H. 8. 29.

In Challenge Challenge.
to the Array, because made at the denomination of the Sheriffs Clerk, Evidence
at his Bailiffs denomination, is good, because favorably made is the
substance. 38 H. 6. 9.

If the Issue be a Suit against an Executor, Administrator, ^r Heir, Assets
Assets.
in London; to prove Assets in any other place, is sufficient. li. 6. 47. Dyer
271.

Account Account.
pleaded before two; Account before one, is good Evidence. Hob. 55. because the
Account is the substance.

Upon the general Issue, the Defendant may give any thing in Evidence, What
Evidence upon the general Issue.
which proves the Plaintiff has no cause of Action, or which does entitle the
Defendant to the thing in question.

But if he has cause of justification or excuse, it must be pleaded: wherefore
upon non detinet, in detinue, the Defendant may give in Evidence a gift from
the Plaintiff; for that proves that he does not detain the Plaintiffs goods;
Detinue.
but he cannot give in Evidence, that the Goods were vawned to him for money,
and that it is not paid, but he must plead it. 1 Inst. 283.

Upon Not guilty, in Battery, In Battery.
Son assault demesne, is no Evidence; for thereby the Battery is confessed. Ib.
neither is Not guilty, good Evidence upon Son assault demesne.

Upon Not guilty, in Trespass, Trespass.
Insufficiency of the Plaintiffs mounds, or to justify for a Rentcharge,
Common, or the like, is no good Evidence. Ib.

So upon the Plea, Null wast fait, in (...) Action of Wast, Wast.
he may give in evidence any thing that proves it (...) Wast, as by Tempest,
by Light^ing, by Enemies, etc. But he cannot give in Evidence any justifiable
Wast, as to repair the House, or the like; nor a reparation of the Wast, before
the Action brought. Ib.

Upon non est factum, Non est factum.
It Is no Evidence, to show that the Bond was made upon an usurious Contract, or
that the Sheriffs name is mistaken, etc. in a Bail-Bond, or that the Bond is
joint, or that it is void by Statute. But it must be pleaded in abatement. Ib.
Hob. 72.

But to prove that the Seal was broken off, and put on again; or to prove a
Rasure of the Deed; this is good Evidence. li. 5. 119. 11. 27. If 'twere done
before the Action brought; but if the Seal was broke off, etc. by chance, after
Issue joined, the Jury may find it specially.

Upon Not guilty, in Trover Trover.
and Conversion, a Demand, and denial of the Goods, is good Evidence. Plo. 14.
li. 10. 57. Cro. 1 part. ult. pub. 495. Hob. 187.

Upon plene administravit, Plene. Administravit.
the Executor cannot give a Judgment in Evidence. Kelw. 59. nor payment of
Debts by Contract, in debt brought upon an Obligation, upon nil debet in Debt
for Rent, That the Lessor entered into part of the Land, is no good Evidence.
Goldf. 81. But, non demisit, is, 9 H. 7. 3.

Upon Not guilty, in an Action upon the Statute de parco fracto, Parco fracto.
That the Plaintiff has no Park, is good Evidence. 19 H. 8. 9.

So upon Not guilty, in Trespass, in the Plaintiffs Warren, Warren.
Evidence that he has no Warren, is good. 10 H. 6. 17. Kitchen 119.

A Shop-book Shop-books.
no evidence after a year. 7 Jac. cap. 12.

In debt for Arrerages of an account Account.
upon Nil debot modo and for^^: No account is good Evidence. 1 H. 6. 26. Upon
Not guilty in trespass, a Loase for years, 12 H. 8. 2. or that locus in quo,
Trespass.
etc. is the Freehold of another, 4 E. 4. 5. is good evidence; but upon this he
cannot ^^^tifie his entry upon the place by a strangers License, or Command, be
general Issue 81. because this is a Justification by way of excuse: neither is
a Lease at Will, good evidence in this case.

So upon not guilty, in trespass Not guilty in Trespass.
for goods, it is good evidence that the goods were a strangers. 9 H. 6. 11. But
that they were a strangers, and that he as Servant to the stranger, or by his
commandment, took them from the Plaintiff, is not good, br. general Issue 81.
because the trespass is confessed. But that the stranger gave them to the
Defendant is good. 9 H. 6. 11.

If the Defendant plead payment to a Bond or Bill, Payment by presumption.
and it appears the debt is very old, and it has not ^een demanded, nor any
use paid for it many years, common presumption is good evidence, that the money
is paid, and the Juries use to find for the Defendants, in such cases.

Trespass another day.
If the trespass were in truth done the 4th of May, and the Plaintiff alleges
the same to be done the ^th of May, or the first of May, when no trespass was
done; yet if upon evidence, it falls out that the trespass was done before
the Action brought, it suffices. 1 Inst. 283.

It Is dangerous to permit Evidence to a Jury by Witnesses, that there was such
a Deed, Deed.
which they have seen or read, or prove the Deed by a Copy, because the Deed
may be upon Condition, limitation, or power of Revocation; and if this should
be permitted, the whole Reason of the Common Law, in showing Deeds to the
Court, would be subverted; for the Deed might be imperfect, and void, which the
Witnesses could not perceive; yet in cases of extremity, as where the Deed was
burned, or lost by some other notorious accident, the Judges may at their
discretion, allow them to be proved by Witnesses. li. 10. 92.

In Case against an Executor; Executor.
whereas the Testator was indebted to the Plaintiff, the Executor promised to
pay the debt, in consideration the Plaintiff would forbear to sue him; the
Executor may give in evidence upon Non assumpsit, that there was no debt, or
that he had no assets tempore promissionis, for then there would be no
Consideration. li. 9. 94. William Banes Case.

Evidence Evidence.
shall never be pleaded, but the matter of fact shall be pleaded, and if it be
denied, the evidence shall be given to the Jury, not to the Court. lib. 9. 9.

Evidence, that the Wife of every Copyholder, shall have the Land durante
viduitate, will not maintain the Issue, that the Custom of a Manor is, that
she shall have the Land during her life, after her Husbands death, because,
though durante viduitate, imports an Estate for life, Estate for life.
yet an Estate durante vita, is more large and beneficial. li. 4. 30.

What may be given in Evidence.
Things done before the memory of man, in another County, or in another Kingdom,
may be given in Evidence to a Jury, as Assets in another County, etc. More 47.
See li. 4. 22. 9. 27. 28. and 34. li. 6. 46, 47.

Upon Issue, payment Payment.
at the day; payment before or after the day, is no Evidence. More 47. but upon
Nil debet, it is good Evidence, because it proves the Issue.

Upon Issue, Assets or no Assets, or seized, or not seized, if one give a
Feoffment, etc. in Evidence, Covin Covin.
may be given in Evidence, by the other, but not if the Issue be infeoffed, or
not infeoffed, for it is a Feoffment ^iel quel, though made by Covin. li. 5.
60. Hob. 72.

Doomesd^ybook.
The Book of Doomesday brought in Court, is good Evidence to prove the Land, to
be ancient Demesne. Hob. 188.

In Attaint, Attaint.
the Plaintiff shall not give more evidence, nor examine more Witnesses; than
was before, but the Defendant may. Dyer 212.

Copies of the Court-Rolls, Court-Rolls for Copyholders.
are the only evidence for Copyholders, for (as Littleton, Sect. 75. tells
you) They are called Tenants by Copy of Court-Roll, because they have no other
Evidence, concerning their Tenements, but only the Copies of Court-Rolls. But
Coke explains the Text, and says. This is to be understood of Evidences of
Alienation; for a Release of a right by Deed. A Copyholder (that comes in by
way of admittance) may have, and that is sufficient to extinguish the right of
the Copyholder which he that makes the Release had.

In Actions upon the Case, trespass, battery, or false im risonment against any
Justice of Peace, Mayor, or Bailiff of City, or Town Corporate, Headborough,
Portreve, Special Evidence upon the general Issue, by whom.
Constable, Tythingman, Collector of Subsidy or Fifteen, in any of his
Majesty's Courts at Westminst. or elsewhere, concerning any thing done by any
of them, by reason of any of their Offices aforesaid, and all other in their
aid or assistance, or by their Commandment, etc. They may plead the general
Issue, an^ give the special matter of their excuse, or justification in
Evidence. 7 Jac. cap. 5.

General Acts of Parliament, may be given in Evidence, Statutes.
and need not be pleaded; and so may general Pardons given by Parliament, if t
ey be without Exceptions; But commonly advantage of the Act is given by the Act
it self to the offender, Pardons.
without pleading it, as by the late (most truly so called) general act of
Indemnity, every person thereby pardoned, may pl^ad the general Issue, and
give the Act in evidence, for his discharge, which are general, and which
particular Statutes, see lib. 4. 76.

Upon not guilty in Trover, Trover.
the Defendant may give in Evidence, that the goods were pawned to him for 10
l. That he distrained them for Rent, or damage feasant, That as Sheriff, he
levied them upon Execution, or that he took them, as Tithes severed. Cro. 1
part. 157. 3 part. 435. Hob. 187.

If there be two Batteries between Plaintiff and Defendant, If there be two
Trespasses, and the Defendant pleads a Justification; if the Plaintiff replies
de injuria sua propria, etc. he cannot give in Evidence a Trespass at another
time; But he should have replied, that at another time, in the same day of his
Count, the Defendant did the other Trespass, etc. to which the Defendant may
plead another Justification, but the Plaintiff cannot then plead a Trespass at
another time, but must conclude Sans tiel cause, etc.
at diverse times, the Plaintiff is bound to prove the battery made the same day
in the Declaration, and shall not be admitted to give another day in evidence,
as the case may be. As in Battery, the Defendant pleaded, son assault Demesne,
and the Plaintiff replied, de injuria sua propria absque tali sua, and in
evidence, the Defendant maintained, that the Plaintiff beat him the day
mentioned in the Declaration, and in the same place, which the Plaintiff
perceiving, he gave in evidence, that the battery was made another day, and
place, to which the Defendant demurred, upon the difference aforesaid.
Brownlow. 1 part. 233. 19 H. 6. 47. But upon not guilty, it is otherwise,
though there be never so many batteries between the parties. Littleton, Sect.
485.

Prohibition for suing for Tithes in Bocking Pa^k in Essex, and furmised, that
the Lands were parcel of the possessions of the Pryory of Christ's Church in
Canterbury, and that the said Pryor and his Predecessors had held it discharged
of Tithes tempore dissolutionis, and pleaded the Statute of 31 H. 8. A non
Decimando.
The Defendant pleads, that the Pryor and his Predecessors, did not hold them
discharged, and upon Issue joined thereon, the Evidence was, that the Pryor, or
his Predecessors, time out of mind, etc. never paid Tithes; but no cause was
shown, In nil debet, upon the Statute for ty^hes, a Lay person cannot give a
Non decimando in evidence, so may the King, and any other spiritual persons.
li. 2. B. of Winchesters Case.
either by ^nity of possession, real Composition, or other cause to show it
discharged; Coke said it was no Evidence; for it is a prescription in non
decimando, Curia contra; For a spiritual man may prescribe in non decimando,
and by the Statute of 31 H. 8. he shall hold it discharged, as the Pryor held
it; and if he held it discharged, non refert, by what means; for it shall be
intended by lawful means, and the Jury afterward found for the Plaintiff. Cro.
3. part. 206.

Upon non assumpsit, in a general Indebitatus assumpsit, Indebitatus ass^mpsit.
the Defendant may give in evidence, payment at any time, before the Action
brought, but upon a special promise to pay money, etc. it is otherwise, Causa
patet; for in the first Case, if there be no debt, the Law will infer no
promise.

If a Church-Book, or any thing else is given in evidence, which ought not to
be allowed, the Court above cannot quash the Verdict, except it be certified
and returned with the Postea. Postea 26. As^^se. pl. 4.
Brownlow. 1 part. 207. But the Court may order a new Trial, upon cause
showed, as for excessive damages, etc.

CAP. XII. The Juries Oath; why called Recognitors in an Assise, and Jurors in
a Jury; of the Trial per medietatem linguae; when to be prayed, and when
grantable. Of a trial betwixt two Aliens, by all English. Of the Venire facias,
per medietatem linguae, and of Challenges to such Juries.
Assise, Enquest, and Proof, are taken for the word Jury. vide 28 E. 3. 23.
THe Jury having heard their Evidence, let them now consider of their Verdict;
But first they must remember their Oath, which in effect is, to find according
to their Evidence; and therefore they should have had it before the Evi^ence,
but that the form and order ^f the Venire facias, (which I have ^ed my self to
follow,) Leads me (...) it after their Evidence, in these words; Ad faciend,
quandam Juraam; I have al^eady showed the ^^rivation of this word Jurata, See
Chap. 1.
and what is the legal acceptance of it; only observe with our great Master
littleton, That the word Assize, 1 Inst. 154.
is ^ometimes taken for a Jury, so as the Learned Commentator does well
paraphrase, That the word Assise, Assisa for Jurata.
is Nomen Aequivocum Aequi^ocan^, because sometime it signifies a Jury,
sometime the Writ of Assise, and sometime and Ordinance, ^r Statu^e; But
Jurata, is Nomen ^quivocum Aequivocatum, because we always understand that
word (according to the aforesai^ definition) to be a Iu^y of twelve men, The
Juri^. Oath.
so called, by reason of the Oath they take, Truly to try the Suit of Nisi
prius, between party and party, according to their Evidence.

Why called Recognitors in an Assise, and Jurors in a Jury.
And as in an Assise, the Jurors are called Recognitors, from these words in the
Writ of Assise, facere Recognitionem; so upon a Nisi prius, they are called
Juratores, from these words in the Venire facias, Ad faciend. quandam Juratam.

In ancient time, the Jury, as well in Common Pleas, as in Pleas of the Crown,
were 12. Knights, 12 Knights.
as appears by Glanvill, lib. 2. cap. 14. and Bracton, fol. 116.

The next words of the Venire facias, are Inter parts predictas. In the fourth
Chapter, I have instanced, That in some Cases, a Jury shall be awarded betwixt
the party, and a stranger to the Writ, and Issue; I will now show what the Jury
shall be, when one of the parties is an Alien, the other a Denizen; and when
both parties to the Issue are Aliens.

This Trial is called in Latin, Triatio bilinguis, Jury per medietatem linguae.
or per medietatem linguae. And this Trial by the Common Law was wont to be
obtained of the King, by his Grant made to any Company of strangers, as to the
Company of Lum^^rds, or Almaignes, or to any other Company, that when any of
them ^as impleaded, the moiety of the ^nquest should be of their ow^ ^^ngue.
Stan. Plea, Cor. lib. 3. cap. 7.

And this Trial in some Cases, ^^s antiquity.
per medietatem linguae, was before the Conquest, ^s appears by Lamb. fol.
91.3. Viri duo^oni Jure consulti, Anglie sex, Walliae totidem, Anglis and
Wallis Jus dicanto. And of ancient time, it was called Duodecim virale
Judicium. 1 Inst. 155.

But afterward, this Law became universal: first by the Statute of 27 Ed. 3.
cap. 8. It was En^cted, that in Pleas before the Mayor of the Staple, if both
parties were strangers, the Trial should be by strangers. But if one party was
a stranger, and the other a Denizen, then the Trial should be per medietatem
linguae. But this Statute extended but to a narrow Compass, to wit, only where
both parties were Merchants or Ministers of the Staple, and in Pleas before the
Mayor of the Staple. But afterward, in the 28th Year of the sam^ Kings Reign,
cap. 13. It wa^ Enacted,

That in all manner of Enquests and proofs, which be to be taken or made
amongst Aliens, and Denizens, be they Merchants, or other, as well before the
Mayor of the Staple, as before any other Justices, or Ministers, although the
King be party. The one half of the Enquest, or proof, shall be Denizens, and
the other half Aliens, if so many Aliens and forraigners be in the Town, or
place, where such Enquest or proof is to be taken, that be not parties, nor
with the parties in Contracts, Pleas, or other quarrels, whereof such Enquests
or proofs ought to be taken: And if there be not so many Aliens, then shall
there be put in such Enquests or proofs, as many Aliens, as shall be found in
the same Towns or places, which be not thereto parties, nor with the parties,
as aforesaid is said, and the Remnant of Denizens, which be good men, and not
suspicious to the one party, nor to the other.

So that this is the Statute which makes the Law universal, King.
concerning the medietatem linguae; for though the King be party, yet the Ali^n
may have this Trial. And it matters not, whether the Moiety of Aliens, be of
the same Country as the Alien, party to the Action, is: for he may be a
Portugal, and they Spaniards, etc. because the Stat. speaks generally of
Aliens. See Dyer 144.

And the form of the Venire facias, Venire facias, pe^ medietatem linguae
in this Case is De vicenet. etc. Quorum una medietas sit de Indigenis, and
altera medietas sit de alienigenis natis, etc. And the Sheriff ought to return
12. Aliens, and 12. Denizens, one by the other, with addition which of them are
Aliens, and so they are to be sworn. But if this Order be not observed, it is
helped as a mis-return, by the Statutes of 18 Eliz. Cro. 3. part 818. 841. So
that Brooks says, it is not proper to call it a Trial per medietatem linguae,
because any Aliens of any tongue may serve. But under his favor, I think it
proper enough.

For people are distinguished by their Language, and Medietas Linguae, is as
much as to say, half English, and half of another tongue or Country whatsoever,
though it be not material of what sufficiency the Jurors are, yet the form of
the Venire facias, shall not be altered, but the Clause of Quo^um quilibet
habeat, 4 l. etc. shall be in, Cro. 3. part. 481.

But suppose that both parties be Aliens, of whom shall the Inquest be then? It
is resolved, that the Inquest shall he all English; for though the English may
be supposed to favor themselves more than strangers, yet when both parties ^^e
Aliens, it will be presumed, they favor both alike, and so indifferent. 21 H.
6. 4.

Where an Alien is party, All English.
yet if ^he Trial be by all Englis^, it is ^^terroneous, because it is at his
^^ill, if he will slip his time, and ^^t make use of the advantage which the
Law gives him when he should. Dyer 28.

The Alien ought to pray a Venire ^^cias, per medietatem linguae, When that
Alien should pray a Venire facias per meditatem.
at the ^^me of the awarding the Venire fa^^^: But if he does it at any time
^fore a general Venire facias be re^^ned and filed, the Court may ^^^t him a
Venire facias, de novo. Dyer 144. 21 H. 7. 32. though it ^^th been questioned.

But if he has a general Venire ^^as, he cannot pray a December tales, Tales.
(...) per medietatem linguae, upon ^^s; because the Tales ought to ^^rsue the
Venire facias. 3 E. 4.11, 2. And so if the Venire facias be (...) medietatem
linguae, the Tales ought to be per medietatem linguae, Tales.
as if 6. Denizens, and 5. Aliens appear of the principal Jury, the Plaintiff
may have a Tales, per medietatem linguae, li. 10. 104. But if in this case the
Tales be general, de circumstantibus, it has been held good enough; for there
being no exception taken by the Defendant, upon the awarding thereof, it shall
be intended well awarded. Cro. 3. part. 818. 841.

If the Plaintiff or Defendant be Executor or Administrator, etc. though he be
an Alien, yet the Trial shall be by English, because he sueth in aut droit;
Where the trial of an Aliens cause shall he by English.
but if it be averred that the Testator, or intestate, was an Alien, then it
shall be per medietat. linguae. Cro. 3. part 275.

Mich. 40. and 41 Eliz. The Queens Attorney exhibited an Information against
Bar, Part English, and part Aliens.
and diverse other Merchants, some whereof were English, and some Aliens: After
Issue, the Aliens prayed a Trial per medietat. linguae. But all the Justices of
England resolved, that the Trial should be by all English, and likened it to
the case of privilege, where one of the Defendants de^ands privilege, and the
Court, us to his Companion cannot hold Plea, there he shall be ousted of his
^riviledge, sic hic. More 557.

By the Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 29.19. Challenge.
Insufficiency, or want of Fxee^^ld, is no cause of Challenge to Aliens, who
are impanneled with the Aliens, (notwithstanding Stamfords Opinion. Pl. Coron.
160) for this Statute says, that the Stat. 2. H. 5. 3. shall extend only to
Enprests betwixt Denizen and De^izen.

If the Defendant do not inform the Court that he is an Alien, When the Alien
should pray a Venire facias per medietatem.
upon ^^arding of the Venire facias, and ^o pray a Venire facias, per
medieta^^^ linguae; he cannot challenge the Array for this cause at the Trial,
^f the Jury be all Denizens (not^ithstanding Stamfords Opinion to ^he contrary,
and the Books cited by him, fol. 159. pl. Cor.) For the Alien at his peril
should pray a Venire facias, per medietatem linguae, Dyer 357.

CAP. XIII. The Learning of General Verdicts, Special Verdicts, Privy
Verdicts, and Verdicts in open Court; and where the Inquest shall be taken by
default.
VErdict Verdict.
or Verdict; In Latin, Vere dictum, quafi dictum veritatis, As Judicium, est
quasi Juris dictum: Is the Answer and Resolution of those 12. men; concerning
the matter of fact referred to them by the Court, upon the Issue of the
parties. And this is the foundation, upon which the Judgment of the Court is
built, for ex facto jus oritur; the Law arises from the fact; Wherefore it is
no wonder, that the Law has ever been so curious, and cautelous, as not to
believe the matter of fact, until it is sworn by 12. sufficient men, of the
Neighborhood where the fact was ^^ne, whom the Law supposes to ^^ve most
cognizance of the truth, or falsehood thereof: which being sworn (for the words
are, Jurato^es predict. dicunt super sacrum suum, The Credit of Verdicts.
etc.) is the Verdict, whereof we now ^eat; And such credit does the ^aw give
to Verdicts, that no proof ^ll be admitted to impeach the ve^ty thereof, so
long as the Verdict ^tands not reversed by Attain; and therefore upon an
Attaint, no Super^deas is grantable by Law. Plo. Com. 496.

And it is worth our observation, ^^t the Law seems to take more ^^^e of the
fact, then of her self; for the Major part of the Judges give ^he Judgment of
the Law, though ^he other Judges dissent. But ^very one of the 12. Jurors must
agree together of the fact, before there can be a Verdict, which must be
delivered by the first man of the Jury. 29 Assize. pl. 27.

General or special.
And this Ve^dict is of two kinds, viz. one general, and the other special, or
at large.

The general Verdict, General Verdict.
is positively, either in the Affirmative, or Negative, as in Trespass, upon
Not guilty pleaded; The Jury fined Guilty, or Not guilty; And so in an Assize
of Novel disseisin, brought by A. against B. The Plaintiff makes his plaint,
Quod B. disseisivit eum de 20 acris terrae, cum pertinentiis, The Tenant
pleads, Quod ipse nullam injuriam seu disseisinam prefato A. inde fecit, etc.
The Recognitors of the Assize do find, Quod predict. B. in just and fine
judicio disseisivit predict. A. de predict. 20 acris terrae cum pertinentiis,
etc. This is a general Verdict. 1 Inst. 228.

A Special Verdict, Special Verdict.
or Verdict at large, is so called, because it finds the special matter at
large, and leaves the Judgment of the Law thereupon, to the Court, 1 Instit.
226.
of which kind of Verdict it is said, Omnis Conclusio boni, and very judicii
sequitur, ex bonis and veris premissis, and dictis Juratorum. And as a Special
Verdict may be found in Common Pleas, so may it also be found, in Pleas of the
Crown, or Criminal Causes that concern life or member.

And it is to be observed, that the Court cannot refuse a Special Verdict, The
Court cannot refuse it.
if it be pertinent to the matter in Issue. 1 Inst. 228.

It has been questioned, A special Verd ct may be found upon any Issue, as
upon an eisque hoc, etc.
whether the Jury could find a Special Verdict, upon a special point in Issue,
or no, as they might upon the general Issue. But this question has been fully
resolved in many of our Books, first in Plo. Com. 92. It is resolved, That the
Jury may give a special Verdict, and find the matter at large, en chescun
issue en le monde, so that the matte^ found at large, tend only to the Issue
joined, and contain the certainty and verity thereof. lib. 9. 12.

And in 2 Inst. 425. upon Collection of many Authors, it is said, That it has
been resolved, that in all Actions, real, personal, and mixed, and upon all
Issues joined, general or special, the Jury might find the special matter of
fact, pertinent, and tending only to the Issue joined, and thereupon pray the
discretion of the Court for the Law. And this the Jurors might do at Common
Law, not only in Cases between party and party, but also in Pleas of the
Crown, at the Kings Suit, which is a proof of the Common Law. And the Statute
of Westminster. the 2d cap. 30. is but an affirmitive of the Common Law.

And as this special Verdict is the safest for the Jury, A Freehold upon
Condition, without Deed, may be sound by Verdict, though it cannot be pleaded.
1 Inst. 228. so in many Cases it is most advantageous to the party, and helps
him where his own pleading cannot. As for example, says Littleton, Sect. 366.
367, 368. Albeit a man cannot in any Action, plead a Condition, which touches
and concerns a Freehold, without showing writing of this; yet a man may be
aided, upon such a Condition, by the Verdict of 12. men, taken at large, in an
Assize of Novel disseisin, or in any other Action, where the Justice will take
the Verdict of 12. Jurors at large: As put the case, a man seized of certain
Land in Fee; lets the same Land to another, for term of life, without Deed,
upon Condition to tender to the Lessor, a certain Rent, and for default of
payment, a Reentry, etc. By force whereof the Lessee is seized as of Freehold;
and after, the Rent is behind, by which the Lessor enters into the Land, and
after the Lessee arraign an Assize of Novel disseisin, of the Land against the
Lessor, who pleads that he did no wrong, nor Disseisin. And upon this, an
Assize is taken. In this case, the Recognitors of the Assize may say, and
render to the Justices, their Verdict at large, upon the whole matter; as to
say, that the Defendant was seized of the Land, in his Demesne as of Fee, and
so seized, let the same Land to the Plaintiff, for term of his life, rendering
to the Lessor such a yearly Rent payable at such a Feast, etc. Upon such
Condition, that if the Rent were behind at any such Feast, at which it ought
to be paid, then it should be lawful for the Lessor to enter, etc. By force of
which Lease, the Plaintiff was seized in his Demesne, as of Freehold, and that
afterward, the Rent was behind, at such a Feast, etc. By which the Lessor
entered into the Land, upon the possession of the Lessee. And pray the
discretion of the Justices, if this be a Disseisin done to the Plaintiff, or
not. Then, for that it appears to the Justices, that this was no Disseisin to
the Plaintiff, insomuch, as the Entry of the Lessor was congeable on him, The
Justices ought to give Judgment, that the Plaintiff shall not take any thing
by his Writ of Assize, and so in such case, the Lessor shall be aided, and yet
no Writing was ever made of the Condition: For as well as the Jurors may have
Conusance of the Lease, they also as well may have Conusance of the Condition,
which was declared and rehearsed upon the Lease.

In the same manor it is of a Feoffment in Fee, or a gift in tail, upon
Condition, although no Writing were ever made of it. And as it is said of a
Verdict at large, in an Assize, etc. In the same manner it is of a Writ of
Entry, founded upon a Disseisin, and in all other Actions, where the Justices
will take the Verdict at large, there where such Verdict at large is made, the
manner of the whole Entry is put in Issue.

Also in such case, General Verdict.
where the Enquest may give their Verdict at large, if they will take upon them
the knowledge of the Law upon the matter, they may give their Verdict
generally, as is put in their charge, as in the case aforesaid, they may well
say, that the Lessor did not disseize the Lessee, if they will, etc.

The Jury may likewise find Estoppel, Estoppels.
which cannot be pleaded, as in the 2d Report, fol. 4. it well appears, where
one Goddard, Administrator of James Newton, brought an Action of debt against
John Denton, upon an Obligation made to the Intestate, bearing date the 4th day
of April, Anno 24 Eliz. The Defendant pleaded, that the Intestate dyed before
the Date of the Obligation, and so concluded, that the said Escript, was not
his Deed, upon which they were at Issue.

And the Jury found that the Defendant delivered it as his Deed 30 July, Anno
23 Eliz. and found the Tenor of the Deed in haec verba, Noverint unive^si, etc.
Dat. 4. Aprilis, Anno 24 Eliz. And that the Defendant was alive 30 July, Anno
23. Eliz. And that he dyed before the said date of the Obligation, and prayed
consideration of the Court, if this was the Defendants Deed, And it was
adjudged by Anderson, Chief Justice Windham, Periam, and Walmesley, that this
was his Deed, And the Reason of the Judgment was, That although the Obligee,
in pleading, cannot allege the delivery before the date, Note, that a Deed may
be pleaded to be delivered after the date, but not before, because it shall not
be intended, written before the date, which may be after the date, 12 H. 6. 1. ^
as it is adjudged in 12 H. 6. 1. which case was affirmed to be good Law,
because he is estopped to take an averment against any thing expressed in the
Deed; yet the Jurors, who are sworn ad veritatem dicend. shall not be estopped.
For an Estoppel is to be concluded to speak the truth, and therefore Jurors
cannot be estopped, because they are sworn to speak the truth.

But if the Estoppel or Admittance, As in Wast supposed in A. to plead that A
is a hamlet in B. and not a Town of it self, adm^^teth the Wast, etc. 9. H. 6.
66. and the Jury cannot find no Wast, for that would be against the Record.
be within the same Record in which the Issue is joined, upon which the Jurors
give their Verdict, there they cannot find any thing against this, which the
parties have affirmed, and admitted of Record, although it be not true; For the
Court may give Judgment upon a thing confessed by the parties, and the Jurors
are not to be charged with any such thing, but only with things in which the
parties vary. Ib. li. 5. 30.

So Estoppels, Estoppel.
which bind the Interest of the Land, as the taking of a Lease of a man's own
Land, by Deed intended, and the like, being specially found by the Jury, Cro.
1. part. 110. Lib. 4 53.
the Court ought to judge, according to the special matter; for albeit,
Estoppels regularly must be pleaded and relied upon, by apt conclusion, and the
Jury is sworn ad veritatem dicend. yet when the find veritatem facti, they
pursue well their, Oath, and the Court ought to adju^ge according to Law. So
may the Jury find a Warranty, being given in evidence, though it be not
pleaded, because it binds the right, Warranty not pleaded.
unless it be in a Writ of Right, when the Mise is joined upon the mere right.
1 Inst. 227.

Verdicts ought to be such, that the Court may go clearly to Judgment thereon;
Uncertain Verdicts.
and therefore Verdicts finding matter incertainly, or ambiguously, are
insufficient and void, and no Judgment shall be given thereupon: As if an
Executor plead Plene Administravit, and Issue is joined thereon, and the Jury
find that the Defendant has Goods within his hands to be administered, but
find not to what value, this is an uncertainty, and therefore an insufficient
Verdict. li. 9. 74. 1 Inst. 227.

It is the Office of the Jurors, to show t e verity of the fact, The Office of
the Jury.
and leave the Judgment of the Law to the Court. And therefore upon an
Indictment of murder, quod felonice per cussit, etc. If the Jury find per
cussit tantum, yet the Verdict is good, for the Judges of the Court are to
resolve upon the special matter, whether it was felonice, and so murder, or
not. li. 9. 69. And if the Court adjudge it Murder, then the Jurors in the
conclusion of their Verdict, find the Felon guilty of the murder contained in
the Indictment.

A Verdict that finds part of the Issue, Verdict finding part of the Issue.
and finding nothing for the rest, is insufficient for the whole, because they
have not tried the whole Issue, wherewith they are charged; More 406.
As if an Information of intrusion, be brought against one, for intruding into
a Message, and 100 Acres of Land, upon the general Issue, the Jury find
against the Defendant for the Land, but say nothing for the House, this is
insufficient for the whole.

Finding more than the Issue.
But if the Jury give a Verdict of the whole Issue, and of more, etc. That which
is more, is surphisage, and shall not stay Judgment: for Utile per inutile non
vitiatur, Leon. 1 part. 66. Cro. 1 part. 130. But necessary incidents required
by Law, the Jury may find.

Where the Verdict ought to be of more than is in the Issue.
Yet in many Cases, (nay almost in all) the Jury ought to find more than is put
in Issue, otherwise their Verdict is not good; and therefore they are to assess
Damages and Cost, because it is parcel of their Charge, as a Consequent upon
the Issue, though it be not part of the Issue in terminis. li. 10. 119.

So in Trespass against two, one ^^ines, and pleads Not guilty, Damages by the
first Inquest.
and ^s found guilty. In this case, the ^rst Inquest shall assess damages ^n
the whole Trespass, by both Defendants; and afterward, the ^ther comes, and
pleads Not guilty, ^d is found guilty: The fin^ing ^f Damages by the first
Inquest, to which he was not party, shall bind ^im; and therefore if the
Dama^es are outrageous, and excessive, ^he Defendant in the last Enquest, shall
have an Attaint. Attaint.
li. 10.119.

So in Trespass, Quare clausum ^egit, if Issue be joined upon a Fe^^ment, and
the Jury give outragi^^s Damages, An Attaint lies; for ^e inquiry of Damages is
conse^eat and dependant upon the Is^ae, and parc^l of their charge. ib.

In the 11th Report, fo. 5. It was ^esolved, Damages by the first Inquest.
that in Trespass against ^wo, where one comes and appears, etc. against whom
the Plaintiff declares with a simul Cum, etc. who pleads and is found guilty,
and Damages assessed by the Enquest, and af^erwards the other comes and pleads,
and is found guilty; The Defendant which pleaded last, shall be charged with
the Damages taxed by the first Inquest; for the trespass which the Plaintiff
had made joint by his Writ, and Count, and done at one time, cannot be severed
by the Jurors, if they find the trespass to be done by all, at one and the
same time as the Plaintiff declared.

Several damages.
So in Trespass against diverse Defendants, if they plead not guilty, or several
Pleas, and the Jury find for the Plaintiff in all, the Jurors cannot assess
several Damages against the Defendants, because all is but one Trespass, and
made joint by the Plaintiff, by his Writ and Count. And although that one of
them was more malicious, and de facto, did more and greater wrong than the
others, yet all came to do an unlawful act, and were of one party, so that the
act of one, is the act of all, of the same party being present. But in trespass
against two, if the Jurors find one guilty, at one time, and the other at
another time, there several Damages may be taxed. But if the Plaintiff bring
an Action of Trespass against two, and declare upon a several Trespass, his
Action shall abate. And this is the diversity between the finding of the Jury,
and the confession of the party.

And in trespass, where the Defendants plead several Pleas, all tryable by one
Jury, and they find generally for the Plaintiff, the Jurors cannot sever the
Damages; if they do, their Verdict is vicious.

But in trespass against two, Judgment de melioribus dampnis.
where one appears, and pleads not guilty to a Declaration against him, with a
simul Cum, etc. and afterward the other appears, and pleads not guilty to a
Declaration against him also, with a simul Cum, etc. Whereupon two Venire fac.
issue out, and one Issue tried after the other, and several Damages assessed:
in judgment of the Law, the several Juries give one Verdict, all at one time,
and the Plaintiff has his Election to have judgment de melioribus dampnis, by
any of the Inquests. And this shall bind all, but fiat nisi unica Executio.

It is a Maxim, that in every case where an Inquest is taken by the Mise of the
parties, by the same Inquest shall damages Damages.
be taxed for all: And in Mich. 39 H. 6. fo. 1. In an Action of Trespass
against many, (who pleaded in Bar the Term before) and one of them made
default, Writ of Inquiry.
which was Recorded, There it is Resolved by all the Court, that for saving of
a Discontinuance, a Writ of Enquiry of Damages shall be awarded, but none shall
issue out, because he shall be contributory to the damages taxed by the
Inquest, at the Mise of the parties, if it be bound for the Plaintiff; and if
it be found against the Plaintiff, then the Writ of Enquiry shall issue forth.

And the Reason wherefore no Writ shall issue out at first, to inquire of
damages until, etc. is, because that if a Writ should issue out, and be
executed, this is nothing but an Inquest of Office, and not at the Mise of the
parties, and yet this Inquiry (if it might be allowed) ought to serve for all
the damages; For inquiry of damages, shall not be twice, and the others which
have pleaded to Inquest, if the Issue be found against them, shall be
chargeable to those damages which are found by the Inquest of Office, and if
they be excessive, they shall have no remedy, although there be no default in
them; for they cannot have an Attaint, because it is but an Inquest of Office.

But in trespass against two, Damages by the first Inquest.
who plead not guilty, etc. severally; and several Venire fac: awarded. The
Inquest which first passes, shall assess damages for all, and the second
Inquest ought not to assess damages at all, but that Defendant shall be
contributory to the damages assessed by the first Jury, notwithstanding he is
not party to it; yet if these damages be excessive, he shall have an Attaint,
(because though he is a stranger to the Issue, yet in Law, he is privy in
Charge.) And so no damage or mischief can accrue to him in this Case.

Verdict, when to be supplied, by Writ of Inquiry, etc.
Now let us see, when something is lest out of the Verdict which the Jury ought
to have inquired of, whether it may be supplied by matter expost facto; and
how: And for this, know, that if damages be left out of a Verdict, this
omission cannot be supplied, by Writ of Inquiry of damages: for this would
prevent the Defendant of his Remedy by Attaint, which would be very
mischievous; for then such omission might be on purpose, to deprive the
Plaintiff of his Attaint, li. 10. 119.

And the Rule is, that when the Court ex officio, ought to inquire of any
thing, upon which no Attaint lies, There the omission of this, may be supplied
by a Writ of Inquiry of damages; as in a Quare impedit, if the Jury omit to
enquire of these 4. things, that is to say, de plenitudine, ex cujus
presentatione, si tempus semestre transierit, and the value of the Church per
annum, there the Plaintiff may have a Writ to inquire of these points. Dyer
241. 260. because of these no Attaint lies, as it is holden in 11 H. 4. 80.
because that as to these, the Inquest is but of Office. But in all cases, where
any ^oint is omitted, whereof an Attaint lies, there this shall not be
supplied by Writ of Inqui^y, upon which no Attaint lies. And t^erefore in
De^inu^, if the Jury find Damages and Cost, and no value, as they ought, this
shall not be supplied by Writ of Inquiry of damages, for the Reason aforesaid.
Ib. Et sic in similibus.

But how then? What, Verdict set aside, because the damages not well assessed.
shall the Plaintiff loose the benefit of his Verdict, because the Jury
assessed no damages, (or did insufficiently assess them)? Cerres in such Cases
where damages only are to be recovered, he must loose the whole benefit of his
Verdict; but where any thing else is to be recovered, besides damages, as in
Debt, Ejectment, etc. he may release his Damages, and have Judgment upon his
Verdict as to the rest. And so where damages are to be recovered, if part of
them are assessed insufficiently, and part well, he may have Judgment for
those damages well assessed. And oftentimes the i^sufficiency of the
Declaration shall set aside the Verdict; Verdict set aside in part.
as if an Action upon the Case be brought upon two promises, and one of them be
insufficiently laid, and the Verdict give entire Damages, this is naught for
the whole; But if the Damages had been severally assessed upon the several
premises, then the Verdict as to the promise well laid, should have stood.

In the 11th Report. fo. 56. Marsh brought a Writ of Annuity against Bentham,
and the parties descended to issue, which was tried for the Plaintiff, and the
Arrerages found, etc. But the Jurors did not assess any damages, or Cost; which
Verdict was insufficient, and could not be supplied by Writ of Inquiry of
damages; wherefore the Plaintiff released his damages, and costs, Release of
damages where none were assessed.
and upon this had Judgment: upon which the Defendant brought a Writ of Error,
and assigned the Error aforesaid, scil. the insufficiency of the Verdict; sed
Judicium affirmatur, because the Plaintiff had released his damages and costs,
which is for the benefit of the Defendant.

In Dyer 22 Eliz. 369. 370. Release of d^mages where they were not well
assessed.
In a Writ of Ejectione Custodiae terrae and haeredis, the Jurors assessed
damages entirely, which was insufficient; for it lay not for the Heir, yet the
Plaintiff released his damages, and had Judgment for the Land: And Note, that
insufficient assesment of damages, and no assessing, is all one.

Damages and Costs.
The Jury ought to assess no more damages pro injuria illata, then the Plaintiff
declares for: But they may assess so much, and moreover give cost, which is
called Expensae litis; though in the proper and general signification, Dampnum
also comprehends Costs of Suit, as the Entry reciting both damages and costs,
well affirms, scil. Quae dampna intoto se attingunt cum. etc.

More damages than the Plaintiff declares for.
But if the Jury do assess more damages than the Plaintiff declares for, the
Plaintiff may remit the overplus, and pray Judgment for the residue, as in the
1^th Report, fol. 115. in Trespass the Plaintiff declared ad dampnum etc. 40 l.
at the trial of the Jury assessed damages occasion transgressionis predict.
ad 49 l. and for costs of suit 20 s. upon which Verdict, the Plaintiff at the
day in Bank, remitted 9 l. parcel of the said 49 l. assessed for damages, and
prayed Judgment for 4^ l. (to which damage he had counted) with increase of
Costs of suit, Damages remitted.
and had 9 l. de Incremento, added by the Court, which in all amounted to ^0 l.
and had his Judgment ac^ordingly: upon which, a Writ of Error was brought, and
the Iudge^ent affirmed.

For as in real actions the Demandant shall not count to Damages, etc. because
it is uncertain to what sum the damages will amount, by reason he is to recover
damages pendant le brief; so in the case of Costs, he shall recover for the
expenses depen^ing the suit, which being uncertain, cannot be comprehended in
the Count, because the Count extends to damages past, Damages in real and
personal actions.
and not to expenses of suit. For in personal actions, he counts to damages,
because he shall recover damages only for the wrong done, before the Writ
brought, and shall not recover damages for any thing, pendant le brief. But in
real actions, the Demandant never counts to damages, because he is to recover
damages also, pendant le brief, which are uncertain.

The Jury may if they will, assess the damages and costs entirely together,
Damages and Costs entirely assessed.
without making any distinction, 18 E. 4. 23. But then they must not assess
more damages and costs, then the damages are, which the Plaintiff counts to;
for if they do, the Plaintiff shall recover only so much as he has declared
for, without any increase of cost, because the Court cannot distinguish how
much they intended for cost, and how much for damages.

As in 1^ H. 7. 16. 17. One Darrel brought a Writ of Trespass, and counted to
his damage 20. marks; the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Jury taxed the
damages and costs of suit jointly to 22. marks, and the Verdict was held to be
good for 20. marks, and void for the residue, because it does not appear how
much was intended for damages, and how much for costs, so that there may be
more damages then the Plaintiff declared for, or less, and so the Court knows
not (...) to increase the cost; where^^e he shall have Judgment but ^20.
marks, by reason of the in^^^tainty.

Where a special Verdict is not ^^tred according to the Notes, Verdict amended
by the notes.
the ^^cord may be amended, and made ^gree with the notes at any time, ^^ugh it
be 3, or 4, etc. Terms af^^r it is entered. lib. 4. 52. lib. 8. 162. ^^o. 1
part. 145.

If the matter, Form. Hob. 54.
and substance of ^^e Issue be found, it is sufficient; ^^r precise forms are
not required ^^y Law in special Verdicts, (which ^^e the finding of Laymen) as
in Pleadings, which are made by men ^urned in the Law; and therefore ^tendment
in many cases shall ^^lp a special Verdict, as much as (...) Testament,
Arbitrament, etc. And therefore he which makes a Deputy, ought to do it by
Escript, but when the Jury find generally, that A. was Deputy to B. all
necessary incidents are found by this; and upon the matter they find, that he
was made Deputy by Deed, because it does tantamount. lib. 9.51. And in the 5th
Report, Goodales Case. It was resolved, That all matters in a special Verdict,
shall be intended, and supplied, but only that which the Jury refer to the
Consideration of the Court.

III conclusion.
In all Cases where the Jury find the matter committed to their charge, at
large, and over more conclude against Law, the Verdict is good, More 105. 269.
and the conclusion ill. li. 4. 42. and the Judges of the Law will give
Judgment upon the special matter, according to the Law, without having regard
to the conclusion of the Jury, who ought not to take upon them Judgment of the
Law. li. 11. 10.

Where the D^claration in Trespass is Cum aliquibus averiis, As general as the
Narr.
of a number uncertain, and the Verdict is as general as the Declaration, cum
aliquibus averiis, there the Verdict is good. Cro. 2. part. 662.

In Ejectione ^irme, where the Plaintiff declared of a Message, and 300 Acres
of Pasture in D. per nomina, of the Manor of Monkhall, and five Closes per non
ina, etc. upon Not guilty, the Jury gave a special Verdict, viz. quoad four
Closes of Pasture, containing by Estimation 2000 Acres of Pasture, that the
Defendant was Not guilty; Quoad residuum; they found matter in Law: And it was
moved by Yelverton, that this Verdict was imperfect in all; Quoad Residuum,
uncertain.
For when the Jury find that the Defendant was Not guilty of four Closes of
Pasture, containing by estimation, 2000 acres of Pasture, it is uncertain, and
does not appear of how much they acquit him. And then, when they find quoad
residuum the special matter, it is uncertain what that Residue is, so there
cannot be any Judgment given; and of that opinion was all the Court wherefore
they awarded a Venire facias de novo, to try that Issue. Cro. 2. part. 113.

Ejectione firmae of 30 Acres of Land in D. and S. The Defendant was found
guilty of 10. acres, and Quoad Residuum Quod Resid^um.
not guilty; and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, That it is uncertain in
which of the Vills this Land lay: and therefore no Judgment can be given: sed
non allocatur, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for the Sheriff shall
take his Information from the party, for what ten acres the Verdict was. Cro.
last part. 465. diversitas apparet.

Where the Jury find Circumstances Circumstances.
upon an Evidence given, to incite them to find fraud, etc. yet the same is
not sufficient matter upon which the Court can judge the same to be fraud, etc.
Brownlow 2. part. 187. Yet in many Cases, the Jury man find Circumstances and
presum^tions, upon which the Court ought to judge: As to find that the Husband
delivered Goods devised by the Wife: Upon this, the Court adjudged that the
Husband assented to the devise at first. More 192.


Where a Verdict is certainly ^iven at the Trial, Postea amended, how.
and uncertainly returned by the Clerk of the As^izes, etc. The Postea may be
amended; upon the Judges certify^ng the truth how the Verdict was given. Cro.
1. part. 338.

In many Cases a Verdict may ^ake an ill Plea or Issue good. Ill Plea, made
good by Verdict.
As (...) an action for words, Thou wast ^erjured, and have much to answer for
(...) before God; Exception after Verdict for the Plaintiff, in arrest ^f
Judgment: For that it is not and in the Declaration, that he ^pake the words
in auditu compluri^orum, or of any one, according to ^he usual form: sed non
allocatur; for ^^ing found by the Verdict that he ^pake them, it is not
material, al^hough he does not say, in auditu ^urimorum; whereupon it was
ad^udged for the Plaintiff. Cro. 1. part. 199.

See Cro. last part 116. Where the Bar was ill, because no place ^f payment
was alleged, yet the ^ayment being found by Verdict, it was adjudged well
enough, for a payment in one place, is a payment in all places.

Trespass by Baron and feme de clauso fracto, of the Barons. And for the
battery of the feme, ad dampnum ipsorum, the Defendant, Quoad the Clausum
fregit, pleaded Not guilty, Quoad the Battery justifies. And for the first
Issue, it was found for the Defendant; And for the second, for the Plaintiff,
and now moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration is not good, because
the Baron joins the feme with him in trespass de clauso fracto of the Barons,
Baron and Feme.
which ought not to be; But for the Battery of the feme, they may join, whereto
all the Court agreed; But it was moved, that in regard it was found against the
Plaintiffs for this Issue, in which they ought not to join, and the Defendant
is thereof acquitted, and the Issue is found against the Defendant, for that
part wherein they ought to join: This Verdict has discharged the Declaration
for that part which is ill, and is good for the residue. As in 9 E. 4. 51.
Trespass by Baron and Feme, for the battery of both: The Defendant pleaded Not
guilty, and found guilty, and damages assessed for the Battery of the Baron, by
its self, and for the Battery of the Feme by its self, and Judgment was given
for the damages for the battery of the feme, and the Writ abated for the
residue. (And of that opinion was Lea Chief Justice, and Doderidge al. contra.)
And the same Law I conceive, if the Jury had found the Defendant Not guilty of
the battery to the Husband, but guilty to the Wife. Cro. 2. part. 655.

Rochel and his Wife, Rochel and his Wife against Steel.
brought an action of trespass and assault in the Exchequer, Hill 16. 59.
against Steel, and others, who pleaded Not guilty, and the Verdict found Steel
guilty of the Battery to the Wife; but ^^und nothing concerning the Husband.
Wherefore Judgment was stayed; but the Barons held, that if the Jury had found
the Defendants not guilty, as to the Husband, then the Verdict had helped the
Declaration, and the Plaintiff should have had Judgment for the damages, for
the battery of the Wife.

Of what a Verdict may be.
The Jury may find any thing that may be given in Evidence to them, as Records,
either Patent, Statute or Judgment. Things done in another County, Plo. Com.
411.
or Country; for which see Evidence before. Hob. 227. And of these things they
ought to have Conusance, they are to have Conusance also, of all Incidents,
Incidents.
and dependants thereupon; for an Incident is a thing necessarily depending
upon another. Co. Littleton 227. b.

The Verdict may be against the Letter of the Issue, so the substance is found.
If the matter and substance of the Issue be found, it is sufficient, though it
be against the Letter of the Issue. As in the first, Institutes, fo. 114. b. A
modus decimandi was alleged by prescription, time out of mind, for Tithes of
Lambs. And thereupon Issue joined. And the Jury found that before twenty years
then last past, there was such a prescription, Prescription.
and that for these twenty years, he had paid Tithe Lamb in specie. And it was
objected first, that the Issue was found against the Plaintiff, for that the
prescription was general for all the time of the prescription, and 20. years
fail thereof. 2. That the party by payment of Tithes in specie, had waved the
prescription, or custom. But it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for albeit,
the modus decimandi had not been paid by the space of twenty years, yet the
prescription being found, the substance of the Issue is found for the Plaintiff.

In Assise of Darrein Presentment, if the Plaintiff allege the avoydance of
the Church by privation, Avoydance.
and the Jury find the voydance by death the Plaintiff shall have judgment;
for the manner of voydance is not the title of the Plaintiff, but the voydance
is the matter. 1 Instit. 282.

If a Gardein of an Hospital bring an Assise against the Ordinary, Deprivation.
he pleads that in his visitation he deprived him as Ordinary, whereupon
Issue is taken, and it is found that he deprived him as Patron, the Ordinary
shall have judgment, for the deprivation is the substance of the matter. Ib.

The Lessee Covenants with the Lessor, not to cut down any Trees, etc. and
binds himself in a Bond of 40. pounds, for the performance of Covenants. The
Lessee cut down 10. Breach of 20. Trees cut down for 10.
Trees, the Lessor brings an action of debt upon the Bond, and assigns a
breach, that the Lessee cut down 20. Trees: whereupon Issue is joined; and the
Jury find that the Lessee cut down ten: Judgment shall be given for the
Plaintiff, for sufficient matter of the Issue is found for the Plaintiff, to
forfeit the Bond. Ib.

And this Rule holds in Criminal Causes: For if A. be appealed, or indicted of
Murder, viz. that he of malice prepensed killed J. A. pleads that he is not
guilty Modo and forma, Indictment of Murder, and Verdict finds Manslaughter.
yet the Jury may find the Defendant guilty of Manslaughter without malice
prepensed, because the killing of J. is the matter, and malice prepensed is but
a Circumstance. Plo. Com. 101.

And generally where modo and forma, Modo and forma.
are not of the substance of the Issue, but words of form; there it suffices,
though the Verdict does not find the precise Issue.

As if a man bring a Writ of Entry in casu proviso, of the Alienation made by
the Tenant in Dower to his disinheritance, and counts of the alienation made
in Fee, and the Tenant says, that he did not alien in Manner, as the Demandant
has declared, Alienation.
and upon this they are at Issue, and it is found by Verdict, that the Tenant
aliened in tail, or for term of another man's life. The Demandant shall
recover, yet the alienation was not in manner as the Demandant has declared.
Littleton, Sect. 483.

Also if there be Lord, and Tenant, and the Tenant hold of the Lord by fealty
only, and the Lord distrain the Tenant for Rent, and the Tenant brings a
Writ of Trespass against his Lord, Trespass by the Tenant against the, Lord.
for his Cattle so taken, and the Lord plead that the Tenant holds of him by
fealty and certain Rent, and for that Rent behind he came to distrain, etc.
And demand Judgment of the Writ brought against him Quare vi and armis, etc.
And the other says, that he does not hold of him, in manner as he supposed;
and upon this, they are at Issue. And it is found by Verdict, that he holds
of him by fealty only, in this case the Writ shall abate, and yet he ^oth not
hold of him, in manner as the Lord has said; For the matter of the Issue is,
whether the Tenant holds of him or no; for if he holds of him, although
that the Lord distrain, the Tenant for other services which he ought not to
have, yet such Writ of Trespass, Quare vi and armis, etc. does not lie against
the Lord, but shall abate. Littleton, Sect. 485.

Also in a Writ of Trespass for Battery, or for Goods carried away, The Verdi.
nay find the Defendant guilty of the Trespass at another day or place.
if the Defendant plead not guilty, in manner as the Plaintiff suppose, and it
is found that the Defendant is guilty in another Town, or at another day, then
the Plaintiff suppose, yet he shall recover.

And so in many other cases these words, scil. in manner as the Demandant or
the Plaintiff has supposed, do not make any matter of substance of the Issue.
Littleton. Sect. 485.

And it is a Rule, Modo and forma. when words of so^^^.
that where the Issue taken, goes to the point of the Writ or action, there
Modo and forma are but words of form, as in the cases aforesaid.

But when a Collateral point in pleading is traversed, When of substance, and
must be found by the Verdict.
as if a Feofment be alleged by two, and this is traversed Modo and forma; So
in non assumpsit modo and forma, upon an Indebitatus assumpsit, there modo and
forma, were not material. Secus, when the action is upon a collateral promise.
And it is found the Feoffment of one, there Modo and forma, is material; So
if a Feoffment be pleaded by Deed, and it is traversed Absque hoc quod
feoff^vit, Modo and forma, upon this Collateral issue, Modo and forma are so
essential, as the Jury cannot find a Feoffment without Deed. Co. Littleton,
282.

But here is a diversity to be observed, That albeit the Issue be upon a
Collateral point, yet if by the finding of part of the Issue, it shall appear
to the Court, that no such action lies for the Plaintiff, no more than if the
whole had been found, there Modo and forma, are but words of form, as in the
aforesaid case of the Lord and Tenant, it plainly appears: for it was all one,
Trespass Quare vi and armis, lies not against the Lord for distraining his
Tenant, without cause.
whether the Tenant held by fealty only, or by fealty and Rent, because if
either was true, the Tenant could have no Trespass, Quare vi and armis, against
the Lord in that use, by the Statute of Marlbridge. cap. 3.

After the Verdict recorded, the Jury cannot vary from it; Jury cannot vary
from their Verdict, when it is recorded.
but before it is recorded, they may vary from the first offer of their
Verdict. And that Verdict which is recorded shall stand. 1 Inst. 227. Plo. Com.
212.

There is also a Verdict given in open Court, O^^^cict, and privy Verdict.
and a privy Verdict given out of Court, before any of the Judges of the Court,
so called, because it ought to be kept secret, and privy from each of the
parties, before it be affirmed in Court.

Because the Jury may vary from their private Verdict, as if that find for the
Plaintiff, The Jury may vary from a Private Verdict.
the open Verdict may be for the Defendant, and this shall stand, and the
private Verdict shall not be deemed a Verdict; for the Jury are charged openly
in Court, and in Court their Verdict ought to be received, and this which they
pronounce openly in Court, shall be adjudged their Verdict.

And although it is usual to take the Verdict secretly, when the Jurors are
agreed, yet this is not of necessity of Law, but of courtesy of Law for the
ease of the Jurors, and in this case, their saying shall not be their Verdict,
till it is openly pronounced in the Court; for when they come in the Court, the
Plaintiff shall be demanded, and then may be nonsuited: But when they give
their Verdict secretly, the Plaintiff is not demandable, nor can be then
nonsuited, but he may be nonsuited, when the Verdict of right ought to be
rendered. Ergo, the force is in the giving of the Verdict in the Court, and not
elsewhere.

Bro. tit. Verdict. 12.
And also in the Court it self, if they pronounce their Verdict, they may change
it, if they be mistaken, or it be not full in Law, or for some other reasonable
cause immediately perceived. Therefore if they may vary, and contradict their
first Verdict given in open Court. A fortiore upon better advisement, they may
do so when their first Verdict was given out of Court, and they not discharged;
for they be in the Custody of the Baily, till they be discharged in Court. Plo.
Com. 211. More 33.

The Jury having once given their Verdict, although it be imperfect, Jury shall
give but one Verdict in the same cause.
shall never be sworn again upon the same Issue (unless it be in case of
Assise, when the party is to recover by view of the Jurors). But there must be
a Venire facias de novo. Cro. 2. part. 210.

If a Verdict be good in part, Verdict good in part.
and naught in another part, it shall stand in part, and a new Inquest shall be
for the rest. Bro. tit. Verdict. 89.

For the Juries direction in their Verdict, What permitted in pleading for the
Juries direction in their Verdict.
greater liberty is permitted in pleading a matter doubtful in Law; for, a
Traverse (for this Reason) may be omitted. As in debt against an Executor, It
is a good plea to say, Administration was committed to him, and therefore he
should be named Administrator, and not Executor, without traversing that he is
not Executor; for the lay people know no difference, between one administrating
as Executor, and one administrating as Administrator, 9 E. 4 33.

For this Reason likewise, the special matter may be pleaded together with the
general Issue, etc. As that the Obligation put in suit, was sealed by him, and
delivered to A. to keep till certain Indentures were made between the Plaintiff
and him; A Special non est sactum.
before which Indentures made, the Plaintiff took the Obligation out of the
possession of A. so is not his Deed. This is good, and yet by this general
conclusion, the matter precedent shall not be wayed for it were perilous to put
the special matter in the mouth of Lay People. 9 H. 6. 38.

A Jury of Middlesex was demande^ in the Common Pleas, Enquest by default.
the first day of the Term, and some appeared, and some not, so that there was
not a full Jury, and neither the Defendant, nor his Attorney did appear, and
therefore the Plaintiff prayed, that the Inquest might be awarded by default;
and by the opinion of Welsh and Dyer, his prayer shall be granted, and the
Custos Brevium, and all the Prothonotaries said the course was so; for the
parties are demandable before the Jury, and if the Plaintiff make default, he
shall be nonsuited, and if the Defendant make default, the Jury shall be
awarded by default, whether they appear or not. Dyer 265.

Where an Inquest is taken by default, What the Defendant looses by his default.
the Defendant shall loose his Challenges, and by 28 Ass. p. 42. tit. Enquest
in Fitz. he shall loose his Evidences also. Bro. Enquest 10.

Der. the Defendant pleaded a Release, and the Plaintiff replied non est
factum, and at the day of the Venire facias, the Defendant made default, and
the Inquest was taken upon his default, and found for the Defendant, When the
Defendant may be condemned by d^fault, and when an Enquest must be taken upon
the default.
for which the Plaintiff took nothing by his Bill; And yet if the Plaintiff had
prayed it, he might have had the Defendant condemned by his default before the
taking of the Verdict, Et sic vide, folly in le Plaintiff. Bro. Ib. 5. But upon
suc^ Release, and default in Trespass, the Enquest shall be taken by default,
and the Defendant shall not be condemned by default, though the Plaintiff pray
it, and the reason is, because the debt is certain, and the dama^es are
uncertain in Trespass. Bro. Ib. 3.

And Finch, fo. 4^9. has well collected out of Brook, that always in an
Action of Trespass, whatsoever the Issue be, Release, Justification, etc. and
also in Debt, Detinue, Account, and the rest which are for things in certainty,
if the Issue be taken upon a matter in fait only, as payment, or that an
Acquittance pleaded in Bar by the Defendant, was made by Dures, etc. The
Inques^ shall be taken by default, if the Defendant makes default; But in the
last recited acti^^^ of debt, etc. If the Issue be upon the acquittance it
self, Release, or other matter ^^-writing, the Plaintiff may pray Judgment upon
the Defendants default, if he ^ill, but if he do not pray it, the Jury shall be
taken by default, as in (...) action of Trespass.

The Jury may give a Verdict without testimony, Verdict without, or against
testimony.
or against testimony, when they themselves have Conuzans of the fact. Plo.
Com. 16.

CAP. XIV. How the Jury ought to demean themselves, whilst they consider of
their Verdict; when they may eat and drink, when not; What misdemeanor of
th^irs, will make the Verdict void; Evidence given them, when they are gone
from the Bar, spoils their Verdict: For what the Court may fine them, and
where the Justices may carry them in Carts, till they agree of their Verdict.
An Amendment offered by the Jury.
Jurors ought not to eat or drink.
THere is a Maxim, and an old Custom in the Law, that the Ju y shall not eat,
nor drink, after they be sworn, till they have given their Verdict, without the
assent and License of the Justices; and that is ordained by the Law, for
eschewing of diverse inconveniences, that might follow thereupon; and that
especially, if they should eat or drink, at the Costs of the parties; and
therefore if they do so, it may be laid in arrest of Judgment.

But with the assent of the Justices, they may both eat and drink; as if any of
the Jurors fall sick, before they be agreed of their Verdict, so soon that he
may not commune of the Verdict, then by the assent of the Justices, he may have
meat or drink, and also such other things as be necessary for him; and his
fellows also at their own costs, For by assent of the parties they may eat and
drink. Br. Jurors 2.
or at the indifferent Costs of the parties, if they so agree, or by the assent
of the Justices, may both eat or drink: and if the Case so happen, that the
Jury can in no wise agree in their Verdict; as if one of the Jurors knows in
his own Conscience, the thing to be false, which the other Jurors affirm to be
true, and so he will not agree with them, in giving a false Verdict, and this
appears to the Justices by Examination, the Justices may in such case, suffer
the Jury to have both meat and drink for a time, to fee whether they will
agree. And if they will in no wise agree, the Justices may take such order in
the matter, as shall seem to the, may their discretion, to stand with reason
and conscience, by awarding of a new Inquest, New Inquest when the Jury cannot
agree.
and by setting fine upon them, that they shall find in default, or otherwise
as they shall think best, by their discretion; like as they may do, if one of
the Jury die before the Verdict, etc. D. and Student. 158.

W^ere, if the Jury eat or drink, it shall avoid the Verdict, and where only
fi^eable.
If the Jury after their Evidence given unto them at the Bar, do it their own
Charges eat or drink, either before or after they be agreed on their Verdict,
it is ^nable, but it shall not avoid the Verdict; But if before they be agreed
on their Verdict, they eat or drink at the charge of the Plaintiff, if the
Verdict be given for him, it shall avoid the Verdict: But if it be given for
the Defendant, it shall not avoid it; Et sic e converse. But if after they be
agreed on their Verdict, they eat or drink at the charge of him, for whom they
do pass, it shall not avoid the Verdict. 1 Inst. 228.

To give the Jury money, makes their Verdict void by two Justices. Leon. 1 part
18.

If the Plaintiff after Evidence given, What delivered to the Jury after
Evidence, shall avoid their Verdict.
and the Jury departed from the Bar, or any for him, do deliver any Letter
from the Plaintiff, to any of the Jury, concerning the matter in Issue, or any
Evidence, or any escrowle touching the matter in Issue, which was not given in
Evidence, it shall avoid the Verdict, if it be found for the Plaintiff, but not
if it be found for the Defendant, Ec sic e converso. But if the Jury carry away
any Writing unsealed, which was given in Evidence in open Court, this shall not
avoid their Verdict, albeit they should not have carried it with them. lb.

How the Jury ought to be kept by the Bailiff.
By the Law of England, a Jury after their Evidence given upon the Issue, ought
to be kept together, in some convenient place, without meat or drink, fire or
Candle, (which some Books call an imprisonment) and without speech with any,
When they may eat and drink. See Smith's Commonwealth. 74.
unless it be the Bailiff, and with him only, if they be agreed. After they be
agreed, they may in causes between party, and party, give a Verdict, and if the
Court be risen, give a privy Verdict before any of the Judges of the Court, and
then they may eat and drink, and the next morning in open Court, they may
either affirm, Wh^re there can be no privy Verdict.
or alter their privy Verdict, and that which is given in Court shall stand.
But in criminal cases of life or member, the Jury can give no privy Verdict,
but they must give it openly in Court. Ib.

Where the Jury cannot be discha^ged before Verdict.
Neither can a Jury sworn and charged in case of life, or member be discharged
by the Court, or any other, but they ought to give a Verdict. And the King
cannot be nonsuit, The King cannot be nonsuit.
for he is in Judgment of Law there present in Court, but a common person may be
nonsuit. And in civil actions, the Justices upon cause, may discharge the
Jury. Br. Enquest. 68. 47. 39. etc.

In Hillary Term, Sexto H. 8. Rotulo 358. It was alleged in arrest of the
Verdict at the Nisi prius, that the Jurors had eat and drunk. And upon
Examination, it was found, that they had first agreed; and that returning to
give their Verdict, they saw Read Chief Justice in the way, going to see a
fray, and they followed him, Et in veniendo viderunt cyplum, and inde biberunt.
And for this, every one of them was fined 40 d. Ju^ors fined.
And the Plaintiff had Judgment upon the Verdict. Dyer 37.

And Dyer 218. At the Nisi prius, the Jury after their charge given, returned
and said, that they were all agreed except one, who had e^t a Pear, and drunk a
draught of Ale, for which he would not agree; Jurors at the Nisi prius, fined
in bank, for eating pears, and drinking Ale.
And at the Request of the Plaintiff, the Jury was sent back again, and found
the Issue for the Plaintiff. And the matter aforesaid being examined by the
Oath of the Jurors Seperatim, and the Bailiff who kept them, and found true,
the offender was committed, and afterward found Surety for his Fine. Si, etc.
And Fitzherbert, the then Justice of Assise, gave him day in banco, etc. at
which day a Fine of 20 s. was there assessed. Et quoad Ball: Curia avisare vult.

In trespass by Mounson against West, the Jury was charged, and Evidence given,
and the Jurors being retired into a House, for to consider of their Evidence,
Fined for having Figgs and Pippins about them.
they remained there a long time without concluding any thing, and the Officers
of the Court who attended them, seeing their delay, searched the Jurors, if
they had any thing about them to eat; upon which search it was found, that some
of them had Figgs, and others Pippins, for which the next day, the matter was
moved to the Court, and the Jurors were examined upon Oath: And two of them did
confess, that they had eaten Figgs before they had agreed of their Verdict, and
three other of them confessed, that they had Pippins, but did not eat of them;
and that they did it without the knowledge or will of any of the parties. And
afterward the Court set a fine of 5 l. upon each of them which had eaten, and
upon the others which had not eaten 40 s. But upon great advice and
consideration had, and conference with the rest of the Judges, the Verdict was
held to be good. Notwithstanding the said misdemeanor. Leon. 1. part 133:

And see the Book of Entries, 251. Fined for eating Raisins and Dates.
The Jurors after they went from the Bar, ad seipsos, of their Verdict to
advise, Comederunt quasdam species, scil. Raisins, Dates, etc. at their own
Costs, an well before, as after they were agreed of their Verdict. And the
Jurors were committed to prison, but their Verdict was good although the
Verdict was given against the King.

Finable for having sweetmeats, etc. about them, though they do not eat them.
See Plo. Com. 519. One fined, and imprisoned for having Sugar Candy and
Liquorish about him.
In Ejectione firm, it was found for the Defendant, three (...) the Jurors had
Sweetmeats in their Pockets, and those three were for the Plaintiff, until th
y were searched, and the Sweetmeats found, an^ then did agree with the other
nine, and gave Verdi^t for the Defendant. It was the Opinion of the Justices,
that whether they eat or not, they were finable for having of the Sweetmeats
with them, for that is a very great misdemcanor. Godbolt 353.

Jurors careed.
40 Assise. Placito 11. The Justices said, that if the Jurors will not agree in
their Verdict, the Justices may carry them in a Cart along with them, till they
are agreed.

The Jury were gone from the Sarr, to confer of their Verdict, and one of the
Witnesses before sworn on the Defendants part, The same Evidence given to the
Jury, after they were gone from the Bar, spoils the Verdict.
was called by the Jurors, and he recited again his Evidence to them, and after
they gave their Verdict for the Defendant. And complaint being made to the
Judge of the Assizes of this misdemeanor, he examined the Enquest, who
confessed all the matter, and that the Evidence was the same in effect, that
was given before, Et non alia nec diversa. And this matter being returned by
the Postea, the Opinion of the Court was, that the Verdict was not good, and a
Venire facias de novo was awarded. Cro. last part, 189.

The Plaintiff delivered an escrowl to a Iuror impanelled, Escrowle delivered
to a Juror, before he was sworn Vitiates the Verdict.
before he was sworn, who afterward being sworn, and gone with the Jury from
the Bar, to consider of the Verdict, showed the same Escrowle to his
Companions, who found for the Plaintiff. The Minister who kept the Enquest,
informed the Court hereof, and the Jury being examined, confessed the matter
aforesaid, upon which Judgment was stayed; for after the Jury are sworn, they
ought not to see, nor carry with them any other Evidence, but what was
delivered to them by the Court: Afterward the Plaintiff said, that the Escrowl
proved the same Evidence, which was given to them at Bar by him; wherefore it
was not so bad, as if it had been new Evidence not given before: Sed non
allocatur. 11 H. 4. 17.

Church-Book delivered to the Jury, act of Court.
Pasche 38 Eliz. Inter Vicary at Farthing, at the Nisi prius. The Issue was
about Nonage, and two Church-Books were given in Evidence, one whereof was
delivered to the Jury in Court, by the assent of parties, and afterward, the
other was delivered to the Jury out of the Court by the Solicitor of the
Plaintiff, without the assent of the Court, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff,
and this was indorsed on the Postea; The Question was, whether this should make
the Verdict (...) or no, for the Justices differed (...) opinion, Popham and
Gaudy, that ^t should not; Fenner and Cleach, ^^t it should; the Negative
Iu^^^^es gave these Reasons. That ^^e Book was delivered in Evidence in the
Court, and so the other p^rty might answer to it, and that the Court had
informed the Jury of the validity thereof, how far they were to believe it,
with many other Reasons: But the Affirmative was urged, because there might be
some matter in this Book, to induce them otherwise than was intended before,
and because it was delivered on his part, for whom the Verdict passed, without
the Courts assent; yet one Book ( scil. Cro. last part 411.) tells us,
Judgment was afterward given for the Plaintiff; see Mores Reports 452. The
Books differ; Consider the Reasons in the former cases.
for Cro. makes Clinch give his opinion for the Verdict. But More brings him on
the other side, which I conceive is truest; and for my part, I know no reason,
why foisting of Evidence to the Jury out of Court, should have any favor at
all.

Hill. 40 Eliz. Rot. 847. In arrest of Judgment after Verdict, Escrowle from
one who was no party.
it was alleged, that a Iuror delivered to his Companions, an Escrowle for
Evidence to them, which was not given in Evi^ence at the Trial, and adjudge^
no cause to arrest Judgment, unless it had been received from one of the
parties, which did not appear. More 546.

In a Writ of Error, the first Error assigne^ was, that Termino Trin. twelve
Jurors, and no more, did appear: Jury adjourned.
This ex assensu partium, was adjourned until Crastino Animar. on which day,
two others came in and were sworn, being of the first Panel.

The Court all clear of opinion, that this is no error, this being good enough,
they being all to be called again. Leon. 3. part 38.

If a Iuror depart Juror depart.
after he is sworn, he shall be fined and imprisoned, and by assent of parties,
another Iuror may be sworn. Bro. Jurors 46. lib. 5. 40.

If a man be nonsuited after the Jury is ready to give their Verdict, the
Court may cause the Amercement of the Plaintiff to be presently offered by the
Jurors. li. 8. 39.

CAP. XV. What punishment the Law has provided for Jurors offending; as taking
reward to give their Verdict. Of Embrac^ors. D^cies tantum. Attaint: several
fines on Jurors. What Issues they forfeit, and of Judgment for striking a
Juror in Westminster.
YOu have already heard how the Court may fine the Jurors for their
misdemeanors in giving up their Verdict, I will proceed in showing what
punishments they are liable unto, if they neglect their duty; and doubtless, no
men have more need of knowing what penalties the Law inflicts on their
offenses, then common Jurors, who too often; being preingaged with favor to
the Plaintiff, or malice against the Detendant, Et sic e converso; or with
common Interest, (as they call it) where Tithes or Commons are in question,
will neither hearken to their Evidence, nor ^^rection of the Judge. But subvert
the whole drift of the Common Law, which will have them of the Neighborhood,
where the fact was committed, to the end, that they knowing most of the fact,
may consequently, give the best Verdict; yet contrariwise, Jurors which live
nearest, do now a days, most commonly so fetter themselves with favor or
animosities to the parties, that those which live furthe^ off (as Iuries from
other Counties) for the most part, gide the cleanest Verdicts. And how should
the Judges remedy this mischief, but by severely punishing those Iuries which
offend; the Law in this will be their Guide; for without doubt, (excepting life
and member) the Law has provided more severe punishments against Iuries, then
against any other offender whatsoever; as well knowing that corruption optimi
est pessima: And common Jurors generally have nothing to do with this verse,
Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore, Therefore it is fit they should be
concerned in the next, Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae; wherefore the
description of what this poena is, shall be the conclusion of this Treatise.

If any Iuror take a reward to give his Verdict, The penalty of Jurors taking
rewards.
and be thereof attainted, at the suit of other than the party, and makes
fine, he which sueth shall have half the fine, and if any of the parties to the
Plea, bring his Action against such Juror, he shall recover his damages. And
the Juror so attainted shall have imprisonment for one year, which imprisonment
shall not be pardoned for any fine, this is by the Statute of 34 E. 3. cap. 8.

5 E. 3. ca. 10. It is accorded, Shall not serve of any other Inquest.
That if any Juror in Assizes, Juries or Enquests, take of the one party, or of
the other, and be thereof duly attainted, That hereafter he shall not be put in
any Assizes, Iuries or Enquests; and nevertheless, he shall be commanded to
prison, Imprisoned and ransomed, (that is) fined.
and further ransomed at the Kings will. And the Justices before whom such
Assizes, Iuries and Enquests, shall pass, shall have power to enquire and
determine according to this Statute.

A man would think that these Statutes should have frighted any Iuror from
taking Rewards to give his Verdict. But -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames?


So sacred is this love of money, that Conscience her self must vail to it, and
not stand in competition with such allurements: wherefore the Law did redouble
its force; nay more, produced a Decies tantum, scil. That a Iuror taking reward
to give his Verdict, shall pay ten times so much, as he has taken; which
forfeiture, my thinks, should make even those who love money best, refuse to
take money upon such an account, because it is like a Canker in their Estates,
depriving them in the end, of ten times more then it brought; for which, hear
the Statute 38 E. 3. cap. 12.

De^ies tantum.
Item, As to the Article of Jurors, in the 24th year, it is assented and joined
to the same, that if any Jurors in Assizes sworn, and other Enquests to be
taken between the King and party, or party and party, do any thing take by them
or other of the party, Plaintiff or Defendant, to give their Verdict, and
thereof be attainted by process contained in the same Article, be it at the
suit of the party that will sue for himself, or for the King, Embraceor.
or any other person, every of the said Jurors, shall pay ten times as much as
he has taken. And he that will sue, shall have the one half, and the King the
other half. And that all Embraceors, that bring or procure such Enquests in the
Country, to take gain or profit, shall be punished in the same manner and form
as the Jurors. And if the Iuror or Embraceor so attainted, have not whereof to
make gree, in the manner aforesaid, he shall have the imprisonment of one year:
And the intent of the King, of Great men, and of the Commons is, That no
Justice, or other Minister, shall enquire of office, upon any of the points of
this Article, but only at the Suit of the party, or of other, as before is said.

Upon which Statute, there is a Writ called a Decies tantum; and who will, may
bring it, for it is a popular Action and lies (as you see) where any of the
Jurors, after he is sworn, takes of one party, or of the other, or of both
(and then he is called an Ambidexter Ambidexter.
) any reward to give his Verdict, etc. And it may be brought against all the
Jurors and Embraceors, So F. N. Br. says. But for my part, I think he is
mistaken, for the Statute mentions nothing of his taking money; and in my
opinion, the case of 37 H. 6. 13. is full against hi^.
although they take several sums of money: and although the Jury give no
Verdict, or a true Verdict. But it does not lie against an Embraceor, if he
takes no money, and embraces, or takes money, and does not embrace. See Bro.
Tit. Decies tantum 13. and F.N. Br. 171.

An Imbraceor, Imbraceor.
is he that procures the Jurors in the Country, to take gain or profit, or
comes to the Bar with the party, and speaks in the matter, or stands there to
survey the Jury, etc. or to ^ut them in fear, or solicits them to find on the
one side or other; and this Fellow cloaks his Embracery, under pretense of
laboring the Jurors to appear, and to do their Conscience: And thus the
^tturneys in the Country, often take upon them to do, Attorneys ill practice.
and many times put in a word or two for their Clyents; which practice deserves
the most severe punishment, next to their getting the Sheriff to return such
and such in the Jury; which they, having been Undersheriffs themselves, and so
agree with one another, are most expert at.

But Counselors Counselors.
at Law, may plead for their money at the Bar; But they must not labor the
Jury privately, and if they take money for t^is, they are Imbraceors. F. N. 6.
171.

So much does the Law hate, Fined for taking money after their Verdict.
that Jurors should privately take money for their Verdict. That certain Jurors
were fined, for taking money after their Verdict, though there was no
preingagement for it. 39 Assise. p. 19.

A Juror was challenged, and six other Jurors were ^^orn to try the Challenge,
who found him indifferent, Jury fined for departing when he was challenged.
and thereupon the Jury was demanded, but did not appear; for which default, he
was fined the value of his Lands for a year; and the other Jurors inquired of
the value, etc. although the other party then would have challenged him when he
was demanded, so that he might have been treit. But the Court would not admit
this, because then the King would have lost his Fine. 36 H. 6. 27.

Juror adjourned upon pain.
If a Iuror appear, and is adjoined upon pain, and makes default, in this Case,
because he shall be fined to the value of his Land per annum, this shall be
inquired by his Companions of the Jury, because the Court knows not the value
of his Land. li. 8. 41.

A Verdict was taken from the Foreman of the Jury, Fined for giving a Verdi^^
before they were agreed.
to which one of them did not assent, and damages assessed to 20 s. in trespass
and assault; and afterward, every one of the 11. were fined, for giving their
Verdict, before they were all agreed. 40 Assise 10.

Where a Jury are to be fined, a Fine jointly imposed on them, The Fine must
not be joint.
is not legal, but they must be severally fined, because the offense of one,
is not the offense of another. Et nemo debet puniri pro alieni delicto; For
then it might be said, Rutilius fecit, Aeimilius plectitur. lib. 11. 42.

A man stroke a Juror at Westminster. (sitting in the Court) who passed against him,
Punishment for striking a Juror.
and he was thereof indicted, and arraigned at the Kings Suit, and attainted,
his judgment was, that he should go to the Tower, and stay there in prison, all
days of his life, and that his right hand should be cut off, and his Lands
seized into the Kings hands, 41 Assise. p. 25. and now our Juror sees what
punishment it is to strike him, in the face of the Court. Let him hold his
hands from others, least the same Judgment light on him.

By the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. It is Enacted, that upon every first Writ
of Habeas Corpora, or Distringas, with a Nisi prius. 10 s. shall be returned in
Issues, upon every person impannelled, and upon the second Writ 20 s. and upon
the 3 d, I^^^.
30 s. And upon every Writ that shall be further awarded to try any Issue, to
double the Issues last, before specified, until a full Jury be sworn.

Not summoned.
But if the Under Sheriff, etc. return a Juror summoned, who in truth was not
legally summoned, and therefore does not appear, and so loses Issues, the
Undersheriff shall pay him double the value of the Issues lost. See the
Statutes of 35 H. 8. 6. and the 2 E. 6. 32.

And note, the Law has been so careful to punish all offenders, who would
endeavor to bias, and corrupt the Jury; and to punish the Juries themselves,
if they receive money to give their Verdict, or any otherwise pre-ingage
themselves to any of the parties; All which is to the end, that a true and
honest Verdict may be given: What punishment shall that Jury have, which gives
a false Verdict?

Such a punishment, that (as I said before) in civil Causes it is without
example: and surely, if the Jurors did bear it in their minds, their Verdicts
would be always grounded upon their Evidence; and not upon their own
Interests, or any partiality to either of the parties.

Wherefore if the Jurors give a false Verdict (which is perjury of the highest
degree) upon an Issue joined between the parties in any Court of Record, and
judgment thereupon. The party grieved, may bring his Writ of Attaint, Attaint.
in the King's Bench, or Common Pleas; upon which, 24. of the best men in the
County are to bet^e Jurors, who are to hear the same Evidence which was given
to the Petite Jury, and as much as can be brought in affirmance of the Verdict,
but no other against it. And if these 24. (who are called the Grand Jury) find
it a false Verdict; then follows this terrible and heavy judgment, at Common
Law, upon the Petite Jury.

Judgment in Attaint.
1. That they shall loose liberam legem for ever, that is, they shall be so
infamous, as they shall never be received to be a Witness, or of any Jury.

2. That they shall forfeit all their Goods and Chattels.

3. That their Lands and Tenements shall be taken into the Kings hands.

4. That their Wives and Children shall be thrown out of doors.

5. That their Houses shall be rased and thrown down.

6. That their Trees shall be ^^ted up.

7. That their Meadow-grounds shall be plowed up.

8. That their bodies shall be ^ast into the Goal, and the party shall be
restored to all that he lost, by reason of the unjust Verdict. So odious is
perjury in this Case, in the eye of the Common Law: And the severity of this
punishment, is to this end, Ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat; for
there is Misericordia puniens, and there is Crudelitas parcens. And seeing all
Trials of real, personal, and mixed actions, depend upon the Oath of 12. men,
prudent Antiquity inflicted this severe punishment upon them, if they were
attainted of perjury. 1 Inst. 294.

But now by the Stat. of 23 H. 8. cap. 3. The severity of this punishment is
moderated, if the Writ of Attaint be grounded upon that Statute.

But the party grieved, may (...) his Election, either bring his Wi^ of
Attaint, at the Common Law, (...) upon that Statute. Wherefo^ let the Iuror
expect the greatest pu^ishment, when he offends. 3 Inst. 16 222.

And so I conclude with the word^ of Fortescue, Quis tunc (etsi imm^ mor
salutis animae suae fuerit) non for midine tantae poenae, and verecundi^ tantae
infamiae, veritatem non dicere sic Juratus?

Who then, though he regard not his Souls health, yet for fear of so great
punishment, and for shame of so great infamy, would not, upon his Oath, declare
the truth?

FINIS.

