THE CASE OF KNEELING AT THE Holy Sacrament STATED and RESOLVED.

PART I.

Wherein these QUERIES are considered:
I. Whether Kneeling at the Sacrament be contrary to any express Command of
Christ, obliging to the observance of a different Gesture? II. Whether Kneeling
be not a Deviation from that example which our Lord set us at the first
Institution? III. Whether Kneeling be not Unsuitable and Repugnant to the Nature
of the Lord's Supper, as being no Table Gesture?
The Second EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Fincham Gardener at the
White-Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

THE CASE.
Whether it be Lawful to receive the Holy Sacrament Kneeling?
THe Resolution of the most weighty and considerable Doubts which may in point
of Conscience arise about this matter (and do at present much influence the
minds and practices of many honest and well-meaning Dissenters) will depend
upon the Resolution of these following Queries.

1. Whether Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Holy Sacrament according to
the Law of the Land, be not contrary to some express Law of Christ obliging to
the observance of a different Posture?

2. Whether Kneeling be not a deviation from that example which our Lord set us
at the first Institution?

3. Whether Kneeling be not altogether Unsuitable and Repugnant to the nature of
the Sacrament, as being no Table Gesture?

4. Whether Kneeling Commanded in the Church of England be not contrary to the
general Practice of the Church of Christ in the first and purest Ages?

5. Whether it be Unlawful for us to receive Kneeling because this Gesture was
first introduced by Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by the Papists
to Idolatrous ends and purposes.

1. Whether Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Sacrament in Obedience to the
Law of the Land, be not a Transgression against some express Law of Christ
which obliges us to observe another Gesture?

For satisfaction in this Point, our only recourse must be to the Holy
Scriptures contained in the Books of the New Testament, wherein the whole body
of Divine Laws delivered and enacted by our Blessed Savior, are collected and
recorded by the Holy Ghost. And if there be any Command there extant concerning
the use of any particular Gesture in the Act of Receiving the Lord's Supper, we
shall upon a diligent enquiry be sure to find it. But before I give in my
Answer, I readily grant thus much by way of Preface. Whatsoever is enjoined and
appointed by God to be prepetually used by all Christians throughout all Ages
without any alteration, that can never be nullified or altered by any Earthly
Power or Authority whatsoever. When once the Supreme Lawgiver and Governor of
the World has any ways signified and declared that such and such positive Laws
shall be perpetually and unalterably observed, then those Laws (though in their
own nature and with respect to the subject matter of them they be changeable)
must remain in full Force, and can admit of no Change from the Laws of Men. It
would be a piece of intolerable Pride, and the most daring Presumption, for any
Earthly Prince, any Council, any Society of Men whatsoever, to oppose the
known Will of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth. In this Case nothing can
take off the Force and Obligation of such Laws, but the same Divine Authority
which first passed them into Laws. Thus much being granted and premised, I
return this Answer to the Question proposed.

God has been so far from establishing the unalterable use of any particular
Gesture in the Act of Receiving, that among all the Sacred Records of his Will,
there is not any express Command to determine our practice one way or other. We
are left perfectly at our liberty by God to use what comely Gesture we please,
either Sitting, See the Case of Indifferent things.
Kneeling, or Standing. And if the Law of the Land did not restrain our
liberty, we might use any of the forementioned Gestures, without the least
violation of any Law of God. This perhaps at first sight may seem very strange
and false to many of our Dissenting Brethren who have been taught to believe
otherwise; and it may be (to judge Charitably) their Teachers and Pastors have
in this particular been imposed on themselves, by the Writings and Assertions
of other Men whose Persons they have had in great admiration. But yet I am so
secure of this Truth, that I challenge all the World to produce the Chapter and
Verse wherein any Command is given for the use of any particular Gesture at the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper. That Popish Principle of believing as the
Church believes, and swallowing all for Gospel which she affirms to be so,
though very mischievous in its consequence, is not so Popish, that is, so ill,
as to pin our Faith on the Sleeves of particular Men, and relying barely on the
word and credit of any one Man whom we highly esteem, of what Party or
Persuasion soever. For this is to create a Pope to our selves, and make every
Man whom we fancy infallible; this is to make two more than six, and the
Authority of one Man outweigh the Authority of the Church, that is a Society of
Men who are nothing near so liable to deception. I don't desire therefore to be
trusted by any means in the matter under present consideration; and therefore I
would have the Reader to observe this Rule: Trust no Man's Eyes or Judgment
where you are able to use your own, but follow the example of the Bereans,
Acts. 17. 11.
so highly commended by St. Paul upon this very account; that is, to make an
ingenuous enquiry into the Truth of things, to search the Scriptures whether
these things be so as I say and assert. If this course were generally followed,
it would go a great way toward the composing those differences, and curing
those divisions that at present are on foot amongst us, occasioned by several
Tenets and Opinions about matters of Religion. By this means, a great many
which pass for Divine Oracles and Doctrines, would appear to be no other than
the whimsies and inventions of Men. With this cautionary advice I might fairly
dismiss this Question as being fully Answered, and leave all my Readers to
disprove me if they can.

But because some may pretend they have not Leisure, and others want of Skill,
and others are not endued with Patience enough to search and examine this
matter thoroughly as it ought, I will yield all the Charitable assistance I am
able toward their relief, by doing the work to their hands. My Business then
at present is this, to Collect and Present to your view all those places which
relate to the Sacrament, and are most likely to inform us what our Lord by his
Institution and Appointment has obliged us to. And certainly if there be any
Command which ties us up to the use of any particular Gesture, Sitting suppose
or Standing, and not Kneeling, we shall find it in one or other of the
Evangelists, who give us a perfect Narrative of the whole Mind and Will of
Christ in all matters necessary to Faith and Salvation: Let us therefore bring
them under a strict examination. Mat. 26. 26.
St. Matthew gives this account of the whole matter: As they were eating, Jesus
took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and
said, Ver. 27.
Take, eat; this is my Body. And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it
to them* saying* Drink ye all of it. Ver. 28.
For this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
Remission of Sins. Ver. 29.
But I say unto you, I will not Drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine,
until that day when I Drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Ver. 30.
And when they had Sung an Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. Much
to the same purpose is the account which St. Mark gives of this matter.

And as they did eat, Mar. 14. 22.
Jesus took Bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take,
eat; this is my Body. Ver. 23.
And he took the Cup, and when he had given Thanks, he gave it to them, and
they all Drank of it. And he said unto them, Ver. 24.
This is my Blood of the New Testament, Ver. 25.
which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you, I will Drink no more of the
Fruit of the Vine, until that day that I Drink it new in the Kingdom of God.
Ver. 26.
And when they had Sung a Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. And
this is the sum of what Saint Mark delivers concerning the Lord's Supper. Saint
Luke with very little variation thus describes the matter.

And he took Bread, Luke 22. 19.
and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body
which is given for you; Ver. 20.
this do in Remembrance of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper saying, This
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you. This Evangelist
indeed makes mention of another Cup which our Lord took, and after he had
blessed it, he said to his Disciples, Take this, and divide it among your
selves; and withal told them that he would not Drink of the Fruit of the Vine
until the Kingdom of God should come; which Cup plainly refers to the Passover,
See Dr. Lightfoot on Mat. 26. 26.
as will appear to any one who will consult and compare the 15, 16, 17, and 18.
Verse of the forementioned Chapter; and is supposed to be that Cup wherewith
the Jews were wont to begin the Paschal Feast, Horae Heb. and Talmud.
which they Blessed or Consecrated in this Form of words: Blessed be God who
Created the Fruit of the Vine. And whereas our Lord says he will Drink no more
of the Fruit of the Vine, his meaning is, that he would never Celebrate the
Feast of the Passover with them any more after that time, but their next
Festival Meeting should be in Heaven: and this is very consistent with our
Lord's Drinking another Cup after this, which he Consecrated to another use and
signification, in the Sacrament, Ver. 20. And this is all the light this Divine
Writer affords us concerning the outward Rites and Ceremones which our Lord
used himself at the Institution of the Sacrament, and established for the use
of all Christians in all succeeding Ages.

As for St. John, he makes no mention at all of the Institution of this Holy
Feast by our Lord. All that can be collected from his Writings relates to the
Passover, or, John 13* from Ver. 1. to 31. vid. Hor. Heb. Tal. p. 300. and Mat.
26. 6.
according to the Learned Dr. Lightfoot, to what past between Christ and his
Disciples at a common and ordinary meal in Bethany, and that for this reason,
among many others judiciously urged by him, because the Disciples thought when
our Lord had said to him, Ver. 27. That thou do do quickly, that he had
given order to Judas who kept the bag, to buy those things that they had need
of against the Feast, viz. the Passover; and therefore all those passages, and
that discourse related by St. John in the foregoing Verses of that Chapter,
were transacted at an ordinary and common Supper. And indeed this seems to be
the great end and design which St. John proposed to himself in writing his
Gospel, and which throughout he constantly pursues, viz. To add out of his own
Knowledge several remarkable passages (especially such as tend to demonstrate
the Divinity of our Savior) as had been omitted by the other Evangelists in
their History of the Birth, Life, Actions and Sufferings of our Blessed
Savior. There is another passage in St. John's Gospel, John 5. 53.
which in the Judgment of many Learned Divines both Ancient and Modern, has
respect to the Lord's Supper, though not at that time instituted when those
mysterious words were uttered by our Savior.

Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, Ver. 54.
and Drink his Blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever Eats my Flesh, and
Drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Ver. 55.
For my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. Ver. 56.
He that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
Now all that can be inferred from these words, as they relate to this Holy
Feast, is only thus much: that it is highly necessary for all Christians (who
have an opportunity to do it) to partake of the Lord's Supper, as they would
partake in the merits of his Sacrifice, and the Efficacy of his Death and his
Sufferings; and that none but such as do receive the tokens and signs of his
Body broken, and Blood shed for their Sins, shall be owned and rewarded by him
as his Friends. These are all the places that we meet with in the Gospel; let
us now see what is delivered in the Acts and other Writings of the Apostles and
Divinely-inspired Authors. Among all their Writings there is but one place
which gives any account of the History of the Sacrament, and Institution of it,
and that is in the 1 Epist. to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. where St. Paul
declares, that what he delivered to them, he received by immediate Revelation
from Christ himself, viz. Ver. 23.
That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, Ver. 24.
took Bread; and when he had given Thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat,
this is my Body which is broken for you: Ver. 25.
this do in Remembrance of me. After the same manner he took the Cup when he
had Supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood: this do, as often
as ye Drink it, Ver. 26.
in Remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup,
ye do show (or show ye) the Lord's Death till he come. There are several other
places wherein the Holy Sacrament is mentioned, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 21.
and described by several Names and Titles suitable to the nature and ends of
it, 1 Cor. 11. 20.
which for brevity sake I omit, Acts 2. 46.
and desire the Reader to consult at his leisure; Acts 20. 7.
and I would not put him to that trouble, if they did contain any thing that
made against Kneeling, or that looked like a command for the use of any other
Gesture. Let us now look back a little upon the places forementioned, and see
what our Lord has ordained and appointed to be of perpetual use in his Church.

The Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, at the Institution of the Sacrament,
were the Representatives of the whole Church; and are to be considered under a
double capacity. Either as Governors and Ministers entrusted by Christ with
the Power of dispensing and administering the Sacrament, or as ordinary and lay
Communicants.

If we consider them as Governors and Stewards of the Mysteries, their Duty to
which they are obliged by the express command of their Lord, is to take the
Bread into their Hands, to bless and consecrate it to that mysterious and
Divine use to which he designed it, to break it, to give it to the
Communicants, as he gave it them: And so in like manner to Take the Cup, to
bless it, to give it to their Fellow Christians.

That which they were obliged to do by the command of our Lord, considered as
private Men, and in common with all believers, was to take and receive the
Consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine, to eat and Drink, and to do all this in
Commemoration of his wonderful Love in giving his Body to be broken and his
Blood to be shed for the Sins of the World.

And what the least Syllable or Shadow of a Command is there here in all this
History, for the use of any Gesture in the Act of Receiving? Since then the
Holy Scripture is altogether silent as to this matter, its silence is a full
and clear demonstration that Kneeling is not repugnant to any express Command
of our Lord, because no Gesture was ever Commanded at all: And this has been
ingenuously Confessed in writing by a great Enemy to Kneeling, A Manuscript of
an unknown Author, cited by Mr. Paybody, p. 48.
and a great Advocate for Sitting, That the Gesture of Sitting is but a matter
of Circumstance, and not expressly Commanded.

But the Scotch Ministers Assembled at Perth, Object.
affirm that when our Lord at the Institution Commanded his Disciple to do
this, he did by those words Command them to use that Gesture which he used at
that time, as well as to Take, Eat, Drink, etc. The Force of their Argument
lies in this, if it have any force at all: Our Savior Sat at the Passover,
Mat. 26. 20.
as the Scriptures plainly inform us; Mar. 14. 18.
and it is to be supposed he continued in the same posture when he instituted
and Administered the Sacrament, Luke 22. 14.
which was at the close of the Passover: therefore Do this relates to, and
includes the Gesture amongst other things. But this is a miserable shift, which
tends to Sink rather than Support their Cause.

For first, Answ. I.
If our Lord did Sit when he Administered the Sacrament (which we will suppose
at present) yet there is no reason in the World to incline us to think, that he
intended by those words, Do this, to oblige us to observe his Gesture only,
and not several other Circumstances which he observed at the same time. Since
Christ has not restrained and interpreted these words Do this so that they
should only respect Sitting as he did, why should we not think our selves
obliged to do all that he did at the same time, as well as this? For example,
If these words may be interpreted thus, Do this, that is, Sit as Christ did,
why not thus also, Do this, that is, celebrate the Sacrament in an upper Room,
in a private House, late at night or the Evening, after a full Supper, Mat. 26.
20.
in the Company of 11 or 12 at most, and they only Men, Mar. 14. 17.
with their Heads Covered according to the custom of those Countries, Luke 22.
14.
and with unleavened Bread? There lies as great an Obligation upon all
Christians to observe all these Circumstances in Imitation of our Lord by
virtue of these words, Do this, as there does to Sit. So that this Argument
violently recoils upon those that urge it, and proves a great deal more than
they are willing to have it. It concludes strongly against their own Practices,
and the liberty they take in omitting some things, and pressing the necessary
observance of others, upon a reason which equally obliges to all.

But I desire our Dissenting Brethren (who may be of the same Persuasion with
these Scotch-men) to take this further consideration along with them; Answ. II.
which I think will turn the Scales, and make deep impressions upon tender
Consciences, and oblige them to observe most of the other Circumstances which
they omit, rather than this of Sitting, which they so earnestly press and
contend for. All those forementioned Circumstances (except the two Last, which
too are generally allowed among Learned Men on all sides) are expressly
mentioned in the Gospel, and were without dispute observed by Christ at the
Institution of the Sacrament: But the particular Gesture used by him at that
time, is not expressly mentioned; and what it was, is very disputable and
dubious, as I shall evince by and by under the second Query.

How then can any Man think himself obliged in Conscience, by the force of
these words, Do this, to do what Christ is no where expressly said to do, and
not obliged to do what the Scripture affirms he really did? Why that which is
dark and dubious should be made an infallible Rule of Conscience, and that
which is plainly and evidently set down in Scripture should have no force, nor
be esteemed any Rule at all: These are Questions, I confess, beyond my
capacity, and surpassing my skill to resolve.

It Is clear from St. Paul in the forecited place, Answ. III.
that those words of our Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 4, 5, 6, 27, 28. Verses.
Do this, do respect only the Bread and Wine, which signify the Body and Blood
of Christ, and those other actions there specified by him, which are essential
to the right and due celebration of that Holy Feast. For when it is said, Do
this in Remembrance of me; and, This do ye as often as ye Drink it in Remembrance
of me; and, As often as ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lords Death till he come; it is plain that Do this must be restrained to the
Sacramental Actions there mentioned, and not extended to the Gesture, of which
the Apostle speaks not a word. Our Lord Instituted the Sacrament in Remembrance
of his Death and Passion, and not in Remembrance of his Gesture in Administering
it* And consequently, Do this is a general Command, obliging us only to such
particular Actions and Rites as he had Instituted, and made necessary to be
used in order to this great end, viz. to signify and represent his Death, and
that Bloody Sacrifice which he offered to his Father, on the Cross, for us
miserable Sinners. Upon the whole matter, I think, we may certainly conclude,
that there is not a tittle of a Command in the whole New Testament to oblige us
to receive the Lords Supper in any particular Posture; and if any be so
scrupulous, after all, as not to receive it in any other Gesture but what is
expressly Commanded, they must never receive it as long as they live: And then I
leave this to their serious consideration, How they will be ever able to excuse
their neglect of a known necessary duty (such as receiving the Sacrament is)
before God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us so much as to send
his Son to be a propitiation for our Sins: How they will ever Answer to their
Crucified Savior their Living and Dying in the breach of an express Command of
his given a little before his Passion to Do this in Remembrance of him, merely
because the Gesture prescribed by Authority was cross to their private Wills
and Phansies, but not to the Mind and Will of God.

2. For the further proof and Confirmation of this Assertion, that there is no
express Command in Scripture for the use of any particular Gesture in the Act
of receiving the Sacrament, I will appeal to the Judgment and Practice of our
Dissenting Brethren, and all the Reformed Churches in Europe.

1. To begin with our Nonconforming Brethren. There are a great many Serious
and Sincere-Hearted persons among them, who profess that (were they left to
their liberty; and not tied up by the Law to Kneel at the Sacrament) they could
with a safe Conscience use that Gesture as well as any other. And they further
tell us, that they are willing and ready to Communicate with us, provided we
would Administer the Sacrament to them either Sitting or Standing, that is, any
way but that which is imposed by Law. For the Rule by which they conduct their
Consciences in this matter, is this: Things in their own nature indifferent,
which are no where Commanded or prohibited by God in Scripture, cannot^ nor
ought not to be restrained and limited by any Power or Authority of Man: And
therefore all such things which God left free for us to do or not to do without
Sin, become sinful to us when imposed by humane Authority. It Is remote from my
business to show how weak and false a Principle this is, and of what
mischievous consequences to the Peace of the Church; and for that reason I will
pass it by. But thus much may be inferred from this Tenent to my purpose, that
they who hold and urge it as a reason why they cannot Receive Kneeling, which
otherwise they could safely do, plainly own, that as to the Gesture, in the Act
of receiving, it is in its own nature Indifferent, and left free by God for us
to use or refuse as we think fit, and by necessary consequence that there is no
express Command given by God for the use of any particular Gesture. It could
not be a matter of indifferency to our Dissenting Brethren, whose Principle
this is, if there were no Law of Man to Kneel at the Sacrament; and now there
is such a Law, it could not be Indifferent to them whether they received
Sitting or Standing, as they profess it is, if there were any Law of God
obliging to the use of any one Gesture whatsoever.

2. That there is no express Command in Scripture for any one Gesture in the
Act of Receiving, may be inferred from the Judgment and Practice of all the
Reformed Churches abroad: Whose Judgment and example will, I presume, sway much
with those who separate from the Church of England as not being sufficiently
purged from the Corruptions of the Church of Rome as other Neighbour-Churches
are, and who stood once engaged in a Solemn Covenant, to reform the Churches of
England and Ireland according to the Word of God and the Pattern of the best
Reformed Churches.

Let us now compare the practice of our Church with the example of the
Protestant Churches abroad, and see whether she ought to reform the Gesture
prescribed at the Sacrament.

The Reformed Churches of France, and those of Geneva and Helvetia Stand; the
Dutch generally Sit; but in some places (as in West- Friesland) they Stand. The
Churches of the Bohemian and Augustan Confession, which spread through the
large Kingdoms of Bohemia, Denmark, and Sweden, through Norway, the Dukedom of
Saxony, Lithuany, and the Ducal Prussia in Poland, the Marquisate of
Brandenburg in Germany, and several other places and free Cities in that
Empire, do for the most part, if not all of them, retain the Gesture of
Kneeling. The Bohemian Churches were reformed by John Husse and Jerome of
Prague, who suffered Martyrdom at Constance about the year 1416. long before
Luthers time; and those of the Augsburg or Augustan Confessions were founded
and reformed by Luther, and were the first Protestants properly so called. Both
these Churches, so early reformed, and of so large extent, did not only use the
same Gesture that our Church enjoins at the Sacrament, but they, together with
those of the Helvetick Confession, did in three general Synods unanimously
condemn the Sitting Gesture (though they esteemed it in it self Lawful) as
being Scandalous, 1 At Cracow, Anno. Dom. 1573.
for this remarkable reason viz. because it was used by the Arrians (as their
Synods call the Socinians) in contempt of our Saviors Divinity; 2 Petricow or
Peterkaw, 1578.
who therefore placed themselves as Fellows with their Lord at his Table. 3
Wladislaw, 1583.
And thereupon they entreat and exhort all Christians of their Communion to
change Sitting into Kneeling or Standing, both which Ceremonies we
Indifferently leave free according as the Custom of any Church has obtained,
and we approve of their use without Scandal and Blame. Moreover they affirm,
That ^hese Socinians who deny Christ to be God, were the first that introduced
Sitting at the Sacrament into their Churches, contrary to the Practice of all
the Evangelical Churches in Europe. Among all these Foreign Churches of the
Reformation, there is but one that I can find which uses Sitting, and forbids
Kneeling, for fear of Bread-Worship: but yet in that Synod wherein they
condemned Kneeling, they left it to the choice of their Churches to use
Standing, Sitting, or an Ambulatory Gesture (as the French do) and at last
conclude thus: Harmon.
These Articles are settled by mutual Consent, 4 Synods of Holl.
that if the good of the Churches require it, they may and ought to be changed,
augmented or diminished. What now should be the ground and reason of this
variety both in Opinion and Practice touching the Gesture to be used at the
Lords Supper? Is it to be supposed or imagined that an Assembly of Learned and
Pious Divines, met together on purpose to consult how to Reform their Churches
according to the pure Word of God, should through weakness and inadvertency
overlook an express Command of Christ for the perpetual use of any particular
Gesture, if any such there had been? Or shall we be so uncharitable as to think
that all these eminent Churches wilfully past it by, and established what was
most agreeable to their own Phansies, contrary to the known Will of God Would
they have given liberty to all of their Communion to use several Gestures
according to the custom of their several Churches, if our Lord had tied them to
observe but one? Would they declare (as the Dutch Synod does) that what they
enjoined might be altered, if the good of the Church so required, if so be
Sitting had been expressly Commanded by our Lord, to be used by all Christians
to the end of the World? No undoubtedly, they would not, we cannot either in
reason or Charity suppose it.

The true Principle upon which all these Reformed Churches built, and by which
they are able to reconcile all this seeming difference in this matter, is the
very same with that which the Church of England goes by in her Synods and
Convocations, viz. That as to Rites and Ceremonies of an indifferent nature,
every National Church has Authority to institute, change and abolish them, as
they in Prudence and Charity shall think most fit, and conducive to the
setting forth God's Glory, the Edification of their People, and the Decent and
Reverend Administration of the Holy Sacrament. Vid. Art. 34 observat. of the
French and Dutch Divines on the Harmony of Confessions, edit. Geneva 1681.
sect. 14. p. 120. In hoc etiam ritu (speaking of Kneeling at the Sacr.) suam
cuique Ecclesiae libertatem salvam reliquendam arbitraemur.
Whosoever therefore refuses to receive the Lord's Supper according to the
Constitution of the Church of England, purely because Kneeling is contrary to
the express Command of Christ, must condemn the Judgment and Practice of all
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, who all agree in this, that the Gesture
in the Act of Receiving is to be reckoned among things Indifferent; and that
whether we Sit, or Kneel, or Stand, or Receive Walking, we Transgress no Law of
God; and consequently they prove my assertion true, that Kneeling is not
contrary to any express Command, no more than any other, because they allow of
all Lawful in themselves to be used; which cannot consist with an express
Command for the use of any one Gesture whatsoever.

Query II.
Whether Kneeling be not a Devotion from that Example which Christ set us at
the first Institution?
FOr a full and satisfactory resolution of this doubt, I shall propound the
four following particulars to the consideration of our Dissenting Brethren;
which I will endeavor with all Brevitie and Clearness to make good.

1. That it can never be proved, so as that the conscience may surely build
upon it, what Gesture Christ and his Apostles used at the Celebration of the
Sacrament.

2. Supposing that our Lord did Sit, yet his bare example does not oblige all
Christians to a like practice.

3. That they who urge the example of Christ for our Rule in this case, do not
follow it themselves.

4. That they who Kneel at the Lords Supper in compliance with the Custom and
Constitution of the Church, do manifestly follow the example of Christ.

First, The particular Gesture used by Christ and his Apostles at the
Institution and Celebration of the Sacrament, can never be demonstrated so as
that the conscience may surely build upon it. This I shall endeavor to make
good these two ways. First, we have no sure ground for it in Scripture.
Secondly, the Customs observed by the Jews render it very uncertain and
disputable.

1. All that can be gathered from Scripture amounts to no more than this, Mat.
26. 26.
that as they were eating, Mar. 14. 22.
or as they did eat, as the Phrase is rendered in St. Mark, Jesus took Bread and
blessed, it and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples; and he took the Cup
(when he had Supped, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
says St. Paul; after Supper, as St. Luke has it) and gave Thanks; Luke 22.
20.
and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. Now it is very clear from this
account which the Scripture gives, that our Lord did Institute and Administer
the Sacrament to his Disciples, and that they did Receive it: But whether
Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing, is no where mentioned, nor plainly determined.
It Is clear that he Instituted this Holy Feast at the close of the Paschal
Feast, for he took the Bread as they were Eating, and the Cup when he had
Supped; that he did Celebrate the Passover according to the usual manner of the
Jews in those times, Luke 22. 14.
which was in a Discumbing posture, Mat. 26. 20. (...), in the Marg.
on Beds placed about the Table, much after the manner of our lying or leaning
upon Couches. Yet whether, after all, the Apostles Received, or our Lord
Administered the Sacrament still Sitting, after the same manner as they did at
the Passover, is not expressed, nor can it be certainly concluded from the Word
of God. The utmost strength of their Argument who urge Sitting in imitation of
our Saviors example, can arise to no more than this: That it is probable our
Lord did not alter the Gesture he used at the Passover, when he Instituted the
Sacrament. But who sees not that a probability is far from a certainty! A thing
may be really false, though it seem likely to be true: And that opinion which
is speculatively probable, may when reduced to practice become a great Sin and
a great Error. Thus to refuse to Receive the Holy Sacrament Kneeling, and
thereby neglect a known necessary Duty, and not only so, but to disturb the
Peace, and break the Unity of the Church, upon a bare probability that our Lord
sat, which we are not, cannot be sure of, is a great fault in all who are
guilty of it. For they appeal to an uncertain example, against a plain certain
Command, viz. to receive the Tokens and Pledges of our Saviors dying love, and
to do this in Remembrance of him. They therefore who urge the example of Christ
for Sitting at the Sacrament, and as a Plea against Kneeling, would do well
first to make the example appear, and prove that he did Sit, before they press
a Conformity.

2. If we consult the Records of Jewish Antiquities, and the Writings of
Learned Men both Jews and Christians, concerning the Passover and the manner of
the Jews Celebrating it, we shall find that they did not keep to one and the
same Gesture throughout the Solemnity. For the Babylon and Jerusalem Talmud,
Maimonides and Buxtorf, do certify us that they did alter their posture at the
Passover, though the Lying or Leaning posture was generally and most
Religiously used and observed at this Feast above any other. And the Scripture
gives some hints and intimations of the Truth of what they deliver.

1. It was the ancient custom of the Jews and of those Eastern Countries at
their ordinary Feasts and Entertainments to Wash their Hands and their Feet,
Genesis 18. 4. 19. c. 2. 24. 32.
and especially at their Religious Feasts to Wash their Hands often. Mat. 15.
2. Mar. 7. 3. Luke 7. 44.
At the Passover they Washed their Hands thrice at least, according to the
Talmudists and the Authors forecited. Tract. Berachoth. Pesachin. Maimon. in
Chametz. Umatsah. Buxtorf. Synag. c. 13.
Which Ceremony could not well, nor was not in all likelihood performed during
their Lying or Leaning posture on their left sides, as their manner was. For
the reason of their Washing at all, and so frequently, was, that no legal
Impuritie or Uncleanness might cleave to them, and to signify the great care
they took to keep this Solemn Feast Holy to the Lord. And as they were Nice and
Curious in Purifying and Washing themselves, Vid. Buxt. Synagoga, c. 12. p. 286.
so in keeping the Beds, Table, Dishes, and all other Utensils necessary for
this Feast, clean and free from all pollution too. To Wash so often more than
the Law required, and the general custom of those Eastern and hot Countries
warranted, was a Pharisaical Invention, and superstitiously abused by them;
and, as such, it is certain our Lord did not use it; but that he did Wash
sometime before he Eat the Paschal Supper, and after he had Sat down as the
manner was, there is little reason to doubt: and all that I infer from hence
is, that when he Washed, be it once or twice, he altered his posture, and in
all probability either arose from his Bed and went to the place where Water
and Vessels were prepared and set for such uses, Vid. John 2. 6.
or had Water brought to him in a Basin, wherein he Washed either Sitting
upright, or Standing; which are both different from that Gesture which was
peculiar and proper to the Passover. St. John, in Chap. 13. 2, 4, 5. Verses,
will explain and Confirm this Custom we are speaking of. There he tells us how
that Supper being ended (that is, in a manner or almost ended; for by comparing
the 12 and 26 and 27 Verses together, we shall find plainly that they had not
quite finished their Supper) Jesus rises from Supper, and laid aside his
Garments, and took a Towel and girded himself; and after that pours Water
into a Basin, and began to Wash the Disciples Feet. There are Learned Men on
both sides, Vid. Grot. in loc.
who think all this was done at the Feast of the Passover, Dr. Hamond on v. 26.
and that toward the close of it when he Instituted the Lords Supper; Mark.
14. 12.
but I shall wave this, and not insist upon it, because, as I hinted before, I
believe, as the Learned Dr. Lightfoot does, it was no more then an ordinary or
common meal; and therefore I only shall conclude thus much from it, which I
think is very probable: That it was usual with the Jews to Wash at their
Feasts, and that in Supper-time: And that our Savior complied with this
custom. To Wash the Feet of the Guests was the Office of Servants, and it was
altogether unusual for the Master of the Feast to do; but our Lord, to set his
Disciples an example of Humility and Charitable condescension one to another,
Joh. 13. 14, 15.
performs this servile Office himself toward them; which he might as well have
done after Supper, if it had not been usual to have Washed in Suppertime.
Seeing then it appears partly from Scripture, and partly from Ancient Monuments
of Jewish customs, that the Jews were wont both before and at their Civil and
Religious Feasts to Wash, and particularly at the Passover; then it is very
probable our Lord did so too, and altered his posture as they did; nay it is
very probable that our Lord, to make his Discipels understand what he was about
to do, did at the Institution of this new Feast, the Holy Sacrament of his Body
and Blood, Wash before it; and having changed the posture that he was in before
at the Eating of the Paschal Supper, did not resume it, but used a new posture
at this new Festival-Solemnity; but what that was, is not certain.

2. At the beginning of the Paschal Feast, the Jews did put themselves into
this Discumbing or Leaning posture, and used it while they Eat and Drank the
two first Cups of Wine (for every Guest was obliged to Drink four Cups at this
Feast) but at the third Cup, As the Talmudist and forementioned Writers testify.
called the Cup of blessing in their Language, and the fourth styled the Song
or Psalm-Cup when they Sung the Hymn, Vid. Dr. Lightfoot Hor. Heb. 291.
there was no necessity of lying along; and it is likely our Lord took an
opportunity when he took the third Cup, to change the use and signification of
it, and to Institute the Eucharistical Cup, called by St. Paul the Cup of
blessing, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

3. Before they Drank of the third Cup, the Master of the Feast took a piece of
Unleavened Bread and brake it, See Mr. Ainsworth a Learned Nonconformist in
Ex. 12. 8. 11.
and after he had Eat some himself, he offers the remainder to the rest of the
Company, to do the like. After this he proceeds to take some of the bitter
Herbs, and to dip them in a thick Sauce called by them Charoseth (which was
formed in the shape of a Brick, to represent the hard slavery undergone by
their Forefathers in the Brick-Kilns of Egypt) and commanded all the Society
to follow his example. Now this was not done in an inclining posture, Buxt.
Syn. c. 13. p. 300.
as the Jewish Doctors teach us; and they give this reason for it, because this
was to put them in mind of the Egyptian Bondage, and therefore here they stood
in all probability, because to eat Standing was the manner of Slaves, Pesachin,
fol. 37. 2. Hor. Heb. 291, 292.
whereas Lying along after a Lordly manner, was in token of that ease and rest
they enjoyed in the Land of Canaan, and of their redemption from the House of
Bondage. So often therefore as they Eat the bitter Herbs, so often they changed
their Gesture.

4. Though the Jews in their Solemn Feasts used Discumbing, yet in blessing and
giving thanks before those Feasts they were, In vita contemplat. p. 663. Col.
Allobro. edit. 1613. p. 695.
as Philo relates, in a Standing Gesture, with their Eyes and Hands lifted up
to Heaven. And therefore it is no way probable that Christ and his Apostles
would continue in their Table Gesture at the blessing of the Holy Supper, which
is an higher Ordinance than the Passover: Because this would be very unsuitable
to so great a Solemnity; Especially too, if Dr. Lightfoot's Opinion be true
(and it may be so for any thing that appears to the contrary,) viz. that Christ
changed the third Cup at the Passover, called the Cup of blessing, into the
Sacramental Cup; because it was the custom of the Jews then, to alter their
Table Gesture that was peculiar to the Passover; and it is highly Improbable
that our Lord would continue in the Table Gesture contrary to the General and
Current Custom of the Jews. They that don't think so as I do in this
particular, will receive little advantage by being cross. For if it may be
supposed that our Lord Sat sometimes when the Jews were wont to Stand, it may
equally be supposed that he Stood sometimes when the Jews were wont to Sit; and
what becomes of their Argument for Sitting at the Sacrament after the example
of Christ? because that stands built upon supposition that our Lord Sat at the
Passover, as the Jews did, and continued in the same Gesture when he Instituted
the Sacrament, which was before the Paschal-Solemnity was over. I will only
observe this briefly by the way, and then proceed to shut up all upon this Head.

That those Nonconformists who cry out so vehemently against the Church for
Imposing, and her Members for using a Kneeling Gesture, were very unfortunate
in their choice when they pitched upon Sitting, and urged it as the only
necessary Gesture to receive in, in Conformity to our Saviors Practice and
Example: Because the Standing Gesture may be much better maintained and
defended than Sitting, and has more and greater probabilities attending it.

If therefore variety of Gestures were used by the Jews at the Passover, and it
no where appears from Scripture that our Lord did not comply in this matter,
then we cannot know for certain what the particular Gesture was which Christ
used at the Institution of the Sacrament: it might be Lying along, and it might
be Sitting upright; it might be Standing in an adoring posture, with his hands
and eyes lifted up to Heaven; which is much more probable than either of the
former, for the reasons forementioned: we cannot certainly say which; and yet
we must be certain of one, before we can build upon it as an Infallible Rule of
Conscience. Let it be therefore granted to our Brethren who differ from us in
this point, that our Savior Sat at the Passover, that the Sacrament was
Instituted by him before the Paschal Feast was fully ended, that the Disciples
Eat the Sacramental Bread, and Drank the Sacramental Cup, in the same posture
as they Eat and Drank at the Passover: What of all this? how will the necessity
of a Sitting Gesture appear from these premises? Why, thus: Therefore our Lord
Instituted and Administered the Holy Sacrament Sitting, say they. How does this
follow of course, I ask? Since they Eat and Drank in several postures at the
Paschal Feast.

I confess the Argument had been strong, if they could make it appear, that
throughout the whole Solemnity of the Passover no other Gesture but Sitting was
used by our Lord. But this I am sure can never be done, and consequently their
conclusion can never be good. From the whole I conclude thus much: Since the
example of our Lord cannot be certainly known in this matter, our Church cannot
be charged for deviating from it: And consequently, to scruple Conformity to
the practice of our Church, because she does not Conform to the practice of
Christ which no body can certify us of, is very Unjust and Unreasonable.

2. Supposing our Lord did Sit as they will have it, yet his bare example does
not oblige all Christians to a like Practice.

1. Because naked examples without some Rule or Note added to them to signify
that it is the mind and will of God to have them constantly followed and
perpetually Imitated by us, have not the force of a Law perpetually obliging
the Conscience. Thus in our present Case, though our Lord did Sit at the
Sacrament, yet his example alone does not become an everlasting Rule for all
Ages to observe, because he has no where discovered his binding will and
pleasure in this particular. And consequently, since he has left us in the
Dark, we may act contrary to his will and intention, when we so zealously press
and follow his example, especially in this matter relating to Gesture. For even
under the Law, where all other Circumstances of Time, Place, Habits, and the
Ceremonies relating to Divine Worship, were with great particularity described,
this of Gesture was left free and undetermined. God never obliged them to use
any particular Gesture in any particular part of his Worship, but left it to
their choice, whether to Kneel, or Stand, or Bow down their Heads and Bodies,
or fall prostrate on the Earth; to use all, or any one of these, as Custom and
their own Pious Prudence should prompt and direct them. Seeing then that the
Gesture in the Worship of God was never determined under the Law: Since it was
and is in its own nature a Mutable Ceremony in the Service of God, it remains
so unto this day: Our Lord left it as he found it, unless it can be proved that
he has by some Command or Note of Immutability fixed and determined it to all
succeeding Ages. But because no such Command or Note is to be found, therefore
we are not tied in Conscience to a strict Imitation of his Example. A few
instances will clear this point. Luke 3. 23.
Our Lord was not Baptized till he was about thirty years of Age; but this
example is not esteemed by the generality of Dissenters a Law or Warrant for us
to defer our Baptism so long. So he Instituted the Sacrament a little before
his Death: But is there no obligation upon us to receive it but when we are
near our Graves, and under a Prospect of Death? He also Instituted and
Administered the Sacrament after a full Meal, in an upper Room, to Men only.
Does his bare example oblige us to observe punctually all these Circumstances,
or no? If it does, why do our Brethren of the Separation take the liberty to
depart from his example in these things? if his example lays no necessity
upon us to follow it in these particulars, how does Sitting become necessary
barely upon the account of his example? I desire them therefore Seriously and
impartially to examine this matter, and see if they can assign any reasons for
this liberty they take of following the example of our Savior in some things,
and not in others, where there is no other Rule to guide them. I believe they
will be constrained to do one of these two things; either to withdraw their
Suit against Kneeling, and quit their own Principle; or condemn their own
practices, as shamefully repugnant to it.

2. The bare example of Christ is no Warrant for us to act by, because the
great end and usefulness of that Glorious example he left us, consists in this,
viz. that it shows the possibility, and clears up the sense of his Laws, and
excites and encourages us to the Practice of them; it puts the Rule into
activity, and sets it forth to the life. It is to our lives, as Exhortation is
to Doctrine, it thrusts us forward to do that which we were obliged in
Conscience to do before. Whatsoever our Lord has Commanded us to do, in that
only we are necessarily bound to Imitate him: But where there is no Precept,
there is no Necessity. We may do it if we will, and if we can innocently (as in
the case of a single Life) but we are not under Constraint, and an
indispensable Obligation. He has Commanded us to be Meek and Lowly, to be Just
and Merciful, to be Patient under all our Troubles and Afflictions, to follow
Peace with all Men, to be ever contented and resigned to the Will of our
Heavenly Father in all States and Conditions of Life, and the like: And in all
these things he became an Example to us, that we might follow his Steps. He
Commands us to do what he performed himself; and that which we are concerned
in, if we would walk surely, is first to look for our Rule, and then for our
encouragement to look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith. It Is
true indeed, we are Commanded in Scripture to follow the Examples of the
Apostles so far forth as they follow Christ, and the Example of our Lord is
made the Touchstone to try all others by; but then if we would know what is our
Duty, we must bring his Example to the Rule. For as to Preach Christ and to
Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
to Obey Christ and Obey the Gospel, Acts 5. 42.
are Phrases of alike Import it Scripture; so in like manner, Acts 11. 20.
to follow Christ, Marc. 16. 15.
is all one with following the Gospel-Rule, Heb. 5. 9.
or doing as Christ did in obedience to his Commands. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
The Sum of all is this; Col. 2. 6.
An Example may help to Interpret a Law, but of it self it is no Law: Against a
Rule no Example is a Competent Warrant; and if the Example be according to the
Rule, it is not the Example but the Rule that is the Measure of our Actions.

3. The bare Example of Christ is no Warrant for us to go by, because he was an
extraordinary Person, and did many things which we cannot, and many which we
must not do. He Fasted 40 Days and 40 Nights, and spent whole Nights in Prayer;
he wrought many Miracles, to prove the Truth of his Doctrine and his Divine
Authority by, that he was the Messiah, the Son of God, and Savior of Mankind;
he was a Prophetical Priest, by which Office he was obliged to teach us the
whole mind of God in all things necessary to Faith and Salvation, and to offer
up himself as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. Nothing (we
should quickly experiment) would be more Vain and Foolish, than attempts of an
Imitation in some things: And nothing more Wicked, than to think and believe we
may and ought to follow his example in others. To dye to Sin, and Crucify the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, is a good way (as the Scripture Teaches
and Warrants) of Imitating our Lords Death in a Spiritual Sense. So, to Die
rather than deny the Faith and Dishonor our Savior, is great and
Praiseworthy; but to Die for Sin, either our own or other Men's, to propose a
Meritorious Death to our Selves, and by way of expiation, is a Sin of so deep a
Stain, that the Blood of Christ will not Wash out: For this in effect is
Trampling upon and Vilifying of the Precious Blood of our Savior, and to
detract from the Virtue and Merits of his Sacrifice, and thereby render it weak
and insufficient to save us. Blindly therefore to follow the Example of Christ,
is a certain way to run into Error and Mischief. We must then of necessity, if
we would follow him safely, seek out for a plain Rule in the Word of God, or
guide our Selves by the Dictates of Reason and Prudence; and either way is a
sufficent Demonstration that a bare Example is not to be trusted to. Those who
urge the example of Christ for Sitting, were somewhat ware of this, namely,
that his example, and those of his Apostles, are not to be Imitated by us in
all things; Gillesp. against Cer. p. 339.
and therefore they lay down this for their Maxim and Guide:

We are bound to Imitate Christ, and the commendable example of his Apostles,
in all things wherein it is not evident they had special reasons moving them
thereunto, which do not concern us. But I would willingly be informed how we
shall be ever able to know when they acted upon special reasons, and what they
were, that we may know our Duty, if a bare Example without any Rule obliges us:
And if we guide our selves by Scripture or Reason in this matter, then they are
the measures of the Example. Besides, if we are not to Imitate them in such
things which they were moved to do upon special reasons which did not concern
us, then we are obliged to Imitate their examples in such things as they did
upon general and common reasons which concern us as well as them, or we are not
obliged at all by any Example; and if so, then those reasons are our Rule, to
which we are to reduce their Examples. Without we find some general or common
Reason, we have no Warrant (according to their own Principle) to follow their
Examples; and when such Reasons do appear, then it is not the example alone that
obliges us, but Reason that approves the Example. To bring their own Rule to
the case in Hand: How do they know but our Lord was moved to Sit at the
Sacrament by Special reasons drawn from that Time and Place, from the Feast of
the Passover to which that Gesture was peculiar? How do they know but that our
Lord might have used another Gesture, if the Sacrament had been Instituted
apart from the Passover?

The necessity of the time, made the Jews Eat the Passover after one fashion in
Egypt, which afterward ceasing, gave occasion to alter it in Canaan; and how do
we know but that our Lord complied with the present necessity, and that his
Example (if he did Sit) was only temporary, and not designed for a Standing
Law perpetually obliging to a like practice? If Christ acted upon special
reasons, then we are not obliged, by their own Rule; and if he did not, let
them produce the reasons if they can, which make this Example of Christ of
general and perpetual use, and to oblige all Christians to follow it. When ever
they do this, I am sure they will expose their own Principle which they have
built so much upon, to the Scorn and Contempt of the World; which is this:
Gillesp. 338. disp. against Ceremo.
That the bare example of Christ and good Men in Scripture, are a complete Rule
and Sufficient Warrant for our Actions, in such things as we have no Precept or
Prohibition for in the Word of God* That a Christians Duty in a great measure
flows purely from Examples Recorded in the Word of God, and not from the
express Laws of God, which he has revealed to us.

4. It Is absurd to talk of Christ's Example apart from all Law and Rule, and to
make that alone a Principle of Duty distinct from the precepts of the Gospel;
because Christ himself, all the while the World enjoyed the benefit of his
example, governed his actions by a Law. For if we consider him as a Man, like
unto us in all things (Sin only excepted) he was Born under the obligation of
the Moral and Natural Law; as a Jew, under the Mosaic Law; as the Messiah,
sent of God into the World to compass the great Work of our Redemption which he
had freely undertaken, he still acted by Divine appointment, and was under the
Gospel-Law. He came to fulfill all Righteousness, and to teach us the whole Mind
and Will of God, and Exemplify to us what he taught and delivered. That which
made that bitter and deadly Cup which ended his Days relish with him, was this
consideration, John 18. 11.
that it was a Cup given him by his Father, and the Drinking it was agreeable
to his will; and it was the comfort and support of his Soul a little before his
Death, that he had finished the Work that his Father had given him. Joh. 17. 4.
v.
He frequently professed in his lifetime that he did as his Father gave him
Commandment, Mat. 11. 27.
and that it was his great business and delight to do the will of his Father;
Luke 2. 49.
and many such expressions he used, Joh. 4. 34.
which may be consulted at leisure. Joh. 5. 30. 8 c. 28, 29.
If therefore we only look to his Example, Joh. 10. 25.
without considering the various Capacities and Relations he bare, Joh. 14. 24,
31.
both toward God and toward us, Joh. 15. 10, 15.
and the several Laws by which he stood Bound, which were the measures of his
Actions, we shall miserably mistake our way, and bewilder our selves; we shall
Act like Fools, when we do such things as he did pursuant to infinite Wisdom.
Thus (to give but one instance) if we should Subject our selves to the Law of
Moses as he did (for he fulfilled the Ceremonial Law, which he came to abolish)
we should thereby frustrate the great Design of the Gospel, and of our Saviors
coming into the World: And yet even this we are obliged to do, if his Example
alone, be a sufficient Warrant for our Actions. I have staid the longer upon
this Head, because so ill a use has been made of Scripture-Examples, and to
show how far forth we may safely steer by them, I scarce know any one Doctrine
so teeming and big with Error, so Fatal to the Souls of private Persons, and
the Peace of Public Societies both Civil and Ecclesiastical, as that which
teaches us to Learn and Derive our Duty from, and to Judge of the Goodness and
Badness of our Actions by the Examples of Christ, and good Men, over and above
what we are obliged to do by the Precepts and Laws of the Gospel.

3. They who urge the Example of Christ against Kneeling at the Sacrament, as
our Rule to which we ought to Conform, do not follow it themselves. Because the
posture he Instituted the Sacrament in, which they say was a Passover-Gesture,
was (if so) very different from that which they so earnestly plead for and use
at this day. For that was a Discumbing or Leaning Gesture on the left side,
much after the manner that we lie upon Couches, with the upper part of the body
almost erect. It is agreed by all Learned Men, that this was the Ancient Custom
of the Jews in our Saviors time, and is so to this day at the Passover, by
which Gesture they distinguish this Festival Night from all others. Now if the
same Gesture were used by Christ at the Sacrament as was at the Passover, and
his example makes it necessary and obligatory to all Christians, for what
Reasons and by what Authority do our Dissenting Brethren change it into Sitting
upright, according to our Civil way and manner of Feasting? When they tell us
this, it will be very easy to justify Kneeling by the same Authority which they
shall allege for Sitting; and our changing the Gesture will be as warrantable
as theirs. Unless they will say, that they alone have the Power and Privilege
to recede from the Example of Christ when and how far they please, but our
Church has not, nor any other upon the face of the Earth. To say Sitting, as
they do, comes nearer to the Gesture used by our Lord at the Passover, and
consequently (as is supposed) at the Sacrament, then the Kneeling Gesture,
according to the Custom of our Church, will do them no service: For there is no
Room for this Question, Who comes nearest to the Example, they or we? when
they ought not at all to vary, if they keep to their own Rule. The Example of
Christ, as it is urged by them against Kneeling, equally Concludes against all
other Gestures besides what he himself used: And then the supposed Gesture
which he observed binds to Lying along. For where we have nothing to go by but
his Pattern, we must cut exactly by it, or else we take a liberty to do that of
our own heads for which we have no allowance: That is, we leave the Pattern
which we were obliged only to follow, and act at random upon our own heads;
and then the Pattern cannot be alleged for our Justification. Though our
Church therefore does not strictly follow the Example of Christ (as is
objected) by requiring all her Communicants to Kneel, yet they have no reason
to complain and to scruple Communicating with us, who do not follow it
themselves, but receive the Sacrament in their separate Congregations in a
Gesture different from what our Lord used at the first Institution of it. The
Presbyterians (if one may Argue from their Practices to their Principles) lay
very little stress on this Argument taken from the Example of Christ. For
though they generally choose to Sit, yet they do not Condemn Standing as
Sinful, or Unlawful in its self; and several are willing to Receive it in that
posture, in our Churches: which surely is every whit as wide from the Pattern
our Lord is supposed to have set us, (whether he Lay along or Sat upright) as
that which is Enjoined and Practiced by the Church of England. There is too a
Confessed variation allowed of and Practiced by the generality of Dissenters,
both Presbyterians and Independents, from the Institution and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles, in the other Sacrament of Baptism. For they have
changed Immersion or Dipping, into aspersion, Mat. 3. 16.
or Sprinkling and Pouring Water on the Face. Baptism by Immersion or Dipping,
Mat. 28. 19.
is suitable to the Institution of our Lord, and the Practice of his Apostles,
and was by them ordained and used to represent our Burial with Christ, Romans 6.
4. 6. 11*
a Death unto Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness, Col. 2. 12.
as St. Paul explains that Rite. Now it is very strange that Kneeling at the
Lord's Supper (though a different Gesture from that which was used at the first
Institution) should become a Stumbling Block in the way of Weak and Tender
Consciences, that it is more unpassable than the Alps; and yet they can with
Ease and Cheerfulness pass by as great or a greater change in the Sacrament of
Baptism, and Christen as we do, without the least murmur or complaint. Sitting,
Kneeling, or Standing, were none of them Instituted or used to signify and
represent any thing Essential to the Lord's Supper, as Dipping all over was;
why cannot Kneeling then be without any wrong to the Conscience, as Safely and
Innocently used as Sprinkling? How comes a Gnat (to use our Saviors Proverb)
to be harder to swallow than a Camel? Or why should not the Peace and Unity of
the Church, and Charity to the Public, prevail with them to Kneel at the
Lord's Supper, as much (or rather more) as Mercy and Tenderness to the Infants
Body, to Sprinkle or pour Water on the Face, contrary to the first Institution?

4. They who Kneel at the Sacrament in compliance with the Customs and
Constitutions of the Church whereof they are Members, do manifestly follow the
Example of Christ.

For our Savior complied with that Passover-Gesture which was at that time
commonly and generally observed by the Jews, Altar. Dam. 745. 747.
but cannot be pretended to be the same that was used at the first Institution
of that Feast in Egypt. For thus the Command runs, Exodus 12. 11. And thus shall
ye Eat it; with your Loins Girded, your Shoes on your Feet, and your Staff in
your Hand: And you shall Eat it in haste; it is the Lord's Passover. This, say
the Hebrew Doctors, was but a temporary Law, suited to the necessity of that
time, and served for that Night only, and did not oblige the following
Generations in the Land of Canaan. For thus they comment upon it: Four things
were contained in this Law, Vid. Mr. Ainsworth Exodus 12. 6. 11.
which did not oblige but for that night at the Passover in Egypt. 1. Eating of
the Lamb in their Houses dispersed in Egypt. 2. Taking up of the Lamb from the
tenth Day. 3. Striking the Blood on their Door-Posts. 4. Eating in Haste. Here
the Gesture in all probability was Standing, though it be not expressly
mentioned: Howsoever, it was different from that used by the Jews in our
Saviors time, which was a Gesture denoting Ease and Rest, and their
deliverance from Egyptian Bondage. And our Lord's Compliance with this Custom
may teach us thus much, That we should not be scrupulous about Gestures, but
conform to the Innocent and prevailing Customs of the Church wheresoever we
live. Phil. 4. 8.
To this Practice St. Paul's Rule well suits; Not only, Whatsoever things are
True, and Just, and Lovely, and Pure, and Honest, but, whatsoever things are of
good report, (...).
(i. e. well spoken of, or laudable:) Not only, (...).
If there be any virtue, but if there be any praise, (if any thing be much
approved of in Common esteem, or is made commendable by Custom) we are to think
(or make account of these things, (...).
) and conform our practice to them. And if Christians in the several places of
their abode did walk according to this Rule, they would greatly promote the
Peace and Welfare of the Church of Christ, and in so doing procure quiet and
Peace to themselves, with unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction. Whosoever would
be esteemed and rewarded as a Peacemaker, Mat. 5. 9.
and avoid the ill reputation and guilt of a Turbulent Person, ought among
other things carefully to observe this, viz. to Submit to, and Comply with the
Innocent Customs of the Church whereof he is a Member. For thus the same Divine
Writer (after he had Argued against Women's being Uncovered in the public
Assemblies) concludes all after this manner: 1 Cor. 11. 6.
If any Man seem to be Contentious, we have no such Customs, nor the Churches
of God. Pray by the way let this be observed from this place, That we may
Lawfully do some things in the Worship and Service of God, for which we have no
Command or Example in Scripture, or else St. Paul's Argument from Custom is of
no force.

To sum up all upon this second Query: Seeing that we can never be certain of
the particular Gesture used by Christ at the Institution of the Holy Sacrament:
Seeing his bare Example (supposing he did Sit) does not oblige us in Conscience
to Imitate it: Seeing they who urge his Example do not follow it themselves,
even in that particular they urge it for: Seeing Conformity to the Gesture
prescribed by Law, is a plain Conformity to the Example and Practice of Christ,
considered as to the Equity, Reason, and Spiritual Meaning and Instruction of
it. I think no Man can reasonably object against Kneeling, and scruple in
Conscience a Conformity to it, as being repugnant to the Example of our Lord.

Query III.
Whether Kneeling be not altogether Unsuitable and Repugnant to the Nature of
the Lord's Supper, as being no Table Gesture?
BEfore I proceed to the Case it self, it will be requisite to premise
something which may explain the true sense of it; and Discover upon what
Grounds and Reasons our Dissenting Brethren build their scruples against
Kneeling, as being no Table Gesture. By a Table Gesture we are to understand
thus much; That at the Lord's Supper we ought in their Judgment to use the same
Gesture as we do at our ordinary Meals and Tables, at our Civil Feasts and
Entertainments: And because diverse Gestures are used at Meals, according to the
different Modes and Customs of several Nations, therefore we are obliged to use
that at the Sacrament, which the Custom of our Country has prescribed at our
Ordinary and Civil Meals. Thus (says the Author of Altar Damascenum, a Stout
and Learned Champion for a Table Gesture, Altar. Dam. p. 762.
Sitting cross-legged as the Turks do at their Meals, would be amongst them (if
they were Converted) a Comely fashion of Receiving the Lord's Supper. Disput*
against Kneeling, p. 2. p. 56. arg. 4.
The Sacrament is a Supper, a Feast, a Banquet, and therefore requires a
Supper, a Feast, a Banquet-Gesture. And such a Gesture must be used as Stands
with the Custom of the Country. In no Nation was it ever held Comely to Kneel
at their Banquets, Abridgment p. 61. reply to Bp. Morton 3 Innoc. Cer. p. 37.
set forth in K. James's Reign.
or to Receive their food Kneeling. So that according to the sense of their own
Writers, and great Patrons of Siting, this is the reason why they question the
Lawfulness of Kneeling: That the Gesture at the Lord's Table ought to be the
same with that which we use and observe at our Ordinary Tables, according to
the Custom and Fashion of our Native Country wherein we live.

And then the full Import and meaning of the Query is this: Whether the nature
of the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, does not require and oblige us to Sit
and not Kneel, because Sitting and not Kneeling is the Ordinary Table Gesture,
according to the Mode and Fashion of England.

Here the Reader may observe, that this Argument for Sitting, drawn from the
nature of this Holy Feast, quite overthrows the two former Arguments drawn from
the express Command and Example of our Savior, and renders them useless and
unserviceable to their cause.

1. For they don't say we are obliged to use the same Gesture with our Lord,
but only a Table Gesture, though never so different from that which he used,
according to the Custom of our Country where we live. Various Gestures,
according to the Variety of Fashions and Usages of several Nations at their
Common Feasts, may be all Comely and Suitable to the Nature of this Holy Feast.
According to this Argument, therefore, we are not obliged to Sit, because
Christ did at the Sacrament; and then his bare Example is no Rule to us in this
matter. His Example was Governed and Guided by the Nature of the Sacrament, and
the Custom of the Jews.

Our Lord Instituted the Sacrament before the Paschal Feast was over, and he
continued in the same posture which he used at the Passover, say they, and that
was Sitting. Suppose this, what follows? Why therefore we are bound to Sit too,
after his Example. No, by no means, say I, unless it be the Custom of our
Country to Sit at our Meals, and Sitting be our Common Table Gesture: Which is
the strength of this Argument drawn from the Nature of the thing, if we may
believe what they say themselves.

2. Again, if the Nature of the Sacrament require a Table Gesture, and we are
obliged to use that in particular which stands with the Custom of our
Country, and the Gestures may be different according as their Customs differ,
then God has no where Commanded the use of any particular Gesture, nor obliged
all Christians in all places to observe one and the same.

3. And then Thirdly, we may Lawfully observe some things in the Worship of
God, for which we have no Command or Example in the Holy Scriptures, if this
Argument of the Table Gesture be good. And this principle, viz. that we ought
not to do any thing in the Worship of God, but what we have some Command or
Example for in Scripture, is the great battering Engine which has been
constantly employed against the Ceremonies enjoined by our Church, and it is a
Principle wherein the Mystery of Puritanisme does consist, Preface to his Sermon.
last Edit. 1681.
as Bishop Sanderson Notes. Therefore it behooves our Brethren not to be fond of
this Table Gesture, as they love the Life of their Cause. I am sure no greater
Argument can be afforded of a routed baffled Cause in the matter of Sitting at
the Sacrament, than to see the Patrons of it running up and down in Confusion,
and flying for Refuge sometime to the Command of Christ, then to his Example;
when driven out there, then to the Nature of the thing and Civil Customs, and
about again to the Example. For thus the Authors of the forementioned Tracts
do. Thus much being premised, I proceed to Consider the Question proposed; for
the Resolution whereof, I shall

1. Enquire into the Nature of the Holy Sacrament, that so we may truly
understand what Gesture is agreeable or repugnant to it.

2. Show that the Nature of the Lord's Supper does not absolutely require and
necessarily oblige us to observe a Common Table Gesture, in order to our worthy
Receiving.

3. That Kneeling is very Comely, and agreeable to the Nature of the Lord's
Supper, though no Table Gesture.

4. That the Primitive Church and Ancient Fathers had no such notion of the
necessity of a Table Gesture as is maintained and urged by Dissenters.

1. As to the Nature of the Sacrament, I shall endeavor to discover it under
these following Heads.

First, the Sacrament in the Holy Scripture is called the Lord's Table, and the
Lord's Supper, and and Banquet, by the Ancient Greek Fathers, because of that
Provision and Entertainment which our Lord has made for all worthy Receivers.
It is styled a Supper and a Feast, either because it was Instituted by Christ
at Supper-time, at night; or because it represents a Supper and a Feast: And so
it is not of the same Nature with a Civil and Ordinary Supper and Feast, though
it bear the same name. There is some resemblance between this Holy Feast and
Civil Feasts; and the showing wherein it lies, will in part explain its Nature.
There are three things Essential and Necessary to a Feast, and included in the
notion of it: Plenty, good Company, and Mirth. And upon the account of these,
the Sacrament is (considered in its own Nature) properly a Banquet, a Feast;
but then it is a Heavenly and Spiritual one, consisting of Spiritual Graces and
benefits, Communion with Christ and with all true believers, signified by, and
tendered under the outward Elements of Bread and Wine: and even in these three
particulars which are Essential to it, considered as a Feast, and are necessary
ingredients into all Feasts whatsoever, it very much differs from Civil and
Ordinary Feasts. For though there be Plenty, yet it does not consist of Variety
of Dishes, to gratify our Palats, or satisfy our Hunger, as other Feasts do,
and particularly the Passover did, where the Body was filled and Feasted as
well as the mind. The provision wherewith our Lord has Furnished out his
Table, is not of an Earthly and perishing, but of an Heavenly and Immortal
Nature, even the Body and Blood of Christ, which we Spiritually Feast upon.

Alas, if we only fix our Eyes and Thoughts upon what is placed on the Table,
and those small portions of Bread and Wine allotted us to Eat and Drink,
without lifting up our Hearts (as So St. Cypr. St. Chrysostom. and St. Aug.
expound this Exhort. of the Minister at the Communion. Cyp. de orat. Dom.
Chrysostom. Hom. de Encaeniis, Aug. de ver. Relig. c. 3.
our Church exhorts us to do, by the Minister, in her Communion-Office) to
those Heavenly and Invisible good things, couched under, and signified by the
outward Elements of Bread and Wine, what is there in all that we see that
deserves the name of a Feast, or can by the help of any figure (but an Irony)
be called by that name? Did ever any Man esteem that a Feast, where there was
not Meat enough to fill his Mouth, nor Drink enough to quench his thirst? It is
upon the account therefore of those Invisible and Spiritual good things,
wherewith the Souls, not the Bodies of worthy Communicants are Strengthened and
Refreshed (of which the Bread and Wine are but the Types and Shadows) that the
Sacrament is, and may truly be called a Feast or Banquet. And for this reason
St. Chrysostom. in Ps. 90. Greg. Naz. orat. 40. Athanasius, St. Cyril. Hierosol.
Catech. and others.
the Greek Fathers called it a Spiritual Feast, and the Table a Mystical Table;
and the Cup, the Cup of Mysteries: and the Sacrament, take it all together, was
by them Styled the Mystical Supper, the Mystery, and Mysteries, as Presenting
one thing to the Eye, and another to the Mind.

2. As Plenty is one necessary ingredient into the Nature of a Feast, so also
is Choice and Select Company. Feasts are made in expectation of Friends and
Acquaintance. A Man may Dine alone, but in Proper and Ordinary Speech, no Man
is said to Feast alone. Now though the Sacrament does resemble our Common
Feasts in this Particular (and therefore has obtained the name of Communion,
and the Guests Communicants, which Phrases do naturally import Number or
Society:) yet if we consider what the persons are that constitute this Society,
and with whom Communion is held, the Nature of this Spiritual Feast will
further appear.

And truly our Communion is with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the three
Divine Persons of the Holy Trinity; though principally our Lord Jesus, the
Master of this Feast, Ephesians. 2. 18.
in and through whom we all have access by one Spirit to the Father, as St.
Paul speaks. This high and inestimable privilege and Honor of being admitted
into the Presence of God, and holding a friendly Correspondence and Converse
with him at his Table, is founded on the Blood of Christ, which we thankfully
Commemorate at this Solemnity, by which we who were afar off are made nigh,
Ephesians. 2. 13.
as the same Divine Writer has it. Moreover, by Eating and Drinking at the
Lord's Table, we are United to, and hold Communion with all Faithful Christians
and worthy Communicants, the Members of his Mystical Body the Church, whom he
has redeemed and cleansed by his most precious Blood. And that which qualifies
a Man for such Communion, does not Consist in External Garbs or Ornaments of
the Body, but in Holy and Virtuous Dispositions of Soul, in a Penitent, Humble,
Charitable, Thankful, and Obedient Heart.

3. Another thing necessary to a Feast is Mirth and Joy, (which implies also
good discourse) and in this too the Sacrament resembles our Common Feasts. But
then the Joy is of a Spiritual Nature, and flows from different Causes.

Not from what we Taste and See, not from our Appetites and Phansies pleased and
tickled with the richness and Variety of Dishes which adorn the Table, nor from
our Blood and Spirits raised and fermented by generous Wines; but from Divine
and Heavenly Considerations. From the Boundless and Unaccountable Love of God
in sending his only Begotten and Beloved Son into the World, to lay down his
Life and shed his Blood as a propitiation for our Sins; from the wonderful
Condescension of our Dear Lord and Master, in undertaking this hard Task, in
appearing Clothed with our Flesh in the form of a Servant, and at last Humbling
himself to the Death of the Cross for our Sakes; from the Victory he has
gained for us over Death and Hell, and all the Spirits of Darkness; from the
miraculous Redemption he has wrought, and the Right and Title to Eternal Life,
which he has purchased for us Sinful Dust and Ashes, by his own most Precious
Blood. This is the secret Language and Discourse of every Devout Christian at
this Holy Feast; and with these kind of Meditations he refreshes and delights
himself. So that from the whole we may conclude, that the Lord's Supper is in
its own Nature truly and properly a Feast, though vastly different from Common
and Ordinary Feasts throughout, even in those things wherein it seems to be
like them. As to the several Names and Phrases by which the Nature of it is
described, they are figurative, and borrowed from Civil Entertainments: but
although it has received the same names, and is represented by Phrases that
properly suit to Ordinary Feasts, yet the Lord's Supper differs in its Nature
from Civil Banquets, as much as Heaven and Earth, Body and Spirit, differ in
theirs. As to the Bread and Wine which we see and taste, they are only Signs and
Types of the true Spiritual Feast, and serve to raise our minds to, and whet
the Appetites of our Souls after Celestial and Heavenly Enjoyments.

Thus much may suffice to inform us what the Nature of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is, considered barely as a Feast.

2. For a further Discovery of its Nature, we are to be minded that it is a
Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin, wherein we are particularly to Commemorate the
Death of Christ by way of expiation for the Sins of the World. 1 Cor. 11. 26.


3. It was Instituted in Honor of our Lord, our great Benefactor and Redeemer;
where we meet to preserve an Eternal memory of his Wondrous Works, to bless and
praise him, and speak good of his Name. And thus partaking of the Lord's Supper
is a proper Act of Christian Worship performed to our Savior. It Is the Worship
of God manifested in our Flesh, and of our Crucified Lord, who submitted
himself to a Vile and Tormenting Death for the sake of us Vile and Miserable
Sinners.

4. The Lord's Supper is a Mysterious Rite of Religious Worship, which as it
respects God the Father, has the Virtue and Efficacy of a Thanksgiving and a
Prayer, as the Sacrifices under the Law had. For our desires and affections may
be signified by Actions as well as Words, and by Ceremonies as well as Speech:
And with respect to this Notion and End of the Lord's Supper, Ignat. Ep. ad
Ephesians. Justin. Mar. in Dial. cum Tryph.
it was Anciently Styled the Liturgy and the Eucharist; which last name, as it
was given to it in the most early Ages of the Church, so it still retains the
same among all the Christian Churches to this day.

5. The Lord's Supper was Instituted to be a Foederal or Covenanting Rite
between God and all worthy Communicants: Luke 22. 19.
Where, by permitting us to Eat and Drink at his Table, 1 Cor. 11. 24.
he signifies that we are in a State of Peace and Friendship, and in a
Covenant Relation with him; and we by coming to his Table, and Eating and
Drinking in his presence, do own him to be our God and Savior, and in effect
plight our troth to him, and Swear Fidelity and Allegiance to him: we take the
Sacrament upon it (as we ordinarily say) that we will not henceforth live unto
our selves, but to him alone that Dyed for us, and gave himself for us an
Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a Sweet Smelling Savor.

6. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was Instituted for this further end,
viz. to be a means to Convey and Apply to us the Merits of that Sacrifice which
Christ offered for Sinners on the Cross; and as a Pledge to assure us thereof.

7. It was instituted to be a Sacred Bond of Unity and Concord among all
Christians, to engage and dispose us to Love one another, as our Lord Loved us,
who thought not his Life too dear, nor his Blood too much to part with, for our
Sakes.

This is a short, and, so far as it serves my present design, a full account of
the Nature of the Lord's Supper. If the Reader desire to see these things
(which I have but touched upon) more largely proved and explained, let him for
his satisfaction consult those two excellent Discourses (among many others)
that pass under these names, Set forth by 1. Dr. Patri^ 2. Dr. Sherlock.
viz. 1. The Christian Sacrifice. 2. Discourse of Religious Assemblies.

Howsoever, by what has been said it appears, that the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper is of a complicated Nature, and Instituted for various ends; that it is
vastly different both in its nature and ends from Civil and Ordinary Feasts:
And therefore I conclude that we are not at this Religious Feast to guide our
Selves by the Rules of Common Table-Fellowship, but by more Religious and
Spiritual Considerations. Which leads me to the second thing proposed for the
Resolution of the present Case.

2. That the Nature of the Lord's Supper does not absolutely require and
necessarily oblige us to observe a Table Gesture, in order to a right and
worthy Receiving of it. The Reasons that I shall offer for the Proof of this,
are these:

1. If the Nature of the Sacrament considered as a Feast necessarily requires a
Table Gesture, then the Nature of the Sacrament considered as a Feast equally
concludes for all other Formalities which are either Essential to all Civil
Feasts whatsoever, or to all Feasts as they obtain among us. For if Sitting be
necessary, purely because the Nature of a Feast requires it, then all other
Circumstances which the Nature of a Feast requires, will be equally necessary
too. But our Dissenting Brethren will by no means allow of this, nor think
themselves obliged to observe all other formalities, though equally suitable and
agreeable to the Nature of a Feast as Sitting is: Though for what good reason,
I am perfectly in the dark.

For 1. As they omit many things at the Sacrament that are as agreeable to the
Nature of a Feast as the Table Gesture is; So they observe several Modes and
Circumstances which are not agreeable to the nature of a Feast, as the Custom
of our Country stands. For instance, at our Common and Ordinary Feasts it is
very suitable and agreeable to Laugh, to Talk, and Discourse together; to
Congratulate one another welfare, to enquire of the State of absent Friends
and Acquaintance, to Sit with the Head Covered, to Eat plentifully and Drink
Frequently, to Carve and Drink to one another. It is further necessary and
convenient, that at such Feasts the Guests should be well attended with
Servants and Waiters, who are not allowed to Sit down at the Table with those
who are Invited. It Is agreeable that the Guests should, if they please, help
themselves and their Friends where they like. And yet these (and many other
things of this Nature) though very suitable to, and commonly practiced at our
Ordinary Feasts, are not allowed of, nor practiced by, nor urged as necessary
to be observed at the Sacrament by our Dissenting Brethren. But why they should
plead for and urge the necessity of a Common Table Gesture as being agreeable
to the Nature of a Feast or a Banquet, and at the same time think there lies no
necessity at all upon them to observe other Formalities equally agreeable to
the Nature of Civil Feasts, and warranted by custom as much as Sitting, is the
great knot of the Question, and that which puzzles me, I confess, to unty.

2. They observe several Modes and Circumstances at the Sacrament, which are
not agreeable to the Nature of a Feast or Supper, nor to the customary way of
Feasting among us. For example: The Sacrament (say they) is a Feast, a Supper,
and requires a Feast, a Supper-Gesture; and then too (say I) it requires a
Supper-time. It is called in Scripture the Lord's Supper, and it was Instituted
the same night in which he was betrayed; and it is clear that our Lord
Administered it at Even, and that late, at the close of the Paschal Feast. Now
the Nature of a Supper, according to Common use and acception, requires the
Evening or Night, as the proper and peculiar season for it; and yet our
Dissenting Brethren make no scruple of Communicating at Noon.

It Is not agreeable to the Nature of a Feast, that one of the Guests, and the
Principal one too, should fill out the Wine, and break the Bread, and
distribute it to the rest of the Society; but this the Dissenters generally
allow of and practice at the Holy Communion. It Is not agreeable to the Nature
of a Feast, to Sit from the Table, dispersed up and down the Room. In all
public Feasts there are several Tables provided, when one is not big enough to
receive the Guests; and yet the Dissenters generally receive in their Pews,
scattered up and down the Church; and think one Table is sufficient, though not
capable of receiving the twentieth part of the Communicants, in some large
Parishes and numerous Assemblies: And where they are few in number, that they
may come up to and Sit at the Table, they generally are against it (especially
the Presbyterians) and think they are not obliged to observe that formality,
though constantly practiced at Common and Civil Entertainments. It Is by no
means agreeable to the nature of a Feast to be Sorrowful. To Mourn and Grieve
at a Feast, is as Indecent and Unsuitable, as to Laugh at a Funeral. But sure
our Dissenting Brethren will not say, that to come to the Sacrament with a
Penitent and a broken Spirit, to come with a hearty Sorrow for all our Sins,
which caused much Pain and Torment to our Dearest and Greatest Friend, our
ever-Blessed Redeemer: To reflect upon the Agonies of his Soul in the Garden,
the Bitterness of his deadly Cup, the Torture he endured on the Cross, with a
deep Sympathy and Trouble for the occasion, they will not surely, I say, affirm
that such a disposition of Heart and Mind is improper and unsuitable to the
Nature of this Holy Feast which we Solemnize in Commemoration of his Death for
our sakes. I make no doubt but all Pious Dissenters bring along with them to
the Sacrament such a temper; but this they ought not to do, if their Rule hold
good, viz. That at this Feast we ought to be guided by the Rules of Common
Table-Fellowship.

2. The Nature of the Lord's Supper does not necessarily require a Common
Table Gesture, because it is not of the same Nature with Common and Ordinary
Feasts. It is very ill Logic, as well as ill Divinity to argue from Natural
and Civil things to Spiritual; to conclude that because they agree in their
names, they are of the same Nature, For example: When any Man, who has led a
loose, sensual, wicked Life, is awakened and excited by the Grace of God to
consider and take up, to mind Heavenly things, and to breath after God, and
Christ, and Eternity; to alter his mind and his manners, and lead quite another
Life from what he did before, this Person is in Scripture Phrase said to be
Regenerate and Born again. But if we would go about to judge of the true Nature
of Regeneration and the new Birth purely by the Correspondency it holds with
the Natural Birth, and argue from the Natural to the Spiritual, we should
Entertain very gross and silly Conceptions of Regeneration, and greatly mistake
the Nature of it. How ridiculous would it be to prescribe the same Rules to be
observed by a New Convert, or a Newborn Babe in a Spiritual Sense, in Order to
his Spiritual nourishment and growth in Grace, as are prescribed and practiced
toward Infants and Newborn Babes in a Natural Sense for the maintenance and
preservation of their Natural Life, and Strength; as, that they should be
Swathed, and enter into a Milk-Dyet! And yet this is every way as reasonable,
as to prescribe Sitting as necessary to the worthy Receiving of the Sacrament,
which is a Spiritual Feast, because it is agreeable to the Nature of Civil
Feasts: Or (which amounts to the same thing) because it is called a Feast,
therefore it is of the same Nature with Ordinary and Common Feasts; and
Consequently, such a Gesture and Behavior as is necessary and requisite to
these, is also requisite and necessary to the Lord's Supper.

3. The Nature of the Lord's Supper, considered as a Feast, does not
necessarily require and oblige us to use a Common Tale-Gesture, in order to
right and worthy Receiving, because, in the Judgment and Practice of numerous
Dissenters, it may be worthily Received Standing. Thus the Presbyterians (and
all their Writers who have engaged against Kneeling) do not condemn Standing as
Sinful and Unlawful, nor esteem such as use it unworthy Receivers on that
account; and yet Standing is no Common Table Gesture.

If any should yet urge the necessity of Sitting as the only agreeable Gesture
to the Nature of the Sacrament considered as a Feast, Object.
and that to use any other Gesture would Profane the Ordinance;

I offer this to be considered as a good Answer, Answer.
That the Passover was called a Feast by God himself who Instituted it, Exodus
12. 14.
and yet he Commanded the Children of Israel to Celebrate it in Egypt after
this manner; Ver. 11.
with their Loins Girt, their Shoes on their Feet, and their Staff in their
Hands: All Signs of have indeed, but no Feast or Table-Gestures either among
the Jews or the Egyptians. To say that God enjoined Gestures unsuitable to the
Nature of that Ordinance, is to call in Question the Wisdom, and the Knowledge,
and the Truth of God, as not Acting upon a right understanding of, and in
Conformity to the true Nature of things: it is all one as to suppose, that God,
after he had Created a reasonable Creature, would enjoin him to do something
that was disagreeable to his Nature and Reason. On the other hand, to say that
the Feast of the Passover did in its Nature admit of several Gestures, is to
yield all that I desire; for then the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, will
admit of several too, and Consequently does not oblige us to observe only a
Feast-Gesture for the due Celebration of it.

3. Kneeling is very Comely, and Agreeable to the Nature of the Lord's Supper,
though no Table Gesture. Which I hope will be made evident to every Honest and
Unbyassed Mind (which Impartially seeks after Truth) by these following
considerations:

1. Kneeling is allowed on all Hands to be a very fit and suitable Gesture for
Prayer and Praise, and very apt to express our Reverence, Humility, and
Gratitude by, and Consequently very fit to be used at the Holy Sacrament, and
agreeable to its Nature. This will appear, if we reflect upon what has been
delivered concerning the Nature and Ends of the Lord's Supper. For at the
Sacrament we express that by Actions (as I hinted before) which at other times
we do by Words; and the Lord's Supper is a Solemn Rite of Christian Worship,
which implies Prayer and Praise. It includes all the Parts of Prayer. By
partaking of the Signs of his Body broken, and Blood shed for our Sins, we do
Commemorate, Represent, and Show forth to God the Father, the Sacrifice which
his Dearly Beloved Son made upon the Cross; we Feast upon the memorials of the
great Sin-Offering: And in so doing, we make an open Confession and
Acknowledgment of our Guilt and Unworthiness to God, and we plead with him in
the Virtue of his Sons Blood which was shed for us, for the Pardon and
Remission of all our Sins. We further Humbly entreat him to be Propitious and
Favorable to us, and to bestow upon us all those benefits which our Lord
purchased with his most Precious Blood.

We Intercede with him too at the Communion for the whole Church, that all our
Fellow Christians and true Members of his Body may Receive Remission of their
Sins, and all other benefits of his Passion. And as Eating and Drinking at his
Table, is a Visible and Powerful Prayer in the sight of God; so it is a Visible
Act of Praise and Thanksgiving, whereby we let our Heavenly Father see that we
retain a deep and lively sense of his Unexpressible Love, in sending his only
begotten Son into the World to Dye for us that we might Live through him. And
that which enlivens our Faith, and emboldens our hopes of finding Favor and
Acceptance at his Hands at this time above others, is this, viz. Our Prayers
and Praises are not only put up in the Name of Christ, but presented, and as
it were Writ in his Blood, and offered to God over the great Propitiatory
Sacrifice. All this our Actions signify and speak, when we Eat the Consecrated
Bread, and Drink the Cup of Blessing at the Lord's Table. If therefore these
things be True (and I think no body who understands what he does when he
partakes of the Lord's Supper will gainsay it) then Kneeling must be judged as
fitting and convenient to be used at such a time, when we signify our desires
and affections by external Rites and Ceremonies of Gods appointment, as when we
do it by Words, that is, when we say our Prayers.

2. Our Dissenting Brethren (and all good Christians) will Grant, that our
Blessed Savior ought to be Worshipped and Adored by all worthy Communicants,
inwardly in their Hearts and Souls, when they Receive the Tokens and Pledges of
his tender and exceeding great Love in laying down his Life for the Sins of the
whole World. And if so, then whatsoever is very apt and meet to express the
inward esteem and veneration of our minds by, cannot be thought Unsuitable and
Repugnant to the Nature of the Lord's Supper: Because that is a Religious Feast
Instituted in Honor of our Lord, and is a Solemn Act of Christian Worship
performed to our Crucified Savior. Our meeting together at this Holy Feast in
Obedience to his Commands, to Commemorate his Death, and tell of all his
wondrous Works; perpetuate the fame of our great Benefactor (as much as in us
lies) throughout all Ages, is an External mark of the Honor and respect we
bear toward him in our minds, and is, properly speaking, that which we call
Public Worship. Since to Bow our Knees then, is allowed to be a proper mode of
public Worship, and an External Sign of Reverence; why should an adoring
posture be thought Unmeet and Unsuitable to the Sacrament, which in its nature
imports Worship and Adoration?

3. No good Christian, of what Party or Persuasion soever, will deny, but that
to lift our Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and to Employ our Tongues in Uttering the
Praises of our Blessed Redeemer, even in the Act of Receiving, is very
agreeable to the Nature of the Sacrament; why then should Kneeling be thought
Unsuitable, which is no more but only Glorifying God and our Blessed Savior
with another part of our Body? Why should the Gesture be scrupled at more than
the Voice, or the Bowing of my Knees be esteemed incongruous and unfitting, any
more than moving my Tongue, or raising my Hands and Eyes to Heaven? Especially
if we consider, that the high degree of Honor and Glory to which our Lord is
advanced in the Heavens by God the Father, as the reward of his Humble and
Submissive Obedience here on Earth, challenges from us all manner of Respect
and Reverence both of Soul and Body, He Humbled himself, and became Obedient
into Death, even the Death of the Cross Wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and given him a Name which is above every Name, Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should Bow, etc. and that every Tongue
should Confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

4. The Holy Sacrament was Instituted in Remembrance of our Blessed Saviors
Death and Sufferings: And therefore I request all our Dissenting Brethren to
Consult one place of Scripture concerning our Saviors Bodily Gesture or
Deportment in the Heat and Extremity of his Passion, wherein he presented
himself before his Father in his Agony and Bloody Sweat in the Garden. Being in
an Agony, he offered up this Prayer to his Father: Luke 22. 42, 44.
If thou be willing, remove this Cup from me: Nevertheless, not my Will, but
thine be done. But after what manner, or in what Gesture of Body* did his
perplexed Soul utter these earnest Supplications? Why, Kneeling, (...) Ver. 41.
or fixing his Knees upon the Earth. Now though we may remember and meditate on
our Saviors Sufferings in the Garden, when his Soul was so exceeding
Sorrowful, when he was reduced to such a Weak and low Estate as to stand in
need of Comfort and Support from an Angel; Ver. 43.
though, I say, this may be done Sitting, yet sure no Sober and Considering
Mind will say, that to Celebrate the Memory of these Sufferings with bended
Knees (as his were) on the Earth, is an Improper and Unsuitable behavior to be
used at the Sacrament, where our proper work is to Commemorate the Death and
Sufferings of our Savior, and particularly these among the rest.

5. The Sacrament was Instituted to be a means of Receiving the benefits of his
Death and Passion, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. If we do but Consider
what invaluable Blessings we expect to receive by our worthy partaking of the
Consecrated Bread and Wine at the Table of our Lord, (such as the forgiveness
of all our Sins, the plentiful Communications of his Grace and Spirit, and a
Right and Title to Eternal Life) we cannot think Kneeling an Unmeet and
Unbecoming Gesture in the Act of Receiving the Outward Signs and Pledges of
this Inward and Invisible Grace* If a Graceful Hearty sense of Gods infinite
mercy through the Merits and Sufferings of his Son, and of the manifold rich
benefits which our Lord has purchased with his most Precious Blood; if a mind
deeply Humbled under the sense of our own Guilt, and Unworthiness to Receive
any mercy at all from the Hands of our Creator and Sovereign Lord, whom we have
by numberless and Heinous Crimes so highly provoked and incensed against us; If
such an inward temper and disposition of Soul becomes us at this Holy Feast,
(which I think no Man will deny) then surely the most Humble and reverential
Gesture of our Body will become us too. Why should not a Submissive Lowly
deportment of Body suit with this Solemnity, as well as a Humble Lowly Mind?
See the Declaration at the end of the Communion-Service, in the Book of Common
Prayer.
And this is that which our Church Declares to be the end and design of her
Injunction, in requiring all her Communicants to Kneel, viz. for a
Signification of an Humble and Grateful acknowledgment of the Benefits of
Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers.

6. They who urge Sitting as necessary, and the only agreeable Gesture to the
Nature of the Lord's Supper, because it is the Common Table Gesture, must make
the Sacrament either the same with an Ordinary and Common Feast, or only like
it in some respects, and unlike it in others; as every like is not the same. To
make it the same, is directly to unhallow and profane the Ordinance; 1 Cor 11,
29.
it is to Eat and Drink unworthily, not discerning the Lord's Body, as St. Paul
charges the Corinthian^. For it is clear from that Discourse of the Apostle,
that their not distinguishing between the Lord's Supper, and a Common Meal or
Supper, was their great fault; which he sharply reproves them for, as that
which rendered them unworthy Communicants. Which will appear to any that will
take the pains to examine the matter. Vid. 20, 21, 22. and compare them with
33, 34.


If the Lord's Supper be not the same with an Ordinary Feast, how comes it to
pass that the same Gesture must be necessarily used at both? If they differ in
their whole nature, then that which is agreeable to the nature of the one, must
be Repugnant to the nature of the other. If they agree in some respects only,
and differ in others, but not in their whole nature, then Kneeling may be as
proper and suitable in some respects, as Sitting is in others. For though the
Civil Custom of a Table Gesture be allowed to strike some stroke in a Spiritual
Ordinance, where there is Eating and Drinking; yet other respects in the Lord's
Supper have a stroke too, and that the greatest, if we duly weigh and consider
the ends of its Institution, which I have already described. And if upon such
Examination it appear, that Kneeling, or an adoring Gesture, holds fitting
Correspondence with the principal respects and ends of the Lord's Supper, then
the Banqueting Gesture, though Lawful and Suitable in some less respects, must
and ought in reason to give place; at least, it ought not to be Insisted on as
the only agreeable and necessary Gesture, without which we cannot worthily
Communicate.

Whatsoever Gesture answers the principal respects and ends of this Holy Feast,
best Suits to its Nature, and consequently ought in reason to be best esteemed
of, and sway more with us than any other, if we will wholly guide our selves by
the Nature of the thing. And that Kneeling or an adoring posture does best
answer the Nature and Ends of the Sacrament, I think is clear and undeniable,
if the account I have given of the Sacrament be good. I am sure, howsoever,
that there is no reason why Sitting should justle our Kneeling as Sinful, and
Unsuitable to the Nature of this Holy Ordinance. Annot. in Luke 22. 14.
Let Mr. Cartwright, a Learned Advocate for Nonconformists, be heard in this
matter, and determine it: A Man must not (says he) refuse to Receive the
Sacrament Kneeling, when he cannot have it otherwise.

4. The Primitive Church and Ancient Fathers had no such notion of the
necessity of a Table Gesture, as is maintained and urged by Dissenters at
present; which will appear from those Names and Titles they gave to this Holy
Feast. And First, I observe from the Learned Mr. Mede, that for the space of
200 years after Christ, there is not the least mention made of the name Table
in any of their Writings. Can. Apost. 2. St. Ignat. in 3 Epistles ad Philad.
Trallon. Ephesians. Justin Mart. Irenaeus.
They call the place on which the Consecrated Elements stood, the Altar; and
the Eucharist, An Oblation and a Sacrifice, because at this Solemnity they did
Commemorate and Represent that Sacrfice which Christ once offered on the Cross
for the Sins of the World. Now the Eucharist conceived under the Notion of a
Sacrifice, and the place on which it was offered of an Altar, does not
necessarily require a Table Gesture; there is not that strict Connection and
Relation between an Altar or a Sacrifice, and a Common Table Gesture, as is
conceived to be between a Feast or Table, and a Feast or Table Gesture.

2. The Primitive Christians and Ancient Fathers of the Church did not
entertain any such conceits about the necessity of a Common Table Gesture, as
our Dissentersdo. As, that Kneeling or an adoring Gesture is against the
Dignity of Guests, Dispute against Kneeling, Arg. 1. p. 6. p. 26, 27, 28, 31,
37.
and Debarrs us the Privileges and Prerogatives of the Lord's Table, such as
Social admittance and Social Entertainment; that it is against the purpose of
Christ, whose intetion was to Dignify us by Setting us at his Table; and much
more of this Nature, and to this effect. Now the Primitive Church little dreamt
of this Dignity and Privilege of Communicants, of this purpose of Christ, and
of this kind of Fellowship and Familiarity with him; as the Phrases they use,
and the August and Venerable Titles they give the Holy Sacrament, even when
they consider it as a Feast and Supper, and speak of the Table on which it was
Celebrated, plainly demonstrate. They call it, as St. Paul does, the Lord's
Supper, the Kingly, Royal, and most Divine Supper; which Import Deference,
Distance, and Respect, on our Parts; the Dreadful Sacrifice, the Venerable and
Unbloody Sacrifice, the Wonderful and Terrible Mysteries; the Royal, Spiritual,
Holy, Formidable, Tremendous Table. The Bread and Wine after Consecration, are
in their Language called the most Mysterious, most Holy Food and Nutriment, the
most Holy things; and the place where the Table stood, the most Holy part of
the Temple, in allusion to that of the Jewish Temple, to which the Jews paid
the highest Reverence. The Bread in particular they Styled the Bread of God;
the Cup, the Holy and Mysterious, the Royal and Dreadful Cup.

The Primitive Bishops and Holy Fathers advise the Communicants to Reverence
these Holy Mysteries, to come with Fear and Trembling, with Sorrow and Shame,
with silence and downcast Eyes, to keep their Joy within, and to approach the
Table with all the Signs and Expressions of Reverence and Humility imaginable.
How can these Speeches consist with that Social, Familiar carriage at the
Sacrament, which the Patrons of the Table Gesture contend for, as the
Privilege of Guests and the Prerogative of the Lord's Table? For a conclusion
of this whole matter, I desire our Nonconforming Brethren seriously to consider
two or three Questions which I shall propound to them, and endeavor to frame
an Honest and Impartial Answer, as in the Presence of God, who searches our
Hearts, and tries our Reins. They are not of a Captious Nature, started to
puzzle the Cause, or for the sake of Contention (God knows my Heart, I have no
such designs through this whole Discourse) but they are plain, and easy to be
resolved almost at first sight.

Qu. I. Whether of two or three Gestures which are all agreeable to the Nature
of the Sacrament, any one is not to be chosen and used by us, when we cannot use
another without breaking the Peace and Unity of that Church wherein we live?

Qu. II. Whether it can consist with Piety or Prudence, to Expose your Selves
and Families to Danger, and the lash of the Law, when nothing is Commanded but
what is consistent with the Law of God, and agreeable to the Nature of the
Sacrament, though not to your Phansies and desires?

Qu. III. Whether we are not, as Christians, obliged by the Law of God, and the
example of our Savior, to deny our Selves many things, Romans 15. 2. 3, 8.
that are otherwise Lawful for us to do and use, and are highly pleasing and
grateful to us, for the Good and Edification of our Neighbor? If so, How much
more, when the public good and welfare of both Church and State depends upon
such self-denial?

Qu. IV. Whether it be Piously done of you to choose never to Receive the
Sacrament, and so deprieve your Selves of the Spiritual Benefit of that
Heavenly Feast, rather then part with a Civil Circumstance, such as a
Table Gesture is?

It is the Custom of our Country to Sit at Feasts; but few men are so mad as to
refuse to Eat Standing, and go Hungry away when they have no room to Sit down.
Why should we not be as Prudent at this Spiritual Feast, in the Concerns of our
Souls, as we are in those of our Bodies.

Put the case we were strictly prohibited by the Law of the Land the use of a
Table or a Table-cloth at this Holy Feast, and we could not receive with that
Convenience as now we may; would you end your days in a continual refusal, and
never receive the Sacrament? I don't know how far Passion and Prejudice, and
the heat of Disputation may blind and transport Men; but if they will calmly
consider this matter, and hearken to Reason, they will find nothing to justify
the total neglect of this Ordinance by. I am very apt to think they will be of
my mind: for I declare to all the World, rather than not Receive at all the
Comfortable Sacrament of our Blessed Saviors Body and Blood. I will Receive it
on a Tombstone, on the ground, in a Church, or in a Field, if all other things
that are Essential to it be rightly observed and performed. If any of our
Dissenting Brethren shall upon this Question think as I do, viz. that there is
no absolute necessity of a Table in this case, which the Custom of our Country
requires at Ordinary Feasts; He will also at the same time see there is no
absolute necessity of a Table Gesture, and that we may Receive worthily without
either the one or the other.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England.

