Kalendarium Hortense: OR, THE GARDENERS ALMANAC, DIRECTING What he is to do
Monthly throughout the Year. AND What Fruits and Flowers are in Prime.

The second Edition, with many useful Additions.

By JOHN EVELYN Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society.

Virg. Geo. 2. -- Labor actus in orbem.
LONDON, Printed by Io. Martyn and Ia. Allestry, Printers to the Royal Society,
and are to be sold at their Shops in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXVI.

TO ABRAHAM COWLEY Esquire
Sir,
THis Second Edition of my Hortulan Calendar is due to you, mindful of the
honor you once conferred on it, when you were pleased to suspend your nobler
Raptures, and think it worthy your transcribing. It appears now with some
advantages which it then wanted; because it had not that of publishing to the
World, how infinitely I magnify your contempt of (not to say) revenge upon it;
whilst you still continue in the possession of your Self, and of that repose
which few men understand, in exchange for those pretty miseries you have
essayed: O the sweet Evenings and Mornings, and all the Day besides which are
yours, -- while Cowley's made
The happy Tennant of the Shade!
And the Sun in his Garden, gives him all he desires, and all that he would
enjoy: the purity of visible Objects, and of true Nature before she was
vitiated by Imposture or Luxury! You gather the first Roses of the Spring, and
Apples of Autumn: Prim^ vere rosam, atque autumno carpere poma.
And as the Philosopher in Seneca, desired only Bread and Herbs to dispute
felicity with Jupiter; You vie happiness in a thousand easy, and sweet
Diversions; not forgetting the innocent Toils which You cultivate; the Leisure
and the Liberty, the Books, and Meditations, and above all, the learned and
choice Friendships that you enjoy: Who would not, like You, Cacher sa vie?
'Twas the wise Impress of a Balzac, You give it luster and interpretation: I
swear to You, Sir, it is what in the World I most inwardly breath after, and
pursue, not to say that I envy Your felicity, delivered from the gilded
impertinences of life, to enjoy the moments of a solid and pure Contentment;
since those who know how usefully You employ this glorious Recess, must needs
be forced either to imitate, or, as I do, to celebrate Your Example.

I. EVELYN.

INTRODUCTION TO THE CALENDAR.
AS Paradise (though of Gods own Planting) Genesis 2.15.
was no longer Paradise then the Man was put into it, to dress it and to keep
it; so, nor will our Gardens (as near as we can contrive them to the
resemblance of that blessed Abode) remain long in their perfection, unless they
are also continually cultivated. But when we have so much celebrated the life
and felicity of an excellent Gardener, as to think it preferable to all other
diversions whatsoever; it is not because of the leisure which he enjoys above
other men; ease and opportunity which ministers to vain and insignificant
delights; such as Fools derive from sensual objects: We dare hardily pronounce
it, there is not amongst Men a more laborious life then is that of a good
Gardeners; but because a labor full of tranquillity and satisfaction; Natural
and Instructive, and such as (if any) contributes to Piety and Contemplation,
Experience, Health, and Longaevity, munera nondum intellecta Deum: In sum, a
condition it is, furnished with the most innocent, laudable, and purest of
earthly felicities, and such as does certainly make the nearest approaches to
that Blessed state, where only they enjoy all things without pains; so as those
who were led only by the light of Nature, because they could fancy none more
glorious, thought it worthy of entertaining the Souls of their departed Heroes,
and most illustrious of Mortals.

But to return to the Labor, because there is nothing excellent which is to be
attained without it: A Gardeners work is never at an end; It begins with the
Year, and continues to the next: He prepares the Ground, and then he Sows it;
after that he Plants, and then he gathers the Fruits; but in all the
intermedial spaces, he is careful to dress it; so as Columella, speaking of
this continual assiduity, tells us, A Gardener is not only to consider
praetermissas duodecim horas, De R. R. li. ix.
sed annum periisse, nisi sua quaque quod instat effecerit: Quare, necessaria
est (says he) Menstrui cujusque officii monitio ea, quae pendet ex ratione
syderum coeli: and the Poet, -- tam sunt Arcturi Sydera nobis,
Hoedorumque dies servandi, and lucidus anguis;
Quam quibus in patriam ventosa per aequora vectis
Pontus, and Ostriferi fauces tentantur Abydi. Geor. 1.

All which duly weighed, how precious the time is, how praecipitous the
occasion, how many things to be done in their just Season, and how intolerable
a confusion will succeed the smallest neglect, after once a Ground is in order,
we thought we should not attempt an unacceptable Work, if here we endeavored
to present our Gardeners with a complete Cycle of what is requisite to be done
throughout every Month of the Year: We say, each Month; because by dividing
it into Parts so distinct, the Order in which they shall find each particular
to be disposed, may not only render the work more facile and delightful; but
redeem it from that extreme perplexity, which for want of a constant and
uniform Method, we find does so universally distract the vulgar sort of Them:
They know not (for the most part) the Seasons when things are to be done; and
when at any time they come to know, there often falls out so many things to be
done on the sudden, that some of them must of necessity be neglected for that
whole Year, which is the greatest detriment to this Mystery, and frequently
irrecoverable.

We are yet far from imposing (by any thing we have here alleged concerning
these Menstrual Periods) those nice and hypercritical Puntillos which some
Astrologers, and such as pursue their Rules, seem to oblige our Gardeners to;
as if, forsooth, all were lost, and our pains to no purpose, unless the Sowing
and the Planting, the Cutting and the Pruning, were performed in such and such
an exact minute of the Moon: Col. de R. R. l. 9. c. 364.
In hac autem Ruris disciplina non desideratur ejusmodi scrupulositas. There
are indeed some certain Seasons, and suspecta tempora, which the prudent
Gardener ought carefully (as much as in him lies) to prevent: But as to the
rest, let it suffice that he diligently follow the Observations which (by great
Industry) we have collected together, and here present him, as so many
Synoptical Tables calculated for his Monthly use, to the end he may pretermit
nothing which is under his Inspection, and is necessary, or distract his
Thoughts and Employment before the Seasons require it.

And now, however This may seem but a Trifle to some who esteem Books by the
bulk, not the benefit; let them forbear yet to despise these few ensuing Pages:
For never was any thing of this pretense more fully and ingenuously imparted; I
shall not say to the regret of all our Mercinary Gardeners, because I have much
obligation to some above that Epithete; M. Rose, Gardener to His Majesty, and
lately at Essexhouse to Her Grace the Duchess of Somerset; and M. Turner,
formerly of Wimbleton in Surrey; who being certainly amongst the most expert of
their Profession in England, are no less to be celebrated for their free
communications to the Public, by diverse Observations of theirs, which have
furnished to this Design. And it is from the Result of very much Experience,
and an extraordinary inclination to cherish so innocent and laudable a
Diversion, and to incite an Affection in the Nobless of this Nation toward it,
that I begin to open to them so many of the interior Secrets, and most precious
Rules of this Mysterious Art, without Imposture, or invidious Reserve. The very
Catalogue of Fruits and Flowers, for the Orchard and the Parterre, will
gratify the most innocent of the Senses, and whoever else shall be to seek a
rare and universal choice for his Plantation.

Touching the Method, it is so obvious, that there needs no farther direction;
and the Consequent will prove so certain, that a Work of the busiest pains is
by this little Instrument rendered the most facile and agreeable, as by which
you shall continually preserve your Garden in that perfection of beauty and
luster, without confusion or prejudice: Nor indeed could we think of a more
comprehensive Expedient, whereby to assist the frail and torpent Memory through
so multifarious and numerous an Employment (the daily subject of a Gardiners
care) then by the Economy and Discipline which we have here consigned it to,
and which our Industrious Gardener may himself be continually Improving from
his own Observations and Experience. In the mean time, we have at the instance
of very many Persons, who have been pleased to acknowledge the effects of a
former less perfect Impression, thought good to publish this second Edition in
a smaller Volume, that as an Enchiridion it may be the more ready and useful;
but the Calendar might be considerably augmented, and recommend it self to a
more Universal use, by taking in the Monthly Employments of all the parts of
Agriculture, as they have been begun to us in Columella, Palladius, Col. de R.
R. lib 11. c. 11.
de Serres, Augustino Gallo, Vincenzo Tanara, Pall. lib. 1. Tit. 1.
our Tusser, Markham, and others; especially if well and judiciously applied to
the Climate and several Countries: but it were here besides our Institution,
nor would the Pages contain them; what is yet found vacant has been purposely
left, that our Gardener may supply as he finds cause; for which reason likewise
we have ranged both the Fruits and Flowers in Prime after somewhat a promiscuous
Order, and not after the letters of the Alphabet, that the Method might be
pursued with the least disorder. Lastly,

The Fruits and Flowers in Prime are to be as well considered in relation to
their lasting and continuance, as to their maturity and beauty.

J. E.

Kalendarium Hortense.
JANUARY
Has xxxj days, long -- 8h-0m

Sun rises 8h-0m Sets 4h-0m Note, that for the Rising and Setting of the Sun,
and Length of the days, I compute from the first of every Month, London Lat.


To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
TRench the Ground, and make it ready for the Spring: prepare also Soil, and
use it where you have occasion: Dig Borders, etc. uncover as yet Roots of
Trees, where Ablaqueation is requisite.

Plant Quick-sets, and Transplant Fruit Trees, if not finished: Set Vines, and
begin to prune the old: Prune the branches of Orchard-fruit-trees; especially
the long planted, and that toward the decrease: but for such as are newly
planted, they need not be disbranched till the Sap begins to stir, that so the
wound may be healed with the scar, and stub, which our frosts do frequently
leave: In this work cut off all the shoot of August, unless the nakedness of
the place incline you to spare it: Consult my French Gardener part 1. sect. 3.
for this is a most material Address: You may now begin to Nail, and trim your
Wall-fruit, and Espaliers.

Cleanse Trees of Moss, etc. the Weather moist.

Gather Cyons for Graffs before the buds sprout; and about the later end, Graff
them in the Stock, Pears, Cherries and Plums, and remove your Kirnel-stocks to
more commodious distances in your Nursery, cutting off the top-root: Set Beans,
Pease, etc.

Sow also (if you please) for early Colly-flowers.

Sow Chervil, Lettuce, Radish, and other (more delicate) Salletings; if you
will raise in the Hot-bed.

In over wet, or hard weather, cleanse, mend, sharpen and prepare Garden-tools.

Turn up your Bee-hives, and sprinkle them with a little warm and sweet Wort;
do it dexterously.

Fruits in Prime, and yet lasting.
Apples.
KEntish-pepin, Russet-pepin, Golden-pepin, French-pepin, Kirton-pepin,
Holland-pepin, Iohn-apple, Winter-Queening, Marigold, Harvey-apple, Pome-water,
Pomeroy, Golden-Doucet, Reineting, Lones-Pearmain, Winter-Pearmain, etc.

Pears.
Winter- Musk (bakes well) Winter- Norwich (excellently baked) Winter-
Bergamot, Winter- Bon-crestien, both Mural: the great Surrein, etc.

JANUARY
Has xxxj. days, long -- 8h-0m

Sun rises 8h-0m Sets 4h-0m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
SEt up your Traps for Vermin; especially in your Nurseries of Kernels and
Stones, and amongst your Bulbous-roots: About the middle of this Month, plant
your Anemony-roots, and Ranunculus's, which you will be secure of, without
covering, or farther trouble: Preserve from too great, and continuing Rains (if
they happen) Snow, and Frost, your choicest Anemonies, and Ranunculus's sowed
in September or October for earlier Flowers: Also your Carnations, and such
Seeds as are in peril of being washed out, or over chilled and frozen; covering
them under shelter, and striking off the Snow where it lies too weighty; for it
certainly rots, and bursts your early-set Anemonies and Ranunculus's, etc.
unless planted now in the Hot-bed; for now is the Season, and they will flower
even in London. Toward the end, earth-up, with fresh and light mould, the
Roots of those Auriculas which the frosts may have uncovered; filling up the
chinks about the sides of the Pots where your choicest are set: but they need
not be housed; it is a hardy Plant.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
WInter- Aconite, some Anemonies, Winter- Cyclamen, Black- Hellebor,
Brumal-Hyacinth, Oriental-Iacinth, Levantine-Narcissus, Hepatica, Prim-roses,
Laurus-tinus, Mezereon, Praecoce Tulips, etc. especially, if raised in the
Hot-bed. Note,

That both these Fruits, and Flowers, are more early, or tardy, both as to
their prime Seasons of eating, and perfection of blowing, according as the
Soil, and Situation are qualified by Nature, or Accident. Note also,

That in this Recension of Monthly Flowers, it is to be understood for the
whole period that any Flower continues, from its first appearing, to its final
withering.

FEBRUARY
Has xxviij days, long -- 09h-24m

Sun rises 07h-13m Sets 04h-45m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
PRune Fruit Trees, and Vines, as yet; For now is your Season to bind, plash,
nail, and dress, without danger of frost: This to be understood of the most
tender and delicate Wall-fruit, not finished before; do this before this buds
and bearers grow turgid; and yet in the Nectarine and like delicate
Mural-Fruit, the later your Pruning, the better, whatever has been, and still
is, the contrary custom. Remove Graffs of former years Graffing. Cut and lay
Quick-sets; and trim up your Palisade Hedges, and Espaliers. Plant Vines as
yet, other Shrubs, Hops, etc.

Set all sorts of Kernels and stony Seeds. Also sow Beans, Pease, Radish,
Parsneps, Carrots, Onions, Garlic, etc. and plant Potatoes in your worst
ground.

Now is your Season for Circumposition by Tubs or Baskets of Earth, and for
laying of Branches to take root. You may plant forth your Cabbage-plants.

Rub Moss off your Trees after a soaking Rain, and scrape and cleanse them of
Cankers, etc. draining away the wet (if need require) from the too much
moistened Roots, and earth up those Roots of your Fruit Trees, if any were
uncovered. Cut off the Webbs of Caterpillars, etc. (from the Tops of Twigs and
Trees) to burn. Gather Worms in the Evenings after Rain.

Kitchen-Garden herbs may now be planted, as Parsley, Spinach, and other hardy
Pot Herbs. Toward the middle or latter end of this Month, till the Sap rises
briskly, Graff in the Cleft, and so continue till the last of March; they will
hold Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plums, etc. the New Mood, and the Old-Wood is
best. Now also plant out your Colly-flowers to have early; and begin to make
your Hot-bed for the first Melons and Cucumbers to be sowed in the Full; but
trust not altogether to them. Sow Asparagus. Lastly,

Half open your passages for the Bees, or a little before (if weather invite;)
but continue to feed weak Stocks, etc.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
KEntish, Kirton, Russet, Holland Pepins; Deux-ans, Winter Queening, Harvey
sometimes, Pome-water, Pome-roy, Golden Doucet, Reineting, Lones Pearmain,
Winter Pearmain, etc.

Pears.
Bon-Chrestien of Winter, Winter Poppering, Little Dagobert, etc.

FEBRUARY
Has xxviij. days, long -- 09h-24m

Sun rises 07h-13m Sets 04h-45m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
COntinue Vermin Trapps, etc. Sow Alaternus seeds in Cases, or open Beds;
cover them with thorns, that the Poultry scratch them not out.

Now and then air your housed Carnations, in warm days especially, and mild
showers; but if like to prove cold, set them in again at night.

Furnish (now toward the end) your Aviaries with Birds before they couple, etc.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
WInter Aconite, single Anemonies, and some double, Tulips praecoce, Hyacinthus
Stellatus, Vernal Crocus, Black Hellebore, single Hepatica, Persian Iris,
Leucoium bulbosum, Dens Caninus three leaved, Vernal Cyclamen white and red,
Mezereon, Ornithogal: max: alb: Yellow Violets with large leaves, early
Daffodils, etc.

MARCH
Has xxxj. days, long -- 11h-22m

Sun rises 06h-19m Sets 05h-41m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
YEt Stercoration is seasonable, and you may plant what Trees are left, though
it be something of the latest, unless in very backward or moist places.

Now is your chiefest and best time for raising on the Hot-bed Melons,
Cucumbers, Gourds, etc. which about the sixth, eighth or tenth day will be
ready for the Seeds; and eight days after prick them forth at distances,
according to the Method, etc.

If you will have them later, begin again in ten or twelve days after the
first; and so a third time, to make Experiments. Remember to preserve the
Hot-bed as much as possible from Rain; for cool him you may easily if too
violent, but not give it a competent heat if it be spent, without new making.

Graff all this Month, beginning with Pears, and ending with Apples, unless
the Spring prove extraordinary forwards.

Now also plant Peaches and Nectarines, but cut not off the top-roots, as you
do of other Trees; for 'twill much prejudice them: Prune last years Graffs, and
cut off the heads of your budded-stocks. Take off the Litter from your
Kirnel-beds; see October. or you may forbear till April.

You may as yet cut Quick-sets, and cover such Tree-roots as you laid bare in
Autumn.

It were profitable now also to top your Rose-trees a little with your Knife,
near a leaf-bud, and to prune off the dead and withered branches, keeping them
lower then the custom is, and to a single Stem.

Slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, etc.

Sow in the beginning Endive, Succory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Chard-Beet,
Scorzonera, Parsnips, Skirrets, Parsley, Sorrel, Bugloss, Borrage, Chervil,
Sellery, Smalladge, Alisanders, etc. Several of which continue many years
without renewing, and are most of them to be blanched by laying them under
litter and earthing up.

Sow also Lettuce, Onions, Garlic, Orach, Purslan, Turnips (to have early),
monthly Pease, etc. these annually.

Transplant the Beet-chard which you sowed in August, to have most ample Chards.

Sow also Carrots, Cabbages, Cresses, Fennel, Majoran, Basil, Tobacco, etc. And
transplant any sort of Medicinal Herbs.

Mid- March dress up and string your Strawberry-beds, and uncover your
Asparagus, spreading and loosning the Mould about them, for their more easy
penetrating: Also may you now transplant Asparagus roots to make new Beds.

By this time your Bees sit; keep them close Night and Morning, if the weather
prove ill.

Turn your Fruit in the Room where it lies, but open not yet the windows.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
GOlden Ducket, [Doucet] Pepins, Reineting, Lones Pearmain, Winter Pearmain,
John Apple, etc.

Pears.
Later Bon-Chrestein, Double Blossom Pear, etc.

MARCH
Has xxxj. days, long -- 11h-22m

Sun rises 06h-19m Sets 5h-41m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
STake, and bind up your weakest Plants and Flowers against the Winds, before
they come too fiercely, and in a moment prostrate a whole years labor.

Plant Box, etc. in Parterres. Sow Pinks, Sweet-williams, and Carnations, from
the middle to the end of this Month. Sow Pine-kernels, Firr-seeds, Bays,
Alaternus, Philyrea, and most perennial Greens, etc. Or you may stay till
somewhat later in the Month. Sow Auricula-seeds in pots or cases, in fine
willow earth, a little loamy; and place what you sowed in September (which is
the more proper Season) now in the shade, and water it.

Plant some Anemony roots to bear late, and successively; especially in, and
about London, where the Smoke is any thing tolerable; and if the Season be very
dry, water them well once in two or three days, as likewise Ranunculus's.
Fibrous roots may be transplanted about the middle of this Month; such as
Hepatica's, Primroses, Auricula's, Cammomile, Hyacinth Tuberose, Matricaria,
Gentianella, Hellebore and other Summer Flowers; Set Leucoium; Slip the Keris
or Wall flower; and toward the end Lupines, Convolvulu's, Spanish or ordinary
Iasmine.

Toward the middle, or latter end of March sow on the Hot-bed such Plants as
are late bearing Flowers or Fruit in our Climate; as Balsamine, and Balsamum
mas, Pomum Amoris, Datura, Aethiopic Apples, some choice Amaranthus, Dactyls,
Geranium's, Hedysarum Clipeatum, Humble and Sensitive Plants, Lentiscus,
Myrtle-berries (steeped a while), Capsicum Indicum, Canna Indica, Flos
Africanus, Mirabile Peruian: Nasturtium Ind: Indian Phaseoli, Volubilis, Myrrh,
Carrobs, Maracoc, sive Flos Passionis, and the like rare and exotic Plants
which are brought us from hot Countries. Note, That the Nasturtium Ind. African
Marygolds, Volubilis, and some others, will come (though not altogether so
forwards) in the Cold-bed without Art: But the rest require much, and constant
heat, and therefore several Hot-beds, 'till the common earth be very warm by
the advance of the Sun, to bring them to a due stature, and perfect their
Seeds: Therefore your choicest Amaranthus being risen pretty high, remove them
into another temperate Hot-bed; the same you may do with your African, and
Sensitive Plants, especially, which always keep under Glasses.

About the expiration of this Month carry into the shade such Auriculas,
Seedlings, or Plants as are for their choiceness reserved in Pots.

Transplant also Carnation seedlings, giving your Layers fresh earth, and
setting them in the shade for a week, then likewise cut off all the sick and
infected leaves; for now you may set your choice ones out of Covert, as
directed in February.

Now do the farewel-frosts, and Easterly-winds prejudice your choicest Tulips,
and spot them; therefore cover such with Mats or Canvas to prevent freckles,
and sometimes destruction. The same care have of your most precious Anemonies,
Auricula's, Chamae-iris, Brumal Iacynths, early Cyclamen, etc. Wrap your shorn
Cypress tops with straw wisps, if the Eastern blasts prove very tedious. About
the end uncover some Plants, but with Caution; for the tail of the Frosts yet
continuing, and sharp winds, with the sudden darting heat of the Sun, scorch
and destroy them in a moment; and in such weather neither sow, nor transplant.

Sow Stock-gilly-flower-seeds in the Full to produce double flowers.

Now may you set your Oranges, Lemmons, Myrtils, Oleanders, Lentiscs, Dates,
Aloes, Amomums, and like tender Trees and Plants in the Portico, or with the
windows, and doors of the Greenhouses and Conservatories open for eight or ten
days before April, or earlier, if the Season invite, to acquaint them gradually
with the Air; but trust not the Nights, unless the weather be thoroughly settled:
Now is also your Season to raise Stocks to bud Oranges and Lemmons on, by
sowing the Seeds; and some of the hardiest Evergreens may be transplanted,
especially if the weather be moist and temperate. Lastly,

Bring in materials for the Birds in the Aviary to build their Nests withal.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
ANemonies, Spring Cyclamen, Winter Aconite, Crocus, Bellis, white and black
Hellebor, single and double Hepatica, Leucoion, Chamae-iris of all colors,
Dens Caninus, Violets, Fritillaria, Chelidonium small with double Flowers,
Hermodactyls, Tuberous Iris, Hyacynth Zeboin, Brumal, Oriental, etc. Iunquils,
great Chalic'd, Dutch Mezereon, Persian Iris, Auricula's, Narcissus with large
tufts, common, double and single. Primroses, Praecoce Tulips, Spanish Trumpets
or Iunquilles; Violets, yellow Dutch Violets, Ornithogalum max: alb: Crown
Imperial, Grape Flowers, Almonds and Peach-blossoms, Rubus odoratus, Arbor
Iudae, etc.

APRIL
Has xxx. days, long -- 13h-23m

Sun rises 05h-18m Sets 05h-42m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
SOw sweet Majoran, Hyssop, Basil, Thyme, Winter- Savory, Scurvey-grass, and
all fine and tender Seeds that require the Hotbed.

Sow also Lettuce, Purslan, Caully-flower, Radish etc.

Plant Articho^k slips, etc.

Set French-beans etc.

You may yet slip Lavander, Thyme, ^eneroyal, Sage, Rosemary, etc.

Toward the middle of this Month begin to plant forth your Melons, and
Cucumbers, and so to the later end; your Ridges well prepared.

Gather up Worms, and Snails, after evening showers; continue this also after
all Summer-rains.

Open now your Bee-hives, for now they hatch; look carefully to them, and
prepare your Hives, etc.

Fruits in Prime, and yet lasting.
Apples.
PEpins, Deuxans, West-berry-apple, Russeting, Gilly-flowers, flat Reinet, etc.

Pears.
Later Bon-crestien, Oak-pear, etc. double Blossom, etc.

APRIL
Has xxx. days, long -- 13h-23m

Sun rises 05h-18m Sets 5h-42m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
SOw diverse Annuals to have Flowers all Summer; as double Marigolds, Digitalis,
Delphinium, Cyanus of all sorts, Candytufts, Garden Pansy, Muscipula, Scabious,
Scorpoides, Medica, Holy-hocks; Columbines, which renew every five or six
years, else they will degenerate, etc.

Continue new, and fresh Hotbeds to entertain such exotic Plants as arrive not
to their perfection without them, till the Air and common earth be qualified
with sufficient warmth to preserve them abroad: A Catalogue of these you have
in the former Month.

Transplant such Fibrous-roots as you had not finished in March; as Violets,
Hepatica, Primroses, Hellebor, Matricaria, etc. Place Auricula Seedlings in the
shade.

Sow Pinks, Carnations, which you may continue to trim up, and cleanse from
dead and rotten leaves, viz. your old roots: Sow Sweet-Williams, etc. to flower
next year: this after rain.

Set Lupines, etc.

Sow Lucoium in Full-Moon, sprinkle it thin, frequently remove them, and
replant in moist weather the following Spring.

Sow also yet Pine-kernels, Firseeds, Phillyrea, Alaternus, and most perennial
Greens.

Now take out your Indian Tuberoses, parting the Off-sets (but with care, lest
you break their fangs) then pot them in natural (not forced) Earth; a layer of
rich mould beneath, and about this natural earth to nourish the fibers, but not
so as to touch the Bulbs: then plunge your pots in a Hot-bed temperately warm,
and give them no water till they spring, and then set them under a South-wall:
In dry weather water them freely, and expect an incomparable flower in August:
Thus likewise treat the Narcissus of Iapan, or Garnsey-Lilly for a later
flower, likewise the protuberant fangs of the Yuca; and make much of this
precious Direction.

Set out and expose Flos Cardinalis: Slip and set Marums: Water Anemonies,
Ranunculus's, and Plants in Pots and Cases once in two or three days, if drouth
require it. But carefully protect from violent storms of Rain, Hail, and the
too parching darts of the Sun, your Pennach'd Tulips, Ranunculus's, Anemonies,
Auricula's, covering them with Matresses supported on cradles of hoops, which
have now in readiness. Now is the Season for you to bring the choice and tender
shrubs, etc. out of the Conservatory; such as you durst not adventure forth in
March: let it be in a fair day; only your Orange Trees may remain in the house
till May, to prevent all danger. You may now graff these tender shrubs, etc. by
Approach, viz. Oranges, Lemmons, Pomegranads, Iasmins, etc.

Now, toward the end of April, you may Transplant, and Remove your tender
shrubs, etc. as Spanish Iasmines, Myrtils, Oleanders, young Oranges, Cyclamen,
Pomegranads, etc. but first let them begin to sprout; placing them a fort-night
in the shade: but about London it may be better to defer this work till mid-
August: Vide also May, from whence take directions how to refresh and trim
them: Prune now your Spanish Iasmine within an inch or two of the stock; but
first see it begin to shoot. Mow Carpetwalks, and ply Weeding, etc.

Toward the end (if the cold winds are past) and especially after showers,
clip Phillyrea, Alaternus, Cypress, Box, Myrtyls, Barba Iovis, and other
tonsile shrubs, etc.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
ANemonies, Ranunculus's, Auricula Vrsi, Chamae-iris, Crown Imperial,
Caprifolium, Cyclamen, Dens Caninus, Fritillaria, Genti^nella, Hypericum
frutex, double Hepatic's, Iacynth starry, double Daisies, Florence-Iris, tufted
Narcissus, white, double and common, English double: Primrose, Cowslips,
Pulsatilla, Ladies-smock, Tulips medias, Ranunculus's of Tripoly, white
Violets, Musk-Grape-flower, Geranium, Radix Cava, Caltha palustris, Parietaria
Lutea, Leucoium, Persian Lillies, Paeonies, double Ionquils, Muscaria reversed,
Cochlearia, Persian Iasmine, Acanthus, Lilac Rosemary, Cherries, Wall-pears,
Almonds, Abricots, Peaches, Whitethorn, Arbor Iudae blossoming, etc.

MAY
Has xxxj. days, long -- 15h-09m

Sun rises 04h-25m Sets 07h-35m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
SOw Sweet-Majoran, Basil, Thyme, hot and Aromatic Herbs and Plants which are
the most tender.

Sow Purslan, to have young: Lettuce, large-sided Cabbage, painted Beans, etc.

Look carefully to your Mellons; and toward the end of this Month, forbear to
cover them any longer on the Ridges either with Straw, or Matresses, etc.

Ply the Laboratory, and distill Plants for Waters, Spirits, etc.

Continue Weeding before they run to Seeds.

Now set your Bees at full Liberty, look out often, and expect Swarms, etc.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
PEpins, Deuxans or Iohn-apples, West-berry-apples, Russeting,
Gilly-flower-apples, the Maligar, etc. Codling.

Pears.
Great Kairville, Winter-Bon-Cretienne, Black-pear of Worcester, Surrein,
Double-Blossom-pear, etc.

Cherries, etc.
The May-Cherry. Strawberries, etc.

MAY
Has xxxj. days, long -- 15h-09m

Sun rises 04h-25m Sets 07h-35m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
NOw bring your Oranges, etc. boldly out of the Conservatory; it is your only
Season to Transplant, and Remove them: let the Cases be filled with
natural-earth (such as is taken the first half spit, from just under the Turf
of the best Pasture ground, in a place that has been well fother'd on) mixing
it with one part of rotten Cow Dung, or very mellow Soil screen'd and prepared
some time before; if this be too stiff sift a little Lime discreetly with it,
with the rotten sticks of Willows: Then cutting the Roots a little, especially
at bottom, set your Plant; but not too deep; rather let some of the Roots
appear: Lastly, settle it with temperately enriched water (not too much) having
put some rubbish of Lime-stones, pebbles, shells, or the like at the bottom of
the Cases, to make the moisture passage, and keep the earth loose for fear of
rotting the fibers: See November. Then set them in the shade for a fort-night,
and afterward expose them to the Sun.

Give now also all your housed plants fresh earth at the surface, in place of
some of the old earth (a hand-depth or so) and loosning the rest with a fork
without wounding the Roots: let this be of excellent rich soil, such as is
thoroughly consumed and will sift, that it may wash in the virtue, and comfort
the Plant: Brush, and cleanse them likewise from the dust contracted during
their Enclosure. These two last directions have till now been kept as
considerable Secrets amongst our Gardeners: vide Angust and September.

Shade your Carnations and Gilly-flowers after midday about this Season: Plant
also your Stock-gilly-flowers in beds, full Moon.

Continue watering Ranunculus's: Transplant forth your Amaranthus's, where you
would have them stand: Sow Antirrhinum; or you may set it.

Gather what Anemony-seed you find ripe, and that is worth saving, preserving
it very dry.

Cut likewise the Stalks of such Bulbous-flowers as you find dry.

Toward the end take up those Tulips which are dried in the stalk; covering
what you find to lie bare from the Sun and showers.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
LAte set Anemonies and Ranunculus omn. genesis Anapodophylon, Blattaria,
Chamae-iris, Angustifol. Cyanus, Cytisus Maranthe, Cyclamen, Heleborine,
Columbines, Caltha palustris, double Cotyledon, Digitatis, Fraxinella,
Gladiolus, Geranium, Horminum Creticum, yellow Hemerocallis, stripped Iacynth,
early Bulbous Iris, Asphodel, yellow Lillies, Lychnis, Iacea, Bellis double,
white and red, Millefolium luteum, Phalangium, Orchis, Lilium Convallium, Span.
Pinkes, Deptford Pinkes, Rosa common, Cinnamon, Guelder and Centifol. etc.
Oleaster, Chery-bay, Trachelium, Cowslips, Hesperis, Antirrhinum, Syringa's,
Sedums, Tulips Serotin, etc. Valerian, Veronica double and single, Musk
Violets, Ladies Slipper, Stock-gilly-flowers, Spanish Nut, Star-flower,
Chalcedons, ordinary Crow-foot, red Martagon, Bee-flowers, Campanula's white
and blew, Persian Lilly, Hony-suckles, Buglosss, Homers Moly, and the white of
Dioscorides, Pansys, Prunella, purple Thalictrum, Sisymbrium double and simple,
Leucoium bulbosum serotinum, Peonies, Sambucus, Rosemary, Staechas, Barba
Iovis, Laurus, Satyrion, Oxyacanthus, Tamariscus, Apple-blossoms, etc.

JUNE
Has xxx. days, long -- 16h-17m

Sun rises 03h-51m Sets 08h-09m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
SOw Lettuce, Chervil, Radish, etc. to have young, and tender Salleting.

About the midst of June you may Inoculate Peaches, Abricots, Cherries, Plums,
Apples, Pears, etc.

You may now also (or in May before) cleanse Vines of exuberant branches and
tendrels, cropping (not cutting) and stopping the second joint immediately
before the Fruit, and some of the under branches which bear no fruit;
especially in young Vineyards when they first begin to bear, and thence
forwards; binding up the rest to props.

Gather Herbs in the Full, to keep dry; they keep and retain their virtue, and
sweet smell, better dried in the shade, then Sun, whatever some pretend.

Now is your Season to distill Aromatic Plants, etc.

Water lately planted Trees, and put moist, and half rotten Fearn, etc. about
the foot of their Stems.

Look to your Bees for Swarms, and Casts; and begin to destroy Insects with
Hoofes, Canes, and tempting baits, etc. Gather Snails after Rain, etc.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
JVniting ( first ripe) Pepins, Iohn-apples, Robillard, Red-Fennouil, etc.
French

Pears.
The Maudlin ( first ripe) Madera, Green-Royal, St. Laurence-pear, etc.

Cherries, etc.
Duke, Flanders, Heart Black. Red. White.
Luke-ward, early Flanders, the Common-Cherry, Spanish- black, Naples Cherries,
etc.

Rasberries, Corinths, Strawberries, Melons, etc.

JUNE
Has xxx. days, long -- 16h-17m

Sun rises 03h-51m Sets 08h-09m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
TRansplant Autumnal Cyclamens now if you would change their place, otherwise
let them stand. Take up Iris Chalcedon.

Gather the ripe Seeds of Flowers worth the saving, as of choicest Oriental
Iacynth, Narcissus (the two lesser, pale spurious Daffodils of a whitish green,
often produce varieties) Auricula's, Ranunculus's, etc. and preserve them dry:
Shade your Carnations from the afternoon Sun.

You may now begin to lay your Gilly-flowers.

Take up your rarest Anemonies, and Ranunculus's after rain (if it come
seasonable) the stalk withered, and dry the roots well: This about the end of
the Month: In mid- June inoculate Iasmine, Roses, and some other rare shrubs.
Sow now also some Anemony seeds. Take up your Tulip-bulbs, burying such
immediately as you find naked upon your beds; or else plant them in some cooler
place; and refresh over-parched beds with water. Water your Pots of Narcissus
of Iapan (that rare Flower) etc. Stop some of your Scabious from running to
seed the first year, by now removing them, and next year they will produce
excellent flowers. Also may you now take up all such Plants and Flower-roots as
endure not well out of the ground, and replant them again immediately; such as
the early Cyclamen, Iacynth Oriental, and other bulbous Iacynths, Iris,
Fritillaria, Crown-Imperial, Martagon, Muscaris, Dens Caninus, etc. The slips
of Myrtil set in some cool and moist place do now frequently take root: Also
Cytisus lunatus will be multiplied by slips in a moist place, such as are an
handful long of that Spring, but neither by Seeds or Layers. Look now to your
Aviary; for now the Birds grow sick of their Feathers; therefore assist them
with Emulsions of the cooler seeds bruised in their water, as Melons,
Cucumbers, etc. Also give them Succory, Beets, Groundsell, Chickweed, etc.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
AMaranthus, Antirrhinum, Asphodel, Campanula, Convolvulus, Cyclamen, Clematis
Pannonica, Cyanus, Blattaria, Digitalis, Gladiolus, Hedysarum, Geranium,
Horminum Creticum, Hieracium, Hesperis, bulbous Iris, and diverse others,
Lychnis var. generum, Martagon white and red, Millefolium white and yellow,
Nasturtium Indicum, Nigella, Aster Atticus, Hellebor Alb: Gentiana, Trachelium,
Ficus Indica, Fraxinella, shrub Nightshade, Iasmines, Honey-suckles, Genista
Hisp: Carnations, Pinks, Armerius, Ornithogalum, Pansy, Phalangium Virginianum,
Larks-heel early, Pilosella, Roses, Thlaspi Creticum, etc. Veronica, Viola
pentaphyl. Campions or Sultans, Mountain Lillies white, red: double Poppies,
Stock-gilly-flowers, Corn-flag, Holly-hoc, Muscaria, Serpyllum Citratum,
Phalangium Allobrogicum, Oranges, Rosemary, Lentiscus, Pomegranade, the
Lime-tree, etc.

JULY
Has xxxj. days, long -- 15h-59m

Sun rises 04h-00m Sets 8h-00m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
SOw Lettuce, Radish, etc. to have tender salleting.

Sow later Pease to be ripe six weeks after Michaelmas.

Water young planted Trees, and Layers, etc. and reprune now Abricots, and
Peaches, saving as many of the young likeliest shoots as are well placed; for
the now Bearers commonly perish, the new ones succeeding: Cut close and even,
purging your Wall-fruit of superfluous leaves which hinder from the Sun; but do
it discreetly.

You may now also begin to Inoculate.

Let such Olitory-herbs run to seed as you would save.

Toward the later end, visit your Vineyards again, etc. and stop the exuberant
shoots at the second joint above the fruit (if not finished before); but not so
as to expose it to the Sun.

Remove long-sided Cabages planted in May to head in Autumme; it is the best
Cabage in the World.

Now begin to streighten the entrance of your Bees a little; and help them to
kill their Drones if you observe too many; setting the new invented
Cucurbit-Glasses of Beer mingled with Honey to entice the Wasps, Flies, etc.
which waste your store: Also hang Bottles of the same Mixture near your
Red-Roman-Nectarines, and other tempting fruits, for their destruction; else
they many times invade your best Fruit.

Look now also diligently under the leaves of Mural-Trees for the Snails; they
stick commonly somewhat above the fruit: pull not off what is bitten; for then
they will certainly begin afresh.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
DEux-ans, Pepins, Winter Russeting, Andrew-apples, Cinnamon-apple, red and
white Iuniting, the Margaret apple, etc.

Pears.
The Primat, Russet-pears, Summer-pears, green Chesil-pears, Pearl-pear, etc.

Cherries.
Carnations, Morella, Great-bearer, Morocca-Cherry, the Egriot, Bigarreaux, etc.

Peaches.
Nutmeg, Isabella, Persian, Newington, Violet-muscat, Rambouillet.

Plums, etc.
Primordial, Myrobalan, the red, blew, and amber Violet, Damasc. Denny Damasc.
Pear-plum, Damasc. Violet, or Cheson-plum, Abricot-plum, Cinnamon-plum, the
Kings-plum, Spanish, Morocco-plum, Lady Eliz. plum, Tawny, Damascene, etc.

Rasberries, Goose-berries, Corinths, Strawberries, Melons, etc.

JULY
Has xxxj. days, long -- 15h-59m

Sun rises 04h-00^ Sets 08h-00m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
SLip Stocks, and other lignous Plants and Flowers: From henceforth to
Michaelmas you may also lay Gillyflowers and Carnations for Increase, leaving
not above two, or three spindles for flowers, and nipping off superfluous buds,
with supports, cradles, canes or hoofes, to establish them against winds, and
destroy Earwigs.

The Layers will (in a month or six weeks) strike root, being planted in a
light loamy earth mixed with excellent rotten soil and siefted: plant six or
eight in a pot to save room in Winter: keep them well from too much Rains; yet
water them in drouth, sparing the leaves: If it prove too wet, lay your pots
side-long; but shade those which blow from the afternoon Sun, as in the former
Months.

Yet also you may lay Myrtils, Laurels, and other curious Greens.

Water young planted Shrubs and Layers, etc. as Orange Trees, Myrtils, Granads,
Amomum, etc. Clip Box, etc. in Parterres, Knots, and Compartiments, if need be,
and that it grow out of order; do it after Rain.

Graff by Approach, Inarch or Inoculate Iasmines, Oranges, and other your
choicest Shrubs.

Take up your early autumnal Cyclamen, Tulips and Bulbs (if you will Remove
them, etc.) before mentioned; Transplanting them immediately, or a Month after
if you please, and then cutting off, and trimming the fibers, spread them to
Air in some dry place.

Gather Tulip-seed, if you please: but let it lie in the pods.

Gather now also your early Cyclamen-seed, and sow it presently in Pots.

Remove seedling Crocus's sowed in September constantly at this Season, placing
them at wider intervals, till they begin to bear.

Likewise you may take up some Anemonies, Ranunculus's, Crocus, Crown Imperial,
Persian Iris, Fritillaria, and Colchicums; but plant the three last as soon as
you have taken them up, as you did the Cyclamens; or you may stay till August
or September ere you take them up, and replant Colchicums.

Remove now Dens Caninus, etc.

Take up your Gladiolus now yearly, the blades being dry, or else their
Off-sets will poison the ground.

Latter end of July sieft your Beds for Off-sets of Tulips, and all
Bulbous-roots, also for Anemonies, Ranunculus's, etc. which will prepare it for
re-planting with such things as you have ready in Pots to plunge, or set in
naked earth till the next season; as Amaranths, Canna Ind. Mirabile Peruv.
Capsicum Ind. Nasturtium Ind. etc. that they may not lie empty, and
disfurnish'd.

You may sow some Anemonies, keeping them temperately moist.

Continue to cut off the withered stalks of your lower flowers, etc. and all
others, covering with earth the bared roots, etc.

Now (in the driest Season) with Brine, Potashes and Water, or a decoction of
Tobacco refuse, water your Gravel-walks, etc. to destroy both Worms and Weeds,
of which it will cure them for some years.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
AMaranthus, Asphodel, Antirrhinum, Campanula, Clematis, Cyanus, Convolvulus,
Sultana, Veronica purple and odoriferous; Digitalis, Eryngium Planum, Ind.
Phaseolus, Geranium triste, and Creticum, Gladiolus, Gentiana, Hesperis,
Nigella, Hedysarum, Fraxinella, Lychnis Chalcaedon, Iacea white and double,
Nasturt. Ind. Millefolium, Musk-rose, Flos Africanus, Thlaspi Creticum,
Veronica mag. and parva, Volubilis, Balsam-apple, Holy-hoc, Corn-flower,
Alkekengi, Lupines, Scorpion-grass, Caryophyllata omn. genesis Stock-gilly-flower,
Scabiosa, Mirab: Peru: Spartum Hispan: Monthly- rose, Iasmine, Indian Tuberous
Iacynth, Limonium, Linaria Cretica, Pansies, Prunella, Delphinium, Phalangium,
Periploca Virgin. Flos Passionis, Flos Cardinalis, Yucca, Oranges, Amomum
Plinii, Oleanders red and white, Agnus Castus, Arbutus, Olive, Ligustrum,
Tilia, etc.

AUGUST
Has xxxj. days, long -- 14h-33m

Sun rises 04h-43m Sets 07h-17m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
INoculate now early, if before you began not, and gather your bud of that
year: Let this work be done before you remove the Stocks.

Prune off yet also superfluous branches, and shoots of this second spring; but
be careful not to expose the fruit, without leaves sufficient to skreen it from
the Sun; furnishing, and nailing up what you will spare to cover the defects of
your Walls. Continue yet to cleanse your Vines from exuberant branches that too
much hinder the Sun.

Pull up the Suckers.

Clip Roses now done bearing.

Sow Raddish, pale tender Cabbages, Caully-flowers for Winter Plants,
Corn-sallet, Marygolds, Lettuce, Carrots, Parsneps, Turnips, Spinach, Onions;
also curled Endive, Angelica, Scurvy Grass, etc.

Likewise now pull up ripe Onions and Garlic, etc.

Toward the end sow Purslan, Chard-beet, Chervile, etc.

Transplant such Lettuce as you will have abide all Winter.

Gather your Olitory-seeds, and clip and cut all such Herbs and Plants within
one handful of the ground before the full. Lastly,

Unbind and release the Buds you inoculated if taken, etc. likewise stop, and
prune them.

Now vindemiate and take your Bees toward the expiration of this Month;
unless you see cause (by reason of the Weather and Season) to defer it till
mid- September: But if your Stocks be very light and weak, begin the earlier.

Make your Summer Perry and Cider.

Fruits in Prime, and yet lasting.
Apples.
THe Ladies Longing, the Kirkham Apple, John Apple; the Seaming Apple, Cushion
Apple, Spicing, May-flower, Sheeps snout.

Pears.
Windsor, Sovereign, Orange, Bergamot, Slipper Pear, Red Catherine, King
Catherine, Denny Pear, Prusia Pear, Summer Poppering, Sugar Pear, Lording Pear,
etc.

Peaches.
Roman Peach, Man Peach, Quince Peach, Rambouillet, Musk Peach, Grand
Carnation, Portugal Peach, Crown Peach, Bourdeaux Peach, Lavar Peach, the Peach
Des pot, Savoy Malacoton, which lasts till Michaelmas.

Nectarines.
The Muroy Nectarine, Tawny, Red- Roman, little Green Nectarine, Cluster
Nectarine, Yellow Nectarine.

Plums.
Imperial, Blew, White Dates, Yellow Pear-plum, Black Pear-plum, White Nutmeg,
late Pear-plum, Great Anthony, Turkey Plum, the Jane Plum.

Other Fruit.
Cluster-grape, Muscadine, Corinths, Cornelians, Mulberies, Figs, Filberts,
Melons, etc.

AUGUST
Has xxxj. days, long -- 14h-33m

Sun rises 04h-43m Sets 07h-17m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
NOw (and not till now if you expect success) is the just Season for the
budding of the Orange Tree: Inoculate therefore at the commencement of this
Month.

Now likewise take up your bulbous Iris's; or you may sow their seeds, as also
those of Larks-heel, Candy-tufts, Columbines, Iron-colour'd Fox-gloves,
Holly-hocks, and such Plants as endure Winter, and the approaching Seasons.

Plant some Anemony roots to have flowers all Winter, if the roots escape; and
take up your seedlings of last year, which now transplant for bearing: also
plant Dens Caninus, Autumnal Crocus, and Colchicums: Note, that English Saffron
may be suffered to stand for increase to the third or fourth year without
removing.

You may now sow Narcissus, and Oriental Iacynths, and re-plant such as will
not do well out of the Earth, as Fritillaria, Hyacinths, Martagon, Dens
Caninus, Lillies.

Gilly-flowers may yet be slipped.

Continue your taking up of Bulbs, dry them and lay them up; Lillies, etc. of
which before.

Gather from day to day your Alaternus seed as it grows black and ripe, and
spread it to sweat and dry before you put it up; therefore move it sometimes
with a broom that the seeds clog not together.

Water well your Balsamine foem.

Most other Seeds may now likewise be gathered from shrubs, which you find ripe.

About mid- August transplant Auricula's, dividing old and lusty roots; also
prick out your Seedlings: They best like a loamy sand, or light moist Earth;
yet rich and shaded: You may likewise sow Auricula.

Now toward the latter end, you may sow Anemony seeds, Ranunculus's, etc.
lightly covered with fit mould in Cases, shaded, and frequently refreshed: Also
Cyclamen, Iacynths, Iris, Hepatica, Primroses, Fritillaria, Martagon,
Fraxinella, Tulips, etc. but with patience; for some of them, because they
flower not till three, four, five, six and seven years after, especially the
Tulips, therefore disturb not their beds, and let them be under some warm
place, shaded yet, till the heats are past, lest the seeds dry; only the
Hepatica's, and Primroses may be sowed in some less exposed Beds.

Now, about Bartholomew-tide, is the only secure season for removing and laying
your perennial Greens, Oranges, Lemmons, Myrtils, Phillyreas, Oleanders,
Iasmines, Arbutus, and other rare Shrubs, as Pome-granads, Monthly Roses, and
whatever is most obnoxious to frosts, taking the shoots and branches of the
past Spring, and pegging them down in very rich earth and soil perfectly
consumed, water them upon all occasions during the Summer; and by this time
twelve-moneth they will be ready to remove, Transplanted in fit earth, set in
the shade, and kept moderately moist, not over wet, lest the young fibers rot;
after three weeks set them in some more airy place, but not in the Sun till
fifteen days more; Vide our Observations in April, and May, for the rest of
these choice Directions.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
AMaranthus, Anagallis Lusitanica, Aster Atticus, Blattaria, Spanish Bells,
Belvedere, Carnations, Campanula, Clematis, Cyclamen Vernum, Datura Turcica,
Eliochryson, Eryngium planum and Amethystinum, Geranium Creticum, and Triste,
Yellow Stocks, Hieracion minus Alpestre, Tuberose Hyacinth, Limonium, Linaria
Cretica, Lychnis, Mirabile Peruvian. Yellow Millefol. Nasturt. Ind. Yellow
mountain Hearts-ease, Maracoc, Africanus flos, Convolvulus's, Scabious,
Asphodils, Delphinium, Lupines, Colchicum, Leucoion, Autumnal Hyacinth,
Holly-hoc, Star-wort, Heliotrop, French Mary-gold, Daisies, Geranium nocte
olens, Common Pansies, Larks-heels of all colors, Nigella, Heleborus,
Balsamin: faem: Lobells Catch-fly, Thlaspi Creticum, Rosemary, Musk-Rose,
Monthly Rose, Oleanders, Spanish Iasmine, Yellow Indian Iasmine, Myrtyls,
Oranges, Pome-granads double, and single flowers, Shrub Spiraea, Agnus Castus,
etc.

SEPTEMBER
Has xxx. days, long -- 12h-37m

Sun rises 05h-41m Sets 06h-19m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
GAther now (if ripe) your Winter Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Plums, etc. to
prevent their falling by the great Winds: Also gather your Wind-falls from day
to day: do this work in dry weather.

Release Inoculated Buds, or sooner if they pinch.

Sow Lettuce, Radish, Spinach, Parsneps, Skirrets, etc. Caully-flowers,
Cabbages, Onions, etc. Scurvy Grass, Annis-seeds, etc.

Now may you Transplant most sorts of Esculent, or Physical Plants, etc.

Also Artichocks, and Asparagus-roots.

Sow also Winter Herbs and Roots, and plant Straw-berries out of the Woods.

Toward the end, earth up your Winter Plants and Sallad herbs; and plant forth
your Caully-flowers and Cabbages which were sown in August.

No longer now defer the taking of your Bees, streightning the entrances of
such Hives as you leave to a small passage, and continue still your hostility
against Wasps, and other robbing Insects.

Cider-making continues.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
THe Belle-bonne, the William, Summer Pearmain, Lordding-apple, Pear-apple,
Quince-apple, Red-greening ribb'd, Bloody-Pepin, Harvey, Violet-apple, etc.

Pears.
Hamdens Bergamot (first ripe) Summer Bon Chrestien, Norwich, Black Worcester,
(baking) Greenfield, Orange, Bergamot, the Queen hedg-pear, Lewes-pear (to dry
excellent) Frith-pear, Arundel-pear (also to bake) Brunswick-pear, Winter
Poppering, Bings-pear, Bishop-pear (baking) Diego, Emperours-pear,
Cluster-pear, Messire Iean, Rowling-pear, Balsam-pear, Bezy d' Hery, etc.

Peaches, etc.
Malacoton, and some others, if the year prove backwards, Almonds, etc.

Quinces.

Little Blew-grape, Muscadine-grape, Frontiniac, Parsley, great Blew-grape, the
Verjuice-grape excellent for sauce, etc.

Berberries, etc.

SEPTEMBER
Has xxx. days, long -- 12h-37m

Sun rises 05h-41m Sets 06h-19m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
PLant some of all the sorts of Anemonies in good rich natural earth,
especially the Latifol. after the first Rains, if you will have flowers very
forwards; but it is surer to attend till October, or the Month after, lest the
over moisture of the Autumnal seasons give you cause to repent.

Now is the most proper season to sow Auricula-seeds, setting the Cases in the
Sun till April: See April.

Begin now also to plant some Tulips, unless you will stay till the later end
of October, to prevent all hazard of rotting the Bulbs. Plant Daffodils, and
Colchicum.

All Fibrous Plants, such as Hepatica, Hellebor, Cammomile, etc. Also the
Capillaries; Matricaria, Violets, Primroses, etc. may now be transplanted; as
likewise Iris Chalcedon, Cyclamen, etc.

Now you may also continue to sow Alaternus, Phillyrea, (or you may forbear
till the Spring) Iris, Crown Imperial, Martagon, Tulips, Delphinium, Nigella,
Candy tufts, Poppy; and generally all the Annuals which are not impaired by the
Frosts.

Sow Primroses likewise: Remove seedling Digitalis, and plant the slips of
Lychnis at the beginning.

Your Tuberoses will not endure the wet of this Season, therefore set the Pots
into your Conserve, and keep them very dry.

Bind now up your Autumn al Flowers, and Plants to stakes, to prevent sudden
Gusts which will else prostrate all you have so industriously raised.

Now you may take off Gilly-flower layers with earth and all, and plant them in
pots, or borders shaded.

Crocus will be now raised of Seeds.

About Michaelmas (sooner, or later, as the Season directs) the weather fair,
and by no means foggy, retire your choice Greens, and rarest Plants (being dry)
as Oranges, Lemmons, Indian, and Span. Iasmine, Oleanders, Barba-Iovis, Amomum
Plin. Citysus Lunatus, Chamelaea tricoccos, Cistus Ledon Clus^i, Dates, Aloes,
Sedum's, etc. into your Conservatory; ordering them with fresh mould, as you
were taught in May, viz. taking away some of the upmost exhausted earth, and
stirring up the rest, fill the Cases with rich, and well consumed soil, to wash
in, and nourish the Roots during Winter; but as yet leaving the doors and
windows open, and giving them much Air, so the Winds be not sharp, nor weather
foggy; do thus till the cold being more intense advertise you to enclose them
all together: Myrtils will endure abroad near a Month longer.

The cold now advancing, set such Plants as will not endure the House into the
earth; the pots two or three inches lower then the surface of some bed under a
Southern exposure: Then cover them with glasses, having clothed them first
with sweet and dry Moss; but upon all warm, and benign emissions of the Sun,
and sweet showers, giving them air, by taking off all that covers them: Thus
you shall preserve your costly and precious Marum Syriacum, Cistus's, Geranium
nocte olens, Flos Cardinalis, Maracocs, seedling Arbutus's (a very hardy Plant
when greater) choicest Ranunculus's and Anemonies, Acacia Egypt. etc. Thus
governing them till April. Secrets not till now divulged.

Note, That Cats will eat, and destroy your Marum Syriacum if they can come at
it.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
AMaranthus tricolor, and others; Anagallis of Portugal, Antirrhinum, African
flo. Amomum Plinii, Aster Atticus, Belvedere, Bellis, Campanula's, Colchicum,
Autumnal Cyclamen, Clematis, Chrysanthemum angustifol. Eupatorium of Canada,
Sun-flower, Stock-gil. flo. Geranium Cr^ticum, and nocte olens, Gentianella
annual, Hieracion minus Alpestre, Tuberous Indian Iacynth, Linaria Cretica,
Lychnis Constant. single and double; Limonium, Indian Lilly, Narciss. Pomum
Aureum, and Amoris, and Spinosum Ind. Marvel of Peru, Mille-folium yellow, Moly
Monspeliens. Nasturtium Indicum, Persian autumnal Narcissus, Virginian
Phalangium, Indian Phaseolus, Scarlet Beans, Convolvulus diverse. genesis
Candy-tufts, Veronica, purple Volubilis, Asphodil, Crocus, or Enlish Saffron,
Garnsey Lilly, or Narcissus of Iapan, Poppy of all colors, single, and double,
Malva arborescens, Indian Pinks, Aethiopic Apples, Capsicum Ind. Gilly-flowers,
Passion-flower, Dature double and sing. Portugal Ranunculus's, Spanish Iasmine,
yellow Virginian Iasmine, Rhododendron white and red, Oranges, Myrtils,
Balaustia, Musk Rose, and Monthly Rose, etc.

OCTOBER
Has xxxj. days, long -- 10h-47m

Sun rises 06h-26m Sets 05h-24m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
TRench Grounds for Orcharding, and the Kitchen-garden, to lie for a Winter
mellowing.

Plant dry Trees (i.) Fruit of all sorts, Standard, Mural, or Shrubs which lose
their leaf; and that so soon as it falls: But be sure you choose no Trees for
the Wall of above two years Graffing at the most.

Now is the time for Ablaqueation, and laying bare the Roots of old unthriving,
or over hasty blooming trees.

Moon now decreasing, gather Winter-fruit that remains, weather dry; take heed
of bruising, lay them up clean lest they taint, Cut and prune Roses yearly,
reducing them to a Standard not over tall.

Plant and Plash Quick-sets.

Remove Graffs after the second year, unless Dwarfs, which you may let stand
'till the third.

Save, and sow all stony, and hard kernels and seeds, such as black Cherry,
Morellos, black Heart, all good; Pear-plum, Peach, Almond-stones, etc. Also
Nuts, Haws, Ashen, Sycomor and Maple keys; Acorns, Beech-mast, Apple, Pear and
Crab kernels, for Stocks; or you may defer it till the next Month toward the
later end, keeping them dry and free from mustiness; remembering to cover the
beds with litter.

You may yet sow Genoa Lettuce which will last all the Winter; Reddish etc.

Make Winter Cider, and Perry.

Toward the latter end plant Abricots, Cherries, Plums, Vines, Winter-pears,
etc.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
BElle-et-Bonne, William, Costard, Lording, Parsley- apples, Pearmain,
Pear-apple, Honeymeal, Apis, etc.

Pears.
The Caw-pear (baking) Green-butter-pear, Thorn-pear, Clove-pear,
Roussell-pear, Lombart-pear, Russet-pear, Saffron-pear, and some of the former
Month, Violet-pear, Petworth-pear, otherwise called the Winter Windsor.

Bullis, and diverse of the September Plums and Grapes, Pines, Arbutus, etc.

OCTOBER
Has xxxj days, long -- 10h-47m

Sun rises 06h-m26 Sets 05h-24m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
NOw your Hyacinthus Tuberose not enduring the wet, must be set into the house,
and preserved very dry till April.

Continue sowing what you did in September if you please: Likewise Cypress may
be sown, but take heed of the Frost: Also,

You may plant some Anemonies, especially the Tenuifolia's and Ranunculus's, in
fresh sandish earth, taken from under the turf, but lay richer mould at the
bottom of the bed, which the fibers may reach, but not touch the main roots,
which are to be covered with the natural earth two inches deep: and so soon as
they appear, secure them with Mats, or Straw, from the winds and frosts, giving
them air in all benign intervals, if possible once a day.

Plant also Ranunculus's of Tripoly, Vernal Crocus's, etc. Remove seedling
Holy-hocs, or others.

Plant now your choice Tulips, etc. which you feared to interre at the
beginning of September; they will be more secure, and forward enough: but plant
them in natural earth somewhat impoverished with very fine sand; else they will
soon lose their variegations; some more rich earth may lie at the bottom,
within reach of the fibers: Now have a care your Carnations catch not too much
wet; therefore retire them to covert, where they may be kept from the rain, not
the air, or lay them on the sides; trimming them with fresh mould.

All sorts of Bulbous roots may now also be safely buried; likewise Iris's, etc.

You may yet sow Alaternus, and Phillyrea seeds: It will now be good to Beat,
Roll, and Mow Carpet-walks, and Cammomile; for now the ground is supple, and it
will even all inequalities: Finish your last Weeding, etc.

Sweep and cleanse your Walks, and all other places, of Autumnal leaves fallen,
lest the Worms draw them into their holes, and foul your Gardens, etc.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
AMaranthus tricolor, etc. After Atticus, Amomum, Antirrhinum, Colchicum,
Saffron, Cyclamen, Clematis, Heliotrops, Stock-gilly-flo. Geranium triste, Ind.
Tuberose Iacynth, Limonium, Lychnis white and double, Pomum Amoris and Aethiop.
Marvel of Peru, Millefol. luteum, Autumnal Narciss. Pansies, Aleppo Narciss.
Sphaerical Narciss. Nasturt. Persicum, Gilly-flo. Virgin. Phalangium,
Pilosella, Violets, Veronica, Arbutus, Span. Iasmine, and yellow Ind. Iasmine,
Monthly Rose, Oranges, Myrtils, Balaust.

NOVEMBER
Has xxx. days, long -- 08h-52m

Sun rises 07h-34m Sets 04h-26m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
CArry Compost out of your Melon-ground, or turn and mingle it with the earth,
and lay it in Ridges ready for the Spring: Also trench and fit ground for
Artichocks, etc.

Continue your Setting and Transplanting of Trees; lose no time, hard Frosts
come on apace: Yet you may lay bare old roots.

Plant young Trees Standards or Mural.

Furnish your Nursery with Stocks to graff on the following year.

Sow, and set early Beans and Pease till Shrove-tide; and now lay up in your
Cellars for Seed, to be transplanted at Spring, Carrots, Parsneps, Turnips,
Cabbages, Caully-flowers, etc.

Cut off the tops of Asparagus, and cover it with long-dung, or make Beds to
plant in Spring, etc.

Now, in a dry day, gather your last Orchard-fruits.

Take up your Potatos for Winter spending, there will enough remain for stock,
though never so exactly gathered.

Fruits in Prime, or yet lasting.
Apples.
THe Belle-bonne, the William, Summer Pearmain, Lording-apple, Pear-apple,
Cardinal, Winter Chess-nut, Short start, etc. and and some others of the former
two last Months, etc.

Pears.
Messire Iean, Lord-pear, long Bergamot, Warden (to bake) Burntcat, Sugar-pear,
Lady-pear, Ice-pear, Dove-pear, Deadmans-pear, Winter Bergamot, Bell-pear, etc.

Arbutus, Bullis, Medlars, Services.

NOVEMBER
Has xxx. days, long -- 08h-52m

Sun rises 07h-34m Sets 4h-26m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
SOw Auricula seeds thus; prepare very rich earth, more then half dung, upon
that sieft some very light sandy mould, and the earth gotten out of old hollow
Willow-trees; and then sow: set your Cases or Pans in the Sun till March.

Cover your peeping Ranunculus's, etc.

Now is your best season (the weather open) to plant your fairest Tulips in
places of shelter, and under Espaliers; but let not your earth be too rich;
vide October. Transplant ordinary Iasmine, etc.

About the middle of this Month (or sooner, if weather require) quite enclose
your tender Plants, and perennial Greens, Shrubs, etc. in your Conservatory,
secluding all entrance of cold, and especially sharp winds; and if the Plants
become exceeding dry, and that it do not actually freeze, refresh them
sparingly with qualified water, (i.) mingled with a little Sheeps, or Cow Dung:
If the season prove exceeding piercing (which you may know by the freezing of a
dish of water set for that purpose in your Green-house) kindle some Charcoals,
and when they have done smoking, put them in a hole sunk a little into the
floor about the middle of it: This is the safest Stove: At all other times,
when the air is warmed by the beams of a fine day, and that the Sun darts full
upon the house, show them the light; but enclose them again before the Sun be
gone off: Note, That you must never give your Aloes, or Sedums one drop of
water during the whole Winter: And indeed, you can hardly be too sparing of
Water to your hous'd-plants; the not observing of this destroys more Plants
then all the rudenesses of the Season: To know when they want refreshing,
consider the leaves; if they shrivel and fold up, give them drink; if pale, and
whitish, they have already too much; and the defect is at the roots, which are
in peril of rotting. If your Aloes grow manifestly too dry, expose it a while
to the air when clear, 'twill immediately recover them.

House your choicest Carnations, or rather set them under a Penthouse against a
South-wall, so as a Covering being thrown over them to preserve them in
extremity of weather, they may yet enjoy the freer air at all other times.

Prepare also Mattrasses, Boxes, Cases, Pots, etc. for shelter to your tender
Plants and Seedlings newly sown, if the weather prove very bitter.

Plant Roses, Althaea Frutex, Lilac, Syringas, Cytisus, Peonies, etc.

Plant also Fibrous roots, specified in the precedent Month.

Sow also stony-seeds mentioned in October.

Plant all Forest trees for Walks, Avenues, and Groves.

Sweep and cleanse your Garden-walks, and all other places, from Autumnal
leaves.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
ANemonies, Meadow Saffron, Antirrhinum, Stock-gilly-flo. Bellis, Clematis,
Pansies, some Carnations, double Violets, Vetonica, Spanish and Indian Iasmine,
Myrtils, Musk Rose, etc.

DECEMBER
Has xxxj. days, long -- 07h-40m

Sun rises 08h-10m Sets 03h-50m

To be done In the Orchard, and Olitory-Garden.
PRune, and Nail Wall-fruit, and Standard-trees.

You may now plant Vines, etc.

Also Stocks for Graffing, etc.

Sow, as yet, Pomace of Ciderpressings to raise Nurseries; and set all sorts of
Kernels, Stones, etc.

Sow for early Beans and Pease, but take heed of the Frosts; therefore surest
to defer it till after Christmas, unless the Winter promise very moderate.

All this Month you may continue to Trench Ground, and dung it, to be ready
for Bordures, or the planting of Fruit Trees, etc.

Either late in this month, or in January prune, and cut off all your
Vine-shoots to the very root, save one or two of the stoutest to be left with
three or four eyes of young wood: This for the Vineyard.

Now feed your weak Stocks.

Turn and refresh your Autumnal Fruit, lest it taint, and open the Windows
where it lies, in a clear and Serene day.

Fruits in Prime, and yet lasting.
Apples.
ROusseting, Leather-coat, Winter Reed, Chess-nut Apple, Great-belly, the
Go-no-further, or Cats-head, with some of the precedent Month.

Pears.
The Squib-pear, Spindle-pear, Doyoniere, Virgin, Gascogne-Bergomot,
Scarlet-pear, Stopple-pear, white, red and French Wardens, (to bake or roast)
etc.

DECEMBER
Has xxxj. days, long -- 07h-40m

Sun rises 08h-10m Sets 03h-50m

To be done In the Parterre, and Flower-Garden.
AS in January continue your hostility against Vermin.

Preserve from too much Rain and Frost your choicest Anemonies, Ranunculus's,
Carnations, etc.

Be careful now to keep the Doors and Windows of your Conservatories well
matted, and guarded from the piercing Air: for your Oranges, etc. are now put
to the test: Temper the cold with a few Charcoal governed as directed in
November, etc.

Set Bay Berries, etc. dropping ripe.

Look to your Fountain-pipes, and cover them with fresh and warm Litier out of
the Stable, a good thickness, lest the frosts crack them; remember it in time,
and the Advice will save you both trouble and charge.

Flowers in Prime, or yet lasting.
ANemonies some, Persian, and Common winter Cyclamen, Antirrhinum, Black
Hellebor, Laurus tinus, single Primroses, Stock-gilly-flo. Iris Clusii, Snow
flowers or drops, Yucca, etc.

FOr by such a Calendar it is that a Royal Garden, or Plantation may be
contrived according to my Lord Verulam's design, pro singulis Anni Mensibus,
for every Month of the Year.

But because it is in this cold Season, that our Gardener is chiefly diligent
about preserving his more tender, rare, exotic, and costly Shrubs, Plants and
Flowers; We have thought fit to add the Catalogue, as it is (much after this
sort) collected to our hands by the Learned, and Industrious Doctor Sharrock
(though with some reformation and improvement) of all such, as according to
their different Natures do require more or less indulgence: And these we have
distributed likewise into the three following Classes.

I. CLASS. Being least patient of Cold, and therefore to be first set into the
Conservatory, or other ways defended.
ACacia Aegyptiaca, Aloe American. Amaranthus tricolor, Aspalathus Cret.
Balsamum, Helichryson, Chamelaea tricoccos, Nasturtium Indicum, Indian
Narcissus, Ornithogalon Arab. Ind. Phaseol. Capsicum Ind. Pomum Aethiop.
Aureum, Spinosum, Summer Sweet Majoran, the two Marums Syriac. etc. Dactyls,
Pistacio's, the great Indian Fig, Lilac flo. alb. Lavendula Multif. Clus.
Cistus Ragusaeus flo. alb. Colutea Odorata Cretica, Narcissus Tuberosus, Styrax
Arbor, etc.

II. CLASS. Enduring the second degree of Cold, and accordingly to be secured
in the Conservatory.
AMomum Plinii, Carob, Chamelaea Alpestris, Cistus Ledon Clus. Citron, Vernal
Cyclamen, Summer Purple Cyclamen, Digitalis Hispan. Geranium triste, Hedysarum
Clypeatum, Aspalathus Creticus, Span. Iasmine, Virgin. Iasmine, Suza Iris,
Iacobaea Marina, Alexandrian Laurel, Oleanders, Limonium elegans, Myrtils,
Oranges, Lentiscus, Levantine tufted Narcissus, Gill. flo. and choicest
Carnations, Phalangium Creticum, Astatic double and single Ranunculus's,
Narcissus of Iapan, Cytisus rubra, Canna Indica, Thymus Capitatus, Verbena nodi
flo. Cretica, etc.

III. CLASS. Which not perishing but in excessive Colds, are therefore to be
last set in; or rather protected under Mattrasses, and sleighter Coverings,
abroad in the Earth, Cases, Boxes or Pots, etc.
ABrotonum mas. foem. Winter Aconite, Adiantum Verum, Bellis Hispan. Calceolus
Mariae, Capparis, Cineraria, Cneorum Matthioli, Cytisus Maranthae, rub.
Lunatus, Eryngium planum totum Caeruleum, Fritillaria mont. Genista Hispan.
flo. alb. Pomegranads, Oriental Iacynth, Bulbous Iris, Laurels, Cherry Laurel,
Lychnis double white, Matricaria double flo. Olives, Pancration, Papaver
spinociss. Maracoc, Rosemary, Sisynrichium, Turpentine-tree, Teucrium mas
Tithymal. Myrtifol. Vetonica doub. flo. single Violets, Lavender, Serpentaria
trifol. etc. Ornithogalon Arab. white and doub. Narcissus of Constantinople,
late Pine-apples, Moly, Persian Iasmine, Opuntia, or the smaller Indian Fig,
Iucca, Seseli Aethiop. Agnus Castus, Malva Arborescens, Cistus mas. Althaea
Frutex, Sarsaparilla, Cupressus, Crithmum marinum, etc.

And to these might some others be added; but we conceive them sufficient, and
more then (we fear) some envious and mercenary Gardeners will thank us for; but
they deserve not the name of that Communicative and noble Profession: However,
this, as a Specimen of our Affection to the Public, and in Commiseration of
diverse honorable, and Industrious Persons, whose Inclination to this innocent
Toil has made them spare no Treasure, or Pains for the furniture of their
Parterres with variety, the miscarriage whereof being sometimes universal to
the Curious, has made us the more freely to impart both what we have
experimentally learned by our own Observations, and from others of undoubted
Candor and Ingenuity: But of this we promise a more ample Illustration as it
concerns the entire Art, together with all its Ornaments of Use and
Magnificence, as these endeavors of ours shall find entertainment, and
opportunity contribute to the Design.

FINIS.

