THE UNIVERSAL MEDICINE: OR, THE VIRTUES OF THE Magneticall, or Antimoniall
Cup. Confirmed To a be Health-procuring, Health-preserving, and
Health-restoring Effectual Medicine.

By extant Monuments of Antiquity.
By testimonies of Honorable Personages.
By 100. admirable and rare experiments.
By 200. Persons of quality that have experienced the same.
Collected By JOHN EVANS Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

In hoc unico Antimonio videndam exhibebimus Vniversalem Medicinam, Medicinarum
Medicinam, and admirandorum aut miraculorum ipsum miraculum seu mirabile
mirabilium. Jos. Quer. c. 31. p. 386. LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne
(in Thame-street, near Addlehill, where you may receive information how to come
by the forementioned Cups.) 1642. 1651.

TO THE Honorable and Illustrious Assembly the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
of the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
THE admirable and incomparable Virtues of this Magneticall Medicine (having
passed, as the pure and well refined Gold, many perfect Examinations) now
presents it Self to your Noble Hands, humbly craving your Honorable
protection of this useful Medicine: It is amply accommodated with warrantble
Testimonies to be the alone Phoenix and Miracle of all Physical Miracles the
Elixer of Life, the Balsame of Nature; It contains Mystically and Essentially
the quintessence of all Mineralls and Vegitables, and Magnetically Sympathizeth
with all Animals, It is in Material composition, as being compounded in due
proportioned Number, Weight and Measure, an Abstract or Compendium of this
Elementary World: It is Extracted from the choysest and purest Mineralls, and
Metals; It is Animated by Celestial Influences, It is sanctified and
Metaphysically endowed with Excellent Virtues by the alone worker of all
miriacles, from whom every good and perfect gift proceeds: This my
Magneticall medicine is distinct in Nature, Compositions and Qualities, and
transcendent in Effects and Virtues from the common Regulus of Antimony,
whereof violent and pernicious Antimoniall Cups are commonly made and vulgarly
vended, The medicinal Virtues, by me declared to be herein Essentially
permanent, are Experimentally approved and found to be most certain and true;
This is a healthful medicine without having or leaving any evil qualities or
malignant Effects after the taking thereof, as I shall answer before God and
Man. Wherefore in full assurance and confidence of the Excellency and safety of
this magneticall medicine, I humbly present and subject this precious Jewel to
to your Honorable Just Censure and Judegment, earnestly praying that it may
obtain with you such credit, esteem and acceptance, as the true worth of it
shall really merit. And thus humbly and devoutly imploring from the alone giver
of all permanent Graces, upon you and yours a plentiful multiplication of all
terrene beatitudes, heavenly Indowments, and Celestial Glories, with his
promised reward for constant Faihfulnesse, which is a Crown of Life; So
earnestly prays.

your Honors most humbly Devoted. JOHN EVANS.

To the Reader.
WHAT the Lord has sanctified, and communicated for the health and profit of
many, ought not to be concealed for the envy and displeasure of a few: Gods
Candle must not be put under a bushel, neither must his Talent be wrapped up
and buried in the ground his endowments are communicative, and every real
Christian may vendicate his part and portion therein. To you therefore
belongs this Medicinal Jem, whosoever that desire to prevent contagious and
Infectious Maladies, to preserve your Bodies in health, strength, and vigor of
Nature, or to restore such as are already infirmed with desperate and dangerous
Diseases. Accept then this excellent Jewel as the singular gift of God; and
the Medicinal Virtues thereof herein mentioned, for the approved experiments
of Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful Personages, many of them for their
Eminency and height of Honor, wherewith they are rightfully ennobled, not here
to be mentioned: And the rest of such worth and Dignity, that for their Piety
and Learning, they are not inferior to many in the Kingdom. And although this
might give sufficient satisfaction to all reasonable minds; Nevertheless, for
that an undoubted Truth fears not to be exposed to all examinations,
whosoever pleases shall have a months trial of them before they buy them; to
the end that by the certainty of their own knowledge, practice, and experience,
they may be fully confirmed, that the one half of the medicinal Virtues of
this Antimoniall Cup, is not herin reported unto them.

A Compendious declaration of the most admirable Virtues of the Magneticall Cup.
1. IT purges the body from all Repletion, and fullness of evil humors. 2. It
will permit no corrupt matter to remain within the body. 3. It helps against
all evil affects of the stomach. 4. It cures all intermittent agues, and
burning Fevers. 5. It helps against the swiming in the head, against madness
and frensy. 6. It cures the Green-sicknesse, and helps against all
Obstructions. 7. It preventeth and helps against the Gout, the Stone and the
Sciatica 8. It helps against al tumors swellings, impostumes, and all other
aches 9. It cures perfectly Morbus Gallicus, and Lues Venerea. 10. It cures
perfectly the Kings Evil, and all scrophulous Diseases. 11. It is a good
Preservative against the Plague, and all Contagions. 12. It is a sovereign
remedy against Poisons, and Venomous corruptions. 13. It cures perfectly the
Falling Sickness and all Convulsions. 14. It cures Congelations, Lamenesse,
the Cramp, and Nightmare. 15. It cures the Smallpox, the spotted Fever, and
the Purples. 16. It cures the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy, and Plurisie. 17.
It destroys Worms, purifieth the Blood, clears the Complexion. 18. It
emptieth the Stomach of all evil humors, the Liver of choler, the Spleen of
melancholy, the Pectoral parts from all hurtful humors, the Head and Throat of
phlegm, and rhume, and all Distillations. 19. It restores Appetite lost, It
causes rest to the Senses, and sleep. 20. It cures Wounds, cleanses and
heals Sores, and stancheth blood. 21. It consumes, dissipates, and purges
away Wens, and other excrescences 22. It cleanses and perfectly heals
Vlcerous Sores and Fistulaes. 23. It consumes away rotten and putrified dead
flesh* and restores new. 24. It purifieth and clears the sight, and
consumes the Web or Pearl. 25. It is excellent against many sorts of Diseases
used in Clysters. 26. It restores from Consumptions, and preserves Natural
vigor. 27. It cures the Dropsy, and asswageth pains of the bones and
arteries. 28. It cures the Morphew, Ring-worms Cankers, and spreading Sores.
29. It purges, heals, and stays the Bloody F^^x, and the Whites. 30. It
dissolveth and purges congealed, cluttered, bruised blood. 31. It is safe and
without violence or danger, and never loses his virtues
A Confirmation of the Medicinal Virtues of the Antimoniall Cup: Collected out
of the most Famous, Learned, and best Approved Philosophers and Physicians,
that have written of that Subject.
OF all the Mineralls contained within the bowels of the Earth, Antimonium
deserves the greatest praise, for the most excellent Medicinal Virtues it
contains for the health and benefit of mankind.

It is a Mineral of dark color, interveined with glistering streaks,
consisting according to Paracelsus, of Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. Antimonium
corpus suum ex Mercurio assumit, estque natura Mercurij crassissima, postquam
expurgatur, vires and virtutes Mircurij omnes retinit nihilq^e est aliud, quam
coagulatus Mercurius per spiritum Salis and Sulphur. And therefore it is
generally, by all the Spagiricks, called the Balsame, Restorer, and Preserver
of Nature.

It was first discovered by Geber King of Arabia, and by him called Magnesia;
for as Magnes draws Iron unto it with the one point, and expels it with
the other: So this magnetically extracteth to^, and expels from the Stomach,
whatsoever within the whole body of man is found to be offensive to Nature, or
contrary to the health and good constitution of the body.

It is also called Lupus, for that it devoureth and destroys all Metals
except the Lion, which is Gold; and that it refineth and purifieth above all
other things; so does it also destroy all the corrupt humors that are within
the body of man, leaving no impurity to remain in the same.

Basilius Valentinus Monachus, compares it to a Ring, without beginning,
without ending, for that his Medicinal and natural Virtues are inscrutable
and past finding out.

Many are the Medicines that are prepared of this Mineral, both against inward
and outward Infirmities; but I freely and willingly disclaim them all
(especially for inward causes) saving only the Regulus, and what may be
conveniently prepared by help of the same, saying with learned and conscionable
Duncanus, Caeterasciens omitto, tanquam pernitiosa medicamenta, Jatroch. Born.
page 91. contenting my self with that, which by authority and testimony of the
learned, and the experiments of my worthy friends, and by common practice and
experience shall be (by Gods grace) invincibly confirmed. The first
cornerstone of my building, shall be that of Duncanus, confirmed also by
laborious and learned Milius: Hic Regulus est summum auri examen, ac vera
omnium florum, and tincturarum medicinalium, in Antimonio existentium materia,
that is, This Regulus is the chiefest examination of gold, and the true subject
and matter of all medicinal Virtues, contained within the Body of Antimony. To
this agrees the testimony of Basilius Valentinus Monachus, calling it Regulus,
sive Dominus medicinae.

Divine Authority, Nature, and Experience confirms this truth; for as life is
hid in man, so in all things, whether Animal, Vegitable, or Mineral, it is
invisibly incentred, and so punctually indiscernaable, that according to the
learned Philosopher Mich. Sengivodius Polonus, the living spark is only the
8200. part of any subject: admire then the effectual power of that spark of
life mentioned in the resembled Mustard Seed; and this to the understanding
Reader, may give some touch, both for the universality, penetration, and
perpetuation of this divine Medicine.

And now having discovered my Materia prima, I will produce such workmen for
the erection of this little Fabric, so well experienced in their profound
knowledge, that though by malice and ignorance, they have been often blamed,
they could never be shamed, nor justly reproved, and the first shall be that
Oriental Star of Natural, Spagiticall, and Magneticall light and knowledge
Theophrastus Paracelsus. He in the sixth book. Tit. De vita Longa page 167.
says as follows. Quemadmodum Antimonium purgat Aurum, ita purgat etiam
corpus, continet enim essentiam eam quae nihil impuri relinquit in puro, nec
ullus est usque adeo, in scriptis Archidoxeos peritus, aut tam insignis
Spagyrus, qui vires and facultates Antimonii, plene indagare queat. In prima
enim Isle, Antimonium adeo exaltatum and inter Mineras Elementi aquae
praedestinatum est, ut facultas, and virtus ejus nullo diluvio, instar
caeterorum aquaearum crescentium imminuta aut absorpta sit, adeoque his omnibus
Antimonium long praestat. In praedestinatione illud ita se habet, ut se
influentiae accommodet, nulla facultate, aut dote ejus diminuta, aut infirmata,
itaque ex omnibus mineralibus summi Arcani laudem optinet, hoc seipsum purgat,
and una secum etiam alia, quod si nihil boni in subjecto reperitur, impurum
corpus transmutat in purum, sicut de Lepra notum est, etc. Paracels. lib. 6. De
vita longa, page 167. Like as Antimony purifieth Gold, so does it also cleanse
or purify the body of man, it contains that essence which will permit no
uncleanness to remain in that which is pure: neither is there any one found so
skillfull in the chief secrets of Nature, or so excellent a Spagyrick, that
can find out fully the virtues and medicinal properties of Antimony: it is so
much exalted in his first Being, and appointed from the beginning to excel all
other Minerals that are of the Element of water, that his virtues should be,
and remain, without waste, or diminution for ever: and that it should
sympathize and apply to the celestial influence, so to be perpetually
sustained in full efficacy, virtue, and effect. Therefore of all Mineralls it
obteineth the praise of the greatest secret, It purges it self, and together
with him all other bodies, and although it finds but little which is clean or
pure: it purifieth cleanses, and changes that unclean body to be most pure
and clean, as it is well known by practice and experience made upon leprous
persons.

And again in the sixth book, page 22. Quinta essentia Antimonii venenum
adimit, pulmonem enim and cor and membra laeprae subjecta mundat autem and
corpus totum purificat and renovat mirum in modum: The essence of Antimony
expels poison, comfort the heart, and wonderfully restores and purifieth
the Lights and other parts of the body apt to be infected with Leprosy.
Moreover the 7. book p. 73.

Tanta vis and virtus est in Antimonio, ut restaurat enim and renovat universas
in corpore vires, ac facultates mirifice: Such, and so great, is the virtue of
Antimony that it wonderfully restores and renews all the strength and vigor
of the whole body.

And in the eight book he declares at large the several virtues and
medicinal operations of many other excellent Vegitables and Minerals, and in
the end concludes, Haec junctim uno in Antimonio latent; These that we have
severally spoken of are all inclusively contained in Antimony alone.

In the sixth book, page 22. He teaches how, by their excellency in virtue and
operation, to distinguish of the pre-eminence, and degrees of dignities of
Simples, the one above the other; saying, That those that perform the more
difficult and desperate cures, ought to bear away the glory of their excelling
virtues; concluding thus: Hoc videmus accidere Antimonio, curat Leprosos,
Morpheam, Alopeciam and similia, Scabies omnes, and Cicatrices, Leoninam,
Elephantiam, Tiriam, etc. Et iterum, Antimonium lepram expellit, magis quam de
ipso credibile sit, non secus etiam de aliis intelligendum. This we see to
happen in Antimony, it cures Leprosy, clears the Complexion, stays the
falling of the Hair, cures Ring-worms* Tetters, and scurviness of the Skin,
all Scabs and spreading Sores, and all contagious and infectious Diseases. And
again afterward, Antimony expels the Leprosy more effectually than would
be believed, the like operation it has against other desperate Diseases.

And in the third book, page 343. Antimonium nihil sinit putrescere: Antimony
suffers nothing to corrupt or putrify within the body of man. And in the
fourth book, page 265. Antimonium per transmutationes rerum preparatum est,
eoque reductum ut in dulcedinem abjerit, haec ab infantibus lincta, Caeducum
sanavit, in Antimonio vis ac tam potens Arcanum latet, ut paroxysmum etiam
vehementissimum tollit: Antimony is so to be prepared, and brought to that
sweetness that it may be taken of Infants, and have been thereby cured of the
falling sickness; there is so great virtue and power in Antimony, that it
takes away, and preventeth the most extremest fits of the Falling Sickness,
Paracels. lib. 4. page 265.

Furthermore, he in the sixth book, page 146. says, Sic ut Antimonium finit
Aurum, sic eadem ratione ac forma finit corpus: In illo enim est essentia, quae
nihil impuri cum puro confundi sinit, atquo adeo virtus permanserit, ita ut
sese ex influentia semper dirigat, neque aliquid de vi; ac virtute nativa
unquam decesserit. Merito igitur omnia, quae mineralium sunt, quorum summum ac
potissimum Arcanum in se claudit Antimonium, huic uni tribuimus, mundat seipsum
una eum reliquis quae immunda sunt, porro si nihil omnino sani adest, immundum
corpus in mundum transformat: Lib. 6. De vita longa, page 146.

Like as Antimony refineth Gold, so also by the same reason and manner it
purifieth the body of man: In it there is that essence that suffers no
impurity nor uncleanesse to remain confusedly intermingled amongst the pure
and good, and his virtues so constantly remains, directing himself always
according to the heavenly influence, that of his natural virtue and power, he
shall at no time suffer loss or diminution thereof. Worthily therefore do we
attribute to this alone, the power and virtue of all Minerals, whose chief and
most powerful secret effects, Antimony comprehends in it self alone, he
refineth himself, and purifieth, together with it self, what he finds
unclean: moreover, though he find nothing sound he alters and changes that
impure body to a clean and sound constitution: Lib. 6. And to conclude,
Essentia Antimonii est purgatio vera, quae purgat hominem excellentissime super
alia quaevis Arcana, radicitus evellit auferendu^, ac omne quod immundum est:
humanum corpus in supremum usque sanationis gradum purum efficit, ac ab omnibus
aegritudinibus mundat, etiam illis ex quibus oriuntur ulcera; quicquid penes
hominem fuerint impuri delet.

The essence of Antimony is a true and natural purge, which purges a man most
excellently above all other secrets, it utterly takes away by the root
whatsoever is foul, unwholesome, and ought to be removed, and reduces the body
of man to the highest degree of perfect health, and cleanses from all manner
infirmities and diseases, even from those that are the original and fountain
of ulcerous and dangerous diseases, it fully and freely removes all corrupt
and impure humors, that might lie lurking within any part of the body of man.
Thus far Paracelsus in his lesser Chyrurgery, page 323.

My second testimony shall be Martinus Rulandus, a man of sound judgment,
great practice and experience, he called the infusion of this Cup his Aqua
benedicta, in the 5. Cent. and the 95. Cure he says thus.

Communi opinione Hermeticorum receptum est, Magnesiam Saturni quam aiuut esse
Antimonium, existere Ens, and radicem omnium metallorum, ex Regulo hujus
Antimonii vasculum formetur ad usum medicinale satis aptum, mirabile and
idoneum semper, permanens citra ponderis sui viriumque amissionem.

It is received by the consent and common opinion of all Hermeticall
Philosophers, that the Magnesia of Saturn, which they call Antimony, is the
original and beginning of all metalls. Of the Regulus of this Antimony there
is made a little vessel or cup very admirable, fit and effectual for his
medicinal virtues, always remaining in force without loss of weight and
virtue: the Infusion of this cup he calls his Aqua benedicta, which he
always, (cum maxima aegrotoru^ salute in omnibus morbis vulgo etiam incurabi
ibus,) used with good success, and the restitution of the health of his
patients, yea also in such diseases as were commonly reputed to be incureable.
And in another place he says; Mirifica^ possidet virtutes in tota been medendi
ratione, etc. It contains admirable virtues fit to be used in all sound and
perfect medicinal cures, 1. It cleanses the stomach, 2. Purges the head, 3.
Preventeth the Lethargy, Swimming, and Vertigo, 4. Cures frenzy and madness,
5. Preventeth, and many times cures the falling sickness, 6. It cures an
inveterated cough and hoarsnesse, although it be of long continuance. 7.
Clears the windpipe and passage from the lungs and so helps such as are
short-winded. 8. It cures the Squinancy or stoping in the throat. 9. It
opens, purges, and heals all Impostumes in the lungs. 10. Restores the
stomach, and expels all evil affects of the same. 11. Preventeth and cures
the Plurisie. 12. Cures deep melancholy and madness, Cheers up the heart and
vital spirits. 13. Cures the Hypochondriaca or windy melancholy. 14. And is
of excelling virtue against all manner of Fevers and Agues. 15. It prevents the
infection of the Plague, or other contagious diseases: 16. It preserves from
the Gout, and every kind and species thereof. 17. It purifieth the blood,
cleanses the whole body. 18. Dissipateth and brings away congealed or
clotted blood or any other currupt matter. 19. Destroys and expels all
manner of worms. 20. Cures Morbus Gallicus, and Lues venerea. 21. It
prevails against the yellow Jaundise, and all overflowings of the gaul. 22.
It opens and cleanses all manner of obstructions it is says Rulandus,
Medicina Medicinarum, the Medicine of Medicines, good, healthful, and
profitable to be used against all manner of Diseases and Infirmities
whatsoever: Thus much and more Mar. Rulandus affirms upon his experience and
knowledge, whereof read more, Ruland. Cent. 5. Cur. 95. and Cent. 9. cap. 51.
Quercitan confirms every particular hereof, and recites many other
experiments of his own practice. See Phrm, restituta Quercitani, page 345. And
again page 238.

Martinus Rulandus affirmavit se sua aqua benedicta. i. Infusione Reguli
Antimonij, centies faelicissimo successis, luem venerean curasse: That is,
Rulandus affirms, That he (with his blessed water which is the infused liquor
in the Antimoniall Cup) has perfectly cured the French Pox, and running of the
Reins an hundred times, with happy and good success. This recites Quercitan
out of Martinus Rulandus.

In the third place I will produce Quercitan himself, Aqua benedicta Antimonij,
Insignes enim, and mirandas edit effectus, blande provocat vomitum and quatuor
vel quinque seeds, evacuando per superiora and inferiora simul, quod vix
praestabit aliud remedium, usurpatur etiam faelicissime, ad omnis generis
febres, etiam pestiferas pleuritides item aliosque deploratissimos affectus qui
ob radices profundius validinque infixas, vix subigi and edomari possunt: Vid.
Quer. Pharm* rest. 238.

The blessed water or infusion of the Magneticall Cup, perfometh most excellent
and wonderful effects, it gently procures vomit, and four or five stools
purging both upward and downwards together, which hardly any other Medicine
will do: it is administered very successefully against all kind of Fevers,
although they be pestilent and infectious; also against the Plurisie, and
against all other deplored and desperate Diseases, which are so strongly
confirmed, and deeply rooted, that they cannot be over-mastered another way, or
by any other Medicines. Thus far Quercitan in his Pharmacop. rest page 238.

Fourthly, This truth shall be further confirmed by the testimonies of that
excellent and learned Doctor of Physic and Philosophy, that wrote out of his
own experience and manual practice, Basilica Antimonij in the 22. and 23. page
he says.

Antimonium est laudabile, and singular Pestis preservativum, in Hydrope, Lue
pestifera, and gallica, in Obstructionibus hepatis, and Lyenis, Ictero, Lepra
ejusque speciebus omnibus, medicamen est speciale, and admirabile, ad
articuloru^ gravitatem a Podagra vel Lue venerea relicta^ commendatur, in
vitiosa sanguificatione, in Chachexia, and Lepra laudatur, Catarrhos, cor, and
pulmones serientes, cum summo successu exhaurit, and ex hoc celeberrima aqua
opthalmica paratur, ad unbeculas and suffusiones co^mendatur, and ad purgantia
Enemeta, cum bono and felici successu recipitur, curat omnes obstructiones
viserum, a quartana and tertiana liberat, in Anasarca comm^ndabilis existit,
sanguinis est depurativum, Leprae, Epilepsiae, and Podagrae unicum
preservativum. That is,

Antimony is a laudable and singular preservative against the Plague, it is a
special and an admirable Medicine against the Dropsy, the running of the
Reins, and the French Pox, against all obstructions of the Liver or the Spleen,
against the intolerable pain of the Arteries and the Joints, proceeding from
the infection of the Pox; it is much commended and praised to purify and
cleanse the blood against the Leprosy and the evil estate of the body: It
dries up all Rhumes and Distillations that offend the Heart or corrupt the
Lungs. And of this infusion is made a most excellent medicine for the eyes. It
is also administered with good and happy success for purging Glisters: It
cures all obstructions of the inward parts: It delivers from the tertian and
quartan Fevers: It is commended against the Dropsy Anasarca: It is the best
purifier of the Blood; And is the chiefest, and only preservative against the
Leprosy, the Epilepsie, and the Gout. page 22, 23. usque ad 30.

And again, the same Author in his Basilica Antimonij, page 39, 40. etc. says
thus; Antimonium, Naturam confortando sudores movendo, sanguinemque depurando,
tantum inimicissimis humanae vitae hostibus bellum in dixit, ut neque Hydrops,
neque Podagra, Arthritis, Gallica Lues. Lepra and hisce affines morbi, contra
talem medicinam quicquid moliri ausint: Antimony by conforting Nature, by
procuring Sweat, and by purifying of the Blood, wageth such war against the
most cruel enemies of man's life, that neither the Dropsy, nor the Gout, nor
the Morbus, nor the Leprosy, can any thing at all withstand the effectual
virtues of this Medicine, p. 39. And again, Antimoniu^ diphoreticu^ est
utilissimum, quod vires conservando sudores movet, in peste and febribus sursum
and deorsum movendo purgat, in Hydrope maxim Arcanum: Antimony is a most
profitable sweat-procuring Medicine, which by preserving the natural strength
procures Sweat, and purges away the infection of the Plague, and
pestilentiall Fever by purging the body both upwards and downwards. Ad capitis
affectus singular remedium: It is a singular remedy against all evil affects
of the head. Moreover in the 43. page he says, Antimonium per vomitum venenum
recentur assumptum, citissime ejicitur, in febribus and capitis doloribus
utiliter exhibitur, omnem Epilepsiae fomitem excernit, and horribilem istum
affectum, and hostem vitaequae humanae tortorem omnino expellit, and eradicat,
omnem vitiosam colluviem per vomitum, and alvum expellit: page 43.

Antimony by vomit expels poison speedily, if lately taken, it is given very
profitably against all Fevers and infirmities of the head, it sifteth out the
unwholesome matter of the Falling Sickness, and utterly expels this cruel
torture, and adverse enemy to the life and health of mankind, also it drives
out by vomit and siedge all filthy corruption and impurity out of the body of
man.

Furthermore in the 46. page he says, Antimonium febres curat, a putredine
praeservat, ciborum appetentiam excitat, ventriculum constringendi confortat,
omnemque calorem praeter Naturam, in corpore humano ortum extinguit, epilepsiam
curat, calculum francit, lumbricos enecat, mensis and urinam movet, and dolores
etiam padagricos extrinsecus adhibitum mulcet, and multa alia in medicina
praestat, dentium dolorem sistit, Balsamum vitae instaurat, sanguinem
purificat, obstructiones reserat; nunquam anhelosos and asthmaticos deserit,
summum sanguinis mundificativu^, Calculu^ renum and vesicae frangit and
expellit, urinam and sudores movet, ulcera, fistulas, and vulnera a putridine
conservat and sanat

Antimony cures Fevers, preserves from Putrefaction, procures Appetite,
comfort the Stomach, allayeth all immoderate, and unnatural heat, cures
the Falling Sickness, breaks the Stone, kills Worms, procures Urine, and
the monthly Flowers, asswageth the pain of the Gout by bathing with the
infusion and external application; and has many other medicinal virtues,
stays the pain of the Teeth, restores the Balsame and strength of nature,
purifieth the blood, opens obstructions, forsakes not to comfort and help
the Asthmaticall, and such as are short-winded, is the chief cleanser and
purifier of the Blood, it breaks and expels the Stone, whether it be of
the Reins or of the Bladder, it procures Urine and Sweat, cures perfectly
Ulcers, Fistula's and Wounds, and preserves them from corruption and
putrefaction. Basilica Antimonij, page 47, 48. 49.

I may not omit the testimony of that excellent Physician Oswaldus Crollius
Physician to the Prince of Anhalt, who in his Basilica Chimica, page 214. says
thus: Antimonium operatur mirabilia in peste, in febribus, acutis, in Mania, in
dilirio, in dementiis, facinationibus, morbis omnibus in universum opitulatur,
epilepsiis and aliis quamplurimis morbis adjuvat, per alvum, per superiora, per
por^s, per insensibilem transpirationem noxia copiose expurgat. Antimony does
wonderful things in the preservation from the Plague, in sharp Fevers, against
Madness, Forgetfullnesse, distractions, Witchcrafts; it helps in general
against all diseases, comfort against the falling evil, and many other
desperate diseases.

And again, in the 216. page, he says; Mirabilia operatur in Peste, quartana,
hydrope* longis obfirmatis morbis, diuturnis putridis febribus, cachexia,
melancholia, insania, delirio venenorum haustorum symptomatibus; It works
wonderful effects against the Plague, the Quartan Ague, the Dropsy, and
against inveterate and confirmed diseases, and against continual, rotten, and
corrupt Fevers, against the Leprosy, and foul spots of the skin, against
melancholy, madness, dotage, forgetfullnesse, and all evil qualities of
poisons and venomous things: And concludes in the 219. page, Non datur melius
catharticum: A better purging Medicine cannot be given.

I will conclude this discourse with the authority and testimony of Mylius, and
Duncanus Bornetus Jatrochimia, Dun. p. 93.

Antimonium est praestantissimum, and nunquam satis laudatum medicamentum, ad
restaurationem and renovationem corporis humani, tinctura enim illa expurgat
atrum sanguinem, and vitiosos quosque humores, idque cum evacuatione manifesta,
and pravorum humorum correctione, hepatis obstructionibus opitulatur, hydropem
discutit, icteritiam curat, laeticiam generat, leprosis sanitatem restituit,
and est praestantissimus adpulmones Balsamus: estque efficax ad Luem veneream
curandam, medicamentum. Maximum enim pro lepra Arcanum est, quo nihil fere in
hoc morbo praestantius inveniri potest: Lienem rectificat, matricis dolorem
sedat, menses movet, ejusque vigorem conservat, Morphaeam curat, Scorbuto
medetur, bilem utramque expellit ex toto corpore, Calculos frangit, caput and
cerebrum expurgat, epilepsiae and convulsionibus omnibus medetur: and ut
brevibus dicam in deploratissimis morbis fere omnibus summum est remdium: That
is,

Antimony is a most excellent, and never-sufficiently praised medicine: for the
restoration and renovation of the body of man, the infusion or tincture
thereof purges black blood and choler, and every corrupt humor, and that
both by manifest evacuation and correction of evil humors: It helps against
all obstructions of the Liver, and of the Spleen; disperseth the Dropsy;
cures the Jaundise; procures cheerfulness and gladness of the heart;
restores the Leprous to perfect health, and is the best preservative of the
lungs: It is a perfect and effectual cure for Morbus Gallicus; and the
chiefest secret against Leprosy, for that nothing is found to be more
excellent against that foul disease: It rectifieth the Spleen; asswageth the
griefs of the Mother; procures the monthly terms; preserves and increases
Nature in strength; cures the Morphew; heals the Scurvy; expels both
black and yellow choler out of the body; breaks and expels the stone:
purges the head and brain; helps against the falling sickness, and al
convulsions: and, to conclude; It is a chief and an excellent Medicine against
all desperate and dangerous diseases. Thus far Duncanus.

To the end that it may apparently, and without contradiction, be manifest to
all, that these collections and testimonies grounded upon knowledge, practice
and experience, and all the aforementioned Medicinal virtues, are truly and
really appropriate to the use and virtue of the Antimoniall Cup, being rightly
prepared and made of the pure Essence, and Regulus of Antimony, I will conclude
with the testimony of Milius and Duncanus in these words: Regulus Antimonii,
est summum Auri examen ac vera omnium florum, and tincturaru^ medicinalium, in
Antimonio existentium materia. Jatrochim. Dunc. page 91. The Regulus of
Antimony is the best and chiefest examination of gold, it is the true matter
and subject of all medicinal virtues, properties, and qualities contained
within the body of Antimony.

The second part.
HAving plentifully Recited the Authorities and testimonies of the most famous
Hermeticall Philosophers and Physicians that in Foraign parts have mistically
written of the wonderful and admirable Virtues of this Philosophical
composition, and have communicated the same for the general good of the
Christian World: Now that our own Nation and Countrymen may stand acquitted
from the imputation of malice or ignorance, or both, as either wanting
experience and knowledge of the Medicinal Virtues thereof; or else wanting
affection to communicate the same. (Although this truth and my self have
suffered violence by the inhumanity of malicious potent adversaries:)
Nevertheless the only Author of these admirable Virtues, the true discerner of
the hearts, who selecteth whom he pleases to be the fittest instruments of his
Praise and Glory, has called certain choice and principal Gentlemen of
learning, experience and great worth of our own Nation and Country, to bear
Record and testimony upon their own particular experiments of his Sacred secret
and effectual work in the rare Virtues of this wonderful and admirable
Medicine: Whose testimonies I will set down in order with my humble
acknowledgements and perpetual engagements for their noble favors in defense
of this truth, for my self in particular, and in the behalf of all others in
general that have already received (or hereafter shall receive) benefit and
profit by their experimental encouragements.

The first I will set down is the Testimony of that honorable and learned
Gentleman, Sir Francis Kinnaston Knight, Esquire to his Majesty's Sacred Person, in
these words.

WHereas declaration has been made of the Medicinal Virtues of the
Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup by John Evans Minister and Preacher of the word
of God; sithence which time many good experiments have been made thereof, as
partly by our own experience, and partly by the commendable relation of our
good friends and acquaintance we are sufficiently informed, and for that it is
always found to be a most safe, healthful, and an excellent Medicine; and
that much good has been done by the uses, benefits, and virtues thereof, unto
very many that were infirmed with desperate and dangerous Diseases: To the end
that a Jewel of such manifold virtues, and so necessary and profitable for the
general good, especially of those that inhabit in remote places from learned
Physicians; and also for the benefit of the poorer sort of People, may be the
more communicative, and generally known; We affirm and testify that the
prepared liquor of this Magneticall Cup, duly prepared, and discreetly
administered according to the direction by the said Mr. Evans prescribed, has
upon much experience and trial been found to be both a safe and Healthful
Medicine, and also of gentle operation, and of such admirable effects and
Virtues, that it justly meriteth to be both approved and commended for the
general good of all men.

Francis Kinnaston Knight, Esquire; to his Majesty's body. Nicholas Page D. of
Divinity and Philosophy. William Molyns Esquire. Roger Ellis Esquire.


The second testimony is the experimental relation of the right worshipful
Sir Thomas Middelton Knight whom I acknowledge to have been my noble Mecaenas
in these studies, and the only Fosterer and favorer of this famous Medicine at
its first growth into any perfection into this Noble Island of great Britain.

MAster Evans, that you may see that I am not unmindfull of my Promise made
unto you, touching my knowledge of the Virtues of the Magneticall or
Antimoniall Cup, I have sent these few lines unto you, not taking upon me to
set forth the full and true worth and excellent Virtues of the same, lest by
seeking to set them forth to the life, I should by my unskillfull handling of
an unaccustomed pencill, deface the same, neither can I, neither am I willing
to certify the parties names that I have cured therewith, both because they
are so many, and also because I will not wrong those grave and learned Doctors
that had them in hand before they came to me and failed to cure them, only I
will impart unto you my opinion of the Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup, and what
Cures I have done with it. The liquor of the Cup I call that, the wine in which
it has been infused, if it be duly prepared observing convenient times will
work incredible cures, working either upwards or downwards according to the
constitution and time it is made, and given, which is a secret* but of great
use to them that will practice that kind of Physic; It expels all noisome and
superabounding humors, it strengthens Nature, and whether it work or work not,
it never hurts (which is contrary to all other Physic) for if that other
material substantial feculent Physic remain and lie within the body, it will
endanger it. It is the most precious thing that any man can have, whether he
be rich or poor, for by it a man shall preserve Health, procure Health, and
prevent Sickness, both to himself and Family, both old and young, and cost him
but a little, the fourtieth part of a Doctors fee, the value of 6d. and if
there were no other Virtues in it than has been spoken, this were sufficient
to commend it: The cures that I have done with it, are truly more than I can
recall to memory; for I have not refused any (whatsoever Disease he or they
were troubled or infected with) except Ulcers and running Soars, which require
also the Chyrurgeons help as well as the Physician, and often times both are
necessary to make a perfect Cure. Some of those Soars have passed my hands, not
many: I have cured all manner of Headaches, Frensies, and Madness, the
Pestilentiall and the Spotted Fever, the Quotidian Tertian, and Intermittent
Agues, the Falling Sickness, the foul (or French) Disease, the Convulsions,
which were thought to be witcheries, the Mother, the yellow and the black
Jaundice, the Consumption that is not too far gone, given ease and prevented
the Stone, given ease and prevented the Gout: I have cured diverse of
Impostumes, I bless God for his goodness and great mercy vouchsafed to me; I
have given it to more than a thousand (since I began to practice with it) and I
never heard of any that miscarried, nor of ten in all that number that I failed
to cure; I have given it to men and women of fourscore years old, to sucking
Children, to women with Child, and never any miscarried, but all have received
benefit by it, blessed be God that gives such varieties of virtues to so
slender a means; I am verily persuaded that there is no Disease that this will
not cure, being rightly prepared, given, and followed, I must confess I cannot
sufficiently praise it, nor give it any fit value or estimable rate, it
exceeding the Gold of Ophire as much as Health does Sickness; with this I will
conclude: It purges and purifieth the Body from all superfluous and
praeternaturall Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy, and makes the body
vigorous, strong, and lusty. What I have written is not by relation from
others, but from my own experience, and to give satisfaction to your desires,
that have taken so much pains, both in the making of the Magneticall Cup, and
in setting forth the Virtues thereof most truly, yet short, in truth, of what
it has; So I conclude, and rest your well wishing friend,

THO. MIDDELTON.

The third testimony shall be the experimental and judicious approbation of
that most Reverend, learned, and holy Divine, now resting with the Lord in
fullness of Joy, Mr. Richard Naper, alias Sandy, Doctor of Divinity,
Philosophy, and Physic: and in his life time Rector of Linford magna in the
County of Buckingham; his words are these.

MUch indeared Mr. Evans, whereas you desire to have my approbation of your
Magneticall Cup, I have most willingly embraced the rule of the blessed
Apostle, Omnia explorate quod bonum fuerit retinete; Although I needed not by
reason of my long practice and much experience, seek out the experiments of new
Medicines; nevertheless I have often times made good use of that Magneticall
or Antimoniall Cup I had from you, and have found the effects and virtues
thereof to be both wonderful and many, and worthy of great estimation, and to
agree very well with all constitutions, and is found to be in the use very
gentle, and without any violence or danger, being administered in a convenient
proportion, and it purges the body well both by vomit and siedge; the infusion
may be made with Wine, Ale, Beer, or with any other convenient liquor,
nevertheless an appropriate vehicle cannot otherwise than profitably further
the effect; I prevails very well against Obstructions, against the
Falling Sickness, Melancholy, Madness, Apoplexy, and against many other
dangerous and desperate Diseases, and Maladies, which would be too long to set
down particularly, and as learned writers affirm, that it is an universal
Medicine; so may it also be of perpetual continuance, which I the rather
conceive and do believe, for that I have often times made use of the
Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup I had from you, and its Physical operations and
virtues are found neither to waste fail nor diminish: And therefore I would
wish you to proceed not only in your careful preparation and due composition
of this excellent Medicine, but in the further discovery of other profitable
good things which the Lord shall please to impart unto you, and you shall find
me ever, your very loving and assured friend,

RIC. NAPER.

The fourth testimony that shall be produced, shall be the judgment and
experimental approbation of a profound Philosopher, and an excellent
Physician, famous throughout all Europe for his great learning, profound
judgment, elegant expression, confirmed skill, and universal knowledge, both
in sacred Theological Mysteries, as also in Philosophical, Hermeticall, and
Chymicall Speculations, his words are these.

WHereas I was requested by Mr. John Evans, Preacher of the Word of God, to
express my mind and knowledge concerning the natures and Virtues of the
Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup; These are to testify, That the liquor that
has resided in them by moderate and kindly heat of fire, does draw unto it,
and indueth the Virtues and properties thereof, insomuch that if it be drunk
down fasting it purges as well by vomit as downward, all such offensive and
preternaturall humors, as are inclined to cause and engender many perilous
Diseases, as tough Phlegmatic humors, which cause Falling Sickness, Cachexies,
and stupid Diseases, also against Fevers as well continual as intermittent,
and to discharge the stomach at any time, over-burthened with superfluous
humors, proceeding of Surfeits or otherwise. My conclusion therefore is, That
such a Cup will prove very beneficial for such as dwell in the Country, and
either are far from a Physician, or else being near, have not the purse to use
either Physician or Apothecary; and especially for that it is a perpetual
Medicine whose Virtues fail not. And to testify thus much I do set to my hand,

ROBERT. FLUD, Esquire; and Dr. of Physic.

In the fifth place, I will set down the Testimony of two learned Gentlemen,
Dr. Vanderlasse, and Dr. Rudston, in these words.

FOr as much as it is apparent by the testimonies and sentences of all Writers
and Authors Phylosophicall and Physical; and that it is obvious to every
sensible man, that things Coct, digested, and separated from their impurities
are of more virtue and efficacy in all Physical use, than things Crude and
Feculent, as also that of Animals, Vegitables, and Minerals; the Minerals bear
Sovereignty in Physic, and knowing that by the opinion of the best Authors and
their practic, that amongst Minerals, Antimony Phylosophycally prepared, is
generally preferred by all, for an excellent universal Medicine against all
dangerous and pernicious diseases: It is without all question that being
digested and purged from all his Impurities and Feculencies as M. John Evans
Minister and Preacher of the word of God has done, and made it into a Cup for
convenience of infusion, preparation and fit proportion of doze, by digestion
of which in convenient liquor of Wine, Beer, or Cider by the moderate heat of
fire, it attracteth the Virtues into any fit liquor, which being taking fasting
purges the body from all offensive and preternaturall humors* which are the
original causes of all diseases, and the operation is both safe and gentle,
and works by Vomit and Siedge, Sweat and Urine, any one of these ways, or
all these ways, as nature, and the offensive humors, best requires; and is
found always to be safe and without any violence to nature, or danger to the
patient; and therefore most writers of authority do affirm it to be an
universal and perpetual Medicine, whose Virtues never fails as experience
has sufficiently confirmed, and to testify thus much we have subscribed our
names.

BARTHOL: VANDERLASSE Medic. and Chyr. Operator. Jo: RUDSTON, Phylo: and Phy:
Dr.


The sixth testimony shall be the experimental approbation and judgment of a
learned Gentleman, a high-German born: but now a perfect Englishman, in these
words.

FOr to help quickly, and to cure safe and pleasantly, all manner of diseases
in men's bodies, cannot be found a more excellent medicine than the Magneticall
or Antimoniall Cup, whose virtues by long and often trial and experience by
several men and nations, have been found infinite and never to decay by often
and much usage or succession of time: Therefore this Chymicall or Magneticall
Cup is found very available and to cure all manner of Head-achings: against the
Megrim, Vertigo, Madness, Frenzy, Melancholy, Falling sickness, Cramps,
Convulsions, against soreness of eyes proceeding from evil vapors ascending
from the Stomach, evil digestion of the Stomach, Surfeits, Plurisies, against
the stuffing of the lungs, and shortness of wind, against all Fluxes, Jaunders,
Green sickness, Dropsies, Obstructions, Gout, French pox, Scurvey, Morphew,
Scabs, Calenture, hot burning Fevers, and against all manner of Agues, and
against the infection of the Plague, Poisons or other infectious diseases being
administered in the beginning; Also this everlasting Chymicall or Magneticall
Cup may right well be styled an Universal Medicine or Panacea, whose Virtues
never decays; and therefore most necessary and useful for any Gentleman
dwelling in the Country, living remote from expert Physicians, and these
Magneticall or Antimoniall Cups are made and prepared with such Diligence, Care
and Art by Mr. John Evans Minister of Gods word, that they are safe to be used;
In testimony hereunto I have written this with mine own hand and subscribed my
name.

Phillippus Mullerus Medicinae and Philoso. Dr.

The seventh testimony I will produce for the confirmation of the Excellency of
this Magneticall Medicine shall be the experienced relation of an honorable
Gentleman Francis Godolphin Esquire.

Kind Mr. Evans, had I been at home, at Farnbies last departure hence toward
London, I should have showed my self willing to have re-saluted you by my
letter, having formerly received yours: be pleased now to accept the
acknowledgement of my hearty thanks for your imparting unto me, the happy Cures
done by your Magneticall Cup, and the more perfect use of it confirmed by daily
experience: And now giving God the Glory, and you many thanks for the Cures
wrought by my Cup (the Child of your happy Invention, I thought good to
acquaint you that there came to my house a poor beggar woman of the parish of
S. Paul about the age of 44. years, and at my door fell into a pitiful fit
of the falling sickness and continued long in that fit: but after the fit was
past, and she began to recollect her senses; by questioning with her, I found
that her disease had continued on her three or four years, and that she much
desired to take any thing that would ease her, and that her fits sometimes took
her twice in one day, here upon I gave her the next morning white Wine ordered
according to your direction, and it wrought effectually with her, and neither
that day nor the day following wherein she took not the Cup had she any fit or
the least symptom of it, the third day I gave it her again, but then it
wrought not with her neither upwards nor downwards, but only by sweat, but
sithence the first time of the taking of it, she has not had any one fit,
which is now a quarter of a year past, and now she goes to her daily labor, as
she was wont to do; once of late I caused her to take it again to prevent a
relapsing into the former grief, but I am confident that she is perfectly
cured. Another young man aged 28 or 30 years, of mine own parish being much
troubled with that grief has by the use of your Cup (God blessing the means)
perfectly recovered his wonted health: And now lately one John Heckes a
Soldier at Pendinas Castle near Penrynne, who for three or four, or more
years was taken so ill, as he had a continual hysking and stopping of his
breath, and was not able to go without a staff and that to his great pain,
and was by as many as daily saw him thought to be in a deep Consumption and not
to be recovered by Physic, entreated me to send him Wine prepared in this Cup,
which I did, and he took it twice according to your direction, and within two
or three days after the taking of it, recovered his health, used no more his
staff, but grew to such jollity of strength as that he was able to carry and
manage his Musket, and does now serve in his arms, and do his duty as ably
as any Soldier in that Castle: Many other helps this Cup has done to diverse
that have made use of it, I pray God to bless you in the well composing of
many more such Cups, and to continue his blessings upon those you do compose,
to the health of such his servants as shall make use of them; thus tendering
unto you my hartiest love, thanks and well wishes, I rest your assured loving
friend.

FRANCIS GODOLPHIN.

The eight testimony that shall be produced is a true and certain Relation of
the experienced knowledge and Experimental Practice of a right Worshipful
Gentleman Captain Gunter living near Newbury in Bark shire, his words are
these.

COncerning the Virtues of the Antimoniall Cup made and sold to me by Mr. John
Evans Minister of the word of God, I do testify that I do Experimentally
know that a certain man about 30 years of age* (who had been grievously
troubled with that disease which is commonly called the Kings evil for seven
or eight years, and was consumed and brought very weak and feeble by reason of
the corrupt humors nourishing and feeding continually that disease) that was
perfectly Cured of that sickness and disease by drinking the prepared Liquor of
this Magneticall Cup thrice, and bathing the sore places with the Infusion, and
being administered to him the fourth time (though in a greater quantity than
before, it wrought not at all with him, by reason that he was thoroughly purged
before, and by the external bathing of the sore places where they were grown
up and enclosed before, they opened and there came forth much corrupt matter
like rotten sinews or putrified corrupt Worms, and afterward perfectly healed
up without any other help: This Cure was perfectly accomplished from the
beginning to the end in ten days. And this man continues perfectly healed of
this sore disease; it was administered to this patient in Ale, I have know this
Medicine administered to more than four hundred several persons of different
Constitutions, ages and sexes, troubled with several griefs and infirmities
that have been brought always to perfect health, by the Virtues and benefits
of this Medicine, and the Operation was always Gentle and Safe with good
success: And I find it also Effectual for the griefs and diseases of common
Animals; for my own Gelding being exceedingly troubled with the Scratches, I
washed the sores with this Liquor, and there came out foul matter, and rotten
dead flesh, and he was perfectly Cured with this Liquor hot. In Testimony of
the certain truth of what is by me related, I have subscribed my name.

HUMFREY GUNTER.

The ninth Testimony shall be the approved Relation of a certain worthy
Gentleman of Reputation and Credit, that writes upon his own particular
knowledge and practice, experienced upon himself: His own words, written with
his own hand, are these.

SIR, my Infirmity was a violent wringing in my Breast, somewhat above the Pit
of my Stomach, thence dispearsing about to my Back with such anguish, as if it
would have pulled Back and Breast to meet together: by continuance it threw me
deep into the yellow Jaundise, made me loath all meats, and almost in despair
of Cure; for I had been in a chargeable course of Physic, which nevertheless
gave me no longer ease than whilst it was in the working; Then I was
advertised of your Antimoniall Cup, which my Brother Captain Lathum bought of
you: and I was advised to make trial of it, which I did with so good success,
that in twice taking I was eased of my pain, and restored to a kindly appetite
with equal digestion; sithence that, especially toward Spring and Fall, I
feel some touches of my infirmity grudging and returning, then presently I use
the Cup as before: At this time I find my self in a good settled estate of
Health, for which I render most humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God for
his merciful goodness, and do heartily wish to you, his mediat Instrument of
this Favor, a plentiful blessing upon your learned and useful Invention,
resting, though unknown, your assured friend and well wisher.

JOHN LATHUM.

The tenth Testimony shall be the faithful Relation of Mr. Tho: Godfrey of
Kent, Esquire, and of Mr. Edmund Harrison his Majesty's Embroyderer.

MAster Evans, whereas you have requested our Testimony concerning the
Medicinal Virtues of the Antimoniall Cups we have received from your hands: We
give you to understand that we have used our Cups against all manner of common
and usual Diseases with happy and good success: We have given the Liquor
thereof to more than two hundredth several persons of both Sexes, from two
years to fourscore: It cures perfectly all sorts of Agues and pestilentiall
Fevers: It has done very much good to all that have taken it, and never any
hurt at all to young nor old: It has Cured our man of the infection of the
Plague; and suppurated, cleansed, and healed the Plague Sore upon him, and
prevented the infectious contagion of that sickness from many others; And to
conclude; All that received it, have received much good and benefit by the use
and Virtues of it, whatsoever their Diseases or Infirmities were, and none of
them received any manner of harm at all by the use of it; In testimony whereof,
we have subscribed our names.

THO. GODFREY. EDMUND HARRISON.


The eleventh Testimony is an experienced Relation of the Effects (M. Nicholas
Benet of the white Cross in Fetter lane) found to be in the Magneticall Cup he
bought of me.

SIR, you have desired me to give Testimony under my hand of the Medicinal
Virtues I have, upon experience, found to be in your Antimoniall Cup, which I
do most willingly, in regard of the great good I, and mine, have found by the
benefit of it, and because I desire the general good of others also; it being
great pity that so precious a Medicine should be kept secret, that may do so
much good, with so little Cost: I have made great use of it upon my self, my
wife, children and servants, I have given of the Wine or Liquor prepared to
many of my friends, and at their entreaty to diverse other strangers; And I did
never know by my own observation or experience, or hear from any other that did
take it, but that they using it (and themselves, after the taking of it) as was
and is prescribed; found very much good by it, let their Disease or Grief be
what it would: so that I do verily believe that it does truly deserve that
title, The Universal Medicine, or a Medicine for all Diseases, neither can I
in Words give it the due commendation it deserves. A Merchant in London, a
friend of mine came to me and told me he had a daughter of twelve years of age,
which was very much troubled with a Disease called the Scurvy, insomuch that
some of her teeth were fallen out, her legs and other parts of her body were
exceedingly swelled, neither did they after much Physic find any amendment in
her, unto whom the prepared Liquor of this Cup was given twice, resting one day
between; it wrought well with her, and a wonderful effect immediately followed
thereupon; for within four days she was perfectly Cured: her loose teeth were
all fastened; her legs and other parts of her body were restored to their
natural proportion again; and she was absolutely freed from her Scurvy
Disease. Another friend that had been for a long time troubled with an Ague and
the Green sickness together, which was grown so faint with it, that she was
not able to go; it helped perfectly at once taking. Some special properties I
have observed in it, which makes me to esteem of it very much, namely the
safety and gentleness of the Medicine in its operation; for it may be given to
young Children without danger, as I have my self often times proved upon my own
Children of three and four years of age; from whose Stomachs it has brought
such foul corrupt matter, that I could not have believed them to have been
troubled withal, had I not seen it; It never straineth the body with that
extreme violence that other vomits do: for this works his effects with great
facility, gentleness, and safety, and also with incredibl expedition, commonly
upon the first or second taking: I have seen wonderful good effects done by
it, and Diseases that have been of long continuance speedily and perfectly
Cured therewith.

Your loving Friend, NICHOLAS BENET.

The twelfth and last Testimony that shall be at this time produced shall be a
Testification of the Experienced knowledge and experimental practice of a
right worshipful Gentleman of great Credit and reputation, and one of singular
humanity, and liberal disposition to further the Common good, Mr. John
Grymesdich Esquire, written also with his own hand verbatim as follows.

A True Testimony of the Operations and effects of the Magneticall or
Antimoniall Cup which I bought of Mr. Evans dwelling in Gunpowder Alley, 1634.
And by my wife used and practiced ever since at my house in Knottingley in the
County of York.
AT my first bringing down of this Cup, having a friend of mine about 15. years
of age, who had for four or five years before been fore troubled with the
Falling Sickness, and could not by any means of Physic or otherwise be Cured:
My wife made trial of this Cup, and gave to this young man the infusion
thereof in white Wine; and he was perfectly Cured without ever having any one
fit sithence: which I conceive to be a Cure beyond all the ordinary practice of
Physic, for although we used the opinion and help of diverse Doctors and others
professing skill in that cure, yet the Child was never the better until he had
this cup. Secondly, my wife finds by continual experience, that it is a
present cure for the Headache, the temples of the Head being bathed with the
Liquor of this Cup warm. Thirdly, there was a violent Disease in the Country
and Town where I dwell, which to many proved mortal (a pestilent Fever or the
like) but my wife has given the infusion of this Cup in white Wine to many of
her neighbors that have been sick of the same Disease, and none of them that
had taken it ever perished but recovered perfectly. Fourthly, at my coming
home, after Ester Term, I find my wife dressing a poor Servants Foot in the
Town, one of his Toes having a foul Fistula in it almost for a whole year
before; and it was so corrupted, that all her Salves and Powders could do no
good at all; in so much that she said, She was now out of hope to cure it, and
therefore would now give him over: but I advised her first to try the Liquor of
the Cup, which she had not before tried in Chyrurgerie, and upon my advise and
entreaty, she did so; doing nothing at all to it, but wash it with the Infusion
made with white Wine, and squirt the ten^ holese with a Syrindge, and lay a wet
cloth upon it, dipped in the same infusion, and she laid green Ivy leaves upon
the cloth to keep it from drying: this practice she continued without using
any other means at all; and within one month that toe which had five tents put
into it at the first, and one of them quite through, was perfectly cured.
Fifthly, after this, she cured a Gyrl of two Fistulaes in her Elbows, which had
continued for four or five years before, and had much weakened and wasted her
arms: this Maid was perfectly cured only with washing and cleansing the sores,
and Syringing in the Liquor of this Cup warm, without applying any thing else
to the Sores, having used all other common means before, but could get no help.
Sixthly, another poor man came to my house with a sore hand mightily swelled,
and infinitely painful to him, so that he could do no manner of labor, and
his wife and children were ready to starve, or to go abroad on begging, living
before only upon the poor man's labor: my wife taking pity and compassion upon
the poor man, bathed his hand with hot liquor of White Wind prepared in this
Cup, a good while together about half an hour, and a wet cloth being laid upon
it, the next morning it broke, and within one fortnight was perfectly cured.
Seventhly, again another poor woman being stricken with a Cows horn as she was
in milking, and her cheek sore wounded, was with the water of this Cup
perfectly cured within one month at the most. Eighthly, I have heard my Lady
Jackson affirm that she having one of these Cups bought of Mr. Evans, used it
to a poor woman that was brought to her, so drawn up with Convulsions, that
she had the use neither of her Legs nor Arms, nevertheless within short time
she was perfectly cured by taking the Liquor of the Cup inwardly, and bathing
with it outwardly: these I do affirm as remarkable cures of my own
observation, but I verily believe that a quire of Paper will not contain the
cures and helps that my Wife has performed unto, and upon poor people, and to
other in the Country since she had it, with the alone prepared Liquor of this
Cup. I may truly affirm that there has not been a day or night this twelve
months sithence the Virtues of this Cup was known in the Country, but it has
been still near unto the fire with Liquor in it both night and day, and the
Strength and Virtues of it still continues without any abatement at all: Thus
much I have written in my thankfulness to God for the help this young man has
received by your happy Invention, and for your better encouragement to proceed
in the well compounding and making of these Antimoniall Cups, verily believing
that the true use of it is more available for the health of men's bodies than
all the Drugs in London, so I conclude and rest your assured friend.

JOHN GRYMESDICH.

A Table of the Cures done by the Antimoniall Cup, as they succeed in order.
OBstructions of the spleen, and fits of the Mother, etc. nu 1, 52.
Consumption. 2, 17, 34, 40, 42, 69, 84. Convulsion fits. 3, 13, 41, 57.
Hydropicall humors: 4. Miserere, or Iliaca passio, the excrements issuing at
the mouth. 5, 56. Frenzy and Madness. 6, 18, 71. Falling Sickness. 7, 96,
97. Headache. 8. Pestilent Fever. 9. A Fistula. 10, 11. Sore hand. 12. A wound
with a cow horn. 14 Kings Evil. 15, 16. A wound by a Bore. 19. Biles,
Botches, etc. 20, 43. Swellings and Kernels. 21. Lamenesse in the Body: 22. The
Scurvy, etc. 23. Deafness, etc. 24. Swounding fits. 25. The Gout. 26.
Inflammations of the Lungs. 27. The quartan Ague, and fever Hectic. 28. The
Fever Hectic, or consuming Marasmos. 29. The Stone in the Kidneys, with
Impostumations of the Lungs, etc. 30. Obstructions of the Spleen, and
Inflammations of the Liver. 31. The Apoplexy, or Paraplegia. 32. The
Consumption, and whiskings of the Lungs, etc. 33. The Green-Sicknesse. 35. The
Dropsy and Gout. 36, 37. The Plurifie. 38. Morbus Gallicus. 39, 54, 55, 99.
The Dead Palsy. 44, 78, 91. The Mother, and Convulsion fits. 46. The Cough of
the Lungs, etc. 47. Sudden Lamenesse. 48. Oppressions of the Stomach. 49.
Abundant bleeding. 50. A Fistulated Leg, etc. 51. Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, with the Consumption. 53. The Small Pox in an Infant three months old.
58. The Strangury, etc. 59. The P^ifick, etc. 60. The Whites, etc. 61. The
Fever Hectic, with the yellow Jaundice. 62. Black Jaundice and Consumption.
63. 64. Dropsy and Consumption. 65, 68, 77, 85. A Surfeit and Dead Palsy,
with Lamenesse, etc. 66. A Fistula and Dropsy. 67. An Ulcerated Breast, etc.
70. The Ague Fever and Consumption. 72. The Cachexia, Green-Sicknesse, etc 73.
The Bloody Flix. 74. The Scorbuto, etc. 75. The Vertigo, etc. 76. The Fever
Hectic. 79. The Quartan Fever. 80. Blindness 81. Dimnesse and weakness of
Sight. 82. The Cough of the Lungs with a Consumption. 83. The Plague. 86, 87.
Benumbed Limbs. 88. Blood issuing at the Breasts. 89. An Impostumation in the
Lungs 90. A Bruise. 92. Excrescencie. 93. The Quartan Ague, with a deep
Consumption. 94. A man aged fou score and four years scabbed all over. 25*
Stoppings grown to a Consumption. 95* The Blood purified. 10. Over-charging the
Stomach. 10.
A true Relation of one hundred Admirable Experiments and Rare Cures, performed
upon several Persons, of several Constitutions, Infirmed with diverse and
several Infirmities and diseases, and restored to perfect health, by the alone
Use and Medicinal Virtues thereof; faithfully collected for the confirmation
of this Truth.
A Noble Lady descended of (and married into) an honorable family, that for a
long time had been dangerously afflicted with the obstructions of the Spleen,
terrible fits and suffocations of the Mother, and withal deeply plunged with
Melancholy: and by the judgments of many Doctors of Physic, not to be
recovered by Physical helps, was afterward within a short time recovered to
perfect health by drinking the alone prepared infusion of this Cup, and is yet
praise be to God, living in good health, and will affirm this for an approved
and certain truth.

2. In the City of London a certain Gentleman of good quality, that was far
spent with a languishing and health-destroying Consumption, and after much
Physic taken, forsaken and left remediless by the Physicians, was within a
few days restored to his health, and strength, and natural vigor, by
drinking the infusion of this Cup, prepared and administered in Ale.

3. A certain young Gentlewoman living in the City of Chester, being strangly
taken with violent Convulsion fits, that she could hardly by the strength of
four Assistants, at the time of her extremity be kept in her bed, so that many
(mistakingly) apprehended her miserable distemperature to have been occasioned
through witchcraft, and to be remediless by Physic, was notwithstanding, by
the special blessing of God upon this Medicine, restored to temperate
constitution and good health, by drinking the infusion of this Cup.

4. A Country woman mightily swelled with Hydropicall humors, and her legs of
such incredible bigness; that by reason of the extraordinary repletion and
fullness of humors continually running in such great abundance, that being
brought into a fair Parlour, the moisture that ran from her legs wet the
boarded floor, as if water had been there spilled in good quantity,
nevertheless taking the infusion of this Cup: within four days she was
perfectly cured and restored to her former health.

5. A poor man living within twelve miles of Chyrke Castle in Denbigh-shire,
that for six months, together had not after the common manner performed the
duties of Nature, being sore troubled with a grieveous Infirmity called
Miserere or Iliaca passio: whereby the excrementitious impurities of the body
were loathsomly ejected at the mouth, contrary to the natural order, was
perfectly cured by drinking three or four times the prepared infusion of this
Cup without any other help.

6. A Certain Gentlewoman, that for many years had continued Remediless and
comfortless, extremely afflicted with violent distractions, frenzy, and
madness, through the goodness of God* and the medicinal virtues of this Cup,
by drinking the Infusion thereof, was speedily restored to health, perfect
senses, memory and understanding: these six receited Experiments and rare Cures
with many hundreds more, were performed by my much honored worthy friend the
Right worshipful Sir Thomas Mydelton Knight.

7. A young Gentleman about 15 years of age that had for four or five years
before, been sore troubled with the Falling sickness, and could not by any
means of common Physic or otherwise be Cured, was perfectly Cured, and freed
from the violence of that cruel disease by drinking the Infusion of this Cup:
without any other help.

8. It is found by continual Experience; that it is a present cure for the
Headache, the temples of the head being bathed with the liquor of the Cup
warm.

9. At Knottingley in the County of York in the year 1636. there was a general
raging and cruel sickness, a pestilentiall Fever, or the like, whereof very
many died: the infusion of this Cup rightly prepared and adminstred to many
several deseased persons, not any one that ever took it perished or
miscarried, but recovered perfectly.

10. In the same Town of Knottingley, avirtuous godly Gentlewoman, cured a
poor servants foot, having in one of his toes a foul fistula, of a whole
years continuance wherein there was 5 holes, five tents put therein
continually, and one of the holes quite through: which Fistulated sore foot
could not be cured by the best skill, Salves and Powders of the common
Chyrurgeons, was within one month perfectly cured with the alone prepared
Liquor of this Cup.

11. The same right worshipful Gentlewoman, cured a young maiden of two
Fistulaes, one in either of her elbows, which had continued four or five years
before, which had much weakened and wasted her arms; she was perfectly and
speedily cured, by using the alone infusion of this Cup; having used all means
before, and could get no help.

12. In the same Town a poor man came to this Gentlewoman with a sore hand
mightily swelled, and infinitely painful to him, so that he could do no
manner of labor: His hand being bathed with the infusion of this Cup, the next
morning it broke and run abundantly, and within one fortnight, by the use of
this infusion alone, his hand was perfectly cured.

13. A certain poor woman was brought to the right honored Lady, the Lady
Jackson, so drawn up and her sinews contracted with Convulsions, that she had
not the use either of Legs, Arms, Feet, or Hands, notwithstanding she was by
the said Lady perfectly cured and restored to strength, health, and able use of
her former benumbed limbs, by the alone infusion of this Cup.

14. Another poor woman being struck with a Cows horn as she was in milking,
and her cheek sore wounded; was, by only washing the sores with the Liquor of
the Cup, perfectly and speedily cured. These eight last recited experiments are
certified to be approved truth, by the right worshipful M. John Grymsdych of
Knottingley, Esquire.

15. A certain man about 30 years of age, troubled for 9 years before with the
Disease called the Kings evil, and much consumed and weakened therewith, was
perfectly cured of that Disease, by the use of the infusion of this Cup. M.
Humfrey Guntur, Esquire, living near Newberry, performed this with many other
very rare cures.

16. In Wallingford, Mr. Smiths Daughter of the George, was perfectly cured of
the Kings-Evill with the infusion thereof, although it was broken out into very
many dangerous and Ulcerous sores about her neck and face. Mr. William Mollins,
Esquire; who lent them his Cup wherewith they cured this patient, of that sore
disease, testifies this.

17. In Mortelake near Richmond a Gentleman of good worth and reputation now
lives, spent very far with a long continued languishing Consumption: and at
length left remediless, and forsaken by many Doctors and Physicians, was
afterward perfectly recovered to good health, appetite, digestion, and
healthful constitution of body, by drinking the infusion of this Cup three
times, being prepared in Ale: witness hereunto M. Humfrey Benet, Esquire.

18. In Barnet ten miles from London, a certain poor man distracted with
extreme Frenzy and Madness, to whom Mrs. Baker dwelling in the Town,
administered in good and sufficient quantity of the Liquor of this Cup, a pint
(of Ale) at a time, for three times: It caused him to vomit, and to purge
plentifully, and fell a bleeding at the nostrills and bled well, stayed of it
self; the patient slept, and perfectly recovered, and remains well, praise to
God.

19. In the same Town upon a Market day, a poor Country man was stricken very
deep into the leg by a raging Boar, and withdrawing his crooked tushes, rented,
tore, and bruised the flesh very sore; nevertheless being dressed with the
infusion of this Cup, was perfectly and speedily healed up without any other
help.

20. Also in the same Town, a certain young maiden being all over the body full
of loathsome Biles, Botches, and scabbed Blains from the Crown to the foot, by
taking the infusion of this Cup she was speedily cured, and her body perfectly
purged and cleansed and she avoided at her mouth diverse worms, whereof one was
of an increedible bigness, proportion, and form: and now she is in good health
and fair of complexion.

21. Another Gentlewoman in the same Town, having many swelling or rising
kernels of sanguine blew and other variable colors, as big as Nutmegs arising
upon her cheek and neck: With the application and drinking of this infusion
they speedily consumed and vanished away, and the Gentlewoman remains
perfectly cured.

22. Another woman living not far from the same Town being lame of her hands,
knees, and feet, and not able to stand or go, and brought into Mrs. Kings
house in a chair by the strength of men, using the infusion of this Cup, within
four days she was perfectly recovered so that she was able to go home to her
own house on foot, being two or three miles distant off. These five last
experiments were don with many more, by Mrs. King, alias Barker living in
Barnet.

23. A Merchants Daughter in London very much troubled with a Disease called
the Scurvy, whereby some of her teeth were fallen out, her legs and body
exceedingly swelled, and she in great extremity of pain; and finding no
amendment by all the former means they had used; by taking the infusion of this
Cup three times she was perfectly cured.

24. An ancient Gentlewoman living near Fetter-lane, having for many* years
complained of an intolerable pain of the head, fell suddenly dangerous sick
and deaf, and all her face and nose mightily swelled. By external bathing the
temples and other parts of her head and face grieved, an Impostume broke in her
head and purged through her nostrils in such great abundance, that it was much
to be admired, that so much corrupt yellow thick matter could be contained in
such a continent, her body also thoroughly purged by the external bathing, and
she is now perfectly recoverd, and lives in good health, able to justify this
to be true.

25. At Wildertop, in the County of Salop, in the house of Mr. Francis Smalman,
Esquire, a young Gentlewoman being much troubled with oppilations and
obstructions and suffocations of the Matrix, whereby she fell into many
dangerous and desperate swounding fits, and at length grew to that weakness,
that she had many signs of apparent and imminent death; upon whom the infusion
of this Cup was enforced in small quantity, which wrought well and gave some
hopes: and after administered twice more; recovered the said Gentlewoman to such
perfect health, that within eight days she traveled safely to London.

26. An ancient Gentlewoman, that for many years was extremely handled with
such intolerable painfullnesse of the Gout in the joints of the Backbone, in
the Huckle-bone, and in the Knees, and Feet, that she could neither stand nor
stir her self any way; nor scarcely suffer to be removed from her Bed to her
Chair. By external bathing the grieved parts with (and drinking) the prepared
Liquor of this Cup, she was perfectly cured; and able within fourteen days to
go up and down the stairs and the house, and to do any necessary business
with as much agility and nimblenesse as any in the same Town of her years; and
has so continued perfectly well for eight years past.

27. In the same Town a certain young woman much troubled with inflammations of
the Lungs, and with foul Impostumations full of rotten corrupt putrifactions;
with drinking the prepared liquor of this Cup thrice, was perfectly recovered
and restored to soundness of health.

28. Another young woman that for a long time had been troubled with a Quartan
Ague, and a species of the Fever Hectic, and remaining, after much and long
use of many Medicines, without help or hope; was perfectly cured by drinking
three or four times the prepared Liquor of this Cup. These eight last recited
experiments were done by Mrs. King, allas Barker, living in Barnet ready to
confirm this to be true.

29. A certain young woman living in Leicester, very far spent with a Fever
Hectic, or rather a consuming Marasmos; her body so foul, and full of rotten
and corrupt putrifractions, that her breath and spittle was so noisome and
offensive, that none would willingly endure to be in the same room with her:
Was nevertheless perfectly and speedily cured, by drinking the prepared Liquor
of this Cup, without any other help.

30. An ancient Gentleman living in or near Leicester, for many years was
extremely tormented with the Stone in the Kidneys, with excoriations and
exulcerations of the bladder, sharp distillations of Urine, and impostumations
of the Lungs, after much Physic taken without help, ease, or comfort; was
perfectly and speedily cured by the alone drinking the prepared Liquor of this
Cup: and such great store of foul corrupt matter diuretically expelled that
would not be credited, should the very truth be delivered.

31. Another young maiden living within two miles of Leceister, much troubled
with oppilations and obstructions of the Spleen, and inflammations of her Liver,
her complexion utterly impaired with foul Morphew and yellowness; was
perfectly and speedily restored to fair complexion and healthful constitution,
by drinking three times the prepared Liquor of this Cup.

32. A certain Gentlewoman, that for many years together was taken often times
with the Apoplexy, or Paraplegia, which is a sudden retention and loss of
motion and speech for many hours together, whereby her health was much
impaired, her Stomach, appetite and digestion lost, her natural constitution
heat and vigor of body impaired, having many years followed the chargable
prescriptions of professed Doctors, without help, hope, or comfort;
nevertheless praised be to God was firmly and perfectly recovered by the alone
use of the prepared liquor of this Cup.

33. The Minister of great Peately in Leicester shire, being far spent with a
deep health-destroying Consumption, and so much stopped with Astmaticall
Oppillations, Stuffings and Whiskings of the Lungs that he could not officiate
his Cure, and so certainly determined for a dead man, that another procured a
presentation to the same Church; having also used all the common and usual
course of Physic, without help or benefit, was speedily and perfectly
recovered to perfect health, and sufficient ability to discharge his
Ministerial function, by the alone use of the prepared Liquor of this Cup.

34. In the same City and County of Leicester another man that for many years
had been mnch oppressed with repletions, of corrupt humors, tough phlegm,
languishing putrifactions, which wasted and consumed away his body and estate
by long use of Physic, was perfectly restored to health and avoided more than
40. worms of most strange, almost incredible, bigness by the alone prepared
liquor of this Cup.

35. A certain young maiden that was wholly affected to feed upon unhealthfull
trash, as Earth, Clay of the wall, Chalk and the like, and therewith had
destroyed the good estate and Constitution of her body, and could not be
withdrawn from her unhealthfull and unnatural longings, was nevertheless
speedily weined from her desires, and perfectly restored to natural and kindly
appetite, to due digestion, and to a healthful Constitution and fair
complexion by drinking the Liquor of this Cup.

36. A certain gross fat woman, whose body was much swelled with Hydropicall
humors, and full of impure and corrupt malignant repletions and her bones,
sinews and arteries continually tormented with restles and intolerable
painfulnesse, and having used the chargefull but unprofitable prescriptions of
professed Physicians, without either help or any mittigation of her
intolerable painfulnesse: was speedily recovered to perfect health, and freed
from all grossnesse and painfullnesse, by the use of this Cup.

37. A certain Gentleman in the County of Leicester afflicted in every
particular as the precedent Patient; was speedily and perfectly restored, by 3
or 4 times drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup.

38. A certain Gentleman, living also in, or near, the City of Leicester,
having been a great company keeper with Gentlemen of quality; and therefore
brought to much grossnesse of body, inflammations and plentitude of foul hot and
corrupt blood, fell suddenly into a dangerous Plurisie: and taking the Liquor
of this Cup, it wrought immediately and sensibly upon that side principally
affected; purified and allayed the heat, and dispersed the blood; he avoided
much blood by the Nostrils; and expelled by siedge much clotted and corrupt
blood, and other foul excrementitious impurities of the whole body; and was
speedily and perfectly restored to his health with this help alone.

39. Another Gentleman of the same County, that had been for certain years
grievously infected with Morbus Gallicus, being a most foul and dangerous
Disease, having many Ulcerous sores running upon several parts of his body,
and many hard scirrhus Bubones, and swelling kernels in the several
emunctories of his body; and his Bones, Arteries, and inward parts full of
continual aches, dolors, and intolerable painfullnesse, and utterly forsaken
as remediless by the common Physicians: Nevertheless by bathing the hard
places and drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, he was speedily and
perfectly restored to health and sound constitution of Body.

40. A certain woman also living near the City of Leicester that had received
hurt through the neglect or unskillfullness of the Midwife, at the time of her
Childing, and therewith brought to much weakness and Consumption of her whole
body, and notwithstanding the common course of Physic, she remained a long
time cureless, drinking the prepared Liquor of the Cup, she was perfectly cured.

41. Another woman that was housekeeper to a Gentleman of good estimation in
the City of Leicester mightily afflicted with violent and strong Convulsions,
that she was drawn or plucked together in two fold, and sometimes extorted or
plucked awry toward the one side, and her face set nigh back, by the strength
and extremity of this strange Convulsion; it was commonly taken for the work of
Witchcraft, and after much practice of Physians she was left remediless: by
external bathing and drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup she was
perfectly Cured.

42. A certain young Gentlewoman, receiving upon her breast a most violent
stroke by the elbow of a passionate displeased Father, by the sudden bursting
or wrongful contusion of certain veins, the natural course of the blood
became stopped, and flowed in great abundance both at the Mouth, at the
Nostrils, and at the Ears, and so continued bleeding more or less (and at the
Monthly times in greater abundance) for a whole year or more, and neither the
Chyrurgeons blood-letting, nor the best experiments of the Physicians, could
any thing at all prevail or profit, to stop or remedy this continual and
daily flux of blood; it much weakened the Gentlewoman, her strength and natural
vigor failed, her Stomach, appetite and digestion became lost, the fair
Constitution and Complexion of the body was changed to a deadly paleness, the
whole body to a manifest desperate hastening Consumption: when all other
chargefull and costly means failed, the Lord made it his own proper work to
restore this Gentlewoman to perfect health, and her whole body to natural order
and good constitution, by alone drinking, (and external application) the
prepared Liquor of this Cup: these 14 last recited wonderful and admirable
Cures were all accordingly effectually performed in Christian piety and
friendly neighborhood by my much esteemed dear friend Mr. William Palmer
dwelling within two miles of the City of Leicester.

43. A certain maiden through want of her natural monthly purgations, became
extremely swelled all the body over, and had also in the right breast, neck and
arm-pit, certain kernels and hard tumors, and all her left arm was altogether
benumbed and congelated in such sort that she had not any use or strength
thereof, and had also followed the prescriptions of many Physicians, with the
applications of many seare-cloths emplaisters and unguents; but all without any
benefit. By the external bathing and drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup,
her monthly terms came orderly and her whole body in every particular was
perfectly and speedily Cured. Witness Mrs. King of Barnet.

44. In the City of London near Algate, a certain young woman extremely taken
with the dead Palsy, in all the parts of her body, that she could neither
stand, nor stir, nor move any one finger toward helping of her self, and so
had continued for 18. months. And although no means was neglected that the
practice and Experience of the Doctors and Apothecaries could prescribe, yet
she was still helpless: But by bathing and drinking the prepared Liquor of this
Cup, she was perfectly restored to her limbs, that within 14. days she came to
the Church on foot without help or supportment of any, to the great admiration
and wonder of all the neighbors, that knew well how she had been taken, and
how recovered.

46. A certain Gentlewoman that for eight or ten years had been continually
tormented with most violent and intolerable fits of the Mother, and retention
of the menstruous, accompanied also with most cruel Convulsions, and
extortments of the several parts of the body, in such miserable and
intolerable manner that all that saw her (as well Physicians, whose costly
prescriptions she fully and punctually experienced without any help, ease, or
comfort, as also many others) conceived that her intolerable excruciaments and
extreme violent fits were beyond the common effects of natural causes, and
that they were done by Witchcraft and by the malice of the Devil* and some
were wrongfully suspected to have practiced witchcraft and enchantment upon
the same Gentlewoman: nevertheless by drinking and bathing with the prepared
Liquor of this Cup, she was perfectly recovered, and her body brought to
natural purgations, and healthful Constitution in every commendable respect,
and so remains perfectly well praise be to God.

47. Within 2* miles of Wallingford, an ancient man that had been for seven or
eight years grievously troubled with a foul inveterated Cough of the Lungs, and
much spitting of noisome corrupt matter, and so much infeebled therewith that
he was scarce able to walk about with the help of a staff, having also upon
him many ulcerous sores and foul Scabs, the remains of a confirmed Morbus
Gallicus, which wasted and consumed his body: By bathing and cleansing the foul
sores to the bottom, and by drinking the Liquor of this Cup prepared, he was
perfectly Cured.

48. In Bark shire near Sherefield Court, a certain woman being taken with
Congelation or sudden lameness of her whole body, and constrained thereby to
keep her bed continually for two years or more without any help or remedy,
although she experimented the skill of many, as well Physicians as others: by
drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, and bathing all the grieved parts
therewith: She speedily and perfectly recovered her health, strength and
agility of her congealed limbs, that within fourteen days she came on foot
seven miles, to render thanks, and to acknowledge the benefit she had received.

49. Another ancient Gentleman that for ten years found himself continually
clogged with some heavy and cold oppression about the Stomach; but being of
strong constitution, and withal full of Lawsuits, did forbear all Physical
helps, till he was suddenly so ill taken, that he was constrained to take and
keep his bed: And then drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, it brought up
abundance of clottered bruised blood, and other foul stuff, which having stood
but a little space became all a hard jelly, much like to a bruised Liver, and
as thick; and the Gentleman immediately recovered perfect health.

50. A certain man bleeding abundantly at the nostrills both night and day
without any or very little intermission, for four or five days together, and
could not be stanched by any means that could be used, that it was generally
thought of all about him, that he would bleed to death: To whom there was
administered of the prepared Liquor of this Cup, a good draught; the blood
immediately stayed, and although it wrought by vomits and other ways 7. or 8.
times, the blood remained stanched, and the man perfectly recovered: and this
is a wonderful property and operation that it should thus stanch blood,
whereas in cause of Lunacy, Madness, Frenzy, and the Plurisie, it is confirmed
by much experience, that it opens the Veins, and causes to bleed abundantly,
both by the Nostrils, at the mouth and ears, and downwards naturally, both by
the menstruall and hemerodiall Veins. These seven last recited admirable and
wonderful Cures, are confirmed to be most certain and true by the right
worshipful Willam Mollins, Esquire.

51. A certain young Gentlewoman having a Fistulated sore leg, with eight holes
of great deepness therein, and much proud flesh spongy and evil colored,
mounting and swelling up in an exceeding hie and deformed disproportion about
the sores; out of all which eight holes came continually great store of foul
thin undigested matter, as also many splints of corrupt and putrified bones
came forth: This sore leg was under the hands of very many Chyrurgeons for
three years continually, without hope of cure, and at length resolved upon to
be cut off: Notwithstanding, by bathing, cleansing, syrindging and drinking the
prepared Liquor of this Cup; the malignant humors were purged, the body was
cleansed, the bones were scarified and purified, the dead flesh consumed, and
the Gentlewomans Leg perfectly healed sound, without any blemish or impediment,
and as perfect and as strong as the other: This was done fourteen years past;
and the Gentlewoman has continued perfect well ever since, and is in London
ready to affirm this truth.

52. A certain Merchants daughter in London, troubled with obstructions of the
Spleen, and retentions of the Menstrues, taking too much and over-violent
Physic, brought a continual Flux of menstrous and diureticall infirmities
upon her, which continued three years, and cast the young Gentlewoman into a
deep Consumption. She was perfectly cured by drinking three times the prepared
Liquor of this Cup, having been before two or three years in the course of
Physic, without any help or comfort.

53. A certain Gentleman troubled with Astmaticall Consumptions and
Obstructions of the Liver, and of the Spleen, and being full of tough phlegm
and other crude corrupt humors, utterly lost the use of his speech, and
following the prescriptions of several Doctors, nevertheless remained dumb
and speechless for three, if not four years together, without help or hope of
recovery; by alone drinking the prepared Liquor of my Magneticall Cup, he
recovered his speech and perfect health within fourteen days.

54. In the same Country a certain young married Gentlewoman, without any
deservings of her own, had Morbus Gallicus, and a cruel sore canker in her
mouth that had eaten away the uvula and corroded away a great hole in the
palate or roof of the mouth, so that whenever she drank, it came flowing
forth at both her Nostrills, and her speech was so impaired, that it was well
nigh lost: Nevertheless by bathing her head, gargasing and cleansing her mouth
with this Liquor, and drinking the same inwardly, the Disease was overcome, the
malignant humor was purged, the blood and Liver purified and cleansed, the
canker in the mouth was healed; and which I do admire; new flesh grew and
covered all over the palate, her speech became perfect, and she was thoroughly
cured.

55. The same course was willingly taken by the Gentleman her husband, and in
few days he was thoroughly purged and cleansed from that foul Disease; and they
have both continued perfect well more than fourteen years past, and the
Gentlewoman has brought forth six Children sithence, of as fair complexion and
perfect constitution as any be in that Country; a manifest assurance of their
own perfect recovery and freedom from that foul Disease.

56. A certain Gentlewoman that was most miserably troubled with that
uncomfortable and loathsome infirmity, called Illiaca passio, or Miserere mei,
so that she could not for many months expel and purge downward the
excrementitious impurities of the body after the natural order, but came up at
her mouth; to whom the liquor of this Cup was administered twice without any
observable benefit; but at the third time there was given to her a full pint
of prepared Ale; and then the Gentlewoman sensibly perceived her bowels as it
were to unrowl and unbinde within her, as though, before, they had been either
twisted about, or cast upon some knot; whereupon she purged plentifully; and
with once more drinking of this prepared Liquor, she perfectly recoverd her
former health, and natural order and constitution of her body, and has so
remained ever since.

57. A certain young man extremely tormented with most strange and violent
Convulsion fits, that the Physicians not knowing how to remedy the same, gave
him over for a bewitched creature, whose cruel tormenting fits they ascribed
to the malice of the Devil, and to witches, his wicked Agents; was
nevertheless perfectly cured of his strong and violent fits, by alone drinking
the prepared Liquor of this Cup. These five last recited wonderful and rare
Cures were performed in Christian and Godly charity, by Mr. Chancy a Reverend
and Learned Divine, a Godly Religious painful Preacher.

58. The Right Honorable, the Countess of Leicester, administered the prepared
Liquor of this Cup with safety and good success to an Infant of three months
old (the like has been done to many sucking Infants and tender children)
against the small Pox, the Purples, and spotted Fever; and never any one
miscarried, but recovered perfectly of every one of these Diseases.

59. A certain Gentlewoman being somewhat troubled with the Strangury, and
painful sharp Distillations (and often times long retention of Urine) took
Physic from an ignorant and wicked Imposturer, that gave her poysonfull pills
of ill prepared Mercury sublimate, whereby her body was much swelled, her teeth
fell to be loose and some fell out, all her bowels and internal parts were
cruelly tormented with excrutiations and burning Inflammations; To whom the
Liquor of this Cup was speedily administered; it wrought upon her gently
fourteen days; expelled the poison, purged the malignities and evil symptoms
occasioned by the poison received, and perfectly recovered the Gentlewoman, who
is very well, and ready to affirm this truth.

60. A certain ancient Gentleman prisoner in the Kings Bench. that for many
years together had been grievously troubled with an inveterate cough,
astmaticall stoppings of the Lungs, and a continual P^isick, tough Phlegm, and
other foul putrifactive humors; was speedily and perfectly cured and freed
from all the recited evil affects, by three times drinking the prepared Liquor
of this my Magneticall Cup, without any other help. These two last recited
experiments were performed by Mr. Francis Tailor, who then was Prisoner in the
Kings Bench.

61. An ancient Gentlewoman that for three years together was continually
troubled with a great Flux of the Menstrues, and also of the whites in great
abundance; was by drinking the prepared Liquor of this Magneticall Cup (and
another secret manner of application) speedily and perfectly cured.

62. Another ancient Gentlewoman that had for a long time languished with the
Fever Hectic and yellow Jaundice, and other infirmities, which might (indeed)
be esteemed incurable in one of her years, and was forsaken of the Doctors of
Physic, and esteemed of her neighbors, and of her own husband, to be
irrecoverable; who therefore made then preparation for her Funeral:
Nevertheless taking but thrice only the prepared Liquor of this Cup, she was
perfectly recovered to health, this was eight years past, and the Gentlewoman
lives not far from Bow-lane in London, ready to confirm this approved truth.

63. Another woman aged 66. or thereabouts, being far gone with the black
Jaudice and deep Consumption, and also at the same time taken with a most
violent spotted Fever, and in the judgment of all her neighbors esteemed to be
past all hope of life, and also forsaken of the Physicians, nevertheless by
drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, she was recovered, and is yet living
in perfect health, this was also six years past.

64 In the same house a young Gentlewoman that was much troubled with the
yellow Jaundise, Obstructions both of the Spleen, and also of the Lungs; was
perfectly cured by three times drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup. These
four last Experiments, were Experimentally approved by Mrs. Goffe dwelling
near the Church in Trinity-lane in London.

65. A certain Gentlewoman, having for many years continued languishing in a
deep Consumption, was mightily swelled with Hydropicall humors and
notwithstanding the best helps of the Physicians esteemed incurable (as all in
such an estate are falsely deemed to be) and so left remedies, was nevertheless
speedily restored to perfect health, all the Hydropicall corrupt humors quite
purged away, and her liver rectified, good appetite, and a kindly digestion
regained, and the natural vigor and strength of the whole body effectually
restored, by drinking 3. or 4. times the prepared Liquor of this Cup, without
any other help.

66. Moreover in the City of Worcester a certain corpulent Gentleman much
given to the company of great drinkers was suddenly caught with a dangerous
surfeit, and dead Palsy, lameness of all the left side; and this Gentleman for
many years before had been much tormented with the painfulness of the Gout,
this surfeit brought also upon him a fierce and a violent burning Fever: this
Gentleman used the best helps of the Physicians, but all in vain:
notwithstanding by drinking the prepared Liquor of my Magneticall Cup: and by
bathing the head, back, sides and all the parts troubled with lameness and
painfulness of the Gout, he was recovered to perfect health and Strength of the
whole body. These two last recited experiments with many hundreths more for
Agues, Green sickness, Obstructions, and the like, were performed by my worthy
friend Mr. Walter Child, Esquire.

67. A certain woman that for 7. or 8. years together had continual
suppression of the Menstrues and a very sore Fistula or dangerous ulcer upon
her leg, having many sore orifices where from continually came forth much
corrupt matter, and her body was also much swelled with Hydropicall humors,
with drinking inwardly the prepared Liquor of this Cup, and cleansing the
ulcerous sores therewith, the monthly courses brake down kindly upon her, and
purged well, all the swelling was abated, the Ulcerous or Fistulated leg was
perfectly healed: witness Mrs. Alliston.

68. A certain poor man a Brick-layer, living about Bedford, being exceedingly
swelled with corrupt and hydropicall humors, and brought to exceeding weakness
by a long languishing Consumption, who after much practice made by common
Physicians, was left remediless and incurable; notwithstanding by the
blessings of God, drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, he was perfectly
restored to health. Mr. Thomas Litton, Esquire, performed this admirable Cure
with many others.

69. A certain Gentleman of good worth and esteem living in the Strand near
Charing Cross, that for certain years continued most grievously tormented with
the windy and flatuous Melancholy in the sides, and with extreme pain about the
Stomach, his appetite to meat lost, and thereby cast into a deep Consumption,
and by many judged to be incurable: Nevertheless by the blessings of God, and
drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, within a few days he was restored to
perfect health; and so has continued still for five years past. This is
testified by Mr. John Lathum, Esquire to be an approved truth.

70. A certain woman having her natural purgations stayed upon her for many
years, and through the suppression of them and the malignities of sharp and
corrupt humors, had a most grievous Ulcerated sore breast, mightily swelled and
intollerably painful, having therein eight holes, wherein eight tents of great
length were put in at times of dressing, and much foul corrupt matter issued
therefrom continually; in began to mortify, and to look black and dangerous;
and the common Chyrurgeons advised the woman to have that Breast cut off, for
other cure thereof they knew none: Nevertheless by syrindging and cleansing
the Ulcerous sores to the bottom without Tents, and by drinking the prepared
Liquor of this Cup, and applying externally hot wet clothes to the sore Breast,
the swelling abated, the corrupt matter expurged, and the woman was speedily
and perfectly healed.

71. A certain Gentleman of great credit and employment, for 2. or 3. years was
most miserably distracted, and deeply plunged with desperate Melancholy, and
had been under the hands of many professed Doctors of Physic without help or
remedy, was perfectly restored to his memory, understanding, and perfect
health, by drinking the alone prepared Liquor of this Cup: And has continued
for many years since comfortable in mind, healthful in body, and every way
able sufficiently with reputation and credit to discharge an office of great
employment and trust

72. A certain poor Ship carpenter having for a long time been grievously
handled with a quartan Ague, and after with a most violent burning Fever, and
cast at last into a deep Consumption, having spent all his whole estate upon
Physicians, and by them left remediless, and helpless; was by drinking the
prepared Liquor of this Cup, perfectly and speedily restored to perfect health,
and strength to labor in his calling.

73. A certain young Gentlewoman being for many years very much troubled with
Cachexia, being an evil disposition of the whole body and stomach,
Green Sickness, Obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, and with continual
vomitings, that commonly whatsoever she did eat or drink came up again
immediately; she was also troubled with many foul and noisome worms, and had
taken very much Physic without any benefit or help: nevertheless by drinking
the prepared Liquor of this Cup, she was perfectly cured, her stomach was
thoroughly cleansed, her complexion became fair, her blood fresh and fluent,
many noisome foul worms of an incredible bigness were expelled, her natural
purgations were restored, and natural strength and vigor flourished to full
perfection.

74. A certain poor man that went very feebly and weakly, wandering about the
streets to beg his sustenance, that for many years was grievously afflicted
with the bloody flix, without finding any help or remedy, was perfectly cured
by 3 times drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, without any other help.

75. A certain Sea Captain at his return was very sore troubled with the
Scorbuto and swelling of the body, but most specially of the legs and feet, and
also with great swelling and painfulnesse in one of his shoulders, his stomach
to meat was gone, and his sleep departed from him: but taking the Liquor of
this Cup inwardly and bathing the parts afflicted outwardly, he was speedily
restored to perfect health.

76. A certain Gentlewoman that for many years together was troubled with
Vertigo, gidinesse and swimming of the head, dizinesse and darkness of her
sight, and with swounding fits, all which proceeded from noisome vapors
arising from her Stomach; and had taken much and costly Physic, without
benefit or help: By drinking this prepared Liquor, she was speedily and
perfectly cured. These seven last recited rare and wonderful experiments were
performed by Mrs. Elizabeth Ray, wife to Captain John Ray, Esquire.

77. A certain right Honorable Lord, that for many years had been very much
troubled with swellings and hydropicall humors, and was fallen very deep into a
languishing Consumption, and having followed for diverse years the prescription
of the Physicians, without any help or hope; Was perfectly and speedily
restored to health, by drinking the alone prepared Liquor of this Cup.

78. In Wolverhampton, in the County of Stafford, a certain Gentleman was most
extremely taken, and troubled with the dead Palsy, which had taken away the
strength and motion of the one side of his body wholly, and also of both the
hands and feet, so that he was not able to stir out of his bed, or being there,
to move or stir either hand or foot: was speedily restored to perfect health,
strength, and ability of body, to walk and write, by drinking the alone
prepared Liquor of this Magneticall Cup, and bathing therewith.

79. In the same Town of Wolverhampton, a certain Gentleman having been for a
long time much troubled with the Fever Hectic, and much stopped and stuffed
with tough phlegm, his Stomach to meat and digestion quite lost, and having
taken much Physic without any benefit or help, and forsaken and left
curelesse: By drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, he was speedily
restored to perfect health.

80. Another man living in the same Town of Wolverhampton, that had been above
twenty years very much troubled with a deadly quartan Fever, and could never
get any prevalent help to free him from the violence thereof: By drinking three
times the prepared Liquor of this Cup he was perfectly cured. This was eight
years past and he remains ever since in perfect health.

81. A poor Maiden living in the same Town, the Daughter of a poor Widow,
having lost the benefit of her sight, occasioned by overmuch coldness of the
brain, and much buffeting and beating about the head, but principally caused by
long retention of the Menstruous (howsoever caused) she was esteemed to be
sightless and remediless: Nevertheless, by drinking the prepared Liquor of
the Cup, and droping some into the eyes, and bathing the temples, her natural
terms brake down kindly, her head and brain received warmness, and in less
than fourteen days she recovered both her health and perfect sight.

82. Another Gentleman that from his Childhood had much complained of dimnesse
and weakness of his sight, especially at any remote distance, and hardly able
to endure the light of a candle, and continually had such a shuting and
pricking in his eyes, as though sticks had been rolled in them: By drinking
three or four times the prepared Liquor of this Cup, and dropping in his eyes
some, allayed with fountain water; it has so cleared and strengthened the sight
that this Gentleman being fifty two years of age, can now read and write by
candlelight, without any glasses for six or twelve hours together, without any
trouble or wrong to his sight, which he could not do at any time before.

83. In Tressul a Parish in Statfordshire, a certain man having thoroughly
heated himself with hay-making, and lying down upon the ground, caught a most
dangerous cold and cough of the lungs, which continued upon him even to a deep
Astmaticall Consumption, so that as well Physicians as others, esteemed him to
be incureable: Nevertheless by drinking the prepared Liquor of this Cup, he
was speedily and perfectly cured.

84. In Walsall in the same County one William Day was so far spent with a
languishing Consumption, and had taken very much Physic without help or any
benefit, and esteemed to be utterly incurable; By drinking the prepared Liquor
of this Cup, he was speedily and perfectly cured. These eight last recited
experiments, and, as it is affirmed, 800. more of several Diseases, were
performed by one Benedict Laurence, dwelling in Wolverhampton.

85. In the same County, and near unto Wolverhampton, another Gentleman was in
a desperate Consumption, and extremely swelled with hydropicall humors, that no
apparel could be had big enough for him, and his miserable swellings and
painfullnesse so great, and such, that himself and his friends heartily wished
his life to be at an end: Nevertheless by drinking the prepared Liquor of this
Cup, he was perfectly and speedily cured.

86. Mr. Thomas Godfrey of Seeling in the County of Kent, Esquire finding his man
coming from London in the time of Plague, to have fallen sick very suddenly,
suspected that he might be infected with the Pestilence, and therefore speedily
prepared the Cup, and caused his man and himself, and every one of his Family
with all possible expedition, to drink good quantities of the prepared Liquor;
and it wrought effectually upon every one of them, and not any one of his
Household miscarried. His man had a great tumor in his Groin, which by bathing
was brought to suppuration, and broke, and was cleansed with the prepared
Liquor, and thereby was perfectly healed. Thus by his careful and heedfull
prevention, the said Mr. Godfrey preserved himself and all his Family from the
contagious Infections of the Plague: This Gentleman has cured also very many
Kentish Agues; and above 100. several persons infirmed with several
infirmities and Diseases, with the alone Liquor of the Cup.

87. The Lady Middleton of Burshby Hill in Hartfordshire, having the same
accident as the last recited, befaln to her Coachman, coming from London in
the time of greatest infection, with all expedition gave to him to drink the
prepared Liquor of the Cup, and also to her self and to every particular person
of her Family; it wrought well upon every one, by vomits and otherwise, cured
the Coachman of the Plague sore, and prevented the infection from the rest.
These I do publish to excite all to glorify God for his merciful goodness,
and to stir them to the like Christian and Godly care and useful practice, for
the better prevention of all such dangerous Diseases.

88. A certain Country man being a Warrener, having in charge to walk about his
ground betwixt one and two in the morning, finding himself addicted to sleep,
having spent the former part of the night in unmeasurable drinking, laid
himself down upon the ground and slept, afterward rowsing himself up, found
his limbs mightily stiffned and benumbed; nevertheless got home to his house
being near, and threw himself on his back in all his clothes upon his Bed,
where he continued five weeks in that very same posture, not being able to
suffer himself any way to be helped, for the ease of natural necessity; at
which time I was come into the Country and earnestly requested to visit him: he
was the most miserable spectacle, and the most foulsome to come near unto, that
ever I saw in all my life: Nevertheless, with bathing his benumbed arms,
thighs, legs, and feet, with (and by drinking) the prepared Liquor of this Cup,
recovered his feet, and after, his perfect health. Mr. Thomas Brooks, Esquire,
and Mr. John Dickons, with many others do know this to be a certain truth.

89. A certain young woman of a fair and healthful constitution, undertaking
the nourishing of two strong children, the monthly purgations became stopped,
and stayed for six months; and in the seventh month clear blood ran forth
abundantly at both her breasts, to the great amazement and astonishment of the
woman her self, and of many others. There was speedily applied to both her
breasts, soft folded clothes, well soaked in the hot prepared Liquor of this
Magneticall Cup* And likewise the prepared, Liquor with two or three spoonfulls
of the Sirup of Mugwort, was given to this woman to drink two or three times;
and the Menstrues came in order, and purged naturally; and in eight days the
woman became to be perfect well, and her breast milk became fair and
healthful; and neither she nor her Nursing children had any manner of harm at
all.

90. A certain woman that for many years had been extremely troubled with
Obstructions and Oppilations of the Spleen, and such Astmaticall stuffings,
that she could hardly draw her breath, and had also a foul Impostumation in the
Lungs; she had spent all her state upon Physicians and Physic, without any
help or comfort: Nevertheless she was perfectly cured by drinking the prepared
Liquor of this Magneticall Cup. These two last recited admirable experiments
were done, with many more, by the Right Worshipful Mrs. Abigaile Smalman of
Wildertop, in the County of Salop.

91. In Warwick an ancient Gentleman lives, that has been for many years much
troubled with the dead Palsy, both in his hands, knees, and feet, so that at
certain times he had no use of either; and for five years* for his help and
remedy, he resorted to the Bathe, to his great charges and painful travel:
and although he recovered some help at the present times, and for sometimes
after; Nevertheless his former Palsy returned again at the accustomed times,
and so he remained without any constant help: Nevertheless by bathing and
drinking of the prepared Liquor of this Cup. This Gentleman is absolutely and
perfectly cured. Mrs. Roe of Warwick knows this to be true.

92. A certain Gentlewoman falling upon her back and shoulders upon a pair of
stairs, her left shoulder and arm swelled very much, and grew to be exceeding
painful; they feared much the dislocation of the shoulder bone; but being
resolved otherwise, the shoulder and all the arm was bathed with the hot
prepared Liquor of the Cup; the swelling brake in the small of the arm, and
much contused blood and quitture came forth; and by this only help, it was
perfectly healed.

93. A certain Gentlewoman having a little Wart under the left Eye, on the
bottom of the nether lid, being accidentally rubbed off, grew to a sore; for
the cure whereof she made use of several Chyrurgeons, but in vain; for the
sore grew to be worse and worse; yea, to such excrescens of proud flesh, as
exceeded an inch in thickness, and her face swelled very much, and continued
very hard, and the sight of her eye was quite lost for the time; and in this
exteamity she was left, and judged to be incurable, and thought it would be the
cause of her speedy death: Nevertheless, by bathing with, and drinking the
prepared Liquor of this Cup, the swelling became abated, the proud flesh became
mortified and fell off, in such sort, that being rooted where the sore was
foulest, it left a hole under her eye, an inch deep; the sound flesh became
soft, her face well colored, and her sight was perfectly regained; and with
washing the sore and applying wet clothes unto the orifice of the sore, without
any tenting, it filled up with good and sound flesh, and she is hereby
perfectly cured. Mr. Lemuell Allen, a Minister, performed this rare cure.

94. A certain Gentleman extremely taken with a Quartan Ague, which continued
upon him 18. Months, and although he spared no cost upon Physic and
Physicians, yet remained he still curelesse and helpless; the long continuance
and violence of this Fever cast him into a deep Consumption, his Stomach and
Appetite to meat was quite lost; his strength and natural vigor failed, so
that for many weeks together he could take no manner of sustenance, but only a
little weak Cullice given him by a spoonful or two at a time: He was in this
extremity admonished to take some of the Liquor of my Cup, aromatised with
comfortable things to please his palate; which he did once, and it wrought
gently by vomit; he took the common and plain prepared liquor of the Cup
twice more, and perfectly recovered his health. Mr. Hunnyman one of his
Majesty's servants knows and justifies this to be true.

95. A certain ancient man, 84 years of age, became all the body over to be
full of dry crusty scabbs, which would commonly scale and rub off for a
certain season, but would come again: at length they came all his body over
dry and hard like the bark of a tree: In this perplexity, his age and
noisomeness considered, his wife and friends were put to many experiments, but
none profited him any thing at all, until they bathed all his body over with
the hot liquor of this Cup, and administered the same inwardly; and by this
practice within a few days this old man, being thoroughly purged and bathed
with this hot liquor prepared, his hard crusty scabbedness scaled off, and his
flesh and skin was restored and renewed both white and clear like a young
man's: This I saw done, and do publish for an experimented truth.

95. A certain woman that lived by her painful labor, by some accidental
distemperature fell to be most grievevously afflicted with often and terrible
fits of the Falling Sickness, whereby her health was impaired, and that cruel
sickness continuing upon her many years, brought her to extreme poverty, to
whom the Liquor of this Cup prepared, was 3 times administered, and she was
perfectly cured.

97. A certain young man also tormented with the same cruel disease to whom
the prepared Liquor of my Cup being in good quantities, three times
administered, he was thereby perfectly cured: There has been cured of the
Falling Sickness by the alone drinking of the prepared Liquor of my Magneticall
Cup in several parts of the Kingdom, whereof I have been informed, more than
200. persons

98. A certain Gentleman in Cornwall, having been for many years much troubled
with the tough phlegm and stoppings, and Astmaticall oppilations and
obstructions of the Lungs, and thereby brought to a languishing Consumption,
that he could hardly walk with a staff, to whom the prepared Liquor of my Cup
was administered three times, and thereby was speedily restored to perfect
health; this Gentleman I have seen since healthful and well in this City of
London: These three last recited experiments were performed by my truly
honored worthy friend, the right worshipful Mr. Francis Godolphin, Esquire.

99. A certain Gentleman having unlawfully and unfortunately accompanied with
an unhealthfull and corrupt creature, had his secret parts mightily swelled and
exulcerated, so that his Urine came from him with intolerable scorching and
burning, and also issued forth at six several places, not one of them being
the proper and natural passage; for that was quite stopped up: the Gentleman
being in this perplexed and well deserved misery; was nevertheless perfectly
cured and healed of all these foul scorchings, swellings, and ulcerated holes,
and all the painfullnesse mittigated and assuaged by washing, cleansing,
syrindging with (and drinking) the prepared Liquor of this Magneticall Cup; and
by this practice, he was fully purged from the contagious infection of that
foul Disease, and was restored unto perfect health, and the natural passage
was cleansed and opened, and became serviceable and officious to nature as
before. This rare and admirable cure, although of a foul Disease, I publish and
testify for an approved and an experimented truth.

100. A certain Gentleman, an especial good friend of mine, being of a strong
corpulent constitution, having many Suits of great importance depending in Law,
for many years continuance, although the state of his body required some help
for natural purifying of the blood and evacuation of foul corrupt humors, yet
could not this Gentleman take any fit opportunity for that purpose; at length he
was suddenly cast down, and constrained to take knowledge of natures
complaint, and thereupon took a good draught of the prepared Liquor of my
Magneticall Cup; it wrought all that day and all the night following, without
any offense or violence, and gave him many vomits, and eight or ten siedges;
the second time it was taken in a greater proportion, and it wrought three or
four days together, and expurged away abundance of foul and corrupt matter:
and the vomits standing three or four hours after the operation, grew all to be
of one entire consistence of Jelly, like a great firm Liver with various
streaks of rotten blood, and other corrupt matter, that had for more then ten
years before oppressed this Gentleman's body; and certainly unless by this, or
some other good help, this had been removed, the Gentleman could not have lived
but a short time Mr. William Mollins, Esquire will affirm this to be an aproved
truth.

101. A certain loving friend of mine finding his stomach to be over charged
with foul gross and corrupt humors, and his stomach and appetite unto meat
quite gone, his digestion weak, his whole body growing more faint, and his
spirits more dull and less cheerful than accustomed, having one of my
Magneticall Cups, prepared therewith a pint of Hy-Countrey White Wind according
to the directions by me prescribed, and drank the quantity by me presribed, it
wrought well and gave 6. or 8. vomits, and so many siedges: this Gentleman
being willing to make a further Experiment than was prescribed, and finding
this former operation to be most gentle and easy, takes of the best sweet
hie-Country White Wind 3. pintes or 2. quarts boiles all to a pint or
thereabouts, and drank it up all at one potion, it wrought with him continually
night and day with easy vomits and gentle siedges for 14. days together,
sometimes 30. or 40. siedges with some gentle vomits betwixt, in the space of
24. hours: This Gentleman sent unto me to have it stayed: I advised him that he
would patiently permit nature to have her full course, for I observed that
neither the vomits, neither the siedges did any way violently constrain the
body, neither brought any thing away but digested corruptions, that the body
was surcharged withal, and could better be spared and expurged than
healthfully kept, and that withal, his appetite to meat and stomach amended
upon it, during the physical operations, and that I knew upon former
Experience, that it would cease when the obnoxious humors were expurged. And
afterward when the Operations ceased, this Gentleman grew to be exceedingly
hungry, and to have a good stomach with good digestion, and recovered perfect
health. And within a few days after my friend took it again, but it wrought
not at all with him, for when it had purged the body and found no corrupt
humors to work upon, it passed through the body in Urine without any other
apparent operation; I would not advise any to follow this adventurous practice
(although I have known many that have done the like with good success)
forasmuch as all constitutions are not alike, and that the safest way is to
practice according to the most common approved and Experimentally prescribed
Orders and Rules.

The Manner and Order how to make Use of my Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup.
TAke a well glased earthen pot or Pipkin with a fit cover, then put this Cup
therein, and power within and round about it as much White Wind, Claret wine,
Muskadine, or Malmesie if it may be gotten for it is best of all, or else Ale
or Beer, a sufficient quantity to fill and plentifully to cover, and to be
above the Cup, an Inch or two or more, that it may stand in full infusion; then
set the Pipkin upon or by a gentle fire, and let it boil gently for two
hours, and afterward remain in the same order covered in a temperate
digesting heat, such as you might endure your finger in, the residue and
remainder of 12 hours from the time you began; yet admonishing you to spare the
curiosity of some that sit up to attend the same all night; place it near the
hot hearth, where fire has been kept all day, and it is sufficient, for a
small heat will serve to keep it in good digestion; being thus used before and
standing covered, then one hour or two before you do take it, or administer it
to another, remove it from the fire, and set it to cool if need be, not taking
off the cover whereby the spirits might evaporate away; Afterward a Cupfull or
more taken fasting cold, purges the body from whatsoever is offensive to
Nature, the operation is safe and gentle, and without any violence or danger,
as has been oftentimes proved: Let them about four, or five hours after sleep,
if their Constitution require it, and then use or take any convenient diet, or
what they are commonly accustomed unto, and govern themselves as after other
Physic. By the quantity and proportion of Wine or Ale, allowing a pint of
Wine, or a quart of Ale to be prepared for two, you may prepare for as many as
you please at one time; and here note, that the greater the quantity of Liquor,
and the weaker it is, the more heat of fire and the longer time of digestion
and preparation it requires: You my also keep of this prepared Liquor in close
glasses or earthen bottles a fortnight or a month, and send it, or carry it
where, and to what distant place you will, for it loses not his Virtue: one
Cupfull is an ordinary and common Dose for Children, Women, and for other weak
and delicate persons: Nevertheless, it works best in strong constitutions,
when two or three Cupfulls are taken and drunk out of a black pot or glass,
and not so effectual out of silver: You may begin with one Cupfull, and so
increase the Dose and quantity of Potion as you find cause; for herein
discretion and experience must be your guide. For the manner of the operation,
it is somewhat difficult and doubtful to foreknow and presage; for it
operateth according as it is most convenint for the present estate and
constitution of the body: Sometimes, and in some constitutions, it operateth by
Vomit alone; in some others, by siedge alone; in others by Urine and Sweat; but
most commonly it works all these ways, and ever without any violence or
danger. To prescribe a time for the use of this Medicine, is needless; it may
be safely taken any time of the year, even in the time of the extremest heat
of Summer, or coldest of Winter; nevertheless, the Spring and fall are most
convenient for all Physical operations. To prevent sickness or when any
convenient occasion is offered, it should be taken three times, leaving a day
or two between, and every time take more than the former: but for confirmed
Diseases it should be taken three times in the week, if occasions permit, as
long as it will work; for when it has cleansed and purified the body from all
impurities and corrupt humors, it works no more; and then you may be sure the
Patient is perfect well; and this is a noble quality of this Medicine. I have
known it administered twenty nine times to a Gentlewoman that had the
Falling Sickness of nine years continuance, leaving intermedian days 1, 2, or
3. betwixt, as occasion required, and the thirtieth time it wrought not at all,
although administered in a greater quantity; and then it was apparent that her
whole body was cleansed, and she perfectly cured, and delivered from the
violence of that miserable Disease: For it is most certain, that so long as
there is any preternaturall humors, or offensive malignant matter, remaining
within the body, it will work. I have known it in some constitutions, and also
against some foul and dangerous Diseases, upon thrice taking, to have wrought
three or four days after by Siedge, yea sometimes with purging and sweating to
the 12, 13, or 15. day after the taking thereof, and always proved to be
without any harm, violence, or danger. And some being timorous, have requested
to have it staid; but I ever advised the contrary, and desired them to permit
nature to have her course, and to perfect her intended work, for this Medicine
is not to be feared, and will eject nothing but that which well may, and ought
to be spared (whatsoever malicious adversaries to experienced truth say to the
contrary.) Against the pains of the Gout, or any other pain, ache, tumor, or
swelling, make the Infusion strong with White wine, and bathe the grieved
places half an hour long, as hot as the Patient may endure it, the night before
you take it inwardly: And by alone bathing the Temples of the Head, the Legs,
and the Feet, it takes away all manner of inveterated pains of the Head, and
purges the Body also, although you take it not inwardly at all: and this is an
approved truth. For swellings, wounds, fistulaes, and ulcerous sores, wash them
well with the hot infusion made with White wine, and Syrindge in the Liquor
into the bottom, and cleanse the sores well, apply wet clothes three or four
fould hot, to the sore orifices: take care you do not Tent, neither bind too
hard. And by using this means, you may perfectly cure any Disease or Infirmity
that may be cured by any other Means, Skill, or Art.

Beware of Counterfeit, Pernicious, Dangerous, and Violent Cups: Howsoever use
them not according to my directions; and if you do, and receive harm or
miscarry, blame your own wilfulness and let your blood be required at their
hands that have abused you: this my Premonition shall plead my Innocence before
the Lord.

The names of such Ancient Philosophers, and Learned Physicians that have
written of the Medicinal Virtues of this Magneticall or Antimoniall Cup.
1. Theophrastus Paracelsus. 2. Martinus Rulandus. 3. Josephus Quercitanus. 4.
Duncanus Bornettus. 5. Lybavius tract. Alch. 6. Oswaldus Crollius. 7. Thalingus
Poppius. 8. Johannes Dan. Millius. 9. Angelus Sala. 10. Johannes Rhenanus. 11.
Basilius Valentinus. 12. Matthias Vntzerus. 13. Guilielmus Avisonus. 14.
Philippus Mullerus. 15. Suchtenius. 16. Baptista Porta. 17. Poterus. his
Pharmacopea. 18. Johannes Beguinus. 19. Leonardus Phirovanti. 20. Guilielmus
Olivarius. 21. Severinus Scotobrittan. Sir Theodore Mayern, Knight. and Dr. of
Physic, and Physician in Ordinary to the Kings most excellent Majesty, has
approved and experienced the same often times with happy and good success.

These Learned men of our own Nation and Country, by their own Experiments and
Observations, have confirmed the same, as by their several Certificates may
appear.

Daniell Featly, D. of D. Moegan Win, D. of D. Richard Naper, D. of D.
Nicholas Page, D. of D. M. Henry Walker, B. of D. M. Hugh Maurice, B. of D. M.
John Vicars, B. of D. M. Aynscombe, B. of D. Robert Fludd, Esquire; D. of Physic.
Barthol. Van der less, D. of Phys. Philip Molthery, Dr. of Physic. Guilielmus
Olivarus, D. of Phys. John Rudston, Dr. of Physic. William Freeman, D* of
Physic. John Higgans, Dr. of Physic. Richard Freeman, Dr. of Physic. Michael
Wainman, D. of Physic. Simon Ryder, Dr. of Physic. Richard Collet, D. of
Physic. William Bailey, Dr. of Physic. William Hodgets, D. of Physic.
These Right Honorable Personages have Experienced this my Magneticall
Medicine with happy and good success.
The R. Hon. the E. of Mulgrave. The R. Hon. the E. of Norwich. The R. Hon. the
E. of Bridgwat. The R. Hon. the E. of Malboro. The R. Hon. the E. of
Nithisdale. The R. Ho. L. Viscount Cambden. The R. Hon. John Lord Harries. The
R. Ho. the Countess of Darby The R. Ho. the Count. of Westmerl. The R. Hon.
the Countess of Devonshire. The R. Ho. the Count. of Excester The R. Ho. the
Count. of Leicester The R. Hon. the Count. of Malb. The Hon. Lady Theophila
Cook. The Hon. the Lady Wilbraham. The Hon. the Lady Delaware. The Hon. the
Lady Jackson. The Hon. the Lady Apsley. The Hon. the Lady Willoughby. The Hon.
the Lady Shelley. The Hon. the Lady Thorowgood. The Hon. the Lady Brown. The
Hon. the Lady Farell. The Hon. the Lady Shurley. The Hon. the Lady Jepson.
These Right Worshipful Knights, and Gentlemen of Reputation and Credit, have
Experienced the same; and approved it to be without Violence or Danger.
Sir Edward Powell, Knight, one of the Masters of his Majesty's Honorable
Court of Requests. Sir Francis Kinnaston, Knight, Esquire to his Majesty's
Body. Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight. Sir Robert Naper, Knight and Bar. Sir
Guilbert Cornwall, Knight Baron of Burford. Sir Thomas Payton, Kn. and Bar. Sir
John Shelley, Knight and Bar. Sir Peter Mutton, Knight. Sir Philip Landen,
Knight. Sir Thomas Burton, Knight. Sir Richard Jifford, Knight. Sir Thomas
Styles, Knight. Sir Anthony Thomas, Knight. Sir Fulbert Varnat, Knight. Sir
Richard Waltingstall, Knight. Sir Christopher Nevell, Knight. Sir William Ford,
Knight. Sir William Font, Knight. Sir Richard Naper, Knight. Sir Richard
Hutton, Knight. Sir Edward Scot, Knight. Sir John Compton, Knight. Sir William
Weston, Knight. Sir William Savage, Knight.
Esquires.
Francis Godolphin, Esquire. Edward Scot, Esquire. Lyster Blunt, Esquire.
Thomas Godfrey, Esquire. John Grymsdych, Esquire. William Molins, Esquire.
Thomas Houldford, Esquire. Roger Else, Esquire. Richard Norris, Esquire.
Thomas Edmonds, Esquire. William Edmunds, Esquire. Thomas Long, Esquire. John
Savage, Esquire. Thomas Challoner, Esquire. Humfrey Gunter, Esquire. William
Cheriton, Esquire. Francis Tompson, Esquire. Richard Aston, Esquire. Robert
Tompson, Esquire. John Poole, Esquire. William Audrey, Esquire. Thomas Weeks,
Esquire. William Vince, Esquire. Thomas Litton, Esquire. Edward Savage,
Esquire. William Cowse, Esquire. Phylip Child, Esquire. George Mynne, Esquire.
Henry Collet, Esquire. Fancis Monday, Esquire. Henry Knight Esquire., William
Nottle, Esquire. William Staneley, Esquire. Henry Poole, Esquire. Arthor
Wallys, Esquire. Richard Hasellburie, Esquire. John Lathum, Esquire. Francis
Lathum, Esquire. Robbert Wallys. Esquire. Henry Nicholls, Esquire. Thomas
Ockrave Esquire. John Anderson, Esquire. Richard Folly, Esquire. Roger Fowke,
Esquire. Alexander Dixson, Esquire. Thomas Savage, Esquire. John Shelden,
Esquire. John Hunt, Esquire. Edward Powell, Esquire. Nicholas Macham Esquire.
Henry Prat, Esquire. John Woodhouse, Esquire. Henry Bromely, Esquire. Innocent
Rash, Esquire. John Blunden, Esquire. Thomas Blundell, Esquire. William
Overton, Esquire. William Craddock, Esquire. John Clackston, Esquire. Richard
Warner, Esquire. Thomas Morton, Esquire. Thomas Carroll, Esquire. William
Edmunds, Esquire. Thomas Wood, Esquire. Henry Hill, Esquire. Thomas Stoakes,
Esquire. William Shephard, Esquire. Henry Lovelace, Esquire. Thomas Prat,
Esquire. John Leigh, Esquire. Samuel Ward, Esquire. George Eves, Esquire. James
Lathum, Esquire. John Thorpe, Esquire. Henry Berkeley, Esquire. Henry
Pickering, Esquire. John Smith, Esquire. William Shephard, Esquire. Arthur
Hill, Esquire. Michael Jues, Esquire. William Poole, Esquire. Henry Hunniman
Esquire. Alexander Emmerson, Esquire. John Warcoape, Esquire. Charles Robinso^,
Esquire. John Thornburie, Esquire. Thomas Kercher, Esquire. William Talcoate,
Esquire. William Wakeman, Esquire. Edmund Harrison, Esquire. James Beard,
Esquire. William Wakeman, Esquire. Henry Turner, Esquire. William Brewer,
Esquire. John Applebee, Esquire. Thomas Mason, Esquire. Thomas Brinfield,
Esquire. John Price, Esquire. William Weston, Esquire. Thomas Brereton,
Esquire. John Malborn, Esquire. Edward Powell, Esquire.
Merchants and Citizens of London.
Mr. Ludowick Roberts. Mr. Richard Morris. Mr. Foster by the Exchange. Mr.
Tichborne. Mr. Babington. Mr. Campion. Mr. Robert Fowls. Mr. Richardson. Mr.
Thomas. Mr. Corderoy. Mr. Wait. Mr. Wright. Mr. Turnor. Mr. Gregory. Mr.
^ightman. Mr. Hayes. Mr. Master. Mr. Reginalds. Mr. Godwyn. Mr. Clarke. Mr.
Pocock. Mr. Davies. Mr. Vaughan. Mr. Peter Maurice. With many others tha no^ I
do willingly omit.
In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. Math.
18. 16.
Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

