Eucharisticon; OR, An Heroic POEM upon the late Thanksgiving-day, which was
the Vigil or Fastof St. Simon and St. Jude.
'TWas on the Evening of that Day,
That very memorable Day,
The Twenty Seventh of October,
When none but Jacobites were sober,
That we beheld the Blessed sight
Of Glorious Eucharistick Light:
But that the Morn we may not wrong,
Which ushered in the Evening Song;
Nor The Infant Day which grew so great,
After it was regenerate
And re-baptiz'd by Proclamation,
And called Thanksgiving-day of the Nation,
We shall relate all that was done
In open Face of Moon and Sun.
But, first, it is fit that we rehearse,
In bold, but grave, Heroic Verse,
Why a Thanksgiving-day was chose,
What were the Reasons, what the Cause;
And why it was resolved, at last,
They Would not Proclaim this Day a Fast.
First, To the First we should begin,
And the Supports bring after in;
But since Supporting's out of fashion,
By the Wise, Warlike, Belgic Nation,
The Rear shall take the Advance Post,
And show you how the Fast was lost.
In Council grave, our Senators were met,
About the important Business of the State;
Business so weighty, that all Europe stood,
Hoping from hence, the Stream of all their Good,
Great Things were moved, and mighty Kingdoms flew,
Like sporting Bubbles, round the God-like Crew:
They puffed those Cares away; but fell, at last,
Upon the Business of the Monthly Fast:
The great Debate was this, Whether 'twas fit
They should for longer time continue it;
Or else Adjourn; or else Prorogue the Day;
Or throw their Prayers and Fastings quite away.
To this hard knotty Question, it was said,
By a most Grave and Venerable Head,
That the Descent was balked, and Numur won,
And the Campaign in all appearance done;
That Heaven could not be now besieged in Form,
And 'twas too late of the year to take it by Storm;
It would be fruitless too, and serve their turns,
No more than Dixmuid does, or little Furnes:
But (in his Judgment) if they would cast their Prayer
To Winter Quarters, till the Spring of the year,
They might have need with all their strength to pray,
And then Proclaim a Weekly Fasting Day.
There was no answering to so plain a case,
But (with low Bows) the Motion all embrace.
Strait they gave Orders that a Proclamation
Should strictly charge this Praying, Fasting Nation,
That it no more should trouble Heavens quiet,
Wit Prayers, or Guts croaking for want of Diet.
So much Devotion in this Age we find,
That were it not by public Laws consigned,
Our Public Prayers and Fasts would strike us blind.
But see how vain all Mortal Councils are,
We Dream of Peace, but feel The Effects of War;
For scarce were these great Orders fully given,
Scarce the blank Sheet died with the Stygian Leven,
When Charleroy cried out, Oh help she cried,
The French are plying hard my leaky side;
Is this a time to give your Praying over,
When we are weltring in Confed'rate gore?
When whizzing Bullets, and the roaring Bomb,
Gall us from Stem to Stern, can you be dumb?
What has your Arms, what has your Money done?
Your Prayers are all that we depend upon.
She spoke; and the amazed Council heard her Tale,
They hung their Heads, and looked with envy pale:
Ah cursed French, they cried, cannot one Town
Escape your lasting fury? What renown
Can you obtain, what Honor get you by it?
It Is well our Mighty Monarch's out of sight;
Had he been nigh! But it is no time to talk,
Post to the Printer, tell him we revoke
Our late deliberate Orders; we will Fast
Whilst Gallick Bullets fly, and Pray as fast;
But 'twas to late, for hasty Time had set
His Iron Teeth upon the fatal Sheet:
But Fame (as Goddesses have done before)
Came in the nick, and brought a Story over,
That our most vigilant King was gone to fight,
And vowed t'should not be lost, out of his sight:
This News restored us, and with swifter speed
Fresh Posts were sent, to tell there was no need
To stop the Press. But, O ye Gods! how short
Are Mortal Joys, how are we made your sport?
Like Tennis-Balls you toss us to and fro,
Or Shittlecocks, driven from Foe to Foe.
Scarce was this Post dispatched, when an Alarm
Put all the Council in a new Vacarme;
For it was said, our Conq'ror was retired,
And the unlucky Town again was fired.
Fast, Fast, the Council cried, let us Pray amain,
Fly to the Press and bid it stop again.
So on the top of Horeb, Moses stood,
Out of whose flinty side he lashed a Flood;
Aaron and Hur with him beheld the fight,
Between brave Joshua and the Amalakite,
When he held up his Finger, they prevail;
But when he let it down, the Jews turn tail.
During this time, Posts hurried through the Town,
And in their course felled one another down;
Flux, and reflux, of differing Councils dashed,
And, in rebounding Air, their Orders clash'd.
So rose the Attoms from their Bed of Night,
And in confusion choked the newborn Light.
What heart could hold to see the sad Distractions,
Which had well-nigh o'er-whelm'd three potent Nations?
The French themselves took pity of our Fear,
And vowed they would spare the Town 'till the next Year.
But now proclaim a Calm; for once more Fame
Post on a Gale of blustering Weather came;
And 'midst this hurly, burly, loudly sings
A rest to us, and to the best of Kings.
In short, the King (with all his Victories)
Had safely past the dangerous Northern Seas.
What would y' have more? We Have got our King at last,
And all must grant it is now no time to fast.
Sing then my Muse a Halleluja Song,
Raise up thy Lute, which was to Fasting strung:
Thanksgiving is thy Theme, and lofty Ode,
And Eucharisticon thy charming Mode.
Great in the Field, and subtle in Debate,
The King convened his Ministers of State;
Flanders was not named there, nor the Descent,
Whether it was, or was not truly meant:
Nor did they speak of the great Siege of Dunkirk,
Nor of their Victory obtained at Steinkirk.
But not to spend our Oil and Time, in dwelling
On Negatives, as I was now a telling;
We do affirm, in short, that the sole Cause
Of this August and Grave Assembly, was
How to resolve on this Thanksgiving-Day:
For some still thought we had more Cause to pray.
These urged besides, the Saints might think it rude
To make a Feast upon the Fast of Jude;
But the Arch- Haman, whose Advice they took
In all such Matters, first his Noddle shook;
Then cried, Great Sir, Saints neither eat nor drink,
Nor do they care, or know what Mortals think,
To fast before, or else behind a Saint,
Or not at all, we for Convenience grant,
But at the worst, when three Fasts come together,
We may post-pone, or else commute at pleasure.
Our gracious Queen (God bless her) when she spied
How well this Man of God could thus divide,
Distinguish, prove, lay open, and decide;
Well spoke, she said, my Vote concurs with yours:
Let sick Men fast for Four and twenty hours
Because they cannot eat: What Is that to those
Whose Health and Strength requirea treble dose?
Besides, the King's returned, let that suffice
For you, and Us, to dry Our Royal Eyes;
His mighty self, all over with Trophies graced,
As sometime Men wore Ribbands round the Waste;
Or like an Orange stuck with Cloves, so thick
Between the Spice, a Pin can hardly stick:
It Is he is returned again, and with him brought
Blessings in store, for which he stoutly fought.
But that is your Care; I have another Cause,
And am obliged to feast by Nature's Laws:
Born for Delight, to eat, drink, sleep and play,
I cannot force my self to fast or pray,
I wish that every one were a Thanksgiving-day.
All bowed around, and with submissive Voice
Agreed we had great Reason to rejoice;
But a Debate arose, where they should fix
The main great Cause; for to be too prolix
In Proclamations, 'twould anticipate
Those Rhimes and Pamphlets which on Conquest wait.
Some then proposed to put the stress o'th'matter
On his Return: But those who could not flatter
Owned 'twas a Cause; but all they stood upon,
Was, that 'twas not a Cause sine qua non:
For had he never returned, no Man will say
There was no Cause for a Thanksgiving-day.
Kings may be lost, but Kings can never dye;
For still successive Kings their place supply:
But if a Battel's lost, or Town be taken,
The Devil's in it, how shall we take it again?
High Words had like t'arose; but the wise King
Who was best able to decide the thing,
Thus spoke -- My Lords, said he, I would believe
(How ever you differ now) you all receive
My Person as a Blessing to the Nation;
'Twas I brought Riches in with Reformation;
'Twas I restored you to your Liberties;
'Twas I secured your Lives and Properties;
'Twas I kept out the Foreigners you seared,
Since that you little French or Irish heard:
'Twas I made Ireland happy, entered France,
Where Schonberg, by my Order, did advance
The Protestant Religion, vowed in Print
That near a Monk or Papist should live in it.
'Twas I turned Popery out from hence, and sent
The English-Scottish Kirk to Banishment.
'Twas I turned Sancr -- out, and put one in
Who will dispense, as fast as you can sin;
Who will not tie you up to the strict Rules
Of Oaths, or Orders, Snares for squeamish Fools:
Unblest, and Unbaptized, this Church's Son
Has all his Mother's Children half undone.
My Countrymen I brought, without pretension
(To serve you here) of either Pay or Pension.
'Twas I that called, and kept your Parliament
So Pure and Free, there is not one Member in it
(God is my Witness if I tell you a Lie)
That ever took Bribe, Pension, or Sallary:
'Twas I that all your Grievances redrest,
And did my self of my own Rights divest:
'Twas I convoyed, and then increased your Trade:
None but my self did ever your Rights invade.
'Twas I -- But it is too much, I will not boast
What I have done for you, to your own cost.
Let it suffice, I Will not put such a stress
On my own Merits, as to clog the Press.
But since I find some of you seem to grutch,
And think the Cause of my Return's too much;
What think you of my Victory at Sea?
Make that the Cause of your Thanksgiving-day.
For my part, I Am indifferent, choose you whether;
Or if you please, we'll twist them both together;
There will enough be left to expatiate,
For all must grant that this Campaign was great.
'Twas not in hugger, mugger, what I Have done,
Since all the World knows 'twas in the open Sun.
All with deep Admiration were struck dumb,
The King admired too what at last would come.
At length, after they would gazed and gaped a while,
A Lord stood up, and with a Courtier's Smile,
Great Sir, said he, it is now well understood,
What ever your Actions are, your Memory's good:
We now perceive how great's the Obligation,
Which justly's owing to you by the Nation.
We'er loath to break with you upon that score,
And to our broken Merchants add still more.
But if you will trust us still (for all that is past)
We may perhaps be even with you at last.
In the mean while,
We will proclaim a Feast in your own way,
And to so joyful a Thanksgiving-day,
Whole Tuns of Grease and Kitchen-stuff we'll pay:
'Twas said, and it was done, and strait each Lord
Made his low Exit from the Council Board.
Now good Miss Muse once more bring in your Aid,
And show your self a well-bred, civil Maid;
For I Am obliged to squeeze more Reasons out,
How this damned Proclamation came about.
Imprimis, then (for Method must be chose
Whether we write in Verse, or write in Prose)
We'll take these Matters fairly as they lie,
Not all at once) but each successively:
First then (if I may say it without Offense)
'Twere fit to thank the King for going hence;
For had he stayed, God knows what had been done,
Namur it self perhaps had not been won:
But more of that hereafter. Next let us tell
The sad Disasters which the French befell
At Sea, I mean; for it is well known at Land,
They had both Wind and Weather at Command:
Their Fleet came struggling against the Eastern Wind,
And full six Weeks they tacked about, to find
Our Navy out, which not a hundred were,
And they full four and forty Men of War.
With Insolence upon our Lane they bore,
And whole Broadsides with wondrous Fury roar:
The Fight was sharp, and Fortune doubtful stood
To which she would give the Empire of the Flood;
When mighty Mars descended in a Mist,
The fierce equal Combatants dismissed:
We neither took, nor lost a Ship of ours;
Nor were we conquered, or Conquerours.
But Neptune, who of late a Neuter stood
Between the British and the Mogan Blood,
Finding both running in our King; cried out,
Return you Tide, and bring the French about:
Since England, and my Dutch are joined, what Foe
Shall dare t'attack them, and unpunished go?
I Will beat the French my self, and for their sake
So strong a Tide in Alderney, I Will make
Their Cables all shall drag, and Anchors break.
'Twas said, and it was done; and the poor French.
Fired sixteen Ships his dreadful Ire to quench.
Thanks to the King then for this Victory won;
For if this will not pass, I'Gad I Have done.
Item, the Siege of Namur next comes on,
At last 'twas weak, at first damnably strong:
So Mons at first was held impregnable;
But when 'twas taken, Faith, 'twas scarce tenable.
But howsoe'er it was, the King was there,
And never expressed a single Mark of Fear:
He heard the Cannons roar, saw the Bombs fly;
And that is a Demonstration he was nigh.
It Is true the Town was lost; who can help that?
The French stood in his way; so 'twa'nt his Fault.
The King of France our Monarch came to meet,
And in the Trenches kiss his conquering Feet:
But our good King thought fitter to forbear;
And, out of Modesty, would not come there:
But Thanks are due, that he was pleased to own,
And then depose to'th'taking of the Town.
For our Gazets such strange Relations bring,
A hundred thousand Men might doubt the thing
Without the Attestation of a King.
Item --
Two hundred thousand Pound to Savoy sent,
I will be sworn that Money was well spent:
For with this Aid, That Duke (like that Great Man,
The King of France) with forty thousand Men
Went down the Hill, and so came up again.
It Is true Duke Schonberg then declared in Print,
That to recover our Rights he there was sent;
And promised if he took all Dauphiny,
He firmly would establish Popery:
Thanks t'him for that, or we had never known
Who fought for Interest, who Religion.
Next, Our Descent at Sea appears, which ran
(So much 'twas noised) from hence to Ispahan:
Four hundred thousand Pounds (so great a Sum
Into a measured Verse 'twill hardly come)
Yet this, and more, and much in Debt was spent
To furnish our this well-contriv'd Descent.
Louis, they say, was almost dead with Fear;
And 'cause he thought Versailes might be too near,
He soon retired still further from the Foe,
And went to hunt and dance at Fontainbleau:
Some say he did not fear; but if 'twere true,
I Am sure our Thanks, at least, for that are due.
Next bloody Steinkirk comes full in our way,
Pox on it, we fought upon the Sabbath Day;
And that is been ever held a Profanation
By our True, Protestant, Reformed Nation:
That Is the true Reason why we bore the brunt,
We see the Godly Dutch would never have don't:
They stood their ground, and prayed whilst we Fools fought;
But we, forsooth, were better fed than taught:
The French retired, and ran away to Mass;
Our Lyon's Paw was headed by an Ass.
Well, we were flog'd, and peppered too, it is true;
But yet to give the Devil and Dutch their due,
Had not they brought us off, we might have lain
Till we had been washed away with Winter's Rain:
This then deserves a long Thanksgiving-day;
For tho we lost our Men, we saved their Pay.
And now our hand is in, let us not forget
To thank Count S -- s, That we were soundly beat:
Go on, brave Men, cried he, Conquer or dye,
The Truth shall not be wronged, whilst I stand by;
And stand he did, as firm as any Post,
Till he saw all his hated English lost.
Ah, Countrymen, had I but time to prove
How well the Dutch our poor three Kingdoms love,
There Is not a Man but would forsake his Farms,
And our dear Dutch embrace with open Arms.
Now little Furnes, thou shall be called great,
And future Ages shall thy Fame repeat:
We little thought that our high-slown Descent;
(And now the Riddle's out) for she was meant,
Some Politicians laid, 'twould land at Bolen;
Others as wisely judged 'twould sail to Colen:
Some were for Breast, St. Malo's, or the Havre,
And laid great odds the French would never save her;
Some for la Hogue; but others with less Malice,
Only pretended to recover Calais:
Some were for Bilboa; but none thought of Thee,
This was Design, this was Sheer- Policy;
The rest was given out for a pretense,
First to surprise, and then to nabb the French.
And who in War or Poetry would rise,
Take it from me, must do it by surprise.
Thrice little Furnes, and great Dixmuid thy Brother,
For whom ten thousand Men made such a pother:
You are the Twins which our Descent brought forth,
The World must grant it was a mighty Birth:
Dunkirk and Ghent were Gossips, and some think
The first may dearly pay the Groaning Drink;
Then Thanks, Great Monarch, for whatever they cost,
These Forts declare our Money was not lost.
Lastly, and Chiefly (for it is fit at last
The biggest Plumb should keep our Mouth in Taste)
What Thanks are due for the King's Preservation
From the Grandvallian Assassination;
It was a strange Escape as ever was heard;
And yet 'twas strange the King too should be scared
With One Gun, who so many Guns had heard;
Nor would we fail to thank that happy Spirit,
Whose Vigilance did such Encomiums merit;
But that he looked so stern, one scarce could tell
Whether he came from Heaven or from Hell.
If from the last, we ought to thank the Devil
That to our Monarch was so wondrous civil.
Thank Grandvall's Powder, which mistook its Aim,
And made it felf invisible, not him.
Thank Parker that he left St. German's Court
Three days before the cautious Witness swor't:
Thanks to the King too, that he took such Care
T'escape these private Dangers of the War.
Poor Gentleman, he was much pitied here;
And these Esoapes have cost us many a Tear,
Heaven send him better luck for the next Year.
But hold my Muse, for should our Thanks run on,
They would amaze the all-beholding Sun,
And strike a blush upon the pale-faced Moon;
Then modestly take up, and loudly tell
How we set forth our Joys by Candl' and Bell.
Scarce did the Polish, Northern Star appear,
Which some great Authors call the lesser Bear.
Scarce had the Cock crow'n once or twice at most,
And Phoebus within ken of the Eastern Coast.
Or in plain English, fcarce had the Clock struck four;
It Is no great Matter, whether less or more,
When a litigious jangling, ill-bred sound,
Through all our Hills and Valleys did rebound;
'Twas thought the Devil's Arse o'th'Peak had got
Some rumblind Wind, or Colic in his Gut,
And by successive Raptures did foretell
Downfall of Church, as by the sound of Bell;
Some thought the Body-Politick in a Fit,
And the Soul-Bell knelling its last Exit.
'Twas not ill Guest, for Church and State may find
There are strange sounds in your Rebellious Wind;
And't might be proved by easy Metaphor,
Wind may be said to ring, and Bells to roar;
Others scarce well awake, judged it the Groan
Of drowsy Sackbut, or the Bag-pipes Drone:
Some swore (who lately had taken a larger Sup,
The Glasses klink'd round the Indented Cup.
In short, they were the City- Choristers,
Which thus untimely lugg'd us by the Ears;
The Bells, I mean, that early thus were singing
Their Lauds and Mattins, which some Men call ringing.
Thus passed the chirping Morn. Now when the Sun
Was driving up to our Meridian,
Some went to Church to hear the New Prayers read;
Others, who liked the Old, lay close in Bed.
Some shut their Shops, which was a silent Token,
That if those Days came off, they would all be broken.
The Canons from the Tower broke through the Wind,
And roared their Thanks, that they were left behind.
Lambeth returned the Complement, and fired
Volleys of Blessings as they would been inspired.
High Pr -- of Mars sprung from Samaria's Race,
Thou still do love to adore in the High Place:
Thou thunder'st out thy Gospel in our Ears,
And those loud Organs tuned thy new-made Prayers,
Thou worst and first of Canterbury's Race,
That with a Wife divided Lambeth 's Grace.
Mars and Bellona never before had met,
Roaring and singing on the High-Priest's Seat.
Thou Man of Faith, could we believe like you,
Who would not turn a Circumcised Jew?
Lastly, for now my Muse is almost weary;
And too much labor makes a Mare miscarry,
I should say something of the blessed Night
How 'twas set forth with artificial Light;
'Twas mothy at the best, not of a piece,
Some black, some white, checkered like Fox and Geese.
The Lights were not of Virgin-Wax, it is true;
For Hybla's Be works not for such a Crew,
Nor of your precious Aromatic Gums,
Nor your sweet Oil which from Oneglia comes.
In short, they were of greasy Kitchen-stuff,
Most proper for the Occasion; that is enough.
May those who love them see no better Light;
For my part I have done, and so good Night.
FINIS.

