FUMIFUGIUM: OR The Inconveniencie of the AER AND SMOKE of LONDON DISSIPATED.

TOGETHER With some REMEDIES humbly PROPOSED By I. E. Esquire To His Sacred
MAJESTY; AND To the PARLIAMENT now Assembled.

Lucret. l. 5. Carbonumque gravis vis, atque odor insinuatur
Quam facile in cerebrum? --
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for Gabriel Bedel, and Thomas Collins, and are to
be sold at their Shop at the Middle Temple Gate near Temple Bar. M. D C. L X I.

TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
SIR,
IT was one day, as I was Walking in Your MAJESTY'S Palace at WHITE HALL (where
I have sometimes the honor to refresh my self with the Sight of Your
Illustrious Presence, which is the Joy of Your Peoples hearts) that a
presumptuous Smoke issuing from one or two Tunnels near Northumberland-House,
and not far from Scotland-yard, did so invade the Court; that all the Rooms,
Galleries, and Places about it were filled and infested with it; and that to
such a degree, as Men could hardly discern one another for the Clowd, and none
could support, without manifest Inconveniency. It was not this which did first
suggest to me what I had long since conceived against this pernicious Accident,
upon frequent observation; But it was this alone, and the trouble that it must
needs procure to Your Sacred Majesty, as well as hazard to Your Health, which
kindled this Indignation of mine, against it, and was the occasion of what it
has produced in these Papers.

Your Majesty who is a Lover of noble Buildings, Gardens, Pictures, and all
Royal Magnificences, must needs desire to be freed from this prodigious
annoyance; and, which is so great an Enemy to their Luster and Beauty, that
where it once enters there can nothing remain long in its native Splendour and
Perfection: Nor must I here forget that Illustrious and divine Princess, Your
Majesty's only Sister, the now Duchess of Orleans, who at her Highness late
being in this City, did in my hearing, complain of the Effects of this Smoke
both in her Breast and Lungs, whilst She was in Your Majesty's Palace. I cannot
but greatly apprehend, that Your Majesty (who has been so long accustomed to
the excellent Aer of other Countries) may be as much offended at it, in that
regard also; especially since the Evil is so Epidemicall; indangering as well
the Health of Your Subjects, as it sullies the Glory of this Your Imperial Seat.

Sir, I prepare in this short Discourse, an expedient how this pernicious
Nuisance may be reformed; and offer at another also, by which the Aer may not
only be freed from the present Inconveniency; but (that removed) to render not
only Your Majesty's Palace, but the whole City likewise, one of the sweetest,
and most delicious Habitations in the World; and this, with little or no
expense; but by improving those Plantations which Your Majesty so laudably
affects, in the moist, depressed and Marshy Grounds about the Town, to the
Culture and production of such things, as upon every gentle emission through
the Aer, should so perfume the adjacent places with their breath; as if, by a
certain charm, or innocent Magic, they were transferred to that part of
Arabia, which is therefore styled the Happy, because it is amongst the Gums and
precious spices. Those who take notice of the Sent of the Orange-flowers from
the Rivage of Genoa, and St. Pietro dell' Arena; the Blossoms of the Rosemary
from the Coasts of Spain many Leagues off at Sea; or the manifest, and
odoriferous wafts which flow from Fontenay and Vaugirard, even to Paris in the
season of Roses, with the contrary Effects of those less pleasing smells from
other accidents, will easily consent to what I suggest: And, I am able to
enumerate a Catalogue of native Plants, and such as are familiar to our Country
and Clime, whose redolent, and agreeable Emissions would even ravish our
senses, as well as perfectly improve and meliorate the Aer about London; and
that, without the least prejudice to the Owners and Proprietors of the Land to
be employed about it. But because I have treated of this more at large in
another curious and noble subject, which I am preparing to present to Your
Majesty, as God shall afford me Leisure to finish it, and that I give a Touch
of it in this Discourse, I will enlarge my Addresses no farther, then to beg
pardon for this Presumption of

SIR, Your Majesty's ever Loyal, most obedient Subject, and Servant. J. EVELYN.

To the Reader.
I Have little here to add* to implore thy good opinion and approbation, after
I have submitted this Essay to his Sacred Majesty: But as it is of universal
benefit that I propound it; so I expect a civil entertainment and reception. I
have, I confess, been frequently displeased at the small advance and
improvement of Public Works in this Nation, wherein it seems to be much
inferior to the Countries and Kingdoms which are round about it; especially,
during these late years of our sad Confusions: But now that God has
miraculously restored to us our Prince, a Prince of so magnanimous and Public
a Spirit, we may promise our selves not only a recovery of our former Splendour;
but also whatever any of our Neighbors enjoy of more universal benefit, for
Health or Ornament: In sum, whatever may do honor to a Nation so perfectly
capable of all advantages.

It is in order to this, that I have presumed to offer these few Proposals for
the Meliorating and refining the Aer of London; being extremely amazed, that
where there is so great an affluence of all things which may render the People
of this vast City, the most happy upon Earth; the fordid, and accursed Avarice
of some few Particular Persons, should be suffered to prejudice the health and
felicity of so many: That any Profit (besides what is of absolute necessity)
should render men regardlesse of what chiefly imports them, when it may be
purchased upon so easy conditions, and with so great advantages: For it is not
happiness to possess Gold, but to enjoy the Effects of it, and to know how to
live cheerfully and in health, Non est vivere, sed valere vita. That men whose
very Being is Aer, should not breath it freely when they may; but (as that
Tyrant used his Vassals) condemn themselves to this misery and Fumo praefocari,
is strange stupidity: yet thus we see them walk and converse in London, pursued
and haunted by that infernal Smoke, and the funest accidents which accompany
it whereso: ever they retire.

That this Glorious and Ancient City, which from Wood might be rendered Brick,
and (like another Rome) from Brick made Stone and Marble; which commands the
Proud Ocean to the Indies, and reaches to the farthest Antipodes, should wrap
her stately head in Clouds of Smoke and Sulphur, so full of Stink and
Darkness, I deplore with just Indignation. That the Buildings should be
composed of such a Congestion of misshapen and extravagant Houses; That the
Streets should be so narrow and incommodious in the very Center, and busiest
places of Intercourse: That there should be so ill and uneasy a form of Paving
under foot, so troublesome and malicious a disposure of the Spouts and Gutters
overhead, are particulars worthy of Reproof and Reformation; because it is
hereby rendered a Labyrinth in its principal passages, and a continual Wet-day
after the Storm is over. Add to this the Deformity of so frequent Wharfes and
Magazines of Wood, Coal, Boards, and other course Materials, most of them
employing the Places of the Noblest aspect for the situation of Palaces toward
the goodly River, when they might with far less Disgrace, be removed to the
Bank-side, and afterward disposed with as much facility where the Consumption
of these Commodities lies; a Key in the mean time so contrived on London-side,
as might render it less sensible of the Reciprocation of the Waters, for Use
and Health infinitely superior to what it now enjoys. These are the Desiderata
which this great City labors under, and which we so much deplore. But I see
the Dawning of a brighter day approach; We have a Prince who is Resolved to be
a Father to his Country; and a Parliament whose Decrees and Resentiments take
their Impression from his Majesty's great Genius, which studies only the
Public Good. It is from them therefore, that we Augure our future happiness;
since there is nothing which will so much perpetuate their Memories, or more
justly merit it. Medails and Inscriptions have heretofore preserved the Fame of
less Public Benefits; and for the Repairing of a Dilapidated Bridge, a decaid
Aquaeduct, the Paving of a Way, or draining a foggy Marsh, their Elogies and
Reverses have out-lasted the Marbles, and been transmitted to future Ages,
after so many thousand and Revolutions: But this is the least of that which we
Decree to our August CHARLES, and which is due to his Illustrious Senators;
because they will live in our Hearts, and in our Records, which are more
permanent and lasting.

1. May. 1661.
Farewell.
FVMIFVGIVM: OR, The Inconveniency of the Smoke of LONDON dissipated, etc.
PART. I.
IT is not without some considerable Analogy, Anima, quasi (...).
that sundry of the Philosophers have named the Aer the Vehicle of the Soul, as
well as that of the Earth, and this frail Vessel of ours which contains it;
since we all of us find the benefit which we derive from it, not only for the
necessity of common Respiration and functions of the Organs; but likewise for
the use of the Spirits and Primigene Humors, which do most nearly approach
that Divine particle. But we shall not need to insist, or refine much on this
sublime Subject; and, perhaps it might scandalize scrupulous Persons to pursue
to the height it may possibly reach (as Diogenes and Anaximenes were wont to
Deifie it) after we are past the Aetherial, which is a certain Aer of Plato's
denomination, as well as that of the less pure, more turbulent and dense,
which, In Timaeo.
for most part we live and breath in, and which comes here to be examined as it
relates to the design in hand, the City of London, and the environs about it.

It would doubtless be esteemed for a strange and extravagant Paradox, that
one should affirm, that the Aer it self is many times a potent and great
disposer to Rebellion; and that Insulary people, and indeed, most of the
Septentrion Tracts, where this Medium is gross and heavy, are extremely
versatile and obnoxious to change both in Religious and Secular Affairs: Plant
the Foot of your Compasses on the very Pole, and extend the other limb to 50
degrees of Latitude: bring it about 'till it describe the Circle, and then
read the Histories of those Nations inclusively and make the Calculation. It
must be confessed, that the Aer of those Climates, is not so pure and Defecate
as those which are nearer the Tropicks, where the Continent is less ragged,
and the Weather more constant and steady, as well as the Inclination and Temper
of the Inhabitants.

But it is not here that I pretend to speculate upon these Causes, or nicely to
examine the Discourses of the Stoics and Peripateticks, whether the Aer be in
it self generally cold, humid, warm or exactly tempered so as best conduces to
a material principle, of which it is accounted one of the four; because they
are altogether Physical notions, and do not come under our cognizance as a
pure and sincere Element; but as it is particularly inquinated, infected,
participating of the various Accidents, and informed by extrinsecal Causes,
which render it noxious to the Inhabitans, who derive and make use of it for
Life. Nevertheless, for distinction sake, we may yet be allowed to repute some
Aers pure, comparatively, viz. That which is clear, open, sweetly ventilated
and put into motion with gentle gales and breezes; not too sharp, but of a
temperate constitutution. In a word, That we pronounce for good and pure Aer,
which head not to sweats and fointnesse; nor cooles to rigidnesse and
trembling; nor dries to wrinkles and hardness; nor moystens to resolution and
over much softness. The more hot promotes indeed the Wit, but is weak and
trissing; Lib. de Aere Aqu. and Lotis.
and therefore Hippocrates speaks the Asiatique people Imbelles and Effeminate,
though of a more artificial and ingenious Spirit: If over cold and keen, it
too much abotes the heat, but renders the body robust and hardy; as those who
are born under the Northern Bears, are more fierce and stupid, caused by a
certain internal Antiperistasis and universal Impulsion. The drier Aer is
generally the more salutary and healthy, so it be not too sweltery and infested
with heat or fuliginous vapors, which is by no means a friend to health and
Longavity, as Avicon notes of the Aethiops who seldom arived to any
considerable old Age. As much to be reproved is the moist, viz, that which is
over mixed with aquous exhalations, equaly pernicious and susciptible of putre
faction; notwithstanding does it oftener produce fair and tendes skins, and
some last along while in it; but commonly not so healthy, as in Aer which is
more dry. But the impure and Uliginous, as that which proceeds from stagnated
places, is of all other, the most vile and Pestilent.

Now, that through all these diversiries of Aer, Mores Hominum do Corporis
temperamentum Sequi, is for the greater part so true an observation, that a
Volume of Instances might be produced, if the Common notices did not
sufficiently confirm it even to a Proverb. The Aer on which we continually
prey, perpetually inspiring matter to the Animal and Vital Spirits, by which
they become more or less obfuscated, clowded and rendered obnoxious: and
therefore that Prince of Physicians Hippocrates, wittily calls a sincere and
pure Aer, De Morb^ Sacro.
, The Internunce and Interpreter of Prudence. The celestial influences being
so much retarded or assisted, and improved through this omnipresent, and as it
were, universal Medium: For, though the Aer in its simple substance cannot be
vitiated; yet, in its prime qualities it suffers these infinite mutations, both
from superior and inferior Causes, so as its accidental effects become
almost innumerable;

Let it be farther considered, what is most evident, That the Body feeds upon
Meats commonly but at certain periods and stated times, be it twice a day or
oftener; whereas, upon the Aer, or what accompanies it ( est enim in ipso Aere
occultus vitae cibus) it is allwaies preying sleeping, or waking; and
therefore, doubtless the election of this constant and assiduous Food, should
something concern us; I affirm, more then even the very Meat we eat, whereof
so little and indifferent nourishes and satisfies the most temperate and best
Educated persons. Besides, Aer that is corrupt insinuates it self into the
vital parts immediately; whereas the meats which we take though never so ill
conditioned, require time for the concoction, by which its effects are greatly
mitigated; wh^^^^ the other, passing so speedily to the Lungs, and virtually to
the Heart it self, is derived and communicated over the whole mass: In a word,
as the Lucid and noble Aer, clarifies the Blood, subtilizes and excites it,
cheering the Spirits and promoting digestion; so the dark, and gross (on the
Contrary) perturbs the Body, prohibits necessary Transpiration for the
resolution and dissipation of ill Vapors, even to disturbance of the very
Rational faculties, which the purer Aer does so far illuminate, as to have
rendered some Men healthy and wise even to Miracle. And therefore the
Empoysoning of Aer, was ever esteemed no less fatal then the poisoning of
Water or Meat it self, and forborne even amongst Barbarians; since (as is said)
such Infections become more apt to insinuate themselves and betray the very
Spirits, to which they have so near a cognation. Some Aers we know are held to
be Alexipharmac and even deleterious to Poison it self, as it is reported of
that of Ireland: In some we find Carcasses will hardly putrify, in others
again rot and fall to pieces immediately.

From these, or the like considerations therefore, it might well proceed, that
Vitruvius, and the rest who follow that Master Builder, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
mention it as a Principle, for the accomplishment of their Architect, that
being skillful in the Art of Physic, amongst other Observations, he sedulously
examine the Aer and Situation of the places where he designs to build, the
Inclinations of the Heavens, Aeres Locorum.
and the Climats; Sine his enim rationibus nulla salubris habitatio fieri
potest: there is no dwelling can be safe or healthy without it. It Is true, he
does likewise add Water also, which is but a kind of condensed Aer; though he
might have observed, that Element to be seldom bad, where the other is good;
omitting only some peculiar Fountains and Mineral waters, which are percolated
through Mines and Metalique Earths less frequent, and very rarely to be
encountered.

Now whether those who were the Ancient Founders of our goodly Metropolis, had
considered these particulars (though long before Vitruvius) I can no ways
doubt or make question of; since having respect to the nobleness of the
situation of London, we shall every way find it to have been consulted with
all imaginable Advantages, not only in relation to Profit, but to Health and
Pleasure; and that, if there be any thing which seems to impeach the two last
Transcendencies, it will be found to be but something Extrinsecal and
Accidental only, which naturally does not concern the Place at all; but, which
may very easily be reformed, without any the least inconvenience, as in due
time we shall come to demonstrate.

For first, the City of London is built upon a sweet and most agreeable
Eminency of Ground, at the North-side of a goodly and well-condition'd River,
toward which it has an Aspect by a gentle and easy declivity, apt to be
improved to all that may render her Palaces, Buildings, and Avenues useful,
graceful and most magnificent: The Fumes which exhale from the Waters and
lower Grounds lying Southward, by which means they are perpetually attracted,
carried off or dissipated by the Sun, as soon as they are born and ascend.

Add to this, that the Soil is universally Gravel, not only where the City
it self is placed; but for several Miles about the Countries which environ it:
That it is plentifully and richly irrigated, and visited with Waters which
Christalize her Fountains in every Street, and may be conducted to them in such
farther plenty, as Rome her self might not more abound in this liquid ornament,
for the pleasure and divertisement, as well as for the use and refreshment of
her Inhabitants. I forbear to enlarge upon the rest of the conveniences which
this August and Opulent City enjoies both by Sea and Land, to accumulate her
Encomiums, and render her the most considerable that the Earth has standing
upon her ample bosom; became, it belongs to the Orator and the Poet, and is
none of my Institution: But I will infer, that if this goodly City justly
challenges what is her due, and merits all that can be said to reinforce her
Praises, and give her Title; she is to be relieved from that which renders her
less healthy, really offends her, and which darkens and eclipses all her other
Attributes. And what is all this, but that Hellish and dismal Cloud of
SEACOAL? which is not only perpetually imminent over her head, For as the
Poet, Conditur in tenebris altum caligine Coelum.
Aeneid. 11.
but so universally mixed with the otherwise wholesome and excellent Aer, that
her Inhabitants breathe nothing but an impure and thick Mist accompanied with a
fuligimous and filthy vapor, which renders them obnoxious to a thousand
inconveniences, corrupting the Lungs, and disordring the entire habit of their
Bodies; so that Catharrs, Phthisicks, Coughs and Consumptions rage more in this
one City than in the whole Earth besides.

I shall not here much descant upon the Nature of Smoaks, and other Exhalations
from things burnt, which have obtained their several Epithetes, according to
the quality of the Matter consumed, because they are generally accounted
noxious and unwholesome, and I would not have it thought, that I do here Fumos
vendere, as the word is, or blot paper with insignificant remarks: It was yet
happily no inept derivation of that Critic, who took our English, or rather,
Saxon appellative, from the Greek word (...) corrumpo and exuro, as most
agreeable to its destructive effects, especially of what we do here so much
declaim against; since this is certain, that of all the common and familiar
materials which emit it, the immoderate use of, and indulgence to Sea-coale
alone in the City of London, exposes it to one of the fowlest Inconveniences
and reproaches, that can possibly befall so noble, and otherwise, incomparable
City: And that, not from the Culinary fires, which for being weak, and less
often fed below, is with such ease dispelled and scatterr'd above, as it is
hardly at all discernible, but from some few particular Tunnells and Issues,
belonging only to Brewers, Diers, Lime-burners, Salt, and Sope-boylers, and
some other private Trades, One of whose Spiracles alone, does manifestly infect
the Aer, more, then all the Chimnies of London put together besides. And that
this is not the least Hyperbolie, let the best of Judges decide it, which I
take to be our senses: Whilst these are belching it forth their sooty jaws, the
City of London resembles the face rather of Mount Aetna, the Court of Vulcan,
Stromboli, or the Suburbs of Hell, then an Assembly of Rational Creatures, and
the Imperial feat of our incomparable Monarch. For when in all other places the
Aer is most Serene and Pure, it is here Ecclipsed with such a Cloud of
Sulphur, as the Sun it self, which gives day to all the World besides, is
hardly able to penetrate and impart it here; and the weary Traveller, at many
Miles distance, sooner smells, then sees the City to which he repairs. This is
that pernicious Smoke which fullyes all her Glory, superinducing a sooty Crust
or furr upon all that it lights, spoiling the movables, tarnishing the Plate,
Gildings and Furniture, and corroding the very Iron-bars and hardest stones
with those piercing and acrimonious Spirits which accompany its Sulphur; and
executing more in one year, then exposed to the pure Aer of the Country it
could effect in some hundreds. -- piceaque gravatum
Foedat nube diem;
Claud. de rap. Pros. l. 1.


It is this horrid Smoke which obscures our Churches, and makes our Palaces
look old, which fouls our Clothes, and corrupts the Waters, so as the very
Rain, and refreshing Dews which fall in the several Seasons, precipitate this
impure vapor, which, with its black and tenacious quality, spots and
contaminates whatsoever is exposed to it. -- Calidoque involvitur undique fumo.
Ovid.


It is this which scatters and strews about those black and smutty Atoms upon
all things where it comes, insinuating it self into our very secret Cabinets,
and most precions Repositories: Finally, it is this which diffuses and spreads
a Yellowness upon our choycest Pictures and Hangings: which does this mischief
at home; is Avernus to Fowl, and kills our Bees and Flowers abroad, suffering
nothing in our Cardens to bud, display themselves, or ripon; so as our
Anemonies and many other choycest Flowers, will by no Industry be made to blow
in London, or the Precincts of it, unless they be raised on a Hot-bed, and
governed with extraordinary Artifice to accellerate their springing, imparting
a bitter and ungrateful Taste to those few wretched Fruits, which never arriving
to their desired maturity, seem, like the Apples of Sodom, to fall even to
dust, when they are but touched. Not therefore to be forgotten, is that which
was by many observed, that in the year when New Castle was besieged and blocked
up in our late Wars, so as through the great Dearth and Scarcity of Coals,
those fumous Works many of them were either left off, or spent but few Coals
in comparison to what they now use: Diverse Gardens and Orchards planted even in
the very heart of London, (as in particular my Lord Marquess of Hertfords in
the Strand, my Lord Bridgewaters, and some others about Barbican) were observed
to bear such plentiful and infinite quantities of Fruits, as they never
produced the like either before or since, to their great astonishment: but it
was by the Owners rightly imputed to the penury of Coals, and the little
Smoke, which they took notice to infest them that year: For there is a virtue
in the Aer, to penetrate, alter, nourish, yea and to multiply Plants and
Fruits, without-which no vegetable could possibly thrive; but as the Poet. Aret
ager: vitio moriens sitit aeris herba:
Georg. 7.
So as it was not ill said by Paracelsus, that of all things, Aer only could be
truly affirmed to have Life, seeing to all things it gave Life. Argument
sufficient to demonstrate, how prejudicial it is to the Bodies of men; for that
can never be Aer sit for them to breath in, where nor Fruits, nor Flowers do
ripen, or come to a seasonable perfection.

I have strangely wondered, and not without some just indignation, when the
South Wind has been gently breathing, to have sometimes beheld that stately
House and Garden belonging to my Lord of Northumberland, even as far as
White Hall and Westminster, wrapped in a horrid Cloud of this Smoke, issuing
from a Brew House or two contiguous to that noble Palace: so as coming up the
River, that part of the City has appeared a Sea where no Land was within ken;
the same frequently happens from a Lime-kelne I do assent, that both Lime and
Sulphur are in some affections specifies for the Lungs; but then they are to be
so prepared, as nothing save the purest parts be received into the body (for so
Physicians prescribe Flores sulph, etc.) and not accompanied with such gross
and plainly virulent vapors, as these fires send forth: Nor are they (as
accurately prepared as Art can render them) to be perperually used, but at
certain periods, in Form, and with due Regiment.
on the Banke-side near the Falcon, which when the Wind blows Southern,
dilates it self all over that Point of the Thames, and the opposite part of
London, especially about S. Paul's, poisoning the Aer with so dark and thick a
Fog, as I have been hardly able to pass through it, for the extraordinary
stench and halitus it sends forth; and the like is near Fox-hall at the farther
end of Lambeth.

Now to what funest and deadly Accidents the assiduous invasion of this Smoke
exposes the numerous Inhabitants, I have already touched, whatsoever some have
fondly pretended, not considering that the constant use of the same Aer (be it
never so impure) may be consistent with Life and a Valetudinary state;
especially, if the Place be native to us, and that we have never lived for any
long time out of it; Custom, in this, as in all things else, obtaining another
Nature, and all Putrefaction, proceeding from certain Changes, it becomes, as
it were, the Form, and Perfection of that which is contained in it: For so (to
say nothing of such as by assuefaction have made the rankest poisons their most
familiar Diet) we read that Epimenides continued fifty years in a damp Cave,
the Eremites dwelt in Dens, and diverse live now in the Fens; some are condemned
to the Mines, and others, that are perpetually conversant about the Forges,
Fornaces of Iron and other Smoaky Works, are little concerned with these
troublesome accidents: But as it is not (I persuade my self) out of choice,
that these Men affect them; so nor will any man, I think, commend and celebrate
their manner of Living. A Tabid Body might possibly trail out a miserable Life
of seven or eight years by a Sea-cole Fire, as it is reported the Wife of a
certain famous Physician, did of late by the Prescription of her Husband; but
it is to be considered also, how much longer, and happier she might have
survived in a better and more noble Aer; and that old Par, who lived in health
to an Hundred and fifty years of Age, was not so much concerned with the change
of Diet (as some have affirmed) as with that of the Aer, which plainly withered
him, and spoiled his Digestion in a short time after his arrival at London.

There is, I confess, a certain Idiosyncrasia in the Composition of some
persons, which may fit and dispose them to thrive better in some Aers, then in
other: But, it is manifest, that those who repair to London, no sooner enter
into it, but they find a universal alteration in their Bodies, which are either
dried up or enflamed, the humors being exasperated and made apt to putrify,
their sensories and perspiration so exceedingly stopped, with the loss of
Appetite, and a kind of general stupefaction, succeeded with such Cathars and
Distillations, as do never, or very rarely quit them, without some further
Symptoms of dangerous Inconveniency so long as they abide in the place; which
yet are immediately restored to their former habit, so soon as they are retired
to their Homes and enjoy the fresh Aer again. And here I may not omit to
mention what a most Learned Physician and one of the College assured me, Dr.
Whistler.
as I remember of a Friend of his, who had so strange an Antipathy to the Aer
of London: that though he were a Merchant, and had frequent business in the
City, was yet constrained to make his Dwelling some miles without it; and when
he came to the Exchange, within an hour or two, grew so extremely indisposed,
that (as if out of his proper Element) he was forced to take horse (which used
therefore constantly to attend him at the Entrance) and ride as for his Life,
till he came into the Fields, and was returning home again, which is an
Instance so extraordinary, as not, it may be, to be paralleled in any place of
Europe, save the Grotto del Cane, nere Naples, the Os Plutonium of Silvius, or
some such Subterranean habitation. For Diseases proceed not from so long a
Series of causes, as we are apt to conceive; but, most times from those
obvious, and despicable mischiefs, which yet we take less notice of, because
they are familiar: But how frequently do we hear men say (speaking of some
deceased Neighbor or Friend) He went up to London, and took a great Cold, etc.
which he could never afterward claw off again.

I report my self to all those who (during these sad confusions) have been
compelled to breath the Aer of other Countries for some years: if they do not
now perceive a manifest alteration in their Appetite, and clearness of their
Spirits; especially such as have lived long in France, and the City of Paris;
where, to take off that unjust reproach, the Plague as seldom domineers, as in
any part of Europe, which I more impute to the Serenity and Purity of the Aer
about it, then to any other qualities which are frequently assigned for the
cause of it by diverse Writers. But if it be objected that the purest Aers are
soonest infected; it is answered, that they are also the soonest freed again;
and that none would therefore choose to live in a corrupt Aer, because of this
Article: London it is confessed, is not the only City most obnoxious to the
Pestilence; but it is yet never clear of this Smoke which is a Plague so many
other ways, and indeed intolerable; because it kills not at once, but always;
since still to languish, is worse then even Death it self. For is there under
Heaven such Coughing and Snuffing to be heard, as in the London Churches and
Assemlies of People, where the Parking and the Spitting is uncessant and most
importunate. What shall I say? Hinc hominum pecudumque Lues. -- Lucan.
And what may be the cause of these troublesome effects, but the inspiration of
this infernal vapor, accompaning the Aer, which first heats and pollicits the
Aspera Arteria, through one of whose Conduits, partly Cartilaginous, and partly
membranous, it enters by several branches into the very Parenchyma, and
substance of the Lungs, violating, in this passage, the Larynx and Epiglottis,
together with those multiform and curious Muscles, the immediate and proper
Instruments of the Voice, which becoming rough and dry, can neither be
contracted, or dilated for the due modulation of the Voice; so as by some of my
Friends (studious in Music, and whereof one is a Doctor of Physic) it has
been constantly observed, that coming out of the Country into London, they lost
Three whole Notes in the compass of their Voice, which they never recovered
again till their retreat; Adeo enim Animantes (to use the Orators words)
aspiratione Aeris sustinentur Cic. de Not. Deor.
ipseque Aer nobiscum videt, nobiscum audit, nobiscum sonat: In sum, we
perform nothing without it.

Whether the Head and the Brain (as some have imagined) take in the ambient
Aer, nay the very Arteries through the skin universally over the whole body, is
greatly controverted; But if so, of what consequence the goodness and purity
of the Aer is, will to every one appear: Sure we are, how much the Respiration
is perturb'd, and concerned, when the Lungs are prepossessed with these gross
and dense vapors, brought along in the Aer; which on the other side being pure
and fitly qualified, and so conducted to them, is there commixed with the
circulating blood, insinuating it self into the left ventricle of the heart by
the Arteria Venosa, to rarifie and subtilize that precious vehicle of the
Spirits and vital flame: The Vena Arteriosa, and Arteria Venosa disposing
themselves into many branches through the Pulmonique lobes, for its Convoy* the
Aer (as we said) being first brought into them out of the Bronchia (together
with the returning blood) to the very Heart it self; so as we are not at all to
wonder, at the sudden and prodigious Effects of a poisonous or less wholesome
Aer, when it comes to invade such noble Parts, Vessels, Spirits and Humors,
as it visits and attaques, through those subtle and curious passages. But this
is not all.

What if there appear to be an Arsenical vapor, as well as Sulphur, breathing
sometimes from this intemperate use of Sea-Cole, in great Cities? That there
is, what does plainly stupifie, is evident to those who fit long by it; and
that which fortuned to the Dutchmen who Wintered in Nova Zembla, was by all
Physicians attributed to such a deleterious quality in the like fuel, as well
as to the Inspissation of the Aer, which they thought only to have attemper'd,
as is by most esteemed to be the reason of the same dangerous halitus of
Char-Cole, not fully enkendl'd. But to come nearer yet.

New Castle Cole, as an expert Physician affirms, Boetlus a Boot.
causes Consumptions, Phthisicks, and the Indisposition of the Lungs, not only
by the suffocating abundance of Smoke; but also by its Virulency: For all
subterrany Fuel has a kind of virulent or Arsenical vapor rising from it;
which, as it speedily destroys those who dig it in the Mines; so does it by
little and little, those who use it here above them: Therefore those Diseases
(says this Doctor) most afflict about London, where the very Iron is sooner
consumed by the Smoke thereof, then where this Fire is not used.

And, if indeed there be such a Venomous quality latent, and sometimes
breathing from this Fuel, we are less to trouble our selves for the finding
out of the Cause of those Pestilential and Epidemical Sicknesses ( Epidemiorum
Causa enim in Aere, says Galen) which at diverse periods, have so terribly
infested and wasted us: or, that it should be so susceptible of infection, all
manner of Diseases having so universal a vehicle as is that of the Smoke,
which perpetually invests this City: But this is also noted by the Learned Sir
Kenelme Digby, Discourse of Sympathetick Powder.
in confirmation of the Doctrine of Atomical Essluvia's and Emanations, wasted,
mixed and communicated by the Aer, where he well observes, that from the
Materials of our London Fires, there results a great quantity of volatile
Salts, which being very sharp and dissipated by the Smoke, does infect the
Aer, and so incorporate with it, that, though the very Bodies of those
corrosive particles escape our perception, yet we soon find their effects, by
the destruction which they induce upon all things that they do but touch;
spoiling, and destroying their beautiful colors, with their fuliginous
qualities: Yea, though a Chamber be never so closely locked up, Men find at
their return, all things that are in it, even covered with a black thin Soot,
and all the rest of the Furniture as full of it, as if it were in the house of
some Miller, or a Bakers Shop, where the Flower gets into their Cupboards, and
Boxes, though never so close and accurately shut.

This Coal, says Sir K. flies abroad, sowling the Clothes that are exposed a
drying upon the Hedges; and in the Springtime (as but now we mentioned)
besoots all the Leaves, so as there is nothing free from its universal
contamination, and it is for this, that the Bleachers about Harl^em prohibit by
an express Law (as I am told) the use of these Coals, for some Miles about that
Town; and how curious the Diers and Weavers of Dammask, and other precious
Silks are at Florence, of the least ingresse of any Smoaky vapor, whilst their
Loomes are at work, I shall show upon some other occasion: But in the mean time
being thus incorporated with the very Aer, which ministers to the necessary
respiration of our Lungs, the Inhabitants of London, and such as frequent it,
find it in all their Expectorations; the Spittle, and other excrements which
proceed from them, being for the most part of a blackish and fuliginous Color:
Besides this acrimonious Soot produces another sad effect, by rendering the
people obnoxious to Inflammations, and comes (in time) to exulcerate the Lungs,
which is a mischief so incurable, that it carries away multitudes by
Languishing and deep Consumptions, as the Bills of Mortality do Weekly inform
us. And these are those Endemii Morbi, vernaculous and proper to London. So
corrosive is this Smoke about the City, that if one would hang up Gammons of
Bacon, Beef, or other Flesh to sum, and prepare it in the Chimnies, as the
good House-Wifes do in the Country, where they make use of sweeter Fuel, it
will so Mummifie, dry up, wast and burn it, that it suddenly crumbles away,
consumes and comes to nothing.

The Consequences then of all this is, that (as was said) almost one half of
them who perish in London, dye of Phthisical and pulmonic distempers; That the
Inhabitants are never free from Coughs and importunate Rheumatisms, spitting of
Impostumated and corrupt matter: for remedy whereof, there is none so
infallible, as that, in time, the Patient change his Aer, and remove into the
Country: Such as repair to Paris (where it is excellent) and other like Places,
perfectly recovering of their health; which is a demonstration sufficient to
confirm what we have asserted, concerning the perniciousnesse of that about
this City, produced only, from this exitial and intolerable Accident.

But I hear it now objected by some, that in publishing this Invective against
the Smoke of London, I hazard the engaging of a whole Faculty against me, and
particularly, that the College of Physicians esteem it rather a preservation
against Infections, then otherwise any cause of the sad effects which I have
enumerated. But, as I have upon several encounters, found the most able, and
Learned amongst them, to renounce this opinion, and heartily with for a
universal purgation of the Aer by the expedients I propose; so, I cannot
believe that any of that Learned Society, should think themselves so far
concerned, as to be offended with me for that, which (as well for their sakes,
as the rest who derive benefit from it) I wish were at farther distance; since
it is certain, that so many of their Patients are driven away from the City,
upon the least indisposition which attaques them, on this sole consideration;
as esteeming it less dangerous to put themselves into the hands of some
Country Doctor or Emperic, then to abide the Aer of London, with all its other
advantages. For the rest, that pretend to that honorable Profession; if any
shall find themselves agreev'd and think good to contend, I shall easily allow
him as much Smoke as he desires, and much good may it do him. But, it is to be
suspected, and the answer is made (by as many have ever suggested the Objection
to me) That there be some whom I must expect to plead for that, which makes so
much work for the Chimny-Sweeper; Since I am secure of the Learned and
Ingenuous, and whole Fortunes are not built on Smoke, or raised by a universal
Calamity; such as I esteem to be the Nuisances, I have here reproved: I do not
hence infer, that I shall be any way impatient of a just and civil Reply, which
I shall rather esteem for an honor done me, because I know, that a witty and a
Learned man is able to discourse upon any Subject whatsoever; some of them
having with praise, written even of the praise of Diseases themselves, for so
Favorinus of old, and Menapius since commended a Quartan Ague, Pirckhemierus
the Gout, Gutherius celebrated Blindness, Hiensius the Louse, and to come
nearer our Theme, Majoragius the nasty Dirt; Not I suppose that they affected
these pleasant things, but as De materiis infamibus quae Graeci (...)
appellant. Noct. At. L. 17 c. 12.
A. Gellius has it exercendi gratia, and to show their Wits; for as the Poet,
Sunt etiam Musis sua ludicra, mista Camaenis
Otia sunt: --


But to proceed, I do farther affirm, that it is not the dust and Ordure which
is daily cast out of their Houses, much less what is brought in by the Feet of
Men and Horses; or the want of more frequent and better conveyances, which
renders the Streets of London dirty even to a Proverb: but chiefly this
continual Smoke, which ascending in the daytime, is, by the descending Dew,
and Cold, precipitated again at night: And this is manifest, if a piece of
clean Linen be spread all Night in any Court or Garden, the least infested as
to appearance; but especially if it happen to rain, which carries it down in
greater proportion, not only upon the Earth, but upon the Water also, where it
leaves a thin Web, or pellicule of dust, dancing upon the Surface of it; as
those who go to bathe in the Thames (though at some Miles distance from the
City) do easily discern and bring home upon their Bodies: How it sticks on the
Hands, Faces, and Linen of our fair Ladies, and nicer Dames, who reside
constantly in London (especially during Winter) the prodigious wast of
Almond-power for the One, Soap and wearing out of the Other, do sufficiently
manifest.

Let it be considered what a Fuliginous crust is yearly contracted, and adheres
to the Sides of our ordinary Chymnies where this gross Fuel is used; and then
imagine, if there were a solid Tent^riu^, or Canopy over London, what a mass
of Soote would then stick to it, which now (as was said) comes down every Night
in the Streets, on our Houses, the Waters, and is taken into our Bodies.

And may this much suffice concerning the Causes and Effects of this Evil, and
to discover to all the World, how pernicious this Smoke is to our Inhabitants
of London; to decrie it, and to introduce some happy Expedient, whereby they
may for the Future, hope to be freed from so intolerable an inconvenience, if
what I shall be able to produce and offer next, may in some measure contribute
to it.

PART. II.
WE know (as the Proverb commonly speaks) that, as there is no Smoke without
Fire; so neither is there hardly any Fire without Smoke, and that the (...),
materials which burn clear are very few, and but comparatively so termed: Thar
to talk of serving this vast City (though Paris as great, be so supplied) with
Wood, were madness; and yet doubtless it were possible, that much larger
proportions of Wood might be brought to London, and sold at easier rates, if
that were diligently observed, which both our Laws enjoin, is faisible and
practiced in other places more remote, by Planting and preserving of Woods and
Copses, and by what might by Sea, be brought out of the Northern Countries,
where is so greatly abounds, and seems inexhaustible. But the Remedy which I
would propose, has nothing in it of this difficulty, requiring only the Removal
of such Trades, as are manifest Nuisances to the City, which, I would have
placed at farther distances; especially, such as in their Works and Fournaces
use great quantities of Sea-Cole, the sole and only cause of those prodigious
Clouds of Smoke, which so universally and so fatally infest the Aer, and would
in no City of Europe be permitted, where Men had either respect to Health or
Ornament. Such we named to be Brewers, Diers, Soap and Salt-boylers,
Lime-burners, and the like: These I affirm, together with some few others of
the same Class removed at competent distance, would produce so considerable
(though but partial) a Cure, as Men would even be found to breath a new life as
it were, as well as London appear a new City, delivered from that, which alone
renders it one of the most pernicious and insupportable abodes in the World, as
subjecting her Inhabitants to so infamous an Aer, otherwise sweet and very
healthful: For, (as we said) the Culinary fires (and which charking would
greatly reform) contribute little, or nothing in comparison to these foul
mouthed Issues, and Curles of Smoke Virgil.
which (as the Poet has it) do Caelum subtexere fumo, and draw a sable Curtain
over Heaven. Let any man observe it, upon a Sunday, or such time as these
Spiracles cease, that the Fires are generally extinguished, and he shall
sensibly conclude, by the clearness of the Sky, and universal serenity of the
Aer about it, that all the Chimnies in London, do not darken and poison it so
much, as one or two of those Tunnels of Smoke; and, that, because the most
imperceptible transpirations, which they send forth, are ventilated, and
dispersed with the least breath which is stirring: Whereas the Columns and
Clouds of Smoke, which are belched forth from the sooty Throats of those
Works, are so thick and plentiful, that rushing out with great impetuosity,
they are capable even to resist the fiercest winds, and being extremely
surcharged with a fuliginous Body, fall down upon the City, before they can be
dissipated, as the more thin and weak is; Pliny.
so as two or three of these fumid vortices, are able to whirle it about the
whole City, rendering it in a few Moments like the Picture of Troy sacked by the
Greeks, or the approches of Mount-Hecla.

I propose therefore, that by an Act of this present Parliament, this infernal
Nuisance be reformed; enjoining, that all those Works be removed five or six
miles distant from London below the River of Thames; I say, five or six Miles,
or at the least so far as to stand behind that Promontory jetting out, and and
securing Greenwich from the pestilent Aer of Plumstead-Marshes: because, being
placed at any lesser Interval beneath the City, it would not only prodigiously
infect that his Majesty's Royal Seat (and as Barclay calls it) pervetusta Regum
Britannicorum domus) but during our nine Months Etesians (for so we may justly
name our tedious Western-winds) utterly darken and confound one of the most
princely, and magnificent Memorabilis amoenitas pene citius animum quam oculos
diffudit, aspectu non Britannia tantum, sed fortasse tota Europa pulcherrimo,
etc. Sed pulcherrimum spectaculum praebit ipsa urbs inter eximias Europae
celebrata, etc. Io. Barcl. Euphor. Sat. part. 4. c. 2.
Prospects that the World has to show: Whereas, being seated behind that
Mountain, and which seems to have been thus industriously elevated; No winds,
or other accident whatever can force it through that solid obstacle; and I am
persuaded, that the heat of these Works, mixing with the too cold and uliginous
vapors which perpetually ascend from these Fenny Grounds, might be a means of
rendering that Aer far more healthy then now it is; because it seems to stand in
need of some powerful drier; but which London, by reason of its excellent
^^ituation, does not at all require: And if it shall be objected, that the
Brakishnesse of the Spring-tides, happening here about at some periods, may
render the Waters less useful for some purposes: It is an extraordinary
Accident, which appearing rarely, is cured again at the reversion of the next
Tide: Or if it only concern the Brewer, I know no inconveniency, if even some
of them were proscribed, as far as any fresh-waters are found dissemboguing
into the Thames; since the commodiousnesse of the passage may bring up their
Wares with so great ease: He that considers what quantities are transported
from Dantzick, Lubeck, Hamborough, and other remote places into Holland, cannot
think this an unreasonable proposition: But if their fondness to be nearer
London, procure indulgence for some of them, The Town of Bow, in regard of its
s^ituation from our continual Winds may serve for the expedient, and a partial
Cure: But the rest of those banished to the utmost extreme propounded on the
River.

At least by this means Thousands of able Watermen may be employed in bringing
Commodities unto the City, to certain Magazines and Wharfs, commodiously
situated to dispense them by Carrs or rather Sleds, into the several parts of
the Town; all which may be effected with much facility, and small expense; but,
with such Convenience and Benefit to the Inhabitants otherwise, as were
altogether inestimable; and therefore, to be va^lu'd beyond all other trifling
objections of sordid and avaricious persons whatsoever. Nor, indeed, could
there at all the lest detriment ensue upon this Reformation; since, the Places
and Houses deserted (which commonly take up a great space of Ground) might be
converted into Tenements, and some of them into Noble Houses for use and
pleasure, respecting the Thames to their no small advantage. Add to this, that
it would be a means to prevent the danger of Fireing, those sad Calamities, for
the most part, proceeding from some Accident or other, which takes beginning
from places, where such great and exorbitant Fires are perpetually kept going.

Not were this a thing yet so extravagant, and without all Presidous of former
times; since even the Smoke and burning of less foetid and noxious Fuel,
produced an inconvenience so universal, in some Countries of this Nation (Not
to mention the complaint which I have heard some parts even of France it self
lying South-west of England, did formerly make of being infested with Smoakes
driven from out Maritime Coasts, which injured their Vines in Flower) that it
was thought expedient an Act of Parliament should be made purposely to reform
it in the seventh year of the Reign of His Majesty's Grandfather that now is,
which, to take off all prejudice, I shall here recite, as it remains upon
Record.

Anno vij. Iacobi Regis.
An Act against burning of Ling, and Heath, and other Moor-burning in the
Countries of York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, Lancaster,
Darbie, Nottingham, and Leicester, at unseasonable times of the year.
WHereas, many Inconveniences are observed to happen in diverse Counties of
this Realm, by Moore-burnings, and by raising of Fires in Moorish grounds and
Mountanious Countries, for burning of Ling, Heath, Hather, Furs, Gorsse,
Turffe, Fearn, Whinnes, Broom, and the like in the Spring time, and
Summer-Times: For as much as thereby happens yearly a great destruction of
the Brood of Wild-fowle, and Moore-game, and by the multitude of gross
vapors, and Clouds arising from those great fires, the Aer is so distempered,
and such unseasonable and unnatural storms are engendered, as that the Corn, and
the Fruits of the Earth are thereby in diverse places blasted, and greatly
hindered in their due course of ripening and reaping. As also, for that
sometimes it has happened, that by the violence of those Fires driven with the
Wind, great Fields of Corn growing, have been consumed, and Meadows spoiled, to
the great hurt and damage of His Majesty's Subjects; which Moor-burnings,
nevertheless, may be used, and practiced at some other convenient times,
without such eminent danger or prejudice.

Be it therefore Enacted by our Sovereign Lord the Kings most excellent
Majesty, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the
Commons in this Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That
from, and after the last day of July next ensuing the end of this present
Session of Parliament, it shall not be lawful for any Person of Persons
whatsoever in the Months of April, May, June, July, August, and September, nor
in any of them, to raise, kindle, or begin; or to cause or practice to be
raised, kindled, or begun any Fires or Moor-burnings in the said Counties of
York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Lancaster, Darby,
Nottingham, and Leicester, or in any of them, for burning of Ling, Heath,
Hather, Furs, Gorsse, Turffes, Fearne, VVhinnes, Broom or the like; neither to
assist, further, nourish or continue the same; And that all and every Person
and Persons, which from and after the said last day of July, shall offend
contrary to the true intent, and meaning of this Statute, the same offense
being proved by contession of the Party, or by the Testimonies of two
sufficient Witnesses upon Oath, before one or more Justices of the Peace of the
same County, City, or Tow Corporate, where the offense shall be committed; or
the Person or Persons offending, apprehended, shall be by the said Justice, or
Justices of the peace, for every such offense, committed to the Common Goal of
the County, City, or Tow Corporate, where the Offense shall be committed, or
the person or persons apprehended, there to remain for the space of one Month
without Bail or Main-prise.

And further, be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that all, and every
person and persons, which shall be so convicted and imprisoned as aforesaid,
shall not be enlarged from their said Imprisonment; but shall there remain
after the said Month is expired, without Bail or Main-prise, until such time
as every such Offender respectively shall pay, or cause to be paid to the
Churchwardens, or unto the Overseers of the poor of the Parish, or place,
where the same Offense shall be committed, or the Offender or Offenders
apprehended, or unto some of them, to the use of the poor of the said parish or
place, where the same Offense shall be committed, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, for every such Offense committed or done, contrary no this Act. This
Act to continue until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

So far the Act. And here you see was care taken for the Fowl and the Game, as
well as for the Fruits, Corn, and Grass, which were universally incommoded by
these unwholesome vapors, that distempered the Ae, See Hipp. de Flatibus and
Gal. l. Ctb. boni and mali succi, instancing in Corn and Water, poisoned by ill
Aer.
to the very raising of Storms and sempests; upon which a Philosopher might
amply discourse. And if such care was taken for the Country, where the more
Acreall parts predominate, and are in comparison free; how much greater ought
there to be for the City, where are such Multitudes of Inhabitants concerned?
And surely it was so of old, when (to object all that can be replied against
it) even for the very Service of God, the Sacrifices were to be burnt without
the Camp; amongst the Jews; as (of old) amongst the Romans, Hominem mortuum in
urbe ne sepelito, neve urito. That Men should burn, or bury the Dead within the
City Walls, was expressly prohibited by a Law of the XII. Tables; and truly, I
am persuaded, that the frequency of Churchyards, and Charnel-Houses
contamminate the Aer, in many parts of this Town, as well as the Pumps and
Waters, which are any thing near unto them; so that those Pipes and Conveyances
which pass through them (obnoxious to many dangerous accidents) ought either
to be directed some other way, or very carefully to be looked after.

We might add to these, Chandlers and Butchers, because of those horrid stinks,
niderous and unwholesome smells which proceed from the Tallow, and corrupted
Blood: At least should no Cattle be killed within the City (to this day
observed in the Spanish great Towns of America) since the Flesh and Candles
might so easily be brought to the Shambles and Shops from other places less
remote then the former; by which means also, might be avoided the driving of
Cattle through the Streets, which is a very great inconvenience and some
danger: The same might be affirmed of Fishmongers, so wittily perstringed by
Erasmus, per Salsamentarios nempe, inqainari Civitatem, infici terram, slumina,
aerem and ignem, and si quod aliud est elementum. (...)
Then for the Butcher; That the Lex Carnaria of the Romans forbad them to kill,
or have their Slaughter-houses within the Walls; that they had a certain
Station assigned them without; ne si passim vivant, totam urbem reddant
pestiletem: So, as were the people to choose, malunt (says he) habere vicinos
december Lenones, quam unum Lanionem; They would rather dwell near Ten Bawds, then
one Butcher: But this is insulsus Salsamentarius, a quibble of the Fishmongers.
I could yet wish that our Nasty Prisons and Common Goales might bear them
Company; since I affirm they might all be removed to some distant places near
the River, the situation whereof does so invite, and rarely contribute to the
effecting of it. But if the Avarice of the men of this Age, be so far
deplorable, that we may not hope for so absolute a cure of all that is
offensive; at least let such, whose Works are upon the Margent of the Thames,
and which are indeed the most intolerable, be banished further off, and not
once dare to approach that silver Channel (but at the distance prescribed)
which glides by her stately Palaces, and irrigates her welcome Banks.

What a new Spirit would these easy Remedies create among the Inhabitants of
London? what another Genius infuse in the face of things? and, there is none
but observes, and feels in himself the Change which a serene and clear day
produces; how heavy and less disposed to motion; Yea, even to good humor and
friendly inclinations, we many times find our selves when the Heavens are
clowded, and discomposed? when the Southwinds blow, and the humors are fluid,
for what we are when the Sky is fair, and the Aer in good temper? And there is
reason, that we, who are composed of the Elements, should participate of their
qualities: For as the Humors have their sourse from the Elements; so have our
Passions from the Humors, and the Soul which is united to this Rody of ours,
cannot but be affected with its Inclinations: The very dumb creatures
themselves being sensible of the alteration of the Aer, though not by
ratiocination, yet by many notorious Symptoms.

But I forbear to Philosophise farther upon this Subject, capable of very large
and noble reflections; having with my promised brevity, endeavored to show the
Inconveniences and the Remedies of what does so universally offend, and
obscure the Glory of this our renowned Metropolis; and which, I hope, may
produce some effects toward the reforming of so public a Nuisance. At least,
let the continual sejourn of our Illustrious CHARLES, who is the very Breath of
our Nostrills, in whose health all our happiness consists, be precious in our
Eyes, and make our Noble Patriots now assembled in Parliament, consult for the
speedy removal of this universal grievance.

It is certainly of far greater concernment (however light and aerie it may
appear to some) then the drayning of a Fen, or beautifying an Aquaduct, for
which some have received such public honors, Statues and Inseriptions; and
will (if ever any thing did) deserve the like acknowledgements both of the
present and future Ages. You therefore, that have Houses in the City, you that
bring up your Wives and Families from their sweet Habitations in the Country;
that Educate your Children here; that have Offices at Court; that study the
Laws: In fine, all that are (...), and ad eundem fumum degentes, bear a part in
this request of mine, which concerns the universal benefit; and the rather, for
that having neither Habitation, Office, nor Being in the City, I cannot be
suspected to oblige any particular. The Elegant Ladies and nice Dames; All that
are in Health, and would continue so; that are infirm or Convalescent, and
would be perfect; that affect the Glory of our Court and City, Health or
Beauty, are concerned in this Petition; and it will become our wise Senators,
and we earnestly expect it, that they would consult as well the State of the
Natural, as the Politic Body of this Great Nation, so considerable a part
whereof are Inhabitants of this August City; since, without their mutual
harmony, and well-being, there can nothing prosper, or arrive to its defired
perfection.

PART. III.
An offer at the Improvement, and Melioration of the Aer of LONDON, by way of
Plantations, etc.
THere goes a pleasant Tale of a certain Sr Politic, that in the last great
Plague projected, how by a Vessel freight with peeled Onions, which should
pass along the Thames by the City, when the Wind fate in a favorable quarter,
to attract the pollution of the Aer, and sail away with the Infection to the
Sea: Transplantation of Diseases we sometimes read of amongst the Magneticall,
or rather Magical Cures; but never before of this way of Transfretation: but,
however this excellent conceit has often afforded good mirth on the Stage, and
I now mention to prevent the application to what I hope propound; There is yet
another expedient, which I have here to offer (were This of the poisonous and
filthy smoke removed) by which the City and environs about it, might be rendered
one of the most pleasant and agreeable places in the world. In order to this I
propose.

That all low-grounds circumjacent to the City, especially East and South-west,
be cast and contrived into square plots, or Fields of twenty, thirty, and forty
Akers, or more, separated from each others by Fences of double Palisads, or
Contr'spaliers, which should enclose a Plantation of an hundred and fifty, or
more, feet deep, about each Field; not much unlike to what His Majesty has
already begun by the wall from Old Spring-garden to St. James's in that Park;
and is somewhat resembled in the new Spring-garden at Lambeth. That these
Palisad's be elegantly planted, diligently kept and supplied, with such Shrubs,
as yield the most fragrant and odoriferous Flowers, and are aptest to tinge the
Aer upon every gentle emission at a great distance: Such as are (for instance
amongst many others) the Sweet-brier, all the Periclymena's and Woodbinds; the
Common white and yellow Iessamine, both the Syringa's or Pipe trees; the
Guelder-Rose, the Musk, and all other Roses; Genista Hispanica: To these may be
added the Rubus odoratus, Bays, Juniper, Lignum-vitae, Laevander: but above
all, Rosemary, the Flowers whereof are credibly reported to give their sent
above thirty Leagues off at Sea, upon the coasts of Spain: and at some distance
toward the Meadow side, Vines, yea, Hops. -- Et Arbuta passim, Virgil.

Et Glaucas Salices, Casiamque Crocumque rebentem,
Et pinguem Tiliam, and ferrugineos Hyacinthos, etc.


For, there is a very sweet smelling Sally, and the blossoms of the Tilia or
Lime-tree, are incomparably fragrant; in brief, whatsoever is odoriferous and
refreshing.

That the Spaces, or Era between these Palisads, and Fences, be employed in
Beds and Bordures of Pinks, Carnations, Clove, Stock-gilly-flower, Primroses,
Aurieulds, Violets, not forgetting the White, which are in flower twice a year,
April and August: Cowslips, Lillies, Nareissus, Strawberries, whose very leaves
as well as fruit, emit a Cardiaque, and most refreshing Halitus: also
Parietaria Lutea, Musk, Lemmon, and Mastick, Thyme: Spike, Cammomile, Balm,
Mint, Marjoram, Pempernel, and Serpillum, etc. which upon the least pressure
and cutting, breathe out and betray their ravishing odors.

That the Fields, and Crofts within these Closures, or Invironing Gardens, be,
some of them, planted with wild Thyme, and others reserved for Plots of Beans,
Pease (not Cabbages, whose rotten and perishing stalks have a very noisome and
unhealthy smell, and therefore by Hyppocrates utterly condemned near great
Cities) but such blossom-bearing Grain as send forth their virtue at farthest
distance, and are all of them marketable at London; by which means, the Aer and
Winds perpetually fanned from so many circling and encompassing Hedges,
fragrant Shrubs, Trees, and Flowers (the amputation and prunings of whose
superfluities, may in Winter, on some occasions of weather, and winds, be
burnt, to visit the City with a more benign smoke) not only all that did
approach the Region, which is properly designed to be Flowery; but even the
whole City, would be sensible of the sweet and ravishing varieties of the
perfumes, as well as of the most delightful and pleasant objects, and places of
Recreation for the Inhabitants; yielding also a Prospect of a noble and
masculine Majesty, by reason of the frequent plantations of Trees, and
Nurseries for Ornament, Profit, and Security: The remainder of the Fields
included, yielding the same, and better Shelter, and Pasture for Sheep and
Cattle then now; that they lie bleak, exposed and abandoned to the winds, which
perpetually invade them.

That, to this end, the Gardiners (which now cultivate the upper, more dry and
ungrateful soil) be encouraged to begin Plantations in such places only: and
the farther exorbitant increase of Tenements, poor and nasty Cottages near the
City, be prohibited, which disgrace and take off from the sweetness and
amoenity of the Environs of London, and are already become a great Eyesore in
the grounds opposite to His Majesty's Palace of White hall; which being
converted to this use, might yield a diversion inferior to none that could be
imagined for Health, Profit, and Beauty, which are the three Transcendencies
that render a place without all exception. And this is what (in short) I had to
offer, for the Improvement and Melioration of the Aer about London, and with
which I shall conclude this discourse.

FINIS.

