AN ELOGY, Against Occasion Requires UPON THE Earl of Shaftsbury. Calculated
for the Meridion of Eighty One.
AT the West End of the Universal Frame,
A Place there lies, which some a Land mis-name;
An Excrement of World, called Natures Sink,
A Mass of undrain'd mire, quag, bogg, and stink.
Ireland Yclep'd, When the All-creating WORD
Great Natures Architect, and Orders Lord
From Nothing spoke out All, and all around
With Form, Light, Beauty, and perfection Grownd;
This Spot alone never heard the Almighty found
This heap of Undigested Earth! a Place,
Which of old Chaos wears the Original Face!
As if the Outcast of the Works of Heaven;
'T had scarce one days Creation out of Seven.
This Country's by a sort of Natives Manned,
With Brains, as much unfurnished as their Land;
But yet, what e're they want in Wit and Sense
Is made up in their TRVTH and INNOCENCE
Such Innocence born in so pure an Air,
Their very Ground will naught that is Poisonous bear
Since it was washed with the last Massacre.
A Massacre, ROME's Memorable toil,
Which like the Plague, stopped by ore-flowing Nile
Purged all Envenomed Locusts from their soil.
With a full Pack of this untainted Brood,
Is Hunted Shaftsbury, to Death pursued.
All nobly sworn to hang the Heretic Dog,
An Oath's no more, then their own Natural Bogg,
Ore which, the nimble Torie safely runs
Whilst the more flow paced dastard stick's and drown's.
Yes, Pope and Hell for his Damnation call,
For he knows Rome, and he deserv's to Fall!
Thy Greatness, Rome, by Mystic steps Ascends,
The Blind and Ignorant are thy best Friends:
Reason and truth to Thee are Foes and Spies,
Then Great Infallability, be wise,
And safely Cut off Heads, to put out Eyes.
Favors in Palaces, let no man boast,
Where but to See, and Know, is to be Lost.
So in the Great Augustus Court of old,
Such Honor did the darling Ovid hold,
Long on his Brows the Royal Laurels hung,
Whilst he soft Airs, to flattered Caesar sung,
Till by a prying Eye undone, he is sent
Damned for a look, to Eternal Banishment:
Yes, in thy Chains, Great Overbury lie,
Rome, is not Rome, till Fear and Dangers dye:
To Preserve Nations, Right, Religion, Kings,
Are for Unhallowed hands, two Sacred things.
In such a Cause it is Fatal to embark,
Like the bold Jew that propt the falling Ark,
With an unlicenc'd Arm he durst approach,
And though to Save, yet it was Death to touch.
Go blasted then, and branded to thy Doom,
With no less Stains, then hateing Rome,
Supplanting France, and Saveing Christendom.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Ab. Green, 1681.


