A BREVIARY OF Roman History. From the Building of ROME, To the Year 1119. Of
that Famous Empire, under its Kings, Consuls, and Emperors. Writ in Latin by
EVTROPIVS. Translated into English by several Young Gentlemen, Privately
Educated in HATTON-GARDEN.

Populus Romanus, ita late per orbem terrarum arma circumtulit, ut qui res ejus
legunt, non unius populi, sed generis humani facta discant. Florus. LONDON:
Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the Black Bull
in Cornhil, 1684.

To his most Honored Friend Sir John Lowther, Baronet.
SIR,
YOU have certainly the best Right to this small Present, which gives me an
opportunity to declare the great Esteem, and Value I have for you, since your
two Sons are amongst the Translators: and all that know you must own that your
Latitude in the knowledge of Men, Affairs, and Books is very great; by the
scrutiny of which, the conduct of your Life is so exact and eminent. To these
from my particular observation, I must add, that your Friendship is excellent,
your Worth unspotted, and your Honor unbiased: yet lest I should seem to lay
the common Varnish of Dedicators, I shall rather contract my self, and at
present unite all these Rays, that illustrate you, into one Point of an
incomparable Father, whereby you transmit, and kindle these Virtues in your
Posterity, and labor to gratify the present and future time. The Hopes and
Advantages of your Sons, besides my management, are much to be ascribed to your
private Care. If your true Tenderness toward them, your search for the best
methods, and your Zeal in the performance was more followed, as it is exemplary,
the sleepy Genius of our Nation would rouse it self, and we should not only
read Stories of Noble Predecessors heretofore, but view them living. Then
Horace's words might not be ominous.

Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Your nice assistance in Education well imitated, might adorn our Country
within it self, and save many the trouble of drynursing their Youth abroad.
Providence has ordained us all things at home necessary for our Body, and why
not for our Mind? May not the Muses as well delight themselves in our Rivers of
Came, Isis, and Thames; as the Sein, the Loire, and the Tiber? To the gaining of
this greatpoint, in my experience, I never found any motive more charming to a
Youth to prosecute his Studies in any Language than History, which insensibly
draws on the Student to gain the Tongue, and insinuating an Appetite from the
beginning, continues it to the end. All our Learning terminates in it; and in
allusion to History, I might say with the Platonist, That Science was only
reminiscence of things past. But laying aside their opinion, I am sure, the
Wisdom of the greatest Scholar, after all the Labors of his Mind extends no
farther than to know the Actions of former Ages, when, where, and how they were
performed; that is, History raised up with the two Wings of Chronology, and
Geography: hence from Observations, and Inferences he gains the name of Prudent
to regulate his present Affairs, and wisely to foretell others by consequences;
what may follow. Why does the young Gentleman visit Foreign Countries, but to
learn History by the eye, and to observe Actions and Places? History cultivates
the Memory, and improves the Judgment; without which, Conversation is either
dry or vain. Well might the Roman Orator say, That not to know what has been
done before us, is always to be a Child. Wherefore he styles History, Testem
temporum, lucem veritatis, vitam memoriae, and nunciam vetustatis.

The remembrance of Alexanders Actions warmed Caesar no less than the sight of
Miltiades Trophies excited Themistocles; and it as much deters Vice, as it
inspires Virtue. Livy tells us, that, Inde tibi tuaeque reipublicae quod
imiteris capias, inde foedum inceptu, foedum exitu, quod vites. And Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus excellently described its nature, when he said (...), that
History is Philosophy teaching by examples. I am sure Homer's Wise man under
the Character of Ulysses undergoes incredible dangers to gain his experience in
many places, whilst the Historian in his Study without trouble enjoying what
others have smarted for, may repeat these Verses of Lucretius.

Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem:
Non quia vexari quemquam est jucunda voluptas,
Sed, quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suave est.
Wherefore for these reasons, since it is the humor of the Age, and to promote
private diligence with mutual aemulation, I thought it highly advantageous to
have this Historian Translated by a select number among us. The usefulness of
Translation I know you much approve of, who are so good a Judge of Letters: it
procures two Languages, and discovers their proprieties the easiest and
quickest way. I am sure the reputation of the thing made them study hard, which
was a pleasant satisfaction to me, and perhaps may push them on all their life
to a true love of Books, since they have already found the conquest of an
Author not difficult; and Eutropius so easy by their former Conversation with
Florus: The Translation may very honestly be called their own, with the
Geographical Index, which they composed, sufficiently known to some Friends.
Then be pleased to excuse the Style, if the Sense, and Grammar be true, as we
hope, it is as much as should be expected. Let this Edition rather be natural,
and the second more artful.

Sir, It Is high time to free you from this trouble, and to beg pardon for it;
yet concluding with my sincerest Wishes for your constant Happiness in all your
concerns, especially with me, which I shall always be most ready to advance;
being by Inclination and Gratitude,

SIR, Your most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, L. Maidwell.

To the Ingenious TRANSLATORS.
AVspicious Youths, our Ages Hope, and Pride,
Exalted minds, and worthy such a Guide:
To whose rich Skill this wondrous Growth you owe;
Most happy, if your happiness you know.
Who close entrencht Eutropius could overcome,
And plunder the Records of ancient Rome.
Unlike my Fate, by Pedants led astray,
Who at my setting out mistook the way.
With Terms confounded (such their methods were)
Those rules my Cloud, that should have been my Star:
Yet groping forwards through the Classicks went,
Nor wholly of my Labors may repent:
Strong holds, and hard to take, but in the set,
No Volume so obscure, no Author met
So difficult, as William Lilly yet.
Without Geography led blindfold on,
And ignorant when each exploit was done;
Of wondrous Men, and wondrous Actions read,
But all the while with Fairy Banquets fed.
All hudled without knowing when, or where,
Utopian Fields, and Battles in the Air.
But you, where e're your Authors Scene is laid,
Beyond your knowledge never are conveyed.
Great your Advantage, therefore use it well,
You fail, if you but mod'rately excel;
Who for your doubts have such an Oracle.
Consult your Guide, whose Judgment more refined,
Unties those Knots, Dutch Comments leave behind:
By which your Authors more obscure become;
The Fogs of Holland cloud the Wit of Rome.
While these the vehicle of words essay,
The subtle Spirit flies unseen away.
He Will show you where their secret Treasures lie;
Sublime their sense, and fix their Mercury.
Let this success, brave Youths, your minds inflame,
Eutropius conquered, calls for nobler Game:
Lanch boldly next on Tully's flowing Seas,
And grasp the thunder of Demosthenes.
To noblest Sciences devote your time,
And rarely, very rarely, sport with Rhyme.
See how your Teacher does the practice fly,
His Genius, and the waiting world deny,
Whilst every Muse in vain stands sighing by.
Even my poor strains some small Applause have found,
Yet were I with the foremost Laurels crowned,
With Wit and Verse I Would hold eternal War,
To be a thriving Blockhead of the Bar.
Once more all Hail to thee Industrious Friend,
Behold what wonders on thy Toil attend!
What pains thy methods cost, that thus excel,
Thy midnight Lamp, and Thou can only tell;
Yet for some longer space thy Tillage ply,
Thy own repose, and pressing Friends deny.
Till like Lycurgus Laws, thy Rules succeed,
And for long Ages leave a noble Breed.
N. Tate.

Juventuti Historicae. S. P. D.
IMperio premeret dominas cum Valens.
Flavius urbes,
Victrices Aquilas and bello parta trophaea
Extendens late; tantos periisse labores
Credidit indignum, positisque inglorius armis,
Arripuit calamum Eutropius; Dux mart tremendus,
Ingenio pollens; scripsitque, and praelia gessit
Una eademque manus; famamque and fata Parentum
Donavit luce, and longum aeternavit in aevum.
Scilicet infantis c^cinit cunabula Romae,
Regesque, Grandaevosque Patres, fascesque verendos,
Et parvis magnum de maenibus incrementum.
Sed neque res Italas memorans, gentemque Togatam,
Praeteriit Domini Julian.
crudelia bella perempti:
Juvit enim Socias, florentesque aere cohortes,
Et, quorum pars magna fuit, cantare labores.
O mundo par opus nec mundi Regibus impar!
Quis dignus transfer tuas Dux inclyte chartas,
Romanosque sonos materna reddere lingua?
Cedit onus pueris, humerisque virilibus aequa
Incumbit moles, nec lassat magna ferentes.
Fortunata tuo laetare Britannia dono:
Et vos O matres Castrae, innuptaeque puellae,
Ponite jam fusos, operosae pensa diei,
Ponite, and hunc melius versetis pollice librum.
Hic annosa ducum series, hic Caesaris arma,
Qui primus toto divisos orb Britannos
Vidit, and in nostro fixit tentoria Coelo:
Nec, quoties placide delectant scripta legentes,
Definite authors toties celebrare tenellos.
Felices pueri, tali sub Praeside docti,
Queis angusta fovens distendit pectora Pallas;
Crescite, foecundosque simul diffundite ramos
Per totam late gentem; quantumque virorum
Coetibus hic praestat, tantum and praestate Juventae.
Haec ego, ut exhibeam gratae munuscula mentis,
Qui monitus Maidvelle tuos, praeceptaque dia,
Felix ante alios jucundis auribus hausi.
Volventemque globum mundi, Titaniaque astra
Vidimus, and vivum veluti mirabar Aratum.
E. Trin. Coll. Cant.

The LIFE of EVTROPIVS.
EVtropius was an Italian, by Suidas called the Sophist; he writ many other
things which are lost by the injury of time; yet skilled in Arms as well as
Arts; for he was in that Expedition, when Julian was killed by the Persians,
which happened An. Chr. 365. or with others 363. He drew up this Breviary of
Roman History by the order of Flavius Valens the Emperor, brother to
Valentinian, from the building of the City to his time, to whom he dedicates
it: the style good, and considering the time, correct: the disposition of the
matter is very methodical, and in the application of Chronology to every great
action surpasses Florus, who wants it: he has been well entertained by the
Ancients, being translated twice into Greek by Capito an Historian of Lycia,
and Paeanius; some have honored him with the Title of Consul; but it is a
mistake; for Eutropius mentioned by the Fasti Consulares, Colleague to
Valentinian the second was not our Author, but Eutropius the Eunuch, against
whom Claudian the Poet writ, and who was afterward slain in his second
Consulship. Some also would (through ignorance in time, confound him with
Eutropius the Presbyter and Historian, Scholar to S. Austin, whilst our Author
cannot be a Christian; for he praises Julian too much, tho he says he
persecuted them; and is angry with Jovian for not falsifying his Oath, and
breaking the Peace with the Persians, which cannot be the advice of a Professor
of Christianity; and makes no mention of the ten Persecutions, nor that of
Dioclesian, carried on with so much rage; but in the time of his Father,
without doubt he was a Trimmer, halting between Pagan and Christian: as many
then were puzzled and groping in a twilight, rather modish in their Religion,
and imitating the Emperor. Nothing else is observable concerning him.

EVTROPIVS's Epistle To the EMPEROR Flavius Valens.
To the most Great, and ever August Emperor Valens, Conqueror of the GOTHS.
ACcording to your Serene Pleasure; I have drawn up, in a short Narrative,
successively from the Buildiag of the City to your time, the Roman
Transactions, which have been remarkable, both Military and Civil; and have
added in short all passages eminent in the Lives of our Princes; that your
Divine Mind may please it self in this to have imitated the Actions of these
Illustrious Persons, in the Administration of your Empire, before they were
known by reading.

The First Book OF EVTROPIVS:
Containing the seven Kings Reigns, with the change of the Commonwealth, the
Hetrurian War with King Porsena, the Wars with the Latins, Vejentes, Falisci,
Fidenates, and the Gauls, and other circumstances remarkable;

From the building of the City to A. V. C. 365.

By Mr. John Williams.
THE Roman Empire, than which none was less in its beginning, yet Story
mentions none upon its increase greater in the whole World, was founded by
Romulus, who was the Son of a Vestal Virgin, and as it is thought, of the God
Mars, born a twin with his Brother Remus, He having lived like a Robber amongst
the Shepherds being eighteen years old built a little City upon the
Palatine-hill on the eleventh of the Kalends of May in the third year of the
sixth Olympiad, as they say who speak most probably, in the three hundred and
ninety fourth year after the sacking of Troy.

Having built this City, which he called Rome from his own Name he performed
these things, He made a great many of his Neighbors free of his City, choosing
a hundred out of the old Men, whom he called Senators from their age, by whose
Counsel he would manage his Affairs. Then when Romulus and his people wanted
Wives, he invited the neighboring Nations to public Sports and took away
their young Women by force. He overcame the Caeninenses, the Antemnates the
Crustumii, the Sabins, the Fidenates and the Vejentes in the War raised against
him for the injury offered to their Women. All these Cities lay about Rome. And
when upon a sudden Tempest at an Assembly he was never seen after, in the
thirty seventh year of his Reign he is consecrated, being believed to have gone
to the Gods. Then the Government of Rome was in the power of Senators for the
space of five days by turns, which Authority lasted one year.

Afterward Numa Pompilius was made King, who waged no War, yet he was no less
serviceable to Rome than Romulus, for he founded the Laws and Customs of the
Romans, who were now thought half Barbarians and Robbers from their continual
Wars. He divided the year into ten Months, which before was confused without
any account, he constituted very many holy Rites, and built many Temples at
Rome, and died in the forty third year of his Reign.

Tullus Hostilius succeeded him, he renewed the War and overcame the Albani who
dwelt twelve miles from Rome. He subdued the Vejentes and the Fidenates, some
of these were six miles from Rome, others eighteen. He enlarged the City having
added the Hill Caelius. When he had reigned thirty two years he was killed by
Thunder, and his House burnt up with Lightning.

Ancus Marcius Reigned after him, he was the Grandchild of Numa by his
Daughter, he warred against the Latins, and joined the Aventine Hill and the
Hill Janiculus to the City, built Ostia a Sea-Town sixteen miles from Rome. He
died a natural death in the twenty fourth year of his Reign.

Then Priscus Tarquinius was made King. He doubled the number of the Senators
and built the Circus Maximus at Rome. He first instituted the Roman Sports,
which are continued to our time. He also overcame the Sabins: and having
conquered much of their Country joined it to the Roman Territory, and first of
all entered the City in Triumph; he built the Walls and the Common Sewers, he
began the Capitol; and was killed by the Sons of Ancus, whom he succeeded, in
the thirty eighth year of his Reign.

Servius Tullius succeeded him, born of a Noble Woman being a Captive and a
Handmaid. He also overcame the Sabins, and added the three Hills Quirinalis,
Viminalis and Esquilinus to Rome. He dug Ditches about the City. And first
of all numbered and taxed the people, which thing was unknown throughout the
whole World. Upon the Assessment there were found eighty four thousand Roman
Citizens with those who lived in the Country. He was murdered in the forty
fifth year of his Reign by the treachery of his Son-in-law Tarquinius the Son
of Priscus his Predecessor, and his Daughter Tullia, whom Tarquinius had
married.

Lucius Tarquinius Superbus was the Seventh, and last of the Roman Kings. He
overcame the Volsci, which people dwelt not far from Rome as we go to Campania;
he took the City Gabii and Suessa Pometia, and made peace with the Thusci, and
built the Temple of Jupiter in the Capitol. Afterward besieging Ardea, a City
situated eighteen miles from Rome, he lost his Kingdom. For when his Son
Tarquinius the younger ravished Lucretia a Woman of great quality, and the most
chaste Wife of Collatinus, and she complaining of the injury to her Husband, her
Father and her Friends, killed her self in the sight of them all. For which
reason Brutus, her Father, and her Husband Tarquinius Collatinus stirred up the
people, and deposed Tarquinius: Soon after the Army, which besieged Ardea with
Tarquinius, deserted him, and he returning to Rome, was shut out. When he had
reigned five and twenty years, he fled away with his Wife and Children.

Thus Rome was governed by seven Kings for the space of two hundred forty three
years, the Romans hitherto scarcely possessing fifteen miles about their City.

For this reason two Consuls were chosen for one King, that if one had ill
Designs, the other having equal Power might restrain him. And 'twas enacted by
the Roman people that they should rule no longer than one year, lest they
should grow proud by a long continuance of their Power; but be always
courteous, knowing they were to be private Men within one year. Therefore
Lucius Junius Brutus, who had been very industrious in expelling King Tarquin,
and Tarquinius Collatinus the Husband of Lucretia were Consuls the first year.
But the Consulship was taken away soon from Tarquinius Collatinus, for the
Romans were not willing that any should remain in the City who was called
Tarquinius; therefore having gathered together his Estate he departed from
Room: Valerius Publicola was made Consul in his stead. But King Tarquinius
Superbus who was driven out waged War against Rome, and by the assistance of
several people fought with them that he might be restored to his Kingdom,
Brutus the Consul and Aruns the Son of Tarquinius killed one another in the
first Battle, yet the Romans came off Conquerors. The Roman Matrons mourned one
year for Brutus, as the Defender of their Chastity and their common Father;
Valerius Publicola took Spurius Lucretius Tricipitinus for his Colleague, who
was the Father of Lucretia, upon whose Death he took Horatius Pulvillus into
his place, so that there were five Consuls in this first year: Tarquinius
Collatinus went out of the City by reason of his name, Brutus was killed in the
Battle, Sp. Lucretius died a natural Death. Tarquinius again made War against
Rome the second year that he might be restored, Porsena the King of Thuscia
assisting him, and almost took it, but was overcome at last. In the third year
after the banishing of the King, Tarquinius, when he could (...) be received
into his Kingdom, nor would Porsena who had made peace with the Romans aid him,
retired to Tusculum, which City is not far from Rome: and there lived a private
life with his Wife fourteen years. In the fourth year after the Kings were
driven from Rome, the Sabins waging War against the Romans were overcome, upon
which there was a Triumph. In the fifth year Lucius Valerius the Colleague of
Brutus and now the fourth time Consul died; he was so poor, that he was buried
at the expense of the public, for whom the Matrons mourned one year as for
Brutus.

In the ninth year after the banishing of the Tarquins, when the Son-in-law of
King Tarquinius had gathered together a great Army to revenge the injuries done
to his Father-in-law, the Romans created a new Authority, which was called the
Dictatorship being greater than the Consulship. In the same year also the
General of the Horse, who was subordinate to the Dictator was made. Nor does
Roman Story relate any thing more like the present Government of the Empire,
which Your Majesty now enjoys, than the ancient Dictatorship, chiefly when
Caius Caesar, and after him Augustus otherwise called Octavianus reigned with
the name and honor of Dictactor; of whom I shall speak hereafter. But Largius
was the first Roman Dictator, and Spurius Cassius the first General of the
Horse.

The first Sedition of the Roman People was in the sixteenth year after the
expulsion, under pretense that the Commons were oppressed by the Senate and the
Consuls. Then the Tribunes of the people were made as their proper Judges and
Defenders, by whom the people might be defended from the Senate and Consuls.

The next year the Volsci renewed the War against the Romans and were overcome,
losing their chief City Corioli.

In the eighteenth year Quintius Marcius a Roman General, who took the City
Corioli from the Volsci, was banished; being angry, he goes to the same Volsci,
and having an Army committed to him against the Romans, evercame them in many
Battles: until he came within five miles of Rome, designing to ruin his Native
Country, having sent back those Ambassadors, who desired peace, had not his
Mother Veturia and Wife Volumnia come to him from Rome. But he being overcome
by their Tears and Entreaties, he drew off his Army: And was the second who led
an Army against his own Country, after King Tarquin.

Coeso Fabius and Titus Virginius being Consuls, three hundred Noble Men who
were of the Fabian Family, undertook the War against the Vejentes without aid,
promising the Senate and the People, that they would by themselves maintain it.
Accordingly all of them marched out of Rome, and every one of them was slain,
each of them deserving to have been a General. One only survived of this great
Family, who being too young was left at home. Soon after a new Register is made
at Rome, and the number of the Roman Citizens was found to be a hundred and
nineteen thousand.

The year following when the Roman Army was blocked up in the Mount Algidus,
almost twelve miles from Rome, Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus was made Dictator,
who managing a Farm of four Acres, tilled it with his own hands. He, when he
was found Plowing, having wiped off the sweat from his Face put on his Robe and
relieved the Army, having overthrown his Enemies.

Three hundred and one year from the building of the City, the Consular Power
which was Supreme ended, and ten Men were elected instead of two Consuls,
called the Decemviri: but when they had passed over the first year well, in the
second year Appius Claudius one of the Decemviri would have defloured a certain
young Maid the Daughter of one Virginius, who at that time was in service
against the Latins: whom her Father killed, lest she should be dishonored by
him, and returning to the Army raised a Mutiny. The Power of the Decemviri was
taken away, and they condemned.

In the three hundred and fifteenth year from the building of the City the
Fidenates rebelled against the Romans: the Vejentes with their King Tolumnius
aided them, both of which Cities were so near Rome, that Fidena was but seven,
and Veii eighteen miles off: and also the Volsci joined themselves to these.
But they were conquered by Aemilius the Dictator and Lucius Quintius
Cincinnatus General of the Horse; King Tolumnius being slain, the City Fidena
was taken and razed. Twenty years after the Vejentes revolted and Furius
Camillus the Dictator was sent against them, whom he overcame first of all in a
pitched Battle, and took Veii one of the most ancient and the wealthiest Cities
of Italy after a long Siege. Then he took the noble City of the Falisci. But he
was maliciously accused, as if he had not rightly divided the prey, for which
reason he was condemned and banished. Not long after the Galli Senones came to
Rome (in pursuit of the Romans, overcome at the River Allia twelve miles from
Rome) and took it, nor could the Romans defend any thing but the Capitol, which
when the Gauls had besieged a long while, and the Romans very much wanting
provision, Camillus, who passed his banishment in a neighboring City came upon
them on a sudden and overthrew them. Afterward they departed having received a
Sum of Gold to raise their Siege before the Capitol: But Camillus chasing them,
so overcame them, that he recovered the Gold which was given them, and all the
Military Ensigns which they had taken. So the third time he entered Rome in
triumph and was styled the Second Romulus, as if he also had been the founder
of his Country.

The Second Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The Wars with the Latins, Sabins, Samnites, the Tarentine War with King
Pyrrhus, and the first War with the Carthaginians, with other contemporary
Actions of the Romans.

From V. C. 365. to 512.

By Mr. Christopher Lowther.
IN the three hundred sixty fifth year after the building of the City, and the
first after it was taken by the Gauls, they changed their Officers, and instead
of two Consuls set up Military Tribunes with a Consular Power. From this time
the Roman Empire began to enlarge its Dominions: for Camillus in the same year
took the City of the Volsci, which had waged War against the Romans for Seventy
years, and the City of the Aequi, and the Sutrini, and having slain their
Armies, seized all their Cities, for which actions he triumphed thrice. Also
Titus Quintius Cincinnatus pursuing the Praenestini, who had come armed even
unto the Gates of Rome, defeated them at the River Allia; and added their
Cities to the Roman Empire, and having besieged the City Praeneste, made it
surrender: he performed all these actions in twenty days, for which they
decreed him a Triumph.

The Authority of the Military Tribunes lasted not long, being soon dissolved.
For four years they were the Supreme Officers in Rome; then the Military
Tribunes resumed again their Dignity with a Consular Power, and kept it for
three years; but afterward the Consuls were restored. In the Consulship of
Lucius Genucius, and Quintus Servilius, Camillus died, whom the Romans honored
above all their famous men, next to Romulus.

Titus Quintius the Dictator was sent against the Gauls, who had lately invaded
Italy. They had pitched their Camps four miles from the City Rome on the other
side of the River Anio. Titus Manlius a most noble Senator fighting with a
Gaul, who challenged him, slew him in single Combat, and having taken off the
golden Chain that was about his neck, put it upon his own, which procured a
perpetual honor to his Family, that they should be called Torquati: the Gauls
were put to flight; and a little while after, Caius Sulpicius the Dictator
routed them. Not long after Caius Marcius overcame the Tusci, and seven
thousand of them were led in Triumph.

The second time the People were taxed and mustered, and when the Latins, whom
the Romans had subdued, would not send them Soldiers: they from themselves
listed their young Soldiers, and made ten Legions, which amounts to sixty
thousand armed Men or more. Yet in these small Affairs the Romans discovered
great valor in their Wars: for when they marched against the Gauls under their
General Lucius Furius Camillus, one of the Gauls challenged the valiantest Man
of the Romans to fight with him. Then Marcus Valerius a Tribune profer'd
himself, and when he marched out armed, a Crow sat upon his right Arm, and a
little while after when they were fighting, the same Crow struck at the eyes of
the Gaul with his Wings and Claws that he could not see before him: wherefore
the Gaul being slain, Valerius the Tribune gained not only the Victory, but
also a Name. For afterward he was called Corvinus for this Deed, and made
Consul in the three and twentieth year of his Age.

The Latins, who would not send the Romans Soldiers, began to exact this of
them, that one of the Consuls should be chosen out of their People, and the
other from the Romans, which being denied, they took up Arms against them; but
being overcome with a great slaughter, the Romans triumphed, and for this brave
Action the Statues of the Consuls were placed upon the Pulpit, from whence they
spoke their Orations.

Now the Romans begun to grow powerful: for they made War with the Samnites,
living about a hundred and thirty miles from the City, who were situate between
Picenum, Campania and Apulia. (L.) Papirius Cursor commanded in this War with
the honor of Dictator. Who going to Rome, charged Q. Fabius Maximus General of
the Horse, to whom he committed the care of the Army, not to fight in his
absence. But he having found an opportunity, fought very successfully, and
routed the Samnites. For which thing the Dictator commanded him to be beheaded,
because he had fought against his Command, yet he was freed by the great favor
of the Soldiers and the People: and there arose so great a mutiny against
Papirius, that he had like to have been killed amongst them.

Afterward in the Consulship of Titus Veturius, and Spurius Posthumous, the
Romans very dishonourably were overcome by the Samnites and made Slaves by
them. But the Senate and the People broke the Peace, which had been made
through mere necessity. Afterward L. Papirius the Consul overcame the
Samnites, and making seven thousand of them Slaves, triumphed for the Victory
obtained against them. At the same time Appius Claudius Censor brought into the
City Rome the Water called from his name Claudia, and paved the Appian way. The
Samnites having renewed the War, overcame Q. Fabius Maximus, and slew three
thousand of his Men. Afterward having his Father Fabius Maximus for his
Lieutenant, he subdued the Samnites and took most of their Towns. Then P.
Cornelius Rufinus, and Manius Curious Dentatus being Consuls were both sent
against the Samnites, and overcame them in several great Battles. Then they
finished the War, which the Romans had waged with the Samnites for nine and
forty years. Neither was there now any Enemy in Italy, who would make trial of
Roman Valor. A few years after, some Forces of the Gauls joined themselves
with the Tusci and the Samnites: but as they marched to Rome, Cn. Cornelius
Dolabella defeated them.

At the same time the Romans proclaimed War against the Tarentini, who lived in
the farthermost part of Italy, because they had affronted their Ambassadors:
they desired Pyrrhus the King of Epirus, who was descended from Achilles, to
help them against the Romans, who came soon after into Italy. This was the
first time the Romans fought with a foreign Enemy. P. Valerius Laevinus the
Consul was sent to fight them, who having taken Pyrrhus's Spies, commands them
to be led about his Camp to view his Army, and then be sent back to tell
Pyrrhus how the Romans managed their Actions. Upon the joining of the Battle
Pyrrhus fled; yet he overcame the Romans by the help of his Elephants, which
they feared, having never seen them before. But the Night putting an end to the
fight Laevinus fled. Pyrrhus took eighteen hundred Romans, whom he used very
honorably, and also buried their dead, whom when he saw lying upon the ground,
with their wounds in their Breast and Face, and with a stern countenance, he is
reported to have held up his hands to Heaven uttering these words, That he
might have conquered the whole World, if it had been his fortune to have had
such valiant Soldiers.

Afterward Pyrrhus having joined the Samnites, the Lucani, and the Brutii to
his Army marched to Rome, wasting all places with fire and sword: he destroyed
Campania, and came to the City Praeneste eighteen miles from Rome. A little
while after he retreated into Campania, being afraid of the Army, which
followed him under the command of a Consul. The Romans sent Ambassadors to
Pyrrhus, to desire him to restore them their Captives, whom he received very
honorably, and sent back their Captives without ransom. He very much admired
one of the Roman Ambassadors, Fabricius by name, and when he knew him to be
poor, he would have enticed him to leave the Romans, and come over to him,
promising the fourth part of his Kingdom; Fabricius despised it. Wherefore
Pyrrhus esteeming the Romans at a high rate; sent an Ambassador a great Man by
name Cineas to make Peace with them on equal terms, which were, that he might
reserve that part of Italy which he had Conquered. The Romans liked not the
Propositions. Therefore the Senate sent word to Pyrrhus, that he could have no
peace with the Romans, if he stayed in Italy. Then the Romans commanded all
those Captives, which Pyrrhus had restored, to be esteemed infamous, who should
have defended themselves with their Arms, neither should they regain their
former credit, till they had brought back the spoils of their Enemies. Pyrrhus
his Ambassador returned with this answer; whom when Pyrrhus asked, what sort
of place he found Rome? he replied, That he had seen a Country of Kings, that
they were all as brave Men there, as he was counted in Epirus, and Greece. P.
Sulpicius, and Decius Mus the Consuls are sent Generals against him. Upon the
joining of the Battle Pyrrhus was wounded, and his Elephants slain, he lost in
the Fight twenty thousand: the Romans only five thousand. Pyrrhus fled to
Tarentum the second year after Fabricius was sent to fight him, whom before he
could not bribe, being one of the Ambassadors, having promised him the fourth
part of his Kingdom. Then his Camp and the King's being nigh one another,
Pyrrhus his Physician came to him by Night, promising to poison the King, if he
would reward him for it: whom he commanded to be carried bound to Pyrrhus, and
to be told that he had undertaken to kill him. The King admiring at him, is
reported to have said, This is that Fabricius, whom it is harder to disuade from
honesty, than to alter the Sun's course, Then the King went into Sicily,
Fabricius having defeated the Samnites, and the Lucani, triumphed. Then Manius
Curious Dentatus, and Cornelius Lentulus were sent against Pyrrhus; Curious
fought him, and cut off his Army, and having driven him to Tarentum, took his
Camp in the same day with the loss of three and twenty thousand of the Enemy.
Curious Dentatus triumphed in his Consulship; he was the first Man that brought
Elephants to Rome, being four in number. A little while after Pyrrhus departed
from Tarentum, and was slain at Argos a City of Greece. In the Consulship of
Caius Fabricius Luscinus, and C. Claudius Cinna, and in the four hundred sixty
first year of the City, Ptolemy sent Ambassadors from Alexandria to Rome, to
make a friendship with the Romans, which they obtained.

Quintius Gulo and C. Fabius Pictor being Consuls, the Picentes raised a War,
and the next Consuls Pub. Sempronius, and Appius Claudius overcame them, for
which Conquest they triumphed. At this time the Romans built these Cities,
Ariminum in Gaul, and Beneventum in Samnium.

In the Consulship of Marcus Attilius Regulus, and Lucius Junius Libo, the
Roman people proclaimed War against the Salentini, a people living in Apulia,
and vanquished the Brundusini with their City, for which there was another
Triumph.

In the four hundred seventy seventh year of the City, the Roman Name was
famous to all the World; yet they had not waged War out of Italy. Wherefore
they made a Muster to know their Forces: there were found two hundred ninty two
thousand, and three hundred thirty four, although they had always been fighting
ever since the building of the City. The first foreign War they made, was
against the Africans, in the Consulship of Appius Claudins, and Quintus
Fulvius. They fought them in Sicily, and Appius Claudius triumphed over the
Africans and Hiero the King of Sicily. The next year Valerius Marcus, and
Octacilius being Consuls, the Romans performed great Actions in Sicily; they
received into their protection the Taurominitani, the Catanenses, with fifty
Cities. The third year they designed to make War with Hiero the King of Sicily;
But he with all the Nobility of Syracuse desired to make Peace with the Romans,
and gave them two hundred Talents; the Romans overcame the Africans in Sicily,
for which they triumphed the second time. In the fifth year of the Punick War,
which was carried on against the Africans, in the Consulship of Caius Duillius,
and Cnaeus Cornelius Asina, the Romans fought first by Sea, having prepared
Ships headed with Iron, which they call Liburnae. Cornelius the Consul was
killed by stratagem; Duillius having joined Battle defeated the Carthaginian
Admiral, and having took one and thirty of his Ships, sunk fourteen, he took
seven thousand Prisoners, and slew three. There was no Victory more acceptable
to the Romans than this, because being a people invincible at Land, they
appeared now very powerful by Sea. In the Consulship of Caius Aquilius Florus,
and Lucius Scipio, Scipio took the Islands Corsica, and Sardinia, and having
brought captive from thence several thousand, obtained a Triumph. L. Manlius
Volso and M. Attilius Regulus being Consuls, the Romans carried the War over
into Africa, and fighting by Sea against Hamilcar the Carthaginian General,
defeated him; for he having lost sixty four Ships, made homewards, the Romans
lost two and twenty; but being come into Africa, they first made the City
Clypea surrender it self. The Consuls went unto Carthage, and having wasted
many of their Towns, Manlius after his Conquest returned to Rome, bringing with
him seven and twenty thousand Captives; Attilius Regulus tarried in Africa; He
drew up his Army, and fighting against three Carthaginian Captains, overcame
them, and having slain eighteen thousand of their men, and taken five thousand
with eight Elephants, received seventy Cities into the Roman protection. Now
the Carthaginians being routed desired to make peace with the Romans, which
Regulus denying but upon very hard terms, they desired the Lacedaemonians to
help them, and Xantippus the General, which they had sent, defeated Regulus the
Roman Geral with a total overthrow, for of all his Army there escaped only two
thousand; fifteen thousand men were taken with their General, thirty thousand
slain, and Regulus cast into Prison.

Marcus Aemilius Paulus, and Servius Fulvius Nobilior being Consuls, sailing to
Africa with a Fleet of three hundred Ships, overcame the Africans first in a
Sea Fight. Aemilius the Consul having sunk one hundred and four of their Ships,
took thirty with the men in them, and having slain or taken fifteen thousand of
the Enemy, enriched his Soldiers with costly Spoils. Now the Romans had
subdued all Africa, if the scarcity of provisions had not been such, that their
Army could not subsist there any longer. The Consuls, as they sailed homewards
were Shipwrecked about Sicily: and the Tempest so great, that out of four
hundred and sixty four Ships, they could scarce save eighty: neither was so
great a storm ever heard of. But the Romans soon set out another Fleet of two
hundred Sail; nor was there any one daunted with their former misfortune.

Cnaeus Servilius Cepio and C. Sempronius Blaesns the Consuls sailing to Africa
with two hundred and sixty Ships, took some Cities, and returning home with
rich Spoil were also Shipwracked. Wherefore the Romans being afflicted with
these continual calamities, the Senate Decreed they should abstain from
Sea Fights, and only keep a Fleet of sixty Ships to guard Italy.

In the Consulship of Lucius Caecilius Metellus, and Caius Furius Pacilus,
Metellus the Consul in Sicily overcame a General of the Africans, marching with
thirty Elephants, and great Forces, and having slain twenty thousand of his
men, took six and twenty Elephants, and gathered together diverse others
straggling up and down in the Country by the assistance of the Numidians, who
helped him in that War, and brought them to Rome in great Pomp, filling all the
Roads with an hundred and thirty Elephants. After these misfortunes the
Carthaginians sent Regulus the Roman General, whom they had taken Prisoner, to
desire the Romans to make peace, and exchange their Captives: he being come to
Rome, and brought into the Senate, acted nothing as a Roman, saying, he was no
Roman from that Day he had been taken by the Africans, hindering even his Wife
from embracing him, he persuaded the Romans not to make peace with the
Carthaginians: for they being weakened with so many misfortunes were now
hopeless; he was not of so great value that they should restore so many
Captives for him being an old Man, and for a few Romans who had been taken.
Therefore he obtained his request: For no body granted Peace to the Africans
desiring it. Upon his return to Carthage, the Romans would have had him to have
stayed at Rome, but he answered, he could not live there with the same honor
as before, having been a Slave to the Carthaginians. Wherefore when he returned
to Africa, they put him to a very cruel Death. P. Claudius Pulcher, and C.
Junius being Consuls, Claudius fighting with ill Omens against the
Carthaginians, was defeated: for of two hundred and twenty Ships he fled with
thirty, the Enemy having taken ninety and sunk the rest, twenty thousand being
made captive. Also the other Consuls Fleet was shipwracked, but he saved his
Army, having landed it on the coast hard by. Caius Luctatius Catulus and Aulus
Posthumous Albinus being Consuls in the twenty third year of the Punick War,
having the management of the War, sailed into Sicily with three hundred Ships,
the Africans had a Fleet of four hundred against him. Luctatius Catulus went
sick a Shipboard, for he had been wounded in the former Battle. The Romans
fought very valiantly over against Lilybaeum a City of Sicily, they took
seventy three Carthaginian Ships, and sunk an hundred and twenty five; they
took thirty two thousand Prisoners, having slain thirteen thousand: with a
great quantity of Gold and Silver. Of the Roman Fleet there were but twelve
Ships sunk. This fight was on the sixth of the Ides of March. The Carthaginians
soon after desired to make Peace with the Romans, which they granted them. They
restored the Romans their Captives; and the Carthaginians having desired their
own Captives might be ransomed, the Senate commanded those who were in public
Prisons to be sent to them gratis, expecting a Ransom only for them in the
possession of private men, and upon their return to Carthage, it should rather
be paid out of the Treasury, than by the Carthaginians.

Quintus Luctatius, and Aulus Manlius being Consuls, made War with the Falisci,
whose City heretofore abounded with Riches, which War they finished within six
days, having slain fifteen thousand of the Enemy, and granted Peace to the
rest, taking away half of their Land.

The Third Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The War with the Ligurians, Sardinians, Illyrians, and the Cisalpine Gauls;
the second War with the Carthaginians, with other passages.

From V. C. 512. to 551.

By Mr. William Williams.
THE first Punick War being ended, which continued for twenty two years, the
Romans being grown famous, sent Ambassadors to Ptolomy the Egyptian King,
promising him aid, because Antiochus the King of Syria had made War upon him.
He returned thanks to the Romans, but accepted not their help, for now the
Battle was over. At the same time Hiero the most powerful King of Sicily came
to Rome to behold the Plays, and gave two hundred thousand bushels of Wheat as
a gift to the People.

In the Consulship of Lucius Cornelius Lentulus and Fulvius Flaccus, at which
time Hiero came to Rome, the War also was carried on against the Ligurians in
Italy, and in conquering them the Romans triumphed. The Carthaginians attempted
now to renew the War, inciting the Sardinians to rebel, who ought to have been
subject to the Romans according to their former Articles. Yet Ambassadors from
the Carthaginians coming to Rome, obtained Peace.

In the Consulship of Titus Manlius Torquatus, and Caius Attilius Balbus, the
Roman people triumphed over the Sardinians: there being no Wars in any place,
the Romans enjoyed peace, which only happened when Numa Pompilius reigned, from
the building of Rome.

Lucius Posthumous Albinus, and Cnaeus Fulvius Centumalus being Consuls waged
War against the Illyrians, and having taken many Cities, the Kings of that
Country submitted themselves; and then the Romans triumphed first over the
Illyrians.

In the Consulship of Lucius Aemilius great Armies of the Gauls passed over the
Alps: but all Italy assisted the Romans; and it is written by Fabius the
Historian who was then a Soldier, that eight hundred thousand Men were in
readiness for that War: but Affairs were managed so prosperously by the
Consuls, that forty thousand of the Enemies were slain, and a Triumph Decreed
for Aemilius.

Not many years after the Romans fought against the Gauls in Italy: the War was
ended in the Consulship of M. Claudius Marcellus and Cnaeus Cornelius Scipio.
Then Marcellus fighting with a small body of Horse, slew with his own hand the
King of the Gauls, who was called Viridomarus. After that with his Colleague he
destroyed the great Forces of the Gauls and took Mediolanum and brought great
Spoil to Rome: and Marcellus triumphing, carried the spoils of a certain Gaul
on a Truncheon upon his shoulder.

In the Consulship of M. Minutius, and P. Cornelius War was made with the
Istri: because they had robbed the Roman Ships which carried provision, and
they were all overcome. The same year the Carthaginians began the second Punick
War by Hannibal their General: who besieged Saguntum a City of Spain in League
with the Romans, being in the twentieth year of his age, his Army consisting of
a hundred and fifty thousand Foot and twenty thousand Horse. The Romans sent to
Hannibal to keep the peace: but he would not see the Ambassadors. Then sending
also to Carthage, that they should command Hannibal not to wage War against the
Allies of the Roman people, they received no civil answer. In the mean while
the Saguntines were overcome through Famine; and being taken by Hannibal were
put cruelly to the Sword. Then Publius Cornelius Scipio having marched with an
Army into Spain, and Tiberius Sempronius into Sicily: War was proclaimed
against the Carthaginians, Hannibal having left his Brother Asdrubal in Spain,
passed over the Pyrenaean Mountains: and made his way through the Alps hitherto
unpassable in that part. Hannibal is reported to have brought along with him
eighty thousand Foot, and twenty thousand Horse, and seven and thirty
Elephants. In the mean while many Ligurians and Gauls listed themselves under
Hannibal: Sempronius Gracchus having notice of Hannibal's coming, shipped his
Army out of Sicily to Ariminum. Publius Cornelius Scipio first fought Hannibal:
the Battle being joined, his Soldiers fled, and Scipio returned wounded into
his Camp. Sempronius Gracchus, and Hannibal fought at the River Trebia. He also
was overcome. Many in Ital submitted themselves to Hannibal, he coming from
thence into Tuscia, fought Flaminius and slew him with five and twenty thousand
Romans, the rest being put to flight. After that Quintus Fabius Maximus was
sent against him; He by not fighting stopped the career of the Conqueror: and
after having found an opportunity, overcame him.

In the five hundred and fortieth year from the building of the City, Lucius
Aemilius and P. Terentius Varro, are sent against Hannibal, succeeding Fabius
in that War; who admonished both the Consuls that they could overcome the eager
and impatient Hannibal no otherwise than by deferring the Battle. But through
the rashness of Varro, the other Consul contradicting him, they fought at a
Village in Apulia, called Cannae, both the Consuls were overcome by Hannibal.
In that Battle three thousand Africans were slain; and a great part of
Hannibal's Army wounded: the Romans never suffered more in any Punick War; for
in this Fight Aemilius Paulus the Consul was slain, and twenty, that had been
Consuls or Praetors: thirty Senators were taken or killed: three hundred Noble
Men: forty thousand Soldiers; three thousand and five hundred Horse. In which
misfortunes the Romans disdained to mention Peace. They listed their Servants,
having made them free, a thing never done before. After that Battle many
Italian Cities which obeyed the Romans, yielded themselves to Hannibal. Who,
profering the Romans to redeem their Captives: it was answered by the Senate,
that they wanted no such Citizens, who when they were armed, could not defend
themselves. After that he put them all to death with diverse Torments; and sent
three bushels of golden Rings to Carthage; which he pulled from the Fingers of
the Roman Knights, Senators and Soldiers. In the mean while Asdrubal Hannibal's
Brother remaining with a great Army in Spain, that he might bring that Nation
under the power of the Africans, was overcome by the two Scipio's, and lost in
that Battle thirty five thousand Men, ten thousand of these being taken, and
twenty-five thousand slain; but twelve thousand Foot, four thousand Horse, with
twenty Elephants were sent to him from Carthage to repair his Forces. The
fourth year after Hannibal came into Italy, Marcus Claudius Marcellus the
Consul fought successfully against him at Nola a City of Campania. Hannibal
took many of the Roman Cities in Apulia, Calabria, and amongst the Brutii: at
which time also Philip the Macedonian King sent Ambassadors to Hannibal
promising him aid against the Romans; upon this condition, that having
destroyed them, Hannibal would help him against the Greeks. Therefore the
Ambassadors of King Philip being intercepted and their Embassy known; the
Romans commanded Marcus Valerius Laevinus to go into Macedonia, and Titus
Manlius Torquatus the Proconsul into Sardinia: for that Province also being
underhand stirred up by Hannibal, had deserted the Roman interest. So at one
time the Romans fought in four several Countries; in Italy, against Hannibal;
in Spain, against Asdrubal; in Macedonia, against King Philip; in Sardinia,
against another Asdrubal, a Carthaginian: this Asdrubal was taken by Titus
Manlius the Pro-consul, who had been sent into Sardinia; twelve thousand of his
Soldiers were slain in that Battle, a thousand five hundred taken; and Sardinia
being subdued by the Romans, Manlius the Conqueror brought the Captives and
Asdrubal to Rome. In the mean while King Philip was overcome by Laevinus in
Macedonia, and Asdrubal and Mago the third Brother of Hannibal, in Spain by the
two Scipio's.

The tenth year after Hannibal came into Italy in the Consulship of P.
Sulpicius, and Cnaeus Fulvius, He came within four miles of Rome, his Horse
came up to the Gates: Not long after, for fear of the Consuls coming with an
Army, Hannibal withdrew into Campania; both the Scipios were slain by Asdrubal
his Brother in Spain, who had been Conquerors for many years: yet the Army
remained entire: for they were overcome more by accident than by Asdrubal's
valor. At which time also a great part of Sicily was taken by Marcellus the
Consul, which the Africans had seized: and great plunder was carried to Rome
from the famous City Syracuse. Laevinus made a League in Macedonia with King
Philip and many people of Greece, and with Attalus King of Asia: and passing
into Sicily he took Hanno an African Captain at the City Agrigentum, together
with the Town, and sent him to Rome with the principal Captives; forty Cities
having submitted, he took twenty six. Thus having subdued all Sicily and
Macedonia he returned to Rome with great glory. Hannibal having set upon Cnaeus
Fulvius the Consul unawares, slew him with eight thousand Soldiers. In the mean
time both the Scipio's being slain, and no Roman General in Spain, Publius
Cornelius Scipio, was sent, being four and twenty years old; the Son of Publius
Scipio, who had been General there, a Man far surpassing almost all the Romans
of his time and those that came after him. He took Carthage in Spain; in which
the Africans kept all their Gold, Silver, and provisions for War: also the best
Hostages which Hannibal had received from the Spaniards: he took Mago
Hannibal's Brother in that City; whom he sent with others to Rome. There was
great joy at Rome for this news: Scipio restored the Spanish Hostages to their
Parents: for which kindness almost all the Spaniards unanimously surrendered
themselves to him. After which things he put to flight Asdrubal Hannibal's
Brother, and took very great Spoil.

In the mean while Q. Fabius Maximus re-took Tarentum in Italy, where Hannibal
had great Forces: he slew there Carthalo one of Hannibal's Captains, and sold
twenty five thousand Captives: and having distributed the plunder among his
Soldiers, sent the price of those that were sold to the Treasury. Then many
Cities of the Romans which sided with Hannibal, yielded themselves to Fabius
Maximus. The year following Scipio performed famous actions in Spain, and
recovered several Towns by himself and his Brother Lucius Scipio. Yet they
fought unsuccessfully in Italy; for Claudius Marcellus the Consul was slain by
Hannibal.

The third year after Scipio came into Spain, he continued his noble Deeds: he
receiving into protection the King of Spain overcome in a great Battle, and was
the first that asked no Hostage of the Conquered.

Hannibal despairing that Spain could be kept against Scipio any longer, sent
for his Brother Asdrubal to Italy with all his Forces; who coming the same way
his Brother Hannibal had come, fell into the Ambush laid by Appius Claudius
Nero, and Marcus Livius Salinator at Sena a City in Picenum: yet he was slain
fighting valiantly; his great Forces were either taken or killed, and a great
Sum of Gold and Silver sent to Rome.

After this Hannibal began to doubt of the event of the War, and the Romans
being mightily encouraged, sent for Publius Cornelius Scipio out of Spain, who
came to Rome with great glory.

In the Consulship of Quintus Caecilius, and Lucius Valerius, all the Cities
which were under the Power of Hannibal among the Brutii, delivered themselves
up to the Romans.

In the fourteenth year after Hannibal came into Italy, Scipio who had acted in
Spain successfully, was made Consul and sent to Africa: something Divine was
thought to have been in that Man; insomuch that he was believed to have
conference with the Gods. He fought in Africa against Hanno the Carthaginian
General, and routed his Army. In the second Battle he took his Camp with four
thousand and five hundred Soldiers, with the slaughter of eleven thousand. He
took Syphax King of Numidia, who had assisted the Africans, and seized his
Camp, who was sent by Scipio to Rome with the most considerable Numidians, and
infinite Spoils; which thing being known almost all Italy deserted Hannibal,
who was commanded by the Carthaginians to return into Africa, now laid waste by
Scipio. Thus the seventeenth year Italy was freed from Hannibal, who was
reported to have left it with tears.

Ambassadors from Carthage desiring Peace of Scipio, were sent by him to the
Roman Senate: a Truce for forty five days was granted them, till they could
return from Rome, where they made a Present of thirty thousand pound in Silver.
The Senate commanded a Peace should be made with the Carthaginians according to
the will of Scipio, who granted it upon these Conditions: That they should keep
a Fleet but of thirty Ships, that they should pay five hundred thousand pound
in Silver, and restore the Captives and Fugitives. In the mean time Hannibal
arriving in Africa, the Peace was broken, and many Hostilities committed by the
Africans; yet their Ambassadors coming out of the City, and seized by the
Romans, were dismissed by Scipio's command. Hannibal being overcome by Scipio
in many Battles, also desired Peace. When it came to a Treaty, Peace was
granted upon the same Conditions as before: Scipio having added to the old Sum
of five hundred thousand pound a thousand pound more for their late Rupture.
The Propositions displeased the Carthaginians, and they commanded Hannibal to
fight; The War was carried on against Carthage by Scipio and Masinissa, another
King of the Numidians, who had made a League with Scipio. Hannibal sent three
Scouts to the Roman Camp: whom being taken, Scipio commanded to be led through
the Camp, that the whole Army should be viewed by them, that a Dinner should be
given them presently, and after that to be dismissed that they might tell
Hannibal what they had seen in the Roman Camp. In the mean time the Armies are
drawn up in Batalia by both these Captains, the like never was seen in the
memory of Man: the Armies being drawn up by the most skilful of all Generals.
Scipio was Conqueror, Hannibal himself being almost taken: who first escaped
with many Horse, then with twenty, last of all with four. Twenty thousand pound
in Silver was found in his Camp, and eight hundred in Gold with other rich
furniture. After that Battle Peace was made with the Carthaginians. Scipio
returning to Rome triumphed with great honor, and hence was styled Africanus.
Thus ended this second Punick War, after it had lasted nineteen years.

The Fourth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The three Macedonian Wars, the third Carthaginian, the Syrian with King
Antiochus, with those in Achaia, Asia, Spain, Transalpine Gaul, and in Africa
against Jugurtha, with other co-incident Actions:

From V. C. 551. to 648.

By Mr. Brune Clench.
THE second Punick War being ended, the Macedonian followed against King Philip.

In the five hundred fifty first year from the building of the City, Titus
Quintius Flaminius was sent against King Philip, fought with good success:
Peace was granted to him upon these Conditions, That he should not make War
upon the Grecian Cities which the Roman protected against him; that he restore
the Captives and Deserters, and keep but a Fleet of fifty Ships, paying yearly
four thousand pound in Silver for ten years, with his Son Demetrius for a
Hostage; also Titus Quintius making War with the Lacedaemonians; overcame
Nabides their General, who submitted himself upon the Consuls conditions, who
upon his return led Demetrius the Son of Philip, and Armenes the Son of
Nabides, two noble Hostages before his triumphal Chariot in great glory.

After the Macedonian War the Syrian begun against King Antiochus, in the
Consulship of Publius Cornelius Scipio, and Marcus Acilius Glabrio. Hannibal
took part with this King, having left Carthage his native Country for fear they
should deliver him up to the Romans. Marcus Acilius Glabrio fought fortunately
in Achaia, and having taken King Antiochus's Camp in a Battle by Night, put him
to flight and restored Demetrius to his Father Philip, because he helped the
Romans against Antiochus.

In the Consulship of Lucius Cornelius Scipio and Caius Laelius, Scipio
Africanus went Lieutenant General under his Brother Lucius Cornelius Scipio the
Consul against Antiochus, Hannibal who was his Admiral was overcome in a
Sea Fight. Afterward Antiochus himself was overthrown in a great Battle at
Sipylum and Magnesia Cities of Asia by Lucius Cornelius Scipio the Consul.
Eumenes the Brother of King Attalus who built Eumenia in Phrygia, assisted by
the Romans in that fight, fifty thousand Foot and four thousand Horse of the
King's side being slain; then Antiochus sought Peace, which was granted to him
though overcome, by the Senate, upon the same Conditions as before; that he
should depart out of Europe and Asia, that he should bound himself with the
Mountain Taurus, pay ten thousand Talents, give twenty Hostages, with Hannibal
the cause of the War. All the Cities of Asia, which Antiochus lost in this War,
were given to King Eumenes by the Senate; likewise many Cities were given to
the Rhodians who assisted the Romans against him. Scipio returned to Rome, and
triumphed with great honor, taking the name of Asiaticus by imitation from
conquering Asia, as his Brother was called Africanus from overcoming Africa.

In the Consulship of Spurius Posthumous Albinus, and Quintus Marcius
Philippus, Marcus Fulvius triumphed for his Victory over the Aetolians.
Hannibal after the Victory over Antiochus, lest he should be delivered to the
Romans, fled to Prusias the King of Bithynia; being also demanded of him, by
Titus Quintius Flaminius, when he was to have been given up to the Romans, he
drank Poison and was buried at Libyssa in the borders of Nicomedia.

Philip the King of Macedonia being dead, who had both fought with the Romans,
and afterward helped them against King Antiochus, his Son Perseus rebelled in
Macedonia, having raised a great Army to carry on the War; Cotys the King of
Thrace, and the King of Illyricum called Gentius aided him; Eumenes the King of
Asia, Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, Antiochus King of Syria, Ptolemaeus King
of Egypt, with Masinissa the King of Numidia helped the Romans, but Prusias
King of Numidia, although he married Perseus's Sister, stood neuter being civil
to both Parties. Publius Licinius the Consul and General of the Romans, was
beaten by the King in a fierce Battle, neither would the Romans grant Peace to
the King desiring it, though they were overcome, but upon these Conditions,
That he should surrender up himself and his Cavalry to the Senate and Roman
people. A little after Lucius Aemilius Paulus the Consul was sent against him,
and Caius Anicius the Praetor into Illyricum, against Gentius, but he being
easily overcome in one Battle, soon after yielded up himself, as his Mother
also did, with his Wife, two Sons and Brother, to the Romans; Thus the War was
ended in thirty days, the overthrow of Gentius being sooner known, than that
the War was begun.

But Aemilius Paulus the Consul fought the third of the Nones of September with
Perseus, and overcame him with the slaughter of twenty thousand of his Foot,
all the Horse being fled with the King; the Romans only with the loss of an
hundred, gained this Victory, with the surrendry of all the Cities in
Macedonia, which the King possessed. He being forsaken of his Friends,
submitted himself to Paulus, but Aemilius did not esteem him as a conquered
Man, for he would not suffer him though he desired it, to lie at his feet, but
placed him next to him: these Conditions were granted to the Macedonians and
Illyrians; that they should live free, paying but half the Tribute they paid to
their Kings: that it might appear, the Roman People fought more for Justice
than for Riches. Paulus delivered these things in a very great Assembly of the
People, and treated the Ambassadors that came from many parts at a most costly
Banquet, saying, that it became the same General to overcome in War, and to
appear great in his Entertainment. A little after having taken seventy Cities
of Epirus, which had rebelled against him; he distributed the Spoils to the
Soldiers, and returned to Rome, with great pomp in Perseus's Ship, reported to
have been of an unusual bigness, with sixteen ranks of Oars, and triumphed most
magnificiently in his golden Chariot with his two Sons standing on each side of
him, and Perseus in the forty fifth year of his age with his two Sons going
before him. Caius Anicius also triumphed over the Illyrians, and Gentius is led
before his Chariot with his Brother and Children: The Kings of many Nations
came to Rome to this great Sight; Amongst the rest Attalus and Eumenes Kings in
Asia, with Prusias King of Bithynia were entertained with much honor, and,
they laid up the Presents which they brought in the Capitol, with the consent
of the Senate. Also Prusias recommended his Son Nicomedes to them.

The following year Lucius Memmius fought successfully in Spain, and afterward
Marcellus the Consul fortunately managed his Affairs there.

Then the third Carthaginian War begun, in the six hundredth year from the
building of the City, in the Consulship of Lucius Manlius Censorinus, and
Marcus Manilius, fifty one years after the second Punick War. These carried the
War to Carthage, against whom Asdrubal fought as General, and Famea commanded
the Horse; then Scipio the Nephew of Scipio Africanus was a Tribune of the
Soldiers, him all the Romans feared and respected, for he was esteemed very
serviceable both in their Battles and at their Councils, therefore many things
were managed fortunately through him by these Consuls; neither did Asdrubal or
Famea shun any thing more, than to fight against that Squadron of the Romans,
where Scipio fought. About the same time Masinissa, the King of Numidia, who
for sixty years was in League with the Romans, in the ninety seventh year of
his age, died, leaving fortry four Sons behind him, and ordered Scipio to
divide his Empire amongst them.

Now Scipio being grown famous though but a young Man, was made Consul, and
sent against Carthage; he took it, and sacked it; and finding there the Spoils,
which Carthage had gathered together from the destruction of many Cities, he
restored back upon proof to several Cities of Sicily, Italy and Africa, their
Ornaments. Thus Carthage was destroyed, about seven hundred years after it was
built, and Scipio by his merit obtained the Name, which his Grandfather had,
being styled for his Valor AFRICANVS the YOVNGER.

In the mean time one called Pseudophilippus, took up Arms in Macedonia and
utterly defeated Publius Juvencius the Roman Praetor, sent against him. After
him Quintus Caecilius Metellus was sent thither by the Romans, and twenty
thousand of the Enemy being slain, he recovered Macedonia and reduced
Pseudophilippus under his Power.

War was also proclaimed against the Corinthians the Inhabitants of a most
famous City in Greece, for an affront done to the Roman Ambassadors. This City
Mummius the Consul took and destroyed; then there were three noble Triumphs at
Rome at the same time of Africanus out of Africa, before whose Chariot Asdrubal
was led, of Metellus from Macedonia, before whom Andriscus went, otherwise
called Pseudophilippus, of Mummius from Corinth, before him were carried brazen
Statues, Pictures, and other Ornaments of that famous City.

One Pseudoperseus also rebelled in Macedonia, having gathered together several
Slaves, pretending himself to be Perseus's Son, but was overcome with seventeen
thousand of his Men by Tremellius the Quaestor. At this time an Hermaphrodite
being seen at Rome, was drowned in the Sea by the appointment of the
Southsayers.

At the same time Metellus performed noble Acts in Celtiberia amongst the
Spaniards. Quintus Pompeius succeeded him, a little after Quintus Caepio was
sent Commander to the same War; which indeed Viriatus waged against the Romans
in Lusitania, upon which through fear Viriatus was slain by his Soldiers, after
having made the Spaniards rebel against the Romans for fourteen years. He was a
Shepherd at first, afterward chief amongst the Thieves, at last he stirred up
so many people to this War, that he was thought the assertor of the Spaniards
liberty against the Romans, and, when his Murderers sought their rewards from
Caepio the Consul; he answered, 'twas never acceptable to the Romans, to have a
General murdered by his own Men.

Then Quintius Pompeius the Consul being overcome by the people of Numantia, a
rich City of Spain, made a dishonorable Peace. After him Caius Hostilius
Mancinus made another League with the Numantians, which the Senate and People
commanded to be broken; and Mancinus the Author of it, to be given up to his
Enemies: that they might revenge the injury of this Rupture upon the cause of
it; wherefore after so great an ignominy, the Roman Army being twice overcome
by the Numantians, Publius Scipio Africanus was made Consul the second time,
and sent to Numantia, he first corrected the vicious Soldiers without any
cruelty, more by labor than punishment. Then he took many Cities in Spain,
partly by force and partly by surrendry; after a long Siege he took the City
Numantia by Famine and rased it; taking the rest of the Province into his
protection.

About that time Attalus a King in Asia the less, the Brother of Eumenes died,
and by making the Roman people his Heir, added Asia to their Empire by his Will.

A little after Decimus Junius Brutus triumphed with great glory for his
Victory over the Callaeci, and the Lusitan, and Publius Scipio Africanus
triumphed the second time over the Numantians the fourteenth year after his
first Triumph in Africa.

In the mean time War was raised in Asia by Aristonicus, the Son of Eumenes,
whom he had by an Harlot; this Eumenes was the Brother of King Attalus, Publius
Licinius Crassus was sent against him with the assistance of many Kings. For
Nicomedes King of Bithynia helped the Romans, and Mithridates King of Pontus,
with whom afterward the Romans had a severe War, and Ariarathes King of
Cappadocia, Pylaemenes King of Paphlagonia, yet Crassus was overcome and slain
in Battle; his head brought to Aristonicus, and his body buried at Smyrna.
Afterward Perpenna the Roman Consul, who succeeded Crassus, hearing of the
event of the War hastened into Asia, and having overcome Aristonicus in Battle,
compelled him through want of Provision to a surrendry at the City Stratonice
whither he had fled; Aristonicus was strangled in Prison at Rome, by the
command of the Senate; but Perpenna could not enjoy his triumph, dying in his
return home at Pergamum.

In the Consulship of Lucius Caecilius Metellus, and Titus Quintius Flaminius,
Carthage in Africa by the command of the Senate was rebuilt; as it is in my
time, two and twenty years after Scipio destroyed it, the Romans planting a
Colony there.

In the six hundred twenty seventh year from the building of the City, Caius
Cassius Longinus, and Sextus Domitius Calvinus being Consuls, waged War with
the Gauls on the other side of the Alps, and the Arverni, with Bituitus their
King, killing a great multitude of them at the River Rhodanus, the spoil was
great, from the very Chains taken from them, Bituitus surrendered himself to
Domitius, and was led captive by him to Rome, where both the Consuls triumphed
with great Glory.

In the Consulship of Marcus Porcius Cato, and Quintus Marcius Rex, in the six
hundred thirty third year from the building of the City, the Colony of Narbona
was planted in Gaul, afterward the Consuls Lucius Metellus, and Quintus Mucius
Scaevola, triumphed for their conquest in Dalmatia.

In the six hundred thirty fifth year from the building of the City, Caius Cato
the Consul fought dishonourably with the Scordisci.

In the Consulship of Caius Caecilius Metellus, and Cnaeus Carbo, the two
Brothers of Metellus, triumphed the same day, one for Thrace, and the other for
Sardinia; and 'twas then reported at Rome that the Cimbri were come out of Gaul
into Italy.

In the Consulship of P. Scipio Nasica, and L. Calpurnius Bestia, the War began
against Jugurtha King of Numidia, for killing the two Kings Adherbal, and
Hiempsal, Sons of Micipsa, his Brothers and Confederates with the Romans.
Calpurnius Bestia the Consul is sent against him, but being bribed with the
King's Money, he made a disgraceful Peace with him, which was disliked by the
Senate; Spurius Posthumous Albinus went the next year to fight Jugurtha. He
fought by his Brothers ill conduct ingloriously against the Numidians. Quintus
Caecilius Metellus the Consul was the third that was sent, he reduced his Army
to Roman Discipline with great severity and order, though without capital
punishment; he overcame Jugurtha in many Battles, either taking or hilling his
Elephants, and when he was making an end of the War, Caius Marius succeeded
him; he overcame both Jugurtha and Bocchus the King of Mauritania who assisted
Jugurtha against the Romans, having taken some Cities in Numidia, he finished
the War, Jugurtha being taken by that great Man Cornelius Sylla his Quaestor,
whom Bocchus had delivered up, though before he had fought for him.

The Cimbri were overcome in Gaul by Marcus Junius Silanus the Colleague of
Quintus Metellus, the Scordisci and Triballi in Macedonia, by Minucius Rufus,
and the Lusitani in Spain by Servilius Caepio. There were two triumphs for
Jugurtha; first Metellus, then Marius; before Marius's Chariot Jugurtha was led
in chains with his two Sons, and not long after strangled in Prison by the
command of the Consul.

The Fifth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The War with the Cimbri, etc. with Mithridates King of Pontus, the Civil War
between Marius and Sylla, with other interfering Actions.

From V. C. 648, to 675.

By Mr. James Lowther.
WHILST War was made in Numidia against Jugurtha, the Roman Consuls Marcus
Manilius and Quintus Caepio, were overcome at the River Rhodanus by the Cimbri,
Teutones, Tigurini, and Ambrones, Nations of Germany and Gaul, and the Romans
were almost all slain, having lost their Tents with a great part of their Army.
The fear at Rome was scarce so great in Hannibal's time in the Carthaginian
Wars, lest the Gauls should come again to Rome. Wherefore Marius after the
Jugurthine Victory the second time was made Consul, and the management of the
War was Deceed him against the Cimbri, and Teutones. Also the third and fourth
Consulship was conferred upon him: because the Cimbrian War continued; in his
fourth Consulship he had Quintus Luctatius Catulus for his Colleague. Then
fighting with the Cimbri, he slew two hundred thousand in two Battles, and took
eighty thousand, and their General Teutobodus, for which good service in his
absence he was created Consul.

In the mean time the Cimbri, and Teutones, whose Forces were yet very great,
passed over into Italy, Caius Marius, and Quintus Catulus again fought with
them: but Catulus the more successfully. For in that Battle which both of them
fought one hundred and forty thousand were slain either in the fight or in the
pursuit; sixty thousand taken, and but three hundred Roman Soldiers lost in
both Armies; three and thirty Ensigns were taken from the Cimbri, of which
Marius his Army got two, Catulus his Army thirty one. Thus the War was ended,
and a Triumph Decreed for each of them.

Sextus Julius Caesar, and Lucius Marcius Philippus being Consuls in the six
hundred and fifty ninth year from the building of the City, when almost all
other Wars were now ended, the Picentes, Marsi, and Peligni made a grievous War
in Italy, who when they had obeyed the Roman people for many years, then began
to assert their Liberty. This War was very dangerous, P. Rutilius the Consul
was slain in it, Caepio a Noble Young Man, and Portius Cato the other Consul.
But the Picentes, and the Marsi had these Captains against the Romans, Titus
Vietius, Hierus Asinius, Titus Herennius, and Aulus Cluentius; the Romans
fought fortunately against them under Caius Marius, now the sixth time a
Consul, and Cnaeus Pompeius; yet under Lucius Cornelius Sylla most
successfully, who amongst other extraordinary actions so overcame Cluentius
Captain of the Enemies with great Forces, without losing one of his Men. This
War was prolonged for the space of four years, yet with great misfortune in the
fifth year, at last Lucius Cornelius Sylla being Consul ended it, when before
as Praetor he had valiantly performed many things in that War.

In the year of the City six hundred sixty two the first civil War began at
Rome, with the Mithridatick War. C. Marius who had been six times Consul, was
the cause of it; for when Sylla the Consul was sent to make War against
Mithridates, who had seized upon Asia and Achaia: being forced for some time to
keep his Army in Campania, that he might make an end of the War in Italy with
the Confederates (which we have mentioned) Marius desired that he might be sent
against Mithridates. Whereupon Sylla in great anger came with his Army to Rome,
where he fought against Marius, and Sulpicius, and upon his first entrance slew
Sulpicius and put Marius to flight, Cnaeus Octavius, and Lucius Cornelius Cinna
being appointed Consuls for the year to come, he marched into Asia. For
Mithridates King of Pontus and of Armenia the less, with the Pontick Sea all
about the Thracian Bosphorus, at first would have drove Nicomedes the Ally of
the Roman people out of Bithynia, informing the Senate, that he was bringing
War upon him for the injuries which he had suffered; the Senate sent word to
Mithridates, if he did so, he should suffer a War from the Romans. Wherefore in
a rage he forthwith took Cappadocia, expelling King Ariobarzenes a friend of
the Romans: and presently invaded Bithynia, and Paphlagonia, having driven out
the Kings Pylaemenes and Nicomedes, Confederates of the Roman People. Then he
marched unto Ephesus, and sent Letters through all Asia, that wheresoever the
Roman Citizens were found, they should be killed in one Day. In the mean time
Athens a City of Achaia was delivered to Mithridates by Aristones an Athenian.
For Mithridates had sent Archelaus his Captain into Achaia, with one hundred
and twenty thousand Horse and Foot: by whom he won the rest of Greece; Sylla
besieged Archelaus at Piraeeus not far from Athens, and took the City:
afterward a Battle being fought with Archelaus, he so overthrew him, that out
of his hundred and twenty thousand there scarce remained ten, and of Sylla's
Army only fourteen were slain. Mithridates upon the news of this Battle
recruited Archelaus with eighty thousand chosen Men out of Asia, with whom
Sylla fought again. In the first Battle twenty thousand of the Enemy were slain
with Diogenes the Son of Archelaus: In the second, all the Forces of
Mithridates were cut off, Archelaus himself three days lying hid in the
Marshes. Mithridates upon hearing of this began to treat with Sylla.

At that time also Sylla overcame the greatest part of the Dardani, Scordisci,
Dalmatians and Moesians, and received the rest into his protection. When
Ambassadors came from King Mithridates, desiring a Peace, Sylla answered that
he would not grant it, unless the King deserting those places which he was
possessed of, returned into his own Kingdom. Yet afterward in a personal
Treaty, Peace was made between them; That Sylla hasting to the civil War might
be in no danger in his absence. For whilst Sylla overcame Mithridates in Achaia
and Asia, Marius, who was fled, and Cornelius Cinna, one of the Consuls,
renewed the War in Italy, and having entered the City Rome, slew the most Noble
and consular Men of the Senate, and proscribed many, having pulled down the
House of Sylla, they compelled his Sons and Wife to secure themselves by
flight; every one of the Senate that remained, flying out of the City came to
Sylla in Greece, entreating him that he would succor his native Country. He
passed over into Italy to fight against Norbanus, and Scipio the Consuls; he
fought the first Battle against Norbanus not far from Capua; where he slew
seven thousand of the Enemy, and took six thousand, with the loss of one
hundred twenty four of his own, Then he marched against Scipio, but before the
Battle, Scipio surrendered his Army without bloodshed. But upon the new Election
of Consuls at Rome, Marius the Son of Marius, and Papirius Carbo being chose,
Sylla fought Marius the younger, and fifteen thousand of the Enemy being slain,
lost four hundred Men. Afterward entering the City, and pursuing Marius the
younger to Praeneste, he besieged him there, and forced him to kill himself.
Then he had a fierce Battle with Lamponius, and Carinates Captains of Marius's
Party at the Gate Collina. Eighty thousand Men were reported to have been in
the Army against Sylla, twelve thousand yielded themselves, the rest were
either slain in Battle, in the Camp, or in flight, so unsatiable was the
revenge of the Conquerors. Cnaeus Carbo the other Consul fled from Ariminum
into Sicily and there was slain by Cnaeus Pompeius, whom but a young Man twenty
one years of age, Sylla upon the observation of his industry, had made
Commander of his Armies, with the esteem of being next to himself. Upon the
death of Carbo Pompey recovered Sicily, and passing into Africa, slew Domitius
one of Marius's Faction, and Hiarbas King of Mauritania, who aided Domitius.
After these things Sylla triumphed for conquering Mithridates with great Glory.
And Cnaeus Pompeius in the twenty fourth year of his age (which never had been
granted to any of the Romans) triumphed for his Victory in Africa. Thus these
two cruel Wars ended, the Italian which is called the Social, and the Civil
War, both which carried on for the space of ten years, destroyed above a
hundred and fifty thousand, twenty four Consular Men, eight Praetors, sixty
Aediles, and almost three hundred Senators.

The Sixth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The Wars with Sertorius, with the Gladiators, and the Pirates; the end of the
Mithridatic; The conquest of Crete and of Tigranes King of Armenia; The
Catilinarian Conspiracy, the death of Crassus in Parthia; the Wars in Gaul by
Julius Caesar, with the civil War between him and Pompey:

From V. C. 675 to 710.

By Mr. Leonard Powel.
IN the Consulship of Marcus Aemilius, and Quintus Catulus, when Sylla had
settled the Commonwealth, new Wars arose, one in Spain, another in Pamphylia and
Cilicia, the third in Macedonia, the fourth in Dalmatia. For Sertorius who was
of Marius's Party against Sylla, fearing the fate of those who were slain,
stirred up the Spaniards to the War, Quintus Caecilius Metellus (his Son who
overcame King Jugurtha) and Lucius Domitius the Praetor, were sent Generals
against him; Domitius was slain by Hirtulejus one of Sertorius's Captains. But
Metellus fought Sertorius with various success. Afterward when he was thought
unfit by himself to manage the War, Cnaeus Pompeius was sent into Spain.
Sertorius fought with variety of fortune against these two Generals, till at
last killed in the eighth year of the War by his own Soldiers. Thus the War was
ended by Cnaeus Pompeius a young Man, and Quintus Metellus Pius, and almost all
Spain subdued by the Romans. Appius Claudius after his Consulship being sent
into Macedonia, Skirmish'd with several people of the Province Rhodopa, and
there falling sick, died. Cnaeus Scribonius after the expiration of his
Consulship was sent to succeed him, he overcoming the Dardani, marched a
Conqueror even to the Danube, and obtained a Triumph, having ended the War in
three years.

Publius Servilius a valiant Man was sent Proconsul into Cilicia and Pamphylia.
After the Conquest of Cilicia he besieged and took the best Cities of Lycia;
amongst these he took Phaselis, Olympus with Corycus of Cilicia, then going
against the Isauri, and they submitting, he ended the War in three years. The
first of all the Romans that marched to the Mountain Taurus returning home, he
received a Triumph according to his merits and had the name of Isauricus.

Cnaeus Cosconius being Proconsul was sent into Illyricum, he subdued the
greatest part of Dalmatia, took Salonae, and ending the War, returned to Rome
in three year.

At the same time Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, Catulus's fellow Consul, would have
raised a civil War, but his insurrection was suppressed in one Summer. Then
many received their triumphs together; Metellus and Pompey from Spain, Curio
from Macedonia, and Servilius from Isauria.

In the year of the City six hundred seventy six, in the Consulship of L.
Licinius Lucullus and Marcus Aurelius Cotta, Nicomedes King of Bithynia died,
and made the Romans his Heir. Mithridates having broken the Peace, would have
again invaded Asia and Bithynia. Both the Consuls sent against him, had various
success; for Cotta was overcome by Mithridates in a Battle at Chalcedon, and
being driven into the City was besieged there. But when Mithridates marched
from thence to Cyzicus, that taking it he might invade all Asia: Lucullus the
other Consul encountered him, and whilst Mithridates was busy in the Siege of
Cyzicus, he blocked him up in the Rear, and overcame him in many Battles. At
last driving him to Byzantium (now called Constantinople) Lucullus also
overcame his Captains in a Sea Fight. Thus in one Summer and Winter Lucullus
destroyed almost an hundred thousand of Mithridates Soldiers.

In the year of the City six hundred seventy eight, M. Licinius Lucullus
governed the Province of Macedonia, the Cousin of that Lucullus who managed the
War against Mithridates. In Italy on a sudden arose a new War; for seventy four
Gladiators under the command of Spartacus, Chrysus, and Oenomaus, having broken
out of their fencing School at Capua, fled away: and wandering through Italy,
commenced as great a War as Hannibal did; for overcoming many of the Roman
Captains, and two of their Consuls, they gathered together an Army of almost
sixty thousand Men; at last they were conquered by M. Licinius Crassus the
Proconsul in Apulia, and after many calamities in Italy, the War was ended the
third year by him.

In the year of the City six hundred and eighty, in the Consulship of P.
Cornelius Lentulus, and Cnaeus Aufidius Orestes; only the Mithridatick and
Macedonian Wars disturbed the Roman Empire. Lucius Lucullus and M. Lucullus
managed them. For L. Lucullus after his Victory over Mithridates at Cyzicus,
and his Captains in a Sea fight, pursued him, and having recovered Paphlagonia
and Bithynia, he marched into his Kingdom, and took Sinope and Amisus two
famous Cities in Pontus. The second Battle was fought at the City Cabira, where
Mithridates had gathered together great Forces from all his Countries
thereabouts, when five thousand Romans putting to flight Mithridates with
thirty thousand of his best Soldiers, plundered his Camp. Lucullus also subdued
Armenia the less, which Mithridates governed. But he was received after his
flight by Tigranes King of the greater Armenia, who then reigned with great
Fame, and oftentimes beating the Persians, had seized upon Mesopotamia, Syria,
and part of Phaenicia; but Lucullus demanding Mithridates that fled, entered
Armenia, Tigranes his Kingdom, took there the famous City Tigranocerta, and
with eighteen thousand so overthrew Tigranes coming against him with six
hundred thousand Cuirassiers, one hundred thousand Archers, and armed Men, that
he cut off a great part of his Armenians. From thence he marched to the City
Nisibis, which he took, with the King's Brother. But those whom Lucullus had
left in Pontus with part of the Army to defend the Romans with their conquest
in the adjacent Countries, behaving themselves carelessly and covetously, gave
an opportunity to Mithridates of breaking into Pontus, and so the War was
renewed, and one sent to succeed Lucullus, having taken Nisibis, and preparing
the War against the Persians: the other Lucullus who governed Macedonia, was
the first of all the Romans that waged War against the Bessi, and overcame them
in a great Battle on the Mountain Aemus, and having taken the City Vscudama
which the Bessi inhabited, in one Day, and Cibyle, he marched Conqueror even to
the Danube. From thence he went against many Cities bordering on Pontus, where
he sacked Apollonia, and took Cala^^s, Parthenopolis, Tomi, Histrum, and all
Buzia. After the War was ended he returned to Rome, and both of them triumphed;
but Lucullus who managed the War against Mithridates, triumphed with greater
glory, being Conqueror of so considerable Kingdoms.

The Macedonian War being ended, and by reason of Lucullus his return to Rome,
the Mithridatic War continuing, which Mithridates with new Forces prosecuted,
there arose a War in Crete. Caecilius Metellus was sent thither, and in three
year having subdued all the Provinces, and being styled Creticus, he triumphed
from the conquest of that Island. About the same time Libya was added to the
Roman Empire by a grant in King Apion's will, in which Province there were
these famous Cities, Berenice, Ptolemais, and Cyrene.

Whilst these things were performed, the Pirates so infested the Seas, that the
Romans though the Conquerers of all the World, could not safely sail. Wherefore
this War was Decreed to be managed by Cnaeus Pompeius, who with great fortune
and celerity ended it in few months, Afterward the War against Mithridates and
Tigranes was committed to him, which having undertook, he overcame Mithridates
in Armenia the less in a Battle by Night, and plundered his Camp, cutting off
forty thousand of the Enemy with the loss only of twenty of his Soldiers and
two Centurions. Mithridates fled with his Wife and two Attendants. Afterward
when he tyrannized over his people, in a mutiny of his Soldiers raised by his
own Son Pharnaces, he was forced to poison himself. Thus Mithridates died at
Bosphorus, a Man of great industry and conduct, he lived seventy, reigned
sixty, and made War with the Romans forty years.

Then Pompey made War against Tigranes, who surrendered himself, and coming to
him in his Camp, sixteen miles from Artaxata, fell at his feet, and delivered
up his Crown, which Pompey restored again, and received him honorably, but
took away Syria, Phaenicia, Sophone; besides fining him in six thousand Talents
of Silver, to be paid to the Romans for raising War against them without a
cause.

Afterward Pompey brought War on the Albani, and thrice overcame Orodes their
King, who at last obtained a Peace by his Letters and Presents to Pompey. He
also overcame in a Battle Anthaces the King of Iberia, who submitted to him. He
gave Armenia the less to Dejotarus the King of Galatia for assisting him in the
Mithridatic War. And restoring Paphlagonia to Attalus and Pylemenes; he made
Aristarchus the King of the Colchi. Then he subdued the Ituraei and the
Arabians, and coming into Syria made Seleucia near Antioch a free City, because
it had not aided King Tigranes. He restored the people of Antioch their
Hostages, and added some grounds to the Daphnenses to enlarge their Groves,
being delighted with the pleasantness of the place, and its many Springs. From
thence he marched into Judaea, and in the third month took Jerusalem the chief
City, and having slain twelve thousand Jews he received the rest into his
protection. Having performed these things, he returned into Asia, and so ended
this long War.

In the Consulship of Marcus Tullius Cicero (the Orator) and C. Antonius, in
the year of the City six hundred eighty nine, Lucius Sergius Catilina, a Man of
high birth, but of a very vicious Disposition, plotted with some audacious
Noble Men against his Country; but he was driven out of the City by Cicero, and
his Associates upon apprehension strangled in Prison; Catiline also overcome in
a Battle, was slain by Antonius the other Consul.

In the year of the City six hundred and ninety, in the Consulship of D. Junius
Silanus, and L. Murena. Metellus triumphed for conquering Crete, and Pompey for
the Piratic and Mithridatic Wars: no pomp of a Triumph was ever like to
Pompey's; for Mithridates his, and Tigranes's Sons, also Aristobulus the King
of the Jews, with a great Sum of Money were carried before his Chariot. At that
time there was no considerable War in all the World with the Romans.

In the year of the City six hundred ninety three, Caius Julius Caesar (who was
afterward Emperor) and L. Bibulus were made Consuls: Caesar having obtained
by Order of Senate the Government of Gaul and Illyricum with ten Legions, first
overcame the Helvetii (who are now called the Sequani.) Then after his
Victories in very great Battles, he marched a Conqueror even to the British
Ocean. He was almost nine years in subduing all Gaul, which lies between the
Alps the River Rhone, the Rhine and the Ocean, in compass three thousand and
two hundred miles. Then he brought War upon the Britans, who never before heard
of the Roman Name, and having overcome them, he took their Hostages and made
them tributary to the Roman Empire, and ordered Gaul to pay an annual tribute
of above three hundred thousand pounds. And then passing the Rhine overcame the
Germans in very great Battles: he was so fortunate, that he fought but thrice
unsuccessfully: once in Person against the Arverni, twice in his absence in
Germany, where his two Lieutenants Titurius and Arunculeius were slain in an
Ambush.

About the same time in the year of the City six hundred ninety seven, Marcus
Licinius Crassus Pompey's Colleague, made the second time Consul, was sent
against the Parthians, and when he fought at Carrae both contrary to the Omens,
and Praedictions of the Southsayers, he was overcome by Surena one of Orodes
his Captains, and at last was slain, with his Son a famous and valiant young
Man. The residue of his Army was saved by Cnaeus Cassius his Questor, who with
great resolution and courage so repaired the calamity, that repassing the
Euphrates he overcame the Persians in many Battles.

Now that lamentable and horrible civil War came on, which, besides the
calamities that happened in Battle changed the condition of the Roman Name. For
Caesar returning Conqueror from Gaul, required another Consulship, and it
being without dispute carried on his side, he was opposed by Marcellus the
Consul, Bibulus, Pompey, and Cato, and commanded, having dismissed his Army to
return to Rome; for which Affront, from Ariminum, where he mustered his
Soldiers, he marched against his native Country. The Consul with Pompey, the
whole Senate, and all the Nobility fled out of the City into Greece. Pompey
being General raised War against Caesar in Epirus, Macedonia, and Achaia.

Caesar having entered the City forsaken, made himself Dictator. Thence
marching into Spain he routed Pompey's brave and stout Armies, under the three
Generals, L. Afranius, M. Petreius, and M. Varro. Then returning he marched
into Greece; where fighting against Pompey, he was in the first Battle
overthrown, and put to flight; but the Night drawing on, he escaped, and upon
Pompey's not pursuing him, he said, Pompey knew not how to conquer, he being
only that Day in his Power to have been overcome. Afterward they fought in
Thessaly at Palaeopharsalus with great Armies on both sides. Pompey's Army
consisted of forty thousand Foot and seven thousand Horse in the left Wing,
with five hundred in the right, besides the Auxiliary Forces of all the East,
all the Nobility, with a great number of Senators, Praetors, and such as had
been Consuls, and the Conquerors of ny Nations. Caesar's Army amounted to
thirty thousand Foot, with a thousand Horse.

The Roman Forces were never greater at one time, nor never commanded by more
valiant Generals, they might have overcome the whole World, if they had fought
against their Enemies. But after a sharp fight, Pompey being overcome, and his
Camp plundered, fled to Alexandria, that he might receive aids from the King of
Egypt, whose Guardian he had been by order of Senate in his minority; but he
following Pompeys fortune more than true friendship slew him, and sent his Head
and Ring to Caesar; which he looking on, is reported to have wept, beholding
the Head of so worthy a Man, and once his Son-in-law.

Afterward Caesar coming to Alexandria, Ptolemy had Designs upon his life, for
which reason Caesar made War with him, and he being overcome, was drowned in
the Nile, but his body was afterward found covered with a Gold Coat of Mail.
Caesar having won Alexandria, gave that Kingdom to Cleopatra Ptolemy's Sister,
with whom he had been dishonourably acquainted. Caesar returning from thence
overcame in a Battle Pharnaces great Mithridates's Son, who aided Pompey in
Thessaly, and also rebelling in Pontus, had seized upon many of the Roman
Cities, upon which misfortune he killed himself. Then Caesar upon his return to
Rome, made himself the third time Consul, with M. Aemilius Lepidus, who was the
year before in his Dictatorship General of the Horse. From thence he went into
Africa, to the War, which very many of the Nobility, with Juba King of
Mauritania had raised against him. The Roman Generals were P. Cornelius Scipio
(of the ancient Family of Scipio Africanus, he was Father-in-law to Pompey the
Great) M. Petreius, Q. Varius, and M. Porcius Cato, L. Cornelius Faustus (the
Son of Sylla the Dictator and Pompey's Son-in-law.) Caesar in a pitched Battle,
after many Skirmishes overcame them. Cato, Scipio, Petreius, and Juba slew
themselves; but Faustus was put to death.

After a year Caesar coming back to Rome made himself Consul the fourth time,
but soon went into Spain, where Cnaeus and Sextus Pompey's Sons had levied a
great War, they fought many Battles, the last was at the City Munda, in which
Caesar was so near overcome, that seeing his Soldiers sly, he would have slain
himself, lest after so great Military Glory, and fifty six years old, he should
fall into the power of these young Men; at last, having rallied his Forces, he
overcame them, and slew Pompey's eldest Son, and put to flight the younger. Now
Caesar having ended the Civil Wars through all the World, returned to Rome, and
began to govern too insolently, and against the customs of the Roman Liberties.
He would bestow Honors at his own pleasure, which were before given by the
people: neither would he rise up to the Senate coming to salute him; he
performed other things after a regal tyrannick manner. Whereupon above sixty
Senators and Roman Knights conspired against him. The chief of the Conspirators
were the two Bruti (of Brutus's Family who was the first that was made a Roman
Consul, and had expelled the Kings) with Cnaeus Cassius and Servilius Casca,
who stabbed Caesar on a certain day with twenty three Wounds when he came to the
Senate.

The Seventh Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The Reign of Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian:

From A. V. 710. to V. C. 850.

By Mr. Thomas Cornwallis.
CAESAR being killed about the seven hundred and ninth year of the City, the
Civil Wars were renewed. The Senate favoring the murderers of Caesar, Antony
the Consul, one of Caesar's party, endeavored to overthrow them in a Civil War.
Having therefore disturbed the Commonwealth, and done many ill things, he was
judged an enemy by the Senate. The two Consuls, Pansa and Hirtius were sent to
pursue him, with Octavianus, Caesar's Nephew, a young man, eighteen years old,
whom he made his Heir, and commanded to bear his name. This is he who
afterward was called Augustus, and obtained the Empire. Wherefore these three
Generals marching against Antony, overcame him: but it happened out that these
two Consuls being Conquerors were slain; upon which the three Armies obeyed
Caesar. Antony being put to slight, having lost his Army, went for succor to
Lepidus, who was General to Caesar's Horse, and then commanded great Forces, by
whom he was received; and soon after Lepidus endeavoring it, Caesar made peace
with Antony; and as if he would vindicate the death of his Father, by whom he
was adopted in his Will, he marched to Rome with his Army, and by force
procured the Consulship in the twentieth year of his age. Having proscribed the
Senate, he began with Antony and Lepidus, to govern the Commonwealth by an
Army. Cicero the Orator was killed by them, with many other Noblemen.

In the mean while Brutus and Cassius the murderers of Caesar raised a great
War, for there were many Armies in Macedonia and the East, which they seized
upon: wherefore Caesar Octavianus Augustus, and Mark Antony went against them,
(Lepidus staid behind to defend Italy) they fought against 'em at Philippi, a
City of Macedonia: Caesar and Antony were overcome in the first Battle, but the
most noble Cassius was slain. In the second Brutus and very many Noblemen of
his side were slain, and then the Commonwealth was thus divided amongst them,
That Augustus should govern Spain, France, and Italy: Antony, Asia, Pontus, and
the East, But Lucius Antonius the Consul raised a Civil War in Italy, his
Brother who had fought with Caesar against Brutus and Cassius, he was overcome
and taken at Perusium a City of Tuscia, but his life spared.

In the mean time Sextus Pompeius, the Son of Cn. Pompeius made a War in
Sicily, those of Brutus and Cassius's party who remained joining with him; yet
after a War brought upon him by Caesar Augustus, and M. Antony, at last a Peace
was ratified.

At that time M. Agrippa acted prosperously in Aquitania, and L. Ventidius
Bassus overcame the Persians, making incursions into Syria, in three Battles.
He killed Pacorus the Son of King Orodes, the same day that heretofore Orodes
King of the Persians had killed Crassus by Surena his General. He first
triumphed truly over the Persians [at Rome.]

In the mean time Pompey broke the Peace: and being beat in a Sea Fight, fled
to Asia, and was there slain. Antony, who governed Asia and the East, being
divorced from Augustus's Sister, married Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt. He also
in person fought against the Persians, and overcame them in the first Battle;
but in his return he suffered much by Famine and Pestilence, and the Parthians
falling upon him in his flight, he lost his Victory. He also raised a great
Civil War by the instigation of his Wife Cleopatra, the Queen of Egypt, whilst
she through a woman's ambition longed to rule at Rome. He was overcome by
Augustus in a famous Sea Fight, at Actium in Epirus, from whence he fled to
Egypt; and in despair, when all his Soldiers had revolted to Augustus, he
killed himself. Cleopatra died with the poison of Asps, which she had put to
her Breasts. Octavianus Augustus added Egypt to the Roman Empire, and Cn.
Cornelius Gallus was the first that governed it. Thus having finished all his
Wars every where, Augustus in the twelfth year after he had been made Consul
returned to Rome. From that time he governed the Commonwealth alone for four
and forty years, having ruled it twelve years before with Lepidus and Antony;
and so from the beginning to the end his Reign lasted six and fifty years. He
died a natural death in the seventy sixth year of his age, in Atella, a City of
Campania. He was buried in the Campus Martius at Rome; a man not undeservedly
for the most part, reckoned a God. Nor was any one more happy than him in his
Wars, or more moderate in Peace. He lived with the greatest civility all the
four and forty years he ruled alone, being most liberal toward all men, and
very faithful to his friends, who he had advanced to so great honors, that they
were almost equal to himself. The Roman affairs never flourished more (before
his time) for besides the Civil Wars in which he was always conqueror, he added
Egypt to the Roman Empire, with Cantabria, and Dalmatia, oftentimes overcome
before, but entirely subdued by him: also Pannonia, Aquitania, Illyricum,
Rhaetia, the Vindelici, and the Salassi, living upon the Alps; with all the
Maritime Cities of Pontus: and amongst these the famous Cities Bosphorus and
Panticapaeon. He overcame the Daci in several Battles. He cut off the great
Forces of the Germans, and drove them beyond the River Allis, which is up the
Country far from the Rhine: but this War was managed by his Son-in-law Drusus,
as the Pannonian War was by his other Son-in-law Tiberius; in which War he
brought four hundred thousand Captives out of Germany, and planted 'em upon the
Banks of the Rhine in Gaul. He retook Armenia from the Parthians, and the
Persians gave Hostages to him, (which they never did before to any other.) Also
they restored the Roman Ensigns, which were taken away from Crassus, when he
was beaten. The Scythians, and the Indians sent presents and Ambassadors to
him, who before had never heard of the Roman name. Galatia in his time was made
a Province, being before a Kingdom; and M. Lollius the Propraetor was the first
that governed it. The barbarous Nations so loved him, that Kings who were
Allies of the Roman People, built Cities to his honor which they would call
Caesarea; as that built by King Juba in Mauritania, and that in Palestine,
which now is a very famous City. Many Kings left their Kingdoms, to do him
service, and being dressed in a Roman Habit, ran by him in his Chariot, or on
Horseback, and dying he was styled a God: He left the Commonwealth to Tiberius
in a most flourishing condition; who being his Wives Son, was afterward his
Son-in-law by the marriage of his Daughter, and at last his Son by adoption.

Tiberius governed very lazily with great cruelty, wicked avarice, and filthy
lust. He never fought in person, but carried on his Wars by his Lieutenants.
Some Kings whom he had enticed to him by his flatteries, he never let return to
their own Country; amongst whom Archelaus King of Cappadocia, whose Kingdom
also he made a Province, and commanded the chief City to be called after his
name, which now is called Caesarea, and before Mazaca. He reigned three and
twenty years, and died in Campania in the eighty third year of his age, to the
great joy of all men.

After him ruled Caius Caesar, surnamed Caligula, Drusus the Son-in-law of
Augustus was his Grandfather, and Tiberius his great Uncle: he was very wicked
and horrible, one who might excuse the Vices of Tiberius. He undertook a War
against the Germans; and entering into Suevia, performed no valiant action. He
committed Incest with his Sisters, and had a Daughter by one of 'em, when he
had been outrageous toward all men in Cruelty, Avarice, and Lust, he was
killed in his Palace in the nine and thirtieth year of his age, and of his
Reign the third year, tenth month, and eighth day.

After him Reigned Claudius, Caligula's Uncle, the Son of Drusus, who has a
Monument at Moguntiacum; whose Nephew Caligula was: He governed indifferently
well, managing many things calmly and moderately, some cruelly and foolishly.
He brought War upon Britany, where none of the Romans durst arrive since Julius
Caesar: and after the Conquest of it by the two renowned Captains Cn. Sentius
and Aulus Plautius. He made a famous triumph: He added also to the Roman Empire
some Islands situated beyond Britany, in the Ocean called Orcades: He styled
his Son Britannicus, and appeared so civil to some of his Friends, that he
accompanied Plautius a Nobleman, who in the British expedition performed many
brave actions, in his triumph going to the Capitol, and walked on his left
hand: He lived sixty four years; and reigned fourteen: He was Consecrated after
his death, and styled a God.

After him came Nero, very like to his Uncle Caligula: who both disgraced and
diminished the Roman Empire; one of unusual luxury and expense: he followed the
example of Caius Caligula, and washed himself in hot and cold Ointments: he
fished with golden Nets and purple strings: he killed a great many of the
Senate, and was an enemy to all good men: at last he prostituted himself so
basely, that he danced and sung upon a Stage in a Fiddlers habit: he committed
many parricides in the murder of his Brother's Wife and Mother: he burnt Rome,
that it might represent to him, how heretofore Troy was taken and burnt: he
performed no warlike action, and almost lost Britanny; for there in his time
two noble Cities were took and destroyed. The Parthians took away Armenia, and
made slaves of the Roman Legions. Yet two Provinces were gained in his time,
Pontus, called Polemoniacus, from the gift of King Polemon; the Alps, called
Cotiae, from the death of King Cocius. Hence he became detestable to Rome,
deserted by all men, and adjudged an enemy by the Senate; When he was searched
for to be punished, which was thus, that he should be lead along in public
naked, with a Fork upon his neck, and beaten with Rods to death, should be
flung headlong from off the Carpeian Rock; he fled out of the Palace; near the
City in a Farm of one of his Freemen, killed himself, between the Salarian and
Numentane way, four miles from Rome: he built the hot Baths called Neronianae,
and now Alexandrinae: he died in the one and thirtieth year of his age, and the
fourteenth year of his Reign. With him all Augustus's Family was extinct.

After him came Ser. Galba, a Senator of a very ancient Family, being seventy
three years, he was chose Emperor by the Spaniards and Gauls, and soon after
was willingly received by all the Armies: when he lived a private life, he was
eminent in Military and Civil Affairs, often Consul, often Proconsul, and
General in the greatest Wars: in his short Reign he began well, but at last
seemed more inclined to severity: he was killed by the treachery of Otho in the
seventh month of his Reign, and had his throat cut in the Forum at Rome, and
buried in his Gardens, in the Aurelian way, not far from the City.

Otho having killed Galba, got the Empire; of a more noble race by his Mother,
than by his Father; but neither was mean: he was effeminate in his private
life, and could not show any experiment of himself in his Reign; for at that
time when Otho killed Galba, Vitellius was made Emperor by the German Armies,
and raised War against him, when he was beat in a Skirmish at Bebriacum in
Italy, tho he had great forces remaining: He killed himself of his own accord,
and answered his Soldiers, desiring him not so soon to despair of the success
of the war, that he was not of so great value, to be the occasion of a Civil
War: he died a voluntary death, in the 38th. year of his age, and the 95th. day
of his reign.

Then Vitellius obtained the Empire, of a Family more advanced by preferment,
than noble: his Father was not very honorably born, yet bore three regular
Consulships; he ruled very scandalously, notorious for great cruelty,
especially for Gluttony; oftentimes keeping a Feast every 4th. or 5th. day: one
Supper was very remarkable, which his Brother Vitellius gave him; in which
entertainment, besides other expenses, there were laid upon the Table two
thousand Fish, and seven thousand Birds: he affected to be like Nero, and so
far pretended it, that he honored him with Funeral Rites who had been so meanly
buried: he was killed by the Generals of Vespatian, having first slain Sabinus
the Emperor, Vespatian's Brother, whom he burnt with the Capitol: he was drawn
naked publicly and ignominiously through Rome, having a Sword under his chin,
and Dung flung at his face and body by all that met him; at last with his
throat cut, he was flung into the Tyber, and wanted common Burial: he died in
the 57th. year of his age, and in the eighth month, and first day of his Reign.

After him reigned Vespatian, made Emperor at Palestine, a Prince of obscure
Parentage, but to be compared with the best; so illustrious before he was
Emperor, that being sent into Germany by Claudius, and then into Britanny: he
encountered two and thirty times with the Enemy. He conquered two valiant
Nations, took twenty Towns, and added the Island Vecta, lying just by Britanny
to the Roman Empire. He carried himself at Rome very moderate in his Reign, tho
somewhat too covetous of money; yet he took it from none wrongfully, and gave
with great care that especially to the Poor which he had gathered with all
frugality. Scarce any Prince before him was more liberal ot just: he was of so
good a nature, that he hardly punished any one guilty of Treason otherwise than
by Banishment. In his time he added Judaea to the Roman Empire, with
Hierosoluma, the most eminent City of Palaestine, and made Provinces of Achaia,
Lycia, Rhodes, Byzantium, Samos, which enjoyed their freedom before his time;
also Thrace, Cilicia, Trachea, Commagene governed by Confederate Kings; he
remembered neither offenses nor quarrels, and patiently bore the reproaches that
Lawyers and Philosophers spoke against him; yet a diligent exactor of Military
Discipline: he triumphed for the conquest of Jerusalem with his Son Titus. For
these things when he was beloved and dear to the Senate, the People, and to
all, he died of the Flux in one of his own Manors near the Country of the
Sabines, in the sixty ninth year of his age, the ninth year, and seventh day of
his Reign, and was numbered amongst the Gods: He knew the Nativities of his Sons
so well, that when many Plots were made against him, which being discovered, he
despised with dissimulation, saying to the Senate, that his Sons should succced
him or none.

After him came Titus, who was also called Vespatian; a Man adorned with all
sorts of Virtue, styled the love and the delight of mankind, very eloquent,
warlike, and temperate: he pleaded Causes in Latin, and made Greek Poems and
Tragedies: At the Siege of Jerusalem fighting under his Father, he killed
twelve men upon the Walls, with twelve strokes of his Darts: he was so civil in
his government at Rome, that none ever was punished: he pardoned those to that
degree convicted of Conspiracies against him, that he treated them with the
same freedom as before: he was one of so great easiness and liberality, that he
could deny nothing to any man; and when he was reprehended by his friends, he
answered, that no man ought to depart with a sad countenance from the Emperor:
wherefore once at Supper remembering he had given nothing that day to any one,
he said, O my friends, I have lost this day: he built the Amphitheater at Rome,
and killed five thonsand Wild Beasts at its dedication. Hence being beloved
with unusual kindness, he died in the same house his Father did, after he had
reigned two years, eight months, and twenty days, in the one and fortieth year
of his age. When he was dead the public mourning was so great, that all
grieved as if they had been fatherless. The Senate having heard of his death in
the evening, assembled with all have in the Senate House the same night, and
rendered him being dead so many thanks and praises, as never to any Emperor in
his presence, or in his life time, consecrating him amongst the Gods.

Then Domitian reigned, his younger Brother, more like Nero, Caligula, or
Tiberius than his Father, or Brother; yet he governed soberly for his first
years: soon after falling into the great vices of Lust, Anger, Cruelty, and
Covetousness, he made himself so hated, that he abolished the merits of his
Father, and Brother: he killed the noblest of the Senate, and commanded himself
to be styled Lord and God: he would suffer no Statue to be erected in the
Capitol for him, but of Silver and Gold: he killed his Kinsmen, and his pride
was execrable: he made four Expeditions, one in Sarmatia, another against the
Catti, and two against the Daci: he triumphed twice over the Daci, and the
Catti, and wore a Laurel for the Sarmatians: he suffered many losses in these
Wars, for his Legions were killed in Sarmatia, with their General, and the Daci
cut off Appius Sabinus a Consular man, and C. Fuscus Captain of the Guards with
their great Armies: he built many places at Rome, as the Capitol, the Forum,
called Transitorium, the Music Room, the Portico's of Isis and Serapis, and
the Stadium: but when he began to be hated by all for his wickedness, he was
slain in the Palace, by a conspiracy of his Servants, in the five and fortieth
year of his age, and fifteenth of his Reign. His Corpse were carried out by the
Bearers with great disgrace, and buried scandalously.

The Eighth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The Reign of Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Philosophus,
Commodus, Pertinax, Julianus, Severus, Caracalla, Madrinus, Heliogabalus, and
Alexander Severus, with the most considerable passages.

From V. C. 850, to 987.

By Mr. Robert Ingram.
IN the eight hundred and fiftieth year from the building of Rome in the Consul
ship of Vetus and Valens the Commonwealth was re-stated in a most prosperous
condition, by being happily committed to the government of good Emperors. Nerva
succeeded Domitian, that cruel Tyrant; a Man moderate in his private life,
valiant, and of the middle rank of Nobility, who, when he was very old by the
help of Petronius Secundus the Captain of the Guards: and Parthenius, who slew
Domitian, being made Emperor, carried himself most justly and civily: and
consulted the good of the Commonwealth with a Divine foresight, in adopting
Trajan. He died at Rome, having reigned sixteen months and eight days, in the
seventy first year of his age, and was consecrated a God. After him came Vlpius
Trajanus Crinitus, born at Italica a City of Spain, of a Family more ancient
than noble: for his Father was the first Consul. Trajan being made Emperor at
Agrippina, a City of Gaul, governed the Commonwealth so well that he was
deservedly profer'd before all other Princes; he was of extraordinary civility
and valor, and extended the bounds of the Roman Empire both far and wide,
which after the time of Augustus was rather defended than honorably increased:
he repaired many Cities in Germany on the other side of the Rhine, and having
overcome Decibalus conquered Dacia, making that part a Province beyond the
Danube, which now belongs to the Taiphali, Victophali, and the Thervingi, about
one thousand miles in compass: he also retook Armenia,, which the Parthians had
seized, having killed Pharnaces the Syrian, who governed it. He gave a King to
the Albani, and took under his protection the Kings of the Iberi, the
Sauromatae, the Bosphorani, the Arabians, the Osroeni, and the Colchi, and
seized upon the Adiabeni, and Marchomedi, with a great Country of Persia,
called Anthemisius; he took the City Seleucia, Ctesiphon, Babylon and Edessa,
and conquered even unto India; at last he came up to the Red Sea, and there
made three Provinces, Armenia, Assyria, and Mesopotamia, with the Nations
bordering upon Macedena, reducing Arabia to the same form of government; he
settled a Fleet in the Red Sea to wast the coasts of India. Yet he surpassed his
Military Fame with civility and moderation, equalizing himself to all at Rome
and through the Provinces. He oftentimes went to visit his Friends, either when
they were sick or upon festival Days; and without any distinction kept mutual
Feasts among them, going abroad with them in their Litters: he never injured
any of the Senators, nor did any unjust thing to increase his Exchequer; he was
liberal to all Men, and both publicly and privately enriched with Money and
Honors, even them, with whom he was but indifferently acquainted: he built
many places all over the World, and granted great privileges to Cities: he
acted all things so peaceably and quietly, that all the time he reigned, but
one Senator was condemned, and he by an Order of the Senate, unknown to Trajan.
For this reason most resembling a God both alive and dead, he deserved to be
worshipped all over the World. Among other sayings of his, this is much
esteemed, when his friends blamed him, that he was too kind to all Men; he
answered, he did to them, as he should wish Emperors to do to him, if he
himself was a Subject. After he had obtained great honor both at home and
abroad, as he was returning from Persia he died of the Flux at Seleucia, a City
of Isauria, in the sixty second year, ninth month, and fourth day of his age,
and of his Reign, the nineteenth year, sixth month and fifteenth day: he was
made a God, and of all other Emperors was buried within the City, his bones
were put in a golden Urn, and placed under a Pillar in the Forum, which he
himself had made, which Pillar was one hundred forty four feet high. So great
respect is paid to this Princes memory, that even unto my time the Senators
with no other phrase honored their Emperors, than be thou happier than
Augustus, and better than Trajan. So much has the glory of goodness obtained
from him, that it gives an occasion of a great Example either to Flatterers, or
true Praisers.

After the decease of Trajan, Aelius Adrianus was made Emperor, indeed not
with Trajan's Will, but by the help of his Wife Plotina, for he, as long as he
lived, although he was his kinsman, would not adopt him; he was born at Italica
in Spain, who envying the glory of his Predecessor, presently forsook those
three Provinces which Trajan had added to the Roman Empire; and recalled his
Forces out of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Armenia, and made Euphrates the Eastern
bound of the Empire; his Friends detered him endeavoring to do the same thing
in Dacia, lest many of the Roman Citizens should be exposed to the Barbarians:
for when Trajan had conquered that Country, he brought a great Colony out of
the whole Roman Empire to plant and build Cities there, Dacia being depopulated
in the long War with Decibalus: Aelius Adrianus enjoyed peace all the time of
his Reign, having made only one War, and that by the Governor of the Province,
he traveled all over the Roman Empire and built in many places. He was a very
good Scholar both in Latin and Greek; not esteemed very merciful, yet he took
great care of his Revenue, and the Discipline of his Soldiers. He died in
Campania, above sixty years old, and in the twenty first year, tenth month, and
twenty ninth day of his Reign. The Senate would not have made him a God, only
Titus Aurelius Fulvius Antoninus, that succeeded him, by long entreaty, when
all the Senators resisted him openly, at length obtained it.

Then Titus Antoninus Fulvius Bojonius was made Emperor after Adrianus, he was
also called Pius, his Family was Noble, but not very ancient* yet he himself
was so famous a Man, that he might as deservedly be compared to Numa Pompilius,
as Trajan to Romulus. When he was a private Man he was very honest, but when
Emperor, much more. He was rough to none, but kind to all: indifferently
honored for his Military Actions, affecting more to defend the Provinces, than
to increase them, he made it his business to seek for men that were able to
govern the Commonwealth, always conferring great honor upon good Men, and
detesting the bad without severity; he was no less venerable to his Confederate
Kings than awful; insomuch that many Nations of the Barbarians laid down their
Arms, and submitted themselves to his Opinion in their Controversies and
Quarrels: he was very rich before he was Emperor, but wasted it in his
Soldiers pay, and gifts bestowed upon his Friends; yet he left a rich Treasury
behind him. He was called Pius for his clemency, and died at Lorium, his
Country Palace about twelve miles from Rome, in the seventy third year of his
age, and twenty third of his Reign, and was deservedly made a God.

After him reigned M. Antoninus Verus, who was without doubt a most noble
Prince: for his Father descended from Numa Pompilius, and his Mother from King
Salentinus; with him reigned L. Annius Antoninus Verus, for then the Roman
Commonwealth first submitted to the equal authority of two Princes, being
governed before but by one Emperor. These were allied by Kindred and Marriage:
for Verus Annius Antoninus married the Daughter of M. Antoninus, but M.
Antoninus was Son-in-law to Antoninus Pius, by his Wife Galeria Faustina the
younger, who was his Cousin-german. They made War with the Parthians, who after
the Victory of Trajan, then made their first Rebellion. V. Antoninus marched to
this War, and living at Antioch near Armenia, did great actions by the conduct
of his Captains; he took Seleucia a very famous City in Assyria with five
hundred thousand Men: and conquering the Parthians, made a Triumph with his
Brother and Father-in-law. He died in Venetia of the Disease, which the
Grecians call the Apoplexy, being killed by a sudden eruption of blood in his
brain, in his Litter with his Brother, as he was coming from Concordia to
Altinum. He was a rough Man, yet never did any ill thing in reverence to his
Brother; he died in the eleventh year of his Reign, and was made a God.

After him only M. Antoninus governed the Commonwealth; a man more to be
admired than praised: he was very peaceable from the beginning of his life;
insomuch that neither joy nor grief could alter his countenance; he mightily
loved the Stoic Philosophy, and was Master of it as well by Learning, as by
the morality of his life. Even when he was a youth he merited so great
admiration, that Adrianus designed to make him his Caesar, but having adopted
Antoninus Pius, he made him therefore his Son-in-law, that he might come that
way to the Government; he learned Philosophy of Apollonius, the Chalcedonian,
and Greek of Sextus Chaeronensis, Plutarch's Nephew, and Fronto that most
excellent Orator taught him Latin; he carried himself very justly to all the
Romans, and was no way puffed up according to the haughtiness of Emperors: he
was very liberal, and governed the Provinces with great moderation. Affairs
while he reigned were carried on successfully against the Germans, in his own
Person, he made one War with the Marcomanni, as considerable as any in Story,
even to be compared with the Carthaginian Wars, and from the loss of whole
Armies to be esteemed worse. In his time there happened so great a Pestilence,
that after his Victory over the Persians, a great number of Men and almost all
his Soldiers died through Italy and the Provinces. Wherefore after he had
persever'd with great labor and patience full three years at Carnuntum, he
ended that War with the Marcomanni, which had been carried on by the
confederacy of the Quadi, the Vandali, the Sarmatae, the Suevi and all the
neighboring Barbarians; he slew a great many thousand of them, and having
freed the Pannonii from their servitude, he made another Triumph at Rome with
his Son Com. Antoninus, whom he had made his Caesar. When his Exchequer was all
exhausted in this War, and he had no assistance by Presents, being unwilling to
lay any thing upon the Provinces or the Senate, he made an Inventory of the
furniture of his Palace, and in Trajan's Forum for two months exposed to sale
his golden Vessels, his Crystal and Amber Cups, his Wifes and his own
Wardrobe, and a great many Jewels, from which he raised a good Sum of God, and
after the Victory bought his Household Stuff again of them that were willing to
sell, being offended with none that refused it. He also granted that Noblemen
might make Feasts with the same Grandeur and Retinue as himself. After this
Victory he was so noble in his Sports and public Shows, that he is reported to
have exposed in the Amphitheater an hundred Lions at once. Thus after he had
restored the Commonwealth to a prosperous condition, he died in the sixty first
year of his age, having Reigned about eighteen years, and was made a God
according to the earnest desires of all Men.

Lucius Antoninus Commodus succeeded him, a Man not at all like his Father, yet
considerable for a War, he managed successfully against the Germans; he
endeavored to have the month September called Commodus from his own name;
being depraved by his luxury and lusts, he oftentimes fought as a Gladiator in
their Fencing Schools, and in the Amphitheater with such sort of Men. He died
suddenly, and 'twas thought he was strangled or poisoned, when he had Reigned
twelve years and eight months from the death of his Father, so detested by
every body, that he was reflected upon as an Enemy to mankind, even after he
was dead.

Pertinax succeeded him, an old Man, who being above seventy years old, and
Governor of Rome, was made Emperor by an Order of the Senate; he was slain in
the eightieth day of his Reign, by a mutiny of the Praetorian Soldiers, and the
treachery of Julian.

After him Salvius Julianus took the government, he was a noble Man and skilful
in the Laws, Nephew to Salvius Julianus, who in the time of Adrianus drew up
the perpetual Statute. He was conquered by Severus at the Milvian Bridge, and
was slain in the Palace, having reigned seven months.

Septimius Severus succeeded him, he was born in Africa, at Leptis, a Town of
the Province of Tripolis. He was the first and last Emperor in the memory of
Man that ever came out of Africa, he was first an Advocate in the Treasury,
afterward a Tribune of the Soldiers, and so by various employments he came to
the government of the Commonwealth. He called himself Pertinax in honor of
that Pertinax slain by Julian; he was very parsimonious, and by nature cruel.
He fought many Wars, and came off successfully: he slew Pescennius Niger at the
City Cyzicus, who had made a Rebellion in Egypt and Syria: he overcame the
Parthians and the Arabians to such a degree, that if he pleased he might have
made their Country a Province; wherefore he was called Parthicus and Arabicus:
he built many Cities all over the Roman Empire. In his Reign Clodius Albinus,
that conspired with Julian to kill Pertinax, made himself Caesar in Gaul, but
was overcome and slain at Lugdunum. Severus, besides the honor he obtained in
Military Actions, was much renowned for Politics, being a very good Scholar,
and an excellent Philosopher: his last War was in Britanny, where he fortified
the Provinces, he had recovered, with a great wall two and thirty miles long,
from the German Ocean to the Irish Sea: he died at Eboracum when he was a very
old man, in the eighteenth year, and fourth month of his Reign, and was
consecrated a God: he left his two Sons Bassianus and Geta to succeed him, and
by order of Senate would have Bassianus, called Antoninus; wherefore he assumed
the name of M. Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus, and succeeded his Father; for his
Brother Geta being looked upon as a public enemy, was forthwith slain. M.
Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus, called also Caracalla, was much of his Fathers
disposition, yet somewhat more rough and ill natured: he made a famous Bath at
Rome, called Antoninianae; the only remarkable thing of his life: he was one so
ungovernable in his Lust, that he married his Mother-in-law Julia: he ended his
days at Osroenes, a City not far from Edessa, in his design against the
Parthians, in the sixth year of his Reign, and second month, scarce three and
forty years old, and was buried at the public cost of the people.

Then Opilius Macrinus the Captain of the Guards was made Emperor with his Son
Diadumenus, they did nothing worth memory, for they reigned but fourteen
months, and were both slain by a tumult of the Soldiers. After these two Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus was made Emperor; he was thought to be the Son of Antoninus
Caracalla, but indeed he was a Priest of the Temple of Heliogabalus: he, when
he came to Rome, with the great expectation both of Soldiers and Senators,
disgraced himself with all sorts of Scandal, and lived most shamefully and
lewdly; so after two years and eight months his Soldiers slew him and his
Mother Semia, the Syrian.

Next to him reigned Aurelius Alexander, he was styled by his Army Caesar, and
by the Senate Augustus; he was a very young Man, and making War with the
Persians, most gloriously overcame Xerxes their King. He strictly kept up the
Discipline of his Soldiers, and disbanded some whole Legions, that were
tumultuous. Vlpian the famous Civilian was the Master of his Rolls. He was very
favorable to Rome, but slain in Gaul, in an uproar of the Soldiers, having
reigned thirteen years and eight days, extremely dutiful to his Mother Mammaea.

The Ninth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
The Reign of Maximinus, Gordianus, Philippus, Decius, Valerianus, Gallienus,
Claudius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Carus, Numerianus, Carinus,
Diocletianus; with other Remarks:

From V. C. 987. to 1056.

By Mr. Martin Bows.
AFTER Aurelius Alexander, Maximinus was the first of any in the Army, that
obtained the government of the Empire, chose only by the Soldiers, without the
Authority of the Senate, himself being no Senator, having managed the War
successfully against the Germans: when he war saluted Imperator by his
Soldiers: upon their revolt, Pupienus killed him and his young Son at Aquileia,
with whom he had reigned three years and a few days.

Afterward there were three Emperors at once, Pupienus, Balbinus, and
Gordianus: the two first were of a very mean Family; Gordianus was a Nobleman:
for his Father being Pro-consul of Africa, was chosen Emperor by the consent of
the Soldiers, when Maximinus reigned; but when they came to Rome, Balbinus and
Pupienus were killed in the Palace, and Gordianus was Emperor alone; who being
but a young man, having married Tranquillina at Rome, set open the Temple of
double-fac'd Janus: and marching to the East, made War with the Parthians, who
now endeavored to invade the Empire; which War he managed very well, and beat
the Persians in great Battles. Returning home, he was killed by the treachery
of Philip, who succeeded him. His Soldiers built for him a Monument near the
River Euphrates, twenty miles from Circessus a Castle of the Romans, and
carrying his Body to Rome, styled him a God.

The two Philips, the Father, and the Son, when Gordianus was dead, got the
Empire; and having brought back the Army safe, they marched from Syria to
Italy. When they governed, in the thousandth year of the City, there was a
great Festival celebrated with all manner of sports. They afterward were both
killed by their Soldiers, the eldest at Verona, the younger at Rome; having
reigned five years. Nevertheless they were numbered amongst the Gods.

After these, Decius who came from the lower Pannonia, born at Bubalia, took
upon him the Empire: he ended the Civil War that was in Gaul, and made his Son
his Caesar: he built a Bath at Rome. When he and his Son had ruled two years,
they were slain fighting far from Rome with the Barbarians, and consecrated
amongst the Roman Gods.

Then Gallus Hostilianus, and Volusianus his Son were made Emperors; under
their Government Aemilianus endeavored an Insurrection in Maesia: to suppress
whom, in their march, they were killed at Interamna before two years end: they
did no great action all their Reign, it being only remarkable for the Plague,
and other diseases.

Aemilianus born of very obscure Parents, governed more obscurely, and died in
the third month of his Reign.

Then Licinius Valerianus being General in Rhaetia and Noricum, was saluted
first Imperator by his Army, afterward Augustus. Gallienus likewise was made
Emperor by the Senate: Their Government was pernicious, and almost destructive
to the Roman name, either by the ill fortune, or idleness of these Princes. The
Germans came up to Ravenna. Valerianus waging War in Mesopotamia, was overcome
by Sapores King of the Persians; and being made captive, lingered out a
dishonorable old age in slavery amongst the Parthians.

Gallienus when he was a young man, was made Emperor; at first he managed the
Empire happily, then indifferently, at last very ill; for in his youth he acted
valiantly in Gaul, and Illyricum, having killed Ingenuus at Mursia who usurped
the Empire, and Trebellianus: a long while he was quiet and peaceable;
afterward falling into all vice: he neglected the Commonwealth, through
idleness and despair; the Almans having wasted all Gaul, broke into Italy: he
lost Dacia, which lying beyond the Danube, was brought under subjection by
Trajan: Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and Asia were overrun by the Goths: Pannonia
was spoiled by the Sarmatians, and the Quadi: the Germans came even to Spain,
and besieged the noble City Tarraco: the Parthians having overcome Mesopotamia,
began to claim a title to Syria. Now things being in despair, and the Roman
Empire almost overthrown, Posthumus born of a very mean Race, made himself
Emperor in Gaul, and managed his affairs so for ten years space, that he almost
won all the Provinces that were lost) with great valor and moderation: he was
killed in a tumult of his Soldiers, because he would not deliver up the City
Moguntiacum, which had rebelled against him in an Insurrection of Lollianus, to
be plundered by his Soldiers. After him Marius a most useful man made himself
Emperor, and was killed the second day of his Reign. Victorinus a very valiant
man took upon him the Government of Gaul, but being very lascivious, and a
defiler of other men's Beds, he was killed at Agrippina, by the Plot of one
Acturius in the second year of his Reign. Tetricus a Senator succeeded him, who
was Governor of Aquitania, and was chosen Emperor by his Soldiers in his
absence; he took upon him the Government at Burdegala, and patiently bore many
Mutinies in the Army. But whilst these things were done in Gaul, in the East
the Persians were overcome by Odenatus, who desending Syria, and regaining
Mesopotamia, went as far as Ctesiphon. Thus Gallienus not minding the
Commonwealth, the Roman Empire was kept up in the West by Posthumus, in the
East by Odenatus; in the mean time Gallienus, and his Brother Valerianus were
killed at Mediolanum in the ninth year of their Reign: and Claudius succeeded
him, chosen by his Soldiers, and declared Emperor by the Senate. In a great
Battle he overcame the Goths spoiling and depopulating Illyricum, and
Macedonia: he was a frugal modest man, a lover of Justice, and fit to govern
the Commonwealth; who nevertheless died of a natural death, before he had
reigned two years, and was styled a God. The Senate honored him mightily, that
he should have a Golden Shield set up for him in the Senate House, with a
Golden Statue in the Capitol.

After him Quintilius the Brother of Claudius was chosen Emperor by the consent
of his Soldiers; a man from his extraordinary moderation, and civility either
to be equaled or preferred before his Brother: the Senate agreed that he should
be called Augustus. He was killed when he had been Emperor sixteen days.

After him Aurelian took upon him the Empire, born in Dacia Ripensis; he was a
man powerful in War, but of an unruly nature, and prone to cruelty: he very
valiantly beat the Goths, and restored the Roman Empire by various successes of
War to its ancient bounds: he overcame Tetricus in Gaul amongst the Catalauni:
Tetricus delivering up his Army whose continual Seditions he could not bear;
for by secret Letters he so pressed Aurelian, that among other arguments he
used this Verse of Virgil, Eripe me his invicte malis, that is, Deliver me thou
great Conqueror, from these misfortunes. He also in a very great Battle took
Zenobia, not far from Antioch, when her Husband Odenatus who commanded those
parts of the East was killed, and entering Rome, he triumphed very nobly, as if
he had been Conqueror of the East, and West; Tetricus and Zenobia going before
his Chariot. Tetricus afterward was Governor of Lucania, but Zenobia left her
posterity at Rome, which remain there to these days. In his Reign those that
belonged to the Mint having coined false money, and killed Felicissimus, the
Master of the Mint, made a Rebellion in Rome, whom he subdued and quelled with
extreme cruelty: he put to death many Noblemen, being severe and bloody, and in
some things rather necessary than to be beloved: he was harsh all his life
time, and killed his Sisters Son; yet a great keeper up of Military Discipline,
and a strict corrector of his Soldiers dissolute manners: he repaired and
fortified the Walls about Rome, and erected a Temple to the Sun, enriching it
with much Gold and Jewels: he deserted the Province of Dacia, which Trajan had
extended beyond the Danube: he wasted all Illyricum and [Maesia; despairing
that it could be kept, having drawn the Romans out of the Cities of the Country
of Dacia:] he placed them in the middle of Maesia, lying on the right side of
the Danube, as it flows into the Euxine Sea, when before it was on the left
side. He was killed by the treachery of a Servant, who brought some names
remarked upon to some Soldiers, his Friends, forging the Emperors Hand as if he
had intended to kill them; so that he might be prevented, he was killed upon a
Journey in the middle of the old way, between Constantinople and Heraclea: the
place is called Caenophrurium; but his death was revenged, and he was made a
God, having reigned five years and six months.

Then Tacitus took upon him the Empire; a man well bred and fit to govern the
Commonwealth; but he could not do any famous action, dying before he had been
Emperor six months. Florianus, who succeeded Tacitus reigned but two months,
and twenty days; neither did he any act worth memory.

After him Probus, a man famous in Military affairs, got the Rule of the
Commonwealth; he restored Gaul with great success, which the Barbarians
possessed: he happily suppressed some endeavoring to usurp the Empire, viz.
Saturninus in the East, Proculus, and Bonosus at Agrippina: he suffered the
Gauls, and Pannonians to have Vineyards; and his Soldiers having planted Vines
on the Mountain Almus near Sirmium, and on the Mountain Aureus in the upper
Maesia, he charged the Inhabitants to look after them; he, when he had waged a
great many Wars having obtained peace, said, that within a little time there
would be no need of Soldiers: he was a valiant and just man, equalling Aurelian
in Military glory, but excelling him in civility: and was killed in the Iron
Tower at Sirmium, in a Mutiny of his Soldiers, having reigned six months and
four days.

After him Carus being Emperor, born at Narbona in Gaul, made Carinus and
Numerianus his Sons, his Caesar's; with whom he ruled two years; but whilst he
waged War with the Sarmatians, having heard of the Insurrection in Persia,
marching to the East he performed noble actions against them, and overthrew
them in a Battle: he took Seleucia and Ctesiphon very eminent Cities, and when
he had pitched his Camp by the Tigris, was killed by a Thunderbolt. Numerianus
his Son, whom he had brought along with him into Persia, a young man of very
great hopes, being carried by reason of a pain in his eyes in his Litter, was
treacherously killed through the incitement of Aper his Father-in-law, and when
he had cunningly hid him [till he could get the Empire for himself] his murder
was found out by the stench of his body; the Soldiers of his Guard being
disturbed with the smell, having taken off the clothes of the Bed, after a few
days discovered his death. In the mean time Carinus, whom Carus, when he made
his expedition against the Parthians, had left in Illyricum, Gaul, and Italy,
defiled himself in all manner of Vice: he put many to death with the accusation
of forged crimes: he abused many Noblewomen, and was also mischievous to his
fellow Students, who had been somewhat smart upon him in their Schools; for
which being hated by all men, he a little after was punished. The Army
returning home after the conquest of Persia, when Carus and Numerianus their
Emperors were killed, one by a Thunderbolt, the other by treachery, made
Dioclesian Emperor born in Dalmatia of obscure Parents, being generally
reported to be the Son of a Scrivener, but by some the Son of a Freeman to
Anulinus a Senator: he in the first Assembly of the Soldiers swore that he had
no hand in killing Numerianus, and when Aper who murdered Numerianus, stood
next to him, he run him through with his own hand in the sight of all the Army:
afterward he overcame Carinus in a great Battle at Murgum, who lived hated and
detested of all men: he was delivered up by his own Army, being stronger than
the Enemy, and deserted between the Mountain Viminatius and Aureus. Thus
Dioclesian obtained the Roman Empire, and the Country people in Gaul making an
Insurrection, and calling their Rebellion by the name of the Bagaude, under
their Captains Amandus, and Aelianus: he sent Maximianus Herculius his Caesar
to suppress them, who in small Skirmishes overcame them, and settled that part
of Gaul. Then also Carausius, who born of a very mean Family, had got great
honor by his good service in the War; when at Dononia all along the Coast of
Belgic Gaul, and Armorica, he had undertook to secure the Seas which the
Franks, and the Saxons infested; having often taken many Barbarians, and not
restoring the entire spoil, neither to the Inhabitants of the Province, nor
presenting it to the Emperors; when there began to be a suspicion, that he had
let in the Barbarians on purpose, that he might meet them in their passage, and
so enrich himself with the spoils: being commanded by Maximianus to be killed,
made himself Emperor, and seized upon on Britanny. So when all over the world
things were in confusion, Carausius rebelled in Britanny, Achilleus in Egypt,
the Quinquegentiani molested Africa, Narseus made War in the East, Diocletian
advanced Maximianus Herculius from Caesar to Augustus, and made Constantius,
and Maximianus Caesar's; of whom Constantius was Claudius's Grandson by his
Daughter, Maximianus Galerius was born in Dacia, not far from Sardica, and that
he might also ally them by affinity, Constantius married Theodora, the
Daughter-in-law of Herculius, of whom he had six Children, the Brothers of
Constantine. Galerius married Valeria the Daughter of Dioclesian, both of them
being forced to divorce their former Wives. At last he made peace with
Carausius, when he had endeavored a War in vain against him, being very
skilful in Military Discipline. Allectus his Colleague killed him seven years
after, and kept Britanny three years after his death, who also was killed by
Asclepiodotus Captain of the Guards, so Britanny in the tenth year was reduced
to the the Roman Power. About the same time a Battle was fought by Constantius
in Gaul near the Lingones; in one day he had experience of good and bad
fortune; for on a sudden the Barbarians rushing upon him, he was forced to
retreat into the City, they were in such disorder, that having shut up the
Gates, they drew him up the Walls by Ropes. Within less than five hours after,
a fresh Army coming up, he destroyed almost sixty thousand Almans; also
Maximianus the Emperor finished the War in Africa, having overcome the
Quinquegentiani, and forced them to make a Peace. Dioclesian within the space
of eight months overcame Achilleus besieged in Alexandria, and killed him; he
exercised his Victory with cruelty, and defiled all Egypt with severe
proscriptions, and slaughters; but on that occasion he managed and did many
things wisely, which remain to this time. Galerius Maximianus fought between
Callinicum and Carrae at first unhappily, but at last successfully; yet rather
through indiscretion than cowardice, joining Battle with a very few men against
a very powerful Enemy; wherefore being beat, he went to Dioclesian, who meeting
him in the way, was reported to have received him with such great pride, that
Galerius ran by his Litter some miles together; afterward having raised Forces
in Illyricum, and Maesia, he fought again very successfully with equal conduct,
and valor, in Armenia the Great, against Narseus the Grandfather of Ormisda,
and Sapores; having been himself a Scout, with one or two Horsemen. Narseus
being overthrown, he plundered his Camp, took his Wives, Sisters, and Children,
a great many Persian Noblemen, with a very rich Treasure, and forced him to fly
to the farthermost recesses of the Kingdom. Wherefore upon his return this
Conqueror was received with great honor by Dioclesian, staying in Mesopotamia
with a reserve. Then they waged War sometimes together, sometimes separate,
having overcome the Carpi, the Basternae, and the Sarmatians. They placed a
great many Captives of these Nations upon the Roman Frontiers. Dioclesian was
cunning, witty, and subtle, so managing himself in his severity, that other men
might bear the hatred. Nevertheless he was a very careful and prudent Prince,
and was the first that rather observed the form of Regal Customs than of Roman
Liberty: and when before his time Emperors were only saluted, he commanded the
people to worship him as a God: he wore Jewels upon his Clothes and Shoes;
whereas before the Badg of Royalty consisted in a Purple Coat, the other dress
was in common: but Herculius in outward appearance fierce, and of a rude
disposition, discovered his roughness in the horror of his countenance; but
smoothing his own nature, he obeyed Dioclesian in his more severe designs.
Dioclesian, when he grew old, finding himself unfit to govern the Empire, moved
Herculius to live a private life, and give up the Commonwealth to brisker and
younger men; to which his Colleague unwillingly consented; yet both of them upon
a certain day changed the Royal Robe for a Private Habit; Dioclesian at
Nicomedia, Herculius at Mediolanum, after they had gloriously triumphed at Rome
over a great many Nations, with a magnificent show of Pageants, in which the
Wives, Sisters, and Children of Narseus went before their Chariot; one of them
retired to Salonae, the other to Lucania. Dioclesian as a private man spun out
an honorable old age at a place near Salonae, exercising himself in Virtue
unusual to him before. He was the only man after the foundation of the Roman
Empire, that of his own accord descended from so high a pitch to a private
condition; for which reason this happened to him which never did to any other,
that tho dying a private man, he should be consecrated a God..

The Tenth Book OF EVTROPIVS:
Constantius, Galerius, Licinius, Constantinus, with his three Sons, and
Successors; also Julianus, Jovianus, with other Roman Synchronisms.

From A. C. 1056. to 1119.

By Mr. John Shadwell.
THerefore Dioclesian and Herculius retiring, Constantius and Galerius were
created Emperors to govern the Commonwealth, and the Roman Empire was divided
between them: Constantius had Gaul, Italy and Africa, Galerius possessed
himself of Illyricum, Asia, and the Eastern parts having chosen two Caesar's.
But Constantius satisfied with the honor of being Emperor refused the trouble
of governing Italy and Africa, he was an excellent Man, and of most
extraordinary civility, extremely gracious to his Allies and private Persons,
he cared not for the fullness of his Exchequer, and was better pleased to have
the public wealth in the hands of private Men, than shut up in one fund. He
affected Pomp so little* that on festival Days, if he were to feast with many
of his Friends, he borrowed furniture and Plate from private persons to
entertain them. The Gauls not only loved this Man, but even reverenced him,
chiesly because under his power they had escaped the suspected policy of
Dioclesian and the bloody rashness of Maximianus, he died in Britanny at York
in the thirteenth year of his Reign, and was consecrated amongst the God.

Galerius was a Man well bred and famous in warlike matters, when he found that
the government of Italy fell under his Command by the consent of Constantius,
he ordained two Caesar's. But Constantius being dead, Constantine his Son by a
Wife of mean quality was made Emperor in Brittany, and as one most desirable
succeeded his Father. In the mean while the Praetorian Band at Rome having
raised a mutiny, proclaimed Maxentius the Son of Herculius Emperor, who lived
publicly not far from Rome, at which news Maximianus Herculius hoping to
reassume the power, he had unwillingly forsaken, came soon to Rome from
Lucania, where as a private man he had chosen to dwell, growing old in that
most pleasant Country. He persuaded Dioclesian also by Letters (but in vain) to
re-take the Power he had laid down. But Severus Caesar being sent to Rome by
Galerius against the insurrection of the Praetorian Soldiers, arrived there
with his Army, but besieging the City his Soldiers basely deserted him: thus
Maxentius his power was increased, and the Empire confirmed to him. Severus in
his flight was slain at Ravenna: but Herculius Maximianus after these things
endeavoring to depose his Son Maxentius in an Assembly of the Army, made the
Soldiers mutiny and revile him. Upon this he went to Gaul with a treacherous
Design, to associate himself with his Son-in-law Constantine, as if his own Son
had expelled him, but endeavoring whenever he had an opportunity to kill
Constantine, who reigned in Gaul much beloved both by his Soldiers and the
Natives, having beaten the Franci and the Alamanni, he exposed their Captive
Kings to wild Beasts at his public and noble Show. Wherefore his treachery
being detected by his Daughter Fausta, who discovered the Villainy to her
Husband, Herculius fled to Massilia, and there slain (intending to sail from
thence to his Son) was punished with a just Death. He was a Man prone to all
kind of roughness and cruelty, unfaithful, injurious, and very barbarous.

Now Galerius made Licinius Emperor being a Dacian, having been formerly
acquainted with him, and acceptable to him for his great endeavors and
services in the War he made against Narseus: Galerius soon after died: then the
Commonwealth was governed by these four Emperors, Constantine and Maxentius
Sons of Emperors, Licinius and Maximinus being Upstarts. But Constantine in
the fifth year of his Reign raised a Civil War against Maxentius, and routed
his Forces in a great many Battles, at last at the Milvian Bridge he conquered
him (who had raged with all kind of cruelty against the Nobility at Rome) and
so gained Italy. Not long after Maximinus attempting an insurrection in the
East against Licinius, his own accidental death at Tarsus, prevented his
intended destruction. But Constantine was a great Man, and endeavoring to
perform all that he had designed in his mind; also affecting the Government of
all the World; he brought War upon Licinius, although he was familiarly
acquainted with him and nearly related to him, his Sister Constantia being
married to Licinius: on a sudden he set upon him first in Pannonia, and then as
he was gathering together great Forces at the City Cibalae, and having gained
all Dardania, Moesia and Macedonia, he possessed himself of a great many
Provinces. Afterward there arose several Wars between them, and the Peace
which was made, broken in the end, Licinius conquered in a Sea Fight, and at
Land at Nicomedia, yielded up himself, and was killed a private Man at the City
Thessalonica contrary to the sincerity of a solemn Oath. Then the Roman Empire
was under one Emperor and three Caesar's (never so before) Constantine's Sons
governing Gaul, the Eastern parts and Italy: but this wonderful success
somewhat altered Constantine from his tractable and gentle temper. So that
first persecuting his nearest Friends, he killed his Sisters Son an excellent
young Man, and of a very good disposition; and after the slaughter of very many
of his Friends he put his Wife to death: He was a Man in the beginning of his
Reign to be compared with the best of Princes, but at last to be ranked with
the indifferent, adorned with a great many Virtues both of Mind and Body, very
ambitious of Military honor, Fortune was successful to him in War, but his
industry was as great as his Fortune. For after the Civil War he often beat the
Goths: and at last having granted them peace, he left even amongst those
Barbarians a great remembrance of his favor. He was addicted to civil Arts and
generous Exercises, an affector of true Friendship, which he altogether sought
to procure by his liberality and easiness; as he was severe to some of his
Friends, so he was extraordinary kind to the rest, letting no opportunity slip
to make them rich and eminent. He made a great many Laws, some good and just,
very many superfluous, and some severe. He first attempted to advance the City
Constantinople called after his own name to so great a pitch as to make it
equal with Rome: in his Design to make War against the Parthians, who had
harassed Mesopotamia, he died in a public Vill of the City Nicomedia, in the
one and thirtieth year of his Reign, and the sixty sixth of his age. His Death
was foretold by a blazing Star, (called by the Greeks (...)) which of an
unusual bigness appeared for some time; and he was deservedly made a God.

He left three of his own Sons and one of his Brothers to succeed him: but
Dalmatius Caesar a most hopeful Man not unlike his Uncle was slain a while
after by a Military Faction with the consent rather than by the command of his
Cousin Constantius. Moreover Constans his Captains slew Constantine making War
against his Brother and unadvisedly fighting at the City Aquileia. Thus the
Commonwealth was reduced to two Emperors. Constans his Reign for some time was
great and just, afterward through sickness and the persuasions of some of his
worst Friends, being grown vicious and intolerable to the Subjects of the
Provinces, and unacceptable to his Soldiers, he was slain by the Faction of
Maxentius, not far from Spain in a Castle called Helena in the eighteenth year
of his Reign, and the thirteenth of his age. He performed a great many valiant
actions in War, and was terrible to his Army all his lifetime without much
cruelty. Constantius his fortune was various, for he suffered very many
injuries from the Persians, who had oftentimes sacked his Towns, besieged his
Cities, and beaten his Armies: never had he any success in Battle against King
Sapores unless at Singara, where the eagerness of his Soldiers, lost in
probability a certain Victory, who tumultuously and foolishly against the
reason of War demanded to fight, the day being far spent. After the death of
Constans Magnentius having got Italy, Africa and Gaul, there arose an
insurrection in Illyricum. Veteranio being made Emperor by the consent of the
Soldiers, and now a very old Man and beloved by all by reason of his long
continuance and success in War, was chosen Prince and Governor of Illyricum.
He was a virtuous Man observing the ancient Roman manners and of obliging
civility, but ignorant of all liberal Sciences; so that he did not learn even
the rudiments of Learning, till he was old and made Emperor; but Constantius,
who to revenge his Brothers Death had raised a Civil War, put an end to the
Reign of Veteranio, who after a new and unusual manner by the agreement of the
Soldiers was forced to lay down the Imperial Power. There arose also a mutiny
at Rome by the means of Nepotianus Constantine's Sisters Son, who seizing upon
the Empire with a party of Gladiators, met with a Death worthy of his cruel
beginnings, being slain on the eight and twentieth day by Magnentius his
Captains, and his head carried all about the City upon a Javelin. There were
great Proscriptions and much slaughter of the Nobility at that time.

Not long after Magnentius was put to flight, and very near taken in the Battle
at Mursa: the great strength of the Romans in that fight was much weakened,
even Soldiers that were fit to manage any foreign Wars, and might have procured
security and many Triumphs to the Commonwealth. Soon after Constantius sent
Gallus his Uncles Son as Caesar to the East: and Magnentius beaten in several
Battles in the third year and the seventh month of his Reign, killed himself at
Lugdunum: as his Brother Decentius, whom he had sent with an Imperial Authority
to govern Gaul, did also among the Senones.

At this time Constantius also having committed a great many outrages, killed
Gallus Caesar, a man fierce by nature, and prone to tyranny if he had been
absolute. Sylvanus also attempting an Insurrection in Gaul, died before the
thirtieth day: (then Constantius was the only Prince and Augustus of the Roman
Empire.) Soon after he sent Julian Caesar to Gaul, who was his Cousin, and the
Brother of Gallus, having given him his Sister in marriage. At that time the
Barbarians sacked a great many Towns, besieged others, and had horribly wasted
all places. The Roman Empire by these misfortunes was in a tottering condition,
by whom with indifferent Forces the great Army of the Alamanni was suppressed
at Argentoratum, a City of Gaul, their most considerable King was taken, and
Gaul was regained to the Empire. This Julian afterward performed a great many
valiant actions against the Barbarians, and drove the Germans beyond the River
Rhine, and restored the Roman Empire to its former Confines. Not long after
when the German Army was removed from their Garrison in Gaul, Julian was chosen
Emperor by the Soldiers, and after a years space he marched to gain Illyricum,
whilst Constantius was busy in managing the Parthian Wars, who died in his
march between Cilicia and Cappadocia, in the eight and thirtieth year of his
Reign, and the five and fortieth of his age, and deserved to be numbered amongst
the Gods: he was a man of an exceeding calm temper, easy, and giving too much
credit to his friends and familiars: he was also too uxorious, but in the first
years of his Reign he behaved himself with great modesty: he also enriched his
friends, nor did let any of them want honor, whose industrious services he had
made use of: yet inclinable to seseverity, if he grew jealous of any design
upon his Empire, but otherwise mild, whose success was greater in the Civil,
than in Foreign Wars.

After this Julian gained the Empire, and with great preparation made War with
the Parthiuns, in which Expedition I my self was present: he made some Towns
and Castles of the Persians to surrender, or else took them by force; and
having depopulated Assyria, he encamped for some time at the Town Ctesiphon,
and returning Conqueror was slain by the Enemy, whilst he too rashly pressed on
in the Battle, on the sixth of the Kalends of July, in the seventh year of his
Reign, and the one and thirtieth of his age, and was translated amongst the
Gods; an extraordinary man, designing admirarably to govern the Commonwealth,
if he had lived: he was very skilful in Liberal Sciences, and much more learned
in Greek than in Latin: he was very eloquent, and had a memory most ready and
tenacious, and in some things more resembling a Philosopher: he was liberal
toward his friends, but not so careful as it became so great a Prince; for
there were some who would wound his honor: he was very just to the Natives of
the Provinces, and eased them from Taxes as much as could be: he was courteous
to all men, but took little care of his Exchequer, very ambitious of glory,
which oftentimes transported his mind: he was too great a Persecutor of the
Christians; yet so as he abstained from putting any to death: he was not unlike
M. Antoninus, whom he endeavored to imitate. After Julian, Jovian, who at that
time was one of the Guard, was elected Emperor by the Soldiers, more eminent by
his Fathers commendation than by his own; who through the disorder of his
affairs, and the want of provision in the Army, when he was overcome in several
Battles by the Persians, made a necessary, tho an ignoble peace with King
Sapores, being forced to diminish the Confines, and to part with some of the
Roman Empire, which in eleven hundred and eighteen years from the building of
Rome, never happened till his time. I confess our Legions were made slaves at the
Town Caudium by Pontius Telesinus, in Spain also at Numantia and in Numidia;
yet no part of the Empire was surrendered. This condition of Peace ought not
altogether to have been blamed, if Jovian would have broke the necessity of his
League, when it was fresh and in force, as the Romans have done in all these
Wars, that I have given an account of; for War was forthwith brought upon the
Samnites, the Numantians, and the Numidians; neither was there any Peace
ratified. But he staying in the East, and fearing one that would rival him in
his Empire, little consulted his own honor: wherefore in his march to Illyricum
he suddenly died in the Confines of Galatia: he was a man neither unactive nor
imprudent. Many snppose he died of a Surfeit, for he loved to indulge Feasting
at Supper, others of the small of his Bedchamber, which coming from the fresh
plaistering of the Wall, was dangerous to such that lie there: some think he
died by the fume of too many coals, which he commanded to be burnt, it being
very cold. He died in the seventh month of his Reign, on the fourteenth of the
Kalends of March; and as they who speak most probably in the three and
thirtieth year of his age, and by the kindness of his Successors was deified;
for he was inclined to civility, and very liberal in his nature. This was the
state of the Roman Empire, when this Jovian and Varronianus were Consuls in the
eleven hundred and 19th. year, after the building of Rome. But since I am come
to famous and venerable Princes, I will put an end to my work; for I must speak
of what remains in a more lofty style, which I do not at this time so much
omit, as reserve to be written more accurately.

A Geograpical INDEX To explain the names of the People, Countries, Citys,
Rivers, and Hills mentioned by Eutropius.
A.
A Chaia, largely taken is Hellas, or Greece, but strictly part of the
Peloponnesus, about Corinth. Actium, a City of Epirus, on the Sea Shore, and
called Nicopolis in memory of Augustus's Victory over Mark Anthony and
Cleopatra. Adiabeni, the people of Adiabene, a Country of Assyria. Egypt, a
Country in Africa anciently divided by Mela into two parts; the lower Delta,
the upper Thebais; Famous for the invention of Arts and Physic, Astronomy,
Husbandry, etc. It is bounded on the East with the Red Sea, on the West with
Cyrene* on the North with the Mediterranean-Sea, on the South with Aethiopia.
Aemus, or Haemus, the greatest Hill of Thrace, called now Balkan. Aequi, a
People of Latium in Italy, now called Campagna di Roma. Aetoli, a People of
Greece, between Acarnania, and Phocis. Africa, one of the four parts of the
World; it is a Peninsula, joined to Asia by an Isthmus of sixty miles long.
Agrigentum, the Town Gergento, on the Hill Agragas in Sicily. Agrippina, now
called Cologne a famous City of the Lower Germany upon the Rhine, so called
from Agrippina the Empress and Wife of Claudius. Albani, the People of Albania,
between Iberia and the Caspian-Sea. Albis, a River, it runs through the midst
of Germany, called the Elb, and falls into the Sea near Hamborough, it has its
name from Halb, that is, half. Alexandria, the name of many Citys, but here in
Egypt now called Scanderia, built by Alexander the Great. Alexandrini, the
People of Alexandria. Algidus, a Hill 12 miles from Rome, with the Town Algidum
built upon it. Allia, a River of the Sabins in Italy flowing into the Tiber,
supposed now to be Rio de Mosso, famous for the Slaughter of the 300. Fabij.
Almans, a People of Germany near to Rhaetia, heretofore inhabiting in Suevia:
now all the Germans are called Almans. Altinum, a Town of the Lower Pannonia
now Hungary, called Tolna. Ambrones, a People of France, where Ambrun is now,
tho Cluverius makes them some of the Helvetii. The Alps, high Mountains which
part Italy from Germany and France. Anio, a River of the Sabin's flowing into
the Tyber, three miles from Rome, now called Teverone. Antemnates, the People
of the City Antemnae in Italy. Anthemisius, a Country of Persia. Antiochia,
Antioch, a great City of Syria, this is the City where men were first named
Christians. Apollonia, a name of many Citys. 1. in Macedonia, 2. in Asia, 3. in
Thrace. Apulia, a Country in Italy, it is now called Puglia, it is divided into
two parts, the one is called Puglia Piana or Daunia, the other Peucetia or
Terra di Barri. Aquileia, a City of Italy not far from Venice. Aquitania, the
third part of France, now called Guienne, one side bordering on the Ocean-Sea,
on the West it has Spain, on the North the Province of Lions, and on the South
Narbone. Arabia, a Country of Asia so called, between Judea and Egypt. It is
divided into three parts, Arabia the Stony, Arabia the Desert, and Arabia the
Happy. Ardea, once a City of Italy twenty miles from Rome. Argentoratum, a City
of Alsatia, it is now called Strasburg. Argos, a Country and a City in the
Peloponnese. Ariminum, a City of Italy, by the River Rubico, cow called Rimini.
Armenia, now called Turcomania, a Country of Asia divided into two parts, the
greater, and the less, the greater has on the West Cappadocia, on the East,
part of the Hyrcane-Sea, on the South Mesopotamia; the Less has on the North,
and West a part of Cappadocia, on the East Euphrates, on the South Taurus.
Armorica, Bretagne in France, so called by Caesar. Arverni, a People of France
by the River Loire, this Province is called Auvergne. Asia, the third part of
the World divided into two parts, the Greater and the Lesser, the Greater is
parted from Europe by Tanais, and from Africa by Nilus. The Lesser is now under
the power of the Turks and called Natolia. Assyria, a Country in Asia, on the
East it has Media, on the West Mesopotamia, on the North Armenia the Less, and
on the South Susiana. Atella, a Town of Campania, Athenians, the People of the
City of Athens now called Setines, famous for an University, built on the
Seacoast in Attica, first by Cecrops, and called Cecropia. Aventinus, one of
th seven Hills of Rome. Now M. di S. Sabina.
B.
BAbylon, a noble City in Chaldea, anciently famous for its Brick-Walls built
by Semiramis, in height 300 foot, in breadth 75. the River Euphrates passed
through the midst of it. It is now called Bagdet. Basternae, a People of
Sarmatia in Europe, in the Kingdom of Poland near the Euxine Sea. Barbaria, a
Country in Africa, it is divided into four Kingdoms, Tunis, Algiers, Fess, and
Morocco, and it lies all along the Africa Shore from the Streights of Gibraltar
to Egypt. Bebriacum, a Village in Italy between Cremona, and Verona, where
Vitellius worsted Otho, it is now called by the Italians, la Bina. Belgica, the
Low Country, or Neatherlands, it contains seventeen Provinces. Beneventum, a
Town of the Hirpini, now in the Kingdom of Naples built by Diomedes, it was
called Maleventum, until a Colony of Romans was brought there, and for good
lucks sake it was called Beneventum. Berenice, a Maritime City of Cyrene,
another in Egypt, both built by Ptolomy in honor of his Wife. Bessi, People
of Thrace by the River Strymon, famous for Theft and Robbery. Bithynia, a
Country of Asia the Less, next to Troas, by Solinus it was called Bebrycia,
afterward Mygdonia, now it is called Bursia, and Becsanguil, by the Turks
Manili. Bononia, Bulloign, a City of France in Picardy. Bosphorani, a People of
Sarmatia nigh the Bosphorus Cimmerius. Britannia, the Isle of Britanny,
containing England, Scotland, and Wales, it is 800. Miles long, the whole
Compass 1836 miles. It has on the East the German Sea, on the West the Irish,
on the North the Scottish, on the South it is divided by a narrow Sea from
Gallia Belgica. Brundusini the People of Brundusium now called Brindisi, it is
a City of Calabria by the Adriatic Sea, which has been a very commodious
Haven, whence was their usual Passage into Greece. Brutij, a People in the
farthest part of Italy beyond the Lucani over against Sicily, whose Kingdom is
now called Calabria. Burdegala, Bordeaux in Guienne in France, an Archbishops
Seat. Byzantium, a City of Thrace built by Pausanias a Spartan Captain, it was
called Ligos, afterward Nova Roma in the time of Severus, and being enlarged
and made the head of the Oriental Empire in the time of Constantine, it was
called Constantinople, it is now under the power of the Turks being won by
Mahomet the Second, and it is called Stambol, here is the Seat of the
Grand-Seignior.
C.
CAbira, a City of Asia the Less in Paphligonia. Callaeci, a People of
Lusitania, or now rather Gallicia. Campania, a Champian Country of Italy in the
Realm of Naples, now called Terra di Lavoro. Cannae, a pitiful Village in
Apulia, famous for a great Overthrow which Hannibal gave the Romans there,
where were slain 40000. and among them such a number of Gentry, that he sent
three bushels full of Rings to Carthage. Capitolium, the Capitol, a strong
Castle of Rome built on one of the seven Hills of Rome of that Name.
Cappadocia, a Country in Asia the Less, it is otherwise called Leucosyria,
Almasia or Geneck and anciently Moga. Capua, a famous City of Campania, not far
from Naples. Carnuntum, a City of the Upper Pannonia now St. Petronel. Carpi, a
People of Salmatia Europoea. Carrae, a City in Mesopotamia, by the Hebrews
Charan, now Heren. Here Abraham dwelt, and it was here that Crassus the Roman
with his whole Army was Routed so miserably by the Parthians. Carthago, a
famous City of Africa, built by Dido after the Temple of Solomon 135 years, and
before the building of Rome 133. in the year of the destruction of Troy 300.
now called Tunis. Catalauni, the People of a Country in Spain belonging to the
Kingdom of Arragon. Catanenses, the People of Catana, now Catania lying between
Messina, and Syracuse. Catti, People of Germany now under the Langrave of
Hessen. Celtiberia, a Country in Spain lying near the River Iberus in the
Country of Biscay. Chalcedon, a City in Bithynia where the fourth General
Council was held before Christ 453. to refute the Heresy of Nestorius, it is
otherwise called Computa, and of late time Calcitiu, and Caulina. Cilicia, a
Country in the Lesser Asia, where St. Paul was born, it is now called
Caramania and Fenichia. Cimbri, a People of Denmark and Holstein. Circessunt, a
Castle of the Romans not far from Euphrates. Clypea, a Maritime City of Africa.
Coelius, one of the Seven Hills of Rome, now M. di S. Giovanni Laterano.
Caeninenses, the People of the Town Caenina in Italy. Colchis, a Country by
the Euxine Sea in Asia near Pontus, having on the North the Hill Corax, being a
part of Taurus, on the East Iberia, on the South Phasis, it is now Mengrelia
and Laxia. Colchi, the People of Colehis. Concordia, a City of the Carni by
Aquileia, also a City in Germany called Kochersberg. Constantinople, a City in
Thrace called the Port, by the Turks Stambol, it is the Seat of the Grand
Seignior. Corinth, a famous and rich City of Achaia placed in the Isthmus going
into Morea. Corsica, an Isle in the Ligustick Sea about six miles from
Sardinia, it is in compass 300 miles, it is now under the City of Genoa. Creta,
the Isle called Candia, situated in the mouth of the Aegean Sea, between Rhodes
and Peloponnesus, the breadth of it is fifty miles, the length 279. Crustumii,
a People of Thuscia nigh the Veii in Italy. Ctesiphon, a Town of Assyria called
Calamio, or Calaneth. Cyrene, a Province of Libya between Mareotis, and
Zeugitana. Cyzicus, a large City of Mysia in the Lesser Asia by the Propontis.
D.
DAcia, a Country beyond Hungary and the Danow, it is now divided into
Transylvania, which was called Dacia, Mediterranea and Valachia, called the
Hilly Dacia, and Moldavia. Daci, the People of Dacia. Dalmatae, People of
Dalmatia. Dalmatia, part of Illyricum, now called Sclavonia, lying between
Croatia, Bosnia, Servia and the Adriatic Sea. Danubius, the Danow, the
greatest River in Europe, as it passes by Illyricum, it changes its name, and
is called Ister, it receives into it sixty more Rivers, and arises in the
lowest side of Germany out of the Hill Arnoba, and runs into the Euxine Sea.
Dardania, the City of Troy in Phrygia, in Asia the Less, built by King
Dardanus. Dodonae, a City of Chaonia, or Molossia, now called Larta or Janna,
and by the Turks, under whose Government it is, Arbanos.
E.
EBoracum, a City in the Kingdom of England, called York. Edessa, a City of
Syria. Edessi, the People of Edessa. Ephesus, a City in Ionia, built by the
Amazons, as Justin says, and called by Lysimachus, who removed it to where it
now stands after his Wife's name Arsinoe, but now Figena or Efeso, famous for
the Temple of Diana, one of the seven Wonders of the World, which was burned by
Erostratus the same night that Alexander was born. Epirus, a Country in Greece,
'twas called by the Ancients Chaonia and Molossia, now Larta and Chimera, it is
under the Turks, and by some called Albania inferior. Esquilinus, one of the
seven Hills of Rome. Eumenia, a City of Phrygia, built by Eumenes, from whom it
took its name. Euphrates, a River of Mesopotamia rising out of Niphatis a Hill
of Armenia, one of the Rivers that come out of Paradise, it passes through
Babylon, and now called Aferat or Frat. Europa, Europe, one of the four parts
of the World, and most considerable for Arts and Arms, so called from Europa
the Daughter of Agenor King of Tire.
F.
FAlisci, a People of Tuscany, in Italy, subdued by Camillus the Consul.
Fidenae, a City of Latium, a Province of Italy, now called St. Peter's
Patrimony.
G.
GAbii, a City of the Volscians twelve miles from Rome in the way to Praeneste,
now called Campo Gabio. Galatia, or Gallograecia, a Country in Asia the Less,
lying between Paphlagonia, Pontus, and Cappadocia, whereof Dejotarus, for whom
Tully did make an Oration, was King, it is now called Chiangare; and by the
Turks Gelas. Gallia, now called France, it is bounded with the English,
Aquitane and Mediterranean Seas, the Pyrenean Hills and the Alps. Galli, the
People of Gallia, now called the French. Germania, Germany, a most large
Country in Europe, having on the West the River Rhine, on the North the Baltic
Ocean, on the South-West the Danow, it is divided into ten Circles, and Governed
by the Emperor, and seven Electoral Princes, with other Dukes and Petty
Princes. Germani, Germans, the People of Germany. Gothi, a people of the Lower
Scythia, in the Northern part of Europe, they did Wast and Depopulate a great
part of Europe. Graecia, a famous Eastern Province of Europe, the Nurse of
Valor and Learning.
H.
HElvetii, the People of Helvetia, now called Switzers. Heraclea, a City in
Thrace betwixt Stanbol and Galliopolis, once called Perinthus. Hierosolyma,
Jerusalem, called also Salem, and by the Poets Solyma, the chief City of the
Holy Land, indeed once of the whole World, 'twas also called Aelia, from Aelius
Adrianus. The Turks who have it now in possession, call it Chutz or Gots.
Hispania, the Country of Spain by the Ancients called Iberia, it is environed
with the Mediterranian, the Ocean, and Cantabrian Seas, except toward France,
from which it is severed by the Pyrenean Hills.
I.
Janiculum, a Castle upon the Hill Janiculus, one of the four Hills of Rome,
called from the God Janus; now Montorio. Iberi, a People of Spain, which was
called Iberia, either from King Iberus, or from the River Iberus. Illyricum,
the Country called Sclavonia, or Wedenland, having on the North Pannonia, on
the West Istria, on the East Mysia Superior, and on the South the Adriatic
Sea. India, a large Country of Asia, called by the Natives Indostan, it is
bounded on the East with China, on the North with Tartary, on the West with
Persia, and on the South with the Indian Sea. Interamna and Italian City in
Vmbria, called Terani. Isauria, a Southern Country of Galatia, joining to
Pisidia, with a City called Isauria, which was afterward called Claudiopolis.
Istri, the People of Istria, a Country now in Italy, by the Dutch called
Histerech, so called from the River Ister, under the Dominion of Venice.
Italica, a City of Spain, built by Scipio Africanus. Ituraei, the People of
Iturea a Region of Palestine bordering upon Arabia. Judaei, Jews, People of
Judaea, or Palestine, now dispersed over all the World.
L.
LAcedaemonia, a large Country of Peloponnesus, now called Tzaconia, the chief
City whereof was Lacedaemon, called also Sparta. Lacedaemonii, the People of
Lacedaemon. Latini, the People of Latium, a Province in Italy, now called
Compagna di Roma. Leptis, a City of Africa, between the two Syrtes belonging to
Tripoli, and now called Lebeda, or Lepeda. Libyssa, a Town of Bythynia, called
now Polmen, where Hannibal died, between Nicomedia and Chalcedon. Ligures, the
People of Liguria in Italy, reaching from the Hill Apenninus to the Tuscan Sea,
of which Genoa is the chief City, it is now called La Riviera di Genoua.
Lilybaeum, a Promontory and City of Sicily, now called Capo coco. Lingones,
People of France, dwelling about Longres. Lorium, a Village 12 miles from Rome.
Lucania, a Country of Italy in the Kingdom of Naples. Lugdunum, the City Lions
in France, called for difference-sake Lugdunum Celtarum, from Lugdunum
Batavorum. Lusitania, the third part of Spain, now called Protugal, it is parted
on the North from Tarracon, by the River Ducro. Lycia, a Country in Asia the
Less, now called Bricquia, by others Aldinelli, situated between Caria and
Pamphylia.
M.
MAcedonia, a large Country of Greece, containing several Provinces, it is now
all under the Turks. Maesi, People of Maesia, a Country in Europe, adjoining to
Pannonia, and running out at length along the Danube to the Pontus, anciently
the higher, and the lower now Bulgaria Servia. Magnesia, a Country of Macedonia
joining to Thessaly, containing Pieria and Pelasgia. Marcomanni, People near
Austria, whose Country is called Mark; or as others, Bohemians. Mare Rubrum,
the Red Sea, called by the Greeks Erythraeum, and it is also called Sinus
Arabicus, it parts Asia from Africa. Mariana, a City in Corsica, now called
Matino or Zagorolo. Marsi, a People of Latium in Italy. Massilia, a City in
Provence in France, called Marsiles. Mazaca, the City Caesaria in Cappadocia,
by the Hill Argaeus. Mauritania, a Country in Africa, called Morisco, lying
toward the Gaditan Straits, and the West Ocean, it is divided into Tingitana
(which contains in it the Kingdom of Fess and Morocco) and Caesariensis called
the Kingdom of Algier, and is now with other Countries contained under the
general name of Barbary. Mediolanum, the City of Milan in Italy, where St.
Ambrose was Bishop, remarkable for four things: for multitude of People, a
stately Church, a strong Castle, and a Library well furnished. Mesopotamia, a
Country of Asia, between Tigris and Euphrates. Milvius Pons, a Bridge two miles
from Rome, where Milvius Ager lies. Moguntiacum, the City Mentz in Germany, the
Seat of one of the Spiritual Electors of the Emperor, here was Printing first
invented. Munda, a Town in Hispania Boetica, where the last and most bloody
Battle that ever Caesar undertook, was fought between him and the Sons of
Pompey. Mursa, a Town in Pannonia.
N.
NArbona, a City in France, an Archbishops See. Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia
by the Propontis. Nicomedienses, a People of Bithynia. Nisibis, otherwise
Antiochia, of this name are many Cities, one of Syria, called Epiphane. Nola, a
City of Campania, fourteen miles from Naples, where Augustus Caesar died, tho
our Author mentions Atella. Noricum, a great tract of Ground containing several
Countries, as great part of Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, etc. Numantia, a City of
Spain, now called Soria or Garray. Numentana, via, a Road, that went from Rome
to Nomentum. Numidia, a part of Africa, now called Biledulgerid, bounded with
Mauritania, Carthage, and Aethiopia. Numidae, the People of Numidiae.
O.
OLympus, it is the name of three Cities, the first in Pamphylia, the second in
Lycia, the third in Cilicia; also the name of a Promontory of Cyprus, and of
twelve Hills, especially one very high in Thessaly, and it is also a Promontory
in Crete, now called Cambrasia, or Cambrussia. Osdroene, a Country in Syria, on
the confines of Mesopotamia. Osdroeni, the People of Osdroene.
P.
PAlatinus, one of the seven Hills of Rome, called so from Palatia Evanders
Daughter, now Palazzo Maggiore. Palaestina, a Country of Asia called by the
Ancients Canaan and the Land of Promise, by Ptolomy Palaestine, or the Country
of the Philistines, and now by Christians the Holy Land, it contains the
Countries of Idumaea, Samaria, Judaea and Galilee, the chief City was
Jerusalem. Pamphylia, a Southern Country in Asia the Less, between Cilicia and
Lycia, now Subject to the Turk, and lying on the West part of Caramania.
Panticapaeon, a great City of Taurica now Tartary the Less, near the Cimmerian
Bosphorus, called Pantico. Pannonia, a large Country of Europe, now called
Hungary, divided into the Upper and the Lower. Pannonii, the People of
Pannonia. Paphlagonia, a Country in Asia the Less, lying between Galatia and
the Euxine Sea, now called Bolli. Parthi, the People of Parthia, a Country in
Asia, lying between Media, Carmania, and the Hyrcane Sea; by Mercator it is
called Aroch, by others Corasan. Parthenopolis, a City of Macedonia, and of
Mysia in Asia the Less. Peligni, a People of Italy about the City Sulmo.
Pergamus, a City of Troas in Asia the Less now called Pergamo, or Bargamo,
where Galen was born. Persia, a large Country of Asia, lying between the
Caspian Sea and the Country of the Moguls, it is Ruled by a Sophy, and the
Inhabitants call it Farsi. Perusium, a City of Tuscany in the midway betwixt
Rome and Florence. Praeneste, a City of Latium in Italy now called Palestrina,
twenty four miles from Rome. Phaselis, a City of Pamphylia, built in the year
of the World 3257. it was a long time held by Pirates. Philippi, a City of
Thessaly, built by Philip King of Macedonia, who called it after his name.
Phrygia, a Country in Asia, bounded with Caria, Lydia, Mysia, and Bithynia, it
is divided into the greater and the less, now called Troas. Picentes, the
People of Picenum, a Country in Italy, now called la Marca de Ancona. Piraeeus,
the Port-Town of Athens, now called Porto di Setine. Ponticum mare called
Pontus Euxinus, and now the Black Sea. Pontus, a Country of Asia the Less,
lying between Bithynia and Paphlagonia and the Euxine Sea. Ptolemais, a Town by
the Red Sea, there are also four Citys of this name. Pyrenaei Montes, the
Mountains that part Spian from France, running from East to West, eighty five
Leagues in length cross the Land.
Q.
QVadi, a People in Germany, in Moravia. Quinquegentiani, a People of Africa.
Quirinalis, one of the seven Hills of Rome, called so from Romulus's, name
Quirinus, now Monte Cavalle.
R.
RAvenna, a City of Italy upon the Coast of the Adriatic Sea. Rhaetia, the
Country of the Grisons on the Alps. Rhenus, a River which parts France from
Germany, and after it has run 300. miles, it falls into the River Mosa, and the
German Sea by two mouths, whence Virgil calls it Rhenus bicornis. Rhodanus, the
River Rhone in France. Rhodii, the People of Rhodes, an Isle near Caria, in
compass an 110 miles. Rhodopa, a Province of Thrace. Rome the chief City of
Italy, seated on the River Tybur, now in the power of the Pope.
S.
SAbini, People of Italy not far from Rome. Saguntum, a City in Spain now
called Morvedre, famous for its Ruin by Hannibal. Saguntini, the People of
Saguntum. Salassi, People of Piedmont, whose Country in Dutch is called
Austhalles from Augusta Praetoria the chief Town. Salentini, a People of Italy
inhabiting that corner of Italy called Terra de Otranto, formerly Messapia.
Salonae, Cic. Salona Pl. a City once of Dalmatia, out of whose Ruins Spalato
came. Samos, an Isle of the Icarian Sea, lying over against Ephesus, the
compass of it 87 miles. Samnites, a People of Italy whose Country was called
Samnium, or Samnis, now adays Labruzzo. Sardica, in this Author is a City in
Dacia upon the Ister, and also it is a City anciently in Thrace, now the head of
Bulgaria, called by the Turks and Greeks Sophia. Sardinia, an Island of Italy
under the Spaniard, it is 170 miles in length, 80 in breadth, 450 in compass,
the chief City is Cagliare. Sardi, the People of Sardinia. Sarmatae, the People
of Sarmatia. Sarmatia, a large Country Northward, part in Europe, part in Asia,
containing Poland, Russia, Muscovy, and most part of Tartary. Sauromatae, the
Scythians and Tartars, a wild People that drink horses blood. Saxones, the
People of Saxony, once Masters of great part of Germany, some of them came over
into England, the Duke of it is one of the seven Electors of the Empire.
Scordisci, a People of Pannonia. Scythae, People of Scythia, Scythians or
Tartarians in the North parts of Asia and in some part of Europe, also
Eastward. Seleucia, the name of several Citys, one in Syria, in Mesopotamia, in
Cilicia, in Pisidia. Sena, the City Siena in Tuscany, 100 miles from Rome.
Sicilia, the Island of Sicily, lying at the toe of Italy, and parted with a
narrow dangerous Sea, 600 miles in compass. Siculi, the People of Sicily.
Sipylum, the name of a Town and Mountain in Lydia, called formerly Tantalis.
Sirmium, the City Sirmisch in the Lower Hungary. Smirna, a City of Ionia called
the old Naulochus, now Smyrna or Ismyr. Stratonice, a Town of Macedonia called
so from Stratonice the Daughter of Ariarathes, and afterward built by
Adrianus, and now called Castro Franco. Sutrium, the People are called Sutrini,
a little City of Hetruria now called Tuscany in the Province of St. Peter's
Patrimony. Suevi, a People of Germany lying about the Danaw, the Country now
called Schwaben. Suessa Pometia, once a City of the Volsci, in Latium St.
Peter's Patrimony. Syria, a Country in Asia, bounded with Asia the Less,
Euphrates and the Mediterranean Sea, divided into Phoenicia and Palaestine.
Syracusani, the People of Syracusae a City of Sicily called Saragossa.
T.
TAiphali and Thervingi People of Dacia. Tarentini, the People of Tarentum,
called now Taranto. Tarentum, a noble City, in the farthest part of Magna
Graecia now called Tarento. Tarraco, the chief City of Hispania Tarraconensis,
which is one of the three parts of Spain, and larger than both twice, it does
now contain the Kingdom of Castile, Gallicia, Navarre and Arragon.
Taurominitani, the People of the City of Taurominium in Sicily now called
Taormina. Taurus, a continual Mountain in Asia, beginning at the Indian Sea,
and stretching its Arms Northward and Southward, it also reaches Westward to
the Aegean Sea. Teutones, the People of Germany in General called Almaines.
Thracia, a large Country of Europe commonly called Romania, bounded with the
Euxine and Aegean Sea, Macedonia and the Mountain Hoemus. Thessalonica, a City
of Macedonia, built by Philip of Macedon in Memory of Conquering Thessaly, now
called Salonichi. Thessalia, a Country of Greece between Boetia, Macedonia, the
River Peneus and Thermopylae. Thusci, a People now called Tuscans. Tygris, a
famous River of Asia, it rises in Mount Araret, in Armenia, parts Mesopotamia
and Assyria, it continues its course after its joined with the River Euphrates
into the Persian Gulf. Tigurini, the People of Tigurum a City of the Helvetians
now called Zurich. Tygranocerta, the Town Sultania in Armenia the Greater.
Tomos, a City of Pontus whereunto Ovid was Banished. Transalpini, the People of
Gaul beyond the Alps from Rome, now called the Realm of France. Trebia, a River
of Italy called la Trebia near Placentia running into the Po. Triballi, a
People of Mysia, between Danubius and Aemus, now the Bulgarians. Tripolis, a
City of Syria, by which name several other Citys are called. Troy, a City of
Phrygia a Country of Asia the Less. Tuscia, a large Country of Italy called
Tuscany, divided into two parts, the one under the great Duke, and the other
under the Pope, called the Churches Patrimony. Tusci, a very ancient People of
Italy, also called Hetrusci now Florentines, their Country was called Hetruria
now la Toscana. Tusculum, a City of Latium in Italy, now Frascati, 12 miles
from Rome.
U.
VAndali, a People of Germany about Mecklenburg; after settling in Spain
Andaluzia was called from them. Vectis, the Isle of Wight, about sixty miles in
compass, twenty in Length and twelve in breadth. Newport is the chief Town.
Vejentes, the People of Veii, a Town of Hetruria in Italy. Venetia, the Country
of Venice. Verona, a City of Italy in the Territory of the Venetians.
Victophali, a People of Dacia. Viminalis, one of the seven Hills of Rome,
called so from the Osiers that grew there. Vindelici, People of Vindilicia a
Country of Germany where now Bavaria is. Volsci, a People of Latium in Italy,
now called Campagna di Roma.
FINIS.

