AN ABRIDGMENT OF Eusebius Pamphilius's ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, IN TWO PARTS.

Part I. A Compendious Commemoration of the Remarkablest Chronologies which are
Contained in that Famous History.

Part II. A Summary or brief Hint of the Twelve Persecutions sustained by the
Ancient Christians, with a Compendious Paraphrase upon the same: Whereunto is
Added a Catalogue of the Synods and Councels, which were after the days of the
Apostles; together with a hint of what was Decreed in the same.

By WILLIAM CATON.

Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, as says the Proverb of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24. 13. The Second Ed. with larg Editions by another hand.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Holden, in the Passage going into White-Hart-Yard,
in Lombard Street, School.

To his well Beloved Friends the CHRISTIAN QUAKERS, In ENGLAND, or else where:
William Caton, Your dear Brother in the Truth; wishes that, Mercy and Peace,
with every good and perfect gift, necessary for your Salvation, and
Consolation, may be plenteously multiplied among you, from God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
My Beloved,

SInce I have heard of your manifold Tribulations and frequent Sufferings,
which of late have befallen you, in your Native Country; my heart has often
been filled with heaviness, not only through the Report which plenteously have
had thereof, but much rather through the sensible feeling which I have ^ad of
the same: well, my Friends, this the day which we have looked for, having
foreseen its coming in the light the Lord; and therefore did some of the
Brethren often put you in mind of it, (...) (I believe) many of you can
testify: A^ since this gloomy and dark day came upon the Nation, I know your
trials have bee^ sharp, your burdens many, your Tribulations great, and your
Temptations no^ a sew: Yet Nevertheless many of our Ancestors, who have striven
for the same Fait^ and suffer for the same Truth, for which you suffer at
present, have endured a gre^ter fight of Torments, Exilements, and m^ terrible
Afflictions, then as yet you have sustained, as may in part appear by this
fo^lowing Treatise: yet in their days the fir^ had a time to kindle, before it
brok o^ into such a vehement and consuming flame in which many of the Ancient
believing Christians were tried, and their faith and patience thereby
exercised, and when the Lord had sufficiently proved and trye^ his jewels, as
in a fiery Furnace, then the vigor of the fire ceased, the flame came to be
quenched, and then the jewels they were gathered, spared, and treasured up, in
the Closset of the Lord's Sanctuary: where neither moth, rust, nor thief could
in any wise enter.

This seems to be a day of your eternal trouble (my dearly beloved) wherein
your Faith and Patience must be yet tried, as in a Furnace of hot persecution,
and surely the flames thereof have lowed, and blazed already about you, though
as yet it does not appear that the vehemence thereof has so much as scorched
that vesture wherewith the Lord had adorned you; although the fury of man's
wrath and indignation has been greater against you (that would not fall down
to worship) then against many Malefactors and Truce Breakers: but O will not
the Lord open their eyes, that they may see, that through the fiery indignation
of their wrath and jealousy were kindled seventy times hotter than ever it
has been against any others, yet shall it not be able to consume your Faith,
nor to burn that garment wherewith your God has arrayed you; would they but
see this, I know they would stand Astonished; yea and fall down in submission
to the power of God, in the light of his Son; to worship him with you, O ye
worshippers of the only true God, who can bow to no Imag^ that is formed in the
likeness of the true faith, true worship, true Religion, but is it not that
which it resembles, neither Conform to, or obey any Decree, which enjoyneth
you to act contrary to the Righteous and Royal Law, which God the Father has
put in your hearts, neither can purchase any freedom or liberty by fraud,
guile, Treachery, falsehood or deceit; surely your liberty shall be glorious,
your reward shall be great, and your Fame and Renown shall spread among the
Godly and upright, who when they hear of your Constancy and Fidelity will be
glad and rejoice therein, and offer sacrifice of Praise unto the Highest on
your behalf with me.

Wherefore my dearly beloved lift up the heads that droop, and the hands that
hang down, yea strengthen the mind that is fee ble, and cheer up the heart that
is heavy and sad, for your Redeemer is at hand, and his salvation is very nigh,
yet not withstanding his pleasure may be farther to try you that for the future
you may be more Precious in his sight, and his delight may be more and more in
you; who above many of the Children of this world have obtained great favor in
his sight, O loose not, loose not the same, but rather grow and increase
therein; to the enriching of your souls, with the Celestial or heavenly
Treasure which will remain when that which is uncertain is vanished and gone.

I have here, Composed a little Treatise which Consists chiefly of a Cloud of
witnesses who have been engaged in the same case, for which you now suffer
spoiling of your goods, the external Ruin of some of your families and Estates,
the deprivation of your liberties, and what not? And now through perusing of
the same you may behold (as in a glass) what the Ancient Christians have
suffered; first by the Jews, secondly by the Gentiles or heathen and finally by
false Christians; yet I do believe that the notion of these things to some will
be but as the shell to the kernel, or as the chaff to the wheat in comparison
of that Internal, sweet joy, comfort, and living refreshment which (I do not
doubt, but that) many of you plentiously enjoy, yea even in the heat of these
troublesome and Perilous times.

This same Abridgment of Remarkable things which I have found upon Record, I
have thought good to Dedicate unto you, in as much as you above many in the
nation, are aquainted with the Christian suffering state and condition, who
heretofore have been men of sorrows and well acquainted with grief, as by that
which follows will more palpably and evidently appear. Let not the Innocent
and simple be offended at it, because it is extracted out of some
Ecclesiastical Histories; For this I say, that many Frivolous Histories which
frequently are perused by such as are Prone and inclining to that wisdom and
knowledge which is from below, are not to be compared to this; for they being
oft-times Stuffed with forged fables, and lying tales, they stir up the vain,
light, frothy minds in people: but the perusing of this which I have here
Collected, will rather stir up zeal, love and tenderness to the truth, and such
as now suffer for it, as the Ancient Christians heretofore have done.

Moreover through the viewing over of this, a litteral knowledge may in part be
obtained, of the Fruits, Doctrines, Principles and Practices, of the
Apostatized Christians, after their degeneration, of their Synods and Counsels,
and what they Decreed; of the temptations, and provocations, which they had
(who retained their integrity) both from the Heathen and from the false
Christians, and how sad and lamentable their conditions were that did not
continue faithful: which may serve for examples, to such among you (beloved) as
are inconstant and of a doubtful mind, let them look upon Origin and hear what
he says in his lamentation after his fall: and let them consider the Faith and
patience of such as chooses rather to die than they would swear, or sacrifice,
renounce the faith, or deny their Lord and Master, and therefore were some torn
in pieces of wild beasts, some Crucified, some beheaded, some stoned to death,
some stifled, some fried or Roasted, some burned to ashes, some hanged, some
brained, some had their eyes pulled out, and the empty place seared with a hot
Iron, some were drowned in the Sea, some fettered and famished to death, in
noisome Prisons and dungeons: Oh the torments that they endured are hard to be
uttered, and that about the exercise of their Conscience and the worship of
their God.

And truly I must tell you (O beloved) that I was constrained to lay those
things before you, that if peradventure they might in any wise tend to the
Confirming and strengthening of the faith of some, to the forewarning of others
of shrinking in the time of trial, and to the strengthening of the hands of the
weak and feeble against their Persecutors; who also hereby may see what
judgment and misery came upon sundry of their Persecuting forefathers: so that
in my judgment it may be of use not only to you who are persecuted, but also to
your oppressors and persecutors; who now persist in their wickedness and
impiety as if they should never come to judgment for the same: well my dearly
beloved, be not you discomforted and cast down in your spirits, because the
wicked is set up, and the ungodly prospers in his ways, and the workers of
iniquity they are counted happy yet it was not thus in the beginning, neither
shall it allways so continue; for the Lord our God in his due time, will strik
the hook into the jaw of the Leviathan, so that he shall be Restrained, and the
pure and upright in heart shall be delivered out of his paw, and snare, into
the glorious liberty of the Children of God: wherefore let none be afraid who
are called to follow the lamb in this Notable day, for I am persuaded, that
Tribulation, nor Persecution, Exilment nor Banishment, Fire nor Sword, things
present nor things to come (though all these do come) shall not be able to
separate us from that love which we are made partakers of, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, in whom I bid you farewell; my dearly beloved.

A GENERAL EPISTLE FOR Young Schoollars and LITTLE CHILDREN.
Dear Children,
REmember Your Creator, and the end wherefore you were Created, now in the day,
of your Youth, before you grow Old in Sin, and take rooting in corrupt ground
of Unighteousness, incline your hearts to Holiness and to the Fear of the Lord,
that you may abound in wisdom and knowledge; learn you to know a tender
principle in your hearts, to teach and instruct you to withhold and restrain
you from Folly and Wantonness, from frivolous or vain Gaming, and Sporting your
selves with idle Toys, and unprofitable Plays, which do not only strengthen
that which is thereunto addicted in your selves, but does toil and weary your
tender bodies; And when you sit down at night some times hungry, and often
weary, consider then what you have reaped by your Plays, Sports and Pastimes,
have you not thereby some time provoked your Tutors, to Wrath and Anger against
you for neglecting of your Books and Learning; have you not also offended and
grieved your Parents, by your neglect of your business and employment, And then
you being sencible of your Fault and Transgression, the show of your
Countenance that witnesses against you, and inwardly you are perplexed and
terrified, partly through fear of your Tutors and partly through fear of your
Parents, when through your Folly you have procured their Displeasure, and then
are you afraid of Chastisement; now if for the time to come you would be freed
from this fear, do that which is good, by being diligent and keeping in the
fear of the Lord, and then shall you obtain Praise and Commendation both of
your Parents and Tutors.

Again (O Children) when you are together, whether in Families Schools, or else
where, be not Wild, Rude, Brutish, nor provoke not one another to Folly, and
Wantonness, but be Sober, Gentle, Meek and Civil, and let the Fear of the Lord
be before your eyes, least you sall into Condemnation.

And you that are of a Mild, Gentle and Tender Nature, who seel something in
your Hearts restraining you from the Evil, which abounds among your fellows; if
you cannot get dominion over it while you are with them, then separate your
selves from them at convenient seasons, and partake not with them in their
Wantonness in their. Folly, Plays, Sports and Pastimes, but rather betake your
selves to your Books; or in some retired place, to wait upon the Lord: And if
they that be Wild and Wanton through their play and wantonness do get
Recreation to their Bodies, you through your stillness and waiting upon the
Lord shall get Refreshment to their Souls, in which you shall have joy and
pleasure, when they shall be ashamed of their folly and have trouble and sorrow
for the same.

When I was A School boy, I was for many years as much inclined to wantonness,
and play, as my Fellows, though sometime I was enticed and drawn by them into
things which I knew then certainly, to be evil, and contrary to the tender
principle of God in my Conscience, yet rather than I would be behind them in
their wonton childish follies, (and thereby have come to have been jeered and
derided by them) I chused rather at that time to run with them to the same
excess of vanity, though I knew for certain I ought not to have done it, and
when for the same I came to be corrected by my Tutor, and judged of the Lord, I
was made to confess, that it was just, and that I had justly deserved the same.

Afterward through the mercy and goodness of the Lord I came to be farther
Illuminated or enlightened before I left the School; And come to have a perfect
sense of true judgment being set up in my heart, And then I came to be filled
with Sorrow and Heaviness, for the loss of my misspent precious time, and the
Sins of my Youth, (even while I was yet a youth) were brought exceeding fresh
into my remembrance, and became in those days my great burden, and withal in
those days my study and learning became also burdensome, and not these alone,
but especially the wantonness and rudness, folly and naughtiness of my School
fellows, that also became grievous unto me at times, and a dread and fear was
upon me, (when I minded the Lord) that I durst not run with them to folly and
wantonness as I had done before; So that when they have gone to play, I have
retired my self into some private place to ponder upon the things which the
Lord put into my heart. And when with a retired mind and upright heart, I came
in sincerity to wait upon the Lord, then came my Soul to feel some secret
Communion with him, and to receive some Crummes of living Refreshment from him;
and then was I joyful in him at night, whereas formerly I had sorrow and
heaviness by reason of my folly and wantonness.

But then again at other times, when I neglected waiting upon the Lord in the
Light of his Son in my heart, and that I came to be enti^ed by my
School-fellows or some of them to go with them too, or to join with them in, or
partake with them of one vanity, or another; And some time rather* then I would
displease them (or one especially unto whom I was then obliged) I have
consen^ed to their request, and some time I have seemed to be cheerful and
merry among them in the time of our pastime, when it was more in Appearance
than in my heart, that being smitten, and I inwardly wounded, for my folly and
vanity, unto which I had condescended, yet I allowed not of it, nevertheless
that which I (the Light) hated and would not, that I (that was born in sin)
did, and ^mbraced; and even then a good desire was present with me in my heart,
but how to perform it, knew not otherwise then through the Cross; yet on these
days when I did well through keeping in the fear of the Lord, then was it well
with me; but when I condescended to evil, and was thereby overcome inwardly and
outwardly, then was my troubles and sorrow great, and my stripes many, and that
in the days of my youth; but since, I have seen it to be the everlasting love
of God to me. These things I rehearse unto you whereby you may understand how
the Lord dealt with me, and how it was with me, while I was yet a Scholar; to
the end that you may somewhat the better know how to behave your selves (I mean
you that are tender, among them that are wild and rude) in Schools where you
are Appointed to learn and to be instructed.

Moreover (dear Children) I have considered, how that many of you are naturally
Inclining to knowledge and understanding in the things which are Laudable, or
worthy of praise, among juditious men: And these things which I have here
Composed, being worthy not only of Recording, but also of perusing, I have
thought them very fit for you to Learn or read at home and at Schools, yea
fitter then other writings which are hard to be understood, and beyond your
weak Childish Capacity to Comprehend: for the much reading of such deep things,
which you can not perceive nor Comprehend, does rather dull your understanding,
then enliven your senses, and rather mitigates your desires, then kindles your
inclinations to Reading and Learning: But as for many of those things which I
have here published, they are so worthy to be looked into, and the knowledge of
them may be so good and profitable, that after you are entered into the reading
of them, your desires may be augmented or enlarged, not only to look over part
of them, but even to see the end and Conclusion of them; that henceforth they
may be retained by you, in your minds, that when you see things fall out of the
same nature in this your age, then you may remember h^w that many of our
Ancestors have suffered and sustained a great Fight of sore Afflictions, And
that the same you may Communicate to your Children, that they also may hear of
them and Learn them: For Irenaeus in his Epistle to Florinus said, I remember
better the things of old, then the Affairs of Late; for the things we Learn in
our Childhood, sink farther into our minds and grow together with us: Eusebius.
Lib. 5. Chapter 18.

Now for your furtherance and profit (O Little Children) have I in part taken
some what the more time in this matter, that so I might explain and interpret
the most hard words I met withal, In this Abridgment; and that as I found them;
that you might understand them even as you read them; for I believe there are
but few of the Schoolmasters that do teach those Children that do only read
English, rightly to understand such hard words when they meet with them in
their Lessons, as you may find in this following Treatise explained: And thus
may you know my interpretation of them which I have Commonly written in a
Parenthesis as for example.

Let the whole Clergy mourn (i. e. Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or the whole
number of them that take upon them the Ministry) Again the Ancient Christians
were forbidden formerly to hold Conventicles (i. e. private Assemblies) or
meetings that are small in which there is Plotting and Conspiring against the
Powers; or that are for other evil ends, such are commonly called Conventicles;
These two Letters (i. e.) serve for id est, which is as much as to say, that
is, likewise, in the margent of the first Part of my Book you may often find
Lib. and a certain figure with it as Lib. 4. know ye (O Little Children) that
Lib. serves for Liber, which by interpretation is a Book as Lib. 4. the forth
Book; And Chapter serves for Chapter; and such as the figure is, that follows Ch
such is the Chapter, as Lib. 4. Chapter 15. that is the fourth Book and fifteenth
Chapter. Moreover the use of the Index or Table is this: Suppose you would know
something concerning the Christians formerly, whether of their Prosperity, or
Sufferings; Then turn to the Table, which I have placed in the beginning of the
First Part of my Book, and see for the Letter C, which when you have found,
then see in what Book or Chapter that is to be found which you desire to see.
And then, and there, with very little trouble, (when you come to understand my
directions aright) may you find the thing: So that the choicest things in the
first part of my book, may you soon find out, by the help of the Index, if your
time will not permit you to look through the whole.

Yet this ought you to note, that the aforesaid Index serves only to the former
part of my book in which some of the things contained in the latter part, are
to be found more at Large.

And as concerning the Twelve Persecutions which I have here inserted; they are
so exceeding largly Treated on in the Book of Martyrs, that there are but few
that will take the pains to look them through, nor not many of the Vulgar or
Common sort of people that will, or can well buy them, they being of such high
prices: And again they being locked up in Chains in Steeple Houses, and so in
the Custody often times of Persecutors, where you can have little benefit by
them; therefore was there the more necessity of such an Abridgment as this,
which will neither cost much money to buy it, nor yet very much pains to read
it.

As for the Martyers that have Suffered in our own Nation formerly, I have
scarce meddled with them, their Sufferings being yet fresh in the remembrance of
many, and may yet be brought up fresher into the remembrance of many through
the Being in 1661.
present lingering Martyrdom, which may become more sharp and bloody if a high
hand prevent it not. Wherefore Record, Record, as with a pen of iron, and as
with a point of a Diamond, the noble observations and transactions of this Age,
which your eyes (O ye Little Children) shall see and behold; let them be told
to your Childrens Children.

In the mean time (O you little ones) mind you the fear of the Lord, and be not
you entangled in, or with the snare of Satan, though he would give you all the
glory of the world, yea and all that which your eyes in the world can behold,
which may as truly now be Accounted Vanity of Vanitis, yea, and all to be
concluded to be Vanity, as in the days of Solomon; who said that all things
under the Sun were vanity, and vexation of Spirit. One thing more must I add,
as a very testimony indeed of truth unto you, (toward whom my bowels yearnes)
and that is this, the sooner that you take up the Cross, the lighter will it be
for you, the sooner that you stoop under the yoke, the easier it will be for
you, the sooner you embrace the Truth, the more natural it will become unto
you, And the sooner that you forsake the Devil and all his works, together with
the world, and the pomp and vanity thereof, the easier it will be for you, and
the more blessed and happy will you become: These things as my own experience
do I commit unto you, in as much as in the days of my youth, I obtained great
mercy from the hand of my God, through whose unspeakable Love I am at times
constrained to entreat, and persuade them that yet are young to learn the fear
of the Lord, and the perfect knowledge of his way, into which God Almighty of
his infinite love, bring all you whose eyes may see, and hands handle this same
book, that every one of you, in your Generation, may become faithful and true
witnesses, in your Generation, unto him, who is your Creator, and who created
you to serve him in righteousness and true holiness, in the Creation;
therefore, I say again, remember him in the days of your youth, and love him
with all your hearts, (who gives you life and breath, and thorugh whose
blessing you obtain food and raiment) that when your Parents have finished
their testimony, and sealed it with their blood; that then you (their off
spring) may stand up in the name, strength and power of our God, to the bearing
of your faithful testimony to, and for the same blessed Cause, for which many
of your dear Parents at this day do suffer; And if it be the good will and
pleasure of our God, to honor any of them with Banishment, or to Crown any of
them with Martyrdom (as he has done many of his precious Saints before them)
be you therewith Content, without murmuring against the Lord, or entertaining a
revengful spirit in your hearts, And peradventer that you shall (in your days)
see him repay, to whom vengeance belongs, who has said unto his seed and
offspring, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; This faithful Creator is
he unto whom you must look, and unto whom you must come, then will he not leave
you comfortless, though you be deprived of many external comforts, yet behold
(O ye dear little ones) he has enough reserved in store for to comfort and
refresh you withal (if you love him and keep his commandments) yea and all the
Comfortless that come unto him, who is said to be A father to the fatherless, A
comforter of the comfortless, with whom there is mercy that he may be feared to
whose disposing, and protection I commend you, wishing your good success and
prosperity in all virtue, and in every goodwork, farewell dear Children;

Your Real and entire Friend W. C.
Rotterdam in Holland the 6 of the 3 Mo. 1661.
A FATHER'S ADVISE TO HIS CHILD, OR THE MAIDENS BEST ADORNING;
Being a Directory for Youth, Setting forth the greatest Beauty by a Holy
Conversation.
DEar Child these words which briefly I declare
Let them not hang like Jewels in thine ear.
But in the secret Closet of thy heart
Safe lock 'em up that they may never depart.
Give first to God the flower of thy Youth
Take for thy guide the blessed Word of Truth.
Adorn thy self with Grace, prize Wisdom more
Than all the Pearls upon the Indian shore.
Think not to live still free from grief and sorrow
The man that laughs to day may weep to morrow.
Nor dream on Joys unmixed; here below
The fragrant Roses on the thorn do grow.
Scorn the deluding world, that most bewitches
And place thy hope in everlasting riches.
Make room for Christ, let not so base a guess
As Earth have any lodging in thy breast.
Bad company as deadly poison shun;
Thousands by that are ruined and undone.
The giddy multitude still go a stray
Turn from the broad and choose the narrow way.
Keep Death and Judgment always in thine Eye
Non's sit to live, but who are fit to dye.
Make use of present time because thou must
Shortly take up thy lodging in the dust.
It Is dreadful to behold a settin Sun,
And night appearing e're our work be done.
Let not thy winged days be spent in vain
When gone no gold will call 'em back again.
Strive to subdue thy sin when first beginning
Custom when once confined is strangly winning.
Be much at Prayer, it is the begging trade
By which true Christians are the richest made.
Of meditation get the blessed art
And often search thy own deceitful heart.
Fret not, nor envy at thy neighbors wealth,
Preferment, beauty, Learning, strength or health.
Abhor the lying tongue, vile fraud detest,
Plain hearted men by Providence are blessed.
Take heed of Idleness, that cursed nurse
And mother of all vice; there is nothing worse.
And fly from pride, high hills are barren found
But lowly valleys with Christ fruits are crowned.
Short sinful pleasures and delights eschew,
Eternal Torments are their wages due.
In The race of temperance run and always keep
A mean in eating, drinking, and in sleep.
Nor costly Garments wear, let men admire
Thy person most, and not thy rich attire.
Lay treasures that are good up in thy heart
Which by discourse, thou wisely may impart.
To profit others, holy thoughts within
Will guide thy tongue, and guard thy lips from sin,
Learn to distinguish between faithful friends,
And fauning flatterers, who for base ends
Will speak thee fair, whose words are soft and oily
And make a show of friendship to beguile thee.
The secrets of thy friend do not disclose,
Left in so doing thou resemble those
Whose ears are leaking vessels, which contain
Nothing, but what is poured in runs out again
At the mouth, These fools proclaim themselves unfit
For any trust, and to be void of wit.
If thou resolve to change a single life
And have proposed to become a wife,
C^use then thy husband not for worldly gain,
Not for his shape or Air; these things disdain.
If money draw, or thou by lust art lead,
Expect no blessing of thy marrage bed.
But if the fear of God most excellent,
Be thy chief end, then look for true content.
Cast off all needless and distrustful care,
A little is enough, over much a snare.
Our Journey from our Cradles to our grave
Can be but short, no large provision crave.
For such conveniences as must be had
Confide to God who has so richly clad
The fragrant Meadows, with fresh' silver showers
Send down to nurse up tender plants and flowers.
He for the chirping Birds provides a nest,
And gives each Creature that which feeds 'em best.
To him give thanks for mercys which before
Thou had received, and that makes way for more,
For faults before his face, reprove thy friend
But all good deeds behind his back commend.
Labor for peace, choose to contend with none
Let reason, with sweet clamours, keep the throne,
Treading fierce wrath, and lawless passions down
The grace of meekness is the woman's crown.
Be loving, patient, courteous and kind,
In doing these thou wilt praise and honor find,
Here on the Earth; and when all conquering Death
Thy body shall desoul, and stop thy Breath;
Upon the golden wings, of faith and love
Thy soul shall fly to Paradise above;
When sin, and sorrow shall for ever cease,
And there be crowned with endless joys and peace.
Greshon Boat.

CATONIS DISTICHA.
RUmores fuge, ne incipias novus author haberi:
Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutam.
Shun rumors, least thou be as The Author named;
Silence hurts none, but some for words are blamed.
Cum recte vivas, ne cures verha malorum
Arbitrii nostri non est quid quisque loquatur.
When thou live well, mind not what lewd folks say:
It is not in our power their tongues to sway.
Dilige non oegra charos pietate parents
Nec matrem offendas, dum vis bonus esse parenti.
Thy parents love, the one as well as the other;
To please thy Father, do not cross thy Mother.
Tranquillis rebus quoe sunt adversa cave to:
Rursus in adversis melius sperare memento,
When things go well adversity beware;
Again, when things go ill, do not despair.
Veritati adhaereto.
Stick to the Truth.
THis Historiographer Eusebius is accounted by many, to be a witness unto whom
credit may be given; he was a Bishop of Caesarea, and one that was said to be
very studious in the Holy Scripture; He flourished chiefly under the Emperor
Constantinus Magnus, and his Son Constantius, about the Year 316.

THE INDEX, Or TABLE.
A.
ADrian the Emperors remarkable Epistle in the Christians behalf. Lib. 4.
Chap. 23. Agbarus Epistle unto Jesus. l. 1. c. 1^. Antioch Citizens stirred up
against the Christians. l. 9. c. 2. Antonius Pius Epistle in the behalf of the
Christans. l. 4. c. 13. Apphianus zeal and boldness. l. 8. c. 22. Apollonarius
touching Montanus and the False Prophets that then were entered, l. 5. c. 14.
16. 19. Attalus Revelation. l. 5. c. 3.
B.
BAsilides Courtesy to a Virgin Martyr, how he would not Swear, and so was
Beheaded. l. 6. c. 4. Biblis restored again to the Faith in the time of
Torment. l. 5. c. 1. Bishops bribed with presents and sums of Money. l. 10. c.
1. Bishops divided about a Lay-mans Preaching. l. 6. c. 19. Blandina Refreshed
in her suffering and torments. l. 5. c. 3.
C.
CHristians Name, dwelling, and foundation. l. 2. c. 17. Christians suffering
by Proclamations, or Edicts. l. 4. c. 25. Christians terribly threatened, and
some converted by beholding their Innocent sufferings. l. 4. c. 8. Christians
prosperity, and also calamity. l. 8. c. 1. Christians were generally summoned
to appear at the Idols Temple. l. 8. c. 22. Clements and of his Epistle. l. 3.
c. 14. Clements Bishop of Alexandria touching the Scriptures. l. 6. c. 13.
Clergy freed from Paying Tax or Tribute. l. 1^. c. 7.
D.
DEfinition of a Christian. l. 1. c. 5. Doctrine of Christ approved of by
Tiberius, l2. c. 2. Dioclesians Proclamations against the Christians. l. 8. c.
3. Dionysius Epistle concerning the Martyrs. l. 6. c. 40. Dionysius Epistle to
the Romans. l. 4. c. 22. Dionysius Epistle to Novatus. l. 6. c. 44. Dionysius
Vision. l. 7. c. 9. Dionysius Fidelity and Constancy in the time of Trial. l.
7. c. 10.
E.
EAster and the controversy about that Fast. l. 5. c. 23. Emperors begun to
favor the Christians. l. 10. c. 2. Emperors Proclamation concerning Christian
Religion. l. 10. c. 2. The Emperor refered the Bishop to the Judges, for them
to take acours^ with troublesome Persons. l. 10. c. 6. The Encratits and their
Heresy. l. 4. c. 27.
F.
THe Frenchman's Epistle unto the Church l. 5. c. 1.
G.
THe Gospel of the Evangelists. l. 3. c. 21. vide l. 3. c. 35.
H.
HOw Heresy crept into the Church, when persecution ceased. l. 4. c. 6.
Heretics were a slander unto Christian Religion. l. 4. c. 7. Heretics and
False Prophets among the Christians. l. 4. c. 21. Herod was Smitten of an
Angel. l. 2. c. 10.
I.
JAmes was slain with a Sword l. 2. c. 9. The Martyrdom of James the Brother of
Jesus. l. 2. c. 9. A History of John the Apostle, and a Young man. l. 3. c. 20.
Ignatius his Valourous courage. l. 3. c. 32. Josephus Testimony of Christ. l.
1. c. 12. Justinus the Martyr. l. 4. c. 16, 17, 18. The Jews would not allow of
Carved Images. l. 2. c. 6. What Irenaeus Wrote concerning the Holy Scriptures.
l. 5. c. 8.
L.
LAw against the Christians l. 5. c. 19. Licinnius cruelty toward the
Christians. l. 10. c. 8.
M.
WHy Mark Wrote his Gospel. l. 2. c. 15. See. l. 3. c. 35. Maximinus Impiety,
and Proclamations. l. 6. 8. c. 16, 17, 18. Maximinius conquered, his
Proclamation and Judgment. l. 9. c. 2. Money given to Ministers. l. 10. c. 6.
N.
NEro's persecutions l. 2. c. 25. Nicolas and his Sect. l. 3. c. 26. Novatus
beresie and impiety. l. 6. c. 24.
O.
ORigen's zeal while he was young his L^vs to the Martyrs, how he sold his
Philosophy books. l. 6. c. 2. Origen's Trial, Fall, and bitter Lamentation. l.
7. c. 1.
P.
PAulus Samosatenus's heresy. l. 7. c. 19. Persecutions against the
Christians. l. 8. c. 6. Persecution suddenly Revived again against the
Christians. l. 8. c. 27. Pilate became his own murderer. l. 2. c. 7. Plinus
secundus the Christians great friend. l. 3. c. 30. Polycarpus's nobility, and,
Constancy until death l. 4. c. 15. Pothinus dyed in prison. l. 5. c. 1.
Polycrates of the death of John, and Philip the Apostles. l. 3. c. 28. A
Proclamation against the Christians. l. 6. c. 40. Priests sedition among
themselves about Tithes. l. 2. c. 20.
R.
ROman Empire prosperous wh^le the Christians enjoyed their Liberty in it. l.
8. c. 14.
S.
SAnctus's constancy and Martyrdom. l. 5. c. 1 Concerning the Scriptures. l. 5.
c. 28. Sects among the Jews. l. 4. 21. Simeon the Bishops Martyrdom. l. 3. 29.
Simon Magus the (...). l. 2. c. 13. The Church of S^yrna's Epistle to other
Churches. l. 4. c. 15. A Synod summoned to Rome. l. 10. c. 5.
T.
THaddaeus cured King Agbarus but would receive no money for his cure, nor for
his preaching. l. 1. c. 14. Theodisia a virgins suffering. l. 8. c. 25. Theudas
the soycerer beheaded. l. 2. c. 11.
V.
VAlerianus was at the first mild and gentle toward the Christians, but
afterward he became exceeding cruel. l. 7. c. 6. Urbanus a cauel persecutor
fell into great misery. l. 8. c. 25.
Y.
YOung and Old were injoynd to Sacrifice unto the Gods of the Heathens. l. 8.
c. 27.
Hoc genus literarum non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum judicandi liberate
legendum est. This kind of Writings is to be read, not with a necessity of
believing them, but with a liberty to judge of them. The First BOOK OF EUSEBIUS
PAMPHILUS.
The Definition of a Christian.
EUSEBIUS says, in his first Book of Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
his Ecclesiastical History, in the fifth Chapter, That he that will express
the Name of a Christian, must be such a Man as excels through the Knowledge
of Christ and his Doctrine, in modesty and righteousness of Mind, in continency
(i. e. chastity) of Life, in virtuous Fortitude (i. e. Srength) and in
Confession of sincere Piety (i. e. Godliness) toward the one and the only
universal God.

Of the Martyrdom of John Baptist; and the Testimony of Josephus touching
Christ.
In the 12th Chap. of the aforesaid Book, Lib. 1. Chap. 12.
Eusebius. speaking of John Baptist, Relates how that when diverse flocked
together, (for many greatly delighted in hearing of him) Herod fearing least
that so forcible a Power of persuading, which was with him, should lead the
Concerning John Baptist and Herod's Jealousy.
People into a certain Rebellion, he supposed it far better to bereave him of
his Life, before any Novelty were by him put in use, than that change, with
danger, being come in place, he should repent him and say; Had I wist. Thus
John because of Herod's suspicion was sent toward, and there beheaded.

In the same Chapter he repeats what Josephus What Josephus wrote of Christ.
wrote of Christ; saying, there was at that time one Jesus, A wise Man (if it
be lawful to call him a Man) a worker of Miracles, a Teacher of them that
received the Truth with gladness; he drew after him many, as well of the Jews
as Gentiles. This same was Christ; and though Pilate by the Judgment of the
chief Rulers amongst us, delivered him to be Crucified, yet there wanted not
them, which from the beginning loved him. Of him the Christian People borrow
their Name.

The Epistle of King Agbarus unto Jesus Christ. Lib. 1. chapter 14. Agbarus wrote
to Jesus.

Agbarus Governor of Edessa, unto Jesus the good Savior showing himself in
Jerusalem, sends greeting; I have heard of thee and thy Cures which thou have
done, without Medicines and Herbs. For as the Report goes, thou make the
Blind to see, the Lame to go, the Lepers thou cleansest, foul Spirits and
Devils thou castest out; the long diseased thou restorest to Health, and
raisest the Dead to Life. When that I heard these things of thee, I imagined
with my self one of these two things, either that thou art God come from
Heaven, and do these things, or the Son of God that bring such things to
pass; wherefore by these my Letters I beseech thee to take the pains to come
unto me, and that thou will cure this my grievous Malady (i. e. Disease or
Sickness) wherewith I am sore vexed: I have heard moreover, that the Jews
murmur against thee, and go about to mischief thee, I have here a little City
and an Honest, which will suffice us both.

The Epistle of Christ unto Agbarus.
Agbarus, blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me, when thou saw me
not; for it is written of me, that they which see me shall Eusebius. lib. 1. chapter
14.
not believe in me, that they which see me not, may believe and be saved.
Concerning that that thou wrotest unto me, that I should come unto thee; I let
thee understand that all things touching my Message are here to be fulfilled,
and after the fulfilling thereof, I am to return again unto him that sent me;
but after my Assumption (i. e. taking up) I will send one of my Disciples unto
thee, which shall cure thy Malady, and restore Life to thee, and them that be
with thee.

Unto these Epistles there was a Narration added in the Syrian Tongue, which
shows how that after Jesus Ascension, there was one of his Disciples sent to
the City where Agbarus resided, and when the King heard of him, he sent for
him; and when Thaddaeus the Disciple, and one of the 70 heard the Message, he
said, I go, for it is for his sake that I am sent thus mightily to work: And
when he was come to The Conference which Thaddaeus had with Agbarus.
the King, he asked him, saying, Art thou of Truth a Disciple of Jesus the Son
of God, which made me this Promise; I will send unto thee one of my Disciples,
which shall cure thy Disease, and shall show Life unto thee and all thine? To
whom Thaddaeus made Answer, because thou have greatly believed in the Lord
Jesus which sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee; but in case that thou
believe in him as yet, thy hearty Petitions according unto thy Faith thou
shall obtain.

To whom Agbarus said, I have continued so believing in him, that I could have
found in my Heart, mightily to destroy the Jews which Crucified him, were not
the Roman Empire a let unto my purpose. Thad. said again, our Lord and God
Jesus Christ, fulfilled the Will of Agbarus was cured.
his Father, which being finished he is ascended unto him. Agb. Answered, and I
have believed in him and in his Father: To whom Thad. replies; therefore in the
Name of the same Lord ^esu I lay my Hand upon thee, which when he had done he
was forthwith cured of his Malady, and delivered of the Pain that pressed him
sore. Agbarus marvelled at this, that even as it was reported to him of Jesu,
so in Truth by his Disciple and Apostle Thad. without Apothecary Stuff, and
virtue of Herbs, he was cured with many more: So afterward Agb, being desirous
to know many things concerning Christ, he Commanded his Citizens to be gathered
together to hear the Sermon of Thaddaeus, which Thad. would not receive a
Reward of Gold.
being ended the King charged that Gold coined, and uncoined should be given
him; but he received it not, saying, In so much that we have forsaken our own;
How can we receive other Men's?

The Second BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
Tiberius approved of the Doctrine of Christ, but so did not the Senate.
THE Emperor Tiberus, would have had Christ Canonized in the Number of the
Gods, in whose time the Christian Name was spread abroad in the World; and when
this Doctrine was signified to him, he communicated the same unto the Senate,
declaring withal Eusebius. l. 2. chapter 2.
that this Doctrine pleased him right well; but the Senate rejected it, because
they had not allowed the same; but he persevered in his Opinion, threatening
them Death that would accuse the Christians.

The Jews would not allow of carved Images.
The Jews formerly judged it an heinous Offense, Eusebius. l. 2. chapter 6.
that any carved Image should be erected in the City, yea so great was their
Indignation against Pictures, that upon a certain time when the Pictures of
Caesar were conveyed by Night into Jerusalem, they that were nearest unto them,
at the sight thereof, when the Day appeared, stamped them with their Feet, as
if they had been abrogated Laws (i. e. Laws abolished or disannulled).

The Death of Pilate.
Pilate that was President in the time of Christ Eusebius. l. 2. chapter 7.
under Cajus, fell into such misery, that necessity constrained him to use
Violence upon himself, so that he became his own Murderer.

Of the Martyrdom of James the Apostle.
When King Herod stretched forth his Hand to vex certain of the Church, he slew
James the Brother of John with the Sword; and it is recorded, that he which
drew him before the Tribunal-Seat, when he saw that he would willingly suffer
Martyrdom, was therewith moved, and voluntarily confessed himself to be a
Christian; then Chapter 9.
were they both brought together, but he in the way requested James the Apostle
to pardon him, which after he had paused a little upon the matter, turning unto
him, answered, Peace be unto thee, and kissed him; and so they were both
beheaded together.

How Herod was smitten.
Upon a certain time King Herod put on a Silver Robe wonderfully wrought, which
yielded so gorgeous a Glistering to the Eye, that the Lib. 2. chapter 10.
shining thereof seemed terrible, and intolerable (almost) to the Beholders:
Flatterers forthwith, one one thing, and another another thing, bolt out such
Sentences, as turned, in the end, to his Confusion, and saluting him as God,
they added therewith all, be gracious; for though hitherto we have feared thee
as Man, yet henceforth we confess thee to be above all mortal Nature. These
things the King rebuked not, neither repelled this impious flattery; but after
he was smote of an Angel, and then he said, I which seemed to you a God, and
was A prosperous estate, sometime miserable.
saluted Immortal, am now constrained to end the race of this Life: For we have
lived not miserably, but in that prosperous Estate, which is termed blessed.

Of Theudas the Sorcorer.
There was a certain Sorcerer named Theudas (of whom the Scripture makes
mention Acts 5.) who persuaded a great Multitude to follow him unto the River
Jordan, bringing with them their whole Substance; for he reported himself to be
a Prophet, and that at his Commandment the Rivers should divide it self,
parting in the midst, yielding unto them free Passage through; and in so
saying, he seduced many who afterward were suppressed, and Theudas being taken
was Beheaded, and his Theudas beheaded.
Head was brought to Jerusalem.

Of Simon Magus.
Simon Magus, was esteemed and accounted in the City of Rome for a God, and
honored as a God, with a Picture between two Bridges upon the River Tibris,
having this Roman Superscription, Simoni Deo Sancto; to Simon the holy God; and
in manner all the Samaritans, Lib. 2. chapter 13.
and certain also of other Nations did worship him, acknowledging him for the
chief God; he is said to have been the first Author of Heresy; they that have
followed his Heresy, have much overflowed in Filthiness, and Obscenity (i. e.
silthy Talk) for it is said of them, that whatsoever may be imagined more foul
than any Filthiness, the same has their damnable Heresy surpassed, and poor
wretched Women they have deluded, with a heap of all kind of Evils.

Of the Gospel written by S. Mark. chapter 15.

It is said that the Romans were not satisfied The occasion of S. Marks writing
the Gospel.
with hearing Peter once, nor yet sufficed with the unwritten Doctrine that he
had delivered; and therefore did they enjoin S. Mark (whose Gospel is now
spread abroad) that he would leave in writing unto them the Doctrine, which
they had received by Preaching, neither ceased they until they had persuaded
him, and so given an occasion of the Gospel to be written, which is now after
Mark.

What the Christians were called.
The Christians were called Worshippers, either because like cunning Physicians
they cured and heald such as came unto them of their malicious Passions, or
that religiously they Worshipped the Celestial Godhead with pure and
Christians renounced their Substance. Is forsook, or cast off.
sincere worship; it is said they renounced their Substance, and that they
which professed Philosophy abandoned (that is, forsook or cast of) their own
proper Goods, and severed themselves from all the Cares of this Life: And
forsook the Cities, and lived solitary in Fields and Gardens. Further (he
says) they did contemplate (that is, behold in their Minds, or think upon) not
only Divine things, but they made grave Canticles, or Songs and Hymns unto What
foundation the Christians laid formerly.
God, etc. Moreover, says he, they placed Continency (that is, Chastity) in
the Mind, as a certain Foundation; next they built there upon other Virtues.
And among them there were diverse elderly Virgins to be found, who chapter 17.
despised corporal Lust, etc.

What Sedition was among the Priests about Tithes.
The aforesaid Eusebius relates something out of Josephus concerning a
Dissension that was between the Highpriests and the Inferior-Priests, and
chief of the People at Jerusalem; they skirmished Lib. 2. chapter 20.
among themselves, says he, they vexed one another, they slinged one at
another; yea so Impudent and past all Shame, says he, were the Highpriests
become, that they stuck not to send and take away from the Barn-floors the
Tithes due unto the Inferior-Priests; so that The Priests miserable end.
in the end it fell out, that the Priests were seen to perish for Poverty.

Of the Martyrdom of James, who was called the Brother of Jesus.
James the Brother of Christ, was termed a just and perfect Man; it is said
that he took in hand the Government of the Church after the Apostles; and when
many of the Princes were persuaded, there arose a Tumult of the Jews, Scribes
and Pharisees, saying, it is very dangerous least the whole People look after
this Jesus, The Jews conspiracy against the Truth.
as though he were Christ. And being gathered together, they said to James, We
pray thee stay this People, for they err in Jesu, as though he were the true
Christ; we pray thee persuade this People concerning Jesu, for we all obey
thee, yea we and all the People testify of thee, that thou art just, and
respectest not the person of any Man; stand therefore upon the ^innacle of the
Temple, that thou may be seen aloft, and that thy word may be heard plainly
of all the People. The aforesaid Scribes and Pharisees placed James upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple, and shouted to him and said, thou just Man, at whose
Commandment we are all here: In so much as this People is seduced after Jesus
who was Crucified, declare unto us which is the Door, or Way of Jesus
Crucified? And he answered, with a loud Voice, Why ask ye me of Jesus the Son
of Man, Lib. 2. chapter 23.
when as he sits at the right Hand in the great Power in Heaven, etc. When
as he had persuaded many, so that they glorified God at the Testimony of James,
and said Hosanna, (i. e. Save now I beseech thee) in the highest to the Son of
David. Then the Scribes and Pharise^s said among themselves, We have done very
ill in causing such a Testimony of Jesus to be brought forth; but let us climb
up and take him, to the end that the People may be stricken with fear, and so
may be brought to renounce his Faith; and they shouted, saying, O, O! And the
just also is seduced; so they climbed up, and threw Justus down headlong,
saying, Let us stone James Justus; and they begun to throw Stones at him; for
after his fall he was not fully dead. And he fell upon his Knees, saying, I
beseech thee Lord God and Father, forgive them for they wot not what they do.
And as they were a stoning of him, one of the Priests, the Son of Rechab, the
Son of Charabim, whose Testimony is in Jeremy the Prophet, cried out, Cease,
wh^t do you, this just Man prays for you? And one of them that were present,
taking a Fullers ^b, stroke Iustus on the Head and brained him, and so he
suffered Martyrdom.

Of Nero's Persecution and Wickedness.
It is Recorded of Nero the Emperor, before whom Paul appeared, that he was so
wicked that he tormented his own Mother with diverse kinds of Death, his
Brethren, his Wife, and many of his nearest Kinsfolks, as if they had been
Enemies, and deadly Foes unto him. He was counted the first Enemy, of all the
Emperors, unto the Service of God; yea some Lib. 2. chapter 25.
boasted and said, They which knew him, may easily perceive that this our
Doctrine had never been condemned by Nero, had it not been passing good: It is
written that Paul was beheaded, and Peter crucified of him at Rome.

The Third BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
Of Clemens and his Epistle which was read in Churches.
WHen Anacletus had been Bishop of Rome Lib. 3. Chap. 14.
twelve years, Clemens succeeded, whom Paul, writing to the Philippians,
calls his fellow Labourer, when he says: with Clemens and the rest of my
fellow Laborers, whose Names are written Euse. Lib. 3. Chap. 14.
in the book of life; One undoubted Epistle there is of his extant, both worthy
and notable, the which he wrote from Rome unto Corinth, when sedition was
raised among the Corinthians; the The same Epistle or another of Clemens is
extant in Holland, and I hear in English.
same Epistle we have known to have been read publicly in many Churches, both
of old, and among us also; at that time there was raised a sedition among the
Corinthians.

An History of John the Apostle and a Young Man.
Ensebius has a certain relation of a passage Lib. 3. Chap. 20.
concerning the Apostle John, in the 20 Chapter of his third Book there he shows;
how that when John was come unto a certain City, and among other things he
having recreated the Brethren; He beheld a young man of A goodly body, gracious
face, fervent mind, whom he Committed unto him that was Appointed chief over
all the Bishops, saying, I Commend this young man unto thy Custody, with an
earnest desire as Christ and the Church can bear me witness; so John returned
to Ephesus. But in process of time, this young man became very dissolute (i. e.
wanton, loose, or given to much vain pleasure) and perniciously accompanied
himself with them of his own years, that were idle, dissolute, and acquainted
with ill behavior; First, they brought him to sumptuous banquets, next they
guided him in the night to steal and to rob, so after he forsook the right way,
he brought himself unto a bottomeless pit of all misorder and outrage: And a
rout of Thieves being gathered together he became a most violent Captain of
Thieves wholly bent to slaughter, and murder, and extreme cruelty. In the
mean while (necessity so constraining) the Bishop sent for John; he, when he
had ended and finished the cause of his coming; Go to (says he) O Bishop
restore unto us thy charge which I and Christ have committed unto thy Custody,
the Church whereof thou art head bearing witness. The Bishop at the first was
Amazed, supposing some deceit to be wrought touching money, which he had not
received, yet was he not able to Answer them for that he had it not; But when
John had said, I require the young man and the Soul of our Brother; then the
Elder looking down with a heavy Countenance sobbing and sighing said: he is
dead. To whom John said; How? and by what kind of death? he Answered he is dead
to God, for he is become wicked, and pernicious, and to be short a Thief for he
keeps this mountain together with his Associates; the Apostle then rending
his Garment, and beating his head with sorrow, said, I have left a wise keeper
of our Brothers Soul; prepare me a horse and let me have a guide. He hastened
and rode in post, being come unto the place appointed he is straight ways
taken of the thievish watch, he neither fled nor resisted, but exclaimed: for
this purpose came I hither, (said he) bring me unto your Captain; who in the
mean time as he was Armed beheld him coming, but as soon as he saw his face and
knew it was John, he was stricken with shame, and fled away: The old man with
might pursued him, and cried, my Son why flyest thou from thy Father Unarmed
and Old? O Son tender my cause, be not afraid, as yet there remains hope of
Salvation: I will undertake for thee with Christ, I will die for thee, if need
be, as Christ did for us, I will hazard my Soul for thine; trust to me, Christ
sent me. But he hearing this, first stood still casting his Countenance to the
Ground, next shook of his Armor, anon trembled for fear, and wept bitterly. He
embraced the old man, and coming unto him, answered as well as he could for
weeping: So afterward the Apostle brought him unto the Church again.

Concerning the Writing of the Gospel.
It is reported that Matthew and John were Constrained to write their Gospels,
for Matthew Of Mat.
when he had Preached unto the Hebrews, and passing unto other People, wrote
his Gospel in his Country Language, supplying by Writing in his absence, that
which was desired in his presence. When Mark and Luke had Published their
Gospels, John (say they) in all that Of John.
space, Preached without writing, but at length was moved to write for this
Cause.

It is reported, that when the Books of the three Evangelists were much spread,
and coming unto John's hands he allowed of them, and yielded of them a true
Testimony, wishing that Euse. l. 3. Chap. 21.
the Declaration of such things had been Printed in their Books which were done
at the first Preaching of Christ. John passes over with silence the Genealogy
(i. e. of the Birth or Pedigree) of our Savior according unto the flesh, being
before amply laid down by Matthew and Luke, and beginning with his Divinity
reserved of the Holy Ghost for him as the Mightier: The cause why Mark wrote
his Gospel we have declared before: And Luke in the beginning of his History,
shows the occasion of his writing, signifying, that diverse now had already
employed their diligent care, to the setting forth of Of Luke.
such things as he was fully persuaded of, necessarily delivering us from the
doubtful opinion of others, when by his Gospel he declares unto us, the sure
and certain Narration of such things, whereof he had received the Truth
sufficiently.

Concerning the Books of the New Testament.
It shall also be Convenient (says Easebins) if in this place we Collect
briefly the Books of the New Testament; In the first place must be set the
fourfold writings of the Evangelists, next the Acts of the Apostles; then the
Epistles of Paul are to be added, after these the first of John and that of
Peter, which are Authentic (that is, undeniable or approved of all) Lastly,
lib. 3. chap. 22.
if you please, the Revelation of John, all these are received for undoubted.

The Books which are gainsaid, though well known unto many are these, the
Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, the later of Peter, the second and third
of John: whether they were John the Evangelists, or some others of the same
name. Diverse do number the Gospel to the Hebrews among them that were
disallowed, which was used especially of them, which received Christ of the
Hebrews.

Of Nicolas and his Sect.
Concerning Nieolas of whom the Revelation of John makes mention, it is Written
of him, that he was one of the D^acons Ordained, together with Stephen, by the
Apostles to Minister unto the Poor, but thus it is Written of him; This Nicolas
having a Beautiful Woman to his Wife, after the Ascension of our Savior, was
accused of Jealousy, and to clear himself of that Crime, he brought forth his
Wife and permitted chap. 26.
him that listed to Marry her. But his followers say that their doing is
agreeable with that saying; that is, the Flesh is to be Bridled: And so
following that doing and saying without all discretion, they Sin without all
shame, in filthy Fornication.

Concerning John, and Philip with his Daughters, it was wrote thus by
Policrates unto the Bishop of Rome, for in Asia (said he) the great Founders of
Christian Religion died, who shall rise the last day, at the coming of the Lord
lib. 3. chap. 28.
when he shall come from Heaven with Glory to gather all the Saints; Philip,
one of the twelve Apostles was Buried at Hierapolis, and two of his Daughters,
which led their Lives in Virginity; And John who leaned on the Breast of our
Savior rested at Ephesus.

The Martyrdom of Simeon the Bishop.
Simeon the second Bishop of Jerusalem, being lib. 3. chap. 29.
accused for being a Christian, was scourged several days, and when he was a
Hundred and Twenty years Old, he suffered Martyrdom, Anno How long the Church
was said to remain as a pure Virgin.
Dom. 110. It is reported, that unto those times the Church of God remained a
Pure and Uncorrupted Virgin, for such as endeavored to corrupt the perfect
Rule, and the Sound Preaching of the Word (if then there were any such) hid
themselves unto that time in some secret and obscure place, but after that the
sacred Company of the Apostles, was worn out and come to an end, and that
Generation was wholly spent, which by special Favor had heard with their Ears,
the Heavenly Wisdom of the Son of God, then the Conspiracy of detestable Error
through deceit of such as delivered strange Doctrine, took rooting. And
because that not one of the Apostles survived, When Error begun to take rooting
in the Church
they Published boldly with all might possible, the Doctrine of Falsehood, and
Impugned, (that is, resisted or assaulted) the open, manifest, known Truth.

How. Plinius Secundus wrote to the Emperor in the Christians behalf.
Under Trajan the Emperor there was a grievous l. 3. c. 30.
Persecution of the Christians, and it seems that Plinius Secundus, a notable
president, was What the Christians refused to do, and what they did.
stirred up to write unto the Emperor in the Christians behalf, who wrote as
follows, saying, That he found nothing in them that was Impious or Wicked,
but that they refused the Worship ing of Images, signifying this withal, that
the manner of the Christians was to rise before day, to Celebrate Christ as
God, and to the end their Discipline might strictly be observed, they forbid
sheding of Blood, Adultery, Fraud, Traiterous dealing, and such like. And for
answer hereunto, the Emperor wrote again, That there should be no Inquisition
for Christians, but if they were met with, they should be Punished. Through
which means the grievous Persecution was somewhat qualified, yet nevertheless
there was scope enough left for such as were willing to Afflict them.

Concerning Ignatius his Valor and Courage.
It is reported that one Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, was sent from Syria to
Rome (for the Confession of his Faith) to be Food for Wild Beasts, who passing
through Asia, curiously Guarded with a great Troop of Keepers, confirmed Eusebius.
lib. 3. chapter 32. Ignatius Epistle to the Church
the Congregations throughout every City where he came, with Preaching the Word
of God, and Wholesome Exhortations, and specially giving charge to avoid the
Heresies lately sprung and at that time overflowing, etc. And in his Journey he
wrote unto several Churches; saying I strive with beasts by Sea, by Land, nights
and days, fettered among ten I eopards, (that is a band of Soldiers) And the
more they receive, the worse they become. I thus exercised with their Injuryes,
am the more Instructed, yet hereby am I not justified. Now do I begin to be a
Diciple, I weigh neither visible nor Invisible things, so that I gain Christ,
let Fire, Gallows, Violence of Beasts, bruising of the Bones, Racking of the
Members, stamping of the whole Body, and all the Plagues invented by the
mischief of Satan light upon me, so that I win Christ-Jesus: This he wrote from
Syria to the Churches.

Concerning Mark the Evangelist.
Eusebius rehearses one thing touching Mark the Evangelist, as follows: The
elder (meaning John) said: Mark the Interpreter of Peter, look what he
remembered, that diligently he wrote, not in that order, in which Chap 35.
the Lord spoke and did them, neither was he the hearer, and follower of the
Lord, but of Peter, who delivered his Doctrine, not by way of Exposition, but
as necessity constrained; so that Mark offended nothing in that he wrote, as he
had before committed to Memory. Of this one thing was he fearful, in omitting
nothing of that he had heard, and in delivering that was false. Concerning
Matthew it is thus written; Matthew wrote his Book in the Hebrew Tongue, which
every one after his skili Interpreted by Allegations.

The Fourth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
When Heresy crept into the Church.
WHen Persecution ceased then Heresy begun Lib. 4. chapter 6.
to spring apace among the Christians, among whom Iuglers and Imp^stors crept
in as Eusebius. relates, who bear the same Name and Title, and in show professed
the same Doctrine with them, thereby the sooner to ensnare the Faithful in the
slippery way of Perdition, and under pretense of reducing them to the Faith,
overwhelmed them in the Whirl-pool, and deep Dungeon of Damnation.

What a slander Heretics were unto Christian Religion.
Eusebius shows, how that some Heretics taught, how that they that would
attain unto Lib. 4. chapter 7.
the Perfection of their Mysteries, or rather abominable Devices, they were to
work such Facts though they were never so filthy, otherwise they could not
overcome the secular (i. e. worldly Potentates) unless every one played his
part after the secret Operation. And through the subtilty of Satan came many
thereby to be seduced, and great occasion was given to the Infidels to
blaspheme against the divine Doctrine, and a great slander came to be spread,
in that the Fame of them was bruted abroad throughout Christendom; and by this
means it fell out often, that the Infidels of those times conceived a wicked,
absurd, and shameful Opinion of the Christians, saying, That they used the
unlawful Christians ^andered.
Company of Mothers and Sisters, and that they fed upon the tender Infants and
Sucklings.

How the Christians were threatened, and how some were converted by beholding
their innocent Sufferings.
In the Judaical Wars it was commanded that the Christians should be grievously
punished, except they would renounce Christ and blaspheme lib 4 chapter 8*
God, but some were Converted, by beholding the patient and innocent Suffering
of the Christians, from Paganism to Piety, as one said; for my self, says he,
delighted with the Doctrine of Plato, hearing that the Christians were led
captive, neither fearing Death, nor any Torments which are accounted terrible.
I thought it could not be, that this kind of Men were subject unto Malice, and
set on Pleasure; for what voluptuous Person, or intemperate, or delighted with
devouring of Man's Flesh, can so embrace Death, that he be deprived of his
desire, and not rather endeavor that this may always last, that he be able to
deceive Princes, and not betray himself to death.

Moreover Justinius writes how that Adrianus How wrongfully the Christians were
Executed.
receiving Letters from a noble President, signifying in the behalf of the
Christians, That it was very injurious, that for no Crime but only at the
cutcry of the People, they should be brought and Executed.

An Epistle of Adrian the Emperor, who ordered that no Christians should be
accused neither suffer without just Cause.
Unto M. F. Proconsul of Asia, Adrian sends greeting; I received an Epistle
from S. G* thy Predecessor; the occasion whereof I cannot with silence leave
untouched, least that thereby Men be troubled, and a gap left open to the
malice of Sycophants lib. 2. c. 23.
(that is, Talebearers) wherefore, if your Provincials can prove ought against
the Christians, whereof they charge them, and justify it before the Bar, let
them proceed on, and not appeach The Accusers were so well to appear at the Bar
as the accused.
(that is, accuse or bewray) them only for the name, with making outcries
against them: For it is very expedient that if any be disposed to accuse, the
accusation be thoroughly known of you and siftod; therefore if any accuse the
Christians, that they transgress the Laws, see that you judge and punish
according to the quality of the Offense: But in plain words, if any upon spite
or malice Mark what justice and Eqtity.
in way of Cavillation complain against them, see you chastise him for his
Malice, and punish him with Revengment.

Antoninus Pius Epistle in the behalf of the Christians.
The Emperor Caesar Marcus, etc. sends greeting unto the Commons of Asia; I
know, lib. 4. c. 13.
says he, the Gods are careful to discover hurtful Persons; for they punish
such as will not worship them more grievously than ye do those whom ye bring in
trouble, confirming that Opinion which they conceive of you to be wicked and
ungodly Men. It is their desire in Gods Quarrel rather to die than to live; so
that they The desire of the Christians.
become Conquerors, yielding their lives unto the Death rather than to obey
your Edicts: It shall seem very necessary to admonish you of the Earthquake,
which have and do happen among us, that being therewith moved, you may compare
our Estate with theirs. They have more Confidence to God-wards than you have:
you during the time of your Ignorance, despise other Gods, contemn the Religion
of the Immortal God, Banish the Christians which Worship him and Persecute them
unto Death; In the behalf of these men, many of the Provincial Presidents have
Written heretofore unto our Father of Famous Memory, whom he Answered in
Writing again* that they were not to be longer molested, unless they had
practiced Treason aganst the Roman Empire. And many have given notice unto us
of the same Matter, whom we answered as our Father did before us; If any
therefore hereafter be found thus busied in other The Christians were not to be
Molested nor Accused.
Men's affairs, we command that the accused be absolute and free, tho he be
found such an one, I mean faulty, and that the accuser be grievously Punished.
This Edi^t was Proclaimed at Ephesus in the hearing of that great Assembly of
Asia.

An Extract out of the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, unto all the
Congregations of the Holy Catholic Church throughout Pontus; Mercy Peace and
the Love of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ be multiplied.
We have written unto you Brethren, of such as suffered Martyrdom; The
beholders of them were amazed, seeing their Flesh rent with l. 4. 6. 15.
Scourges, even unto the Inner Veins and Sinews, so that the most secret
Entrails of their Bodies, their Bowels and inward Privities were (...). 15.
piteously to be seen; beholding again the sharp Shells of Seafish, and pibble
Stones strowed under the Martyrs Backs and bruised Bodies, with every kind of
Torment that could be devised; last of all they were thrown to be torn in
pieces, and devoured of Wild Beasts. But there was a certain Phrygian, by Name
Quintus, that trembled at the fierce Rage of the terrible Beasts, and shrinked
at the sight of their grim Visage, and betrayed his own safety with slackness
of Courage; for the same Epistle testifies A warning to forward Spirits.
of him, that he personally appeared, together with the rest before the Bar,
more of rashness than of any Religion; and being taken he publicly professed,
That none ought to intrude himself among such Men without good Devotion,
neither to intermeddle in matters wherewith he has not to do.

The same Chapters shows how that after Polycarpus was apprehended, he was
brought to the City upon an Ass on the great Sabbath day: And a Justice of
Peace, with his Father, meeting him, they received him into their Chariot, and
persuaded him, saying, What harm is it A Temptation and Provocation.
to say, Lord Caesar, to sacrifice and so be saved? At the first he answered
nothing; but when they urged him he said, I will not condescend unto your
Counsel. They perceiving he would not be persuaded, gave him very rough
Language, and tumbled him down out of the Wagon, and afterward he was brought
upon the Theater, or Stage; and when the Multitude saw him they were in a great
Rage: The Proconsul, or Deputy-Counsel, demanded of him whether he were that
Polycarpus, beckning that he should deny Polycarpus was provoked to lie and
swear, but would do neither.
it, and saying, Tender thy Years, with such like persuasions, Swear by the
fortune of Caesar; repent thee of that is past, say, Remove the Wicked. But
Polycarpus beholding with unmovable Countenance the Multitude round about the
Stage, pointing with the Hand Sighing, and looking up to Heaven, said, Remove O
Lord these Wicked: When the Proconsul urged and said, Swear, and I will let
thee go; Blaspheme and defy Christ: Polycarpus answered, fourscore and six
Years have I served him, neither has he ever offended me in any thing; And how
can I revile my King which has thus kept me? The Proconsul still urged him,
and said, Swear by the Fortune of Caesar. To whom Polycarpus said, if thou
requirest this vain Glory, that I protest the Fortune of Caesar, as thou
say, feigning thou know me not who I am, hear freely, I am a Christian;
and if thou desire to know the Doctrine of Christianity, appoint the Day and
thou shall hear it. Afterward the Proconsul said, I have Wild Beasts to devour
thee, unless thou repent; Polycarpus answered, bring them forth, For it is
determined among us not to pass Nota.
from the better unto the worse by Repentance; but we count it a thing
commendable to turn from the thing that is evil, to that which is good and just.

Again the Proconsul said, I will quiet thee with Fire, if thou regard not the
Beasts nor repent: To whom Polycarpus answered, Thou threatnest Fire for an
Hour, which lasts a while and quickly is quenched; but thou art ignorant of
the everlasting Fire at the Day of Judgment, and endless Torments reserved for
the Wicked: But what lingerest thou? Dispatch as it pleases thee. So the
Proconsul being amazed, commanded the Beadle, in the midst of the Theater,
thrice to cry, Polycarpus confesses himself a Christian.

At which saying, the Multitude both of the Jews and Gentiles inhabiting
Smyrna, shouted with a great Rage, this is that Doctor of Asia, the Father of
the Christians, the overthrower of our Gods, who has taught many that our Gods
are not to be adored: And they craved of the President, that he would let loose
a Lion to devour him; and when he would not do that, then they cried with one
Voice, that Polycarpus should be burned quick. And in a short while all things
necessarily required for the Execution were applied. And when as they would
have nailed him to the Stake, he said, Nay suffer me even as I am, for he that
gave me patience to abide this Fire, will give me also an unmovable mind to
persevere within the fiery Pale, without your Provision in fastening my Body
with Nails.

Cencerning the Expressions of Justinus the Martyr.
Justinius (who Reprehended, or reproved the Philosophers, as Gluttonous and
Deceiptful Lib. 4. chapter 16.
Persons) was by the Malicious means of Crescens the Philosopher Martyred,
which he foresaw and signified in his Apology (i. e. defense, or speech) in
these words: I look for no other thing then this (said he) that I be betrayed
by some one of them called Philosophers: It is not indeed requisite to call him
a Philosopher, which ignorantly reports that the Christians are Impicus and
Irregulous, to the end he may please and flatter such, as are overshadowed with
the mist of Error and Darkness, for if he Impugn or resist the Doctrine of
the Christians, having neither It Is folly to speak evil of that one knrweth not.
read nor known the same, then is he full of Malice, and far worse than Idiots
(i. e. Fools) that sometime beware they reason not of unknown matters, least
they speak falsely: or if he has read them, he understands not the Mystery
and Majestical meaning thereof: or if he do understand them, he does this, that
he be not taken for such an one, and then is he again far more Wicked and
Spiteful, the Bondslave of vain Glory and Brutish fear.

What Justinus Reehearsed in his Apology.
The aforesaid Justinius makes mention of a certain Woman, that had been given
unto Lasciviousness Lib. 4. chapter 17. Christiani ty brought Chastity.
and Lewdness, but when she learned the Doctrine of Christ, she repented of her
former Life, and Embraced Chastity, and she exhorted her Husband likewise to
repent, but he continuing still in his former Lewdness by his unlawful actions
alienated his Wife from him: Impatiency
for she said that it was thence forth unlawful for her to use company at Bed
and Board with that Man, who contrary to the law of Nature, beyond all right
and reason sought means to satisfy his filthy Lusts, and therefore would she
have been divorced from him: But through the Persuasion of her Friends, who
counseled her, a little while quietly to live together, that there Wisdom.
was yet hope at length of his repentance, she revoked her Sentence, changed
her Mind, refrained her self, and continued with him in Wedlock; Submission
but he accused her for being a Christian; but having no other Color nor Cloak
to accuse her, his Malice turned against Ptolomaeus who instructed his Wife in
the Christian Faith; and after he had suffered much in Prison, he was examined
whether Truth gives boldness.
he was a Christian, or no? whose Conscience bearing him witness of no Crime,
but in a just Cause, confessed that he had preached the true and heavenly
Doctrine of Christ. For he which denies himself to be that he is, either
condemns Nota.
that which is in him, by denial, or knowing himself unworthy and estranged
from the matter, refuses to confess; whereof neither is found in a true
Christian; and when Urbitius commanded that he should be brought forth: one
Lucius (that was also a Christian) seeing the Sentence given contrary to all
reason, said to Urbitius, what reason is it (O Urbitius) that thou should
condemn this Man for confessing the Name of Lucius's godly zeal against
Injustice.
Christ, which has committed neither Adultery, neither Fornication, neither
Manslaughter, neither Theft, neither Robbery neither any wicked Offense, that
he may justly be charged withal? Urbitius answered nothing to these things, but
said to Lucius, and thou seem to me to be such a one: Lucius answered, I am
so; and he commanded him to be brought forthwith to the place of execution.

Of the spite that was in the Jews.
The aforementioned Justinius wrote a Dialogue Lib. 4. chapter 18.
(i. e. a Communication betwixt two or more) against the Jews, wherein he
declared their spite against the Doctrine of Christ, saying, The Jews Spite
against Christianity which was accounted Heresy.
you have not only hardened your selves from repentance, but have sent chosen
Men from Jerusalem, which should pass throughout the World, and pronounce that
there was a certain Christian Heresy sprung up* slandering us, as the rest do
which know us not, so that hereby you proved your selves Authors of Falsehood;
not only to your own People, but Prophecy then not ceased.
to all other Nations: He writes also that unto his time the Gift of Prophecy
flourished in the Church.

Of Heretics among the Christians, and Sects among the Jews.
Egesippus wrote, how that after Iacobus Iustus Lib. 4. chapter 21.
was martyred, in such sort as Christ himself was put to death: his Uncle Simon
Cleophas was chosen Bishop, and then they called the Church a pure Virgin; for,
as yet (says he) the Devil had not sown there any corrupt Seed of False
Doctrine. But Thebulis, because that he was not chosen Bishop, went about to
corrupt the same, being one of the Seven Heretics among the People: He writes
of many more Heretics, as of Simon, ^cobius, Dosithaeus, Heretics.
Gortaeus, Machotaei, Menend^anises, Carpocratians, Valetinians, Basilidians,
and Saturnians, whereof every one (says he) has set abroach a proper and a
several Opinion.

Of these (says he further) sprang the false Christ's, the false Prophets, the
false Apostles, False Christ's and false Prophets were entered then too among
the Christians.
rending asunder the Church with their false Doctrine, directed against God and
Christ; The same Author describes likewise the old Heresies of the Jews,
saying, there were in the time of the Circumcision sundry Sects among the
Children of Israel, varying in Opinions, and set opposite against the Tribe of
Judah and Christ; namely these, the Esseans, the Galileans, the Hemerobaptists,
the Masbotheans, the Samaritans, Many sects among the Jews.
the Sadducees, and Pharisees. And by Occasion the aforesaid Egesippus
reasoning of the Scriptures called Apocrypha, that is, hidden, doubtful, or
unknown, he said that in his time, diverse of them were published by Heretics,
that is, such as make choice, of themselves, what points of Religion they will
believe, and what they will not.

Of Dionysius Epistle to the Romans.
Moreover there remains an Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, unto the
Romans, as Lib. 4. chapter 22.
Eusebius says, wherein it is thus written; It has been your accustomed
manner, says he, even from the beginning, diversely to benefit all The
Christians relieved the Brethren.
the Brethren, and to send Relief throughout the City, supplying the Want of
the Poor, by refreshing them in this sort, and especially the Want of the
Brethren appointed for slavish Drudgery and digging of Metals. The same Author
reports of his own Epistles, that they were patched and corrupted; in these
Words, When I was entreated of the Brethren to write, I wrote certain Epistles,
but the Messengers of Satan have sown them with Tares, pulling away some
things, and putting to other some. For whom Condemnation is laid up. No marvel
then (says he) though some endeavor to corrupt Some corrupted the Scriptures.
the sacred Scriptures of God, whenas they went about to counterfeit such
Writings of so small Authority.

Concerning the Christians Sufferings.
Melito, the Bishop of Sardis, in his Apology to the Emperor, reports some
of the things Lib. 4. Chap. 25.
practiced against the Christians, writing thus; The godly People were grieved
by reason of new Edicts, which were published throughout Asia, and never before
practiced, now suffer Persecution. For impudent Sycophants, (that is,
Tale-bearers or Slanderers,) and greedy Gapers after other Men's Goods, having
gotten The Christians were made a prey upon, yet innocent.
Occasion, through these proclamations, openly to rob and spoil, day and night,
such as commit no Trespass at all. And after a few Lines, he says, The
Emperor that is just never puts in Practice any unjust thing, and we
willingly will bear away the Honor of this Nota.
Death; yet this only we will crave of you, that you (after Notice and Trial
had of the Authors of this Contention) do justly give Sentence, whether they
are worthy of Death and Punishment, or Life and Quietness.

Of the Encratits and their Heresy.
Out of the School of Syternius and Marcion sprang the Heretics whom they call
Encratits, (that is te say, contient or chaste persons) who lib. 4. chapter 27.
taught that Marriage was to be aborred, contemning the ancient Shape and Mould
of Man framed of God; And so, by Sequel (or consequently) reprehending him that
made the Generation of Mankind; again they have commanded Abstinence from
living Creatures, for so they call them; showing themselves ungrateful toward
God, who made all things for the Use of Man. After that Justinius was martyred,
Tatianus fell from the Chureh, and being puffed up with presumptuous Estimation
and Self-opinion of Doctrineship, as though he passed all other, invented a new
Form of Doctrine. He dreamed of certain invisible Worlds with the Valentinians:
Some report that he presumed metaphrastically (i. e. by a Metaphor to change
one Word from its natural Sense into another Sense like unto it) to alter the
Words of the Apostle, correcting, as it were, the order of the Phrase.

The Fifth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
The Servants of Christ inhabiting Vienna, and Lions, Cities of France, unto
the Brethren throughout Asia and Phrygia, having with us the same Faith and
Hope of Redemption, Peace, Grace, and Glory from God the Father and Jesus
Christ our Lord be multiplied.
WHEN they had premised certain things by way of Preamble, they pr^ceed in
these Lib. 5. Chap. 1.
Words: The Greatness of this our Tribulation, The Epistle of the Frenchmen
unto the Churces of Asia and Phrygia. Extraordinary Sufferings.
the fury of the Gentiles against the Saints, and what things the blessed
Martyrs had suffered, we are not able exactly to express by Word, or Comprehend
in Writing; for we are not only banished our Houses, Baths, and common
Marketplaces, but altogether every one one of us are straightly charged not to
show our Faces. And many have born all the Vexations that the Multitude have
laid upon them, as Examinations, Scourgings, Draggings, Spoiling, Stoning,
Fettering, and the like whatsoever the heady savage Multitude accustomed to
practice against their professed Enemies. Next, being had unto the open
Marketplace, and Examination had, they were condemned in the Presence of the
People, by the Tribune (that was, a certain Officer that ought to have defended
their Liberty) and the other chief Potentates of the City, and were cast into
Prison until the Presidents coming: After that, when they were brought before
the President which had exercised all kind of extreme Cruelty against us:
Vetius Epagathus, one of the Brethren, (whose Conversation was so perfect, that
he was thought comparable with Zachary the Priest) allowed not of the Sentence
unjustly pronounced against us, but with vehement Motion required that Audience
might be given him, to plead for the Brethren, alleging that we had committed
no Impiety, which being denied him, of such as compassed the Tribunal (that is,
the Iudgment-Seat) and the President rejecting this just Petition, only demand
whether he was a Christian? Which he confessed with a loud Voice, and so he was
received unto the Fellowship of the Martyrs: And was called the Advocate (that
is, one which pleads for another in a Consistory, or in a Judgment place) of
the Ghristians.

There was certain found unready and as yet weak, not of abillity to bear the
Burden of so weighty a Combat (in number Ten) which fell through the Frailty
of the Flesh, to our great Heaviness,, and sorrowful Lamentation, quailing the
Cheerfulness of others, which were not as yet aprehended, but accompanied the
Martyrs, what Torments soever befell them, and severed not themselves from
them; then Trembled we all for fear, and that greatly, because of the
uncertainty of Confessions; being not terrified Of the Love that was among the
suffering Christians.
with any Torments, but careful for the end, least any should fall from the
Faith, daily there were apprehended such as were worthy to fulfill the number of
the Fallen Weaklings, so that out of both these Churches, as many as Ruled and
bore the greatest sway were taken and Executed, and also certain of the
Ethnicks (i. e. Heathens) being our Servants were taken (for the President had
commanded publicly a General Inquisition to be made for us) who being overcome
by the subtle slights of Satan, and terrified with the sights of the Torments
which the Saints suffered, through the persuasion of the Soldiers, feigned
against us, and reported that we used the feastings of Thiestes and the Incest
of Oedinus, with diverse other Crimes, which Slanders falsty raised against the
Christians.
may neither Godlyly be thought upon, neither with modesty be uttered, neither
without Impiety be believed. These things now being Bruited, (or reported)
abroad, every body (almost) was moved and incensed against us, insomuch that
they which for familiarity sake, used moderation Their familiar acquaintance
were offended at them.
before, now were exceedingly moved and mad with us, great then was the rage
both of People, President and Soldiers against the Martyrs: And among the rest
there was a woman called Blandina, by whom Christ showed, that those things
which in the sight of men appear vile, base and Contemptible, deserve great
glory with God, for the true Love they bear to him indeed without boasting in
show. For when as we all Quaked for fear, yea and her carnal Mistress (which
also was one of the persecuted Martyrs) was very careful least that
peradventure, at the time of her Answer, by reason of the frailty of the Flesh,
She would not persevere Constant: Yet she was so replenished from above with
Grace, that the Executioners, which Tormented her by turns from morning to
night Fainted for weariness and ceased, confessing themselves overcome: and
that they were no longer able to Plague her with any more Punishments, etc. For
she like a noble wrestler, was nenewed at her Confession, for (as it is
reported of her) as often as she pronounced: I am a Christian, neither have we
Committed any Evil: She was recreated, refreshed, and felt not Pain of her
Punishment.

Sanctus also bare nobly and valliantly; yea above the Nature of man, all such
vexations as man could devise; his Constancy was so great, that he uttered
neither his own Name, neither his Kindred, neither the Country whence he was:
nor whether he were Bond or Free, but unto every Question, he answered in the
Roman tongue, I am a Christian. This confessed he often instead of all other
things, of his Name, and City and Kindred; neither could the Gentiles get any
other Language of him; wherefore the President and the Tormentors were feircely
set against him; and when as now there remained scarce any Punishment
unpractised, at length they applied unto the tenderest parts of his Body,
Plates of Brass Glowing Hot, which ^ryed, Scared and Scoarched his Body, yet he
remained Cruel torment.
unmovable, nothing amazed, and constant in his confession, being strengthened
and moistened with the Dew which fell from the Celestial (that is, Heavenly)
Fountain of the Water of Life.

Over all his Body his Flesh was wounded, his Members bescarred, his Sinews
shrunk, so that the Natural shape, and outward hew was quite changed. And when
as the wicked Tormentors a few days after had brought him to the place of
Torment, and well hoped, that if they punished him now they should overcome him
and prevail: or if that he dyed in Torment, they A wonderful thing if true.
should terrify the rest, and so warn them to take heed: None of all these
things happned unto him, but beyond all men's expectation in the latter Torments
his Body was released of the pain, recovered the former shape (as it is
recorded of him) and the Members were restored to their former use; so that the
second Plague through the Grace of Christ, was no grievous malady (i. e.
disease) but present Medicine,

Again, Satan going about Blasphemously to slander us, procured Biblis a woman
(one of them which had fainted before) to be brought forth, supposing her frail
and fearful mind, now to be quite altered from the Christian Opinion,
consequently through her Blasphemous denial to be in danger of Damnation. But
she at the very hour of Torment, returned unto her self, and waking as it were
out of a dead sleep, by means of these Punishments Temporal, considered of the
pains of Eternal Fire, and unlooked for, cried out unto the Tormentors, and
said, How could they devour Infants, which were not suffered to touch the Blood
of Brute Beasts? Therefore when she confessed her self a Christian, she was
appointed to take her chance among the Martyrs. Afterward the Saints were
Imprisoned in deep and dark Dungeons, and were fettered in the Stocks, and
their Feet stretched unto The Saints cast into dark and deep Dungeons.
the fifth board chink, with other Punishments, which furious Ministers or
Goa^ers, full of devilish rage are wont to put in ure (i. e. use) and practice
upon poor Prisoners: so that many were stifled, and strangled in Prison.

And when many of the Saints were so weakened with grievous Torments, that life
seemed unto them unpossible, they remaining shut up in close Prisons, destitute
of all man's aid; yet They were comforted of the Lord when destitute of man's Aid.
even then were they Comforted of the Lord, and confirmed in Body and mind, so
that they stirred up and Comsorted the rest, several of the younger sort that
were newly apprehended, whose bodies had not before tasted of the lash of the
whip, loathed the closeness of the Prison, and were choked up with stinch: And
Pothinus Bishop of Lions being above four score and ten years old, weak of
Body, scarce able to draw breath, because of the Imbecility (i. e. Feebleness
or Weakness) of Nature; he was carried of the Soldiers and laid before the
Tribunal (i. e. Judgment) seat accompanied with the Potentates (i. e. Princes
or great Rulers) of the City, and the whole multitude diversely shouting, as if
he had been Christ; he has given a good Testimony: And being asked of the
President who was the God of the Christians; he answered, If thou become
worthy, thou sholt understand.

After this answer, he was cruelly handled, and suffered many stripes; for such
as were nearest to him, struck at him both with hand and foot, and such as
stood afar off, look what each one had in his hand, that was thrown at his
head; and such as ceased from pouring out their poisoned malice, thought
themselves to have grievously offended; supposing by this means to avenge the
ruin of their rotten Gods. Afterward he was cast into Prison, where after two
days he departed this life.

Moreover, as many as fainted in the first persecution Recantation availed not.
were all alike imprisoned, and Partakers of the affliction, neither did they
prevail, or the denial profit them; it was thought sufficient Fault, that they
confessed to have been such; but these as Murderers and heinous Trespassers,
were twice more grievously plagued. The joy of Martyrdom, the hoped promises,
the love toward Christ, and the fatherly Spirit, comforted the one Company;
The other were vexed in Conscience, so that their outward Countenance bewrayed
their inward Apostasy, i. e. their revolting or falling from the True Religion;
for the former went cheerfully with great majesty and grace, their Fetters
becoming them as the skirts of the newmarried The difference betwixt the
faithful and unfaithful
Spouse, garnished with sundry Colors, and laid over with Gold, and withal
yielding a Christian fragrant, (i. e. sweet smelling) smell, so that many
supposed their Bodies to have been outwardly perfumed: But the other all sad
and mournful, as vile and abject caitified i. e. base, naughty, misshapen
Creatures, full of all deformity, derided of the Gentiles themselves, deserving
death as degenerating Cowards, destiture of the most precious, glorious, and
lively Name of Christianity; with the sight hereof many are confirmed, so that
suddenly being apprehended, without stay they professed their Faith. A little
after, in the same Epistle, it is shown, how that Maturus, Sanctus, and
Blandina, were led unto the brute Beasts in the popular and public spectacle
of the heathenish Inhumanity, even at the day appointed of set purpose, where
Maturus and Sanctus were diversely tormented with sundry sorts of punishment, as
if they had suffered nothing before; and whatsoever the outrageous multitude
craved and commanded, that they suffered; but above all, they patiently
suffered the Iron Chair, wherein their Bodies boiled as in a Drying Pan; yet
could they get no other Sentence of Sanctus, save that Confession Terrible
cruelty.
which he cried at the first. And because Caesar had commanded that such as
confessed themselves Christians should be executed, and such as renounced
should depart the frequented Solemnity (which by reason of the concourse of the
Gentiles from every Country was at the beginning very populous) he brought
forth A s^d time.
from Prison the blessed Confessors (for so it seems the Christians were
sometimes called) into the open Spectacle, or View, and Presence of the People,
to be scornfully gazed upon, and when he had again made Inquisition them, as
many as he (to wit, the President) found to be privileged Persons of Rome,
those he beheaded, the rest he threw to be torn asunder of wild Beasts. But
Attalus was burned in the Iron Chair; and being demanded what Name God had, he
answered, God is not called after the manner of Men. And after these things,
Blandina, together with Ponticus (a young Man of fifteen years of Age) was
brought forth, and compelled to swear by their Idols Names: But they constantly
persevered in their Opinion, and contemning their Idols, set the multitude in
such a rage against them, that they neither pitied the years of the young Man,
nor spared the Womankind, but plagued them with many Torments used in their
Theaters (i. e. certain Places made for People to sit and behold solemn Games
and Plays) urging them now and then The Christian Martyrs would not swear.
to swear; which when they could not bring to pass, Ponticus, being encouraged
of the Sister in presence of Pagans (i. e. Heathens or Infidels) who then
beheld how she exhorted and confirmed the young Man, after he had suffered many
Torments, yielded up the Ghost. And Blandina was afterward wrapped in a Net,
and tumbled before a wild Bull, who fanned and tossed her with his Horns to and
fro, yet, it is said, she had no feeling of these things; her Mind being fixed
and wholly set upon the Conference which she had with Christ; and finally she
was beheaded.

The Rage and Cruelty of the Gentiles did not herewith cease against the
Christians; for as many as were choked up with the noisome stink of the
Prisons, were thrown to be devoured of Dogs, and a continual watch set day and
night, that none of them should be buried; and The Martyrs were not be buried.
some fretted and fumed at them, with the gnashing of their teeth, seeking
further revengement of them; others derided and scoffed them, magnifying their
Idols, as Causers of the Chrishians Calamity. And such as were of a milder
Nature, and somewhat sorrowed at our Sufferings upbraided us (i. e. cast them
in the teeth) The Christians upbraided.
and said, Where is their God? and what profited them this Religion, which they
preferred before their Lives? And after they had kept the dead Bodies six days
unburied, at length were burned to ashes; the ashes also they gathered and
scattered in the River Rhoanus,) which passed by, so that no jot or relick
thereof should longer remain upon Earth.

This they did, to the end they might overcome God, and hinder the reviving of
the Saints, lest that, as they said, there should be any further hope of the
Resurrection, whereof, say they, the Christians being fully persuaded,
Christian Religion termed new and strange.
bring among us a strange and new Religion: They contemn (i. e. despise)
punishment, and hasten themselves cheerfully unto death: Now let us see whether
they can arise, and whether their God can help and deliver them from our hands.

Of Attalus's Revelation. Chap 3.

In the aforesaid Epistle, there was a certain Narration contained, concerning
one Alcibiades, who lived miserably, feeding only on Bread and Water, when he
had determined with himself to live in Prison: It was revealed to Attalus,
after his first Conflict on the Theater, that Alcibiades did not well, in that
he used not the lawful Creatures of God, and also gave an occasion of doubting
unto others. Hereof when The Spirits of the Christians were subject one to
another.
Alcibiades was persuaded, he used all things indifferently, and praised God:
For they were not destitute of the Grace of God, but had the Holy Ghost for
their Director.

What Irenaeus wrote concerning the Holy Scriptures. Chapter 8.

Eusebius relates what Irenaeus has writ concerning the Four Evangelists (i.
e. the Bringers of good Tidings) saying, Matthew delivered unto the Hebrews the
History of the Gospel, written in their own Tongue. When Peter and Paul had Of
the Evangelists.
preached at Rome, and planted the Church, aftheir departure, Mark the Disciple
and Interpreter of Peter also, delivered us in writing such things as he had
heard Peter preach. And Luke accompanying Paul, comprised in one Volume the
Gospel preached of him. After these, John the Disciple of our Lord, which also
leaned on his Breast, published a Gospel unto the Posterity remaining at
Ephesus. Moreover, in the same Chapter it is said, That in the Captivity of the
Jews under Nebuchadnezzar, the Scriptures Concerning the Scriptures.
were perished (the Jews returning into their own Region, i. e. Country, after
seventy years, in the time of Artaxerxes King of Persia) he inspired Esdras the
Priest, of the Tribe of Levi, that he restored again all the Sayings of the
former Prophets, and delivered unto the People the Law given by Moses.

Apollinarius concerning Montanus. Chap. 14.

It is now a great while ago, well-beloved A. M. since thou did enjoin me
this Task, that I should publish some Book against the Followers of the
Heretic Montanus, whereupon I doubted unto this day what was best to be done:
Not because I was not able to confure their Falsehood, and give Testimony unto
the Truth, but that I feared greatly, lest by writing I should seem to add
something to the Doctrine of the New Testament, whereto nothing may be added,
and wherefrom nothing may be taken away, by him that will lead a Life agreeable
to the Gospel. I being of late at Ancira in Galatia, found the Church through
Pontus, not with Prophets, as they call them, but rather, as it shall be
proproved, with Fal^e Prophets; where through False Prophets were entered.
the Lord, as much as in me lay, I disputed in the Chuhch, the space of many
Days, against them and their several Objections, so that the Church rejoiced,
and was thereby confirmed in the Truth; but the contrary Part yet repined, and
the Gainsayers were very sorrowful.

It is written of Montanus, that he was puffed up with an immoderate Desire of
Primacy, i. e. Chief Authority, opened a Gap for the Adversary to enter into
him; and being mad and estranged suddenly, and bereft of his Wits, waxed
furious, and published strange Doctrine, contrary to the Tradition and ancient
Custom of ancient Succession, now received, under the Name of Prophecy; they
which then were Auditors of this unlawful Preaching, some chastised and checked
him for a Lunatic (i. e. one possed with Lunacy, who at certain times of the
Moon is distracted in his Wits) and one that was possessed with the Spirit of
Errors, and forbad him to Preach, being mindful of the Forewarnings and
Threatenings of our Savior tending to this end, that we should take diligent
heed of False Prophets. Others waxed insolent (i. e. proud) and boasted and
bragged of him not a little, as if he had been endued with the Holy Ghost and
Gift of Prophecy; so that through disobedient Persons, he came to be more
honored than his Merit did require: And two Women being possessed of a foul
Spirit, spoke fond, foolish, and fantastical things, even as he had before, and
they gloried and rejoiced in that Spirit which pronounced them happy, and
puffed them up with infinite fair Promises; yet A deceitful Spirit.
sometimes by Signs and Tokens he rebuked them to their faces, so that he
seemed a chastising Spirit. There were few of the Phrygians seduced,
notwithstanding that bold and blind Spirit instructed them to blaspheme and
revile generally every Church under Heaven, because they neither did Homage (i.
e. a servile Ceremony of some Tenants, which by Duty they owe to their Saints
did no homage
Lords) neither courteously received among them that false Spirit of Prophecy.
Those things he wrote in his first Book; and in his second Book he writes thus
of their Ends: These, say they, are the Prophets which the Lord promised to
send his People. Let them answer me: I charge them in the Name of the Living
God, O ye Good People, Is there any of the Sect of Montanus, and these Women
which have been persecuted by the Jews, False Prophets are not persecuted to
death.
or put to death by any Tyrant? Not one of them bearing the Name was either
apprehended or crucified, neither was their any Woman of them in the Synagogues
of the Jews either scourged or stoned at all, but Montanus and Maximilla are
said to die' another kind of Death.

Moreover, when the Bishops went about to rebuke the Spirit which spoke in
Maximilla, they were hindered by others that wrought by the same Spirit, saying,
Let not the Spirit of Maximilla say, I am chased as a Wolf from the Sheep: I am
no Wolf, I am the Word, the Spirit and Power; but let him manifestly express
the power by the Spirit, and prevail.

Apollonius against the Montanists.
He wrote in this manner, saying, But what kind of New Doctrine this is, his
Works and Doctrine do declare. This is he which taught the breaking of Wedlock,
i. e. Marriage; this is he which prescribed Laws of Fasting: This is he which
called P^puza and Tymium (pelting Parishes of Phrygia) Jerusalem, to the end he
might entice all Men from every where to frequent thither. This is he which
first ordained Tollgatherers and Taxers of Money; this is he which under
pretense and color of Oblations, First Inventer of Bribes. Gives hire to the
preachers of his doctrine. Bribes becomes not prophets.
has cunningly invented the Art of Bribing; this is he who gives great hire
unto the Preachers of his Doctrine, that by feeding of the Paunch his
Prophecies may prevail. Moreover, he adds, saying, Does not the whole
Scripture forbid that a Prophet should receive Rewards and Money? When I see a
Prophetess receive gold and silver, and goodly Garments, how can I choose but
detest her? Again, of another he says, And besides these, Themison also,
inflamed with the burning Thirst of Covetousness, tasted not of the tart
Cognizance of Confession before the Tyrant; but shuffled himself out of Fetters
with much Money. And whenas therefore he should have humbled himself, yet he
all in bragery as if he were a Martyr, i. e. one that died for Righteousness
sake, after the example of the Apostle, wrote a Catholic, i. e. Universal or
General, Epistle very presumptuously, to instruct them which believed better
than himself, and to exhort them to strive with him for this New Doctrine, and
to revile the Lord and his Apostles, and his holy Church.

Again, speaking of one of their highly esteemed Martyrs, he writes in this
sort: And that we trouble not our selves with many, let the Prophetess tell us
touching Alexander, who called himself a Martyr, with whom she has banqueted,
whom also many do adore, i. e. worship, whose Thefts and other heinous Crimes,
which he suffered for, I will not presently rehearse, for they are publicly
known and registered, Whose Sins has he pardoned? Whether does a Prophet yield
theft unto a Martyr, or a Martyr an immoderate Desire of gathering unto a
Prophet?

For as when Christ commanded, You shall not possess Gold, neither Silver,
neither two Goats; these, on the contrary, seek after the Possession of
unlawful Substance; for they whom they False prophets covetous.
call Prophets and Martyrs, have extorted Money, i. e. wrested it from people
per force, not only of the Rich, but of the Poor, the Fatherless and Widows.
But if they plead innocence, let them stay and join with us in the issue in the
matter, upon this condition, that if they be overthrown, at leastwise from
henceforth they will cease to commit the like Sin again. The Fruits of the
Prophets are to be tried; the Tree is Note.
to be known by its Fruit. And that the case of Alexander may be known of such
as desire it, he was condemned at Ephesus by Aemilius Frontinus, not for his
Profession, but for his presumptuous and bold enterprised Theft, being a lewd
Person: And then with a false pretense of Christian Profession, seducing the
faithful of that place, he was pardoned and set at liberty.

Again, in another place, he writes of their Prophets thus.
If they deny their Prophets to have been Bribers, let them affirm it
conditionally that if it be proved, they be no longer Prophets. For all the
Works of a Prophet are necessarily to be proved. Tell me, I beseech ye, Is it
seemly for a Prophet to painthimself in Colors? Is it seemly for a Prophet to
smooth himself with the white glittering Stibi^? i. e. A certain Stone which
makes the Skin look very fair, when it is rubbed with it. Is it seemly for a
Prophet to pinch and gingerly to set forth himself? Is it seemly for a Prophet
to Dice and Cards? Is it seemly for a Prophet to be a Usurer? Let them answer
me.

Of Apollonius's Apology before the Senate. Chap. 19.

Apollonius, who was said to be a Christian Philosopher, i. e. a Lover of
Wisdom and Learning, was brought before the Tribunal, i. e. Judgment Seat, at
Rome; and being earnestly entreated of the Judge to render an account of his
Faith before the Noble Senate, i. e. the Council, he exhibited, i. e. gave, or
presented, in the presence of them all, a notable Apology, i. e. Defense or
Speech, of his Faith, in which he suffered Martyrdom, i. e. a suffering of
grievous torment unto death, for constant perseverance A cruel Law against the
Christian^
in true Religion. For the ancient Deeree was of Force, and prevailed among
them, that the Christians which were once presented before the Tribunal-Seat,
and not revoked, i. e. called back again, their Opinions should no more be set
a liberty.

A Controversy among the Bistops about celebrating Chap. 23.
Easter.
Immediately upon this, Victor Bishop of Rome goes about to sever from the
unity in the Communion, all the Churches of Asia, together with A division
among the Christians when they apostatized.
the adjoining Congregations, as savouring not aright, and inveighing, i. e.
speaks bitterly, against them in his Epistles, and pronounces flatly all the
Brethren there for excommunicated Persons. But this not pleasing all the
Bishops, they exhorted him to seek after those things which concerned Peace,
and Unity, and Love between Brethren. And one amongst the rest wrote to him,
saying, Neither is this Controversy only of the Day, but also of the kind or
manner of fasting; some think they ought to fast Their Opinions concerning
fasting.
one Day, some two, some forty; and telling the Hours throughout day and night,
they count a day. Moreover, he added how that they that were Bishops before
Soter, of the Sea which thou governest, neither did so observe it themselves,
neither left they any such Commandment unto their Posterity; and yet they
(though not observing the same Custom) were at unity with them, which resorted
to them from other Churches, and did observe the same, although their
Observation was contrary to the Minds of such as observed it not.

The Sixth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS. Concerning Origin.
THis Origin, when he was yet young, bear in his Mind fervent desire of
Martyrdom. Chap. 2.
He exhorted his Father not to Faint, when he was in close Prison. He was of a
Child trained up in the Holy Scriptures, and he contented not himself with the
bare and casual (i. e. that which happened by chance, or uncertain) reading of
the Words, but sought farther, searching the perfect profound understanding
thereof. When his Father died a Martyr, he was left an Orphan, i. e. one that
wants Father or Mother; of the years of seventeen, He was also afterward
received of a certain Matron, i. e. a grave Motherly Woman, who was very rich,
and also Religious. He was one that detested the Doctrine of Heretics He
purchased unto himself a Famous Opinion among the Faithful, in that he
cheerfully embraced, in the heat of Persecution, all the Martyrs, not only of
his Acquaintance, but such as were unto him unknown: He visited not only such
as were fettered in deep Dungeons and close Imprisonment, neither only such as
looked for the last Sentence of Execution, but after Judgment given and
Sentence pronounced. He was present with the Martyrs, boldly accompanying them
to the place of execution, putting himself in great peril oftentimes, boldly
embracing them; so that once the furious Rage of the fond Multitude of the
Gentiles (i. e. such as did not profess the Faith of Christ, or Heathen) had
stoned him to death, if the divine power of God had not marvelously delivered
him. Soldiers were commanded to watch about his House, because of the
multitude that came to be instructed of him in the Christian Faith.

It is said of him, that as he taught, so he lived; that as he lived, so he
taught. When he perceived Nota.
many Disciples to frequent unto him, and that the Charge of the School was now
by Demetrius the Bishop committed unto him alone, he supposed the reading of
Humanity (i. e. Courtesy or Pleasant Manners) to be out of Season, and
transformed the School, as altogether ^nprofitable, by reason of profane
Literature, to the exercise of godly Discipline (i. e. Instruction.) After good
advice taken for necessary Provision, he sold the profane Writers, Origin sold
his Philosophy books.
which he had diligently perused, and laid by him, enjoing the Buyer ^ay by day
four half penny of the set Price, wherewith he contented himself.

Of the Martyrdom of Potamaiaena a Virgin, Marcella her Mother, and Basilides a
Soldier. Chap. 4.

It is said that Potamaiaena for the Chastity of her Body, and Purity of Mind,
strove very stoutly with her Lovers; and that after she had suffered very much
for the Faith of Christ, with her Mother Marcella, she was burnt with fire, and
consumed to ashes; after Sentence pronounced, Potamaiaena was taken and led to
Basilidos, a Soldier of Authority among the Host, to execution. And when the
Multitude molested her fore, spitefully handling her with opprobrious, i. e.
repro^chful, Terms; Basilides repressed and rebuked their raging Speeches,
Basilides compassion
pitying her very much, and practicing great Courtesy toward her: And, on the
other side, she approved and acknowledged his courteous Dealings toward her,
and bade him be of Good Cheer, etc. When she had done speaking to him, Pitch
scalding hot was poured by little and little over all her Body. and such was
the suffering that this Worthy Virgin sustained.

But not long after, Basilides being required by his Fellow Soldiers to swoar
for some occasion or other, he refused, and said That it did not become
Basilides would not swear.
him, or it was not lawful for him to swear, for h^ was a Christian. At the
first he was thought to dally; but when he constantly a vouched it, i. e.
affirmed it boldly, he was brought before the Judge, and there confessing the
same, was clapped in Prison, afterward he was beheaded and suffered Martyrdom.

Clemens Bishop of Alexandria, of the Canonical Chap. 13.
Scripture.
The Epistle unto the Hebrews he affirms to be Paul's for undoubted, and
therefore written in the Hebrew Tongues for the Hebrews sakes, but faithfully
translated by Luke, and preached unto Note.
the Gentiles. It is not to be misliked at all, says he, that Paul an Apostle
is not prefixed to this Epistle; for, says he, writing unto the Hebrews,
because of the ill Opinion they conceived of him, very wisely concealed his
Name, lest that at first he should dismay them, i. e. astonish them. Afterward
of the Order of the Evangelists, according unto the Tradition of the Elders, he
writes thus: The Gospels which contain the Genealogies (i. e. a description of
Stocks, Lineages, or Pedigrees) are placed and counted, first, The Gospel after
Mark was written upon this occasion: When Peter preached openly at Rome, why
Mark wrote.
and published the Gospel by rote, many of the Auditors entreated Mark, being
the Hearer and Follower of the Apostle a long while, and one that well
remembered his Words, to deliver them in writing such things as he had heard
Peter preach before; which thing when he had signified to Peter, he neither
forbad him, nor commanded him to do it.

John last of all, seeing in the other Evangelists the Humanity of Christ set
forth at large, Why John wrote.
being entreated of his Friends, and moved by the Holy Ghost, wrote chiefly of
his Divinity.

Bishops were divided about a Lay-man's Preaching. Chap. 19.

Origin was entreated of the Bishops to dispute in the open Church, and to
expound the Holy Scripture, before he was called to the Ministry: Which may
evidently appear, by that which they wrote in defense of the fact unto
Demetrius concerning him, after this manner: (He laid this down in his Letters,
that there was never such a Practice heard of: that there could no where the
like President be found, that Laymen, i. e. such as are not of the Clergy) in
presence of Bishops have taught in the Church. We Demetrius answered.
know not for what cause he reports a manifest untruth, whenas there may be
found such as in open Assemblies have taught the People; yea, whenas they were
present Learned Men that could profit the People: And moreover, Holy Bishops at
that time also exhorting them to Preach; as several might be instanced.

Dionysius Bistop of Alexandria reports in his Chap. 40.
Epistle, the Constancy of such as were Martyred at Alexandria, under Decius;
as follows.
Dionysius unto Rabius Bishop of Antioch.
This Persecution was not begun by the Emperor's Edict (i. e. Proclamation or
Decree) but one whole year before: For there came unto this City a certain
Southsayer, and Inventer of Mischief, who moved and stirred up the whole
Multitude of the Heathen against us, and excited (i. e. stirred up) them to
defend the Superstition of their Native Soil: By whom they being thus provoked,
and having won to their side such as were of Power and Authority, to perpetrate
(i. e. to commit any unlawful thing) all impious Acts, they persuaded
themselves, that the only Worship of Devils and our Slaughter was Piety (i. e.
Godliness) it self. First then, they apprehended a certain Minister, and
commanded him to utter Blaspemy; who for disobedience therein, was beaten with
Clubs, his Face and Eyes they pricked with A Martyr stoned.
sharp Quills; afterward they led him forth, and stoned him to death.

Again, they brought into the Temple of Idols, a Faithful Woman named Quinta,
and constrained her to Worship; who contrarying and abhorrying their Idols, had
her Feet bound Heathen Cruelty.
together, and by them trailed and lugged all along the Streets. which were
paved with sharp Stones; and withal being beaten against Millstones, and sore
scourged, she was brought forth to the place and executed. Which being done,
they all almost with one accord violently rushed into the Houses of the
Religious, and and the wicked led the heady multitude unto their Neighbors
Houses, whom they knew to be godly and well-disposed, and they destroyed,
spoiled, stole, and bore away the precious Jewels; but the vile, the base, and
the wooden stuff they threw out into the Street, and burned it to ashes;
showing forth thereby a Resemblance, or Spectacle of a City taken and ransacked
by the Enemy. But the Brethren took it in good Part, and very cheerfully
suffered they the Loss of their Goods; much like unto them of whom Paul has
testified, so great was the Rage of the Heathen, that there was no way left for
us to pass, no not the common Highway, nor any By passages either by day or
night; they cried out all, and exclaimed every where; there was no other
choice, but either to utter Blasphemy, or to be drawn and burnt at a Stake. But
in the end, this Sedition and Civil War overtook the seditious Persons
themselves, and turned upon them the selfsame Cruely, which they before had
practiced upon us; so that for a little Season we refreshed our selves, their
Fury wherewith they raged against us being somewhat abated. But a while after,
the alteration of the Imperial Scepter was made known unto us, which
before-time had been very favorable unto us, but now threatened great Mischief
to ensue, And the Emperors Edict or Proclamation was proclaimed; and that most
dreadful Saying of our Savior Proclamation aagainst Christians
prognosticated (i. e. foretold) long before, then took place, That if it had
been possible, the very Elect themselves should have been offended..

Then did all tremble and Quake for fear; some forthwith of the mightier sort
fled away, doubting what would befall them; some of their own accord were
carried away with their worldly Affairs, some were persuaded by their
Neighbors, and being called by their Names, were present at their profane and
impious Sacrifices: Some waxed pale and trembled, not as though they would
Sacrifice, but like to become Sacrifices and Oblations (i. e. Offerings) to the
Idols, so that the whole Multitude derided them; for they seemed manifestly to
be timorous both to die, and also to Sacrifice; some went stoutly to their
Altars, and affirmed boldly that they never were Christians; some other there
were that held with both sides; some fled, and some were taken, whereof diverse
endured Fetters and Imprisonments: Othersome after long imprisonment, before
they came unto the Tribunal (i. e. Judgment) Seat, renounced (i. e. forsook or
denied) their Faith; yea, some denied Christ, after they had endured Torments.
But Iulianus and Cronion (who confessed and acknowledged the Lord with a sound
Faith) were burned to ashes in the presence of the People, which compassed them
round about.

Whenas they were brought forth, a certain Soldier rebuked such as reviled
them, wherefore they exclaimed against him, so that he was brought forth in
that great Skirmish for the Christian Faith, and was beheaded.

Dioscorus, a young Man of fifteen years old (with others) were committed:
First of all the Judge took the young Man in hand with A young Sufferer.
fair Speeches, as though he were easy to be entreated; afterward with
Torments, as though he were soon terrified; but he for all his persuasion,
would neither bow at his Flatteries, or break at his Threats. The rest, after
they had endured cruel rending and dis-jointing of their bodily Members, he
commanded to be burned with fire: But Dioscorus he set at liberty, wondering at
his gracious Countenance (which gave a glittering shine) and the wise Answers
which proceeded out of his mouth, saying he would grant him longer space to
repent and remember himself, for his tender years sake. Moreover, Nemesion an
Egyptian was accused of Theft, whereof, after he had openly purged and cleared
himself before the Centursion (i. e. Captain of 100 men) again he was accused
of Christianity, wherefore he was bound and brought before the President (i. e.
a Ruler or Judge.) But the most cruel and unjust Judge delivered him among the
Thieves, to be twice more grievously tormented and vexed.

There stood before the Tribunal-Seat certain Soldiers compassion.
Soldiers, and together with them old Theophilus, who (when any of the
Christians came to hear the Sentence or Judgment, and then was ready to shrink)
so strugled, that they were ready to burst within themselves; they nodded with
their Countenance, and beckned with their Hands, exhorting them to Constancy,
with many signs and gestures of the Body; the which when the Multitude in
compass had perceived, before that any laid hands on them preventing their
doings, they stepped forth before the Bar, and proclaimed themselves to be
Christians; so that the President and his Assistants were amazed, and the
Christians upon whom the Sentence had past, were thereby emboldened to suffer,
and the Judges marvellously afraid. These therefore departed from the Tribunal
(i. e. Judgment) seat cheerfully, and rejoiced in the testimony of their Faith,
God gloriously triumphing in them.

Ischyrion martyred by his Master. Chap. 41.

Many others (says Dionysius) throughout the Cities and Villages, were
quartered and dismembered by the Ethnicks (i. e. Heathens) whereof for example
sake I will rehearse one. Soldiers Zeal.
Isohrion, being a Noble-man's hired Servant, and by Office his Stoward, was
commanded by his Master to do Sacrifice, and when he obeyed not, he was
contumeliously (i. e. reproachfully) reviled. The Heathen Master seeing his
Christian Servant so constant, p^rsisting in his former Opinions, takes a
great Cudgel in his hand, and beat his Body and Bowels till Breath departed.
What shall I say of the multitude of them which wander in the desert, and waste
mountains, consumed with Famine and Hunger, and Cold and Diseases, spoiled by
Thieves, and devoured by Beasts, whose Blessedness and Victories, they that
remain alive are able to testify. These things (Brother) I write not in vain,
but that thou may understand, what and how great Evils and Mischiefs have
happened among us, whereof they know more, which among all others have felt
most.

Of Novatus his Heresy and Impiety. Chap. 42.

There was a certain Priest of Rome that was puffed up with Pride, became
himself the Author and Ringleader of his own Heretical Sect (to wit) of such as
through their swelling Pride did call themselves Kathrous (i. e. Puritans)
whereof there was a Synod (i. e. a General or Universal Assembly) gathered
together at Rome, of threescore Bishops, besides many Ministers and Deacons:
And it was decreed, that Novatus, together with such as swelled and consented
unto his unnatural Opinion, repugnant, i. e. disagreeing, or contrary, to
brotherly Love, should be excommunicated and banished the Church, etc.

It is said, that this Novatus longed of old after a Bishopric; and to the end
he might conceal his own peevish Desire, he used the Cloak of Arrogance, i. e.
Pride or Loftiness, who chose two men of a desperate Condition to be partakers
of his Heresy: These being simple men, not knowing their crafty and malicious
Fetches, they were unclosed by such lewd Persons as were suborned, i. e. were
brought in for false Witnesses, for the purpose; and a^ut ten a Clock when they
were somewhat tipsie, i. e. wanton, or somewhat drunk with Wine, and well
crammed with Victuals, were constrained to create him Bishop, with imaginative,
or devised and frivolous, i. e. vain laying on of Hands, the which craftily and
subtly, not compatible for his Person, he challenged unto himself.

It is said of him, that he being loath to die, and desirous of Life, in the
time of Persecution, denied himself to be a Priest: And when he was entreated
by the Deacons, and admonished to come forth of the house (wherein he had
enclosed himself) and to minister unto the necessity of the Brethren which
wanted; he was so far from yielding to the Deacons, that he went away, and
departed in a Chafe, saying, That he would playno longer the Priest, but addict
himself unto another Trade of Philosophy. It is said of him, that when he
distributed the Oblation to People, that he caused them to swear unto him, By
the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they would never forsake him.

An Epistle of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, unto Novatus. Chapter 44.

Dionysius unto the Brother Novatus, sends greeting: If thou wast constrained
against thy will, as thou say, thou will declare the same, if thou return
willingly. Thou should have suffered rather any thing, than to have rent
asunder the Church of God; neither is this Martyrdom which is suffered for not
severing and dividing the Church of less Glory than that which is tolerated, i.
e. suffered, for denial of Sacrifice unto Devils, yea, in Judgment, it is of
far greater Glory. For in the one Martyrdom is suffered for one Soul, in the
other for the Universal Church; i. e. the Church in general, or the whole
Church. For if thou either persuade the Brethren, or constrain them to return
to Unity, this notable Act will be far greater than the Fault that went before;
and the one will be imputed, i. e. laid to his charge, the other will be
commended: If thou can not persuade the rebellious and disobedient, save at
leastwise thy own Soul. I desire thy Health in the Lord, and thy embracing
Peace and Unity.

The Seventh BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
Concerning Origin.
Origin is said to have suffered much affliction for Christ's sake, being
famous, eloquent, Chap. 1.
trained in the Church even from his Youth up; but through Envy he was brought
before the Rulers and Magistrates, and through the despiteful subtilty and
crafty Invention of Satan, he was brought into great slander and blemish of
Infamy. They say, that the Authors of Iniquity devised that a Man should work
the feat; that is, they prepared an Ethiopian, or foul Black-moor, beastly to
abuse his Body; but he not being willing to away with, neither willing to hear
of so horrible an Act, brake out into loud Speeches, and exclaimed at both the
things which were given him in choice: Rather than the one, he would do the
other. The Choice was, That either a Black-moor should play the Sodomite with
him; or he himself should Twotkings put to his choice. His Fall.
sacrifice unto Idols: And in the end he consented to Sacrifice; whereof when
they had put Frankincense crifice in his hand, they threw it into the Fire upon
the Altar. By this means he was by the Judge put from Martyrdom, and also
banished the Church. After that, he was entreated by the Priests of Jerusalem,
to bestow a Sermon upon the People in the Church; after great entreaty, and in
a manner constrained by the Priests, he rose up, took the Bible, opened it, and
happened upon this Parcel of Scripture: Unto the ungodly, said God, Why do
thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in thy mouth? When he had thus
read, he clasped the Book, Psalm. 50. He was guilty.
sat down, and burst out into Tears, together with all the Audience, i. e. the
Assembly of People, which wept with him. He lived till he was Threescore and
nine Years old: And after his Fall, he wrote his Lamentation, out of which I
have drawn this following Extract.

O ye Saints and Blessed of God, with waterish Eyes and wet Cheeks soaked in
D^lour (i. e. Sorrow) and Pain; I beseech you to fall down before the
Mercy-seat of God for me, miserable Sinner: Woe is me, because of the Sorrow of
my Heart: Woe is me that my Soul is thus afflicted; woe is me that I am compassed
thus on every side, and shut up in my Sin, and that there is no Health in me:
Woe is me, O Mother, that ever thou broughtest me forth for a skilful Lawyer, to
be overthrown in his unrighteous Dealing; for a religious Man to fall into
extreme Impiety (i. e. Ungodliness.) Woe is me, O Mother, which broughtest me
forth a righteous man to be conversant in unrighteousness; an Heir of the
Kingdom of God, but now an Inheritor of the Kingdom of the Devil; a perfect
Man, yet a Priest found wallowing in Impiety; a Man beautified with Honor and
Dignity, yet in the end blemished with Shame and Ignominy (i. e. Infamy) a Man
beset with many Evils, and choked with infamous Doings: Woe is me, O Mother,
which broughtest me forth as an high and lofty Turret (i. e. Tower) yet
suddenly turned down to the Ground; as a fruitful Tree, yet quickly withered;
as a burning Light, yet forthwith darkened; as a running Fountain, yet by and
by dried up.

Woe is me that ever I was bedecked with all Gifts and Graces, and now seem
pitifully deprived of all. But who will minister moisture unto the Temples of
my Head, and who will give streams of Tears unto my Eyes, that I may bewail my
self in this my sorrowful plight (i. e. estate.)

Alas, O Priesthood, how shall I bewail thee? Alas, O Ministry, how shall I
lament thee? O all you my Friends tender you my case, pity my Person, in that I
am dangerously wounded. Pity me, all ye my Friends, in that I am now become an
abject Person (i. e. a Castaway, or one cast down in mind, almost desperate:)
Pity me, O ye my Friends, in that I have now trodden under-foot the Seal and
Cognizance (i. e. notable Token) of my Profession, and joined in League (i. e.
Peace, Truce, or Friendship) with the Devil: Pity me, O ye my Friends, in that
I am rejected and cast away from the Face of God: It is for my lewd Life that I
am thus polluted, and noted with open shame: Bewail me whom the Angels have
bewailed; bewail me whom the Saints have bewailed; bewail me, O all ye Nations
under Heaven, in that I am fallen from my Glory.

The Lord has made and engrafted me a fruitful Vine, but instead of pleasant
clustered Grapes, I have brought forth pricking Thorns: Bewail me also, for
that instead of Grapes I have brought forth Brambles.

Alas, what have I felt, and how am I fallen? Alas, how am I thus come to
naught? There is no Sorrow comparable unto my Sorrow; there is no affliction
that exceeds my affliction; there is no bitterness that passes my
bitterness; there is no Lamentation more lamentable than mine, neither is there
any Sin greater than my Sin, and there is no salve for me.

Alas that ever I was Doctor, and now occupy not the room of a Discipl^: Thou
know, O Lord, that I fell against my Will, whenas I went about to enlighten
others, I darkened my self; when I endeavored to bring others from death to
life, I brought my self from life to death: When I minded to present others
before God, I presented my self before the Devil; when I desired to be found a
Friend and a Favourer of Godliness, I was found a Foe, and a Furtherer of
Iniquity: When that I set my self against the Assemblies of the wicked, and
reproved their Doings, there found I shame and the most pestilent Wound of the
Devil: When that I was ignorant and unskilful in the diverse slights of strivers
which commonly entrap men; I allured and exhorted them to the knowledge of the
Son of God; wherefore after much sifting, they promised me, unhappy man, crafty
Conveyances to avoid the Subtilty of Satan. But after that I departed from
them, the Devil in the same night transformed himself into an Angel of Light,
and reasoned with me, saying, When thou art up in the morning, go on, and
persuade them, and bring them to God; if they demand ought of thee, if in case
they condescend and hearken unto thee, do It, and cease not, staggering nothing
at the matter, to the The Serpent's subtilty.
end many may be saved.

And again, the Devil going before to prepare the way, whetted their Wits to
devise mischief against me silly Wretch, and sowed in their Minds Hypocrisy,
Dissimulation, and Deceit. But I, O unhappy Creature, skipping out of my Bed at
the dawning of the day, could not finish my wonted Devotion, neither accomplish
my usual Prayer, but wishing that all men might be saved, and come unto the
knowledge of the Truth, folded and wrapped my self in the snares of the Devil.
I got me unto the wicked; I required of them to perform the Covenant made the
night before.

O blinded Heart, how did thou not remember? O foolish Mind, how did thou
not bethink thy self? O witless Brain, how did thou not understand? O thou
Sense of Understanding, where did thou sleep? But it was the Devil which
provoked thee to slumber and sleep, and in the end slew thy unhappy and
wretched Soul. He bound my Power and Might, and spoiled me of my Knowledge; he
bound my Power and Might, and wounded me. I answered but in word, and became
reproachfully defamed: I spoke without malice, yet felt a spite. The Devil
raised an Assembly about me, and pronounced against me that unjust Sentence:
ORIGIN has Sacrificed. O thou Devil, what have thou done unto me? How have
thou wounded me? I bewailed sometime the Fall of Sampson, but now have I felt a
far worse my self; I bewailed heretofore the Fall of Solomon, yet now am I
fallen far worse my self; I have bewailed heretofore the State of all Sinners,
yet now have I plunged in them all.

Sampson had the Hair of his Head clipped and cropped off, but the Crown of
Glory is fallen off from my Head: Samson lost the carnal Eyes of his Body, but
my spiritual Eyes are dug out. It was the Wiliness of a Womon that brought
him to his Confession, but it was my own Tongue that brought me to this sinful
Fall: And even as he wanted after that the loss of his earthly Possession; so
my Tongue having bolted out this wicked Saying, deprived me of the spiritual
Gifts, which sometimes have flowed with Heavenly Riches. And even as he being
severed from the Israelites, and cleaving unto Foreigners, endured these
things; so I going about to save notorious Sinners, brought my self Captive
unto Captives, and the Bond-slave of Sin. Alas, my Church lives, yet am I a
Widdower; alas, my Sons be alive, yet am I barren: Alas, every Creature
rejoiceth, and I alone am forsaken and sorrowful: Alas, O Church, wherein I was
gladsome: Alas, O Seat, wherein I sat full merry: Alas, O Spirit, which
heretofore came down upon me, why have thou forsaken me? I am forsaken, and
become desolate, because of the Corruption and Filth of mine Iniquity. Bewail
me that am deprived of all Godliness; bewail me, O ye blessed People of God,
who am banished from God; bewail him who is bereaved of the Holy Ghost; bewail
me that am thrust out of the Wedding-Chamber of Christ: Bewail me who once was
thought worthy the Kingdom of God, but now altogether unworthy: Bewail me that
am abhorred of the Angels, and severed from the Saints of God: Bewail me for
that I am condemned to eternal Punishments: Bewail me, for that I am here on
Earth, and now tormented with the Prick of Conscience: And what shall I do I
wot not, being thus on every side beset with Misery.

If there be any Man that can, I beseech him now to help me with his earnest
Prayers, and with his sorrowful Tears; for now it behooves me to shed infinite
Tears for me great Sin. Who knows whether the Lord will have mercy upon me,
whether he will pity my Fall, whether he will tender my Person, whether he will
be moved with my Desolation, whether he will have respect unto my Humility, and
incline his tender Compassion toward me, who have no taste nor relish of him,
but am as the unsavory Salt.

Now let the Elders mourn, for that the Staff whereto they leaned is broken:
Now let the Young Men mourn, for that their Schoolmaster is fallen: Now let
the Virgins mourn, It is sasd Origin gelded himself.
for that the Advancer thereof is defiled: Now let the Priests mourn, for that
their Patron (i. e. a great Friend) and Defender is shamefully fallen: Now let
all the Clergy (i. e. Bishop, Priests, Deacons, etc.) mourn, for that their
Priest is fallen from the Faith: Woe is me that I sell so lewdly; who is me that
I fell most dangerously, and cannot rise again.

Now all ye which behold my Wound tremble for fear, and take heed that ye
slumber not, neither fall into the like Crime (i. e. Fault or Offense;) but
come jointly which have the same measure of Faith, let us assemble together and
rend our Hearts, and provoke streams of Tears to gush out of the Temples of our
Heads: I mourn and am sorry from the Heart root, O ye my Friends, that ever I
fell from aloft; I have fallen, and am bruised, there is no Health in me. Let
the Angels lament over me, because of this my dangerous Fall: Let the Garlands
and Crowns of the Saints lament over me, for that I am severed from among their
blessed Assemblies: Let the Holy-Church lament over me, for that I am ruinously
decayed: Let all the People lament over me, for that I have my deaths Wound. I
was constrained of the Holy Bishops to break out into some Words of
Exhortation, and taking the Book of Psalms in my hand, I prayed and opened; and
I lighted upon that Sentence, the which I am ashamed to repeat, yet compelled
to pronounce, Unto the ungodly said God, Why do thou preach my Laws, and
take my Covenant in thy Mouth? But bewail me, and lament this my bitter
Sorrow; bewail me who am in like case with the reprobate Jews (i. e. Castaways)
for that which was said unto them by the Prophet, now sounds alike in my
Ears; What shall I do that am thus beset with many Mischief.

Alas, O Death, why do thou linger, to wit, that thou may spite and bear me
malice? O Satan, what mischief have thou wrought unto me? How have thou pierced
my Breast with thy poisonous Dart! Think thou that my ruin will avail thee
any thing at all? think thou to procure unto thy self ease and rest, while
that I am grievously tormented?

Who is able to signify unto me whether my Sins be wiped and done away?
whether that I have escaped the Pains which greatly I feared? Who is able to
signify to me whether again I shall be coupled, and made a Companion of the
Saints?

Alas, O the Bosom of the Father which I am deprived of! Alas, that I became
Partaker with the rich Man of his Condemnation in the horrible Pit, and partner
of his Thirst, in the bitter place full of sorrow and heaviness; why have thou
broke down my hedge and strong hold? The wild Boar out of the Wood has
destroyed me, and the wild Beast of the field has eaten me up; rid me, O Lord,
from the roaring Lion.

The whole Assembly of Saints do make intercession unto thee for me, which am
an unprofitable Servant; have me, O Lord, out of the mouth of the ravenous
Wolf, and suffer me not to become the Sacrifice of Sin, but let down upon me
thy Holy Spirit, that with his fiery Countenance he might put to flight the
crooked Fiend of the Devil, that I may be brought home again unto thy Bosom;
that the Bill of Sin written against me may be blotted out; that my Lamentation
may cease in the Evening, and receive Joy in the Morning: Let my Sackcloth be
rent asunder, and gird me with Joy and Gladness; let me be received again into
the Joy of my God; let me be thought worthy of his Kingdom, through the Prayers
and Intercession of the Saints, through the earnest Petition of the Church,
which sorroweth over me, and humbles her self unto Jesus Christ, to whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory and Honor for ever, Amen.

Dionysius professed that he was profited by reading the Books of the Heretic.
Dionysius writes thus unto Philemon a Roman Minister, I have read over the
Traditions and Chap. 9.
Commentaries (i. e. Registers, or Records) of He eticks, not infecting my mind
with their impure cogitations, (i. e. unclean thoughts or thinkings) bu^
profiting my self so much thereby, that I reprehend (i. e. reprove) them with
my self, and detest, i. e. abhor, them utterly: And when I was brotherly and
charitably forbidden by a ^ertain Minister, who feared lest I should wallow in
the Puddle of their Maliciour writings, whereby my Soul might perish, who as I
thought said the truth. a certain Vision came to me from Heaven above, plainly
commanding and saying, Read all whatsoever comes into thy hands, for thou
shall be able to weigh, to prove and try all, and by this means at the first
thou came unto the Faith.

Concerning Valerianus the Emperor.
We have to consider, how that above all his Predecessors, i. e. those that
were in Place or Office Chap. 6.
before, he was disposed at the first, gentle before all the men of God, meek,
friendly-minded; for there was none of all the Emperors, so Courteous and
Friendly affected toward them, no not they which openly were accounted
Christians; He at the first embraced our men most Familiarly, most Lovingly,
and that openly, so that his Place was replenished with professors of the
Faith, and accounted for the Church of God: Yet afterward he became so
exceeding Cruel and Wicked, that he brought to pass Impure Ceremonies, i. e.
unclean Rites or Customs, execrable, i. e. Herrible or Wicked, Enchantments,
and abominable Sacrifices: He made a Slaughter of miserable Children: He
Sacrificed Cruel inhumanity.
the Sons of Unfortunate, i. e. unhapy, Parents: he searched the Bowels of
newly born Babes, spoiling asunder the shaped Creatures of God, as if by such
heinous offenses he should become Fortunate, so that he became a deadly foe
unto the Catholic, i. e. Universal or General, Christian Faith, under which
was raised the Eighth Persecution against the Christians.

Of Dionysius constancy, and fidelity in the time of Tryaly; of his Banishment
and Suffering.
In as much, says Dionysius, as it is commendable to conceal the secrecy of
the King, and Glorious to publish abroad the Works of God, forthwith then will
I show the willfulness of Germanus (a Bishop who at times Backbited Dion:) I
came unto Aemilianus with some of the Brethren: And Aemil. said not unto me
specially raise no Conventicle (i. e. a small Assembly commenly for Evil) for
this would have been Superfluous, (i. e. that which is too much) And the last
of all he having recourse unto that which was first, his speech was not of
making no Conventicles but that we should be no Christians at all, and
commanded me to cease henceforth from Christianity, For he thought that if I
altered mine Opinion diverse others would follow me. I made him answer neither
unreverently nor tediously, That we ought to obey God rather than Man. Yea, I
spoke with open Nota.
protestation: I worshipped God which is only to be worshipped, and no other,
neither will I be changed, neither cease henceforth from being a Christian:
This being said, he commanded us to depart to a certain Village adjoining upon
the Desert called Cephro, afterward Dionysius, with others were brought forth,
and Aemilianus sat in the Presidents room, and said, I have here signified by
word unto you the Clemency, i. e. gentleness or mercy, of our Liege and Lord
the Emperors toward you.

They have granted you Pardon, so that you turn unto that which Nature it self
does bind you unto, so that you Adore, i. e. Worship the Gods which guard the
Empire, and forget the things which Repugn, i. e. Resist Nature: What answer
make you unto these? I hope you will not Ungratefully, i. e. Unthankfully
refuse their Clemency, insomuch as they Counsel you to the better.

Dionysius answered, All men do not worship all Gods, but several men do
worship several Gods, whom they think good to be worshipped: But we Worship and
Adore the one God the Worker of all things, etc.

Then Aemilianus the President said, What let is there, I beseech you, but
that naturally you adore that your God (insomuch as he is a God) together with
these our Gods? Dionysius said, We Worship no other Gods; To whom Aemili. the
President said, I see you are altogether unthankful, Chap. 7.
you perceive not the Clemency of the Emperor; wherefore you shall not remain
in this City, but shall be sent into the Parts of Lybia unto a Dionysius and
others banished.
place called Cephro; this place by the Commandment of the Emperor, I have
picked out for you. It shall not be lawful for you and others to frequent
Conventicles, neither to have recourse, as they call them, unto Churchyards.

If any of you be not found in that place which I have appointed for you, or in
any Conventicle, let him under his peril. There shall not want sufficient
Provision; depart therefore whither you are commanded. So he commanded me,
says Dionysius, although sickly, to depart with speed, not deferring no not
one day. Afterward he wrote thus; Truly we are not absent, no not from the
corporal Congregation of the Lord (i. e. from some that were of or belonging to
the Body;) for, says he, I gather such as are in the City as if I were
present, being indeed absent in the Body, but present in the Spirit. And there
continued with us in Cephro, a great Congregation, partly of the Brethren which
followed us from out of the City, and partly of them which came out of Egypt;
and there. God opened to me a door unto his Word (that was in the place to
which he was banished) yet at the beginning we suffered persecution and
stoning, but at the length not a few of the Painims (i. e. Countrymen)
Heathens converted.
forsaking their carved Images, were converted. For unto such as before had not
received, then first of all we preached the Word of God, and insomuch as
therefore God had brought us among them, after that the Ministry was there
Chap. 7.
complete, he, to wit, Aemilianus removed us unto another place, which was
thought to be more rough: I hearing we must depart from thence, and knowing not
the place whither we were commanded to go, neither remembered I that ever before
I heard it named, for all that, took my Journey willingly and cheerfully. Yet
here I will accuse my self; for at the first I fretted and took it very
grievously. If Places better known and more frequented, had fallen unto our
Lot, it should never have grieved me; but that Place whither I should repair,
was reported to be destitute of all Brotherly and Friendly Consolation, subject
to the troublesome Tumult of Travelers, and violent Invasion (i. e. assault)
of Thieves.

Moreover, he relates how Germanus peradventure gloried of many Confessions,
and could tell a long Tale of the Afflictions which he endured: But what can be
repeated on our behalf? Sentences of Condemnation, Confiscations Christians
Sufferings.
(i. e. Forfeiture of their Goods to the Emperor or King's use) Prescriptions
(i. e. Banishment, or open sale made of their Goods) spoiling of Substance,
deposition of Dignities (i. e. deprivation of Honor) no regard of worldly
Glory, contempt of the Praises due unto Presidents and Consuls, threatening of
the Adversaries, the suffering of Reclamations (i. e. Gainsayings) Perils,
Persecutions, Errors, Griefs, Anguishes, and sundry Tribulations, etc. Yea,
there were Men, Women, young Men, old Men, Virgins, and old Women, Soldiers
and simple Men, of all sorts and sects of People; whereof some after stripes
and fire, were crowned Victors (i. e. Conquerors) some after Sword, some other
in small time sufficiently tried, seemed acceptable Sacrifices unto the Lord.
And yet to this day (said he) the President cease not cruelly to slay some
that are brought forth, to tear in pieces othersome with Torments; to consume
other with imprisonment and Fetters, commanding that none come nigh them, and
enquiring daily if any such Men be attainted (i. e. convicted, Nota.
or proved guilty of some great Crime.) Yet for all that, GOD refreshes the
Afflicted with cheerfulness, and frequenting of the Brethren.

How Persecution ceased. Chap. 2.

When Valerianus's Son got the Supremacy (i. e. chief Place, Rule, or
Authority) he wrote The Emperors Edict.
unto the Bishops, as follows: The Emperor Caesar P. L. etc. unto D. P. D.
together with the rest of the Bishops, sends greeting: The Benefit of our
gracious Pardon we command to be published throughout the whole World, that
they which are detained in Banishment, depart the Places inhabited of Pagans
(i. e. Heathens.) For the execution whereof, the Copy of this our Edict (i. e.
Proclamation or Decree) shall be your discharge, lest any go about to molest
you. And this which you now may lawfully put in ure (i. e. use) was granted by
us long ago.

Marinus a Soldier suffered Martyrdom. Chap. 13.

The cause was this; There is a certain Dignity among the Romans called the
Centurions Vine, the which whosoever does obtain, is called a Centurion, i. e.
a Captain of a hundred; when the Room was void, the Company called Marinus to
this Degree; and he being preferred, another came before the Tribunal, or
Judgmen-seat, and accused him, affirming that it was not lawful, by the ancient
Laws, for him to enjoy that Roman Dignity, because he was a Christian, and
sacrificed not unto the Emperor, and that it was his turn next to come in
place. The Judge being very much moved with this, first demanded what Opinion
Marinus was of, and when he saw him constantly confessing himself to be a
Christian; he granted him three Hours space to deliberate, i. e. advise or
consider. This being done, Theote^nus Bishop of Caesarea took Marinus in hand
with Exhortations, and showed him the Sword that hung by his side, and pulled
out of his Pocket the New Testament, and set it over against the Sword, and
bade him choose whether of these two he preferred or liked best, for the health
of his Soul, when he immediately stretching out his Hand, had taken up the Book
of Holy Scriptures: Hold fast then, says Theote^nus unto him, cleave unto God,
and thou shall enjoy the things thou have chosen, being strengthened by him, and
get in peace. After he had returned thence, the Crier lifted up his Voice, and
called him to appear at the Bar, the time granted for deliberation being now
ended. Standing therefore at the Bar, he gave Tokens of the noble Courage of
his Faith, wherefore in a while after as he was led, he had the Sentence of
Condemnation, and was beheaded.

Several Bishops wrote unto Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and to others, concerning
Paulus Samosatenus, Chap. 19.
who was rejected as a Heretic by them.
They say that neither by Art, Trade, or Exercise he attained unto the
abundance of Wealth he enjoyed, but with lewd Acts and Sacrilege (i. e.
robbing of a Church, or stealing of holy things) by injurious or wrongful and
tyrannical oppressing of the Brethren, whom he made to tremble for fear with
his guileful gain, and wily promise of hired Patronship, i. e. defense or
protection, by which subtilty and deceit he gained so much, that Procured the
Givers to be liberal, to the end they might be delivered from their
Adversaries, and so he turned Godliness into Gain. Neither need we declare how
that he being puffed up with Pride, usurped secular D^gnities, i. e. took into
his use contrary to right, worldly Honors and would rather be called a warlike
Captain, than a Bishop of the Church, walking stately through the Streets and
Marketplace reading Letters, and withal openly inditing; maintaining about him
a great troop to guard his Person, some going before, and some coming after; so
that our Faith and Religion ran to great spite, slander and hatred, by reason
of his swelling Pride and haughty Disdain. Neither will we rehearse the
monstrous Figments, i. e. Lies, which he feigned, his glorious Brags, the
uglisome Spectacles, i. e. horrible Sights, he devised to amaze the minds of
the simple sort. He made for himself a lofty Seat and high Throne, not like the
Disciple of Christ, but severed, in show and title after the manner of the
Princes of the World, smiting the thigh with the hand, pouncing the footstool
with his Feet: If any extolled him not as the use is upon Theaters, i. e.
places where People sit to behold solemn Games or Plays, with clapping of their
Hands, with shouting and hurling of their Caps; if any also both of Men and
Women had not skipped to and fro with busybodies and undescent obeisance, i.
e. uncomely Obedience by bowing the knee; if any as in the House of God had
behaved themselves honestly and decently, i. e. comely or handsomely, the same
he checked and all to be reviled.

He licensed the Bishops and Ministers of the adjoining Villages and Cities,
which honored Who licensed Bishops etc. to preach.
him to preach unto the People; the Elders and Deacons which accompany with him
know his Wickedness, but dare not accuse him, insomuch as they themselves are
guilty of the same Crimes; for he enricheth them, wherefore he is both beloved
and honored of them that gape after the like Gudgeons, i. e. Gift or Reward.

We know, beloved Brethren, that a Bishop and the whole Order of Priesthood,
ought to be a Pattern of Good Works unto the common People; neither, are we
ignorant of this, that many are fallen by reason of the closely kept Women, and
many again are subject to suspicion and slander.

The Eighth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
Concerning the Peace and prosperous Success of the Chap. 1.
Christian Affairs, and Calamity which followed after.
THE Clemency, or Mercy of the Emperors was so increased toward the
Christians, that they committed the Government of the Gentiles to them: And for
the great Favor they bore to our Doctrine, says Eusebius, they granted
Liberty and Security to the Professors of Christian Religion: What shall I say
of them, who in the very Palace of the Emperors, and Christians honored.
in the presence of Princes lived most familiarly. Yea the Bishops of all
Churches came to be in great Reverence and Favor among all sorts of Men, and
with all Magistrates, who can worthily describe those innumerable Heaps,
flocking Multitudes, throughout all Cities and Famous Assemblies, frequenting
the Places dedicated or appointed unto Prayer; because of which Circumstances,
they not contented with the old and ancient Buildings (which could not receive
them) have throughout all Cities Builded them from the Foundation wide and
ample Churches.

But then after that our Affairs through too much liberty, ease, and security,
degenerated, i. e. turned out of kind, from the natural Rule of Piety; and
after that one pursued another with open contumely, i. e. disgrace or reproach,
and hatred; and when that we impugned, i. e. resisted or assaulted, our selves
by no other than our selves, with the Armor of Spite, 2nd sharp Spears of
opprobrious, i. e. reproachful, Words, so that Bishops against Bishops, and
People against Note.
People raised Sedition, i. e. discord or strife: Last of all, when that cursed
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation had swom even to the brim of Malice, the heavy
hand of Gods high Judgment, after his wonted mann^r, whilst as yet the
Ecclesiastical Companies, i. e. them of, or such as belonged to the Church,
assembled themselves nevertheless, began softly by little and little to visit
us; so that the Persecution that was raised against us took its first original,
i. e. first beginning, from the Brethren which were under Banner in Camp,
whenas we were touched with no Sense or Feeling thereof, neither went about to
pacifice God; we heaped Sin upon Sin, thinking like careless Epicures, i. e.
such as are given to excess in Gluttony, that God neither cared, nor would
visit our Sins.

And they which seemed our Shepherds, laying aside the Rule of Piety, practiced
Contention and Schism among themselves, i. e. division in matters of Religion;
and whilst they aggravated, i. e. made things worse and worse by Words, these
thing, viz. Contention, Threatenings, mutual, i. e. that which passes one from
another, Hatred and Enmity, and every one proceeded in Ambition, i. e. Pride,
or immoderate Desire of Sovereignty, much like Tyranny it self; then, I say,
the Lord, according to the saying of Jeremiah, made the Daughter of Sion
obscure, and overthrew from above the Glory of Israel, and remembered not his
Footstool in the day of his Wrath.

Of Dioclesians Proclamations against the Christians. Chap. 3.

In the nineteenth Year of Dioclesian's Reign Cruel Proclamation.
was there Proclamations published, in which it was commanded, That the
Churches should be made even with the ground, the holy Scriptures by burning
them should be abolished, i. e. disannulled or destroyed; such as were in
Honor and Estimation should be contemned, and such as were of Families, if
they retained or held the Christian Faith, should be deprived of their Freedom.
And such were the Contents of the first Edict.

But in the Proclamations which immediately followed after, it was added: That
the Pastors, i. e. Shepherds, throughout all Parishes, first should be
imprisoned, next with all means possible constrained to Sacrifice: Afterward
some endured bitter Torments; others fainted for Fear, and at the first onset,
or first violent assault, were quite discouraged: Some were tortured and
launched with more intolerable pain, some failed of the purposed End, some were
found constant and perfect. Yet the Enemies of Truth triumphed and labored to
bring their purpose to effect.

Concerning the Persecution. Chap. 6.

The Persecution against the Christians grew so exceeding great, that some
after many Torments endured, were broiled to death; some were hanged, and some
were beheaded. And about that time, some of the Emperor's Palace happened to be
on fire, and when the Christians were taken in suspicion to be the Authors
thereof, by the Emperors commandment the whole Troop generally of all the godly
there, at that time was executed, whereof some with the Sword were beheaded;
others burned with fire, others carried in a Boat, and thrown into the deep
Sea. And such were the practices in the beginning of the Persecution at
Nicomedia. Afterward the Emperor commanded all the Pastors throughout every
Church, to be imprisoned and kept in hold; multitudes were enclosed or shut up,
and the Prisons of old appointed and ordained for Murderers, diggers of
Sepulchers; and riflers of Graves, were then replenished with Bishops,
Ministers, Deacons, etc. so that there Prisons filled with Christians
was no room in Prison for such as were condemned for heinous Offenses. Again,
when the former Edicts had taken place, there followed others, by virtue of
which, such as sacrificed were set at liberty, and such as resisted were
commanded to be tormented with a thousand kind of Torments.

Concerning the Roman Empire. Chap. 14.

Before the Roman Empire waged Battle against us, says Eusebius, in the space
the Emperors favored us, and maintained Peace, it may not sufficiently be
declared how prosperously the Commonwealth flourished and abounded Note.
with Goodness, etc. And whenas the Empire after this sort increased without
offense, and daily was enlarged, they had no sooner removed Peace from among
us, but they stirred up Battles as could not be reconciled. Not fully two years
after this Hurlyburly, i. e. tumult or stir, there was such a change happened
unto the whole Empire, which turned all upside down. For no small Disease
overtook the Chief Emperor, and bereaved, i. e. deprived, him of his Wits:
Afterward the Empire was divided into two parts, the which was never remembered
to have come to pass before that time.

Not long after Constantius the Emperor, passing all others throughout his
Lifetime in Clemency and Goodness toward his Subjects, when he died his Son
Constantine supplied his room: In his Life he was most benign among all the
Emperors; who alone of all the Emperors in our time governed most gloriously
and honorably during the whole term of his Reign, showing humanity and
bountifulness unto all Men, etc.

The Dissimulation of Maxentius. Chap. 15.

Maxentius, who exercised Tyranny at Rome, in the beginning of his Reign
dissembled our Faith egregiously (i. e. some time basely) creeping into Credit
by flattering the People of Rome; and therefore he commanded his Commonalty or
vulgar People, to cease from persecuting of the Christians, whereby he might
pretend a show of Piety, i. e. Godliness, and seem tractable and more benign,
i. e. favorable, than his Ancestors that went before him: But in process of
time, he was not indeed found the same which Men took him for, and hoped he
would be; for he fell into all kind of Enormities (i. e. he went out of rule or
measure) omitting no heinous Offense, how detestable and lascivious soever it
was unessayed (i. e. untried) wherefore all, both high Primates (i. e.
Archbishops) and inferior People, trembling for fear of him, were oppressed
with his intolerable Tyranny; yet neither by silence, neither by suffering this
grievous servitude (i. e. bondage or base estate) could they be free from the
bloody slaughter and imbrued murder of this Tyrant.

Concerning Maximinus, and his Proclamation in Ch 16, 17 18.
the behalf of the Christians.
It seems his Behavior toward the Christians was very cruel, and the
Persecution long and tedious in his day, which continued for 12 years: He
exceeded many in Hypocrisy, Superstition, Idolatry, Oppression, Prodigality,
in Drunkenness, Lechery, etc. wherefore a plague lighted on him, which took
root in his Flesh, Judgment on a Tyrant
and afterward proceeded even unto his Soul. At length being thus tormented,
and lying in this miserable condition, he began to ponder with himself the rash
Enterprises he had practiced against the holy Worshippers of God: Wherefore
returning unto himself, first he confessed his Sins unto God, next calling unto
him such as then were about him, he gave commandment, that with all speed they
should cease from persecuting the Christians; and that by the Commandment and
Decree of the Emperor, they should build again their Churches, etc. And his
Proclamations were published throughout the Cities, containing a Re^antation of
these things formerly prejudicial unto the Christians.

In the third Year of our Persecution under Chap. 22.
the Reign of Maximinus, the second Hurlyburly was raised against us; and the
Tyrants Letters were then first of all brought to Urbanus, charging all the
People of what Degree or calling soever, that they should Sacrifice unto their
Gods (the Magistrates also throughout every City busily applying themselves to
the same) and that the Beadles throughout all the City of C^sarea, should, by
virtue of the Presidents Edict, summon the Fathers, the Mothers and their
Children, to appear at the Idols Temple; and that the Tribunes should likewise
out of a Scroll (i. e. a piece of Paper or Parchment which might be called a
Bill) call every one by his Name; by reason whereof, there was no where but
heaviness, sobbing and sighing. And Apphianus went cheerfully unto the
President as he was sacrificing, and boldly took hold on his right hand, and
stayed him forthwith from doing Sacrifice, exhorting him thenceforth to cease,
and to be no more seduced; saying moreover, there was no reason that he should
despise the One, and the Only True God, and offer Sacrifices unto Devils,

Immediately after he was haled of the Presidents Train as of savage Beasts
furiously raging againest him, and tormented over all his Body with many
stripes, the which he patiently suffered; and for a while was clapped in prison;
and afterward shas brought before the Judge, and was tortured with many
Torments, and was finally cast into the Se.

Great Persecution against the Christians.
A young Virgin called Theodosia coming to Chap. 1.
salute certain Prisoners, she was apprehended, as if she had done some heinous
and horrible Offense, and she was haled before the President, and he forthwith
like a mad man bereaved of his Wits, scourged her bare sides with bitter and
grievous Lashes, and afterward she was drowned in the Sea. Afterward many
were condemned to the Mine-Pits:, not for Commodity and Profits sake, but for
Affliction and Misery; some burned; three Martyrs enjoined to buffet, if not to
kill one another; and some were torn of wild Beasts; and some of the Christians
were g^lded, and afterward condemned to the Quarries; and others were
condemned grievously, and chastised with Imprisonment and Fetters. Of which
number was Pamphilus, of all my Familiars, says Eusebius, my dearest Friend, a
Man who among all the Martyrs of our times, excelled for every kind of Virtue.
But not long after this Villainy exercised upon Pamphilus and others, Vengeance
from above began on a sudden to take hold on Urbanus their persecutor, while as
yet he governed in this sort; so that after great shame and ignominy being
convinced of heinous Crimes, and horrible Treachery, he was condemned to die;
then he whined like a Child, and cried for the help of the whole Nation which
he had ruled.

The Punishment of 130 Confessors, and of Persecution reviving again, against
the Christians. Chap. 27.

Not long after there were 130 valiant Champions out of the Country of Egypt,
Protesting their Faith in Christ and Religion to God-wards, which at the
Commandment of Maximinus, suffered in Egypt the like Torments (viz.) That their
right Eyes should be sticked upon the point of a Bodkin, and all to be dug
out, and searched to the inner Veins with a hot scalding Iron, and that the
left Leg should be Sawn alunder in the Knee-Sinews: But with these heinous and
horrible Treacheries practiced against the Noble and Renowned Martyrs of
Christ, the great heat of Persecution was assuaged, and the Flame thereof (as
it seemed unto us) by reason of their Blood was quenched, and now Pardon and
Liberty was granted unto the Confessors, for so the Christians (it seems) were
then called of Thebias, who were then oppressed with drugery in the digging of
Metais, growing in that Region: And we poor silly Christians, went about to
recreate our selves in this calm season of quiet peace: but he in whose hand it
lay to persecute us, I wot not how, neither by what motion, was again thoroughly
and wonderfully incensed, i. e. stirred up to Anger against the Christians.

Therefore, upon a sudden the Letters of Maximinus were sent to raise
Persecution against A new Persecution.
us in every Province, whereupon the President and the grand Captain of the
Emperors whole Host gave out Commandments by Writs, by Epistles and Public
Decrees unto the Wardens in every City, unto the Governors and Rulers of
Garrisons, unto Auditors, i. e. Officers of Account, and Recorders, that the
Emperors Edict with all speed might take effect: And charged moreover, that
withal Celerity, i. e. Swiftness or Speed, they should repair and build again
the Idol-groves, and Temples of Devils, lately gone to ruin: And also they
should bring to pass that Men and Women, their Households and Families, their
Sons and their Servants, together Sacrifised young and old.
with their tender sucklings hanging at their Mothers Breasts should Sacrifice,
and in very deed taste of the Sacrifice themselves, etc.

These things being come to this pass, and the Christians being (as it is most
like) altogether dismayed at these sad sorrowful Plunges wherewith they were
held: And the Ethnicks, i. e. Heathens themselves complained, of the
Intolerable, and Adsur'd, too too shameful a dealing, Cruelty to Heathen^
for they were cloyed with too much Cruelty and Tyranny, and this lamentable
season hanging every where over our Heads, the divine power of our Lord Jesus
Christ again gave unto these his Champions such valiant Courage of mind, that
they set at naught, tread down, and stamped under Foot, all the terrors and
threats which the Enemy could devise.

Three therefore of the Faithful Christians Linked together in one mind, went
unto the President as he Sacrificed, and with a loud voice exhorted him, to
reform himself, to rev^ke his Error, and to leave his Folly, affirming there
was no other God but he, who was the Author and Finisher of all things: And
being demanded Courage of the Christians.
who and what they were, boldly made answer, That they were Christians: whereat
Firmilianus being vehemently moved, without any more ado or farther Punishment,
commanded forthwith, They should be Beheaded.

The Ninth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
Maximinus forbad Assemblies in Churchyards.
THis Tyrant who bore Rule in the Eastern Parts, would not suffer the
Christians to Chap. 2.
live in peace, no not Six whole Months, but pur in Ure every Mischievous
Practice, to the overthrow of Peace and Tranquillity, first by a certain
pretense he goes about to bar us of our Liberty of meeting in Churchyards;
next, by sending certain Malicious Men, he incited, i. e. stirrod up, and
provoked against us the Citizens of Antioch, that they should buy of him for a
great benefit, that he would permit no Christian at all to dwell within his
Dominions.

Maximinus waged Battle with Licinnius and was Chap. 2.
overcome, and then Published an Edict in the behalf of the Christians.
Maximinus became so furious and mad that he broke the League made with
Licinnius, and he raised an Irreconcilable War; and in a short space therefore
with all might he molested in manner every City, and having gathered all his
host together and mustered a multitude of many Myriads, i. e. ten thousands of
Soldiers, he marched to Battle, trusting in Devils whom he took for Gods, and
was Arrogant, i. e. proud or Insulting, because of his great multitude of Armed
Soldiers, but he was overcome, and became subject to most vile shame and
reproach, and being stricken with rage and madness, he slew many Priests and
Prophets of their Gods; Afterward he ordained a most perfect absolute decree
in the behalf of the Christians Liberty.

Wherein he said; That if any were disposed to An Edict in behalf of the
Christians
cleave unto such Ceremonies (i. e. Rites, or Customs, or to addict themselves
unto the observation of that Religion, it might be Lawful for them without
Offense to follow their own will; And that they should be hindered or forbidden,
by no man.

Our pleasure is moreover, that without fear and suspicion, they should use
that service which pleased every man best, wherefore we have decreed to Publish
this EDICT, whereby it may appear manifest unto all Men, that it may be Lawful
for them as many as will follow that opinion and Religion, by this our gracious
gifts and Letters Pattents, i. e. Writs, or Commissions from the Prince, as
every one lists and is delighted, so to use that Liberty granted.
Religion, which him pleases, and after his own manner to exercise the same,
besides this also is permited unto them that they may build places of Prayer
for the Lord: Last of all, that this our gift may be the greater we have
vouchsafed to decree that also: That if any House or Manors, i. e. Farm-Houses
without the walls of the Cities, heretofore belonging unto the Christians
Title, by the Commandment of our Ancestors have passed unto the Crown, either
presently enjoyed by any City, or otherwise sold or given to any Man for a
reward, all these we have Commanded they should be revoked, to the Ancient
rights of the Christians, whereby all may have experience of our Piety and
Providence in this behalf.

These words of the Tyrant, not one year being fully past, followed the Edicts
or Proclamations which against the Christians were Engraven in Pillars.
Afterward he was smitten of God with a Plague from above, and his Flesh wasted
A Judgment upon this Persecution.
by an Invisible Fire, so that it consumed and dropped away, and lost all the
fashion of the old form, being become like a Painted Image, dried up of a long
time; his Eyes passing their bounds, left him Blind; at length he confessed he
suffered those things justly, and gave up the Ghost. Foelix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cantum. Happy is he, whom other men's harms do make to beware.

The Tenth BOOK OF EUSEBIUS.
The Heathen were glad of the Christians Success: The Emperor favored them
much.
THE Heathen being delivered and rid of the former Mischiefs, confessed
diversely, That the Only True God was the Defender of the godly Christians: But
unto us there was an unspeakable Joy (says Eusebius) which with incessant Hope
did depend upon Christ the Anointed of God: Moreover, the most Puissant, i. e.
Mighty, Emperors by their often Constitutions, i. e. Appointments, published in
the behalf of the Christians, have amplified and enlarged the things granted to
us by the free Bountifulness of God. Unto the Bishops also there came
favorable Letters from the Emperor; Dignities were bestowed, Sums of Money
and Presents were sent them.

The Edicts of Constantine and Licinnius, touching Christian Religion, and the
Liberty thereof.
Weighing with our selves, said they, that of old the Liberty of Religion was
not to be hindered, and every one had license after his Mind and Will; We have
presently commanded, that every one shall handle the holy Affairs at his
pleasure, and that the Christians shall retain their Faith of their former
Opinion and wonted Service. Whenas with prosperous Success we came to Milan,
and enquired of the things which made for the Commodity and Profit of the
Commonwealth, these amongst many other things seemed expedient, yea, before all
other, we purposed to decree; wherein the Reverence and Service due to God is
comprised (i. e. contained) that is to say, by which we might grant unto the
Christians altogether Free choice to embrace what Service and Ceremony pleased
them best, to the end the Divinity of the Celestial (i. e. Heavenly) Affairs
now every where received, might in some part be pleasing unto us, and to all
our Subjects.

Then according unto this our Pleasure, we have decreed, with sound and most
right Judgment, Liberty of conscience granted.
that License any Liberty be henceforth denied unto None at all, of choosing and
following the Christian Service or Religion, but that this Liberty be granted
unto every one, to addict his Mind unto that Religion which he thinks fit for
him, to the end that God may grant unto us his wonted Care and Goodness. And
now whosoever freely and firmly is disposed to retain the Christian Religion,
let him do it without all molestation or grievance. And because that we have
granted Liberty to use their Observance and Religion, if so please any; It
manifestly avails for the Tranquillity, i. e. ease and quietness, of our
Times, that every one have Liberty to choose and worship what God pleases him
best. This have we done, lest ought of our Doings seem prejudicial unto any
Service or Religion.

And because the said Christians are known not only to have enjoyed the place
of their Meetings and Assemblies, but also certain other peculiar (i. e.
proper) not to every one privately, but belonging by right unto their whole
Society; see that thou command all those according unto the Decree mentioned
before, to be restored unto the Christians.

Afterward the Emperor summoned a Synod i. e. a General or Universal Assembly,
of Bishops to meet at Rome, for the uniting and reconciling A Synod called.
of the Churches; for it seemed unto him very grievous, that there should be
found in his Provinces, a multitude of People prone, i. e. inclining unto the
worse, and disagreeing, and that among Bishops there should be variance.

Money granted unto Ministers by the Emperor. Chap. 6.

Constantine the Emperor unto Decilianus Bishop of Carthage, sends greeting:
Inasmuch as it pleased us to administer something for expenses sake, unto some
certain Ministers of the approved and most Holy Religion, throughout all the
Provinces of Africa: I have signified unto Ursus, that he should cause three
thousand Poles of Silves (i. e. certain Weights, one containin 222 pounds and
six ounces, the other weighing 208 pence) to be told unto thy Fidelity.

And forasmuch as I understand that some troublesome Persons were supposed to
pervert by some lewd Corruption, to People of the most Holy and Catholic (i.
e. Universal) Church; wherefore if thou perceive such Men to persist in their
Folly, without any more ado have recourse unto the Judges, and make them privy
thereof, that they consider of these as I charged them when they were present.

A Copy of the Epistle, by the which the Emperor freed the Bishops from paying
Tax or Tribute. Chap. 7.

We greet you, most Honorable Anilinus: Because it appears diversely, that if
the Religion wherein great estimation of Holiness is maintained be set at
naught, great danger will ensue to the public Affairs: And again, if the same
be orderly handled and maintained, great Prosperity and special Felicity (i. e.
Happiness) will follow unto the Roman Empire, and the Affairs of all Men, the
Goodness of God exhibiting (i. e. giving) the same. It seemed good unto us,
that those Men which labor in this godly Religion, with due Holiness and
diligent Observation of this Law, shall receive Recompense of their Travels:
Wherefore our Pleasure is, That they of the Province committed to thy charge,
whom we commonly term Clergymen (i. e. Bishops, Deacons, and Priests, etc. be
wholly free and exempt (i. e. free from any Service or payment) from all
public Burdens, lest by any error or cursed swerving they be withdrawn from
the Service due unto God, but rather may occupy themselves about their
profession, without any molesting at all, who, while they perform the great
Ministry of the Holy Worship, do seem to profit very much the public Affairs.

Licinnius's Cruelty toward the Christians. Chap. 8.

Afterward Licinnius began to imitate the Wickedness and Impiety of cruel
Tyrants, and secretly endeavored by little and little to impugn, i. e. resist
or assault, the Saints under his Dominion, who never molested or endamaged his
Empire, neither hurt him any kind of way at all: Yet by his Injunctions
commanded, That no Charity by any man should be extended toward them which
were afflicted in Prison, neither Compassion should be had on them, which in
Fetters were like to perish with Famine; neither was it lawful for any to be
honest, or to practice Charity toward their Kinsfolk, whom they were bound to
pity, even by the Law of Nature. The Law was indeed shameful and cruel, and far
from a Good Nature; unto the which there was a penalty annexed, That such as
had showed Compassion, were punished alike with them unto whom they had been
merciful; and such as had showed any Kindness toward them, were fettered,
imprisoned, and punished alike with the afflicted. Such were the Constitutions
(i. e. Decrees or Appointments) of Licinnius. So that the flattering
Presidents, to gratify the mischievous Tyrant, tormented some without cause
that had done no evil, as if they had been Murderers; whereof some endured a
strange Death, their Bodies being cut in small pieces as Butchers do use, and
after this cruel and horrible Spectacle, thrown into the bottom of the Sea, to
become Food for Fishes.

But in a short time after, Licinnius was overcome by Constantine, who favored
the Christians, and restored unto them external Peace.

The End of the First Part.
A SUMMARY, Or brief Hint of the Twelve Persecutions Sustained by the Ancient
Christians: With a compendious Paragragh upon the same; and a Catalogue of the
Synods and Councils which were after the Days of the Apostles: Together with a
Hint of what was decreed in the same; as also the Judgment of some Wise Men
concerning such Convocation.

LIKE-WISE An Appendix of some observable Things concerning the Christians
which lived about a Thousand and Four hundred Years since; with whose State,
Principle, and Condition, is paralleled the Suffering Christians of this Age.

PART II.

Qui est Crucianus, non est Christianus. He that bears not the Cross of
Christ, is no Disciple of Christ. For unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.
29. LONDON: Printed for Francis Holder, in the Passage going into
White-Hart-Yard, in Lombard Street, School.

PART II.
How from the beginning the Enmity of Satan has been great against the
Reghteous and Innocent People of God.
OF a truth, he that is born after the Flesh, persecuteth him that is after the
Spirit; and that irreconcielable Enmity which God (after many Transgression)
put betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, has in all the
ages of the World, appeared in Satan's Instruments against the Righteous and
Harmless People of the Most High, who since the Fall have suffered through many
Generations: And it is observed, how that when the Adversary of Mankind had got
possession in Cain (Adam's first Son, Genesis 4. 1, 8.) that then did Cain rise up
against his Brother Abel, and slew him: And this same Adversary is he, who has
been a Murderer and a Liar from the beginning, who until this day has
retained a place in the Hearts of Cain's Posterity; and one remarkable Token
whereby he might be known in all Ages has been Persecution. And after he had
gotten Dominion in Man's Heart, the Wickedness of Man became great in Genesis 6. 5.
12, 13.
the Earth, and the Imaginations and Thoughts of his Heart were evil
continually; so that the Earth came to be corrupted, yea to be filled with
violence. And then did the Wicked and Ungodly often offer violence unto the
Just and Righteous, even as the wicked Sodomites did unto just Lot, whose
Enmity was not only against him, but also against the Angels whom he had
entertained, Genesis 19. 5.

And likewise this Adversary of God and good Men, had gotten place in the
Hearts of Joseph's Brethren, who conspired together to slay him; but they not
being suffered of the Lord to do Genesis 37.
that, they cast him into a Pit in the Wilderness.

Moreover, it appears that Satan (i. e. an Adversary or Devil) had a possession
in Pharaoh, and in the Egyptians, who did much perplex Exodus 1. 12, 14.
and afflict the Righteous in those days; for they were grieved with them, and
therefore did they make the Lives of the Righteous bitter with hard bondage,
etc.

Again, the Enmity of this Adversary was great in many of the Potentates of the
Earth, against the People of God in the days of old, as appears in sundry
Places of the Old Testament. And it may be observed, how that when they that
were called the Lords People departed from his Counsel, that then this
Adversary got place in them also; which plainly appeared by their murmuring
against the Lord, when they were wroth over his Servants, and cried out, Stone
them with stones, etc. Numb. 14. 10.

Again, this Adversary of God, and of good People, got possession, yea dominion
in the Sons of Belial; who beset the House of him that entertained the
wayfaring Levite, and intended to have slain him.

Again, we may see how that when Saul departed from the Gounsel of the Lord,
then did the Evil Spirit of this Adversary enter into him; and then commanded
he his Footmen to slay the Lord's Priests; and although they would not do it,
yet Doeg slew fourscore and five of them upon one day, 1 Samuel 22. 17, 18.

Again, the evil persecuting spirit of this Adversary appeared also in Jezebel,
Ahab's Wife, who stirred up the Elders and the Nobles to procure two false
Witnesses against Naboth, to testify falsely against him, as if he had
blasphemed against God and the King; and the People of the City being leavened
with the aforesaid Spirit, they carried him out of the City, and stoned him to
death.

Again, when the Israelites were departed Ier. 37.
from the Lord, then did the Enmity of this Adversary of God and all Goodness
appear in them, which manifested it self by the wrath and indignation which
appeared in them against the Prophet Jeremiah, whom they cast into Prison, and
against Zechariah, whom they slew betwixt the Temple and the Altar. Yea, so
mightily did the Enmity of Satan's persecuting Spirit prevail over them, that
in the end they killed and crucified those whom God sent among them, and
scourged them in their Synagogues, and persecured them from City to City, Mat.
23. 24, 25.

From these few Examples which I have here alleged, it does most plainly
appear, that Satan, this Adversary of God, of the Creation, and of Mankind,
has of old had a mighty Enmity against the Righteous, yea before the coming of
the Messiah, of whom the Prophets that were slain testified; and it is
manifest, that it was his persecuting Power and Spirit which appear in Cain,
in Joseph's Brethren, in the Sodomites, in the Sons of Belial, in the
Egyptians, in Saul, in Jezabel, and in the Jews: And the same Enmity has often
appeared in the same persecuting Power and Spirit of this old Adversary against
the True Christians since the coming of the Messiah; which may more clearly
appear from that which follows.

WHen the Jews had crucified the Lord of Glory, then did they raise a terrible
Persecution against the Apostles, and that under pretense of Religion; yet they
sought to conceal their Blood-thirstiness, through their carrying John 18. 31.
on their wicked Design by the Romish Authority; for they said expressly, It was
not lawful for them to put any Man to death; yet in the mean time they could
hale them before their Councils, where the High Priest was President, and there
did they Judge and Condemn the Christians, as they had done Christ; and
afterward they delivered them to the Earthly Powers, to be punished according
to their Sentence; Acts 24.
calling the Christians the Sect of the Nazarites; and said they set the whole
World in an uproar, and sought to annihilate (i. e. to bring to nothing) the
Law of Moses, whereupon they presently got the help of the rude Multirude to
persecute the Christians, and that under Pretense of defending of Religion.

Note, Are not the true Christians now called a Fanatic Sect? And are they not
accused for making uproars and tumults, when they are as free from such things
as the Christians were in the Days of the Apostles; who were not only accused
for making Uproars, but also for setting the Law of Moses at naught, even as
true Christians now are falsely accused for making void the Scripture, and of
setting it as naught; whereupon many now suffer about their Religion (by such
as pretend to defend and propagate it) even as the ancient Christians did then
under the Jews, who resisted the Spirit of Truth, and the holy Men that spoke
as it gave them utterance; and being filled with an evil Spirit of Malice and
Enmity against the Lord and his Truth, they whipped the Apostles, and haled
Stephen before their Council, and procured false Witnesses against him. And
when Stephen in his Answer laid open their Acts 6.
Wickedness, they were pricked at the Heart, and gnashed their Teeth at him,
and stopped their Ears, and run forceably upon him, and stoned him to death.
And after that, a mighty Persecution of the Christians arose, insomuch that
they came to be scattered throughout the Acts 8.
Land of Judah and Samaria.

After that the Jews did bring much suffering upon the Christians, against whom
their indignation Acts 13. 50. Chap. 14. Chap. 17.
was great, and especially against Paul, whose life they earnestly sought
after, and sometime did they stone him, and sometime they did whip him, and
often were they moved with envy against him and the Brethren, and upon a time,
took unto them certain lewd Fellows of baser sort, and gathered a company and
set all the City upon an uproar, and assaulted the House of Jason, and drew him
out with others of the Brethren unto the Rulers of the City, crying They that
have turned the World upside down are come hither also, and these all do
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar.

Note. Has it not been so of late in England, that when the true Christians
have come to one of their Friends Houses in a City, some evil affected person
or other, has gathered a company of Rude People, and have haled the Innocent
out of their Friends Houses, when they have been edifying and building up one
another in the most Holy Faith: So that oftentimes the Anti-christians have
behaved themselves like the Unbelieving Jews, and through their Tumultuous
Uproaring have they caused the peaceable and harmless to suffer, when they who
were Guilty have gone free.

Moreover, the professing Jews manifested their envious Spirit against Paul,
when they stirred up the People and laid hands upon him, crying out; Men of
Israel help: this is the Man that teaches all Men every where, against the
people, and the Law and this place; And all the City was moved, and all the
People ran together, and they took Paul, and drew him out of the Temple, and
had him before their Council, and accused him to the Governor; but when they
could not prevail, neither by Righteousness nor by Violence, then did a Company
of them bind themselves by an Oath, neither to eat nor to drink until they had
killed Paul. Thus much concerning the Jews.

Note, Since that the Gospel has been preached again in the Power and
Demonstration of the eternal Spirit, some Cities in England have been as in
Uproars, where the true Christians have so preached the Gospel as before
mentioned; and at the same time they have been accused for teaching People
against the Scripture, and for incensing of them against Magistracy and
Ministry, yea against their Laws and Discipline; and thereby have some
Professing Antichristians, stirred up the rude Rabble shamefully to entreat the
good Christians, who at this day are found in the footsteps of the ancient
suffering Christians.

Object. But some will say, Who do thou call the True and Good Christians,
whom thou do at this time parallel with the Ancient Christians? We know not
whom thou meanest, nor do we know whom thou call the Anti-christians; thou
might do well to inform us a little.

Answ. I call them the True or Good Christians, who walk in the Light of the
Lamb, Who are Christians
who follow him through Honor and Dishonor, through evil Report and good
Report, who bear his daily Cross without murmuring, who do unto others as they
would be done unto, who renounce the vain Customs of the World, and forsake the
frivolous Traditions of Men, together with the hidden things of Dishonesty; who
are truly contented in suffering when they are therein exercised, and that for
the exercise of their Conscience in matters pertaining unto Religion, who for
Conscience sake cannot Swear, because their Master forbids them, nor pay
Tithes, because their Lord is come who ends the first Priesthood that took
Tithes, and is become their Priest, unto whom Psalm. 51. 16, 17.
they could freely give Tithe, Sacrifice, Oblations, etc. But these that be
external he wills not, therefore do they freely offer that unto him, which they
are sure he will not reject nor despise, to wit, a clean, contrite, and broken
Heart, etc. And they who live godlily and unreprovably, as becomes right
Christians, such I do call Good and True Christians. And for as much as I find
the People (who in contempt are called QUAKERS oftener than Christians) in the
Light of the Lamb, in his Doctrine, and in the Practices in which the ancient
Christians were exercised, therefore it is meet that they now should be called
The Good or True Christians.

And for the Anti-Christians (i. e. Opposers of, or Adversaries to true
Christianity) such I Who are Antichristians.
call so, as are found professing Christianity in words, but deny it in works,
as some that professed in Words they knew God, but in Works they denied him; so
they that profess to be Christians, Tit. 1. 16.
and live in all manner of Unchastity, they by their Works deny that which they
profess in words, and so are not worthy to be called Christians, while they are
found in that which is against, or contrary to Christianity, in which thousands
of persecuting false Christians are found; and therefore do I call such
Antichristians.

How the Ancient Christians suffered by the Heathen; and how true Christians
now suffer by the same Spirit of Enmity and Persecution, which is entered into
the false Christians, alias Antichristians.
The First Persecution.
WHen that the Jews were bereaved of their Power by the Heathen, and that the
time was expired wherein they had so cruelly used the People of God,
nevertheless the Christians were not therefore freed from suffering, for they
were therein exercised under the Heathens Baron. 66 number. 1.
Power, and Nero was said to be the first Tyrannical Emperor that persecuted
the Christians; it was called the first Persecution, because it was under the
Emperors Power, and it began in the year 66, after the Birth of Christ, and at
that time was chiefly within the City of Rome: About that time did People begin
to accuse the Christians, with all manner of Wickedness, and to esteem them as
Reprobates, because they did not honor the Gods.

Note, Have not the true Christians suffered in England, under the sundry
Powers that have been of late, even as the Ancient Christians suffered under
the Jews. And it appears that when the Jews were deprived of their Power,
then did the Heathens Persecute the Christians; And did not both Protectors and
Parliaments persecute the Innocent when they were in Authority? but since they
have been deprived of the power, and turned out as the Jews were, when the
Gentiles came to have the pre-eminence, has not the King himself become Guilty
of their Sin in persecuting or suffering the Innocent to be persecuted within
his Dominions; And has not all manner of Evil been spoken of them, and they
been accounted unfit to live in either Kingdom or Commonwealth, and that
chiefly because they could no more honor that Proud and Ambitious Spirit which
is gotten up in the hearts of Men, then the Ancient Christians heretofore could
honor the Gods of the Heathen?

The Second Persecution.
IN the Year of our Lord 93. did the second Persecution begin under the
Emperor Domitianus, under whom several were put to Death, and about the same
time was the Apostle John Banished unto the Island Pathmos, where Origin Lib.
13.
he Wrote his Revelation; In those days the Christians were so little esteemed,
that the People called them Cobbler, Weavers, Combers of Wool, Illiterate and
exceeding Rustic, or Clownish, yea such as knew no good fashions.

Note. Have not some of the true Christians been put to death of late in New
England? and have not many of them suffered the spoiling of their Goods, and
their Bodies to be cast into Prison, to be Whipped, and shamefully entreated by
the Anti-Christians, and that about their Religion? And have not many of the
true Christians Christians. now vilified as formerly.
been in derision called Cobblers, Taylers, Weavers, Plowmen, etc. So little
esteem have the true Christians now among the Children of this World, as the
Ancient Christians heretofore have had among the Children of Men.

The Third Persecution.
IN the Year 102. did the third Persecution begin under the Emperor Trajanus,
who though he was called a good Emperor, did nevertheless Persecute the
Christians, out of Humility to the Gods, in which Persecution several Bishops
were put to Death, as the Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of Jerusalem, etc. And at
that time the Bishop of Antioch testified, That Sufferings made us like unto
Christ, who had suffered for us himself, preparing a way through suffering unto
Eternal Life: About the same time did a Governor Write unto the Emperor in
the Christians behalf, whereupon the Emperor wrote, That they should seek no
more of them, but those they had in Prison should they put to Death.

Note. Without Controversy the Bishop or Pope of Rome, must needs be much
degenerated from that State in which those Bishops then were; forasmuch as he
now (by that Power through which they were put to death) does put others to
Death about their Religion, for which they then suffered Martyrdom: From hence
it may be observed that the Bishops now, which persecute tender Consciences
about Religion, are found rather in the Footsteps of the Heathen, then in the
condition of those Bishops that suffered Martyrdom: Moreover in these latter
days the Lord has stirred up some at times to speak a Word, or to Write a few
Lines in the behalf of the true Christians unto them in Authority, whereby
their hearts have been so far moved and reached, that they have done something
in order to the mitigating of the Sufferings of the Innocent, who at this day
share with their Brethren in the Fellowship of the Suffering of the Gospel.

The Fourth Persecution.
IN the year, 164. was the fourth Persecution of the Christians, which arose
under the Emperor, Baron. An. 164. Number. 2.
Marcus Aurelius and Lucias Verus, in which Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna was put
to Death, who had been a Disciple of John, and had been many years in the
service of the Lord, as he himself acknowledged; About the same time was
Iulianus put to death at Rome, in whose time the Christians were accused for
having a Fleshly conversion one with another, which he marked to be Lies by
their willingness to Die, and thereby he coming to be Converted, Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 16.
became an Eminent Teacher of the Christians.

At Lions in France did there go forth a Proclamation, That the Christians
might not dwell in their Houses, nor that they must not converse upon the
Streets, nor show their Faces; which being Impossible for them to perform,
their sufferings became exceeding great; and in the mean time some of the
Slaves gave out that the Christians lived in filthy Lasciviousness among
themselves: In this Persecution there was one Lucius put to Death, for
reproving the Judge for putting the Christians to crueller Deaths then any other
Transgressors.

Note, Though the true Christians now are Vilified and Falsely accused by
Anti-Christians as the ancient Christians were in former Ages, yet wise men can
see their Innocence, and therefore do they love them in their Hearts, and some
time some have been Convinced, by beholding the Patience, Long-suffering, and
Innecency of the Innocent in these latter days: who now some time do suffer the
loss of their Liberty, and the spoiling of their Gods, if not Banishment,
either by virtue of Proclamations, or of Decrees, or of corrupt Laws, which
true Christians now can Christians no^ are in the same mind as formerly.
no more observe and obey, then the ancient Christians observed the aforesaid
Preclamation of the King; and this has been evident, that sundry of the true
Christiant in these later days have died in Prison [as some did in the
aforesaid Persecution] where they-Sealed their Testimony with their Blood, as
many have done before them: And sometimes it has hapened that Affliction has
been added to the Bonds of some of the true Christians, when they have told a
Judge or an Inferior Officer, that Malefactors have had more freedom and
liberty then they, and more favor shown them, by such as were in place of
Trust; and this has been manifest enough in many parts of the Nation as is
well knowd to many.

The Fifth Persecution.
IN the year 201. did the fifth Persecution begin under the Emperor Severus,
which was Baron. An. 100. Number 2.
hence in part occasioned (to wit) when the Emperor had a War, and had gotten
the Victory, the Christians kept themselves Still, without making tokens of
Joy, with Fires or May-polls, or other Triumphs, according to the manner of the
Heathen: Whereupon they accused the Christians out of Envy, as if they had
despised and hated the Emperor, and the rather, because the Christians would
not Swear by his Fortune: Again, they reported that the Christians blew out
their Candles in their Meeting in the Evenings, and that they did behave
themselves unseemly one toward another, so that the Christians were despised
of (almost) all: Something to this purpose Tertullian rehearses, saying,
Tertul. 30. page 127.
The Heathen accused the Christians of Meeting together to Sacrifice a Child,
and after they had taken away his Life in a Barbarous Superstition, that then
they committed Incest, (i. e. Carnal knowledge betwixt near Kindred) they also
added, That the Christians had Dogs which served to overthrow the Candles, and
loosing all shame in taking the Lights from them, and covering their Actions
under the veil of Darkness, Emboldened them to seek the use of Ungodly and
Sacrilegious (i. e. Abominable) pleasures.

Again, (said he) The Christians were accused of Sacrilege, (i. e. an abusing
of Sacraments or Holy Misteryes) for they did not Solemnize with the Heathen
the days they Feasted on in Honor to the Emperors with all kind of Beastly
Ceremonies, Repugnant (i. e. contrary) to the Christians Modesty, Chastity, and
Purity.

In those days it was a manner among the Christians not to go to any Comedies
or Stage Plays, The ancient Christians would not go to any Ceremonies.
for they understood, that if they did forsake the Devil and all his Works,
with the World, that then they must forsake Comedies and Stage Plays: Moreover
the Christians said, We renounce (i. e. resign or refuse) your Shows, as we
condemn their diverse Originals by the knowledge we have, that they are effects
of Superstition and Idolatry, etc.

Note. Does it not from hence plainly appear, that the Tokens of Triumph which
are used by Anti-Christians in England, are Heathenish Inventions and
Traditions, in which many have been found of late who profess themselves to be
Christians: Did not many of our English People [who glory so much of
Christianity] make Bone-fires [so called] set up May-poles, and In, and With
such like Heathenish Inventions, Heathnish inventions.
Triumph when the King was Proclaimed, when he came to London, and when he was
Crowned? And did not then the true Christians that Feared the Lord, keep
themselves Still and Quiet, like unto the ancient Christians? And were not they
judged to be Enemies to the King, and Despisers of him, because they did not
run with the Multitude to the like excess of Vanity: But renounced their
Idolatrous Superstitious Shows, which many did not only produce upon the times
before mentioned, but which are produced by Popishly affected Anti-christians
upon their Popish Holy [but rather Prophane] Days: and upon their Mayor Days,
even like unto the Heathen, whose manner was to set forth such vain Shows upon
the days on which they Feasted, in whose practice the Anti-Christians are now
found, who also are offended as the Heathen were, when they that fear the Lord
do not observe their days and times, which they, or the Heathen have appointed
to be Solemnized, which sometime they spend in Voluptuousness, Fullness, and
Excess, with all kind of Beastly Ceremonies, (as Tertullian well calls them)
which are now indeed as disagreeing and contrary to Christians Modesty,
Chastity, and Purity, as the Ceremonies were, which the Heathen joined the
Christians to observe.

Moreover the true Christians have been the rather supposed to be Evilly
affected to the KING, and to be despisers of him, because they can no more take
the Oaths of Allegance (i. e. Obedience of a Subject to his Prince) and
Supremay (i. e. chief Authority) then the Christians heretofore could swear by
the Emperors Fortune, for the true Christians now are of Basilides mind, who
said, It did not become him Eusebius. l. 6. chapter 4.
to swear, because he was a Christian, neither would it become them now to do
that which their Lord and Master has forbid, who said, Swear not at all.

Again, Have not the true Christians been also upbraided with such false
Accusations, as if they put out their Candles and did behave themselves
uncivilly in the Evening Meetings; but let such as have thus falsely accused
them see in whose steps and practice they are found.

Moreover it appears, that it was the practice of the Heathen to have Comedies,
or Stage Plays, but the Christians manner then, was not to go to them, and
behold it is not the manner now of Antichristians to have Comedies, but the
manner of the good Christians is not to come at them, except it be to bear a
Testimony against them; wherefore may not even little Children judge, that they
who have their Comedies for their pastime, at set times and appointed places
that such are in the nature and practice of the Heathen, who derided the
Christians and said; Their pleasures were not the Christians, The Heathens
pleasures were not the Christians
and therefore they had Reason to reject the things which pleased them as they
said: even as Anti-Christians now reject Piety and Godliness which pleases the
true Christians, who have pleasure in the Lord, and not in Unrighteousness, in
which the Apostatized Christians now take pleasure, as the Heathen herefore
have done.

The Sixth Persecution.
IN the year 237. did the Sixth Persecution under the Emperor Maximinus arise,
who partly out of Envy to his Kinsman Alexander (who had been favorable to the
Christians) did persecute the Christians: In which persecution there were many
put to death; For the Heathen in those days were so spiteful against the
Christians, that when there was an Earthquake, or a storm, or the like, they
laid the blame upon the Christians, saying, Their Gods The Honor of the Gods
decayed.
were Angry, because their Honor went to nothing through the Christians; This
Emperor did not Reign very long, therefore did this Persecution cease the
sooner.

Note. The same spirit of Envy which was in the Heathen, has often appeared in
the Anti-Christians, against the true Christians in these latter days, who have
boren a faithful Testimony against the vain Honor of false Christians, which
must be brought to nothing by the Power and People of God, even as the Honor
of the Gods, of the Heathen was brought to nothing, by the Antient-Christians,
who could not bow to the Gods of the Heathen, no more then the true Christians
now, can bow to the corrupt wills of Ambitious and unreasonable men, and though
the Innocent suffer therefore for the present, yet for their sakes, will the
Lord shorten the days of the Wicked, as he did the days of that Persecuting
Emperor.

The Seventh Persecution.
IN the year 253. did the Seventh Persecution arise under the Emperor Decius,
who with Excessive Cruelty did Persecute the Christians, In this Persecution
several of the Bishops were put to death and such as were the chief among the
Christians did they torture with many Torments, and the Houses of the
Christians they Plundered, and that which the Plunderers did not esteem that
they burned; In this Persecution many suffered Martyrdom, some being Burned,
some Beheaded (Women so well as Men) some being whipped to death, and some
Soldiers (for Encouraging these Martyrs in their Suffering) were put to death;
In this Terrible Persecution several departed from the Faith for fear of the
Torments, How some fell from the Faith, in the time of Trial.
yet afterward came to be restored again, the Suffering of the Christians was
great under this Emperor, but his days were also shortened, for he had not
Reigned two years but was caught in a Whag of Mire, where he met with a check
or Reproof for his cruelty.

Note. Thus it appears that the Christians that lived Godly in Christ-Iesus,
suffered Persecution, according to what the Apostle has said; 2 Timothy 3, 12.
And many now that live Godly and Righteously do suffer not only the
Imprisonment of their Bodies, but also the Spoiling of their Goods, which have
been Spoiled both by Priests and People, who have sometime (as it were)
Plundered their Houses for their dishonest gain, and they have showed themselves
in their carriage and behavior to be liker unto the Heathen then the suffering
Christians; who suffered their Houses to be Plundered, but we do not Read that
they then Plundered the Houses of any, but with patience suffered the Plundring
of their Goods, and in this patience and long Suffering are the Christians
(that are so not in Name only, but in Nature) found, in these Perilous times.

Again, have not some Soldiers been turned out of their places, yea and
brought into suffering for countenancing and favoring the Sober, Innocent,
true Christians, among whom some for fear of Suffering, may in some respect
desert the Truth, as some faithless ones among the ancient Christians did; yet
we know certainly there are a Remnant that cannot bow their knee to Baall, but
would choose rather to die the death which many ancient Christians suffered,
then they will forsake the Lords Truth, or Transgress his Righteous Law, by
breaking his commands.

The Eighth Persecution.
IN the year 259. did the eighth Persecution arise under the Emperor
Valerianus, who put forth a Proclamation against the Christians, wherein he
forbad their Meetings, and when this Proclamation or Order was not observed,
then did there follow a great Persecution of the Christians, in which there was
very many put to death, and some were Banished, and they converted of the
Heathen in the place to which they were Banished; but the Emperor under whom
the Christians thus suffered, did not go unreproved for his cruelty, for he was
taken Prisoner by the King of Persia, who made use of him for a Footstool when
he got up upon his Horse, etc.

Note. Has it not happned so in England, that by the Kings Proclamation the
Meetings of the true Christians have been forbidden? And when that, they
observed the Kings Proclamation no more then the ancient Christians observed
the Emperors; has not a great Persecution followed? have not many of the
Prisons he silled with them, partly because they could not Swear, and partly
because they continved their Meetings, when they were forbidden by the Kings
Proclamation, as the Religion of the Christians Tertul. Apol. pa. 19.
was forbidden by the Laws of the Heathen; and therefore did the Heathen with
much rigor pronounce these words unto the Christians, Your Religion is
forbidden by the Laws etc. And did not Anti-christians the like, when they
abused them in their Meetings, and broke them up with much Violence; did they
not also pronounce these words with much Rigor, Your Meetings are forbidden by
the Kings Proclamation, etc.

And forasmuch as the true Christians now have chused rather to suffer Bonds
and Imprisonment, yea the spoiling of their Goods, and what not? then they
would renounce the Faith, deny their Religion, or forsak the Assembling of
themselves together; it does therefore appear that the same mind is found in
them now, which was heretofore in the ancient Christians, who chused rather to
suffer the loss of their Lives, then to forsake him, for whose cause they
suffered; yet we see their Persecutors did not always go unreproved; Oh! that
other Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, would take warning from that which
happened to these Persecuting Emperors.

The Ninth Persecution.
IN the year 273. did the ninth Persecution arise under the Emperor
Aurelianus, but this Persecution was not so great as the other, because he was
cut off by death soon after he had determined the same: yet in this Persecution
was Felix the Bishop of Rome put to Death, with several others here and there
in diverse places.

Note. Often does the Lord frustate the purposes, and Determinations of such as
conspire Mischief against his People, yea have we not seen sundry Powers
overturned in England, and Parliments broken up, and Councels (if not
Committees also) shattered to pieces, when they have been determined to do
Wickedly? so that sometime they have not had power to bring that forth which
they had Conceived and brought to the Birth, so mightily has the Lord
confounded their Conspiracies and brought their devices to naught, and this the
true Christians have concluded to be the Lords doing, which they have beheld,
and which thing has been indeed marvelous in their Eyes.

The Tenth Persecution.
IN the year 302. begun the Tenth Persecution, which was so great, that it
exceeded all that had been before it, not only in cruelty, but in continuance,
for it continued 12 Years, Eusebius (who lived at that time) Writes of it at
large in his Eclesiastical History; saying, it was occasioned through the
freedom of the Christians, who were come into great Reputation, and were put in
places of Office, to Rule in Countries and Cities, but through their prosperity
and voluptuousness, Brotherly Love came to decrease, Haughtyness and Pride got
up, and in stead of the worship of God, an insolent authority begun to get up
in the Church of the Christians; And at that time the Emperor Diocletianus
gave forth a Proclamation, wherein he commanded that all the Christian Churches
should be pulled down, and the Holy Scriptures Burned, and that the Christians
should be turned out of their places, with other such like things.

After that there came another Order that they should cause the chief of of the
Church to offer unto Idols, or else they were to be put to death, then did they
begin to Rack, Torture, and put to death such as resisted, and some were
constrained to offer.

This Persecution hegun as a little spark, but it spread over the whole
Church, and the Persecution was so hot and great that the Persecutors
themselves were troubled if not wearyed; In Syria there was so many of the
Chritians in hold that their Prisons were filled with Prisons filled with
Christians
them, and with joy they went unbound to their death,

Eusebius Writes how that many of the Christians had their Ears cut off, and
their Noses slit, and other of their Members were cut off also, but they who
caused it to be thus done unto the Christians, did not escape the Hand of the
Lord, For Diocletianus who had endeavored to root out the Name of Christians,
did nevertheless see in his Old Age that the Christians flourished, at which he
was troubled and killed himself; and Maximinianus another Persecutor, was
terribly perplexed with Pain in his Bowels and other Misery which came upon
him, the Hand of the Lord was heavy upon others, who had Persecuted the
Christians, yea and some was made to confess that they had deserved the
Judgment from the Hand of the Lord.

Note. As the Christians were then much prejudiced by their external
Prosperity, and Preferment, so have many Thousands been Since; And (it is like)
the most of the Sects that are yet in being among the Christians may experience
something of this (to wit) that their great external liberty, and Prosperity in
the flesh, with their Promotion and Preferment in the World has been a great
Snare unto them, as it was unto the Ancient Christians, who afterward felt the
Chastizing hand of the Lord, and if all wanton Persecuting Christians in Europe
and all the World over felt the same, it might (I am persuaded) be good for the
humbling of them, who have exalted themselves higher then ever the Lord exalted
them; and so are become Haughty and insolent, the Brotherly Love being
Extinguished, and so have set up an Usurpation of Authority in matters of
Religion, concerning the Worship of God; But Oh, will not the Lord visit for
these things, will he not avenge his Soul of such Hypocritical Anti Christians,
who are now found Persecuting and shamefully entreating the Lambs of God, with
whom in those latter days Prisons have been filled, and some of them have had
their Ears cut off, and the Lives of others have been taken away, and that by
professing [but Persecuting] Christians who have run on in their Blind Zeal in
Persecuting the Innocent and Harmless Christians; and sometime the remakeable
hand of the Lord has been upon their Persecutors, though others have not laid
it to Heart, yet they that have felt it, have Mourned under it, and therefore
true is that saying. Qui ante non cavet, post dolebit

The Eleventh Persecution.
IN the year 316 did the Eleventh Persecution of the Christians arise, under
the Emperor Licinius; who formerly had been inclining to the Christians and a
favourer of them, yet afterward did he Imitate the Wickedness and Impiety of
other Tyrants, for he by his Injunctions gave Commandment, that no Charrity
should be extended to the Christians, for they that showed them favor were to
be Punished like the rest. In this Persecution the Bodies of some were cut in
small pieces and thrown into the Sea, for to feed the Fish: And the flattering
Presidents to gratify this Tyrant Tormented such as had done no Evil, even as
if they had been Murderers, but when the Emperor Constantine could bear his
Wickedness no longer he made War with him and overcame him, then did this
Persecution cease, by whose means also the Christians lived in External Peace
and Socra. 1. l. chapter 2.
Tranquillity, but after this Peace there ensued Wars and deadly hatred among
the Christians themselves.

Note. Many were the Tribulations of the Ancient Christians, during the time of
these Persecutions whereof I writ, howbeit it is very like that then true
Brotherly Love abounded among them, and that they had a perfect fellow feeling
of one another Sufferings, for their Hearts was bound up in the bond of Love,
while they were kept in the unity of the Faith, and exercised together in the
fellowship of the sufferings of the Gospel; But when these profitable
Chastizments ceased, and that they who succeeded in the places of those
Persecutors became the great Friends and Favorers of the Christians, so that
they thereby came to enjoy external Peace, ease in the Flesh, and liberty in
the outward; How soon then did they Entertain Prejudice and Evil, surmizing one
against another, how then did they begin to rend and tear one another, and that
often about their How evils crep in amongst the Chrstians.
Bishoprics, an Benefects? How then did they run into Sects, heaps, and
Partys, and how did they weary the Emperor [their special Friend] with their
complaints one against another, and with the perpetul strife, and division that
superabounded among them? To demonstrate these things at large, would require.
a greater Volum then I intend to make at this time, and particularly to
prescribe them would ask more time then at present I have to spend about this
matter, yet thus much I may avouch or boldly affirm, that in those days many
evils crept in among Christians, which unto this day could not be totally
excluded root and Branch; And about that very time when the Church was thought
to Flourish most of all, did many hurtful Weeds and degenerat Plants took
rooting, which have much more thriven and grown among the Anti-Christians, then
the Seed of the Kingdom, which Seed has been so overgrown and overtopt, that,
that little which yet thereof remains, is as hard to be found now in the Luke
18. 8.
Children of Men, as Faith wili be to be found upon the Earth at the coming of
the Son of Man.

The Twelfth Persecution.
IN the year 362 did the Twelfth Persecution arise under the Emperor Julianus
the Apostate (i. e. one that revolted from true Religion who had been accounted
a Christian, but was an Hyprocritical dissembler, and counterfeated a Monkish
life, who being sent into France by the Emperor to make War with the
Barbarians, and obtaining some notable Victories was afterward Proclaimed
Emperor by the Soldiers, and then did he set wide open the Temples and Idol
groves, and Sacrificed to Pictures and Entitled himself an High Priest.

Then the Pagans at Alexandria stomaked the Christians, and that the more,
because they went about to disclose unto the World the Pagans Pictures, to the
end their fond Ceremonies might be derided of all Men: Whereupon they Boiled
within themselves for Anger, and took what first came to their Hands, set upon
them; Socrat. l. 3 c. 2.
and Slew of them every kind of way, so that some were run through with Swords,
some others Brained with Clubs, other some Stoned to Death, some Strangled with
Haltors about their Necks; in the end (as commonly it falls out in such
hurly-burlies) they held not their Hands from their dearest Friends (for one
Brother sought the other Brothers. Life, one Friend fell upon another, yea the
Parents put their Children to death, and to be short, the one cut the others
Throat.

Moreover the Emperor Julianus gave out a Proclamation, that such as would not
renounce the Christian Faith mould Warfare no longer in the Emperors Palace,
likewise that all should prepare themselves to Sacrifice, and that no Christian
should bear office in the common thap. 11.
Wealth; For their Law (says he) forbideth the use of the Sword unto such as
deserved death, and therefore they are not fit to be Magistrates.

Afterward he devised a certain slight to wring Money from the Christians, for
he set a great fine upon the Heads of such as would not Sacrifice, and the Tax
was very grievous and duly demanded of the Christians; Then did the Heathen
insult over the Christians, and the Governors of Provinces, suposing now that
it was High Tide for them under color of the Emperors Religion to make up
their Bags, vexed the Christians far sorer then the Emperors chap. 12
Proclamation bore them out, demanded greater Tax then they were sessed at, and
some time Tormented their Bodies.

The Emperor understanding of their doings winked at them, and answered the
Christians, which complained unto him in this sort, it is your part when you
have injuries offered unto you, to take the same patiently, for so your God
commanded you.

The Emperor made a Law that the Christians should not be trained up in
profane Literature (i. e. learning, or cunning, Grammar Writing) for (says
he) seeing they have the gift of utterance so readily, they shall easily be
able to overthrow the quirks of Logic wherewith the Gentills (i. e. Heathen)
do uphold their Doctrine etc.

Note. As this Apostatized Emperor Julianus exceeded many of his Predecessors
in Subtilty and Wickedness, even so have many Apostatized professing
Christians, exceeded the common sort of Ignorant People in Hypocrisy and
Craftiness, in Deceit and Spiritual Wickedness, so that the Sufferings of the
true Christians have been very great under such, as they were, under this
Emperor Iulianus, and as theirs are at this present; whose Sufferings are
augmented oftentimes through the Covetousness and Cruelty of Inferior
Magistrates, whose Wickedness now is not only wincked and connived at, but
Tolerated and Countenanced by their Superiors: Has not this been appearent
How the Wickedness of Officers was Tolerated.
enough at sundry times in Englland, where the chief Officers have been privy
to the unjust and illegal proceedings of their under Officers, and yet they
have passed it by, as if it had not been worthy of Reproof; in the mean time
the Innocent, Harmless and true Christians they have suffered the spoiling of
their Goods, and that because they would not Swear, nor Pay Tithes to an
Hireling Priest, nor be conformable to the National way of Worship for
Conscience sake, no more then the ancient Christians could Sacrifice, or Uphold
the Worship of the Heathenish Gods, for the refusing of which they suffered as
before mentioned, but it was indeed by and under the Heathen, who did neither
own nor profess the Doctrine of Christ, like as the ancient Christians do,
who in many things are found as much out of it, as the Heathen were, and so
consequently rather in the practice of the Heathen, then in his Doctrine, who
said, Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and Pray for them which Dispitefully use and Persecute you. Math. 5. 44.
But this Doctrine is little more regarded by some Anti-Christians, then by the
Heathen themselves, whose manner was to uphold their Doctrine by quirks of
Logic, even as the Priests do now, for when they cannot How the Priests help
themselves with the Quirks of Logic.
uphold their Doctrine, and maintain their Religion by Spiritual Weapons, then
will they betake themselves unto their quirks of Logic, and when they are
Insufficient for them, then do they ordinarily make their addresses unto them in
Authority, for to crave their help and assistance, but this was not the
practice of the ancient Christians, neither is it the matter of the true
Christians now, but the custom of the Anti-Christians, who are found in the
practice of the Heathen.

I have read, how that when the Nicene Counsel was Sommoned, which consisted of
above three hundred Bishops, besides the Priests, Deacons and others which were
heard to be numbered, the Logicians busied themselves, propounding against
diverse others certain preambles of Disputation, and when diverse were there
drawn to disptuation, and allured as it were by bait; a Layman (that is not
one of the Clergy, who was of a simple and sincere mind, set himself against
the Logitians, and told them Socrat. li. 1. c. 5.
thus in plain words, That neither Christ nor his Apostles had delivered unto
us the Art of Logic, neither vain Falacies (i. e. crafty devises) but an
Christ nor his Apostles the Author of Logic.
open and plain mind to be preserved of us with Faith and good Works.
Afterward the Logitians quieted themselves and held with his Sentence, Logic.

Note. Thus we see that this Art of Logic (in which the Heathens were very
expert, and by the quirks of which they upheld their Doctrine was not approved
of by all the ancient Christians, tho is begun to creep in amongst them when
they Appostized, but by some it was testified against then, as it is now, by
the true Christians, who are in the life and power of Godliness, which was
before this Sophiestical and deceitful Art was, by the quirks of which,
Persecutors have upheld their Doctrine, and by the quirks of it, Persecutors do
uphold their Doctrine; but so did not Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the ancient
suffering Christians, neither does the true Christians now, who abide in the
Light and Doctrine of their Lord and Master, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, blessed for ever more.

The Histories do relate, that in these twelve Persecutions which were against
the Christian Church, the Blood of about five hundred thousand was shed; and
that among all these that Suffered, there was not one that by Weapons revenged
himself, but patience was their Armor, and thereby did they conquer the
severity of the Emperors: Relig. Vryh. Lib. 1. Fol. 198.

Note. Therefore such Christians now as suffer patiently for Righteousness sake,
without resisting or revenging themselves by violence with carnal Weapons, are
rather found in the Spirit and Practice of the ancient Christians, then
revengeful persecuting men, who are commonly called Christians, yet do not only
do wrong to their Brethren and Fellow Creatures, but are also found revenging
themselves of the wrong done unto them by others, contrary to the Doctrine of
the Apostle, and contrary to the Practice of the ancient Christians, in which
Doctrine and Practice the true Christians are found.

Thus have I very briefly run through these twelve remarkable Persecutions
which were Sustained by the Ancient Christians under the Heathen.

Here follows a short Relation of some Persecution, which was by some false
Christians after they were Apostatized from the Faith, and Patience, Love and
long Suffering, which the true Christians retained while they abode in the
Doctrine of their Lord and Master.
THe first Persecuting Christians were called Arians from one Arius a Priest at
Alexandria, a Man very skilful in the subtilties of Sophistical Logic, who
reasoned thus, saying, If the Father begat the Son, then had the Son Socra.
Lib. 1. Chapter 3.
which was begotten a beginning of Essence; hereby it is manifest (said he)
that there was a time when the Son was not, and the consequent to follow
necessarily, that he had his Essence of nothing. When he had with this strange
kind of Doctrine concluded and laid down this position, he provoked many to
reason hereof, so that of a small spark a great Fire was kindled; And for the
debating of this, with a controversy that was in the Church about the Feast of
Easter, was the Nicene Counsel Sommoned; And when the Arians had got the
Emperor on their sides, then did they set up themselves and did boast of the A
porsecuting Bishop set up.
Emperors Religion, and by force of Arms did they Instal (i. e. Consecrate)
one Lucius an Arian in the Bishopric at Alexandria; And they laid hands or
Peter that before was Bishop and clapped him in Prison, and the rest of the
Clergy the Banished, some unto one place, and some unto another; And horible
Acts was committed afterward against' such as inhabited the rest of Egypt, by
Imprisoning of some, Tormenting of others, Exileing (i. e. banishing) of the
rest; then did the world begin to favor the Ariens much, and after the
Emperors Edict (i. e. Ordinance or Proclamation) was Proclaimed, the Houses of
the Righteous in the Desert were spoiled, overthrown and cruely beaten to the
ground; the armed Soldiers set upon the silly and unarmed People (who
stretched not out a Hand for their own defense) and slew them miserably: The
The Christians defend not themselves.
History says, That the manner of the Slaughter was so Lamentable, that it
cannot sufficiently be manifested unto the World,

And when the Emperor Valens, had by Law ordained that Persecution should be
raised against all that maintained the Faith of one Substance, then was many
brought before the Bar, many clapped up in Prison, others diversely Tormented, for
they vexed them with sundry Punishments which led a Peaceable and quiat Life,
and many of them were set at naught, Scourged, Spoiled of The calamity of the
Faithful.
their Raiment, Fettered in Prison, Grushed with Stones, Beheaded with Bloody
Swords, Shut up in the Desert, covered with sheep and goats Skins, destitute of
aid and succor, grievously afflicted wonderfully troubled with the Adversary,
many wandered in deserts and dangerous ways, they hid themselves in Mountains,
in Denns, in Caves, and hollow Rock's; These afflctions they suffered for their
Faith, and for their Works; After that these notable men through their
invincible patience and sufferance had overcome the sundry and manifold
torments: Lucius (that Persecuting Bishop) persuaded the Captain to exile the
Father and Ring Leaders of these Religious Socra. lib. 4. chapter 19.
Men, and they were Banished into an Island, where there was not a Christian,
yet it is said, That they converted both Priest and People unto the Christian
Faith.

When the World favored the Arians in this sort, they set up themselves, they
crowed insolently The cruelty of false Christians
over the Christians, they Scourged, Reviled, Imprisoned, and laid upon them
all the grievous and intolerable Burdens they could devise; The true
Christians being thus oppressed with extreme dealing went unto the Emperor,
besought of him, that if not altogether, yet at least wise, he would ease them
of some part of their troubles: but he was their deadly foe and the cause of
their calamity; for when eighty of the Clery were sent in the name of all the
rest to him, to open their grief unto him, and they certified unto him the
injuries which they sustained at the hands of the Arians: he, although he was
very much incensed against them, yet concealed he his displeasure until that
privily he had commanded his Lieutenant to lay them in The Emperobrs Hipocrysie.
hold, and to punish them with Death: And then he made them believe that he
would Banish them the Country, which they seemed to take in good part, and they
going Aboard and taking Shiping, as if they were to be conveyed into Foreign
and far Countries: but the Lieutenant charged the Mariners, that when they
came in the main Sea, they should set the Ship on Fire, so that dying in that
sort they should have none to bury them, and so they did, and in the end, the
Ship, with the Christians that were in her, were consumed to Ashes, but it is
reported that this horrible act was not long after revenged, for immediately
the Land was Plagued with a sore and lamentable Famine.

Again there was a certain man called Moses, who led in the desert the
Monastical (i. e. Solitry or Comfortless) trade of life, but for his Zeal,
Faith and Godliness, and for the strange Miracles wrought by him, he was Famous
among all men: And a certain Queen called Mavia, required of the Romans this
Moses to be her Bishop. Moses therefore was taken from the Wilderness, and sent
to Alexandria for Orders, and when Moses was come in the presence of Lucius,
the Persecuting Bishow before mentioned, Socra. lib. 4. chapter 29.
he refused to receive Orders at his hands, reasoning with him in this sort: I
think my self unworthy of the Priestly Order; yet if it be for the profit of
the Common wealth that I be called unto the Function, truly thou Lucius shall
never lay hand upon my Head, for thy right hand is imbrued with Slaughter and
Bloodshed. Then Lucius said again, that it became him not so contumeously to
revile him, but rather to learn of him the precepts of Christian Religion;
Moses answered, I am not come now to reason of matters of Religion, but sure I
am of this, that thy Horrible Practices against the brethren, prove thee to be
altogether void of the true principles of Christian Religion; for the true
Christian strikes no Man, fights with no man: for the servant of God should
be no fighter: But thy deeds in exileing of some, throwing of others to wild
beasts, burning of some others, do cry out against thee: yet are we surer of
the thing we see with our eyes then of these we hear with our ears: This
happened Ruffin lib. 11. chapter 8.
in the year of our Lord 272: In which time it came to pass that the Meetings
of the Christians were forbidden: And upon a certain time there was a Woman
that went very zealously with her Child toward the Meeting of the Christians,
and being asked of the Judge whither she was going, she replied and said, The
courage of a Woman.
to the meeting of the Christians, to die there a Martyr with this Child: with
which Answer the Judge was so Smitten that he ceased Persecuting.

In the 1035 did Berengarius with the Bishop Bruno in France begin to teach
against Infants Babtizm, and Transubstantiation (i. e. a changing of one
substance into another, as the Papists Imagine the Bread and Wine to be changed
into the Body of Christ, through, or after Consecration, which Doctrine begun
presently to spread it self through France and Germany; against which Bar. An.
1050. Number. 1.
Pope Leo IX. held two Synods in the year 1050 one at Rome and another at
Vercle, in which the opinion of these two were Condemned.

In the year 1126 did Peter de Brusius teach against Infants Babtizm,
Transubstantiation, praying for the dead and such like things, which he
Preached near upon twenty years, and finally because of this Doctrine, was he
Burned: for Bar. An. 1116. Number. 6.
then was the Pope begun to follow the Foot steps of the Arrians, in
Persecuting men to death for their Religion, though it was not the practice of
the Apostles.

In the year 1139 did Arnaldus teach against Bar. An. 1145. Number. 3.
Infants Babtism, Transubstantiation and other things, but the Pope Innocentus
the Second, commanded him to be Silent, fearing least he should spread this
Doctrine much; There was Anno. 1148. Number. 11.
one Peter Abailardus of the same opinion: And to this opinion many of the
Clergy were brought, insomuch that three Popes had enough to do, one after
another, to reduce them to their Superstition: Afterward this Abailardus was
apprehended and Burned to ashes in Rome.

Moreover there arose some who suffered themselves to be called Apostolical,
because they said they walked in the footsteps of the Apostles: They rejected
Infants Babtism, the Purgatory, praying for the dead, and calling upon the
Saines with other of the Romish Ceremonies, they also rejected the priests that
led a Sinful Life; These were called Unlearned Blockish Clowns.

In the year 1176, There was a People raised up in the province of Albi in
France, whose opinion was (as Baronius writes) That Infants Babtism was not
necessary to Salvation; That an unworthy Sinful Priest, could not administer
the Sacrament, that none should be Bishops except they were unreprovable, that
men should build no Churches to the Honor of God, nor to the Honor of the
Saints, and that it was unlawful to Swear, neither would they receive the
Doctors Interpritations. These people (says Baron) were taken into the
protection of some Princes and Rulers, against whom the Pope made War because
they The Popes Cruelty.
would not Persecute them, and expel them out of their Country.

In the year 1178. The King of France and the King of England, observing how
these People did daily increase; They concluded together per force of Arms to
expel them out of their Coasts; But changing their mind, they first labored to
convert them by the Clergy: And to that end was there many Bishops and learned
men sent to convert these (whom they juged to be Heriticks) by their Sermons:
but withal they sent several men with their Clergy: that in case they with
their Sermons, reasons and Arguments could not overcome them, that then the
other should fall upon them and drive them out. And when the Bishops with their
Train were come to the City Toulous, where the aforesaid People were; They
engaged the Citizens by an Oath to discover them they knew to be of this
People. And among the rest there was one Peter Moranus discovered, and being
examined he made a confession of his Faith freely, and therefore was he
presently condemned for a Heritick, and all his goods were Confiseated, with
his sumpteous House in which he had holden Meetings, and part of it was
demolished: But this Faithless Peter when he saw this Storm, begun to fear and
begun to be sorrowful seemingly, and begged forgiveness; And it was granted him
with this condition, that one Bishop with another man should whip him, he going
naked and barefoot toward the Church, and that three years long he must go
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, (which then was become a fashion among the Apostazed
Christians) Bar. An. 11 78. Number. 3, 4.
and when the three years were expired, he was to have his Confiseated Goods
again.

Now others of the aforesaid people observing this, begun somewhat to fear, and
some seemed to recant, but when there was an Oath required of them, they
refused to take it, whereupon they were rejected as Heriticks and afterward
were Banished: And it was commanded that all the Catholics should shun them;
and that all Princes should expel them out of their Countries.

In the year 1199 the the aforesaid people begun to be dispersed in many Citys
and Countries, and their Doctrine begun to spread exceedingly yea through the
most part of Europe That the Popes with the assistance of the Princes and
secular powers, had enough to do to root out the same, First they endeavored
by disputing and afterward by Banishment, and lastly by all manner of
Torturing, Burning Hanging and cruel Bloodsheding, so that the whole World
seemed to be as in an uproar: And this was all about Religion.

When that the Christians had gotten the power How the false Christians behaved
themselves after they had got the power in their hands.
into their own Hands (I mean the secular or earthly Power) then did they by
that power Persecute as they had been persecuted, Compel, as they had been
complled, and put men to Death about their Relegion, as their Brethren had
been put to Death for their Religion; And with this thing the Church of Rome
has not only corrupted her self, but the most of the Sects that have come out
of her, when they got the carnal Sword in their Hands, then did they endeavor
to defend their Sect, their Religion, their Worship, and their Discipline with
that Sword, which may kill the Body, but connot slay nor destroy the Spiritual
Wickedness in the Body, which at this day abounds among Anti-Christians, who
are yet Persecuting about Worship, Faith, Religion and things of this Nature,
as their forefathers, the Arrians did; in whose steps most of the professors
have been found, who wrestle with flesh and blood; And when that their Clargy
could not prevail with their Original, with their Philosophy, with their quirks
of Logic; nor with their strong reasons and Arguments; then were they to have
the help of the Civil Magistrate, unto whom they have cried for help, as the
Jews did unto the men of Israel, and often have they combined together for to
kill and destroy, that which God had made alive, Acts 21. 28.
yea and to extinguish that which he had kindled, as appears from what I have
rehearsed; And the same Spirit of enmity (which has been in the World since
the beginning) has appeared often, against the work of God and his
Instruments, as it now has appeared against the true Christian-Quakers, who
are found in the footsteps of the suffering (but not of the Persecuting)
Christians.

I might here add, very much concerning the terrible and redious Persecution in
Iermany, and in the Low-Countrys, which begun in the year 1524. And continued
until the year 1641. About the beginning of which, the Emperor put forth a
Proclamation, wherein it was contained, That all such as were found stained or
polluted A cruel Preelamation of the Emperors
with the cursed Sect of Anabaptism (for so he called it) of what state or
condition soever they were, their adhaerents and compliences, were to forfeit
both their Lives and Estates, and were to be brought to the utmost punishment
without any delay, especially those that continued constant, and that had
Baptized any, likewise they that had the name of Prophets, Apostles, or
Bishops, they were to be Burned: And all other sorts of people that were
baptized, or had entertained any of the aforesaid Anabaptists, though they
renounced that oppinion and were truly sorry for what they had done, yet were
they to be drowned: And for the better manifesting of the Wederdoopers the
Emperor expressly commanded all his Subjects, that they manifested the same to
the Officer, of the place where they lived, or where they were found: And if
any knew of them, and did not manifest the same to the Officer, or Officers of
the place, such were to be punished, as Favorers of, complyers, with, and
adhaerents to the aforesaid Sect: And such as did discover the same, were to
have the third part of the partys confiscated goods.

Moreover he forbad all his Subjects, to rerequire or further any mercy, favor
or forgiveness, for the aforesaid Wederdoopers, or Anabaptists, or to occasion
request, or show any petition on their behalf in pain of being arbitrarily
punished; Forasmuch as he would not allow that any of the aforesaid people
(because of their Wicked oppinion as he called it) should be received into
mercy or favor, but they should be severly punished, to be made examples to
the rest, without any dissimulation, favor or delay. This was given out at
Brussel and Printed the 10 day of July (so called) Anno 1535.

When this same came to be Proclaimed, most terrible Persecutions did follow,
and great Havoc was made of these People, The cruelty of their Persecutors
toward them, the severity* o^ their Punishments, by terrible Tortures and sad
Imprisonments, with the sundry sorts of Cruel Deaths which they suffered in
this sore Persecution, would be to tedious for me now to rehearse perticulerly,
together with the reproach of the Wicked, the threatening of Tyrants, how they
would not fly when they were apprehended, though sometimes they had
oppertunity, how they were hindered from praying at the time of execution, how
the Rulers were divided among themselves concerning them, and sometimes the
wrath of the furious Magistrates was mitigared, and they brought to a sense of
the suffering Sufferers, and laid down their Commissions, comforted the
Sufferers, and prayed for Forgiveness: And likewise how the Sufferers were
prevented from Speaking, sometimes with Bridles, sometimes with Balls in their
Mouths, and sometimes with Cords or Ropes, sometimes by Drums, sometimes having
their Tongue bound, with other Inhumane Devices: And what Judgment fell upon
their Persecutors? These things to demonstrate at large, (I say) would require
a far greater Volume than I am now determined to publish; and them to Compose,
Translate, and Transcribe, would ask more time than I can now well spare,
having the weight of a weightier Service upon me; yet for the Reader's better
satisfaction, I shall here rehearse what Articles were charged against one of
them, with a hint of the manner of this suffering, whereby he may the better
judge how and for what the rest suffered.

First Article.
THat he and his Adhaerents had done contrary to the Emperors Proclamation. 2.
That he had taught and believed, that the Sacrament was not the Body and Blood
of Christ, 3. That he had taught and believed, that Infant Baptism was not
profitable to Salvation. 4. That he had rejected the Sacrament of Anointing
with Oil. 5. That he had rejected and despised Mary the Mother of God. 6. That
he had said, that Men should not Swear to, or before the Magistrate. 7. That he
had begun a new and an unheard of Custom of the Lords Supper, laying Bread and
Wine in a Platter, and has eaten the same. 8. That he was gone out of the
Order, and had taken a Wife. 9. That he had said, If the Turk came into the
Country he would not resist him, and that if it were lawsul to Fight, he would
rather draw^a Sword against the Christians, than against the Turks.
These were the Articles that were drawn up against him, which were looked upon
as heinous things against their Holy Faith, and their Mother the Holy Church
(as they called it and especially the last of the nine, concerning which he
gave them this reason, saying, Den Turck is even rechten Turck, end en weet van
dat Christen Geloove niet, end is even Turck mae den vleesche: Maet shy wilt
Christenen zijn, end veroemt u Christi, maer ^hy vervolght de broom Getuygen
Christi end zijt Curcken na den Geest. Which by Interpretation is, The Turk is
a right Turk, and knows nothing of the Christian Faith, and so is a Turk
according to the Flesh; But you will be Christians, and you will Glory of
Christ? and yet persecuted the honest or Faithful Witnesses of Christ, and so
are Spiritually Turks.

Afterward the Magistrates laughed at his answer and reason, cast their heads
together, and the Recorder spoke to him, saying, Yen, thou Infamous, Devil and
Monk, should men dispute with thee; yea the Hangman shall dispute with thee,
believe me that. Michael Sadler (for so he was called) said, What the Lord
will, that shall come to pass. Recorder, Thou devilish Heretic I tell thee,
that if there were not a Hangman, I would hang thee my self, and think that I
did God good service thereby. After other words that passed betwixt them, there
was one that stood by M. S. and drew out a Sword that lay upon the Table,
saying to M. With this shall Men dispute with thee. When some asked him, why he
did not continue a Lord in the Cloister, he answered and said, That according
to the Flesh he was a Lord, but, said he, it is better to be thus: After these
things had passed, his Sentence was read, which was to this purpose, That he
should be delivered over to the Hangman, and that he should cut out his Tongue,
and that afterward he should be cast upon a Wagon, and that his Flesh should
be twice torn with Hot Glowing Tongues, and that afterward he should be
brought withhot the Port, and there Tortured, and afterward as a Heretic
Burned to Ashes. Thus it was done to him, and so was he Martyred; his Brethren
were Executed with the Sword, his Wife and Sisters were Drowned, Anno 1527. And
these were the fruits of the False Christians, who were become as cruel
Persecutors, as the Jews and Heathen had done of the true Christians: which
thing I determined to manifest according to what I have in part done, through
the help and assistance of him that put it into my heart to undertake this
matter.

The People that suffered in this Persecution were upbraided with Ian van
Leyden, his Consorts, and that bloody and ambitious Insurrection which happened
at Munster, even as the Christian-Quakers have been upbraided with that
unfortunate and unhappy Insurrection, which of late happened through wilful Men
at London.

Note. The Baptists themselves do confess, that they are very much fallen and
degenerated from that state and condition, in which they were, that then
suffered Martyrdom.

How the Papists once cried out against forcing of Conscience: How Calvin was
against it, and for it: How Luther and they that owned him were entreated, when
they renounced Popery, and when the Protestants begun to persecute.
THE Papists themselves (who have been the greatest Persecutors of any that
ever professed Christianity) when they were much conquered in the
Low Countries, and came to be persecuted by such as they had persecuted; then
they themselves cried out against forcing of Conscience as an unfitting thing,
and then could they say also, that the Conscience ought to be free, etc. this
appears by their Remonstrations, Requests, and Apologies: Vide Merckteyck, page
126.

Calvin, Swinglius, and others, before they had gotten the power in their
hands, they carried themselves meek and lowly, and condemned Persecutors, but
when they were become strong and mighty, then did they glory in their
Magnificence, and begun to beat their fellow Creatures; yet when Calvin was
persecuted himself, he blamed such as sought to compel others to believe by
corporal Punishments; but afterward he himself taught that Heretics Calvin's
Apostasy.
might be punished with the Sword: Merckteyck, page 151, 153.

When Luther renounced Popery, then was he looked upon as a Devil in Man's
shape, and as a Veterator (i. e. an old experienced crafty Deceiver, or a
subtle Knave;) yea, as a wicked shameless Man that bewitched People; and the
How Luther and his Adherents were reviled
Lutherans were looked upon in the general for the shameful est People that
were to be found upon the Earth, and not worthy that the Sun should shine upon
them, and in those Days People were to burn them for Heretics, without showing
them mercy. Bond. hist. lib. 40. f. 449.

Afterward when they were grown mighty, And what Spirit they were of.
then they contended with others about Religion, and run out in bitter
Scolding, Blaspheming, partial Judgment, and condemning others that came out of
Popery, so well as the Papists, and that not only in their Pulpits, but also
with their Libels.

Likewise in the Low Countries the Reformed Remonstrants scolded at, and
reviled the Contra-Remonstrants; notwithstanding the Proclamation of the Lords,
the Remonstrants were cried out against as Pelagians, Socinians, etc. yea, as
Papists, Traitors, and Enemies of the Country. Acerba^ fratrum bella, Prove. 18,
19.

As for the Arminians, they were accused for bringing in Atheism, (i. e. the
damnable Opinion of the Atheists) for being Heretics; yea, more hurtful and
more dangerous than the Arrians, Macedonians, and other Sects, and it was said
of them, that they Damned themselves before God; with all that heard them.

And upon a certain time, when the Priests were met together at Harlem, they
desired (for the Defense of their Religion, that the Proclamation against the
Arminians might be renewed, published, and put in execution. Thus the Priests
manifested the same evil Spirit of Persecution to be in their Hearts, which was
in the Papists, whom they pretended to renounce in Words, yet they retained
their envious Spirit, which could bear others no more that differed from them,
than the Papists could bear them.

The Histories do show how that after the Protestant Church, had been about ten
Years, Protestants degeneration.
then did they put forth a Proclamation against the Wederdoopers, (i. e. such
as were Baptized again, or Anabaptists as they are commonly called in England)
wherein they commanded all the Inhabitants of the Land, to discover unto their
Officers the Wederdoopers, to prevent their multiplying, (it is said) they were
determined to put them to Death, with their adhaerents, according to their
Laws, etc, Merck-teyck, page 154.

Thus it appears from what I have here briefly instanced, that the Protestants
so well as the Papists, have been out of the right way, and that they have run
in the way of the persecuting Jews, persecuting Gentiles, and persecuting
Arrians, who are said to be the first that persecuted under the Name of
Christians; but since many Sects have followed their pernicious ways, rather
than the practice of the ancient Christians, who stretched not forth a Hand in
their own Defense (as it is said) when they were persecuted, but both Papists,
Lutherans, Calvinists, (otherwise Presbyterians) Arminians, Independants, and
many of the Wederdoopers have showed themselves to be of another Spirit since
they degenerated from that Glory and Power; Love and Life, Meekness and
Longsuffering, Patience and Purity, which abounded among the ancient Christians
in the Primitive Church, unto which the Eternal God has again restored a
Remnant, who at this time suffer, as the manner of their Fellow Citizens has
been who are gone before. And such as are now found in the Life and Power of
the Truth, they are at this Day judged by Papists, by Lutherans, by Arminians,
by Presbyterians, by Independants and Paptists, etc. as the Lutherans and
others were, when they renounced Popery: And the Sects now, that are among the
Protestants, are as apt to hate and cast out their Brethren from among them,
when they come to walk in a more excellent way than the rest of their Sect, as
the Papists were, to persecute them that renounced Popery; therefore are the
Protestants so well degenerated as the Papists; witness their daily Practices.

A CATALOGUE Of the Synods and Counsels.
Which were Summoned after the days of the Apostles: As also the Cause for
which many of them were summoned; together with a Hint of what they Decreed,
Likewise showing in what Year several of them were held, etc.

IN Asia Sundry Synods were held, in which Montanus was excommunicated and his
heresy condemned. Eusebius. lib. 5. chapter 14.

Anno 193. There was a Synod held at Rome touching the time of the celebration
of the feast of Easter, where Victor excommunicated all the Eastern Churches
Eusebius. lib. 5. chapter 23.

Anno 195. There was five or six Synods held in sundry parts of the world about
the celebration of the seast of Easter, in which the Bishop or Pope of Rome had
no more Authority then the other Bishops, he in his City and they in theirs
were chief, and when he went obout to challenge authority over the Eastern
Churches, Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France sharply reproved him for it,
Eusebius. lib. 5. chapter 23.

There was a Synod held at Carthage, which is said to have erred about the
rebaptizing of Heretics.

Anno 287. There was a Counsel of 300 Bishops called together at Sinvessa where
the Bishop or Pope of Rome, was condemned for denying Christ and sacrificing to
Idols. Therefore the Pope of Rome, has erred, and may err.

Anno 311. There was a Counsel held at Neocaesarea, where among other things it
was Decreed, that none should be made Priest before he was thirty years old.

Constantine called a Counsel to remove the dissension risen among the Bishops.

Anno 330. A general Counsel was called at Nice of three hundred and eighteen
Bishops by Constantinus Magnus, where they condemned Arrius, debated the
controversy about Easter, laid down a form of faith, etc.

Silvester called at Rome 284 Bishops in the presence of Constantine, where
they laid down Canons (i. e. Laws) for the government of the Clergy.

Anno 336. A Counsel held at Eliberis in Spain in the time of Constantine,
Decreed, that the Usurer, should be excommunicated: that Tapers (i. e. Candles)
should not burn in the day time in Church yards; That Images should be banished
the Church, that nothing should be painted upon the wall to be worshipped, etc.

But are not Usurers now admitted without any scruple to be members both of the
Papist, and also of the Protestants Churches? and are not Images errected in
their Masshouses, (which they call Churches) and many painted upon their walls,
and in their glasswindows? The vanity and evil of which this aforesaid Counsel
saw, and therefore were they prohibited then, though they are practiced and
upheld now, by the Apostatized Christians.

Anno 340. The Counsel of Gragra condemned the heretical opinions of
Tustathius, and allowed the marriage of the priests.

A Counsel held at Carthage, Decreed that there should be no rebaptizing, and
that Clergimen should not meddle with Temporal affairs.

A Counsel of Arrian Bishops met at Antioch, where they endeavored to abrogate
(i. e. to take away, abolish, or disannul) the Nicene Creed.

Thus like the builders of Babel were they divided, for that which one Synod
Decreed and set up; that did another Synod abolish and throw down.

Anno 350. A General Counsel was summoned at Sardis, for the hearing of them
whom the Arrians had exiled (i. e. banished;) the Counsel restored them, and
deposed (i. e. put down) their accusers, and condemn the Arrians, and confirmed
the Nicene Creed.

Anno 355. A Counsel of Arians held at Sermium scourged among them Osius, and
made him subscribe unto Atheism (i. e. the damnable opinion of the Atheist.)

But the like was never done by the Apostles, for they never sought to bring
any from Atiheism, or to Atiheism, by Scourging but ^ather suffered themselves
to be Scourged by Jews and Atheists.

A General Counsel was summoned to meet at Millian, where the East and west
Chruches brawled about Athanasius and dissolved the Counsel agreeing upon
nothing.

The Meletians assembled at Antioch, where they laid down the Macedonians
opinion of the Son of God, jump between the Arians and the true Christians,
where they proved themselves Neuters i. e. an indiferent party, not on the one
side, nor the other.

Anno 368. A Counsel at Laodicea decreed that the laity, or common people
should not choose the Priest: that Lissons should be read in the Church, between
certain Psalms, and Service should be morning and evening, That the Gospel
should be read with other Scripture on the Sunday; that Lent should be observed
righteously without solemnizing the Feasts of the Martyrs and that Christians
should not dance at Bride Houses etc.

A Counsel was called at Illytini where the truth in the Blessed Trinity (i. e.
three joined in one) was confessed.

A Counsel held at Valentia in France decreed Priests should not marry.

The first Counsel held at Toledo in Spain, decreed that Priests should marry.

Therefore one of those Counsels have erred, though the Papists say they could
not err.

There was a Council held at Chalcedon, where Chrysotom was condemned: of
spite, and for no other crime.

A Counsel was called at Cyprus, where through the spite of Theophilus Bishop
of Origin were condemned.

The third Counsel held at Carthage decreed; that the Cletgy in their yeirs of
discretion should either marry or vow chastity; and that the chief Bishop
should not be called Prince of the priests or highest prles^, but only the
Bishop of the chief See (i. e. Seat.)

If the Counsel erred not in decreeing this decree, the Popes have erred since,
who have been called the Prince of all the world, and has been said to have
the place of the everlasting King upon earth, unto whom all power in Heaven and
earth was given, and whom all nations should serve, etc. Therefore may the Pope
through arrogance err, so well as Counsels which have erred; so that we may
conclude that both Popes and Counsels (which are erred from the spirit) are
fallible and have erred, as does and may more fully appear.

Anno 417. A Counsel held at Hippo decreed that Bishops and priests should look
well to their Children, that the Head Bishop of the Head See should not be
called the chief priest, and that no Scripture should be read in the Church but
Canonical (i. e. approved by exact Rule.)

The Counsel held at Taurinum was held for the reformation of the Clergy, which
then was corrupted; but since much more.

The Counsel of Matta condemned the Pelagians and Donatists and concluded that
Infants were to be baptized.

The Counsel of Agatha decreed that none should be made priest before he was 30
years old; And that the Clergy should wear such attire as became their
profession, with many other Constitutions.

The first and second Counsel held at Vasio decreed that in such Churches,
where Preachers were not, Deacons should read Homelies (i. e. Sermons or
Speeches.)

A Counsel held at Carpentoracte decreed, that the Bishops should not poul the
Parishes (that i^ not to rob, pillage, or take money from them by extortion or
deceit.

It would be good that every Bishop now in being, observed well this decree,
and kept clear of pouling their parishioners by extortion and deceit, which
many of their forefathers have been guilty of, and it is expected now by many,
that they who have of late been installed will in this particular follow their
example, rather then the Apostles, who covered no man's Bishopric, nor
Benefice, no man's Tithe nor Augmentations, no man's Gold, Silver nor Apparel,
etc.

A Counsel held at Venice decreed, that no Clergy man should be at wedding
dinners, Dancings and hearing of wanton sonnets, or vain songs, etc.

All the Bishops of Afric came together by the commandment of Honoricus the
Arrian, where his heresy was confirmed and 444 Bishops exiled or banished.

Anno 492. A Synod of 70 Bishops were called together at Rome where the
Canonical Scripture (i. e. such as were approved by exact rule) were severed
from such as were Apocrypha (i. e. doubtful or not well known.)

A Synod met at Epaunis and decreed, that no Clergy man should either hunt or
hauk; That throughout the Province such Divine service as the Metropolitan (i.
e. Chief City, or Archbishop) liked of, should be retained.

It is to be noted, that though this uniformity was thus decreed by the Synod
in the Apostasy, that through the Province such Divine service as the Chief
City, or Archbishop liked of should be retained, yet the Apostles decreed no
such thing that the Scripture makes mention of.

A Counsel held at Aurelia decreed that Lent should be solemnly kept before
Easter, the Rogation or Gang week with the Emberdays about the Assention,

A Counsel held a Gerundia in Spain decreed, that every Province should observe
one order of Divine service, that Baptism should be ministered only at Easter
and Whitsontide, and at other times if necessity so required, and that the
Lord's Prayer should be said at Evening and Morning prayer,

A Counsel held at Caesar Augusta, accursed such as received the Sacrament, and
eat it not in the Church.

A General Counsel was called at Constantinople, which decreed, that Mary
should be called the mother of God.

Anno 583. The First and second Synods were called at Lions for the removing of
Schism (i. e. divisions in matters of Religion) raised in the Church.

Six Synods were held at Rome touching the Electon of a Bishop and the
preservation of Church goods, etc.

Malum Consilium, Consultori pessimum.
THese things have I thought good here to recapitulate or briefly to rehearse,
to the end that the great Apostasy (so often spoken of) might be evidently
manifest to all, and the great fall and revolution of the Church from the
Apostles Doctrine and Practice: For when they assembled together it does not
appear that there was such discord and divisions, such strife and a^tipathy,
such brawling and contention, in their general assemblies, as there was in the
Counsels before mentioned, neither did they manifest such a bitter spirit of
enmity and discord, when they chused Mathias in the room of Judas, nor yet when
they chused the seven Disciples, Acts 1. Chap. 6.

Moreover when the Apostles and Elders and Brethren were assembled together to
determine what was best to be done touching the doctrine sowed by certain that
came from Judea, which taught the Brethren saying; That except they were
circumcised after the manner of Moses they could not be saved; after they had
debated the Matter they decreed with one accord Acts 15.
to send chosen men unto the Gentiles and to enjoin them to abstain from things
offered to Idols and blood, from that which was strangled and from fornication,
etc. But it does not appear that they out of spite condemned or excommunicated
those of Judea, and held them forthwith for acursed, because of their error,
like as the Apostatized Bishops and Clergy men have done one with another and
one unto another, as appears from what I have before rehearsed.

Again when Paul came to Jerusalem he went Acts 21.
with the Brethren unto James, where all the Elders were assembled; and there
they determined what they thought best to be done, and decreed that Paul should
purify himself according unto the Law, etc.

These Counsels or General Assemblies o^ the Apostles and Brethren the
Scripture makes mention of, yet it does not appear from the Scripture, that the
Apostles and Brethren, Decreed the Celebration of the Feast of Easter, or that
none should be made Priest till they were thirty years old, neither does it
appear that they brawled about men, and agreed upon nothing; nor yet that they
ordered Lessons to be read in the Church between certain Psalms; neither does
it appear from the Scripture that they decreed that Lent should be righteously
observed, and that the Priests should not marry, nor yet that Infants should be
baptized; Neither does it appear that they decreed that the Clergy should wear
a different Attire from other men, or that such Divine service as the
Metropolitan liked of, should be retained; I say it does not appear that they
(to wit the Apostles and Brethren) decreed these or such like things in their
Counsels, but that since the Apostles days they have been decreed by the
Synods and Counsels, which have been in the Apostasy, and yet at this day many
of them are taught for doctrins, though they be but the traditions of fallible
Synods and Counsels, as I have shown.

Inclinemus igitur aurum verbo Dei in cord, and non ex Conciliis contendentium
Episcoporum non ex Disputationibus novitiis, non ex forensibus and
manicipalibus gestis, sed in nostris cordibus veritatem quaeramus.

The Judgment of some notable men concerning SYNODS, (i. e. general or
universal Assemblies) and Counsels, together with their Effects.
I. IN the days of Berardus the Church of Rome was polluted with many
superstitions; and Baudaert said, that the Bishops were rather biters of sheep
then true Shepherds; And upon a time when he was in a Counsel of the Clergy,
and had seen how unchristianly they dealt, he said; Sometime I have admired,
that among the little number of the twelve Apostles there was a Traitor; but
now do I wonder much more, that among this great number of so many Bishops and
Prelates, that one upright Disciple of Christ cannot be found, Apop. Chr. lib.
13. page 260. Daar geen Godvreesendheid bij en is,
Daar is it, hoe geleerder, hoe verkeerder.
Where there is neither God's fear, nor godliness,
There Is the more learn'dess, the more perverseness.


II, Gregorius Theologus (who lived about three hundred years after the birth
of Christ) said, That he had promised and determined never to come at Synods,
forasmuch as he observed that always there came more evil then good out of
them, for the ambitiousness and contention of the Bishops is above measure
(said he) Anno 300.

III. The Reformed Protestants testified; that Synods and Counsels which strove
upon the earth might err, and with the most voices conclude Lies, in this or
the other point, according to what experience in all ages has taught, Eub. chapter
28, 29, etc.

IV. D. Calvin testified that Prophets and Pastors, the Church Counsels have
erred; And that God has often discovered that in Counsels which was humane; to
the end that People should not rely or depend too much upon men, Instit. 4. ix.
chapter 3.

V. Boudaert said in Gilterland's Synod; Soffragia non ponderanda sed numeranda
esie, (i. e. that voices were not to be pondred but numbered) but said he, if
the Church reign in this manner or deal with voices, shall not the most evil
surprise the best which is the least, for is it not so most commonly? and when
that the Shepherds come to be changed into wolves, are not the innocent,
harmless sheep then in pitiful danger; Espetially (says he) when Rulers of
Cities are stirred up by passionate Priests.

VI. D. Pareus said, Often has the Truth suffered wrong in Synods, because all
that were assembled agreed in one error, so that the truth came often times to
be abandoned, and with silence passed by. Iren. 57. p.

VII. It has been said, the Church judged of the Doctrine of the Church.
According to this saying, shall the Papists Church judge of the the doctrine of
Popery, the Lutherans, the Calvinists, the Anabaptists and every one of them;
but what such a judgment is this? otherwise then that which is daily practiced,
by their one condemning another, and every one maintaining his own Sect: So
says Hilarious.

What unity or edification is there in such work, and in so much following
partial Counsels or conferences? None at all, said he.

VIII. Beza declared expressly that the Church and Counsel might err, and that
they had often erred, and that the Devil in some old Counsels had sitten as
President in them.

IX. The Professors of Leyden said, We see Synop. D- D. Acad. L^id Disp. 49.
These. 70. 71.
that particulars have not only erred, but General Counsels, for shepherds may
also be devoures; Isai. 56. 10. Ezech. 34. Jer. 23.

And the Church being gathered into a Synod, may be a Church yet not of God,
but of malignity; Likewise they that profess the name of God, may abuse their
power against the Truth: Yet they that do so, will not say that of themselves,
not yet acknowledge themselves to be guilty; May not every one then judge of
Synods, and declare their opinion concerning them?

X. Museulus said, Concerning the Synods of Priests, which the unexperienced
think to be the only remedy against differences, yet they are nothing else
(said he) but Fencing-Schooles. Nevertheless the complaining Church cries,
after the Synod then, after the Synod, will they not do that, etc.

XI. Gregorius Nazianzenus used to say, that he never had seen any good end of
any Counsel or Synod, vide Inst. Calv. 4. lib. 9. chapter 11.

XII. The States of Holland said to the Lords of Amsterdam; This has men
heretofore observed, that the reformation was not accomplished by Synods: for
the remedy was not to Nota.
be expected from the Clergy, who were the cause of the desease: Anno. 1616.
Mark-teeck.

FOrasmuch as many at this day have great expectations in their minds of peace
and tranquillity, together with an uniformity and settlement in Ecclesiastical
affairs, which they suppose might be procured through the means of a Synod or
Convocation, which some imagine would be a speedy remedy for their deplorable
disease: I have therefore thought good not only to give a brief hint of the
many Synods, of which I have spoken, but also in short to instance the
approbation and judgment of them that were accounted wiser men in their
generation, then the Christian-QUAKERS are accounted by this generation, that
if peradventer I might thereby in any wise convince them, through alleging
that which some that are renowned among them have affirmed; even as Paul when
he sought to convince the Athenians of the Lords being near unto them, he
instanced their own Poets who also said the same, Acts 17 27, 28. In like
manner have I alleged the sayings of those noted men, to the end, that they
whose expectations, are to see such great things produced by Synods or
Convocations, may the rather be persuaded; that the notable work of real
Reformation^ and the It Is the Lord's work to Establish his people in peace, and
not the work of Synods.
true and perfect establishing of the Church or people of God, in lasting peace
and pure tranquillity, must be the Lord's work by his eternal power and Spirit,
and not by the consultations of Synodal Conversations, nor yet by the Arm of
flesh: Far that is not the means which God chooses, but that which the sons of
men have chosen in the Apostasy, and therefore has these excessive
persecutions ensued, of which I have made mentlon: And now let England take
heed how she heaps up Counsels or Convocations, least she look and run more
unto them for help, then unto the Lord; for I testify unto her in the name of
the God of the living, that they shall not be able to heal her deseases, nor
yet to bind up her breaches: Oh that she would therefore Good advise for England
fly unto the Lord and look unto him, rather then unto the Convocations or
Synods of mortal men, how soon would he then heal all her backslidings, bind up
all her breaches, and with everlasting loving kindness gather her.

AN APENDIX UNTO THE ABRIDGMENT.
Whein is contained, many Notable things which passed betwixt the Ancient
Christians and the Heathen; which are extracted out of Tertullian's Apology,
(the which he made in the Defense of the Christians against the Accusation of
the Gentiles.) To the end, that all may see, how the like railing accusations
which are, and have of late been so frequently produced against the true
Christians of this age, have also been produced by the Heathen against the
Ancient Christians 1406. Years ago.

Section 1.
The Heathens opinion of Christianity, how they vilified them and their God,
how they were Judged when they denied to sacrifice, and how they were condemned.

THE Heathen believed a man could not Tertull.
make profession of Christianity, without being Tainted with all sorts of
Crimes, without be^g an enemy to the Gods, to Princes, to the Law's, to good
manners and to nature, neither could a Christian at that time be acquitted
unless he denied himself to be a Christian. Tert. Apol. page, 12.

Are not many now of the like opinion, that Parallel.
a man cannot be a true Christian-Quaker without being an enemy to the worship
of God, to the King, to the Laws of the Kingdom, to good manners, and to nature?

The Heathen reproached the Christians as wiched Tertull.
Superstitious persons, whom they accounted worthy the infamy of punishment,
and in conclusion objects of laughter and contempt, and with much rigor did
the Heathen pronounce these words unto the Christians, Your Religion is
forbidden by Nota.
the Laws, etc. page 19.

Are not such now become objects of laughter Parallel.
and contempt, as cannot run with the multitude to excess of Riot, and be
conformable to the workers of iniquity in their vain customs and frivolous
fashions, which the true Christians are redeemed from, and cannot be
conformable unto, though they therefore be accounted worthy the infamy of
punishment, and have it inflicted upon them, by virtue of unwholesom Laws,
which prohibit their Liberty now, as the Laws of the Heathen prohibited the
true Christian Religion.

Such were the calumnits (i. e. false accusation) Tertull,
that were invented against the Christians Religion, that upon a certain time a
picture of their God was shown by a certain infamous person, who openly showed
the same with this inscription therein, this is Onochoetes (i. e. the God of
the Christans) This supposed God pretended by him, had the ears of an Ass, a
hoof on his foot, carried a book and was clothed with a Gown. page 71.

Has there not been something of the like Parallel.
nature acted among the Stageplayers of this age, in contempt and derision of
the Religion (if not of the God himself) of the true Christians, whose
profession is now reproached and vilified by infamous lewd men, as the
profession of the Ancient Christians was by the Heathen.

The Christians were forbidden to have their Religion Tertull.
apart, though none besides them were forbidden the like, and because they did
not serve the Gods of the Romans, therefore did they offend the Romans, and
were accounted unworthy the name of Romans. page 105.

Have not many in the nation labored and Parallel.
endeavored much to have the like brought to pass, concerning the true
Christians, who are not conformable to the national way of worship, which is
much rather formal then spiritual, and therefore is it renounced by the true
Christians, who worship God in the spirit as the Ancient Christians did.

When the Christians were enjoined to offer sacrifice, Tertull.
they resisted; Then said some, there was folly in their resistance, and that
they might sacrifice when they were pressed to it, and preserve their lives
without injuring their consciences in keeping a secret resolution to remain
firm in their Religion: And that in neglecting their security, they preferred a
vain self will before their welfare. p. 113.

In like manner have many of the people of Parallel.
God in these latter days been enjoined to do things, which have been as
absolutely against their consciences, as it was against the consciences of the
Christians to sacrifice; and when the true Christians now have resisted, when
they have been pressed thereunto; it has been said of them, that they were
selfwill'd and obstinate, when they could not dissemble (to avoid sufferings)
like other hypocrites, who asfumed unto themselves a Liberty, which the spirit
of God never allowed of; so that the true Christians have often been judged,
and have suffered deeply, when time serving dissembling hypocrites have gone
sree.

The Heathen caused the Christians to undergo Tertull.
such punishment as was ordained for their wretched slaves; for the Christians
they shut up in prison, and caused them to be condemned to work in the Mines,
or to some other servile work of the like condition, page 114, and 115.

The punishments and sufferings which many of the true Christians have
undergone in these Parallel.
perilous times, have exceeded the sufferings which many Malefactors have
sustained for their transgressions, for thousands of the Innocent and harmless
Christians have been shut up in close Prisons, where ordinary necessaries could
scarce be gotten to them for several days together, and others of them have
been sent to houses os Correction to work there like slaves and dissolute
persons, when they have been as harmless and blameless as the Ancient
Christians were,

Section 2.
How the Christians Societies were called Factious, how unprofitable they were
judged to be in Commerce, who could gain nothing from them, how they renounced
the Heathenish superstitions in peril of their lives, etc.

THe Societies of the Christians were called factious Tertull.
(i. e. troublesome or contentious) but says Tertullian to such as called them
so, tell me, did we ever Assemble to procure the hurt of any one; as we are in
the particular, so we are in the general, that is to say, in whatsoever State
we are found, we offended no body, we injure no body: And farther says he,
when any virtuous or godly people are associated, when any Pious or chaste
persons Assemble together, their union should not be called a faction, but a
lawful society, page 142.

Are not the Societies of the true Christians called Factious at this day also?
because they Parallel.
worship God in the Spirit, and meet at places distinct from the common
ordinary places of the National worship, though they by their peaceable
Assembling procure the hurt of none now, no more then the Ancient Christians
heretofore did.

The Heathen cried out against the Christians, Pertull.
and said, they were not any way profitable in Commerce (i. e. intercourse, or
merchandise) of the world: Yet Tertullian says, neither were they without
their public places, their Markets, their Shops, their Inns, etc. page 150.

Have not the true Christian in like manner Parallel.
been upbraded, when they have been diligent in their places in the Creation,
and have frequented both Faires and Markets, etc. about their lawful Callings;
for their Religion did Nota.
not separate them from their ordinary and lawful Commerce, but from the
superfluity of needless and frivolous words, and from the deceit therein;
though its true some have laid aside that kind of Commerce in the world, which
was neither useful to God, nor beneficial unto man, but prejudicial to the
Creation, and it is very like the Ancient Christians did the like, after their
illumination and conviction.

There were certain persons that did complain of Tertull.
the Christians, as people of whom there was nothing to be gained for them, but
they were such says Tertullian, as were infamous corrupters of chastity, who
meddled with giving Poison, and Magicians (i. e. Conjurers) and finally
Southsayers, Diviners, and Astrologers, to whom it is very profitable in this
life to be unuseful, says Tertull. p. 152, 153.

Some such like men have of late als^ accused Parallel.
the true Christians, together with Taverren and Alehouse-keepers, Musitioners
and Stage players, with some sort of Shopkeepers, that have sold Gold, and
Silver-lace, with Jewels, Pearls, Rings and Ribbins, with such other
unnecessary Toys, such like men, with the Priestly Merchants of Babylon, may in
part complain so well as Southsayers and Astrologers, of the true Christians
now, as some such heretofore among the Heathen have done, of the Ancient
Christians: But most commonly they that do complain of them without a cause,
are infamous corrupters of chastity, who are adicted to speak evil of dignities.

The Heathen tolerated the Sects of the Philosophers Tertull.
without punishing of them, but the Christians Doctrine which they published
was forbid by the Laws, and they were exposed to all sorts of punishments; But
the Philosophers were not so forced to sacrifice, to swear by their Gods, and
light Candles at noon, which things were imposed upon the Christians as
necessary, which they refused on peril of their lives. page 158.

It is well known in the Nation of England, Parallel.
how that the Christian-Quakers have been much more restrained of their Liberty
then other Sects, and their Doctrine has been more prohibited by the Laws of
the Land then others, which have been much more pernicious, nevertheless it
has been tolerated if not upheld by a Law; when that the true Christians have
been exposed to grievous punishment, and others that have been guilty have gone
free: Yea have not many observed how their adversaries have endeavored to
force them to come to their places of Worship and likewise to take the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, which have been hard imposed upon them, and which
they have refused on peril of being shut out of the Kings protection, and of
forfeiting their Estates, Goods and Chattels unto him, yet others are connived
at as the Philosophers were by the Heathen, and in the mean time the true
Christians are exposed to sundry sorts of punishments, as the Ancient
Christians were by the Heathen,

Some said that even among the Christians there Tertull.
were a people, that gave themselves the liberty of doing evil; but said
Tertullian so soon as they fall into this disorder, we own them no more for
Christians. page 162.

With the like thing have the true Christians Parallel.
been upbraded in these latter days by many, who have cast the failings and
disorder of the unfaithful and disorderly upon the innocent, who have no more
approved of their evil, then the Ancient Christians did of the disorder of the
disorderly among them, whom they did not judge worthy of the name; which at
this day is not a little dishonored by the life and conversation of
Antichristians, who until this present, have retained the Name, but are wholly
degenerated from the nature, as their fruits do abundantly declare.

Section 3.
How they that were not of the Christian Religion, had more liberty then the
Christians, what prejudice many had against the Name Christian, how some were
praised before they became Christians, and how both Men, Women, Children and
Servants suffered for becoming Christians.

WHen men that were not of the Christian Religion Tertull.
were, accused of the same Crimes they imputed to Christians, it was permitted
them to have their innocence made known, and to defend themselves by word of
mouth, they also were suffered to give an answer to what was objected against
them and to make their justification: for the Laws did not allow those to be
condemned, whose offenses were not heard: But the Christians had not the like
liberty: for they were condemned for the confession of the Name Christian, and
their confession only exposed them the public hatred. page 7.

Has it not been thus in our days, have not Parallel.
many malefactors had more liberty to plead for themselves then the true
Christians could have for some years last past? and was not this one great
reason (viz.) because Malefactors could bow and stand uncovered, and withal
given flattering titles unto men, but because the true Christians could not do
the like, therefore have they at times, been condemned before they have been
permitted to speak in their own defense; so that the wills of many now (who are
called Christians) have been more wicked and unreasonable, then some of the
Ancient Laws of the Romans.

The Heathen did certainly believe that the confession of the Name Christian
carried enough Tertull.
with it of all Crimes, and they also held, that to confess the Name Christian
made the Christians guilty.

Are there not many of the like opinion concerning the name Quaker, against
which many Parallel.
have received as great prejudice as the Heathen did against the Name
Christian, and therefore do they not only hate the Name, but also them that are
called by it, though their fruits ^e never so good.

The Heathens believed all that was published Tertull.
against the Christians, though they saw no proof, and they took occasion to
condemn the Name, which was the object of their hatred, and the only confession
they made of the Name was sufficient for the conviction of those Crimes they
attributed to it, without any other ground then their own opinion page 14.

Have not many done the like concerning Parallel.
the true Christians in these latter days, who have born the name of Quakers,
which name The name Quaker now the object of hatred, as the name Christian has
been.
yet remains the object of many ones hatred, who know little of the life,
doctrine and conversation of them that bear it, yet the acknowledgment of it,
causes many to be judged as Criminals or Offenders, in the Opinion of many,
who judge now with evil thoughts, as the Heathen did, and so with a prejudiced
spirit condemn the Righteous, without any just ground or cause; and thus it
happens now unto the true Christians, as heretofore it has unto the Ancient
Christians, whose Life, Doctrine, and Practice, is lived in by the Righteous
now, and therefore must the same, or the like measure, be measured unto them,
which heretofore was to the other.

Upon a certain time in a conferrence one of the Heathen said, Truly he of whom
you speak is an Tertull.
honest man, if he were not a Christian, and his life would be free from blame?
And others said do you know such an one? who had the reputation Nota.
of a wise and discreet man; he is lately turned a Christian, there were others
that said, how pleasant and of what a good humor was that woman? how sociable
(i. e. kind or loving) and jovial (i. e. merry) was that man, its pity they
should be Christians. page 15.

Has there not often been the like communication Parallel.
among many people concerning the Christian-Quakers? And have not many of them
been lamented by their Friends and acquaintance, after their conversion in such
a manner, as the Christians were lamented for by the Heathen, and wherein
differs that pity now, from the pity that was in the Heathen? Who would
praise and extol the Christians while they lived in the vanity of the world
with them, but when they were redeemed from the same, then were they bewailed
by them that continued in the same; And surely thus it is at this day with the
true Christian, who are now bewailed by such as continue in that which they
through mercy are redeemed and saved from.

Thus is it written in Tertullian's Apology; A man who heretofore had his mind
full of jealousy, Tertull.
could no longer endure the company of his wife, what assurance soever he had
of her chastity, after once he perceived she was turned Christian.

Moreover, A Father who of a long time endured the disobedience of his son,
resolved to take from him the hope of succeeding him in his Inheritance for
turning Christian.

And a Master that used his servant or slave gently when his carrage gave some
cause of distrust, afterward put him far from him, when he became a Christian.
page 16.

Thus has it been with true Christians in Parallel.
these latter days, for some honorable and devout women, have not only been
excluded for some certain time, out of their husbands company, but they have
also been shut up as close prisoners in their own houses, through the aversness
of their husbands, whose wrath and fury was become great against them, and that
chiefly because they were become Quakers.

Item, Sundry men who have long dispensed with the wantonness and disobedience
of their sons; aster they have been truly converted to God, and came to live
righteously and soberly, then have their Parents threatened them to disown them
from being their Children, etc. and that because they were become Quakers.

Item, Some Masters who have born much with their servants when they had cause
to distrust them, and sharply to reprove them, have upon their conversion and
reformation from the evil of their ways, either turned them out of their
places, or at least frowned very much upon them; (though they had more
assurance, of their fidelity then formerly) and that because they were become
Quakers.

But may not we say as Tertullian said: It Is committing of a crime to correct
the disorders of a man's life, by the motions of a holy conversation to the
Christian Faith, and the good which is produced by so happy a change, works not
so powerfully on the minds of men, as the hatred they have conceived against
us; Indeed this hatred is strange, and when I consider that the Name of a
Christian, (or the Name of a The name of a Christian procured hatred as the
name of a Quaker does now.
Quaker) only makes it to be so, I would willingly know, how a name can be
criminal, and how a simple word can be accused; methinks a word cannot be
condemned, unless it be barbarous, or expresses some evil speaking, or
represents some unchaste thing, and of ill report page 16.

Section 4.
How the Christians were haled out of their Assemblies, what honor they
rendered to the Emperors, the Heathens testimonies of affection to the
Emperor, How the Christians would not revenge themselves, how they suffered
themselves to be killed; their order concerning their Collections, how they
disposed of them; and how their sufferings were prejudicial to the Common wealth.

WHen the Christians saw themselves every day Tertull.
besieged and betrayed, and when they were very often taken in their
Assemblies, and pressed to sacrifice to the Gods, then they cried out and said;
We cannot hinder our lives from being in danger, if we will be faithful to God.
page 31, Note.
and 116.

It is well known unto many, how that the Innocent and harmeless Christians
have of late Parallel.
been often haled out of their Assemblies, and pressed to do things contrary to
their consciences, upon the refusal of which, their Liberties and Estates, have
not only been in peril. but their lives also; so that the true Christians may
well conclude as the Ancient Christians did, (viz.) That they cannot hinder
their lives from being in peril, if they will be faithful to God.

The Christians were accounted public Enemies Tertull.
to the Emperors, because the honors they rendered to them, were neither vain
flattering, nor rash; but mark what Tertullian says to the Heathen concerning
this particular; Think you (says he) these are such great testimonies of
affections, to kindle fires in the midst of the streets, to set up Tables
there, to make feasts in the publik places, to change the face of the City into
that of a great Tavern, etc. Must a public shame be the mark of a public joy?
(says he) must these things be accounted seemly on the solemn days of Princes,
which at no other time, or on other days, are fitting or decent. page 126.

In like manner have the true Christians been Parallel.
accounted Enemies to the King, because they could not honor him with any vain
flattering honor, like unto that wherewith, the Heathens honored their
Emperors, who manifested their affections to him, by kindling fires in the
midst of the streets, and by changing (as it were) the face of the City into
that of a Tavern, etc. Now let our English Apostatized Christians come forth,
and parallel their Bonefires, which they used to make in the midst of the
streets; their causing the Conduits to run with wine, and their setting up
Scaffolds with Shows, etc. which they did, when the King was proclaimed, when
he came into the Realm, and at his Coronation, let them (I say) come forth and
compare their practices then, with the practices of the Heathen, and they may
see how they resemble one another, to their great shame that profess
Christianity, and are yet manifesting their public joy, by glorying in their
public them, which is neither comely, decent nor profitable, either to the
King, the kingdom, or to the Subjects, nor yet in any wise becoming Christians,
therefore are they now to be testified against, as they were heretofore, when
they were up held by the Heathen, and were witnessed against by the Ancient
Christians

The Ancient Christians confessed they were commanded to love their Enemies,
and that they Tertull.
were to hate none, and that they were forbid to revenge injury received,
though the sword and sire was employed against them, and they were often by
people assaulted with stones, yet they endeavored in no wise to ressent the
evil treating they had received, though they wanted not an occasion, if it had
been permitted them to render evil for evil, but God forbid (said they) we
should do so. page, 132.

The same mind is now found in the true Parallel.
Christians, whose principle leads them to suffer injury done unto them,
rather then to revenge themselves on such as injure them, and therefore is it
manifest that they are of the same spirit which the Ancient Christians were of,
who suffered violence to be done unto them but did not with violence resist nor
defend themselves, like as the Apostatized Christians do now, who at times
assault the true Christians with stones, with pistols, with swords, etc, all
which they suffer patiently without rendering evil to them that thus entreat
them, and therefore may we conclude that they are found in the practice and
condition of the Ancient Christians.

The Christians suffered themselves willingly to Tertull.
be killed, saying, In their Religion it was rather lawful to let themselves be
killed then to kill others; Note.
nevertheless they were declared to be the Romans Enemies, though they did them
no hurt, and thus much they confassed, It Is true said they, we are Enemies, yet
not of men, but of their errors, pa. 133. 134.

The true Christians now that are of the Parallel.
pure Religion say yet the same, though Apostatized Christians be imprisoning,
banishing and killing their fellow creatures about their Religion, but so did
not the Ancient Christians, who kept the Faith and abode in the Truth, in which
the true Christians are now found; though at this day they are accounted
Enemies both to Priests and Professors, yet they hurt none, neither are they
Enemies to their persons as men, but to their error and deceit, which lodges
in their hearts where it ought not, Tertull. What order there was among the
Christians, concerning their Collections.


In the Church of God there was nothing done (says Tert.) by allurement of
gifts, for in the Assemblies of the Ancient Christians, every one contributed a
little sum at the end of the month, or when he would, but it was if he would
and could, for none were constrained to give; And if they got any Alms it was
of good will, and riches gathered in this manner, they accounted them pledges
of Piety, and employed them in feeding the poor and burying them; in comforting
children that were destitute of Parents and goods; in helping old men that had
spent their best days in the service of the Faithful, and in assisting them
that served in Mines, and were banished into Islands, and shut up in prisons,
because they confessed the Religion of the true God, that so during the time
they suffered for the confession of his Name, they might be nourished with the
Stock of the Church; and these actions caused the Heathens to wonder, and to
cry out saying, see how they love one another, and how they are ready to die
for one another, page 137, 138.

This is also the practice of the true Christians now, whose faith works by
love, and Parallel.
not by the allurement of gifts and rewards, which have blinded the eyes of
Apostatized Antichristians, who have lost the charity, and are departed from
that faith which works by love, and therefore must they often times ^orce and
constrain one another, by a secular power, not only to contribute to the relief
of the poor, fatherless and widows, but also to their Priests, who is allured
to preach among them How gifts alure Priests to Preach.
by gifts, and who without gifts and rewards will not preach, and also by Sumes
of money may be allured from one place to another, and that more out of love to
the gifts, then the souls of the people: But it is not thus with the true
Ministers, nor yet with the true Christians, who give freely that which they
have received freely, and are ready to serve the Lord with their whole
substance, and freely to communicate thereof unto one another necessity, even
as they would have others to communicate unto them in the time of their
necessity; And that brotherly love, which in this particular has been
manifested among the true Christian- Quakers, has caused their Adversaries
much to admire and wonder, even as the Heathen did, over that entire love,
which was among the Ancient Christians.

Tertullian told the Gentiles there was cause to Tertull.
wonder their passion was so irregular (i. e. contrary to rule) that in
prosecuting the Christians they made no difficulty to take away the life of men
that were profitable to the Commonwealth; farther he said, the State received
by their injustice an evident damage and important loss, and yet no body looks
to it (said he) no body weighes of what consequence the sufferings are, of so
many persons of good life and the punishment of so great a number of Innocent.
page 153.

There has also been cause to wonder at the rashness and imprudency of many
bitter, willful Parallel.
Antichristians, whose foolish indiscreet behavior toward the true
Christians, has been not a little prejudicial to the Nation, in which no great
difficulty has been made, of casting thousands of them into prison, and they
who have done it, or have been the cause of it, have fought and endeavored
thereby to procure the ruin of their Families and Estates, which thing
certainly has brought no honor to the King, neither has it been any profit
or advantage to his Kingdom, but certain external inconveniences, have been
thereby procured to some of his faithful Subjects the true Christians; yet few
in authority seemed to lay to heart, nor yet see seriously to consider of what
sad consequence the undeserved sufferings of so many harmless people might be.

Thus have I briefly stated the suffering condition of the Ancient Christians,
with which I have truly parallelled the true Christians state in this present
age; And let now the upright in heart judge how far both Papists and
Protestants (that are accustomed to prosecute about Religion) are degenerated
from the same, and how disagreeing their principles and practices are, to the
principles and practices of the Ancient Christians, yet notwithstanding will
they glory of their Antiquity, and condemn others, as New upstart Sects, and
unheard os Religions that differ from them, and Worship God in the Spirit; but
by these things which I have re-capitulated in this Treatise, the wise in heart
may see, how that the CHRISTIAN-QUAKERS, have whereof to glory, so well as
others, (if not beyond many others) who at this day glory so much of their
Antiquity; but this I know to be their resolution, and determination (viz.)
that they will glory in the Lord, and in the fellowship of the sufferings of
his dear Son, their Lord and Savior; This knowing, how that, he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit.

Thus it has been yea thus it is, and thus it will be until he Reign whose
right it is.

A REGISTER OF THE Death, Sufferings and Martyrdom, of the Prophets and
APOSTLES; According to the Testimony of the Scripture, and other Historical
RECORDS.
ISAIAH was sawn asunder with a wooden saw.

Ierimiah was often persecuted, and imprisoned, yea he was thrown into a deep
Dungeon, where (it is said) he stood in the mire to the head, and at length was
stoned to death in Egypt.

Ezekiel was slain in Babylon, by the Duke of the people.

Daniel was thrown among the hungry Lions yet the Lord preserved him.

The three Children were thrown into the Fiery Furnace; but the Fire did them
no harm.

Micah was thrown down, and his neck broken.

Amos was smitten with a club on the Temples of the head, and so brained.

Zachariah was stoned to death.

The Life of Peter.
PETER was born at Bethsaida, formerly an obscure and inconsiderable Village,
till Matthew. 11. 21.
lately re-edified and inlarger by Philip the Tetrarch, Cituate it was upon the
banks of Gallile, and had a wilderness on the other side, called the desert of
Bethsada, whither our Savior used often to retire the privacies and solituds
of the place, advantageously Ministering to Divine Contemplation; but Bethsaida
was not so remarkable, as it self was memorable for a worse sort of barrenness,
ingratitude and unprofitableness, under the influence of four Sermons and
Mericles, thence severely upbraided by him and threatened till one of his
deepest woes, Woe unto the Chorarin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. A Woe that
stuck close to it, for according to one who surveyed it in the last Age, it was
sunk again into a very mean and small Village, consisting only of a few
Cottages, of Moors and wild Arabs; and Travelers have since assured us, that
even these are dwindled away into one poor Cottage, so fatally does sin
undermine the Greatest, the goodliest Places; so certainly does God's Word take
place, and not one jot either of his Promise or Threatening fall to the ground,
the particular time of his Birth cannot be Recorded; in General, we may
conclude him to be at least two years Elder than his Master; his Married
condition and settled course of life, at his first coming to Christ and that
Authority and Respect, which the Gravity of his Person, procured him amongst
the rest of the Apostles can speak him no less; the Name given him at his
Circumcision was Simon or Symeon, a Name common among the Jews; our Savior
adds thereunto Cephas, signifies a Stone or Rock, was hence derived into the
Greek, and by Us Peter, his Father was Jonah, probably a Fisherman of
Bethsaida, for the Sacred Story take no farther notice of him, than by the bare
mention of of his Name, and I believe there had been no great danger of
mistake, thought Metaphrastes had not told us, that it was not Jonas the
Prophet, who come out of the Belly of the Whale; Brother he was to Andrew the
Apostle, and it was as certain that he was a Fisherman by Trade, a very survile
course of life, as besides the great pain and labor it required, exposing him
to all the injuries of Wind and Weather, to the storm of the Sea, the darkness
and tempestuousness of the Night, and all to make a very small return; but
meanness is no bar in God's way, the Poor if virtuous are as dear to heaven as
the wealthy, and the honorable equally alike to him, with whom there is no
respect of persons. Nay our Lord seemed to cast a peculiar honor upon this
Profession, when afterward calling him and some others of the same Trade, from
catching of Fish, to be (as he told them) Fishers of Men.

And hear we may justly reflect upon the wise and admirable method of divine
providence, which in planting and propagating the Christian Religion in the
world, made choice of such mean and unlikely instruments, that he should hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and reveal them unto Babes; Men that
had not been Educated at the Accademy, and the Schools of Learning, but brought
up to a Trade to catch Fish, and mend Nets; most of the Apostles being taken
from the meanest Trades, and all of them (Paul excepted) unfurnished of all
Arts of Learning, and the advantage of liberal and ingenious Education, and yet
these were the Men that were designed to rund down the world, and to overturn
the Learning of the Prudent; certainly had humane wisdom been to manage the
business, it would have taken quit other Measures, and chosen out the
profoundest Rabbis, the accutest Philosophers, the smoothest Orators, such as
would have been most likly, by strength of Reason, and Arts of Rhetoric, to
have triumphed over the Minds of Men, to Graple with the stubbornness of the
Jews, and baffle the the finer Notion and Speculation of the Greeks; but it
being otherways, it is plainly evident, that they taught Christianity by a
Divine Power, the sum of the discourse is in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
28. that God chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, the
weak to confound those that are mighty.

In the Enumeration of the Apostles, all the Evangelist constantly place Peter
in the front, and Matthew expressly tells us, that he was the first, that is,
he was the first Called to be an Apostle; his Age also, and the gravity of his
person, more particularly qualifying him for a Primar of Order amongst the rest
of the Apostles:

Yea, our Lord chose him, to be his more intimate Companion, whom he admitted
more familiarly than the rest, in all the most secrets, passages, and
transactions of his Life.

Peter Preached such a Sermon in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, the effect of
which was so strange and wonderful, there being that day added to the Church no
less then Three thousand Souls, a quit and plentiful Harvest; and though the
Converting so vast a multitude, might justly Challenge a place amongst the
greatest Miracles; yet the Apostles began now more particulars, Acts 3. 1, to
exercise their Miraculous power, and Peter and John going up to the Temple,
about the hour of prayer, they found a poor impotent Criple, who, though above
forty years old, had been lame from his birth, lying at the beautiful Gate of
the Temple, and asking an Alms of them, Peter carelessly looking on him, told
him he had no money to give him, but that he would give him, that which was much
better, restore him to his health, and lifting him up by the hand, commanded
him in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth to rise up and walk, the word was no
sooner said than the thing was done; while Peter was this working Miracles, and
discoursing to the People in one place, we may suppose that John was Preaching
to them in another, and the success was answerable, there being by this means
no fewer than five thousand brought over to the Faith, Acts 4. 4.

Whilst the Apostles were thus Preaching, the Priests and Saduces who hated
Christianity, intimated to the Magistrates the danger thereof, seized on the
Apostles, and cast them into Prison, Acts 4. 1. the next day they were brought
before the Jewish Sanhedrims, and being asked by what power and authority they
had done this, Peter resolutely answered, in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth,
whom they themselves had Crucified, and God had raised from the dead, and made
head of the Corner, and that there was no other way to expect Salvation but by
him, etc. Great was the boldness of the Apostles, admired at by the Sanhedrim
it self, especially when this was the very Court, that had so lately Sentenced
and Condemned their Master; the Council commanded them to Preach no more in the
Name of Jesus, but Peter and John replied, that they could by no means yield
Obedience thereunto, appealing to themselves, whether it was not more fit that
they should obey God rather than them, and that they could not but testify
what they had seen and heard: The Church exceedingly multplied by these means,
and that so great a company (most whereof were poor) might be maitained; they
generally sold their Estates, and brought their money to the Apostles to be by
them disposed in one common Treasury, and thence distributed, according to the
several exigent of the Church, which gave occasion to the dreadful instance,
Ananias and his wife, Acts 5. 1. Sapphire, having taken upon them the profession
of the Gospel, according to the free and generous Spirit of those times, and
had Consecrated and Devoted their Estates, to the honor of God, and the
necessity of the Church, and accordingly sold their possessions and turned them
into money, but as they were willing to gain the reputation of Charitable
Persons, so were they loath wholly to cast themselves upon the Divine Providence,
by letting go all at once, and therefore privately withheld part of what they
had divoted, and bringing the rest, laid it all at the Apostles feet, hoping
thereby they might a deceived the Apostles, though immediately guided by the
spirit of God; Peter at his first coming in, treated Ananias, with these sharp
inquiries;

Why he should suffer Satan to fill his heart with so big a wickedness, as by
keeping back his Estate, to think to dceive the holy Ghost, that before it was
sold, it were holy at his one disposing, and after, it was perfectly in his own
power, fully to have performed his Vow, so that it was capable of no other
interpretation, then that herein he had not only abused and injured Men, but
mocked God, and what in him lay, lied too, and cheated the holy Ghost, who they
knew was privy to the most secret thoughts and proposes of his heart: This was
no sooner said, but suddenly to the great terror and amazement of all that
were present, Ananias was Arrested with a stroke from Heaven, and fell down
dead to the ground, not long after his wife come in, whom Peter, entertained
with the same severe reproofs, wherewith he had her husband, adding that the
like sad fate and doom should immediately seize her, who thereupon drapt down
dead, as she had been Copartners with him in the sin becoming sherer with him
in the Punishment; an instance of great severity filling all that heard it,
with fear and terror, and become a seasonable prevention of that hypocrisy
and dissimulation, wherewith many might possibly think to have imposed upon the
Church; this severe case being extraordinary, the Apostles usually exerted
their power in such Miracles, as were more useful and beneficial to the world,
curing all manner of diseases, and disposessing Devils, Acts 2. 12. Insomuch
that they brought the sick into the Street, and laid them upon Beds, and
Couches, that at least Peter's shadow, as he passed by might come upon them,
these aftonishing Miracles could not but mightily contribute to the propagation
of the Church, and convince the world, that the Apostles were more considerable
Persons than they took them for, Poverty and Meanss being no bar to true worth
and greatness; thus Peter, who converted the world not by power of Arms, not by
Engines or Artificers of Pomp and Gradeur, but by Faith in the Power of Christ;
the Jewish Rulers alarmed with this news, and awakened with the growing numbers
of the Church, sent to apprehend the Apostles, and cast them into Prison, but
God who is never wanting to his one cause, sent that night an Angel, from
Heaven to open the Prison doors, commanding them to Repair to the Temple, and
exercise their Ministry, which they did early in the morning, and there taught
the People, how unsuccessful are the projects of the wisest Statesmen, when
God frowns upon them, how little do any Councils against heaven prosper, in
vain is it to shut the doors, where God is resolved to open them, the firmest
bars, the strongest chains cannot hold, when once God has designed and decreed
our Liberty; the Officer returning the next morning, acquainted the Council,
who much wondered at it, sent for them, and asked them how they durst propagate
that Doctrine, they had so strictly commanded them not to Preach, Peter in the
name of the rest, told them, that they must in this case obey God rather than
Men, so vexed was the the council with his answer, that they began to consider
how to cut them off, but Gamaliel a grave and learned Senator prevented it by
commanding the Apostles to withdraw, and then bid the Council take heed what
they did, putting them in mind that several Persi^ns had heretofore raised
Partys and Factions in great numbers but came to nothing, and therefore they
would do well to let these men alone, for if their Doctrine and design were
mearly humain, they would in time, of themselves fall to the ground, but if of
God, all their power and polisie, would never be able to defeat and overturn
them, and that hearing they themselves would appear to appose the Council and
design of Heaven, with this prudent answer, they gave them their Liberty,
commanding them to be only scourged, and charged them no more to Preach this
Doctrine, but their hard usage, did not in the least discourage them, to their
duty to God, or less zealous, and diligent, both public and private, to Preach
Christ every where.

Peter was dispatched by the Apostles to consirm the Church newly planted at
Samaria, where he baffled and silenced Simon Magus; he is again cast into
Prison by Herod Agrippa, but as miraculously delivered by an Angel.

He is again with Paul cast into Prison by Nero the Emperor, who is resolved
now the Apostles shall fall as a Victime and sacrifice to his cruilty and
revenge; Peter is desired by his companion to make his Escape, and accordingly
did, but meeting his Lord, Peter asked him Lord whether art thou going, who
answered I am come to Rome, to be Crucified a Second time, by which Peter
apprehended himself to be reproved, and that our Lord meant, he was to be
Crucified a second time in his servant, and so returned back to the Prison, and
it is reported that in the stone where our Lord stood, while he talked with
Peter, he left the impression of his feet, which stone has been ever since
preserved as a sacred Relic; before his suffering, he was no question
scourged according to Custom, and having saluted his Brethren, more especially
Paul, he was brought out of Prison, and led to the top of the Vatican Mount,
near to Tybur to be executed; the death he was adjudged to, was Crucifiction,
but he entreated the Officer that he might not be Crucified the Common way, but
might suffer with his head downwards, affirming he was not worthy to suffer in
the same posture as his Lord suffered, (as Chrysostom glosses) to be set in the
rediest posture of traveling from Earth to Heaven; his body being taken from
the Cross, is said to have been embalmed by Marcellinus the Presbiter, after
the Jews manner, and was then buried in the Vatican near the triumphant way.

The description of his Person.
HIS Body if we may believe the description given him by Nicephorus, was
somewhat slender, of a Middle size, but rather inclining to Tallness, his
Complexion very pale, and almost white, the hair of his Head curled and thick,
but withal short, his Eyes black, but speak with read, which Baronius will have
to proceed from his much weeping, his Nose long but rather broad and flat than
sharp; such was the case of that Jewel that was within, he was very Eager in
his Temper, which like a whetstone sharpened his Soul for all bold and generous
undertakings.

The Life of Paul.
THough Paul was none of the Twelve Apostles yet had he the Honor, of being an
Apostle extraordinary, and to be immediately Called in a way peculiar to
himself, he justly deserves a place next Peter, for in their Lives they were
pleasant and lovely, so at their deaths they were not divided, especially if it
be true that they both suffered, not only for the same cause, but at the same
time; Paul was born at Tarsus, the Metropolis of Cilicia, a City infinitely
Rich and Popular, and what Contributed more to the Fame and Honor of it, an
Academy, furnished with Schools of Learning, where the Scholars, so closly
plied their Studys, that as Strabo informs us, they excelled in all Arts of
Politeck Learning and Philosophy, his Parence was Jews, and that of the
Ancients Stock, not entering in by the Gate of Proselitism, but Originally
desended from that Nation, which surely he meanswhen he says, that he was an
Hebrew of the Hebrews; his Parents belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin, whose
Founder was the younger Son of the Old Patriarch Jacob, who thus provisied of
him; Benjamen shall Raven as a Wolf, in the Morning he shall devour the prey,
and at Night he shall devide the Spoil; this Prophetical Character Tertullian
and others will have to be accomplished in our Apostle, as a Ravening Wolf, in
the Morning devouring his prey, that is as a Persecutor of the Church, in the
first part of his Life, destroying the Flock of God; in the Evening deviding
the Spoil, that is in his declining Age as Doctor of the Nation, feeding and
distributing to Christ Sheep; we find him described in Scripture by two Names,
the one Saul, a name common in the Tribe of Benjamen, his other was Paul asumed
to him as some think at his Conversion, to denote his humility; in his youth he
was brought up in the Schools of Tarsus, fully instructed in all the Liberal
Arts and Sciences, whereby he came admirably aquainted with famous and external
Authors; having run through the whole Circle of the Sciences, and laid the sure
foundation of humain Learning at Tarsus, he was by his Parance sent to
Jerusalem to be perfected in the Study of the Law; it is said when Stephen was
Executed Paul stood by, and kept the Clothes of them that did it, whether he
was any farther conserned in the death of this innocent Man, we do not find;
however it was enough loudly to Proclaim his approbation and consent, and
therefore we find him indicting himself for this Fact, and pleading Guilty,
when the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and
consenting unto his death, and kept the Raiment of them that Slew him, Acts 22.
20. God chiefly inspects the Heart, and if the Vote be passed there, writes the
man Guilty, though he stur no farther in all moral Actions, God values the will
for the deed; the storm thus increased apace, and a violent persecution began
to arise in which our Apostle was a prime Agent and Minister, Raging about in
all Parts, with a mad and ungoverned Zeal, searching for the Saints, beating
some, imprisoning others, and procuring them to be put to death; indeed he was
a kind of Inquisitor, employed to hunt and find out these upstart Heretics;
accordingly took a Warrant and Commission to go down to Damascus, in fury and a
misguided Zeal, whether many of those persecuted Christians had fled for
shelter, but God who had designed him for a work of another nature, and
separated him from his Mother's womb, to the Preaching of the Gospel, stopped him
in his journey as Acts 22. 9. and he fell unto the ground, and heard a voice
saying, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me, and he went to Damascus another
man, from a Persecutor he became one of the Persecuted; from hence he Traveled
to Arabia and spent three years in the Ministry there, and then retunned to
Damascus, a great and populus City, from hence he went to Jerusalem and
converst with Peter and James; it was at Antioch about the beginning of
Claudious's Reign, ten years after Christ's Ascension, where the Desiples was
first called Christians, being usually styled before Nazarens; from Jerusalem
he set Sail to Cyprus and planted Christianity there, and now the Old Spirit of
the Jews did begin to hunt and pursue them, who coming from Antioch and
Iconium, exasperated and stired up the multitude, and they who just before
accounted them as Gods, used them not only worse then men but slaves, for in a
mighty Rage, they fell upon Paul, stoned him, and as they thought Dead, and
then dragged him out of the City, where the Christians of that place coming
probable to Inter him, he suddenly Revived and Rose up among them, and the next
day went hence to Debe, and so Traveled to several places to Confirm the new
planted Church, he was Imprisoned and Illused at Phylippi.

His Parents were Tent Makers by Trade, Preaching Christ at Jerusalem, Italy,
Spain, Laboring much among the Gentiles, suffered at Rome under Nero; as he
was leading to Execution it is said Three of the Soulders that Guarded him,
seeing his Courage, become Christians, and suffered Death, he kneeled down and
his head stricken off with a Sword, as some write in the 68 year of his Age,
and was buried with Peter.

The description of his Person.
He was a Man said to be of Low and tittle Stature, and somewhat stooping, his
Complexion fair, his Countenance grave, his head small, his Eyes carried a
kind of beauty and sweetness in them, that he was Low himself plainly
intimates, when he tells us they were wont to say of him, that his bodily
person was weak, and his speech contemptable, in which respect he is styled by
Chrysostom a Man Three Cubits (or a little more than four Foot,) high, and yet
tall enough to reach Heaven.

The Life of Andrew.
HIstory which has hitherto been very Large and Copius in describing the Acts
of the two first Apostles, is hence forward very sparing in its accounts,
giving us only now and then a few oblique and accidental Remarks concerning the
Rest, and some of them no farther mentioned, than the mere recording of their
Names, for what Reason it pleased the divine Wisdom and Providence, that no
more of their Acts should be consigned to writing by the Pen Men of Old, is to
us unknown; Andrew was Born at Bethsaida a City of Galile, standing upon the
bank of the Lake of Genesareth, Son to John or Jonas a Fisherman, of that
Town, Brother he was to Simon Peter; he had Scythia and the Neighboring
Country primary alloted him for his Provinces, first then he Traveled through
Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia, and Instructed them in the Faith of Christ.

Passing all along the Euxine Seas, formerly called Axenus, from the Barbarous
and Inhospitable temper of the People, who were wont, to sacrificed strangers,
and of their Skulls make Cups to drink in at their Feasts and Banquets, he was
brought before the Proconsul, who persuaded him that he would not foolishly
destroy himself, but live and enjoy with him the pleasures of this Life; the
Apostle after many more words replied, that now he saw it was in vain any
longer to deal with him, a person incapable of sober Counsel, and hardened, in
his on blindness and folly, he might now do his worst, and if he had one
Torment greater than another, he might heap that upon him, the greater
constancy he showed in his suffering for Christ, the more acceptable he should
be to his Lord and Master, the Procounsul first Commanded him to be scourged
seven lashes successively, whipping his naked body, and seeing his invincable
patience and constancy, Commanded him to be Crucified, but not to be fastened to
the Cross with Nails but Cords, that so his death might be the more lingering
and tedious; as he was led to Execution, to which he went with a cheerful and
composed mind, the People Cried out, that he was an innocent and good Man,
being come within sight of the Cross, he saluted it with this kind adress, that
he had long desired and expected that happy hour, thus having prayed and
exhorted the People to constancy and perceverance in that Relgion, he was
fastened to the Cross, whereon he hung, two days teaching and instructing the
People all the time, and when great importunities in the mean while was used to
the Proconsul to spare his Life, he earnestly begs of the Lord that he might at
this time depart, and seal the Truth of his Religion with his blood, God heard
his prayers, and he immediately expired, in the 9th month, though in what year,
no certain account can be Recorded; his Body being taken down and Embalmed, was
decently and honorably Interred by Maximilla, a Woman of great Quality and
Estate.

JAMES The Son of Zebede, a Fisherman, by Birth a Galilean, supposed to be one
of the Brethren that their Mother asked, that one might sit at the right hand
and the other at the left hand of Jesus in his Kingdom; he Preached Christ unto
the 12 Tribes, some write that he came to Spain, and other Western parts, and
also Britain, Ireland; he was slain with a Sword by Herod the Tetrach of the
Jews in Judaea, where he was buried.

JOHN The Brother of James, by Birth a Galilean, Preached Christ in Asia,
coming near Rome was accused to the Emperor as an Assertor of Athesim, and
Subvertor of the Religion of the Empire, whereupon he was sent bound to Rome,
and put into a Coldron of boiling Oil in which he had no harm, Banished by
Trajan the Emperor into the Isle of Patmos, and there he wrote his Gospel,
being Releast in the Reign of Vertinax, and in the 100 year of Christ, as
written by some, returned to Asia, chiefly Residing at Ephesus, his constant
practice to his dying day (being led to the Metting) saying no more than Little
Children Love one another; he lived as some write to the Age of 120 years.

PHILIP, Born at Bethsaida, near the Sea of Tiberias, Brought up in learning,
it is said he Preached Christ in Phrygia, and the City Hierapolis, many having
reciev'd the Faith, he was seized and carried to Prison, was cruely Scourged
and hanged by the Neck against a Pillar, at which time as some write, was a
Terrible Earthquake; he was Buried at Hierapolis, and his Daughters some say
was Crucified at Paimimes.

BARTHOLOMEW, Who some think to be Nathaniel of Cana in Galile, Preached Christ
unto the Indians, Buried in Albania, a City of Armenia the Great, where he was
Crucified with his head downward and slain alive, and some wright that he was
beheaded at the Commandment of Polemis King of India.

MATTHEW, Otherwise Levi, Born at Nazareth, a City of Zebulon, the Son of
Alpheus a Tax gartherer, Preached Christ to the Ethiopians, which is called
Presbiter John's Kingdom, by Hurtychus's Command thrust through with a Sword,
he dyed at Hieropolis in Porthia, and was Buried, supposed to be 70 years of
Age.

THOMAS, a Jew, and Fisherman, as some write, Preached Christ unto the
Parthimans, Medes and Persians, and to the Caramans, Hixcans, Bartrians, and
Magicians, he rested at Calamica a City in Judea, where the Heathen Priests, as
he was Praying a lone in a solitary place, they coming upon him with a Dart
called a Spear or Javelin, Run him through.

SIMON ZELOTES, Born at Cana in Galile, Preached Christ throughout Mauritania,
and Africa the Less, and Persia, Egypt and Bretania, where he was, as some
write Crucified and Buried.

JUDE, And sometime called Thaddaus and Sebbaeus, as some writ, Brother of
James, Preached Christ in Iudaea, Samarie, throughout all Mesapotamia; he was
slain in the Time of Agbarus King of Edesse, and buried.

MATTHIAS, One of the 70 Disciples, and Numbered among the 11 Apostles in Room
of Judas, he Preached in Macedonia in Ethiopia, about the Haven Hyssus, and the
River Phasis, a Barbarous Nation and Ravonous of flesh; he dyed at Sebastobilus
nigh the Temple, Stoned by the Jews, at last beheaded with an Ax, Anno 59 some
say 64.

MARK, Of Jews Parents, of the Tribe of Levi, Preached Christ at Alexandria and
all the Bordering Regions from Egypt unto Pentapolis, in the Time of Tarmin, he
had a Cable Rope tied about his Neck, some write his Feet, at Alexandria; by
which drawn from a place called Bucolus to the place called Angeles, where he
was Burned to ashes by the furious Idolaters in the month Pharmuthi, with us
called April, on the 25th day.

LUKE, The Evangelist, Born at Antioch the chief City of Syria, brought up in
Learning, Toyled with the Apostles, Epiphanias writes that he Preached in
Dalanatia, Galatia and France, and Italy, and Macedonia; Authors do not agree
where he suffered Martyrdom, but it is supposed at Ephesus, he died and was
Buried.

TIMOTHY Preached at Ephesus and Illyricum, and throughout Hellas in Achaia,
where he died and was Buried.

Thus did these faithful Witnesses finish their testimony, and through their
constancy and fidelity obtained not only a good Report, but also a Crown
immortal, through faith in Christ Jesus, to whom be glory and dominion for ever.
SOME PASSAGES OUT OF A LETTER, WRIT TO A PERSON OF Quality:
Giving a True Relation in General, Concerning the Heavenly Lives of the
Primitive Christians.
SUCH was the Beginning, and first Institution of the Christian Church; that in
it we find Men, who voluntarily became little Children, Children who in Wisdom
exceeded Patriarchs, Virgins, who had the Prudence and Gravity of Matrons, and
Matrons endowed with Virgininal Modesty, and Chastity. Men of gray Hairs, and
old in Years, but Children in Malice, Pride and Ambition; and it was hard to
say, which were the Old, and which the Young Disciples, for the younger sort
strove to qual, if not exceed the elder in Devotion.

Holiness was their Ornament, and Men were counted Great, as they arrived to
high Degrees of Piety; and the more Religious any Man was, the greater Majesty
and Respect he was thought worthy of.

The Light they came attended withal filled the World, as the Sun does the
Universe, which comes forth from its Eastern Conclave, and presently diffuses,
and spreads its Light over all the surface of our Hemisphere. So soon did the
World feel the influence, and operations of these new Stars, and were focred to
acknowledge their Divine Power and Virtue; for they pressed through the C^aos
Mankind lay in, as souls do pierce through Bodies, and the Life, Sense and
Understanding they taught them, was wholly new, so different from what was in
the World before, that Men gazed at the Spectacle, and lost themselves in
Admiration.

What advantages the Soul can be supposed to give the Body, the same did the
first Christians afford to the benighted World; and whatever inconveniences the
Body puts the Soul to, the same did the besotted World bring upon the first
Christians; for as the Soul tenders the Bodies welfare, so did they the Worlds;
as the Soul directs the body to do things rational, so did they the World; as
the Soul restrains the Body from doing mischief to it self, so did they the
World; and as the Soul makes the Members of the Body Instruments of
Righteousness, so did they attempt to reform the deluded World into Holiness:
On the other side, as the Body afflicts the Soul, so did the World persecute
those first Christians; as the Body makes the Soul live uneasy, so did they
incommode these excellent Men: as the Body puts ill Constructions on the
actions and admonitions of the Soul, so the World did put the same on theirs;
and as the Body seems to long for nothing so much, as the ruin of the Soul; so
the destruction of those Saints, was the great thing the World then did aim at.

They were a Commonwealth made up of Great and Low, of Rulers and Underlings,
of Governors and Subjects; and yet nothing was more hard, than to distinguish
one from the other; for whatever the difference might be, they esteemed one
another epual, and by their carriage one would have concluded that they had
been all of the same degree and condition. Their P^stors and chief Men were
more known by their Munificence and Good Deeds, than by their Coats of Arms, or
Splendor of their Offices.

They seemed to be all of the same Kindred; for the Aged they honored as
Fathers, and the Youths they tendered as their Children. Those of the same Age
called one another Brethren, and these were the names they gave one another;
and in these Titles they gloried more, than men nowadays do in the lofty
Epithers of Duke, Earl, Baron, Knight, or Gentleman.

You might see amongst them abundance of Mothers that never had any Children,
and Virgins took care of innocent Babes, as if they had be^n Mothers, No Family
complained of Barrenness or Unfruitfullness, for they never wanted Children to
provide for; and and those that had none of their own, would be sure to find
some to take care of. None wanted paternal Care, while so many Fathers studied
to do good, and men were readier to Give, than others were to Ask, and seemed
to be sorrowful if they had not Objects, upon which they might exercise a
paternal Charity.

There was hardly a Widow among them, that complained of Solitariness, or
sought comfort in a second Husband, and second Marriage was counted little
better than Adultery. Their Widows were the same, that they were whilst their
Husbands lived; and finding that upon their Husband's death, they were become
Sisters of many Brethren, they aimed at no other Contract, but that with
Christ, who, if they were found worthy, would, as they thought, marry them at
last to the Service of the Church, where they might exercise that Material Care
to the Poor and Needy, which formerly they used to express to their own
Children. Here you should see none Rejoicing, that he had any thing of his own;
for whatever he had, he looked upon his Fellow Christians as Coheirs; and was
so well contented, that they should inherit with him, that he thought, that
which he had, a Burden, if his Neighbors were not to share in his
Possessions. This present Life was the least thing they minded, while that to
come, engrossed their Thoughts and Considerations. They were so entirely
Christians, that in a manner they were nothing else, and cared not for being
any thing else, lest if they should be something else, they should be suspected
of deviating from their Master's footsteps.

Hence it was, that the Pagans accused them of Unrighteousness, and
Unprofitableness, as if they were dead Weights in the World, contributing
nothing to the welfare and prosperity of Manking, and as if they stood for
Ciphers in Humane Societies, though none were more ready to communicate of the
Profit of their Labors to others than they, and did therefore on purpose keep
close to their Calling and Profession, that they might be able to relieve the
Needy. And though they were loath to take upon them the Employment of
Magistrates and Governors, lest the Empero's and God's Commands should clash,
and they lie under a temptation of obeying Man more than God; yet, whenever
they were thought worthy to bear Office in the Church, they readily embraced
the Charge, that they might be in a greater capacity to improve the Talents God
had given them, to his Glory, and his People's good, and were pleased with the
Trouble of the Office, that the World might see they had no design of Gain, or
Worldly Interest in the Administration.

They spoke little, but their Thoughts were always Great and Heavenly: and as
they looked upon sublunary Object^, as too mean for their lofty Minds to rest
on, so their care was to keep the Eyes of their Understanding fixed on that
World, which fades not away.

Their Communications or Answers in common Discouries were Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay. An Oath they shunned as much as Perjury, and a Lie among them was more
rare, than a Sea Monster is to the Inhabitants of a Continent; for they said,
that in their Baptism they were signed with the Mark of Truth, and that they
could not be Servants of the God of Truth, if they should yield but to the
least appearance of Falsehood.

In the Cities and Towns where they lived, none was unknown to the other; for
they Prayed together, heard the Word together, met frequently at Meals
together, and were continually helpful one to the other; In-so-much that
wherever they met, they knew one another; and when they durst not with their
Lips, yet with their Eyes and Gestures, they would salute one another, send
Kisses of Peace one to another, rejoice in the common Hope, and if permitted,
assist one another in Adversities. This is one of us, says such a Saint, for
we have seen him in our Oratories, we have Preyed with him, we have been at the
Lord's Table together, we have heard the Scriptures read together, we have
kneeled together, we have been instructed together. O happy Kindred! which
comes by Prayer, and Communion of the Body and Blood of JESUS! O Blessed
Relations! where Men are not called Brothers of the Sun or of the Stars, as the
ancient Tyrants styled themselves, but Brethren of CHRIST, Children of GOD, and
Citizens of Heaven!

When a Christian, who was a Stranger, came to them, before ever he showed his
Testimonias. they knew him by his lean Visage, and meager Face, which his
frequent Fasting had brought him to, by the Modesty of his Eyes, by the Gravity
of his Speech, by his Gate, and Habit, and mortified Behavior, for something
Divine did shine through their looks, and one might read the Characters of the
Spirit in their Countenance. Nor is it very strange, that a good Man should be
known by his Carriage, for to this day, a serious Person, though he says
nothing, something in his Lineaments, and Features, and Postures, will betray
the inward Zeal, and Sincerity of his Soul; and his Deportment will discover,
there is something more than ordinary in him, as much as the Roman Senator was
betrayed by the Perfumes about him.

Whenever they were thrust: into the Crowd of Malefactors, there
Fellow Christians soon guessed who they were; for they hastened with Meekness to
their Martyrdom, and without expressing any impatience, or indignation,
submitted their Necks to the stroke of the Axe, prepared for them. They used to
look frequently up to Heaven, and one might by their smiles see that between
God and them there was more than ordinary Correspondence. Sometimes they would
provoke the Executioners to begin their Tortures, and be earnest with the
Hangman, not to delay their Agonnies. Sometimes they would laugh at the Pain
they suffered, and in the very jaws of Death betray a taste of Immortality.
They looked upon Christianity, as a Religion, that taught them to suffer
valiantly; and to them it was no other but a Science, to instruct Men to
despise Riches, Honors, and Torments too, in order to Everlasting Glory.

Their Presidents, and Pastors, were known by no other Character, but that of
Officiousness, and Charity, nor had their Shepherds any other mark to be
distinguished by, but their willingness to advance the good of the Sheep, and
their readiness unto every good Word and Work. And indeed so were the
Christians in general known by their mutual Love, and kind Offices.

If any fell sick, the rest did cheerfully run to comfort him; and this
Employment their Women were chiefly ambitious of, who seldom stirred out of
their own Houses, but upon such occasions, and when they resorted to their
Oratories. They were seen but rarely in the Streets, except such charitable
Employments called them forth; for none denied her Neighbor her care, nor
could any worldly Rspects discharge them from that Officiousness.

If any were Rich, or Noble, they were the readier to express their compassion,
and Women of the highest Descent were the forwardest to assist the Calamitous
in their need; for Religion had mortified in them all Punctilio's of Honor and
State, and made them remember that in Christ they were all equal. She in whose
Veins the Noblest Blood did run, would say of her poor distressed Nighbour, she
is my Sister, my Fellow-member, one that has part with me in my Dear Redemer.
If she be ancient, she is my Mother, said she, if younger, she is my Daughter;
nor were these expressions names of course only, but they were written in their
hearts, and their Lips spoke what their Minds believed, and these words were at
once pronounced, and thought. Hence it was, that the greatest Ladies touched
their poorer Neighbors Sores, bound up their Wounds, applied Plasters to
them, made their Beds and tended them, as the meanest Servants. Here you might
see the industry of one, there the sweetness and patience of another; one would
turn the sick Sister, the other help her up, the third dress her, the fourth
feed her, and in all this, the sick Creature saw, as it were, the Face of the
Lord JESUS. She that tended the Sick, looked upon Christ in her that was sick,
and she that was sick, thought she saw Christ, in the person that tended her.
So Divine, so heavenly were their Works of Mercy, that one was to the other in
God's stead, and that saying of Christ, What you have done unto the least of
these my Brethren, you have done it unto me, did not depart from their
Memories. Thus stood the case with the Holy Women then, and this advantage they
reapt by their Charitable care, that when their Husbands died, they were taken
as Deaconnesses into the Church, and thus they prepared themselves for Christ,
and the Church's Service.

If any were imprisoned upon the account of Religion, all that knew them would
fly to them. No Keeper so hard-hearted, but they would find out a way to smooth
him; no Lock, no Bar so strong, but they would make a shift to break it, either
by their Gifts, or their soft Answers, not to make the Jaylers false to their
Trusts, but to get an oppertunity to see their Suffering Friends; and when they
saw them, one would kiss their Chains, and Fetters, another lay his Lips to
their Wounds, a third give their bruised Members and tired Bodies such
refreshment as was needful.

(...) any of them were driven into Exile, in every place they met with
Brethren, and Feliow-Christians, and these would run to to them, comfort them,
lead them into their Houses, and treat them as Members of their own Family,
especially when by Letters from their Brethren, they understood, that for
CHRIST his sake they were driven from their native home.

Were any condemned to work in Mines, or Quarries, the neighboring Christians,
that that heard of it, would presently come together, help the innocent Man,
endeavor to make his burden light, feed him with Victuals, and assist him in
the performing of his Task.

Were any of them sent through the malice of the Heathen Governors to the
Correction-house, or forced to labor hard in Caves and Dens, or lamentably
scourged, beaten, and abused for the name of the Lord JESUS. The rest that
heard of it, would not complain, nor think their Brethren unhappy, but rather
count themselves so, because they were not counted worthy to suffer for the
Name of JESUS, and therefore would wish that this might be their Lot and
Portion too.

If the fury of Tyrants abated, or remitted at any time, and the imprisoned and
afflicted Believers got leave to return home again, some wounded, some bruised,
some with disjoynted Bones, some half Burnt, some Maimed, some with one Arm,
some with one Eye, some with one Leg only; their Friends would run out to them,
and strive, who should first receive them into their Houses. Happy the man that
could kifs their Wounds. and refresh them with Necessaries and Conveniences;
and the longer any Man could harbor such a Christian at his House. the happier
he thought himself to be. And such Men as had thus suffered for Christ, they
honored for the future, and esteemed them equal with their Pastors and
Presidents. Indeed out of these, they chose their Bishops, thinking those
fittest to serve at Christ's Altar who had already made themselves a Sacrifice
for him. Thus Men purchased the degree of Pastors by their Holiness, and their
eminent Sanctity, which pressed even through Wounds and Tortures for the Name
of Christ prepared them for that Function. Men that were strong to suffer, they
justly thought might be fittest to lalabour in God's Church, and they that had
been such Champions for the truth, they looked upon as the properest
Instruments to defend it to their death.

Nor did their kindness extend only to their Friends, but reached even to their
greatest Enemies; and they that jush before were persecuted by them, if their
Persecutors fell fick, or were afflicted, or the Plague of God came upon them,
these injured Christians would offer their Services, support them, comfort
them, admonish them, attend at their Beds side, and Lend them their
helping-hand, cherish them, supple their Sores, relieve them, and with a pity
great and magnanimous, weep over their calamitious Estate to the amazement of
the Pagan World, who were now ready to look upon them as Angels, when but just
before they thought them as bad as Devils.

Poverty was the least thing that troubled them; nor did Want sit so heavy on
their Souls, as it does on ours, for they had learned to undervalue Riches; and
that which made them slight it, were these two impressions the Apostles
Doctrine had made on their Souls

This sunk deep into their Hearts, that here we have no Continuing City, but we
seek one to come. That all we see here, is but shadow, and imagery, but the
substance is not yet Visible; that the fashions of this World will pass away,
and the Gaudes and Glories below the Moon afford no real satisfaction. This
made it ridiculous in their eyes, to snatch at a Butterfly or a Flying Feather;
and they rationally believe, that whatever is subject to time, and change,
will certainly make it self Wings, and flee away, and leave the Soul as empty
as it found it, and that therefore their Thoughts must be turned another way,
even there where constant satisfaction, lasting content, permanent happiness,
perfect beauty, and uninterrupted joys are to be found; and indeed, this duly
weighed, will breed a mighty contempt of Temporal things, and a certain
expectation of future Bliss.

Nor did the care of their Children fill their Hearts with anexious Thoughts,
for they were sensible, that whenever the Church had notice of their want,
they would certainly be relieved, and looked after; for as many Fathers and
Mothers left their Estates, and what they had to the Church, so the Church
employed those Legacies, or Gifts, to support all those that should be
necessitous. Besides this, their Pastors both by their Doctrine and Example
admonished them to be diligent in working with their own hands, that they might
get something not only to be beneficial to themselves, but to others too, and
indeed they thought they did little or nothing, if of what they got, they did
not communieate to those, who were not able to help themselves.

They had nothing that was superfluous and hence it was, that there was but
little striving about what they left. To lay up much Goods for many years, they
thought was fitter for Heathens that for Christians; and having seen no such
thing in their Master, they could not tell, how it could be proper in his
Servants.

Love of Money, and admiration of Riches, and anxious worldly Cares and Desires
of Hoarding, were things they had an antipathy against; and though out of that
Stock they provided themselves with Necessaries, yet for engrossing any thing
to themselves, besides, was a thought as far from their Minds, as the Heaven
they longed for was from that Earth, on which they trampled, and looked upon
with pity and scorn? for, alas! what greediness could there be in them after
Temporal Means, who were already greater than the World could make them, and
took delight in nothing, but surveying that Glory, which ere long they should
rejoice, and triumph in?

If any were so Malicious as to traduce their Teachers, and brand them with the
guilt of Covetousness, or Slander them, their Pastors used no other Weapon to
put by the Sting, but Meekness to the Back-biter, and their own innocence by
degrees dashed, and wiped away all aspersions, Hence the Christians gave them
their own freely, for they believed they could lose nothing by it, and long
experience had so confirmed that belief, that Envy it self could make no
impressions upon them to the contrary; when it was in their hands, they thought
it was safer than in their own; and being hereby freed from abundance of Cares,
and Encumbrances, they pressed more cheerfully to the promised Mark.

If any Christian kept any land in his hands, his care was so to use his
Income, as to give God the First Fruits of it, to bring his Gift to the Church,
to lay by somewhat for Alms, to help and assist the Sick, and to relieve the
Prisoners and Captives, not only such as were within the verge of the Town he
lived in, but others also. Thus did those men live under Riches, as under
Thorns, and were sensible of nothing so much as this, that great Wealth is but
a great temptation to be Vain, and Sensual, which made them use this
Self-denial in their Incomes.

He that for a kindness, he did to his Neighbor, expected a Recompense, was
looked upon as a Person greedy of filthy Lucre; and he that could do nothing
for his friend, without a Reward, or prospect of some Profit to himself, was
censured as a Person ignorant of the Fundamental Law of their Religion. Usury,
Interest, and such names, were scarce heard of among them; and Oppression was a
thing, which they thought none that named the Name of Christ could be guilty
of. In a word, they desired nothing so much in this world as to be quickly gone
from it, and they thought it the joyfullest news imaginable to understand, that
they were to be dissolved, and to go to Christ.

This was the Temper Nature, and Constitution of that Commonwealth. The Members
of it looked mean, and contemptible. Nothing about them was pompous, either in
Clothes, or Diet, or Habitation, or Housholdstuff. Such among them, as were
Noble or Learned, or of a gentile Extract laid aside their Pride, and all their
swelling Titles, forgot that they were better Born, or Educated than others,
and became like their Brethren. Plaiting and Curling the Hair was a thing that
both their Men and Women proscribed from their care, and they thought that
labor lost, which was employed on such Superfluities. They were jealous of
their serious frame of Spirit, and therefore all such Dresses, as might serve
to infuse Vanity into their Minds, or damp their Zeal to Religion, they
shunned, as they did Houses infected with the Plague. They minded no such thing
as Modes and Fashion, nor did any new Habit, or Ornament that came up, entice
them to imitation. Decency was their Rule, and Modesty the Standard of their
Habit, and Conversation. They wore nothing about them that was either Costly or
Curious, and there greatest study and contrivance was, how to advance their
Souls, and make them fit for the Wedding of the Lamb; Laying on either White or
Red upon the Face, or disfiguring it with something black, and of Kin to Hell,
they knew not what it meant. Their Garments were either Linen or Woollen, or
Furr, or Sheeps-skin, and their Furniture Mean and Homely.

Without God, they attempted nothing; and whatever Enterprise it was, they
betook themselves to, they sanctified it by Prayer, and Suplication. If they
went out either to Sow, or to Plough, or to Reap, or to Build, God's Blessing
was first sought, and begged, and they never put on their Clothes, but
entertained themselves all the while with some holy reflections. Theaters and
seeing of Plays they hated, as a thing contrary to their Profession; and though
the Heathen despised them for it, looked upon them as unsociable, Men of
pitiful Spirits, Strangers to the Art of Conversation, Melancholy Wretches,
Brethren of Worms, and no better than Vermin of the Earth; yet they mattered
not their Censures, and triumphed more in a good Conscience, than the other
could do in all the Vanities and Glories of this present World. The Worlds
Contempt, was their Glory, and they were proud of being Scorned and Undervalued
by the Vulgar Crowd, that they might with greater earnestness long after a
better Inheritance. If any wanted business, he would find some; and they that
had no need to work for their Living, worked for the Poor. Idleness they had an
aversion from, as from the root of Evil, and great Men and Women would do
something, which the Needy might be the better for. The greatest Lady would not
disdain to Spin, or Sow, or Knit for her distressed Neighbor, and like Bees,
they were ever busy, and employed for the common Good.

Love of the World was death to them; and they thought it a certain sign, that
they had no Portion in Christ if they did serve both God and Mammon. To be in
the World, and not of the World, was their Motto; and to be other Men, than
they seemed to be, was the thing they chiefly aimed at. They seemed to be
profane, because they would worship no Heathen Gods, but were the devoutest
persons in the World to the true God; and they forgot to be Men, that they
might be the better Christians. Not a few left their high Places, and great
Dignities to become Christians, and chose to be low, and contemptible in the
World, that they might have no impediments in their way to Heaven.

Servants never concerned themselves to get their Freedom, for their Masters
were Christians, and themselves were so; both cheerfully discharged their
Duties one to another, and consequently lived in perfect Peace, and Unity. Many
Servants, that might have had their Freedom, would not, because they lived
sufficiently happy under their Believing Masters; and while they saw nothing
but Love in their Masters, their very Bondage was perfect Freedom.

If one Wept, his Neighbor did Weep with him; If one Mourned, his Neighbor
Mourned with him, as if both had committed the same Sin; In a word, they had
their Joys and Sorrows common, and they might be said to be all in one, and one
in all: In their Meals they were temperate.

Their Houses were open to Strangers, as well as to their Friends and
Neighbors; and where the Traveller could produce a Certificate, that he was a
practical Christian, he could not fail of a most hearty Welcome. Hospitality
was their Badge, and he that would not receive a Brother into his House,
because Poor, and Ragged, was either forbid the Church, or not suffered to come
into it.

And though they never had studied Pythagoras, yet both their Faith and Reason
told them, that as the Body waxes stronger by the ^eath of the Soul, so the
Soul becomes more ^aliant, and lively by the death of the Body. This made them
Conquerours of those Pleasures of the Flesh, which in all Ages have weakened the
bravest Men. and Women, melted Hearts of Iron, and conquered the greatest
Conquerours of the World.

To suppress such satisfactions of the Flesh, they were so watchful, so
courageous, so magnanimous, that they seemed Angels more than Men, and were
actually nearer to God, to whom they lived, than to the World, in which they
lived. In their Lives, Chaste and Modest; in their Married estate, Moderate and
Holy; and not a Man came near his Wife, after he perceived, or had notice that
she was with Child, till she was delivered; and even then when they came
together, their Thoughts were so innocent, that they proposed no other end but
Procreation of Children to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord.
In the very Works of their Calling, they would sing of Christ, and make
Spiritual Objects so familiar to them, that in their very Sleep and Dreams,
they rolled in their Imagination; They were always ready for prayer, and holy
Ejaculations; and so addicted to the love of Goodness, that they could not
endure a vicious Person; and if they met with any such in their Assemblies, did
thrust him out of their Communion, and made it Criminal for any Christian
either to Eat, or Drink, or Converse, or Talk, or keep Company with him.

Of their Teachers they were so observant, that without them they would begin
nothing, and go nowhere without their Letters of Recommendation. Without their
advice, they would not marry, nor do any thing considerable in their civil
affairs without asking their counsel and approbation, for they looked upon them
as their Fathers, and as Religion had made them so, so they thought the
obligation to consult them upon all occasions was the stronger.

And when they were beaten, would not beat again; when reviled, would not
revile again; and when abused, would not abuse again, nay look upon an unjust
Calumny as a piece of Martyrdom, and therefore bear it undauntedly.

Their meeting or coming together to Pray, they esteemed a thing so Sacred,
that no Frowns, no Thunders, no Threatenings of Tyrants could make them forbear
it; andbeing conscious of their innocence, they justly thought, their Enemies
might bytheir Authority forbid, but could not with any color of Reason
prohibit their Assemblies. This made them flock to their Oratories, though it
was death to go; and Parants with their Children would run, though the next
news, they were like to hear was Christianos ad Leones, Throw those Dogs to the
Lions. Though they were thrust into Mines, and Prisons, yet they would find
opportunities to Pray.

Some traveled into far Countries, Preached the Gospel, and when they had laid
a good Foundation there, went farther, and spent their Lives in Pains and
Labors, and doing good.

With this kind of Life, the first Christians amazed the unbelieving World, and
their Power and Number quickly grew so formidable, that the Emperors
themselves began to be startled at their progress, and therefore employed their
Might and Greatness to oppose it. To crush their towering Piety, the Heathens
showed them Racks, Flames, Gibbets, Grid-irons, Cauldrons, boiling Oil, Lions,
Bears, Wild Bulls, and set before them the Worldly Prudence of Philosophers,
but by the Grace and Assistance of that JESUS, who strengthened them, they were
more undaunted at their Torments, than their Hangmen, did fight with Lions, and
smile, and were more daring than the Flames they suffered in, firmer than the
Racks, that broke their Bones, and by their practices surmounted all the great
Acts that were ever done by Hero's, and the most famous Conquerours. They
overcame Death by a desire of Death, and were more willing to die, than their
Executioners to suffer them. Their Blood proved the Seed of the Church, and the
more they Massacred, the more their numbers grew, till at last the Emperors
themselves became Christians, and were forced to yield to the Faith, and
Patience of JESUS, and the Christians at last gave Law to those, who at first
did Stab, and Murder them, and Conquered them in the end, who in the beginning
Butchered them like Dogs, and such inconsiderable Animals.

THE END

