THE VOICE OF King CHARLES the Father, to CHARLES the Son; And, the Bride say,
Come.

Being, An Invitation of King Charles to come in peaceably, and be reconciled to
his Kingdoms, according to his Father's mind; and showing the integrity of his
Highness OLIVER CROMWELL.

Also, That the Author's Prophecy is fulfilled in part, and shall perfectly be
verified in 1655.

The Sabbath straightly to be sanctified and kept.

The Vindication of Infant Baptism, and re-baptizing proved by Scriptures and
Fathers to be a Truth.

With an exhortation to the Royalists. And many other discoveries of Truth.

Noble Royalists, this is your way of advancement.

By ARISE EVANS.

Heb. 4. 7. To day if ye will, hear bis voice, etc.

Printed at London for the Author, 1655.

To the most glorious King CHARLES, of Great Britain: ARISE EVANS wishes, that
Grace, Truth, Peace, and Glory may come to you from God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.
Most illustrious King,
I Am not fitted to direct a Speech unto so great a Majesty, being not versed
in Courtly Complements, or acquainted with Princely Titles. I hope your Majesty
does not expect such Language from me; nor yet, that you will despise the
simpleness of the Style: but seriously consider, and regard the matter of this
mean Method. I presume the more to present your Majesty with these few Lines
after sorude a manner, (yet so well dressed as I am most able to pen them)
because I have heard of your virtuous Clemency and Humility, toward such as
were of so low a Rank, as I my self am, even of the poorest of men. Therefore I
beseech your Majesty likewise to bear with my boldness and presumption in
speaking the Truth to you; for it will be the glory of your Royal Patience, not
to look upon it contemptibly; but rather give ear to it, for that it comes
from the pure affections of a true heart toward you. If I know my own heart,
Jer. 17. 9. which speaks unto you, wishing you eternal happiness, both for
your Soul and Body, and that your glorious splendour may shine in Power, and not
in Words only, which are like vain shadows without the substance; as some
perhaps would have themselves so exalted; yea, too many are apt to flatter
Princes with hollow Titles which are as empty shells, or nuts without kernels,
yet with such vainglory, earthly Princes, (whose minds are ridiculous before
God and godly men) too too much delight to be applauded. So that it is now, and
it was ever so with God and good men, That he which humbles himself, and
slighteth such earthly pomp, (though an honor truly belonging to him) is of
God and good men counted most worthy of Honor, Favor, and Exaltation. And I
hope your Majesty does, and will observe this Rule, and not fix your self upon
such rotten branches, (which promise much, yet let you sall) but upon God the
sure Rock, and the Community of those that love him, and keep his Commandments;
so shall you be surely fixed and established. And not to trouble your Majesty
with too long a Prologue, I shall now (God willing) speak to the purpose.

Judges 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21. When the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto Gideon, he saluted him thus, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of
valor. And when Gideon answered, If the Lord be with us, why then is all this
befallen us, that we are delivered into the hand of our enemies? And then the
Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shall save
Israel from the hands of his enemies, (mark it) have not I sent thee? And when
Gideon said, Wherewith shall I save Israel? my family is poor in Manasseth, and
I am the least in my father's house; The Lord said, I will be with thee, and
thou shall smite the enemy as one man. Moreover, the Angel gave him a sign, by
touching his present that was upon the rock, with the end of his cane or
walking-staff, until the fire came out of the rock, and consumed his present.
And something to that purpose was done to your Majesty by this last rising at
Salisbury, as you may see by my book called, The Iron Rod.

And after that, Gideon sought to know thr Lord by Sacrifice and Prayer; and
the Lord made himself known unto him by Signs, and gave him Wisdom, and
prospered him so, that with three hundred chosen men, he overthrew the numerous
host of the Midianites. Here your Majesty may see what it is to seek the Lord.
And these things are as properly spoken to your Majesty now, as they were then
to Gideon, and they will be as effectually performed to you, if with faith you
receive them, (as Saint Augustine did,) as they were then to Gideon; or, as if
the same Angel had spoken them unto you: yet the case is not the same, for
Gideon used his Sword only; but you are to use first your Word; and if that
will not, your Sword then will prevail.

I have, as you shall find, in this ensuing little Book, set down to you (if
happily from your Subjects after a propitiatory manner) something to engage
your Sovereign Majesty, for your own good, and their desire, and good of all,
if your Majesty please to comply with it; which Subjects I find (if they be
real) are willing to prostrate themselves before you, as soon as you shall hold
forth your golden Scepter of mercy unto them, as Ahasuerus did to Esther,
Esther 6. 2, 3. And I beseech your Royal Majesty, (though you may well think me
inconsiderable, to intercede between you and your People) yet hear the voice of
your Royal Father of famous memory, saying, Son, (for so he begins) I have
offered Acts of Indemnity, and Oblivion, to so great a latitude, as may
include all that can but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious or liable
to the Laws, and which might seem to exclude all future jealousies, and give
securities. I would have you always propense to the same way: whenever it
shall be desired and accepted, let it be granted, not only as an Act of
State Policy and necessity, but also of Christian charity and choice. All I
have now left me, is a power to forgive those that have deprived me of all:
and, I thank God, I have a heart to do it; and joy as much in this Grace which
God has given me, as in all my former enjoyments; for this is a greater
Argument of God's love to me, then any prosperity can be. Be confident (as I
am) that the most of all sides who have done amiss, have done so, not out of
malice, but out of misinformation or mis-apprehension of things; none will be
more loyal and faithful to me and you, then those Subjects, who, sensible of
their errors and our injuries, will feel in their souls most vehement motives
to repentance, and earnestly desire to make some reparations for their former
defects. As your Quality sets you beyond any duel with any Subject, so the
nobleness of your Mind must raise you above the meditating of any revenge, or
executing your anger upon the many: the more conscious you shall be to your
people, the more prone you will be to expect all love and loyalty from them,
and to inflict no punishment upon them for former miscarriages. You will have
more inward complacency in pardoning one, then in punishing a thousand. And
again, (says he) for those that repent of any defects in their duty toward me,
as I freely forgive them in the word of a Christian King, so I believe you will
find them truly zealous to repay with interest, that loyalty and love to you,
which was due to me, etc. And, dear Sovereign, many such exhortations to press
you to offer a free pardon to all, and not to seek to be revenged on any, ye
have in his Book, and last Speech to you.

Now I say, If a Subject had been murdered, and that his sonshould forgive all
the murderers, yet the Law has a power in it to put them to death for their
actings in murdering his Father, notwithstanding his son's remittance; because
his son is not a competent Judge in the cause. But in a King (in whom is the
life of the Law) it is not so; for in any Case, and especially his own Case, he
may forgive what he will, and that must stand for Law, because he is a complete
Judge, so that his word by the Law is made to be above the Law, as we see in
Cases of Remittance: for after that many have been cast to die by the Law, the
King's pardon has saved them: and whosoever denies this, denies the King's
Prerogative Royal.

Again, I say, There is a distinction between Martyring and Murdering: for a
Martyr offers himself for the defense of the Truth of God, as our Savicur
says, John 10. 17, 18. He lays down his life, none properly can be said to
take it from him, because he has power to lay it down, and to take it up
again, else he is not a Martyr; but the life of him that is murdered, is
violently taken from him, that though he would live upon any terms, he may not
live, and he cannot help it. And your Royal Father understanding this, did not
say at his death, (nor as you have it in his Speech to you) that he was
murdered; but said, that he was martyred. Therefore he that says he was
murdered, does not only deny him to be a Martyr, but does also deny both his
power and pardon, and belyeth him: for he did never pardon any for wilful
murder, yet pardons all these men, being his own enemies, looking not on
them as his murthereres; but as they wilfully, yet ignorantly, did slay him:
and he would have you to pardon them in like manner.

Your Royal Father following Christ Jesus in it, who (as he was a King, and a
pattern to all Kings for the future times) had an eye to his Perogative Royal,
thus, that he gives order to his Apostles, concerning them that had put him to
death, that if they did repent, his blood should not be required of them: and
we see Peter proceeds with them accordingly; for after he had showed the Jews
how they had slain the Lord Jesus, until they were pricked in their hearts, and
made to cry out to the Apostles, saying, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
Peter does not say, Tou must die for it; but says, Repent and be baptized
every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins; and
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 2. 37, 38. yet by the Jews
Laws such offenders were to die without mercy, Levit. 24. 17, 18. and if it had
been the will of Christ, Peter had power enough to put them to death, as we see
Ananias and Sapphira were slain by the word of his mouth, Acts 5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. but herein is Christ's pardon or Perogative Royal seen.

Most Royal Sovereign, That Text, 2 Chronicles. 25. 3. which many urge in this Case,
is no president for you to follow* first, Because Joash was murdered, 2 King.
12. 20. Secondly, Because we read not, that King Joash gave any such charge to
his son, as your Royal Father gave you, to show that he forgives all his
enemies, and would have you to forgive them freely, if they repent and come to
agreement with you. Thirdly, We read not of the repentance of them that slew
King Joash; therefore it was but just for his son Amaziah, to put them to death.

And it behooves your Majesty, if there be any defects in your Father's Speech,
to rectify it by the word of Christ, and let not any wrest it to a wrong
sense, contrary to his mind; for I am sure he meant to imitate his Savior,
notwithstanding he might fail in expressing his mind, through the frailty of
flesh and blood, following the customs of former Kings, whose conditions did
not reach unto him, yet I know none that came nearer to Christ in word and
deed, then he did. Therefore do you follow the best, as he did, and take
Peter's doings, Acts 2. 37, 38. for your president, and so you will honor your
Father: for if you do not offer mercy to all freely without exceptions, and
receivs all that will accept of your pardon, preferring and securing them for
the time to come, you wrong your self, and disobey and dishonor your Royal
Father more then any ever yet did, by taking from him that power to forgive
all; which power, (as he says) all his enemies could not take from him: for in
the well managing of that power, lies all your happiness, and of your peoples.

God did appoint three several Voices to be heard of men, and obeyed upon pain
of his displeasure. The first Voice was that of Moses and Joshua to the
children of Israel; and because they did not obey it, all that generation fell
in the wilderness, Heb. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. The second Voice was that of John
Baptist and Jesus Christ to the Jews; and because they did not obey it,
Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jews, which lies desolate to this day, Heb.
4. 1, 2, 3. The third Voice is this Voice, even the Voice of your Royal Father
to your Majesty; and for not obeying it, you and your people have suffered
hitherto; and this Voice is signified, Heb. 4. 7. and therefore I beseech your
Majesty, obey it now.

And as Peter took the first spouse of Christ (after his resurrection) out of
those that had put him to death; so I see no way left for you to obtain your
three Kingdoms, but by joining your Royal Self, to his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Counsel; and to prevent all jealousies, make one of his
Daughters partaker of your Royal Crown; for you see the people dare not rise
against him for you: this is evident by the last appearance for you, in most
places of the heart of England, which if the generality of the people that are
well-affected to you, had come in to them that rose, the work had soon been
done: and if you bring in a foreign Nation, it is like all will rise, yea,
many of your Friends will rise against you; for the terror of CROMWELL and his
Army, is upon the people here and abroad also, because they see him prevail,
and that every work devised against him comes to naught: but if your Majesty
slight this motion, it is propable in a short time that his Highness may obtain
these three Kingdoms, and have them put upon him for his own inheritance, and
then the best Prince in Europe will think himself happy to have his Daughter to
Wife.

For my own part, there is none can do for you more then I have done; for I
have maintained your Cause in the highest manner before your reputed greatest
enemies; and have propounded this way of union between your Majesty and his
Highness to them; and it was well resented by all, insomuch that his Highness
himself came to speak with me, and used me very favorably; and I set them a
time, that the union should be before Midsummer: I pray God it be not too long
before these writings come to your Royal Hands.

But some of them said, They feared your Majesty would not consent to so good a
motion for all sides, and the Kingdoms happiness. And once as I was propounding
these things, the Ladies and Daughters of his Highness being present, I was
demanded whether I had any commission from your Majesty to do such things. I
told them, No; but said, I had Visions, and a commission from God to propound
such things, and that I believed your Majesty would allow of what I did, and
consent to so reasonable an agreement; which if you do, that high dignity which
God by me said should be yours, shall undoubtedly rest upon you: but however,
it is necessary for your Majesty to offer freely (from your heart) to all a
general pardon and remission; and if that be refused, God that knows the
integrity and secrets of your heart, will raise you Friends unexpected, so that
you shall prevail: and it must be so, because justice is but the handmaid of
mercy, and she may not go before her mistress; but if her mistress be
affronted, she immediately follows to avenge her, and then the mistress
rejoices at it, James 2. 13.

There is a party that are bloody men, of no Religion, who would have you come
in by the Sword; not for any good they wish you, but thinking thereby to
increase their sins; for now they look upon themselves as in bondage: first,
because their means is taken from them, so that they cannot commit such sins as
they would do, if they had plenty of money. Secondly, because they are
restrained from their courses of sins by these men now in power, more then they
were formerly; and kept out of power, being looked upon as abominable
creatures, which have not the fear of God in them, and they care not much who
is on the Throne, so that sin and open profaness may be in esteem and favor
again, and they to have their means and power again, to be its favorites.
Against such a sort of men many took up arms, and against such the Army now
stands: and such bloody irreligious men will never consent to have you pardon
all them now in power, and come to such an agreement as abovesaid: for if you
do agree, their hope is frustated, so that then sin shall domineer no more in
this Kingdom. I pray God change their hearts, and let them see that God will
never suffer such minds to prevail here again.

I know there is many eyes looking upon your Royal Fathers last Speech to your
Majesty, expecting daily when will your general pardon come out to all
according to it, which specially is expected by these to whom it chiefly
belongs, who also have power to establish you in your Fathers Throne; and
judicious men may think hard of your deserring to obey the Christian command of
so good a Father, which might prove so much advantageous to his glory, and your
own glory and prosperity here, and hereafter in Heaven. Be not persuaded by
any, contrary to your Father's last Speech unto you; for you have none so wise,
nor none so faithful to you as he was; and therefore trust not to their wisdom
nor their fidelity in this thing: and if you have them about your Majesty, that
hinders to send a general pardon, put them away from your presence.

It is the wisdom of a Master to turn away all his Servants if they are grown
evil ones, lest they consume his estate; and take other Servants, and to be
sure to keep them in better order. The Court of England (as most Courts are)
was grown very corrupt, when Vice was more in esteem then Virtue, and he that
wilfully brake God's Commandments had in honor, while he that strove to keep
them was despised; so that men took sin for a pleasure, deceit for wisdom, and
folly for foelicity; and as the richest meat or best fruit, is most jubject to
putrefaction, and therefore ought to be well seasoned and preserved, else it
will turn to noisome worms; so it is in the King's Court by reason of the
fatness that attends it* that except there be a straight rule of sobriety, and
the love and fear of God be fixed in the Courtiers hearts, that they may
endeavor to walk in all the Commandments of God without reproof, they shall
surely become unsavory in the nostrils of God, and he will raise of the vulgar
sort of men, them, that shall cast the Courtiers out, and trample upon them as
upon dirt; for, who will take water from a corrupt fountain? The Court is the
eye of the Kingdom, and, If the eye be evil, the whole body will be full of
darkness, Mat 6. 22, 23. and if the darkness be so great, what can follow it
but confusion and destruction? We are not strangers to these things, for that
we have seen these consequences too much verified in our days; and yet there
is many among us, stands to vindicate themselves, and will not believe their
own eyes, nor acknowledge the just judgments of God upon them for their sins.

But I beseech your Royal Majesty to lay these things to heart, and to
acknowledge by confessing it before the Lord, that a great many of sins were
harbored in the Court, under your Grandfather, and your Father also: and there
were four capital Causes which broke out into judgments.

The first was in the Case of Essex and Overbury, when Essex's Lady was too
much favored: for though there might be just cause for her to put away Essex,
yet she should have suffered as an adulteress, when she married Carre, Mark 10.
12. so that we see, that for that injustice and disobedience to the word of
Christ, Essex having this grudge still in his mind, at last is made the chief
Instrument to destroy your Father's Court, when no man else could do it.

The second grand Cause, was that toleration to prosane the Sabbath, which so
stirred up the wrath of God against the King, that he caused all his people to
abhor him for it.

The third was, the refusing to take the Anabaptist-Petition in 1633. into
consideration; for though they were then but small, yet they had such a Truth
on their side, that they became to be the most violent and prevalent
instruments, that stood up in the war against the King.

The fourth was a young man that suffered in 1634. for poisoning his Master,
for so it was proved either by a false witness or a true one, yet the young man
constantly denied it to the death, and great application was made to save his
life, insomuch that the Case came before your Royal Father, who as I heard
examined it, and was so satisfied in the matter, that he would not pardon it:
and no small heart-burning fire arose from that, even insomuch that the Kingdom
is turned upside down by it; and therefore let men now take heed how they judge
such hard Cases between blood and blood, lest they slay the innocent. This I
believe his Majesty then might have done in such a Case, that seeing the young
man's Friends depended so much upon his innocence, that if they would free the
King by taking the blood upon themselves laid to his charge, in case the
Witness was true, and that God should require it, he to grant their request;
for so much liberty to the King (in such a Case) is intimated, 2 Samuel 3. 28,
29. where David clears himself by putting the blood of Abner upon Joab, and his
deferring to avenge it for his time. I do not say, Your Royal Father sinned in
this thing; (for it was done by witness) but that it gave occasion against him,
Judge. 10. 4. and against his people, with whom God was angry; so that as he
would not pardon this sin, God would not pardon the other sins.

Therefore it is not prudence for a King to be violent against any one sin, and
yet suffer many sins to go unpunished: for, A King that sits in the throne
of judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes: A King, who can say, I
have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin, Prove. 20. 8, 9. It is one
thing for a man to sin as he is a man, and it is another thing for the same
person to sin as he is a King: David as he was a King, was perfect save only
in the matter of Uriah, 1 Kings 15. 3, 4, 5. but as he was a man, he had other
sins, Psalm 40. 12. 1 Chronicles. 21. 7, 8.

But I conclude this, I believe your Royal Father, for his own particular, to
be a perfect man; and had he been so severe to punish Sabbath Breakers,
Whore-mongers, Swearers, Drunkards, and suchlike sinners, as he was to punish
Murderers, he had been a perfect King also. Yet I hope, what he wanted, will
be made up in your Royal Person, that you may be perfect in every degree; for
such things was too hard a business (as times then went) for your Royal Father
in his lifetime to do; because the great ones were too much inclinable to such
sins: but God by his providence brought them down, and punished their sins by
manifesting his wonderful wisdom, in making that great sin of Murder (so hated
by your Royal Father) to fight against all the other sins, and to conquer and
subdue them, that your Royal Father by his martyrdom, through Jesus Christ,
might conquer, murder, and so bring all under Christ Jesus and himself. For a
Murderer has no power over a Martyr, (and a rebellious War is a Murderer)
neither can he be a Murderer to him, for that he is subdued before him,
because he stays and conquereth the Murderer by his death: as if he should
say to him (for so the Scripture holds it forth, Hosea 13. 14.) O Murderer, by
my death I will be thy death: and the Martyr also by his death gets eternal
life, John 12. 25. his mortality is swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. besides,
Murder throughout the Scripture is called Death, as he says, 1 Cor. 15. 26,
54. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. And again, speaking of
this time, says he, Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory. And again, Heb. 2. 14. That through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and the
devil was a murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. Again, No murderer has
eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 15. All which places and many more show,
That, Death, Devil, Dragon, and Murderer, is one and the same: and none can
destroy this Dragon and his Followers, but Jesus Christ with his Martyrs, Rev.
12. 11. by giving him as much blood as he can desire, and as much mercy as he
can receive, that he might cease from his wickedness, and be reconciled unto
God again, that God may be all in all, and that the mortal enmity that is among
men and brethren (through war and division) might be swallowed up with love and
life eternal.

And in appearance as yet to me, there is none more capable under God then your
Royal Self, to make your Self and all others in these Kingdoms happy; and
there is no way for your Majesty to do it, but by obeying your Royal Father's
Voice, as abovesaid: and though that be most contrary for flesh and blood to
do, yet you must humble your Royal Self more then that, by sending your free
general pardon to all, without any seeking, but my seeking of it? for according
to that which goes for Law with us, it is not safe for any, and specially they
in power, to seek to you: but what I say, (who have always hazarded my life
for my conscience sake) may prove as authentic, as if all had sent to your
Majesty. And therefore, I beseech your Majesty make trial of it, if not to
them, yet may it please your Majesty to send it; and though I be unworthy to be
your Royal MESSENGER, and if you think fit to honor me with such a Favor, I
make no question through GOD's assistance, but to give you a good account of
it; notwithstanding the danger of moving such a thing; so that I believe it is
not safe at first for any of your Nobles to come upon such a MESSAGE.

And for any grudge to revenge, or rancor in heart against them that put your
Royal FATHER to death, have no such thoughts, but purely love them; for I never
heard that any of the seed of the Martyrs, hated them that had put their
Fathers to death; but rather gloried, in that their Fathers so gloriously died.
And who were the Instruments to bring them to that glory, but those that put
them to so hard a Trial?

And after the Grace of Repentance is given them, who will honor the Martyrs
more, then they who have persecuted them unto the death? witness Saint PAUL who
did all this, insomuch that Saint PETER, at last calls him, Our beloved brother
PAUL, 2 Pet. 3. 15. Wherefore (nowithstanding they have so violently persecuted
your Royal FATHER to the death) most glorious Sovereign, (upon their
repentance) receive your Subjects in love and mercy, as your FATHER has
commanded you, who went beyond any one Martyr, because of his power and
dignity; and therefore his sufferings were greater, and are morefull of glory,
which is to you an unspeakable joy full of glory, through Jesus Christ who did
enable him.

To the Son, JESUS CHRIST, be all Glory and Praise for ever and ever, Amen.
In long-Ally, at the entrance of Crown Court in Blackfriars, March 23. 1654.
Your faithful Servant in the LORD, Arise Evans.

To the Reader.
Beloved,
THese things had been out in print before the last Christmas, but that I had
Visions to the contrary, which showed me, that the King's party then had high
hopes to prevail another way; so that these things then would have been
rejected: but now I hope they are satisfied, and see no good can come to them
that way, and that they will look upon this to be the most probable and the
most excellent way for the King to come in; and, that this for that end comes
out seasonably now: and the Lord send his presence and blessing with it, to his
glory, and our comfort. So be it.

To the ROYALISTS.
Reloved,
YOU see in my little book (called, Voice of Michael the Archangel) what Lines
I have presented to his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, to show him how God is for
us. And I believe, and so does his Highness give credit (by all that I can
gather from his deportment toward me.) He believes also, that what I showed
him came to pass. On last Saint Michael's ^ay, was the appearance of God for
you; and since the Almighty has appeared for us, insomuch now, that his
Majesty CHARLES STEWARD upon good terms may come to his Throne when he please.
And God forbid, but that the QUEEN, DUKE of York, DUKE of Gloucester, and all
the late KING's Children should come in upon the same Agreement, and be highly
honored by this Nation, if her Majesty leave Idolatrous Superstition, and all
other sins attending Courts in our days behind her, which the Lord of Heaven
and Earth that bears rule in this Nation cannot a bide.

I know nothing that hinders the KING at this time, but a seeking of his
Kingdom, and showing himself willing to agree with his Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR and his Party. Then let us praise God, to whom only be the glory of
our Salvation by Jesus Christ: and truly, as you see by the above said book, I
have not spared them, but roughly showed them the Truth; which albeit his
Highness received not in wrath; but as it is a sharp loving reproof, (to his
and their honor be it spoken) they received it with all readiness, mildness,
meekness and clemency, showing to a discerning eye a willingness in them to
perform what is required on their part, provided, that they have an Agreement
suitable to their Worth and Valor: of which Demands in reason they ought not
to be denied by his Majesty CHARLES STEWARD.

Therefore having through God's assistance brought it to this pass, left I
should be unfaithful, I shall God willing now speak a word of reproof unto you
of the KING's party, and chiefly to you who have not hitherto changed your
habit of sin and cause of your misery, yet you would have the Kingdom come with
all haste; and some of you are so violent, that nothing will satisfy you but
blood, and treading down of such parties; and especially upon such and such men
as you fancy to be guilty, you would have no mercy showed. And in all these
things you are mistaken, for they are so willing to do righteously, and to have
peace, that they please God thereby.

And therefore neither you nor all Europe shall not be able to bring them down
by force. Truly, let me tell you, I think it is in vain for any to fight with
these men in the field. I know none that did attempt to fight them, which got
any thing by them, but the humbling of their high and lofty Spirits. And his
Majesty the late KING was sensible of it; and knew that he had chosen the wrong
people for his Soldiers, when he said of them, Sect. 26. page 209. of his
Book, as follows,

For the Army (which is so far excusable as they act according to Soldiers
principles and interest, demanding pay and indemnity) I think it necessary in
order to the public peace, that they should be satisfied as far as is just; no
man being more prone to consider them then my self. And though they fought
against me, yet I cannot but so far esteem that valor and galla^try they have
sometimes showed, as to wish I may never want such men to maintain my Self, my
Laws, and my Kingdoms in such a peace, as wherein they may enjoy their share
and portion as much as any men.

And truly the King had great reason to wish such a wish, when he had
considered the carriage of both Armies; for as the King's Army were generally
given to swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, with other such vain sinful lusts,
which, to maintain such a course of life, no small means will serve turn; so
that, to maintain such lusts they wronged the Countries where they came, (which
Countries observing the different dealing of both Armies, and that the KING's
Army made them, who before were really for the King, to abominate such doings)
so that they all did join with the PARLIAMENT's Party against the KING; which
thing proved both his and his Armies ruin, and indeed the ruin of all his
Party. Besides, such men were the worst men for Soldiers, as could be
imagined; for when they should be watching and always in readiness, one party
was with their whores; another, drunk; a third, gaming, a fourth, plundering; a
fifth, swearing and fighting one with another: (which things are destructive to
an Army, who should sanctify themselves, specially at such times, Deuteronomy. 24.
9.) but when they were got together, though they would fight most gallantly at
a single duel, or at an Alehouse, yet such men are never good in the field,
specially when they come to encounter with a people, (whom they think do seek
the Lord, and fear him, and live civilly) then the fear of God's wrath and of
death, commonly makes them run away, or else their ambitious Commanders strive
for honor till time be past, when indeed they should go on by lot, Judge. 1. 1,
2, 3. and if they chance to do an exploit, they too soon fall a plundering,
that seldom, but at the last they come to lose all again. These things the late
KING understood, and experience did witness it to him.

But the PARLIAMENT-Souldiers were men of another temper; and though of diverse
Opinions, yet they went out of zeal, in rage and fury to fight against those
incivilities of the KING's Army: for truly, had the KING's Army been
temperate, considering what they went about, and adorning their Religion,
(specially at such a time) with a holy life, they had not lost the day, neither
had so many as did go out, been so eager to fight against them.

And when the KING's Army abovesaid were fulfilling their lusts, the
PARLIAMENT's Army, some were praying; others, meditating; a third, reading the
Scripture; the fourth, exercising their Arms; the fifth, consulting and taking
care how to provide for the Army, that they should not wrong the Country: and
all watching opportunities, being always in readiness. And there is much more
difference, if you consider all in both Armies, as they differed in all points;
so that it was impossible for the KING to prevail, though I confess the KING
had as gallant men (but not many) as ever England bred, who have done gallantly
here sometimes, and specially beyond Sea.

And the PARLIAMENT's Army knowing, that they fought against such profane
sinners (that made no conscience of their ways) had comfort, and they were
assisted with courage, that they seldom turned their backs upon the Enemies;
because they feared the Lord, though it was sometimes irksome to them, to go
against the Lord's anointed, specially to them that did truly understand; but
others that went on false Principles, fought stoutly, (as we say) without sear
or wit, being not able to see the event thereof.

Now the prudence of our late KING was such, seeing these gallant Spirits, that
though he sacrificed his life to satisfy them that fought against him, yet
such was his clemency, that he loved them, and wishes to have them stand for
him, counting them excusable for what they did against him, and worthy of
mercy, none exempted, but that all according to their degrees and merits,
should enjoy their share (in peace and happiness) as much as any men in his
Kingdoms: which mind of the late KING, is clearly seen in the words above
cited.

And truly, let me tell you, That the KING and all the Nobles in England,
could not have done so much right to the Commonwealth or Crown of England as
his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR did, and after times will further manifest it.
And again, I say, if we consider, you shall find, that he is true to the Crown
(whatsoever men say to the contrary:) for whenas his Highness, took upon him
the Title of PROTECTOR, if such righteous thoughts had not been then in his
Heart, he might have as easily then been a KING as a PROTECTOR; and he did
refuse it, to manisest, that he acknowledges the KING, and that he would be
but a PROTECTOR until the KING came to an Agreement with his Kingdom.

For according to the Laws of England, a PROTECTOR is no more then a person
that stands for a KING, and rules for a time, that is, till the KING come to
age, or otherwise, till he be capable of ruling; which, now our KING being at
a difference with his Subjects (though he be of Age and Discretion susficient
to rule) yet the difference and distance between Him and his Subjects makes him
incapable. And I believe you will find, if you examine former presidents of
this nature, that though the KING does not rule himself in person while there
is a PROTECTOR, yet always the time of his reign is recknoned; so that the
King begins his reign from that time, as his PROTECTOR, which is his Deputy,
takes the rule upon him: and therefore I hope you that think I have missed, in
saying, That KING CHARLES should come to reign in 53. when you see the time of
this PROTECTOR reckoned to KING CHARLES' reign, then you will say, I said right.

If there be any antipathy (as I believe there is) between David and CHARLES,
he must reign in Hebron for a time, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. that is, without
the consent of all his people, having nothing from them: for Hebron in the
British Language signifies, That he raigns KING though the Kingdom be not given
to him: for Heb in English is not, and ron in English is given; so that Hebron
by interpretation is not given: any Welch-man can tell you, that Hebron in
English is not given; and if not, I will put it into a phrase that is
undeniable, Ron iddo dyrnas, that is, A Kingdom will be given him; I mau nw
etto heb i roi hi, that is, they gave it not yet. Therefore I say CHARLES raigns
in Hebron; and doubt not, but after the similitude of David, he shall reign in
Jerusalem, that is, by the consent of all God's people.

And to stop their mouths that do asperse me, as a false Prophet, concerning
1653. put the case I took CHARLES for OLIVER; for he came in in 53. it is no
more thenwhat Samuel did in the like case, when he took Eliab for David, 1 Samuel
16. 6, 13. therefore a true Prophet may be subject to such a mistake: yet as
above, to clear my self of such a mistake, I hope you will see hereafter, that
CHARLES then came to the Throne, though in the person of OLIVER his Deputy by
my account.

But you will object, David and Eliab was of the same family.

I answer, CHARLES and OLIVER also be of the same family; if Haraulds reports
be true: for Oliver by the one side comes of the ancient British Kings; and by
the other side comes of the Stewarts: and that is the true Line of the late
King Charles, by which he enjoyed the Crown of Great Britain.

And though some say, It was a presumption in me to declare so much concerning
53. yet I do not fear, but God will maintain me in what I said, against all
those that asperse me, and will overthrow the aspersion that is cast upon me of
them that understand not, by a judicious party which does both understand and
will plead my Cause.

It is true, I have set down something concerning my anointing, from 1 Samuel 16.
3, 11, 12. which by no means can sink into the brains of some learned men that
cavil against it.

Gentlemen,

I directed it not to you, but to his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, who I know
delights in such things, for that he is able to comprehend them. Therefore
you might have passed by it with silence, rather then condemn that which you
understand not; for sacred mysteries are not to be understood by your
Grammer-Rules, without faith, neither is that a rule for a Prophet to
understand the mysteries of God's Kingdom, for if Faith be wanting, he cannot
see nor say nothing to that: and our Savior Christ gives thanks to God the
Father, because it is so ordered; and tells you plainly, That such things are
hid from the wise and prudent, Luke 10. 21. Matthew. 13. 11. and Saint Paul tells
ye, That our rule of Faith that we go by, shall destroy all such learning as
opposes it, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20, 25. 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16. for Prophets have a holy unction from him that is holy, and an
anointing that is of God alone, 1 Job. 2. 20, 27. It is not fit to cast such
holy things before fierce unfaithful men of common understanding, which by our
Savior Christ's account (though they be learned) are as dogs or swine, that
know not such things, nor the worth of them, Matthew. 7. 6. but I thought better
of you before whom I have showed my pearl, else I had not done it.

Gentlemen,

If you cannot speak well of him that speaks well of you, and seeks your
welfare, how will you come to speak well of him that speaks evil of you? and if
you cannot do good for good, how will you come to do good for evil? Romans 12.
20, 21. I have not spoken evil of your learning, and why should you despise
mine? you know it is said, Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20. And it is said, Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2. 8. you square the Scriptures, and
understand them by such rules of learning; but the Prophets have another rule
to construe them right, which rule your Philosophers never knew. Theresore
Prophets need not come to you for help to unfold the mysteries of the holy
Scripture, but rather ye ought to magnify Gods wisdom, and deny your own
carnal wisdom, when you see a thing opened by a mean man, and made clear, which
all your prudent men could not do, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 13,
14.

I do admire at the haughtiness and loftiness of some peoples Spirits, who
would not only seem to be mightily for King Charles; but also are as violent
against the Protector: I am sure they are none of the Kings Friends; he has
too many such proud arrogant ones on his side, (which are zealous for his
honor) that undid his Father, and will never do him good, except they
understand themselves better then hitherto they have done.

I pray, is it an impossible thing to be, and an unreasonable thing to believe,
that King Charles, and the Protector should agree, and that the way to do it,
should be by a match between the King and one of the Protector's Daughters?
they being virtuous Ladies, both beautiful and personable, brought up in as
good education and parts as Europe can afford, being not inferior (if
considered in all parts) to any Ladies in Christendom, nor less worthy of a
Princely bed, then the best of them: except ye judge them that are most wanton,
and are puffed up with their vain beauty or painting, which have the least of
the fear of God in them, to be most worthy of such enjoyments.

And truly for descent of Blood, I believe, if it were well examined, we
should find, that his Highness comes of as good a Royal Stock, as any Prince
came of, (though for a long time it has been under a Cloud, and not so
esteemed) even the very same as King Charles is, of the ancient British Kings,
and not much, if any thing, inferior to him in that Line. And the hope of the
Britains has been, ever since they were brought under the Saxons, that one
should be exalted sttangely out of that Stock to do great things: and we have
many Sayings, and Proverbs of instruction, or rather Prophecy, to that
purpose, which I believe are now verified in his Highness: one is thus, Husbus
i deng is y d^n obbo radd i mau i wriddin: that is in English; The man in his
time will manifest of what root or degree he is descended. But his Highness
does not glory in flesh and blood, as the prodigals do of their blood and
gentility, though he shows it in actions, to pull down such high spirits that
are mor fore Vice then Virtue; and he does it with more tonderness, then they
would do to him, if they had him under, which shows he is of a right Princely
vein; for a Clown and a Coward is cruel, and will have no mercy on his enemies,
if once he gets them in his power.

But however, suppose his Highness were not of so great a Blood; if that
Charles Stewards house should descend as it did hitherto, and Oliver Cromwell's
house ascend as it does, within a few Generations to come, it would not be
counted then a bad match, for the best of the Stewarts to match with the chief
Cromwell's Daughter.

Therefore I say, Why should you be so contrary to the King's welfare, as I
heard some say, That they would rather see the King lose all and perish, then
so to undervalue himself, as to be married with Cromwell's Daughter. Truly, I
doubt such proud Spirits must down: and the King's best way, is not to hear
them: for if the late King were now alive, to see these things now as they are
brought about, he would counsel his Son to marry his Highnes's Daughter, and so
to make peace. And if the late King's words be rightly considered, his wishes
to have the Army for him says no less: for what more probable way is it for
the King to gain the Army to him, then to join in affinity with the
Captain General thereof? I think this is the sense of the Speech of his
Majesty's Father, as true as if he was now living to declare it: for he was a
wise foreseeing Man, that saw this Army was invincible. And I cannot find in
all the late King's Book, where he does give way for his Son, this King, to
avenge his blood; but rather, that he forgive all, and exhorts him to forgive
all that are willing to come to an agreement with him: and truly it is not
only perfect Christianity, but it is also his greatest Policy to do so.

Yet many say, That if the King should match with his Highness's Daughter, he
would be in scorn among all the Princes in Christendom.

Alas! he is more in scorn among them now as he is: for what do the Princes
do, for to restore him? If they send him a little maintenance for a time, they
are soon weary of him; and account of him but as a poor man that craveth Alms.
We know how the Papists scorn and slight their poor brethren, if they be
contrary to them in their Religion, and do nothing for them, but rather do what
they can against them, even to the taking away of their lives: And it is God's
mercy to King Charles and that Family, that he has escaped among them all this
while with his life, being he is one that they fear, if he be set up, may come
to ruin their Religion.

Therefore if once the KING's Majesty were joined with his Highness the Lord
Protector, what need had the King to care for any Prince in the World? I
believe they would all tremble at his presence; for God has provided him an
army, that if once he were in the head of it, all the World could not parallel
nor show such another; because his Army does consist of civil, wise, politic
men, that have zealously devoted themselves to fight Christ's battles, and to
bring down his Rebellious enemies under his Iron Rod, for to keep Gods
Commandments: and they shall prosper.

Yet let me not flatter our gallant English Soldiers, lest I should deceive
them; for I read Joel 2. of a terrible Army, called, A Northern Army: which I
believe is designed for this place, and shall do great things: but if we turn
to God and the King, as you see Joel 2. 12, 13, 14, 20. then God will remove
this Sea Northern Army from us. I had also Visions of such things. And
Grobnerus's Prophecy agrees to it, which speaks thus: Then shall appear one
Charles descending of Charles, with a mighty fleet on the coast of his Fathers
Dominion, and with the aid of the Danes, Swedes, Hollander, and French shall
subdue his adversaries, and shall govern the people most happily, and shall
reign long and far, and shall be greater then Charles the Great. Besides, there
is in a Book of Sir Franc is Bacon, a Prophecy to the same purpose: thus, as
follows,

There shall be seen upon a day,
Between the Borrough and the Bay,
The black Fleet of Norway;
And when that Fleet is come and gone,
England build houses of lime and stone,
For after wars you never shall have none.
And Mr. Gostolawes Visions, as you have it in his Book, does witness the same.
But I look upon there, as a threatening from God, to bring the Army to agree
with the King in reason, and honoring him, and not to stand it out with him,
so as to look upon him altogether inconsiderable, because he has not men and
money; for God is able, on a sudden, to raise him both, though it is hard to
get such as our English Army consists of; and I hope they will not lose the
honor of bringing in the King, they consisting of the purest sort of men.

But indeed, in all other places where they raise Armies, they raise them of
the most vile and uncivil men that are among them, as formerly they did take
the Thieves from the Goals for Soldiers, and press the most vile and wicked
sort in all Countries, such as had no fear of God in them. Therefore as the
Proverb says, Put a Sword in a mad-man's hand, and see what will be the fruit
of it; and if you like it, do it again; I am sure the late King found a bitter
fruit from it the last time: but this Army are of a clean contrary sort of men;
for they that had most of the fear of God in them, were the Foundation of this
Army. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, be it good or bad, Matthew 13.
33. 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. And therefore ten thousand of them that pray to God when
they fight, and study God's word continually, shall bear forty thousand of such
as fear not God, (but contrarily, curse and swear) be they never so desperate
and strong men: yet let none presume upon his holiness as the Pope did, who
thought to make the World fly before him, and was choked by a fly that flew
in at his mouth.

The King can never have a better opportunity then he had the last time he came
from Scotland; for had not the blind and the lame been with him, who were
hated of David's soul, 2 Samuel 5. 6, 8. the King had been on his Throne at
London, within eight days after he had entered England; for if his Counsel of
War had had eyes to have seen their way, and legs to come valiantly forward,
when God gave them such an opportunity, the work had been done; and it had been
wisdom and valor in them not to sleep upon it, but to march night and day
until they came to London; and if they had taken all the horses in their way to
bring them speedily up, the King then might have suddenly recompensed the
owners of such horses: and the way was open, no power being between them and
London able to hinder them; for the Parliament themselves were amazed at the
sudden news of the Kings coming into England with such a great power; and they
being so unprovided, were ready to receive him without a stroke, had his Army
been swift enough to come in time to London.

But had the Lord Protector with so many of his men been (in their stead) with
the King upon such a design, having so fair an opportunity, the Lord Protector
and his men had soon been Masters of London, and had set the King on his Throne.

Therefore let not King Charles think, that such men as brought his Father
(though unwittingly) to the block, and himself into such hazard at Worcester,
and themselves to a great destruction, that ever they should do him good in the
field. It is true, the men wish well to the King: and who can be more truer to
him then they are? but alas! they have deceived both him and themselves
hitherto; for they are not fit Soldiers, specially to go against these men
that are in the Army now in England, because they are blind and lame in all
their proceedings.

We may not think that David's soul did hate a blind and lame man, that wanted
the use of his natural eyes and feet; No, God forbid he should hate such poor
creatures as could not help themselves: but those blind and lame that David
hated, were foolish negligent Soldiers, that were not so wise as to see their
time, and swift enough to take their advantage, when God gave them the
opportunity. And so I hope the King will be of David's mind; for such
Soldiers do but deceive, destroy and waste themselves and those that employ
them.

Therefore the Jebusites said in scorn to David, 2 Samuel 5. 6. Except thou take
away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither; Thinking David
cannot come in hither. (As our long Parliament justly scorned the King's men,
knowing they were both blind and lame in all their enterprises.) But David
returns the Jesubites mockery upon themselves, saying, they were the blind and
the lame, 2 Samuel 5. 7, 8. and Joab made them know, when he sinote them, that
David had no such men, as they thought they were, 1 Chronicles. 11. 5, 6.

Therefore, I say, the King will do well if he agree and join himself to this
Army now on foot, for I believe it will be a hard task for him to get an Army
that shall beat them out: for the late Kings blood, the providence of God has
clearly showed where it lies, if men had but eyes to see it.

I pray observe, the Presbyterian Parliament (for I believe the Independent
consented not to it) set forth a Declaration to invite the King, saying, That
if the King would leave his evil Council and come in to them, they would make
him a glorious King. And the KING resting upon their promise, hoping to find
them faithful, went without his Council to the chief strength of the
Presbyters, even the Scots Army.

Then the English Presbyters, forsooth, seemed to be angry, that he came not to
them: and between them they then set out a pamphlet, a busing that Scripture, 2 Samuel 19. 41, 42, 43. and taking it for a cloak to dislemble with the good and
innocent King, wherein, forsooth, the English Presbyters took upon them to be
Israel, and the Scotch Presbyters took upon them to be Judah, making as though,
according to the Text, they strove who should be most forward in their love to
bring home the King. (Shall not such Hypocrites be punished!) But in their
bringing of him home, the one proved to be more like Jezebel, 1 King. 21, 7, 8,
9, 10. then Israel; and the other more like Judas, Matthew. 26. 14, 15, 16, 47,
48, 49. then Juda: for so they brought him to his long home, and delivered him
to Pilate. And as the Pilate of our time, had not the honesty to wash his hands
from his blood; so the other had not the honesty to take his blood upon them,
as by right it is, Matthew. 28. 24, 25. and has been required to the purpose of
the Scotch Presbyters. Therefore sure their English Brethren shall not escape,
though they be the cunningest Hypocrites on the earth; the Scribes and
Pharisees were but Fools in comparison to them, for hypocrisic.

Yet God forbid that I should say, All that go under the name of Presbyterians
are so guilty of the Kings blood, though they all be sufficient Hypocrites in
other Cases; but certain it is, that a party of them contrived the way to bring
the King to his end; how many they were in number, God only knows, and it is
too a hard a thing for man to find them out, because all are perjured persons,
that are to witness it: all honest men were excluded from that secret, so that
they can witness nothing.

Therefore I would not have the King to punish any of them for his Fathers
blood; but refer it to God: for the evil name and shame they got by it, and the
guilt that lies upon their conscience, with the voice of his blood that
follows them withersoever they go, is a greater punishment to them, then all
the torture the King can devise to put them to: for if he punish them, then it
mitigates and lesseneth the aforesaid punishment. And truly he cannot punish
the guilty, but he must also destroy the innocent; for they were so linked
together in the work, that if the Case of the King's blood come to be tried, I
believe the most guilty will escape best; for they will say and swear, and hire
others to swear any thing, and use all means to cast it upon the innocent.
Therefore, I say, let the King forgive all or none; truly, I am sure by a
Vision that I had, he must forgive all or none: and if he forgive none, I know
not how he will ever come to enjoy his Kingdom.

We have a continual noise of Plots among us; I am persuaded most men are more
inclinable to that bloody way, then to the way of peace: yet these Plotters are
so foolish in the managing of their Plots, that their designs are discovered
before they are laid. The Presbyterians were not so in their Plots against the
Church and the late King; as not long since I heard a Sectary say, That he knew
of that Plot thirty eight years agone; but said, we had no drunkards nor
tell-tales among us; they covered their Plots with religious pretenses; they
were so circumspect, that they would not be seen in Taverns and Alehouses,
left they should be suspected: and they held it unlawful to fight against the
King or for Religion; but when at last they got strength, they fought against
both, until they brought their Plot to effect; yet you know how soon they lost
that pre-eminence, which so long with many Prayers was in getting. God gave
them their request; but sent leanness into their soul, Psalm. 106. 15. that they
are not the better, but now much in a worse condition, then when they began to
plot.

Therefore let all the Plotters take the Presbyterians for an example, and see
what fruit they had for their long plottings and contrivings to shed blood; and
what they are like to have hereafter, is to be lamented by them.

I am sorry to see men given to bloody Plots: I am persuaded many care not what
money they spend to bring in the King that way, yet I believe they are none of
them that be in favor with him; but such as think to gain his favor thereby,
are most ambitious and forward in these Plots. Let them take heed, they run a
great hazard to little purpose: for I am sure one man with his Prayer and Pen,
he having but one hundred pound to set him forward, Eccles. 10. 19. shall do
more good to bring in the King in peace, then a thousand Plotters should do to
bring him in after their manner, though they had a thousand pound a piece to
set them forward.

For my own part, I have neglected my outward calling, and done what I could,
spending my time, and what I could get, in writing and printing for the King,
these three years: and now, being brought low every way, my best Friends
forsaking me, my outward calling failing; for I was hindered in it, because I
gave my self to write, and am yet hindered and lose my time with people that
come to me daily to be satisfied with Words: but my Wife and Children will not
be satisfied without bread, and I must provide for them, or deny the Christian
Faith, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Therefore expect not much more from me, except God send me
means, which yet I know not of.

It is true, Diverse Persons of Quality paid me royally for my former Books,
else I had not been able to subsift. And many came to keep me in talk, (not
considering my time) but thought I had my Books for nothing, for they would
have them at so small a rate; and not only so, but many poor people had them
for nothing, though when my number was gone, and I wanted Books, I had paid
dear to the Bookseller for them. Therefore what I got from the one, I spent
upon the other. Loath I was, to offend any by denying them my company, which
many times came a great way to see me: being also willing, that the poor honest
- hearted should should have freely what I had, as well as others which paid me
well.

Yet had any done to me, as that most honorable Earl of Pembrook did to
Matthew coker, they might have been offended, who, for a less service then I
have done for the King's Party, when he was in distress, the said Earl did send
him a hundred pound. But alas! all that I had from them for Books these three
years, did not amount to half a hundred pound; yet God be praised I live,
(though poorly) and men do expect great matters from me, though by no means
will they be obedient to God's word, upon which the promise of happiness is
grounded; which Word, in all my books I have always set before them, showing,
that except they would believe, repent, and amend their lives, God would not
perform to them what I had said. And therefore they ought not to blame me
because the King came not in, bnt rather to blame themselves, for that they did
not turn wholly to God; which if they had done so, God in mercy to them had
brought in the King, and would have settled all things in Church and State before
now.

I have not eaten the bread of idleness all this time; my labor is beyond
expression, for I have taken more pains these three years, then a daily
thresher, whose morsel is sweet unto him, and his rest pleasant: but this sort
of labor takes a man from all outward comforts; for such a man delights in
his sore labor; so that Christ, Moses, and Eliah eat nothing in forty days,
as you see Exodus 34. 28. 1 King. 19. 8. Matthew. 4. 12. Therefore though natural
men know it not, the labor is great, and of so much value, that if men should
give all they have to such a labourer, it would not balance his desert. I speak
not this for my self, because I look not for any reward from you, for I believe
God will reward me: but having experience in the work, I know the time does not
afford to the faithful labourer encouragement, and that reward which he merits;
else the work that I began had been more foreward then now it is. Wherefore ye
ought to consider them.

Many are offended with me, because I set a time for the King's coming into
England: I wonder what they lost by it: if some being covetous to get; have
laid wagers upon it, who advised them to do it? I never read of but one wager
laid in all the Scripture, Judges 14. 12, 13, 17. but Sampson that laid the
wager lost it through his own folly, in telling his mind; as the now-Plotters
were spoiled, because they could not keep their own secrets; and they that won
the wager got nothing by it, for Sampson made them pay dear for it, Judge. 14.
19. Judge. 15. And was it not meet, that these men now should lose, to teach
them, that they should not wantonly dally with secret things in those
presumptuous profane ways and gambols? they should have been wiser before they
laid any thing upon it. And take notice, that when I first set down the time
for the King's coming in, in the year 1653. I told them plainly for any to
understand it, that if they did not leave their profaneness, the King would not
come in according to my saying, and that God would alter the appointed time (of
the King's coming in) as he did in the time of Moses alter it forty years,
Numb. 14. 34. as you have it in the Postscript of my Book, called, The Ecche.
And all the prophecies of God are conditional; for when God sends a Prophet to
pronounce destruction to a people, and sets a time for it, if upon it they
repent and amend their evil ways, they shall not be destroyed at that time.
And when God sends a Prophet to bring good tidings of deliverance to a people
that are in captivity for their sins, and sets a time for their deliverance, if
that people upon it do not repent and amend their evil ways, they shall not be
delivered at that time, Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10, yet though God remove the decree
for a longer time, Micah 7. 11. that which the Lords Prophet has spoken,
whether it be of mercy or justice, it shall surely come to pass, as we see in
the case of Nineveh, it was destroyed according to the saying of Jonas, though
not in the time God at first allotted for it, Tobit 14. 4, 8, 15. and Israel
came to Canaan, though not at the first time that God had allotted for them,
Numb. 13. 2. Deuteronomy. 9. 23. Joshua 21. 43, 44, 45.

And you of the King's Party, I say, pray, Beloved, take notice of the manner
of God's fulling his promises to his people, when they will not leave their
sins: Jeremiah prophefied that the Jews should be delivered out of their
captivity in Babylon after seventy years was expired: and his word was
fulfilled in part; for in the first year of Cyrus there was a Decree made for
their freedom, 2 Chronicles. 36. 20, 21, 22, 23. Ezra. 1. and according to it they
came to Jerusalem, and laid the Foundation of the Temple, Ezra 3. 10, 11. but
they had many great sins among them, Ezra 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Nehem. 5. Nehem. 13.
15, 16, 17, 18. as we also have: Therefore you shall find that they were
notperfectly delivered until the second year of Darius, Ezra 4. 23, 24. for the
adversaries of Judah and of Benjamin wrote against them to Ahasuerus and
Artaxerxes Kings of Persia, and got Commissions to suppress them by force of
Arms, 1 Esdras 2. 30. Ezra 4. and also you shall find, 2 King. 17. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30 31, 32. Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 King. 19. 37. that
these adversaries that then hindered the freedom of the Jews, were such people
as hinder you now, for they were absolute Independants, of diverse Religions,
and all feared the Lord (as now these fear the Lord) but they served their
several Gods, 2 King, 17. 29, 30, 31, 32. And as the men of Babylon made
Succoth-Benoth their God; and the men of Cuth, made Nergal their God; and the
men of Hamath, Ashima, their God; and the Avites, made Nibhaz and Tartake their
God; and the Sepharvites burnt their their children to Adrammelech and
Anammelech the Gods of Sepharvaim, and they made themselves Priests of the
lowest of the people: so in like manner our Sectaries have their several
Demigods; as the Prsbyters have Fairfax, Knox, Waller, Love, Calamy, with many
other; the Independents, Harrison, Feak, Vavasor Powel, Rogers, Simpson; the
Levelers, Lilburn; and the like: yea, there is not any Sect, but fancy to
themselves Gods or Leaders, and make to themselves Priests of the lower sort,
which have neither Religion, Reason, Eloquence, Learning, or any other
Ingenuity in them at all, but a proud ignorant sort of zeal, being in all
things like the adversaries of Judah; for as it is said of them, 2 King. 17.
33. they feared the Lord, but yet it is said, verse. 34. that they feared not
the Lord, because they worshipped him not according to the Law that God had
prescribed for Jacob whom he named Israel: so now the Presbyterians,
Independents, Levelers, or Brownists, may be said to fear the Lord, and yet not
truly, because they do not worship him according to the law that God has
prescribed for us, as in the Communion-Book, vulgarly called, The Book of
Common Prayer. And to show you a mystery of hope, the Jews were hindered for the
time of three Kings, Ezra 4. 5, 6, 7. of which three, Artaxerxes reigned thirty
two years, Nehem. 13. 6. Yet the Holy Spirit speaking of the same matter, tells
us, that they were hindered but two years, 1 Esdr. 5. 37. surely this Prophecy
is for us; for they were hindered for a longer time. And this shows you, That
since the Foundation was laid in 1653. you shall be perfectly delivered before
1655. be expired, and King Charles will be on the Throne by then; provided,
That you unfaignedly turn to the Lord, by fasting, praying, and reforming your
ways, according to Gods Commandments, and specially in not profaning, but
keeping holy and sanctifying the Sabbath day, for therein lies the promise of
glory, Isa. 58. 13, 14. here and for ever, Isa. 56.

Now you will ask me, How was the Foundation laid, and wherein had the King's
party any freedom in 1653. or in what manner does it resemble Cyrus his decree
for the Jews?

First, I answer, That in 1653. by all accounts the Foundation was laid; for
whereas before the power was in the State, Parliament, or People, or where we
knew not; now it is in one single person again: so that the Foundation of
Monarchy (which was destroyed) is laid again in the Protector I hope for King
Charles.

Secondly, In 1653. the Engagement was so taken off, that the King's party that
took it not, now have the benefit of the Law, from the which benefit by the
Engagement they were utterly excluded; so that if one that had taken the
Engagement had robbed and killed one that had not taken it, it had not been a
Crime in those times; for we have right to nothing but by she Law. Thus you see
what God has done for you, to fulfill my Propoesies in 1653. you must not
despise the day of small things, Zach. 4. 10.

There came unto me a Gentleman, a great Historian, about two years agone, who
did affirm that Cromwell was Cyrus, and that he would restore both our Liberty,
Church and King to us again. This Gentleman was a West Countryman, who had
Commanded in the late King's Army, and had suffered much: I could wish all the
King's Party were of his temper and mind.

Truly I believe, That Cromwell is not only Cyrus, but will also prove
Zerubbabel, that did not only lay the Foundation, but will also finish the
work of God, and bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, (I mean
King Charles) crying, Grace, grace unto him, Zach. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And not
only so, but that Cromwell will be Darius, that shall curse and bring a curse
upon all, whether they be Kings, or whatsoever they be, that hinder the work of
God in establishing the King again, and the true worship of God, Ezra 6. 11, 12.

Therefore be not like the Jews, that said, Can there come any good thing out
of Nazareth? John 1. 46. for you see Jesus the most blessed came from thence,
John 19. 19. Wherefore let not the Independent think, but that much good may
come to them from the King Charles Steward; and let not the Kings Party think,
but that great good may come to them from Oliver Cromwell, now Protector, who
will restore the King, and has done as you see something already in order to
it, and more I could show you. Therefore I say to you again, of Oliver Cromwell,
as the Prophet said, Zach. 4. 9, 10. to the Jews of Zerubbabel, He has laid
the foundation of the work, for the King's restoration, he shall also finish
it; do not despise the day of small things, that is, do not despise what he did
in 1653. when he turned the State into a Monarchy, and freed you from the
Engagement; that is something, though it be but small in your eyes. Oh that you
had abated in your sins so much, as that does add to your deliverance. You know
the people of God fasted and prayed often when they were in distress, and that
not only privately, but also publicly. And you see the Independents and
Sectaries do so, though they be not yet the people of God: and why do not you
so seek the Lord, that he may be merciful to you? I am ashamed of you: what can
I say to God or Man for you, when you neglect these things?

Once, not long since, as I was at Mr. Peters's Chamber on a Sabbath Day in the
evening after Sermon, he was disputing Cases of Conscience: when all was done,
and the people gone, except some few Gentlemen that staid to talk with him; He
asked me, How I liked such meetings. I said, I liked it well, if it had been
done in and for the Church of God. He said, If you do not count us the Church,
why do not the Cavaliers use such holy meetings among themselves? we should be
glad to see them do so. Said I, The reason is, because you will not suffer them
to do it, for fear they should plot against you, as you formerly plotted in
such meetings against them. Said he, we never hindered them to meet in this
manner. I answered, That you did to my knowledge; for not long since at a house
in Coven-Garden there was a company of devout Cavaliers met to serve the Lord;
and you sent a company of Soldiers upon them for no other cause, which took
many of them prisoners to St. Jamses. Then Mr. Peter's remembering it, had not a
word more to say to that.

But he might have answered, That was in the long Parliaments time; the Lord
Protector since he came in power did allow of no such thing, for now you have
the Church-door open, you need not go into houses; you may fast, you may pray,
you may preach, provided it be for peace: and I am sure his Highness will
rejoice to see it; yet if you fast for strife and debate, as the Presbyterians
did, all for blood, giving thanks when they killed many, and fast to the end
that they might kill and oppress the more (as the Prophet sets them out in
their colors, Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) if you cause your voice to be heard on
high, and fast as they did* then God and man will not allow your deeds; but if
you fast innocently, being without malice, and pray the Almighty God to send
Truth and Peace to all Nations, Zach. 8. 19. and specially to give a good
understanding between the King and Protector and their Councels, that they may
make peace, and confidently believe one the other, and keep faith and a good
conscience toward God and with one another for the time to come; then will God
grant your desire, and no man can hurt you for so doing. And the main cause why
you are not delivered, is, because you have not a good opinion of Oliver
Cromwell, the man under God that is appointed to effect it by restoring your
King and Church again.

If you look upon me as one sent of God, you should hearken to me, and obey my
voice, (and and not tax me for things not coming to pass for your good, when
you would not believe and obey me) for so the good people obeyed the Prophets
of old, and prevailed, 2 Chro. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. Ezra 5. 1, 2.

Consider, Beloved, God did let none of my words fall hitherto, 1 Samuel 3. 19.
but all that I declared is come to pass, as I showed above: and if you had
sought the Lord, and forsaken your sins, as I did exhort you to do in all my
Books, the King had been on his Throne before now; for men must look upon God's
Commandments, and keep them, if they look to have his promises of mercy
fulfilled to them, for his mercy is to them that love him and keep his
Commandments, Exodus 2. 6. Israel in their captivity sat down and wept, and
threw away their Harps, Psalm. 137. 1, 2. so should you leave your pleasure, and
mourn for your sins by fasting and praying in private, and publicly associate
your selves together to seek the Lord, that he may be merciful to you.

And above all things, keep the Sabbath Day: he that keeps the Sabbath Day of
the Lord holy and wholly, as the Prophet says, Isaiah 58. 13, 14. he shall
never do amiss; for the Lord Jesus will bless him, prosper him, and make him
honorable, so that he shall ride upon the high places of the earth, and the
seed of God shall be in him, to preserve and protect him all the weeks of his
life, from Sabbath to Sabbath, until at last he come to glory in Heaven with
Christ at the right hand of God; for if you will remember to keep holy the
Sabbath Day, God will not suffer you to forget any of his Commandments; but
your delight will be in them, to keep them and do his will: but if you forget
to keep the Sabbath holy (by praying, reading, hearing, speaking God's words,
meditating in it, doing deeds of charity, for bearing all works or words
touching worldly affairs) then God will not bless you, and you shall fall from
one misery to another, and never have rest to your souls.

The Lord will reign, and execute judgment for the Sabbath, therefore he is
called the Lord of the Sabbath, and judgment will come upon the world, chiefly
for their not sanctifying the Sabbath: and if you take notice of Psalm. 92.
(entitled, A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day) which Psalm continues until
you come to Psalm 98. so that Psalm 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. is but one Psalm by
the Author's account; for you have no title until you come to Psalm 98. I say,
if you take notice of Psalm 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. you shall find how God
will come to judgment and to reign, and of his triumphing over his enemies,
which enemies are similated by a flood of waters, Psalm. 93. 2, 3, 4. Pfal 96.
10, 13. Psalm. 97. 1. and the contention must needs be about the Sabbath, (for
this Psalm is for the Sabbath Day) and has begun with us already.

King James destroyed his Throne, by making a Law to profane the Sabbath:
truly, there was no need of such a Law to give liberty for outward sports on
the Sabbath Day: the people were too forward in profaning it; so, that if he
had made a severe Law to restrain them, yet would they have taken too much
liberty to break the Sabbath: and I wonder, that the King and his Counsel were
so blind as to countenance the Sabbath Breakers, since the Prophet shows it
clear, that the promise to Rule, is founded upon the exact keeping holy of the
Sabbath Day of Christ, Isa. 58. 13, 14. so that he that keeps the Sabbath,
shall ride upon the high places of the earth; and what is meant by riding upon
the high places of the earth, but to have the rule and power over it, and
govern it? Deuteronomy. 32. 12, 13. Judge. 5. 9, 10. compared with Isa. 58. 13, 14.
will show it.

And when the masking-bouse in 1638. was erected at White Hall, purposely to
profane the Sabbath; then sin went in the Court with an open face, though in a
mask; yet so without a mask, that he which had but half an eye might easily
have seen it, and say, God will not suffer this Court to stand long.

Whosoever advised the late King to set up that house, he was his greatest
enemy. He that envieth a King or Prince, need no other way to overthrow him,
then to persuade him to profane the Sabbath: neither can a man show his love to
his King by any means more, then by advising him to keep holy the Sabbath Day
of the Lord Jesus. And believe it, God will speedily have a quarrel with the
Kings and Princes of the earth, for breaking his Sabbath.

The long Parliament got much footing against the late King upon that score,
for reforming what he suffered to be deformed; by restaining the profanation of
the Sabbath; they went up, and he went down: but when they likewise began to
take the liberty to profane it; so that when no Boat on the Thames durst stir
on the Sabbath, the Lord Bradshaw's Boat may; and when other men must go afoot
on the Sabbath, a Parliament Man sends his ticket for a Coach, and will have
it; then God brings them down also.

I do not speak this of the Parliament Men without ground; for being in 1650.
at a Parliament-man's house in White Hall, who pretended to be one of the most
religious of them, there was some Friends of his there, that were to come home
to London. Said his Wife, When my Husband comes in, we will have a Coach for
you to go home. How! said the Man, we cannot have a Coach to day. Yes, said
she, a Parliament Man may send his Ticket, and have a Coach at any time; none
dare deny him.

Another Sabbath a while after, I was at a Sermon in White Hall, and in the
middle of the Sermon, I was forced to go to the stairs; when I came there, I
beheld a Boat coming up from the bridge. What, said I to one that stood there,
do the Boats go abroad again on the Sabbath Day? No, said he. Why, said I, what
is yonder? Said he, That is my Lord Bradshaw's Boat coming from Greenwich.
What, said I, then he takes upon him to be Lord of the Sabbath? Yes, said the
man, he may do what he please now. But consider how soon God rooted the
Parliament out, for such presumption: and now the Boats and Coaches go abroad
on the Sabbath again without any molestation: judge you what will be the issue
of it.

Therefore let none presume to break the Sabbath, be he never so high; I dare
say, God will bring him low enough that does it, pick what you can for that out
of Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 6, 10, 11. And the Prophet tells the King
and people of Judah, that though their sin was written with a pen of Iron, and
with the point of a Diamond, and does say, that they should go into captivity,
yet a little after that, he tells them also, That if now they would turn, and
keep holy the Sabbath, they and their city should remain for ever, Jer. 17. 1,
2, 3, 4, 14, 15.

Therefore you see, that the keeping holy of the Sabbath, will turn away the
greatest wrath of God from a people, if it be generally and commanded by their
King and Governors, otherwise it will not avail; for in King Charles his time
by some the Sabbath was kept more exact then ever, (and specially more then it
is now, when Families are broken into several Opinions, that there is hardly
three in a great Family of one judgment) and all might have so kept it, for
any thing that he declared against it; but he did not declare for it soon
enough, and therefore wrath came from the Lord upon his people.

A man in King Charles his time, could not pass along the streets, morning,
evening, or at night on the Sabbath, but he should hear them in most houses
reading, repeating of Sermons, singing Psalms, and praying, yea, and every day
they had prayers in their Families both evening and morning; and now such
things are out of use.

Also, how beautiful a thing was it to see them go to Church, in those days!
the Master went before, the Mistress, Children and Servants following with one
consent; surely then they were in the way of God, if I can judge: but now the
Master goes one way, the Mistress another, the Children and Servants another;
every one goes several ways; and when they come home, Mum is best; for they
can neither pray together nor speak any thing of God; if they do, there is a
hot house presently with their damning and confounding one another: God is not
the Author of such confusion, but of peace and concord, 1 Chronicles. 14. 33. and
how can there be religious Government, or a keeping of the Sabbath in Families,
when the Church is without Government? for if the Foundation or
Church Government be destroyed, what can the righteous Masters of Families do?
Psalm. 11. 3. they cannot say with Joshua 24. 15. We and our Families will serve
the Lord; for there is a power above them, that will nor suffer them to bear a
complete rule in their own houses, Esther 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

The granting Liberty of Conscience was the overthrow of the late King; for had
he been severe to make all men keep holy the Sabbath, he had not fallen; and
his tolerating men to use, on that day, their own Conscience and wills as they
listed, was his failing, so that he and his lost all by it: and now there is no
way left to pacify God's wrath, but by fasting and prayer to seek the Lord in
public and private, and specially to keep holy the Sabbath Day.

And to tell you which day is that day, Bishop Bayley in the Practice of Piety
does witness from Scripture and Reason, that it is the day commonly called
Sunday; and he gives you many instances of judgments on Towns and Persons that
had profaned it. And truly, that Prophet (for so I may call him) foreseeing
this judgment, with an intention to prevent it, directed his Book to King
Charles.

But a lass! that is nothing to what we can witness for the vindicating our
Sabbath, the Lord's day; for we have seen since, Kings and Kingdoms routed,
Parliaments and States destroyed, and all for profaning that day.

Therefore now God has resolved that Jews question, so that it is without
doubt, our Sabbath, and none but it, is the Sabbath which God does own.

Wherefore if you look to be saved of God, strive and have a care to keep it
holy, and wait patiently upon the Lord: we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.
9.

I know many good Protestant is now in Job's condition, having his Family
destroyed, his House and Goods plundered, and perhaps his Body smitten with
sore Diseases; besides, his Friends being Independent, Anabaptist, or
Presbyterian (as Job's three Friends) come to oppress, accuse and condemn him
falsely; but Job for all this appeals to God for his integrity; and saying
through Faith, that though his flesh should be destroyed, and his body
consumed, yet that he did believe (as many now in the same manner do believe,
that they shall see King Charles on his Throne) and was assured that he should
see his Redeemer in that very same body, Job 19. 25, 26, 27.

And you see God does at last show himself to Job: and as his three friends
were forced to have him pray for them, Job 42. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. so these that now
condemn you as evil doers, will be glad to lie at your feet, and have you pray
for them to God, and also petition to the King for them. But observe this,
verse. 10. that after Job had prayed for his Friends, then (and not before) God
turned away his captivity, and gave him twice as much as he had lost.

From hence learn thus much: You that have suffered most, are to pray earnestly
to God for them that most wronged you; then shall you be accepted of God for
your selves and them. Again, you must likewise make their peace with the King;
for you only are accepted and fitted under God, and none but you can do that;
and doing thus, your captivity immediately upon it shall be ended, and you
shall have twice as much as you had before, both of honor and riches.

I speak thus much in particular to you that were great ones; if you do as
abovesaid, you will be far greater then ever you were. And do this with all
speed; it will take but a little time, if you be willing to do it: but however,
do not despair, wait patiently upon God until he frames your mind to do it,
for it is far from you to consent to what I say in these things.

David, though anointed to be King of Israel, notwithstanding the promise, 1 Samuel 16. 1, 13. it being deferred, and he hotly persecuted, he thought it would
never be, and that one day he should fall by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
and again said in his haste, All men were liars, Psalm. 116. 11. concluding,
that Samuel had erred in anointing him, and in saying he should be King: but at
last when David came to be King indeed, he confessed his error in being too
hasty, Psalm. 31. 21, 22, 23, 24. and exhorts men in such cases not to be
hasty, but to wait patiently upon the Lord; showing, that though sometimes he
was hasty, which was but folly, yet most times he waited patiently upon the
Lord, Psalm. 27. 13, 14. Psalm. 40. 1, 2.

A Reproof for Withers, Walker, and Lily.
THere has been, and there is, certain ungodly men that devour this Nation, by
infusing into them the spirit of rebellion, confusion and disorder. Truly,
such men are no less then Witches, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Gal. 3. 1. and of late years
they have gained too much credit, to the ruin of the Nation, by setting the
Subjects against the King, the Church against the Bishops and Pastors, the
Wives against their Husbands, the Children against their Parents, the Servants
against their Masters, the Soldiery against their Commanders, striving to set
all in rebellion against God's Ordinances, pretending to the people it is for
their liberty; but the people by following their disorderly ways, have brought
and do bring themselves into bondage daily. There are too many such instruments
in this Land, and chiefly the Fathers of them are, that withered Poet
consulting with his Muses, and that whited wall Lily, consulting with his Stars
or worst Angels; and that doubletongu'd Walker, consulting with his false
Hebrew, (who shall have his reward as his brother had, 2 Samuel 20. 1, 21, 22.)
the three unclean spirits, Rev. 16. 13. which have brought such a confusion by
striking at all Governors and Government in this Nation, that it is almost
past recovery.

The first comes like Faux with his dark Lanthorn (to plot and blow up all) in
which he tells us of a rebellious perpetual Parliament that should continue for
ever; comparing it to the River of Thames.

But Gaffer Withers, what is become of your Parliament now? I believe God's
providence by his Highness the Lord Protector, has dried up your infernal
River, Rev. 16. 12. Rev. 9. 14, 15. that the way of the Kings of the East might
be prepared: and Collen, where those Kings or Wisemen, Matthew. 2. 1. were
buried, from hence is eastward: and will they not now be raised up in warlike
bodies to help King Charles to his throne? Merlin says as much, not Lily's
false Merlin, nor the Scots Merlin; but the true Britain Merlin, which cannot
be translated into English or any Speech verbatim, nor cannot be understood but
by some few Welsh-men, which had the traditional rule to understand it from
hand to hand ever since Merlin's time.

And about three years agone (when the King was in France) as I was saying,
That the King would come in; an ignorant Welsh-man hearing me, answered and
said, Not yet a while. Why? said I. Said he, The King must first go to Collen,
and be saluted of the three Kings there, who shall say thus unto him, Art thou
come? thou art welcome, Brother. Said I, How do you know this? Said he, I heard
it from some that had skill in Merlin; and Merlin does not speak doubtfully to
them that understand him. Therefore, how that welcome was to be performed,
whether by the Princes congratulating of the King there, or by some Vision he
was to have there, or whether he is to be rebaptized there, I leave that to a
further manifestation.

Some think that Merlin meant, that the King should die and be buried at Collen
with those three Kings, and that his Brother, Duke James, should reign and be
that great King Merlin mentions; yet Merlin says nothing of the King's
death; but says he shall be buried there, and that is to be understood, that
he shall be buried in Waterbaptism, Romans 6. 4. and then be raised into glory;
for the Spirit of God that moved upon the Waters, and created the Light, Genesis
1. 2, 3. which Spirit was upon those three Kings that lie buried there, who
came to our Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 2. 1, 2. is to rest upon our KING when
he is rebaptized: then shall he prosper victoriously, and his wisdom shall be
glorious in settling the affairs of the whole Earth.

I heard another say, who was acquainted with an old man that had skill in
Merlin, and had foretold him many things which he found come to pass; The old
Man said, That he understood the time of things coming to pass by the golden
number, which by Merlin 's Rule consisted of twenty eight years. And said to
him further, That the Book of Merlin would be out of date and of no use within
this three years; for before the end of 1657. all that he said is to be
fulfilled. And this Merlin, though long before, spoke truer concerning the
King, then Withers did of his Thames-River-Parliament.

And what does Lily, but like a Monkey bark at the Moon! he knows nothing, nor
never did know any thing, but as the Parliament directed him to write; for they
consulted with him (knowing him to be a cunning sophister, and an enemy to the
King) and gave him notice of their designs, and bid him that he should write in
such a Month so and so, and in such a Month so and so; and they having Men and
Money at command, brought their wicked designs to pass, and fulfilled his
wicked sayings, until Lily was looked upon as a rare Simon Magus, that the
Soldiery and others by his means were much encouraged against the King: but
when the Parliament got all to themselves, and began to slight Lily, he began
to encourage the Army against them, saying, That they should fall. Then the
Parliament send for him, imprisoned him, and would have condemned him as a
Witch or Conjurer: and ever since Lily could foretell nothing: but as a blind
man, which throws stones fast about him, perchance may kill an unhappy Crow;
so he speaking much for and against the Power, something of his words must
needs come to pass: and for his Book called, Monarchy or no Monarchy, who knows
not that? every one can tell that England must be either a Kingdom or no
Kingdom? that is no news: and all that he does in that Book, is but spitting
his venom against the Truth, by perverting, confounding and wresting some
ancient prophesies. And when all is done, he can make out nothing himself, but
in the later end of his Book he directs you to enquire at a company of
pictures, of dumb beasts and other images, which he has pourtrayed, saying to
you, That that is the ancient Egyptian way of prophecy. Truly, it is the
Egyptian Bondage he would lead you in: and he, the beasts, and their Pictures,
are all alike in their knowledge and expression, being all void of any
instruction; therefore believe him not.

It is a wonder to see what mysteries there by God's providence (that ye might
avoid them) is in these men's names: all that are possessed with Withers's
Opinion, may be called Witherds; and all that are possessed with Lily's Opinion,
may be called Lilyes; as we call Lutherans and Calvinists, after the names of
Luther and Calvin, who were the first of those Opinions; but see how Christ
has designed by name, both Withers and his party, with Lily and his party to
the fire, Matthew. 6. 28, 29, 30. John 15. 6. as for Walker, that man of ^^lial
and son of Bichri, he is designed to fall by the wisdom of a woman of Abel, 2 Samuel 20, 1, 15, 16, 17, 18. 19, 20, 21, 22. for the Blood of King Charles, like
the Blood of Abel, cries against him, Genesis 4. 10. because that he stirred up
most against him, when he wrote that wicked Pamphlet in 1641. entitled, To
your Tents O Israel: to stir the people to rebellion; and withal did fling it
to the King as he went in his Coach, using all the despite he could against
him; when all others at that time seemed to reverence him, until that wicked
Walker broke the way of rebellion to them, and then they followed him like so
many madmen. For my part, I hate not these men; but I hate the evil Spirit
that is in them; and loving them, I discover their wickedness, if so be by it
they come to repent and amend: for a flock of Geese teaches better doctrine
then such men do. And if you observe their goings, their chief going before,
the rest following with their mutual chattering without division, you shall
find that in all their ways there is better order among the Geese, then
Withers, Lily and Walker would have to be among men in the World. Therefore God
is pleased to judge such rebellious men by those Creatures which we count most
foolish; as we commonly say of one that is silly, He has no more wit then a
Goose, speaking as if a Goose had no wit; but one Goose has more wit then them
three.

The Author's judgment touching Baptism.
BUt why do I trouble my self with these men? it is only to warn them to
repent, and to warn you not to believe such seducing Spirits that would divide
the head from the body in Churches, Kingdoms, and Families; for the end of my
discourse is to bring all men to godliness, order and unity under one visible
Head, or (...)ost (...) us: (...) you (...) says (...) with (...) 1
King, as Jesus Christ has said, John 10. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 13. And now I must tell
you, That through the darkness which came upon the Church some hundred years
ago, by reason when the corrupted Clergy (who were without conscience or
honesty) got the power and records of antiquity into their own hands, they
destroyed Records, which showed the ancient Apostolical Custom of the Church,
that they might put upon us such a seeming Divine Law as pleased them, and made
most for their lazy ends and profits; and through the malice and subtilty of
the Serpent, wrought much mischief by the corruption of the Popish Clergy for
the destruction of mankind: yet unawares to them, God has reserved so much of
the Records, as clearly confuteth their practice in the Fundamental Point of
our Religion, even Baptism; about which controversy, begotten by the laziness
of the Clergy, many thousands lost their lives, and themselves will come to
ruin.

I find, that though Infants were baptized in old times by their sureties
undertaking for them, or christened, which is a more proper word for them, as I
shall make it appear by St. Augustines own confession, yet I find, that that
which now we call confirmation or bishoping, by the ancients was called, The
Baptism: but our late Prelates being Lordly minded (though they unjustly raised
their hire above their Predecessors, yet) thought it too much labor and
abasement, for such as they were, to baptize their flock again in Water, being
content to let that stand for Baptism, which they received in their Infancy,
and only to lay their hands upon them, using a few words over them, and so let
them go, making as though they could create a new Sacrament without its
Element, which properly is Water, which is, as if they should invite men unto
the Communion Table, and then use the same Words, as if they gave them Bread
and Wine, but give them nothing; or just as Saint James says, Jam. 2. 13, 14.
If one see a man naked, and destitute of daily food, and say unto him, Depart
in peace, be thou warmed and filled, yet he gives him neither clothing nor
meat; and, what is the poor man the better for his good words? so your
bishoping in like manner was unprofitable, and the people finding it so, did
not esteem it, nor did they care whether they had it or not: for without Water,
it was but a starving of their souls. And if the Bishops being ancient, durst
not for fear of danger go down into the water, they might have commanded others
to baptize the people, Act. 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. Act. 10. 48. Jeremiah
foreseeing the darkness that came upon the Church, sends us to seek the good
old way, and bids us walk in it, saying, Then we should find rest to our
souls, Jer. 6. 16. And when the Church had lost the way of Christ's worship, she
inquired of him, how she should come to his Saints rest: he answers her
saying, If she knew not the way to find out their rest, she must follow their
footsteps, and so come to find out their rest, Cant. 1. 7, 8. and this method
is taker. from shepherds, which in time of snow find out their sheep by
following their footsteps. Therefore, I say, we must search the Scripture; and
withal, because we cannot agree in the understanding the Scripture, for to help
our understanding, we must take notice how the Church did walk in those ages
after the Apostles time, when it came to its highest perfection; and by so
doing we shall rightly understand the meaning of the Scripture, which is the
Apostolical rule of worship. And I find, that Saint Augustine mistrusting the
knavery of the Clergy that should follow, in his discourse, by God's providence
did hide some things in secret; which secret being now opened, may show us what
they then did, in what is most considerable and greatest in question now among
us: for so you shall find it in the matter of Baptism, if you observe Saint
Augustine, Confession 1 lib. chap. 11. says he, (speaking of his Christening)
I was then signed with the sign of his cross, and seasoned with his salt so
soon as I came out of my mothers womb. Whence it is clear, this was his
Infant Baptism; for you shall find in the same Chapter, that being come to
some discretion, and falling sick, how earnest he was to have Christ's Baptism:
and speaking of Pontitianus, Confession 8 lib. chap. 6. says he, He was both a
Christian, and baptized too. Hence you may draw this conclusion, that then they
were called Christians, from their Christening in their Infancy, but not
baptized Christians, until they were manifest Believers, and that they were
baptized by their own consent; and their Baptism was in those times deferred
until men came to sobriety, and that the heat of youthful lust and sin was
almost overcome, and commonly until they were married, otherwise, though they
were never so learned, except they believed, and were tempered, or were in
dying, they were not admitted to have it, as you may see, if you will read and
observe Saint Augustine's Confessions, and the Rubric that goes before the
Baptism in the book of Common prayer, you shall find that they say, that in
the old time the people were baptized at Easter or Whitsuntide, and at no time
in the year besides: and if we compare this with Saint Augustine, this must
needs be their rebaptizing, for Infants were not kept so long without it, as
you see by St. Augustine, and see he was rebaptized at Easter, and I am sure he
was then about 30 years of age, for he had a son was then 15. Confess. 9 lib.
chap. 6. Here it is clear that the ancient Church though they baptized or
christened their Infants by their sureties, yet after they came to be men, then
they were baptized upon their own score. And now let us see whether their then
practice was agreeable to the Scripture delivered to us by Christ and his
Apostles.

I have delivered seven Arguments grounded upon the Gospel, for the defense of
Infant Baptism, which are so invincible, that I believe all the Ana baptists
are not able in so few words to answer them; which Arguments you shall find in
my book called, The Echo to the Voice from Heaven: besides, it is evident,
that the promise is as well to their children, as to the believing parents, Act.
2. 39. and therefore the Apostles upon the confession of a master or head of a
family, baptized all persons both great and small in the house, Act. 10. 33,
47, 48. Act. 16. 14, 15, 30, 31, 32, 33. according to the saying of our Savior
to Zacheus, Luke 19. 9. Salvation is come to this house, that is, to all in
this house both great and small, Infants being not excepted, nor exempted; for
our Savior counts them the purest, Luke 18. 15, 16, 17. Now to prove that
Infants were baptized by their sureties or upon their account, some Authors do
ground it upon the command of God, Isa. 8. 1, 2, 3. and the example, Luke 1.
57, 58, 59. These types indeed being well considered, are very forcible, and a
sufficient warrant for it: and the Apostles command binds us to do it, saying,
Romans 15. 1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak. And
again, Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of
Christ. Infants are most weak, and we ought in charity to help them, in what
concerns their souls, as we do in what concerns their bodies.

All by nature are born children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1, 3. that Infants are not
only dead in sins and trespasses; but are also so dead, that they know not
wherefore they are plunged in water baptism, they know not what their washing
signifies: though indeed they have Faith in Christ, Mat. 18 6. and a
dependency upon the supreme power, that brought them forth into the world, far
above that of the young Ravens which cry to God for their sustenance, Job 38.
41. Psalm. 147. 9. yet Infants are not capable of entering into atonement with
God through Christ in baptism; and if without it they depart this life, they
cannot be saved, Mar. 16. 16. Jahn 3. 5. Therefore in charity we ought to help
them, and be sureties for them until they come to age.

Now Infants being dead in regard of original sin, and in regard of speech and
understanding what Baptism is, 1 Cor. 14. 20. in the Apostles time there were
some that did answer for them, and perform that part in Baptism for them, which
they themselves being unable could not do, and this is clear by the Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 15. 29. Else what shall they do that are baptized for the dead?
if the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead? that is,
if Infants do not awake to live righteously, that God may be all in all, their
sureties must answer for it, 1 Cor. 15. 28, 34. and by these dead ones here, is
meant, Infants; for to what purpose shall any be baptized for them that are
corporally dead? as if that would raise them again. And therefore the Church of
England is right in this point; for in the book of Common Prayer the question
is not put to the Infant, but to the surety, saying, will thou be baptized in
this Faith? and the surtie answers, That is my desire: so that accordingly
the surtie is more properly said to be baptized then the Infant, though all is
for the Infant's sake: and the Infant if he by his washing perform the external
part in Baptism, that is all, and that is but the ouside of it, as the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

For Re-baptizing also you shall find, that it was put in practice in the
Apostles time, Act. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. for them Disciples being found
ignorant were baptized again: and if you compare Act. 10. 47, 48. with Act. 19.
5. you find, they were baptized with water; and to clear it further, says he,
Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy
Ghost. Hence I conclude, that here he spoke of Re-baptizing, mark the words
regeneration and renewing, it signifies to make an old thing new again: and as
the renewing of a covenant cannot be done to him that never was in covenant,
nor can you renew your friendship with him that never was you friend; so the
renewing of baptism here intimated, cannot be said to be done to them that
never were baptized: and it must needs argue from this place, Tit. 3. 5. that
in some measure when they were Infants they had baptism, and that now being
defiled by the sins of their youths, they were rebaptized, washed, and had the
Spirit renewed on them again: and as David after he went in to Uriah's wife,
and by sin defiled his holy Spirit, he desired God to wash him, and to renew a
right spirit within him, Psa. 51. 2, 7, 10, 11. yet David then had the holy
Spirit, though in a weak measure, because of his sin; therefore he desires God
not to take his holy Spirit from him, but to wash him, and renew the holy
spirit he had, by giving him a greater measure of the same spirit: so in like
manner, them now that are rebaptized, should not despise the holy spirit which
they received in their Infant Baptism; but with David desire God to renew that
holy Spirit within them, by giving them a greater measure of the same spirit.

Again, from these Texts, Heb. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 21. we must needs understand
the rebaptizing, for how can Infants be said to come to baptism with full
assurance of faith, having their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
their bodies washed with pure water? whereas Infants understand not what
conscience is: and how can they have the answer of a good conscience toward God
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, seeing they are not able to know these
things? surely this baptism meant here, is not to Infants, but it belongs to
them that are of ripe age to receive it. And therefore from hence it is
evident, that those who are to be saved (notwithstanding their baptism in their
infancy) ought to be baptized again. As for them that died in the former times
of ignorance, which God winked at, Act. 17. 30. doubtless God was merciful to
them; but now it will be required if you refuse rebaptizing, for Infant Baptism
is but as that of John, which is appointed to prepare a people for the Lord:
and truly the holy Ghost is in some measure in John's baptism, for our Savior
had the holy Ghost descended on him at his baptism, Mat. 3. 16. but the fullness
of all, is in Christ's baptism, who had not the spirit by measure, John 3. 34.
And St. Augustine understood it thus: for speaking to God, as if in his infancy
he had had John's baptism, and confessing when he was sick what then he had
done, says, confess. lib. 1. chapter 11. Thou saw, O my God! (for thou were my
Keeper) with what earnestness of mind, and with what faith, I importuned the
piety, both of my own mother, and thy church the mother of us all, for the
baptism of thy christ my Lord God. Mark, the baptism of thy christ. And
observe, for here he makes a distinction betwixt John's Baptism, which he had
received when he was an infant, and the baptism of Christ which now being sick
he would have had: for he thought it not meet to term that Baptism which
infants receive.

It was a wonderful providence that brought me to maintain this point by any
thing out of S. Aug. and it was thus: When I was about to write this, two
learned men (the one a Minister, the other a great student) being at my house
together; and I perceiving they would be my great antagonists in it: to hear
what they would say, I broke my mind unto them: they began to oppose me in it
with might and main. I held it forth against them both: so that at last the
student said, Now I call to mind, I think S. Aug. speaks of such a thing. And
he having the book in his pocket, drew it out; and it silenced them very much:
yet they would give me no encouragement, nor would they tell me plainly what S.
Aug. said in it. Upon this, I went into Paul's Churchyard, to see if I could
find S. Aug. and hear him speak, by means of some Latin Scholar: but being
there, I found him to speak English, and I brought him home, with an intent
that before he and I part, to be better acquainted with him. Thus Gods
providence helps forward his own work, that men may see that the practice of
the ancient Church was agreeable to the New Testament, and that by their
practice we may the better understand the Scripture, specially in the
mysterious great Controversy about Baptism (the foundation of Christianity) to
end and reconcile the difference of Christendom in that point of Rebaptizing,
commonly called Anabaptism; which opinion, being weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, has as much truth in it, yea more then the contrary: yet the Ana
baptists follow not the footsteps of the Ancients in Christning their infants,
and acknowledging the holy Spirit in their infants baptism to be of value; but
seeking another spirit in baptism, and not the renewing of that holy Spirit
which they had in their infants baptism, (for their punishment, and to bring
them home) God sends them an evil spirit, 1 Samuel 16. 14. that puffs and
vexes them, and sets them one against another; so that there is no peace among
them: and though they do mighty things for a time, prevailing, yet at last they
come to nothing, because they deny and pitifully reproach the breathing of Gods
Spirit upon them in their infancy.

On the other side, because the Church of Engl. at the first appearing of the
Anab. did not admit Rebaptizing, (it being Gods way) and take those people into
the Church, (they confessing the Church, and their infants baptism) as the most
eminent part of it; the difference grew greater, and they became a scourge; so
that all Heresies broke out in the Church, upon its refusing and condemning
such a truth, warranted by* Scripture and Fathers; which truth is the means
appointed to bring men into communion with God: for none ought to come to the
Lords table, before they themselves (being at years of discretion) do confess
their sins, repent, and be baptized, upon their own score. And good reason: for
we see, if a man himself be bound to pay a debt he owes, he will take special
care to pay it, lest his adversary cast him into prison; but if sureties be
bound for it, the principal cares not, but lets them suffer: this is common
among men. So infants in baptism are not bound, but their sureties; and as they
are bound to or promise nothing, so they are as careless to perform any thing
promised for them or in their name: for pray where is any does forsake the
devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all
the sinful lusts of the flesh; that does believe all the Articles of the
Christian faith; that does keep Gods holy will and commandments all the days of
their lives? Here are mighty things promised, who performs them? Take heed;
God will not be mocked, Gal. 6. 7, 8. Now if Ministers had pressed men to renew
their Covenant with God, and caused them with their own mouths to promise such
obedience as above said, and rebaptized them upon that account, showing such as
would not come in (upon such terms) their damnable condition, and that their
infant baptism was but a figure to save them, if they had died in the time of
their ignorance; surely men would not have been so careless in keeping Gods
Word as now they are.

Therefore I give this as a Rule of truth to the Church for time to come; which
Rule is grounded, as abovesaid, on Scripture, the best Fathers practice,
Reason, and on the confession of our Church of England, in the book of
Common Prayer, as you have it before Baptism in the Rubric.

1. I say, that Infants ought to be by their sureties baptized in water, as we
formerly did in the church of England. 2. That they should be catechized and
educated in the faith, and by all means persuaded to leave their sins. 3. That
they being come to the age of discretion, should repent and confess their sins,
and show their resolution to amend their lives, before they come to renew their
baptism. 4. That they be rebaptized in water, and then the Bishops to lay
their hands upon them: and all this to be done to them, before they be admitted
to come to the Lords Table. 5. That those Heathens or Jews that are persuaded
to the faith, converted and baptized, they being of full age, refraining from
sin, and steadfast in the faith, need not be rebaptized: but if they have young
children, or servants that are subject to youthful vanities, notwithstanding
they be baptized with their masters or fathers* they ought to be rebaptized as
abovesaid. 6. That whosoever after re-baptizing opposes the faith, or breaks
the commands of God, be excommunicated, and not received in again, until he
repent, and be willing to suffer a shameful penance. If he will not come in,
but goes about to seduce the people of Christ, then shall the King put him to
death speedily, that others may fear the Lord and King. 7. That the King and
all keep holy the Sabbath, not only by forbearing servile work, but by
praying, reading, bearing, speaking Gods word, meditating on it, and deeds of
charity.
And let me tell you in the name of God, that Gods Covenant in baptism, is that
perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten, Jer. 50. 5. It is the quarrel
of that Covenant which God did and will avenge, Lev. 26. 23. not the
blasphemous foolish Scots Covenant, as the Presbyterians would have men
believe: no, it was that covenant with death and hell, Isa. 28. 15. God never
owned that wicked Covenant, but will punish all that had a hand in it; the King
and all others that took it, be Anathema Maranatha: the late King, and that
rightly, did abominate it. Nothing will clear this King and all that took it,
but to repent and be rebaptized, as abovesaid: for that was the arm of the
abomination of desolation, Mat. 24. 15. and it threw down the pillars of
Christ's Church, and our Bishops: it was the work of the Presb. Coppersmith; the
Lord reward him according to his works, 2 Timothy 4. 14. God send us to love and
to enjoy truth and peace in all our generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Black*friers in Long-aLley, March. 1. 1654. Arise Evans.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd now if the King and the rest of the royal party will submit unto God,
according to the foregoing lines (by his providence) directed to them, and
humble themselves before him, constantly calling upon him as they find
occasion; not only in forms of prayers, in which many times they come short of
asking what they need; but also calling upon him by the dictates of God's
Spirit in them; for as they know how to ask a man what they need, so the
Apostle would have them make known then requests unto God, Phil. 4. 6. and not
plead ignorance, as if they had not the Spirit of prayer; for if they know what
they need, they know how to ask it of God, as well as they know how to ask any
thing they want of men, and easier; for God is not as man, that will be courted
with fine phrases before he gives any thing, but plain simple terms are
acceptable with God, and as available as the highest eloquence. And as a Father
delighting to hear his little child speak and ask him something from the
dictates of his own wit, to encourage the child for to speak to him, will give
him sooner what he asks, then he will give to others of his children that can
speak better; so God does delight to hear his little ones speak to him from
their own breast, and will answer their prayers, when eloquent Orators prayers
are denied. And let me tell you, that I believe God does not bless any thing
that men possess, so much as he blesses that thing (if it be a lawful thing)
which they ask him in prayer, and return him thanks for it; for though a man be
born to the highest preferment in the world, and look not upon it as the
immediate gist of God unto him, not glorying in his birthright, but in the
Lord that gave it, he shall find that God will deprive him of that he gloried
in, by making one born in a barn, and cast into the briers, to enjoy his
dominion. I say, if the King and his party will observe these things, and
practice them, then I am sure God will suddenly restore him and his party, and
they shall find, it is not in vain for men to seek the Lord; but if they will
not observe these things and put them in practice, I wish them well, let them
go on in their own ways, and see the fruit thereof, for I know the meek (and
not the furious and proud) shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5. 5. and the humble
shall be exalted, Luke 14. 11. for, Before destruction the heart of man is
haughty, and before honor is humility, Prove. 18. 12. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1
Pet. 5. 6.

FINIS.
Arise Evans.


