THE DEFENSE OF JOHN ETHERINGTON AGAINST STEVEN DENISON, and his Witnesses,
their Accusations, and Depositions. Wherein their whole Proceedings and ground
whereupon he was Censured and committed to prison by the high Commission Court,
is in brief declared. Which he having now opportunity, and special occasion
also urging, thought needful to publish.

PROVE. 19. 5. A false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks
lies shall not escape. LEVIT. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteous Judgment;
Thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the
mighty. DEUTERONOMY. 1. 17. Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment, but ye shall
hear the small as well as the great. Printed in the Year, 1641.

THE DEFENSE OF JOHN ETHERINGTON Against STEPHEN DENISON, and his witnesses,
their accusations, and depositions: upon which he was censured by the high
Commission Court.
Unto all Christian people of what estate or calling soever, which in your
hearts do prefer the love of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
his grace and truth, To judge righteous judgment, To show mercy, To defend the
innocent, To releeve the oppressed, To comfort the afflicted brethren of
Christ, To suffer affliction with them, and so your own eternal happiness
before all temporal honor, pleasure, profits, promotions, and reputations of
this world. The love of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, his grace
and truth, mercies and peace, and an assured hope of eternal happiness be
with you all, Amen.
BELOVED Christians, for of what degree soever ye be, a more honorable and
blessed title ye cannot have, being so indeed. If a Christian that is
despised, reviled, and persecuted, having all manner of evil that evil man
can invent against him, and that by persons professing a strictness in
Religion above others, as well Preachers as professors of that kind; not only
in their private talk and conferences together, but publicly in Pulpits and
printed books, and in the open streets and parts both of City and Country, as
(among the rest of the evils) That he will equivocate, lie, deny and forswear
all things before Authority, which he believes, says, and does privately,
and submit with his body and word to any Religion, and not suffer persecution
for any thing. If such a one may be admitted to speak for himself in his own
defense, and that his words may possibly be regarded, then give me leave a
little now once at last I humbly beseech you, and regard my words so far forth
as charity and truth may bind you thereunto.

It is so well known to many in this City of London, both how my adversary,
before named, has dealt and proceeded against me from his first beginning to
this present, as also how I have dealt with him, and what my mind concerning
Religion, that if I should set down any thing that were untrue, either in one
respect or other, I should be soon taxt for the same. Not only by mine
enemies (who having done so already without cause, will do it again quickly
when there is cause) but by others also which know me and understand truly how
things are. And so I shall give all men just occasion to reject me, and to
account me a false deceitful man; which yet I am sure I have not done, and
which is more, I shall corrupt my conscience toward God, and provoke him to
displeasure against me, unto whom now, notwithstanding all the evil of man,
and malice of Satan, I can appeal with a good conscience, and make my petition
and complaint unto him, as a child to a most gracious Father and just avenger
of all his childrens wrongs. Therefore whatsoever I here write, though it be
but little in comparison to that which has been said, sworn, and published
against me, yet as prizing a good conscience far above either liberty of my
body, or favor of the world, through the grace of God, it shall be true, and
so clear, and full in all things, as I shall be able in so short a space to
express.

My accusers are many, the first and chief of all, the common accuser only
excepted, is Mr. Stephen Denison, Vicar of Katherine Cree-Church in London; the
rest as they stand recorded by the Register, are, Rowland Thomson, Thomas
Rogers, Joyners. Christopher Nicholson, Chandler. Peter Worcester, Drawer.
Susan Price, a Porters wife. Henry Robrowgh, Curate. John Okey, Clothworker.
George Dunne, Surgeon. Thomas Stephens, Clarke.


These are the full number of Mr. Denisons Witnesses, whose testimonies were
taken by the Register, and stand for proof of the articles against me.

Their accusations are these following.

Their first accusation.
That the said John Etherington, being a Boxmaker by his trade, about five or
six years since, gave over his trade of Box-making, and betook himself to
the expounding or interpreting of the holy Scriptures to others besides those
of his own family, and has so done since the 20 of December 1623. and taken
upon him to instruct many persons, not being of his own family, in points of
doctrine and matters of faith.

These are the words contained in the sentence, as they are set down by the
Register, to which Rowland Thomson, Thamas Rogers, Christopher Nicholson, Henry
Robrowgh do testify.

The deposition of Thomson.
To the first Article he says and deposes, that this deponent has known the
said Etherington the space of these seven years last past, about the beginning
of which time he the said Etherington professed the trade of a Box-maker, and
followed that trade for many years together; and also says, that the said
John Etherington has of this deponents certain knowledge, and in his presence
and hearing, oftentimes took upon him to expound sundry places of Scripture,
and to instruct many persons not being of his own family, in points of
doctrine and matters of faith, tending to the salvation of the soul; and this
he has done within the time aforesaid, and since the 20 of December 1623.

The deposition of Rogers.
To the first Article he says and deposes, that the articulate Etherington,
being for some years past (as this deponent has heard) a Box-maker, and
professing that trade, did about the time in the article mentioned, give over
his said trade and vocation, since which time being since the 20 of December
1623. this deponent has heard him take upon him to expound some part of the
Scripture, to sundry persons not being of his own household.

The deposition of Nicholson.
To the first Article he deposes and says, that he has known the articulate
Etherington for the space of six or seven years last past, at which time this
deponent believes, that he the said Etherington professed the art of a
Box-maker, but since that time he utterly forsook his said trade and vocation;
and further says, that he the said Etherington (as he this deponent verily
believes) has of late time, and since the 20 of December 1623. endeavored to
instruct diverse persons inhabiting in several places in or near unto the
City of London, in new and strange points of doctrine, and also to expound the
holy Scriptures unto them, and that he the said Etherington does take upon him
as a Teacher in matters of doctrine, and is so generally reputed among his
proselites and followers, as he this deponent has heard and believes.

The deposition of Robrowgh.
To the first Article he deposes and says that he has known the articulate
Etherington for these four or five years past, or thereabout, and knows
that he for most part of the time articulate professed himself to be a man
able to interpret the Scriptures, and that to those which are not of his own
family or household, because he has opposed some Ministers of the Church of
England in disputation, which his writings between him and this deponent, and
likewise his printed books do plainly show, and also because this deponent
once meeting with him and his company to dispute of matters of Religion, told
him the said Etherington, that he this deponent was exhorted by a Minister not
to trouble himself in disputation with him; whereupon the said Etherington
replied, that the said Minister so spoke it, because he was afraid to contest
with him the said Etherington.

These are the words as they stand recorded by the Register.

My answer and defense.
Here Mr. Denison and his Witnesses at their very first entrance do plainly
show forth and discover their evil conspiring minds against me; for it is
well known (which they could not be ignorant of, neither if they were will it
in this case excuse them) that although I left the trade that I had used, which
they so often mention by the name of a Box-maker, in scorn and der^sion as any
man may well perceive, though it may beseem a poor Christian, like my self,
well enough, if it were meaner then it is; yet did I not then or thereupon
betake my self to the expounding or interpreting of the Scriptures, as a
teacher or instructor to many persons as they speak; neither did I leave it
for any such end, nor to live or have any maintenance thenceforth for such a
thing, as they my accusers by their cunning Article and deceitful testimonies
would make the Court and the world believe; but I betook my self to another
kind of trade or work, as low and servile as it, touching the conveyance of
water in pipes that I made of earth, which I had used seven or eight years
before, and had now necessary occasion requiring me to follow altogether, by
reason of a work I had to do for the serving of the City of Westminster with
water, and not utterly leaving or forsaking the other, as they depose, but made
use thereof also as need required in things concerning this, which I have
followed with much labor and pains night and day, as well for the maintenance
of my self, my wife, and children, as for the good and benefit of others; as
all or most of the Inhabitants of Westminster, and sundry other Gentlemen and
Inhabitants of London, and other parts of the Kingdom, for whom I have done
the same kind of work, will testify for me, and wherein I should at this
present time also be employed for the supply of my own, and my wife and
childrens present wants, and for the good of the Commonwealth, if I were not
(through the envy of my for-mentioned enemies, and pleasure of the Court)
restrained by imprisonment; for God does know, that as I hold it to be a more
blessed thing to give, then it is to receive, Matthew. 25.
as Christ has said, and St. Paul testifies, so I do desire in my heart to
give and do service in that kind to others, Acts 20.
rather then to receive of any.

Neither have I ever in my life taken upon me, or any way assumed to my self,
the office, name, or place of a teacher, or instructor over any people in any
private conventicle or meeting whatsoever, nor have so much as to imitate
Ministers or teachers in any manner of form, gesture, expounding, or
interpreting, or to be as a chief leader, or to have proselites or followers,
or a company, as they my accusers charge me, but do utterly dislike all such
bold presumptuous practices, and have opposed and reproved them, as some that
know me well, and things that I have writ, can witness.

Nevertheless, this I confess, that not only for five or six years past,
but for these five or six and thirty years, since the time that it pleased God
of his gracious goodness to call me from the pleasures of the sins of my
youth to seek him, I have given my mind with earnest desire of my heart and
prayer unto God, to read, hear, and understand the word of God, to the end,
that understanding the truth and way of life contained in the same, I might
walk therein all the days of my life, to the honor of God and my own
comfort and salvation. For I remembered that Christ commanded to search the
Scriptures: John 5. 39.
and foretelling of the abomination of desolation that was to come, Matthew. 24.
5.
warns his people, that who so reads, should understand: and how he does
pronounce them blessed, that read and hear the words of his prophecy, and
keep those things which he has spoken, because the time of his coming is at
hand: Revel. 1. 3.
and as God vouchsafed to show his grace and mercies unto me, and give me
understanding in the same his truth and way of life, so I have endeavored to
impart that which I understood, with admonition to my wife and children,
neighbor and friend, desiring in my heart, and praying unto God in secret,
that he would vouchsafe the same grace unto them. This I confess, I have done,
though in great weakness, and so, as holding it always a special point of
wisdom, to be more ready in this respect to receive, then to give, to hear,
then to speak; and I confess, I have not been in all this time of thirty-five
years so conversant and sociable with the profane multitude of the world, as
I have been with the sober and well disposed, the wise in heart. I have desired
to converse with such especially above all other wheresoever I have come to
talk and confer together of the word of God, which we have either heard or
read, or had in our hearts and memories, edifying one another in the faith and
hope of eternal life. This on the first day of the week, and so daily as
opportunity might permit, I confess, I have done in society with such
persons; remembering the charge given by St. Paul to every Christian, saying,
Take heed brethren, Heb. 3. 12, 13.
least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God, but exhort one another daily while it is called to day, least any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And again, Heb. 10.
24. 25.
Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works, not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching. All
which I suppose the meanest Christian of the lowest degree or place that is,
may do, and that it concerns him as much as it does any other, though never
so great.

If in this I have offended against the law of the Church of England, I have
offended it, I confess, but I do suppose, nay, I verily believe there is no
law in this Christian Kingdom, now at this time, forbidding these things. In
the times of Papistry, it was not held lawful for the Scriptures to be in the
English Language, nor for the lay people to read the same. But thanks be to
God, it is not so now, those days of desolation are shortened in this Realm;
according to the word of Christ as he foretold, saying. But for the elect sake
those days shall be shortened. Mat. 24. 22.
The Scriptures wherein the light of the truth and way of salvation is
contained and held forth, which by Antichrist and his Church has been so long
obscured, are by the Laws and Authority of this Land translated into our own
native tongue, and by the same Authority, all men young and old, have free
liberty to read and consider the same, to talk and confer thereof one
neighbor with another; and as the men of Berea after they had heard Paul
preach, did search the Scriptures daily; so may we do after we have heard; and
as Timothy did know the Scriptures of a child, which were able to make him
wise unto salvation, so may we even of children know the Scriptures. Therefore
we are greatly bound to be thankful unto God for this inestimable treasure,
and for those his servants, who have been the means of this so great good
unto us. And God forbid, that ever the Authority or Law of this Christian
Kingdom should prohibit the same again.

So that whereas Steven Denison and his witnesses do charge me that I have
oftentimes taken upon me to expound sundry places of Scripture, as a teacher or
instructor to many persons, etc. They charge me very falsely, for I never did
otherwise then as one Christian neighbor or friend may and ought to do to and
with another (so far forth as God has given him grace and understanding) as I
have said.

But because it will be conceived, that all this that has been said and done
against me, was not for nothing, I must therefore request the favor and
patience of the Reader, to give me leave to relate the beginning and ground of
all, which was this;

First, it is true, I confess, I did and do still hold as a maine truth of
the Gospel of Christ (contrary, as it appears, to Mr. Denison) that
repentance does necessarily go before remission of sins, and so before
justifying faith also, as well as before justification or remission; and this,
I confess, I have endeavored to maintain against some that have held the
contrary. Which thing Mr. Denison having heard of, he took upon him with great
violence, in his Pulpits to oppose the same, calling it a damnable error, a
familisticall point of doctrine, and that none but familists held it, and
naming me often by name and by trade, as if I were the Author thereof, and
charged me also with many other things very false, vilde, and wicked. And this
was before he began his suite in Court against me, and not at all knowing me,
or having once ever spoken with me, but being only informed and set on by his
two first witnesses Thomson and Rogers, as Thomson afterward acknowledged.

These two Thomson and Rogers, are men that I was never acquainted or
conversant with, either in one kind or other; neither have I ever been in
their company, but by their own occasion or procurement, or some of their own
or Mr. Denisons sociates, and always with some others with them, and under
pretense of refuting the forementioned point of repentance before justifying
faith, which I held, or, (after Mr Denison had begun so in his Pulpits) under
color of friendship, as seeming to be desirous to know my mind in matters of
Religion more fully, to the end they might inform Mr. D. thereof rightly, and
so stay his proceedings in his Pulpits; for this Thomson and Rogers were his
special devotaries and inward with him.

I say under these forementioned pretenses, they procured me into their company
three or four times, which I for my part never sought. And when I was in their
company, they or some of their fellows spoke as much or more then I, and
especially Mr. Robrowgh, who for most part of the times was one with them; and
the speech was not in any manner of teaching or expounding as a teacher or
instructor for my part especially, but in the way of reasoning and answering to
their questions and demands; and the chief matter was concerning repentance,
which I hold for a principle of truth, is and must be before justifying faith;
I say not all kind of faith, but justifying only. We must repent, that is to
say, return from the pleasures of our vain and evil ways, and sins, to a
true and deep sorrow and mourning for the same, and in humbleness and
contrition of heart confess them unto God, and like the Publican, standing a
far off, as not daring (because of our sins and vildnesse) to look up to
heaven, but smiting our breast as truly confounded, earnestly desire God to be
merciful to us sinners. Heb. 6.
This repentance, Mark, 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
being a principle of Christ, and part of the Gospel, do I hold, is and must
be before justifying faith; as these Scriptures do declare, Matthew. 4. 17. Mar.
1. 15. Luke 24. 47. Act. 2. 38. Act. 3. 19. Act. 5. 31. Act. 13. 23, 24 Act.
19. 4. Luk 18. 13, 14. Which Mr. Robrowgh being their chief disputer, denied,
and opposed as a damnable error; denied, I say, repentance to be before
justifying faith, but acknowledging it to be before justification and remission
of sins; for he makes repentance and sanctification (meaning a holy and new
life) to be both one, and will have them to fall in and come between
justifying faith and justification, as in the writing which he before in his
deposition mentions, passed between him and me, is to be seen; as if
justifying faith could be one moment of time, without or before justification
or remission of sins, which are in effect both one; for, to have ones sins
forgiven, is to be justified from them, and so of necessity it will follow,
that if repentance be before remission of sins and justification, it must be
before justifying faith, because where remission of sins is not, there can be
no justifying faith.

Hereupon it is that the said Thomson and Rogers do depose that I have often
times taken upon me to expound sundry places of Scripture, and to instruct many
persons in their presence and hearing, and therefore they name no time, place,
part of Scripture, point of doctrine, nor person to be present besides
themselves, least their cunning equivocations should be discovered, but since
the 20 of December 1623: they are very careful to have set down, because they
would not have King James his pardon by any means to relieve me against their
wicked conspiracy.

And Henry Robrowgh, he says not that I have often times taken upon me to
expound sundry places of Scripture, and to instruct many persons in his
presence and hearing, etc. Which he might have deposed as safely as they,
having all one and the same ground, hereby seeming to have some more honesty in
him. But that I profess my self to be a man able, and sets down the reason
thereof to be, because I have opposed some Ministers in disputation, naming
himself only, and the writing that passed between him and me, for proof
thereof. Whereas, as it is well known, he was the man that desired it, and
promised fair and friendly proceeding, though he now has showed himself
otherwise; and mentioning also my printed books, as in his deposition, for
further ground. As if a man may not reason, or dispute with a Minister, nor
speak or write of Religion, or of the Scriptures, but he therein takes upon
him as a teacher or instructor, and professes himself to be a man able; for
this is the thing Robrowgh drives at, as well as Thomson and Rogers, to prove
against me to the Court; which for my part, I never did profess, nor take upon
me, although I know a man may through the grace and gift of God, be in some
measure able, that dares presume to take the office, name, or profession of a
Teacher or Instructor upon him. And such gifts of God, as to prophecy, if in a
man of the lowest degree, place, or calling in the Church of God, Shepherd,
Clown, Carpenter, or other, ought not to be despised or envied at for his low
estate, or meannesse of his person sake. Nay, a greater Messenger of God then
ever Mr. Robrowgh was or will be, said once of some that for the same causes
were so envied, and complained of; I would that not only they, but the whole
host of Israel did prophecy. And St. Paul says without excepting the meanest
artificer, Desire the best gifts, and chiefly that ye may prophecy. Mr.
Robrowgh forgets that they were but envious scorners, though Scribes and
Pharisees, who once upon such terms, so slighted and despised the Lord
himself, his works and words. So that Mr. R. comes nothing short of Thomson
and Rogers in false witnes-bearing and scorning; I will not equal him with the
old Scribes and Pharisees, because of the honor and grace of him whom they so
despised.

And for Nicholson, the other witness, a man that I was never in any sort
conversant with, nor have had one half hours time of speech with in my life,
whose testimony therefore is altogether as he has heard and believes, and so,
what he has heard and believes, he presumes to swear; what those new or
strange points of doctrine are, in his deposition, he names not, nor any one
of those sundry persons that I should expound the Scriptures unto, whom he
calls my proselites and followers, and me their Teacher in matter of doctrine.
But howsoever, though his deposition be but upon hearesay only, and as he
verily believes, yet the Court has so credited his testimony, that the most
of the words and matters of this first accusation in the sentence, are his
words, and grounded chiefly upon his deposition; and so he is and will be found
a false witness like the rest, and the Count, I suppose, cannot be excused,
but I refer all to the understanding Reader to judge how rightly I have been
dealt withal by my accusers and the Court.

But now let me yet give the Reader a little further to understand, That before
Mr. Denison began his suite in Court against me, after he had begun to revile
me in his Pulpits, and I having used all means both by writing and friends of
his and my own to speak with him, to inform him rightly of things concerning
my self and my mind in matters of Religion, before some men of understanding,
that they might hear and discern truly thereof, and so pacify him, and stay
his violent course, and could by no means obtain either the one or the other,
but that he still persisted both at Cree-Church and great Allhallowes for near
half a year together, reviling me by name in most bitter manner, calling me
Viper, Serpent, Heretic, Familist, and many other vile reproachful and
scandalous names, unseemly to be spoken, and shameful to be uttered by a
Minister in a Pulpit, and charging me with many very false and wicked things,
and saying to the people, This is one Etherington a Box-maker, whither he be
dead or alive with God or the devil, I cannot tell, I know him not if I meet
him in my dish, etc. And utterly refusing still to be spoken with, gave out in
his Pulpit, as a flat denial, saying, Must I speak with every Heretic
before I may reprove him openly; nay, it has been told me by them of the
household of Cloe, and I believe it to be true.

Then I being much urged and provoked by reason of some that began to conceive
and say, If things were not so, and that I were not such a one as he had
charged me to be, I would complain. Hereupon, I confess, I did complain by
Petition to Doctor Martin, who was then Chancellor (for so I was advised)
certifying him how matters had passed, and requesting that he would send for
Mr. Denison, and examine the reason of his so strange and unlawful
proceedings, and to stay the same, and appoint that the things of difference in
opinion, or howsoever, might be heard before some Ministers, if he thought fit;
to which he answered, You have brought me here a strange Petition, I know Mr.
Denison to be a very honest man, I know not you, I will not send for him Dic
ecclesia.

Then as thinking it but my duty to seek to the Rulers of the people, whose
office is to defend the innocent, and to rebuke the offenders, and as hoping
still things would be heard, examined, and ended in peace. I did complain to
the Bishop of London to the same effect, who granted my Petition, and sent for
Mr. Denison, who at the time appointed came, bringing with him his friend Mr.
Robrowgh, to assist him; And so the Bishop having questioned some thing about
the matter, and a little blaming him, spoke when to have another time of
hearing, which Mr. Denison presently opposed, saying, I meant to have had him
into the high Commission Court, if he had not prevented me, Dr. Martin being
also there present, and speaking to his purpose, as his special friend,
furthering his motion, the Bishop answered, you may then do so yet; which when
I perceived, and that Mr. D. had such a friend of Dr. Martin, I did with as
much speed as I could Petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, certifying him
also how things had passed, and requesting that he would be pleased to send for
Mr. D. and appoint that the matter might be heard and ended without suite of
Law, if it might be. To which he answered, that Mr. D. had been with him the
day before, and showed him a scrowle of strange things against me, and so
contradictory one to another, as never was known to be in any Heretic
whatsoever, and that he thought it not possible therefore they could be all
true, yet told me that he had Letters missive granted him, but willed me to be
at the Court the next thursday, and he would order that I should clear my
self according to my own conscience upon my oath; which accordingly was done;
whereat Mr. D. murmured, and said, My Lord, I have witnesses that will swear
against him; to which the Bishop answered, Peradventure you may have two or
three evil persons that will swear and cause a man that is innocent to be
condemned, he shall clear himself upon his oath. And so I did according to
the order, give into the Register Office full answers upon oath to all Steven
Denisons Articles, which are to be seen. This being done, and Mr Denison
perceiving that I was to be cleared thereupon, and seeing that matters would
then fall foul with him, and having no way to heal himself, but by wounding
and suppressing me, moved to the Court, vehemently affirming that I was a
Familist, and would forswear and deny all things in public which I held and
did in private, saying I have twenty witnesses that will swear against him.
Whereupon Dr. M. stood up, and spoke so to the furthering of his motion, as
that the Archbishop was turned against me; way was given him, the order of my
clearing upon my oath was crossed, my answers to his articles rejected, and
never might come to the view or hearing of the Court. And so his Witnesses
being all of them either those his associates and devotaries which first set
him on, as aforesaid, or such as he had in his Pulpit (three or four days
before he was to go before the Bishop of London) charged to assist him,
saying, Whosoever has any thing against John Etherington, let him come to my
Chamber to morrow by eight a clock; As ye love the Ministers of God, now stand
for them, for they go about to silence all the good Ministers in the City,
such as by this means, and by his diligent search and inquiry through the
City, partly by fair persuasions, partly by threatenings, had gathered
together to conspire against me; laying also plots to get me into their
company, that so they might find occasion, and get matter whereof to accuse
me; these came readily together with him to the Court, to take their oaths
against me.

Then upon Motion and Petition of complaint, which I again made of Mr.
Denisons unlawful proceedings in his Pulpits, the Court did order that I
should bring in my Articles against him, and I should be heard. Which to the
end things should be the more cleared, I did; but the day that he was to make
his appearance unto them, Doctor Martin with another speech which he then made,
caused my Articles to be rejected, and this order also, as the former, to be
crossed, so that I might not proceed in Court against him, till his suite
against me were ended.

Then after his Witnesses had been examined, I had upon motion a Defense
granted me; but King James then dying, the great plague of pestilence
immediately ensuing, the Court for a year or thereabout ceasing, and I
supposing that he my adversary (as being by this time in conscience rebuked,
had let fall his suite, and I not willing of my self, to stir the matter up
again, partly, because of the great charge, and for that I saw he was, by
reason of his great friends in Court, too strong for me, though I knew my cause
to be better then his) I neglected it, he prevented me, the matter was ordered
to sentence before I knew or thought it was once again called upon; after
which, though in all humbleness, I moved and requested several times for a
defense, I could not have it granted, Doctor Martin his voice, which so greatly
swayeth the Court, as at other times, so now likewise withstood me, and so upon
the last Court day of Michaelmas term 1626. the Depositions of Mr. Denisons
Witnesses were by his Council read, and as their manner is, aggravated against
me to the Court, and I was censured without any defense or permission to be
heard speak for my self.

This has been the beginning, proceeding and prosecution of this business and
cause hitherto, which being first known and considered, will make all things
more plain and clear to be understood. The rest of the matters contained in
the sentence, and the testimonies of the Witnesses, which stand for proof,
with my defense unto them, follow.

The second accusation, as it is in the sentence.
That the said Etherington since the 20 of December aforesaid, has been and is
a man disaffected to the government and discipline of the Church of England now
by Law established, and agrees with the sect of the Familists and other
Sectaries, having said and writ touching their Conventicles and unlawful
meetings, that Caesar may command a place in public, so he forbid none in
private; and further, that he maintains and agrees with the Familists, in
the perfect purity of the soul.

Touching the government and discipline, Rowland Thomson, Thomas Rogers, and
George Dunne, do depose and testify.

The testimony of Thomson.
To the second Article this deponent says, that by reason of some opinions,
that he the said Etherington holds, this deponent conceives him to be a man
disaffected to the government and discipline of the Church of England.

The testimony of Rogers.
That this deponent knows that the articulate Etherington, for all or most
part of the time articulate, has been and is a man disaffected to the present
discipline of the Church of England, in regard this deponent has in the time
articulate heard him the said Etherington maintain some opinions, contrary to
the received judgment of the said Church.

The testimony of George Dunne.
That this deponent well knows that the articulate Etherington for these
twenty years together, has been and is a man disaffected to the government
and discipline of the Church of England, in regard this deponent has often
conversed with him the said Etherington.

These are their words as they stand recorded by the Register.

My Answer and defense is this.
These three Witnesses in these their testimonies, howsoever it may stand with
a good conscience, they laying that aside, have showed themselves very willing
men, as before to the first Article, so here to the second, to witness any
thing against me, though never so falsely.

Thomson says, he conceives and holds it to be so by reason of some
opinions which I hold, but names none.

Rogers says, he knows it to be so by reason of some opinions he has heard
me maintain, but names none.

George Dunne says, he knows it to be so, by reason he has often conversed
with me, etc. yet names nothing that he has heard me say or known me
practice or do in all this his said time of twenty years, tending to that
purpose or any other. As it the Court would trust to their understandings of
the discipline and government, and to their judgments and conceivings of my
opinions, and not hear the opinions, nor a word or practice mentioned, and so
pass sentence; for who can know a man's affections, but by his words or deeds?

First, for Dunne, I will excuse him in this, that he names neither word nor
deed, because the truth is, he never conversed with me in his life, nor I with
him, neither had I ever any kind of dealing with him in my life, except only
that about nineteen or twenty years ago, my wife having sore eyes, he came
(by whose means I know not) and laid something to them, for which I paid him.
So that Dunne could not well name any thing upon the ground of often conversing
with me, yet he is a false witness nevertheless, and a foresworne man every
way to his own knowledge; first in this, That he upon his oath says, he well
knows that which he knows he knows not, and sets down that for his reason
and ground, upon oath also, which he knows is false.

There are other matters wherein George Dunne has upon his oath also testified
falsely, which because they are not taken for proof of any thing contained in
the Sentence, I pass them over until some further occasion.

But for Thomson and Rogers they might have named what the opinions had been,
for they heard me maintain them, they say. It seems they mean by opinions,
those before mentioned against Robrowgh and Denison, which Rogers calls the
received judgment of the said Church, as holding their doctrine to be the
discipline and government of the Church of England; for such a devoted conceit
have they of these two men, and some other of their strain, as if the Church
of England, doctrine, government, discipline, and all matters else thereof did
consist in them; for it is to be noted, that these words, Now by Law
established, which are in the Sentence, are not in any of their testimonies.
But I leave the testimonies of these men to the consideration of the
understanding Reader, to judge how good and sufficient they are, and how
judicially the Court has proceeded against me, to condemn me upon such
evidence.

And as touching the second part of this second Article passed in the Sentence,
That I do agree with the sect of the Familists and other Sectaries, etc.
Rowland Thomson, Thomas Rogers, Henry Robrowgh, do testify.

The testimony of Thomson.
That the said Etherington does agree with some of the Sectaries articulate in
many tenants and opinions, which he this deponent knows, in regard he has
been present when he the said Etherington has strived to maintain the same.

The testimony of Rogers.
That he the said Etherington does agree in some points and tenants with the
Familists articulate, which he has published in this deponents presence.

The testimony of Robrowgh.
That the said Etherington concurreth with the Separatists and Sectaries in
private Assemblies, which this deponent knows by report, and also by his
printed book against Separatists, where he says, Caesar may command a place
in public, so he forbid none in private, Page 82. and he agrees with the
Familists in the perfect purity of the soul after regeneration, as one Iesop
confessed to this deponent to be his and the said Etheringtons opinion.

My answer and defense.
Thomson pretends now to speak upon knowledge, as well as Rogers; their
grounds are both one; The one says he has heard me strive to maintain, the
other to publish tenants and opinions, and both of them, like brethren in
evil, are still agreed to forbear to tell what the tenants and opinions are,
least by naming them they should disable their testimonies to their purpose. No
doubt they are the tenants and opinions before mentioned, which Mr. Denison had
told them in his Pulpits, was a sure mark whereby they should know a Familist,
and so they presumed upon his judgment, and by concealing what the tenants
are, make them serve their turn for this as well as to be against the
government and discipline, how sufficient the testimonies of these two men are,
to prove the things in the Sentence, and how concionably they have dealt, I
refer to the Christian Reader to consider.

My defense against Robrowghs testimony.
To the first concerning private Assemblies, What Mr. R. knows by report, that
he may safely depose and say, So God help him, I refer to the Reader to
consider. But where he says, And also by his printed book against
Separatists, etc. I confess, I wrote such a book, which being allowed, was
published in the year 1610. where in Page 82. these words are, Caesar may
command a place for the public, so he forbid none in private; yet
nevertheless, Mr. Robrowgh has showed himself a very evil minded man in two
respects; first, in that he leaves out the words and matters going before and
following after in the said book, which would have cleared my meaning more
fully, and takes only those words as may most seem to make for his purpose.
And secondly in this, that whereas my words are, Caesar may command a place for
the public, so he forbid none in private; he gives it into the Court upon his
oath, Caesar may command a place in public, etc. leaving out two of my words,
and putting in one of his own in stead of them, to alter the scope and intent
of those few words which he does take, to make them serve his turn against me,
for who knows not, that the leaving out or changing one word for another in a
sentence, does oftentimes alter the intent and scope thereof; as to build a
house in a City, and to build a house for a City, are two differing things;
the King may build a house in the City of London for his own use, but if the
King, say I, build this house for the City of London, all men will understand,
he means for the Cities use: again, the King may command a place in
public, for himself to come and worship God therein; but to command a place
for the public, is for the people also publicly: So whereas I say, Caesar
may command a place for the public, my meaning is, that the King may lawfully
with authority from God, and warrant from his word, command a place and places
for the public worship of God, to all his Subjects, in and throughout all
parts of his Dominions; which if the King may, and that my words do intend and
express so much, (as I think no man that is wise and conscionable will deny)
then all the Kings subjects are bound to obey the King, and come to the
public worship of God in those public places; and as it is for place, so it
is for time, and other such like circumstances, (as in the 83. Page of the said
book against Anabaptists is also set down) always provided (as it must be
understood) that it be the true worship of God that is commanded, and not any
idolatry or heathenish superstition; as is now in the Church of Rome commanded
and practiced: these things being so, then I reason thus, further; If Caesar,
or our King, Law and Authority, may command a place and places, times, etc.
for the public worship of God, that is to say, for the assembling together of
the people of God, to prayer, preaching, reading and hearing of the word of
God, the administration and participation of the Sacraments, praising and
giving thanks unto God for all his benefits, etc. and that all true Christian
Subjects are bound to obey the King, Law, and Authority, and come to the
public worship of God in those public places, times, etc. then no Christian
subject may separate or schism therefrom, nor make any private assemblies,
speak, practice or do any thing in opposition or contradictory thereunto;
Nay, but on the contrary, every Christian subject, young and old, is bound to
be thankful unto God day and night, that has vouchsafed to dispose the hearts
of Kings, Princes and Authority of that Nation whereof he is a member and a
subject, to set their helping hands to build the walls of Jerusalem, to cast
out the abominations of the Heathen, and of Antichrist, and restore the morning
and evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, (as in the former time and in
the days of old) which the Kings, Princes, and Authority of this our Nation
have in some good measure done, to the great benefit of the same, thanks be
unto God therefore. So that taking my words right as they are, Caesar may
command a place for the public, and this will be the true and necessary
consequence of them; and then these words, so he forbid none in private, will
receive of all charitable minded Christians, a more favorable construction,
then to tend to the maintaining of the private assemblies of Familists,
Separatists, or other Sectraies; but only to preserve the liberty that every
Christian has, to worship God, to pray unto him, and do him service, at all
times and in all places, every where, even in our secret chambers with humble
and contrite hearts, lifting up pure hands, as the Scriptures speak, Ioh 4.
23. Mat. 6. 6. 1 These. 5. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 2. 8. and as it is in Psalm. 111. 1.
How false and deceitful therefore Henry Robrowgh has here sworn and dealt, I
refer to the indifferent discreet Reader to consider.

And secondly, in that the charge me to agree with the Familists in the
perfect purity of the soul, after regeneration, and only upon the report of
one Iesop, as himself says: I refer also this to the wise to consider, how
safely he may depose the same of me upon the report of another, whereas for my
part, whatsoever Iesop has said or holds, I never held any such thing, but
do hold the soul of the holiest man living to be impure; and although as Paul
faith of himself, a regenerate Christian does in his mind serve the law of
God, yet nevertheless through the law and strength of his corrupt members, he
even his soul is led captive to the law of sin, and of death, and so is a
captive to sin, but not a servant. Neither did I ever agree with the
Familists, or any other such like blasphemous sect, in any of their tenants and
opinions, but have opposed and disproved them, according to my ability, as in
the aforesaid book against Anabaptists is to be seen, and as some can
testify, so that herein also Mr. Robrowgh is a false witness; how rightly I
have been condemned by the Court for these things upon these testimonies, I
refer to the discreet Christian Reader to consider.

Their third Accusation, as it is in the sentence of the Court, according to
Mr. Denisons fourth Article.
That the said Etherington within the time aforesaid, has also maintained and
published, that the Church of England is no true Church of Christ, and that it
teaches false doctrine.

To the first part, that the Church of England is no true Church of Christ,
Rowland Thomson, Thomas Rogers, and Henry Robrowgh do depose and testify.

The testimony of Thomson.
To the fourth he deposes and says, that he this deponent has within the
time articulate heard the said Etherington maintain or publish some of the
opinions articulate, viz. that the Church of England as it is now by Law
established, is no true Church of Christ.

The testimony of Rogers.
To the fourth Article he deposes and says, that the said Etherington has
within the time articulate, and since the 20 of December 1623. held and
published, in this deponents and his precontest Thomsons presence, that the
Church of England as it is here by Law established, is no true Church of Christ.

The testimony of Robrowgh.
To the fourth Article he deposes, that the articulate Etherington has of
this deponents knowledge, within the time articulate, maintained and published,
that the Church of England as it is here by Law established, is no true Church
of Christ, because he teaches this true Church to consist of the regenerate
only, as in his book against Separatists, Page 15.

My answer and defense.
Thomson and Rogers, they as two confederates keep close together in their
conspiracy against me, for although I neither published nor spoke to or in the
hearing or presence of them, or any other, that the Church of England as it is
now by Law established, is no true church of Christ, nor any thing to such
purpose; yet these two Joyners as well acquainted before hand with Mr. Denisons
Articles, and being with Henry Robrowgh the chief of his counsel in the
inventing and making them, to confirm what they had begun, by a secret
equivocation they depose upon some words which I spoke in answer to their
questions and demands, that I had published, as aforesaid, and because they
will be sure to agree in one tale, they come both together to the office to be
examined, and there Rogers standing by Thomson while he was examining, which is
the reason why the Examiner calls Thomson Rogers precontest, as being
examined immediately before him and in his presence and hearing; which my self
coming to the Office the same time saw; let not the Reader therefore marvel
that they so well agree.

They name no time, place, nor person to be present besides themselves, Rogers
and his precontest, when I should publish this thing, and I was never in
company with these two men alone at any time. Christ says, He that does evil
hates the light, and he that does well comes to the light, etc. wherefore if
these men's consciences had not accused them of their false and evil dealing,
and that they had not feared their evil deeds to be discovered, they would no
doubt have named both time and place, and some of the persons that were present
beside themselves, for by that means their testimonies would have carried a
more fair and honest countenance then now they do, but since the 20 of
December, that must not be omitted, they will not have me pardoned by any
means. I do well remember, that about the time that Mr. Denison first began
his suite in Court against me, after he had a long time before reviled me in
his Pulpits, these two men, Thomson and Rogers, sought to get me into their
company, Rogers being the solicitor or earnest suit or for the same to one
Solomon Seabright, being of his acquaintance and one that knew me, to bring it
to pass, pretending and promising that if they might speak with me, and
should find things to be otherwise then they had conceived, they would inform
Mr. Denison thereof, and cause him to cease his course and proceedings against
me. Whereupon I did consent to speak with them, so that they would appoint the
time and place, for I suspected it to be a plot laid between Mr. Denison and
them, to get matter against me, either to prove a conventicle or otherwise to
entrap me in my words, being forewarned by one that knew some of their secrets,
that such a thing was plotted and intended by them, which accordingly so
proved; So the place being at the said Solomon Seabrights near Algate, I met
them there at the time they appointed, where in the hearing of sundry persons,
they moved many questions unto me, concerning repentance and faith, the Church,
and other things, to which I did answer them according as I did understand and
believe.

As touching the Church, they asked me, what I held the true Church of Christ
to be; To this I answered and told them plainly, that I held the true Church of
Christ to be and consist of the true regenerate servants and people of God,
sanctified in heart by faith in Christ Jesus, lively stones, built upon the
rock Jesus Christ, the chief corner stone, Mat. 16. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5.
according to the words of Christ, and as S. Peter describes it, which St.
Paul calls the body and spouse of Christ, the pillar and ground of truth;
according also as it is contained in the Creed, I believe in the holy Ghost,
the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, etc.

Then they asked me of the outward state of the Church of England, if all in
general were the same true Church of Christ, or of it; to which I answered,
nay, I could not say so; Then if any whole Parish that I knew were, to which I
also answered, nay, I knew no such Parish that I could so conclude of all, God
knows who are his: Then lastly, if I did not hold some private company with
my self to be the same true Church of Christ; to which I answered also and
told them, nay, but that all of all degrees and callings in the whole Kingdom,
whose hearts were sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus, were the true Church of
Christ here of England: and that if I, or they that asked those questions, or
the rest there present, were so sanctified in heart, then were we of the same
true Church of Christ, else not, and that there was never any Church, generally
considered as it was outward and visible to the eye of man, but some, yea many
times the most part, and of the greatest of them in most eminent place in the
Church, as well as of the lowest and meanest, have been unfaithful, ungodly,
unholy, and so, not of the Church, though they were in it: And I told them
plainly, that I held the Church of England as it was by the authority of
Princes and by Law established, to be the best reformed, so generally
considered, this day in the world, and that I did believe God had a special
respect unto it above any one Nation or Kingdom whatsoever; and that he had
many faithful servants, sons, and daughters therein, and much people to
save, for whose sakes the rest do fare well, and are the more happy.

These were my answers to their questions, touching the Church, or to this very
effect, as some that were there present and heard me, as well as they, can
testify. It seems that upon my answer to their question of the outward state
of the Church of England, if all in general were the true Church of Christ, or
of it, because I said, nay I could not say so, therefore they presume to
swear, that I held and published, that the Church of England as it is now by
Law established, is no true Church of Christ, as if I would have some other
outward form established, to make a true Church, or that none could be in the
outward state of the Church, and partake with it in the outward calling of the
ministry, preaching, administering, hearing; receiving, but regenerate persons
only, all which was far from my thought; So that in this also as well as the
former, they are very false witnesses.

And concerning Robrowghs testimony, who deposes that because I say the true
Church does consist of the regenerate, therefore I teach and maintain that the
church of England as it is now by Law established, is not a true Church of
Christ.

My answer is, that if Mr. Robrowgh can, and when he shall prove that the
Church of England as it is now by Law established, is not part of the holy
Catholic Church of Christ, whereof all are Saints, then will I grant his
testimony to be true; in the mean time, he is a false accuser, and one that
does deny the Church of England now by Law established, to be part of the true
holy Catholic Church of Christ, of the Communion of Saints; proving himself
guilty of that whereof he charge me. It would small avayle the Church of
England to have the name of a true Church, and not to be of the holy Catholic
Church, which the Creed and the Scriptures do describe unto us, and require us
to believe and acknowledge for Christ's true Church, his body, his spouse, etc.
for although all be not Saints that are in the Church, as touching the outward
estate and society thereof, yet as touching the true spiritual communion, all
are Saints that are of it, and are one body and one bread, being all made
partakers of that one bread Christ Jesus, and baptized by one Spirit into one
body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. and 12. 12, 13.
and made to drink into one Spirit, as St. Paul declares, according as St.
John testifying against some Antichrists of his time; 1 John 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out that they might
manifest that they were not all of us: and St. Paul again; But Christ the
son over his own house, Heb. 3. 6.
whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the
hope firm unto the end. So that they only which are truly faithful, and hold
fast the confidence, etc. are the true Church of Christ.

If Mr. Robrowgh does or will deny himself to be one of these, I dare then
deny him to be one of Christ true Church, notwithstanding he has the office of
a Curate in the outward state thereof.

And secondly, whereas I stand charged in the sentence to have said, that the
Church of England teaches false doctrine, and upon the testimony of Susan
Price only, a woman greatly devoted to Mr. Denison, and an associate of
Thomson and Rogers; My answer is, she testifies falsely, unless the Church
of England does consist of Mr. Denison, Mr. Robrowgh, and some other of their
corrupt humor, as many such women (and some men also as unwise as they) do
conceive it does, and therefore dare swear that whatsoever is spoken against
them and their doctrine, is spoken against the Church of England.

Their fourth Accusation.
That the said Etherington within the time aforesaid, viz. since the 20th of
December 1623. has maintained and published, that the Sabbath since the
Apostles times was of no force, and that every day is a Sabbath, as well as
that which we call the Lords day or Sunday.

To this first position of the fourth Article, Rowland Thomson, Thomas Rogers,
Suzan Price, Peter Worcester, Heury Robrowgh, do depose and testify.

The testimony of Thomson.
That he this deponent has within the time articulate, heard the said
Etherington maintain or publish, that the Sabbath was of no force since the
Apostles times, and that every day is a Sabbath as much as that which we call
the Lords day or Sunday.

The testimony of Rogers.
He deposes and says, that he the said Etherington has within the time in
this Article mentioned, and since the 20 of December 1623. held and published
that the Sabbath was of no force since the Apostles time, and that every day is
a Sabbath as much as that which we call the Lords day or Sunday.

The testimony of Suzan Price.
That she this deponent does certainly know that the articulate Etherington
within the time articulate, maintained and published, that the Sabbath was of
no force since the Apostles times.

The testimony of Worcester.
That he this deponent has within these eight months last past, before his
examination, heard the said Etherington maintain, that there is no day to be
set apart for outward rest, by virtue of any commandment.

The testimony of Robrough.
That the articulate Etherington has of his deponent^ knowledge within the
time articulate, held, maintained, and published, that the Sabbath is of no
force, and that we are not now bound to keep it, by virtue of the fourth
Commandment.

My answer and defense.
The words of Tomson, Rogers, and Susan Price, which are the words contained in
the Sentence, I never spoke in my life, much less maintained or published as
they depose, nor yet the words of Henry Robrough, but I do hold the Sabbath to
be in force according as I shall hereafter manifest, and that the first day of
the week is to be observed.

And as touching Worcester and his testimony, for him he is a man that I was
never conversant with, only I have been in his company two or three times,
and the last time was as he says, and at the house of one Master Pike in
East-cheape, where he the said Worcester with some other of Master Denisons
favorites, had occasioned me to meet them, under pretense of friendship also,
and of making peace, but being indeed another train to entrap me. This
Worcester with some of his sociates then present, were very importunate with me
to reason with them concerning repentance, and the Sabbath, which I refused to
do, being forewarned of their conspiracy, and that this Worcester with others
of them, had given out threatening words, tending to the taking away of my life,
one saying it is pity that he lives, he deserves to be burned, another, I
will never leave him till I make him fry, and others to the like effect, and
because I held it not a thing fitting to make a controversy of this matter of
the Sabbath, which they most desired to have me speak of with them, neither
did I ever contend with any man about it, until Master Denison had begun to
revile me in his Pulpits, and charging me falsely in many things concerning it,
nor had I then, but that I was drawn to it once through fair pretenses also,
with one Master Cleaver, at which time we seemed to part friends, and not so
disagreeing as there need to be any enmity between us for the difference. So
that I only told Worcester and the other with him, my mind in few words, but
not in way of maintaining as he deposes, for the words, it is like I did say
thus or to this effect, that if the fourth Commandment, as it did concern the
outward bodily rest of the seventh day, be abrogated (as I think all the
Christian Churches in the world do hold it is) then there is no Commandment
in the word of God requiring the same outward bodily rest upon any other day
instead thereof: and this I say still, yet not denying the observation of the
first day of the week, as I shall declare, so that thus far I deny not
Worcesters testimony, though otherwise, and in other matters he is false like
the rest.

But whence these two sworn brethren Thomson and Rogers (whose testimonies:
because they so well agree, are so often the words of the Sentence) Susan Price
and Henry Robrough, have had the words they depose, I cannot tell, neither do
themselves declare, nor mention any time, place, or person to be present, when
I should publish, and maintain them as they speak, and I am sure I never said
to any man living, that the Sabbath was of no force, but do hold that it is in
force, and the Commandment also according to the spiritual intent thereof; I
mean by Sabbath the true and perfect rest of God, which he did rest the
seventh day, having finished all his works, therefore called his rest, as he
says, If they shall enter into my rest.

And that it is here entered into of us, and kept not through the Law, by doing
any kind of work or works therein contained, but through the promise, eventhe
the Gospel of Jesus Christ by believing, as Saint Paul says; For we which
have believed do enter into rest, as h^e said, as I have sworns in my wrath,
if they shall enter into my rest, although (says he) the works were finished
from the foundation of the world, for he spoke in a certain place of the
seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh Day from all his works;
and in this place again, If they shall enter into my rest, Heb. 4. Where the
Apostle declares plainly, that the rest of God, which he is said to rest the
seventh day, and this in David, which the faithful do enter into, is all one
and the same rest, and that it is preached unto us in the Gospel, as it was to
the Israelites in David's time, and in the wilderness; And the reason why they
that fell in the Wilderness entered not in; was their hardness of heart and
unbeleefe, as in the 15. ver. of the 3. chap. and the 2. ver. of the 4. chap.
He declares and says further, That they that are so entered ^^ve ceased from
their own works, as God did from his; that is, from seeking their own
pleasures, and speaking their own words, from all their corrupt carnal and
sinful pleasures and delights of the world, wherein their soul as well as
their body and members thereof had walked; (the whole man being corrupted
through the fall) and which are therefore called their own works and their
own pleasures, and their delight is now in the Lord, and in his holy and
heavenly ways, seeking his face continually, and honoring him, etc. as the
Prophet Esaias says; And they that are so entered here by faith and keep the
Lords holy Sabbath, will the Lord cause to ride upon the high places of the
earth, and will feed them with the heritage of Jacob their father, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Esaias 58.
which heritage of of Jacob is the everlasting Kingdom, the heavenly Country
and City promised which all the holy Fathers looked for and is to be
manifested and fully accomplished, when Christ shall come in his glory, and all
things shall be restored according to the Prophets. And so I hold the Sabbath
spiritual, and eternal to be in force, and that the outward rest of man and
beast commanded the Jews on the seventh day was but a shadow thereof and is
now ceased to Christians; So that as we are (...) bound to Circumcision, nor
other ceremonies of the Law, which is manifest by Acts 15. Gal. 4. and other
places of Scripture, neither are we to the strict observation of any litterall
Sabbaths of years, times, months, or days, as the Jews were by the Law, but
are free as Saint Paul says Let no man judge you in meats or in drinks, or
in respect of an holy day or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath day, which are
a shadow of the things to come, but the body is Christ, Col. 2.
And he said to them of Galatia, who were by false Teachers brought to an
extreme in that kind more then the Law it self, Gal. 4.
(ever intended) Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years, I am
afraid of you, etc. in both which places, the Apostle speaks of the seventh
day Sabbath, and concludes of it as of the rest, In Gal. he begins with it
before the monthly Sabbathes, as besides which before the monthly there is not
another to be rekoned, and in Col^. He ends with it, in reckoning next after
the new Moons or monthly Sabbathes, except which after the monthly there is
not another to be named, and counts it with the rest a shadow of things to
come.

And this, no doubt was the reason why the Apostles and Christian Churches to
this day, have left it with the rest of the signs and shadows of the law, as
holding that Christians are free, as touching their consciences in all such
respects.

If this be true, that the litterall rest of the seventh day commanded in the
Law be a shadow, as by the Apostles words, is most clear and past all
contradiction, then the first day of the week used in the Apostles times, and
ever since in the Christian Churches, for the assembling together of the people
of God to breaking of bread and prayer, and preaching, and hearing the word of
God, for exhortation, spiritual communion, edification and comfort one
another, praising the Lord, etc. Was taken up freely, and is a free
observation, and not by force of any commandment of the Law or of the Gospel.

And this does the Apostle further declare in Romans 14. where he plainly
shows, as he does also in Colo. 2. the in^iferency now under the Gospel of
eating and not eating of meats, and of esteeming and not esteeming one day
above another. So that although Christians be now free in these things, as
touching the conscience, in respect of the Law, and are not bound, yet, they
not only may observe a day to the Lord for the ends before mentioned, and
forbear therein their common worldly affairs, but ought, it so being ordained
and appointed by the state and Church wherein they live, and so far we are
bound by the command of the word of God, in all good and lawful things to
obey; And some day or time is needful, and the more time the bett^r, and he
that makes the most use of the same time to the same ends does the best; and
the first day of the week may very well be the day, rather then any other,
because it was for some reasons, no doubt, taken up, and used for those ends in
the Apostles times, whither because they might be more free therein in respect
of the Jews, then on the Sabbath day, or for what reason else, it is not
written, being not so needful to be known. And so in respect of this
spiritual use and end, it has been and is appointed and employed unto, it
may be called a Sabbath day, though not by force of the commandment.

But whosoever shall lay such a burden upon the consciences of Christian
touching the day, as Master Denison and some others have done, charging the
people upon heavy curses and condemnation to do, and not to do such, and such
kind of things as they prescribe, These things.

Which although you may lawfully leave them undone upon any other day and not
sin, you are bound to do them in this day in pain of condemnation.

And these and those kind of things or actions, which although you may lawfully
do them on any other day and not sin, you are bound not to do any of them
in this day on pain of condemnation, and whosoever does not constionably, so
observe the day cannot be a true Christian; wherewith they have so inthralled
the minds of many people, some of tender consciences zealously affected toward
God, and have brought them to such distraction and unquietness of spirit, by
reason they are not nor can be satisfied in every particular action, what they
are so bound to do, and what not to do upon that day, when to begin and when
to end, that there is more talk and questioning among them, and and more
resorting to Ministers for satisfaction about the same, then about any matter
of religion whatsoever.

This doctrine (I say) is very unsound, and just like unto that which the false
Apostles and Teachers taught and charged them of Antioch and them of Galatia
touching Circumcision and the Sabbath of the Law, which was very erroneous,
even in the time of the Law; and a burden as Saint Peter says, which they nor
their fathers were able to bear, for such doctrine had been taught the Jews
by such Pharisees and false Teachers, a long time before Peter's days, and is
by the Church, in Acts 15. and by Saint Paul in Gal. 4. condemned for false and
very erroneous doctrine, and to be a dangerous step of falling from Christ, for
Saint Paul testifies plainly, that the Gentiles which had not that Law of
Circumcision, and the Sabbaths, etc. might have the truth and effect thereof in
their hearts, and be a Jew inwardly in the spirit though not outwardly in the
flesh, so that there was never such a necessity as those false Teachers taught,
and most part of the Jews conceived, nay, they ought to have known, that
although themselves that had the Law, (to whom especially it was given) were
bound to observe it to the utter-most of their power, yet if they failed in any
part (as all did in many) and so in all parts, they might be saved another way,
through the grace and mercy of God in the Gospel, and that of this there was
always a necessity, and without the same no man could be saved; and that a
Gentile having the same grace, should be saved, though he were ignorant of the
Law; for this is the effect which was signified by those signs and shadows
which are now (as it was a law to the Jews) ceased to Christians.

Unto all this do agree the best approved writers of the Christian Church,
both of the ancient and latter, s^^ce the Apostles times, as Hierome upon Gal.
4. Augustine in his Epistles chapter 19. and in his book Conscientiae Diaeta, and
of the Spirit and letter, chap. 14. and upon these words of Christ, Take up thy
bed and walk, Tract. 17. Tertullian also in his book Adversus Iudae^s, and
others; And of the latter Master Tindall in his answer to Master Moors first
book, page 287. Doctor Barnes in declaration of the cause of his condemnation,
page 106. Master Faith in his declaration of Baptism, page 96. Master Calvin
and others, and as it is contained in the Harmony of consessions of the
Reformed Churches, page 473. and page 499. besides sundry writers of this
present age; So that in this I am not singular, though I differ from Master
Denison.

Their fifth accusation.
That the Books of Esdras are and ought to be esteemed part of the Canonical
Scripture.
They that testify to this are Rowland Tomson and Susan Price, their
testimonies are both according to the words of the Sentence.

My Answer and desence.
Their testimonies to this also, as they have given it into the Court are
false, for I never said that the two last Books of Esdras (which it seems
they mean) are or ought to be held canonical, or part of the canonical
Scripture, But this I say, and do believe, that Esdras was a holy Prophet and
true servant of God, and that those his two last Books are as well as the
rest, holy and true, as sundry Divines have esteemed him, and written of them,
and one Book now public, Printed first in Queen Elizabeth's days, and
presented to the Lord Robert Devoreux Earl of Essex, upon the 11. chap, of the
last Book of Esdras, wherein matters of great moment, are manifested worthy, I
dare say, to be regarded of every true Christian that desires understanding.

And I dare say further, that they have done and do very wickedly which rail
against him, calling and counting him a counterfeit, a liar, a blasphemer, as
some have done, it had been far more wisdom for them to have left him in
these his last Books, and suspended their judgments until time, the tryer
and discoverer of truth from falsehood, should manifest things more clearly,
that so upon clear proof of experience, they might have judged rightly of
that, which through want of understanding, they could see before.

Their sixth accusation as it is in the Sentence.
That the said John Etherington within the time aforesaid, has kept private
Conventicles or exercises of Religion by the Laws of the Realm prohibited,
and taken upon him in such Conventicles to be the chief speaker or expound^r
of the Scripture, and has many adherents disciples and followers of his
doctrine, and gives many oppositions contrary to the received opinions taught
in the Church of England, saying, that outward ordination of a Minister does
snot make a true Minister, And has uses many reproachful speeches, to and of
the Ministers of the Church of England, And by this means has seduced and
drawn many from th Church of England to be Scismatiques and separatists, and
caused them, or some of them to forbear to participate with us in the
celebrating of Devine service and Sacraments.

They that testify to this are Rowland Tomson, Thomas Rogers, Christopher
N^cholson, Peter Worcester, Susan Price, Henry Robrough, John Okey, George
Dunne.

Here like pursuers of blood, they cry out together with open mouth, as if they
meant now at last to swallow me up quite and clean, this being the maine toil
which they (from the beginning) had laid, whereby above all, they made sure
account to take me.

Their depositions to this sixth Accusation are not only many, but so long and
tedious, that if I should set them all down, with answers to every particular
thing in them, it would require more time and space then all that is already
past, and would weary any sober mind to read them over, I will therefore give
my answer and defense to that which is contained in the words of the Sentence,
as being the maine and sum of all, as also to the chief of their
depositions, and leave the rest until some further occasion shall serve.

My Answer and Defense.
To the first, concerning private Conventicles and exercises of Religion by the
Laws of this Realm prohibited, my answer is. It is a false accusation, I
never kept any such, nor have done otherwise then I have acknowledged in my
Defense to their first Article, as one Christian neighbor or friend, may and
ought to do to and with another, which I am out of all doubt, the laws of
this Realm do not forbid, neither I hope ever will.

And secondly, whereas they say that I take upon me to be a chief speaker or
expounder of the Scriptures, and to have many adherents, disciples and
followers, etc. My answer is, They charge me in this also very falsely, I am so
far from taking upon me such things as that I do reject, the very thought
thereof in my self, especially, and have opposed and reproved such as have so
done and been so affected, as some can witness, although I confess I have
been free, and always ready to speak to my neighbor and friend, and
children, etc. whatsoever I have known and understood of the word, and ways
of God, as I have been also to hear and recite, and so I hope I shall
continue to do, as time and occasion shall serve, so long as I live.

Thirdly, in that they charge me to give many expositions contrary to the
received opinions taught in the Church of England.

The chief besides those before mentioned of Repentance, etc. (which I
confess are contrary to M^ster Denisons and Robroughs doctrine) being (as it
seems) this contained in the Sentence, That outward Ordination of a Minister,
does not make a true Minister, Page 70 and 71.
Deposed by Henry Robiough from the foresaid book against Anabaptists. To
which I answer and confess, that the words are in the place of the book, and
I am not afraid to justify them to be truth agreeing with the Scriptures, and
with the Doctrine of the Church of England, as I meant them, I do not say that
out ward Ordination of a Minister does not make a lawful Minister outwardly,
nay, I acknowledge it does. So as that he may lawfully Minister, and people
may lawfully receive the word and Sacraments with him, according to the 26. and
36. Articles of the Church of England, and as it was in the Apostles times, and
in the Church of the Jews, with Christ's approbation. But this, I say, that
outward Ordination does not make a true and faithful Minister inwardly, in
Gods accounts he may be a deceiver, a false Prophet, an Antichrist,
notwithstanding which they that are true in Gods account, called and sanctified
of him by a more special, heavenly, inward calling may not, for they are built
upon the Rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. Otherwise,
if outward Ordination of a Minister did make a true Minister inwardly in Gods
account, then all they of the Church of Rome must needs be true Ministers, for
they have outward Ordination, as they have also outward Baptism, and such as
we do not hold needful to be cast off, (if any come out from them) and
receive another outward Ordination and Baptism before they may administer, or
be received for true Ministers or true Christians, (as the Anabaptists opinions
is, So that of necessity there must be some more excellent thing or things
besides outward Ordination and outward Baptism to make a true Minister and a
true Christian in Gods account.

Neither were the words spoken or given in a private Conventicle to adherents
or disciples of mine, as my doctrine to them, as my answers seem to depose, or
at least as the Register set it down and is in the Sentence, But they were
written in defense of the calling of the Ministers of the Church of England,
and of the Sacrament of Baptism here administered against the Separatists and
Anabaptists, who denied the same, and was published in print with license of
the Bishop of London. being first viewed over by himself and by his
appointment by Master Crashaw, then Minister of White-Chappell, who did also
approve of the same, and suscribe to them, which is well known to be true.

And this deponent Henry Robrough charge me further, saying, That he knows
the Articulate Etherington does teach and maintain opinions which do derogate
from the Jurisdiction of Bishops, because he interprets that place of
Scripture, Math 18. Tell the Church to be understood of the little ones borne
of God, as in his book against Separatists, page 74.

To which I answer, That if Master Robrough can, and when he shall infallibly
prove as he does here in effect swear, that Bishops are not not can be of the
little ones, borne of God, spoken of in Mat. 18. then will I grant his
deposition to be true, in the mean time he proves himself a false accuser,
and one that denies Bishops to be of the holy Catholic Church of Christ,
which I do not. For although it be true that the little ones borne of God, the
lively stones built on the head cornerstone Jesus Christ, be the true Church
of Christ, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, and to which
Christ has given the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, as in Mat. 16. and Matt.
18. and 1 Pet. 2. and other Scriptures is evident. And that the places and
Jurisdictions of Bishops be now great, and great and high places be dangerous
and slippery places, as the Scriptures speak, and experience (lamentable) has
a long time and often proved, yet notwithding, I undoubtedly believe, that
Bishops have been, or may, and shall be found to be of the little ones borne of
God, and so of Christ true Church, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevayle, etc. When many a one of as low a place in the Church as Master
Robrough shall come short of being of that number. For I know that he that is
greatest may be as the least, and he that is chief, as him that serves,
according to the word and commandment of Christ, And it greatly concerns
every such one so to be, and to bear with his weak Christian brother, and not
to constrain him with any kind of violence, either in words or deeds, to do
things against his conscience, which he is not, nor can yet be persuaded of,
though otherwise lawful, because whatsoever is not of faith is sin. That so
ruling in wisdom, and judging always righteous judgment, instructing with
truth in the spirit of meekness and love, showing mercy with good works of
charity, he may receive double honor of his Christian brethren, and so
continuing, be found one of those of whom Christ says, Blessed is that
Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. But otherwise, if
any one so entrusted in place of authority, shall begin to smite his fellows,
to eat and drink with the drunken, etc. the same servants Lord will come in a
day that he is not aware of, etc. and will hew him in pieces, and give him his
portion with hyporites.

And John Okey, the man that vowed he would not leave me till he made me fry,
to this of the fourth Article he deposes saying,

That he knows that the said Etherington held, that he was as Elias, left
alone, and that he knew none to be of the visible Church of God but himself.

These are Okeys words as they stand in the deposition, which in the Brief
that was read to the Court, are altered and set down thus.

That within the time articulate the said Etherington, has affirmed, that he
was as Elyas, left alone, and that he knew none of the visible Church of God
but himself.

And to this deposition of Okeys is also added another of Henry Robroughs, his
words as they stand in the brief which was read to the Court are these.

That the Author of the Epistle to the Church of Rome viz. John Etherington
affirms, that he knows no man in the flesh that holds with him, That the
said Etherington is the Author of the book entitled The Epistle to the Church
of Rome. look page 9.

My Answer and Defense.
First, for the words of Okey, they are a very false accusation in both places.
I never held, neither affirmed, nor thought any such thing of my self, but do
hold it a vile and wicked thing for any man so to think, much more to affirm
to himself or of any other. How Okey knows that I held this of my self,
which he deposes in the first place, or who heard me affirm so of my self,
in the second place he mentions not. And for him, he is a man that I never
had any acquaintance or dealing with, neither have I been in his company, to
my knowledge, one half hour together in my life, nor have spoken two words
with him these twenty years at least, but only, about three or four years
ago, I having heard that he had threatened me, spoke to him at a Booksellers
stall in Cheape-side, who heard what I said unto him.

And secondly, for Robroughs testimony, as touching an Epistleto the Church of
Rome, I confess I have seen and read such a Book, which was published in the
year 1588. when I was not eighteen years of age, and therefore far unable
to write such a book, as I am still, I confess; So that I could not possible
be the Author thereof.

And whereas Robrough directs to the ninth page of the said book for proof
of his deposition, where the Author having described to the Church of Rome the
true Church of God and her true children, says himself, being (as it seems)
then in Rome. And yet thou say, let me see her, Behold be that writes
testifies before the Throne of God and all his holy Angels, that he knows
no one this day after the flesh, that takes part with him; what then shall I
say, I am left alone? God forbid, for I see and hear with the ears and eyes
of my soul, the groans, the chains and tears of seven thousand, whose
obedience is greater then mine, and of which number I am the least and as a
poor and miserable, and borne out of time, am not worthy to be one of them,
and this is she who once Balam walks in thy streets, and all the earth was
filled with her beauty, etc. And a little before in the same page of the book
he says, Whose modest countenance, whose chaste and comely steps walk in our
streets, etc. meaning here in England, himself being an English man.

So that Henry Robrough does here also declare himself to be a very evil
minded man in several respects. First, in that he alters the Authors words,
where he says, That he knows no one this day after the flesh that takes
part with him, and sets it down, that he knows no man in the flesh that
holds with him, as if the Author meant and affirmed, that there was no man
living of his opinion, so altering not only his words, but his very intent and
meaning to another purpose, for so it is set down in the Brief that was read
to the Court, that I affirmed that there was no man of my opinion but my self.

Secondly, in that he leaves the words going before and coming after, which
do plainly show, that he speaks not of his opinion, but of his sorrow and
tears of repentance, and therefore says, that he saw and heard with the
ears and eyes of his soul, the groans, the chains, and tears of seven
thousand, whose obedience was greater then his, and judges himself not worthy
to be one of them, so that although at that instant he knew no one after the
flesh, yet he saw thousands after the spirit with the eyes of his mind, whom
he prefers before himself.

And thirdly, in that the said Robrough deposes and would prove by the said
page of the said book, that I am the Author thereof, that so by making
himself another false witness with Okey, he might accomplish Okeys vow
against me, that he would never leave me till he made me fry; For Okey
deposes as it seems from the same page of the said book, (judging also me to
be the Author) that I affirmed that I was as Elyas left alone. Whereupon the
voice of one Bishop in the passing sentence against me, was that I should go
the same way to heaven that Elyas went, through fire, though he thought (he
said I should never come there as Elias did) whereas the Author does not say
he was as Elyas left alone, but what then shall I say, I am left alone? God
forbid, which is the clean contrary; and therefore these two evil men (as
before with the rest of their fellows) so here from the fountain and evil
treasure of their hearts, they have brought forth their evil and bitter fruit,
which any judicious Christian may perceive.

And whereas I am charged to have used many reproachful speeches of the
Ministers of the Church of England, which though they be not set down in the
Sentence, yet they are in their testimonies, the speeches are these, that there
is a generation of Pharisees among the Ministers of the Church of England.

They that testify to this, are Peter Worcester and Susan Price, and the
Ministers that I should use these speeches of, Susan Price names Master
Denison, and Master Robrough, for the principal, and Worcester another whom I
will not here name.

My Answer and Defense.
I would it were not true, that there is a generation of Pharisees among the
Ministers, as well as among the people, and although it be not an usual thing
with me so to speak of any Minister by name, yet I might well say it of these
two, which this woman names for principal, and do them no wrong at all, and
no doubt they have more fellows, else were the Church of England the rarest
Church that ever was in the world.

And lastly, whereas they charge me that I have by this means drawn many from
the Church of England to be Schismatics, and Separatists, and caused them or
some of them, to forbear to participate with us, etc.

My Answer and Defense is.
This is a very false accusation, not withstanding their mouths be all open to
witness it.

First, for my self it is well known in all places where I have lived, what
my behavior has been, For so it is, that since the beginning of the year
1588. now above these forty years, I have lived in or nere unto the City of
London, and until now, that Master Denison and his Sociats had thus prosecuted
against me. I was never presented, nor once complained of, for any neglect or
ill carriage toward the Church of Englands either in one respect or other; and
that I have frequented the public Assemblies and Sacraments, for near twenty
years last past before my imprisonment, I have sufficient Certificate and
testimony, for proof of the same, which I had ready to show to the Court, if
my defense had been admitted; and I never was in any private Assembly in my
life, where I have either received the Sacrament my self, nor seen it done by
others; So that for mine own part, I am neither Schismaticke nor Separatist.
And for others, I know there is not a man living that can truly say, much
less depose, that I have drawn, or caused any one to Schism or Separation
from the Church of England, not to refuse to participate, either in Prayers,
Preaching, or Sacraments, nay, I am sure, that neither Master Denison, nor all
the enemies else I have in the world, are able to bring forth one.

But on the Contrary there be sundry can witness that I have been a means of
the withdrawing and dissuading some, from Schism, Separation, Anabaptisme,
Familisme, and other corrupt opinions and unlawful practices, so that their
testimonies to these things also, are all likewise false.

This has been the passage and proceeding of this business and cause against
me, these be the things contained in the sentence, and these be the testimonies
that are for proof of them, for which, and whereupon I was censured by the
high Commission Court on the last day of November 1626. not having any defense,
nor being heard what I could say for my self.

The sentence or judgment of the Court is this, I was fined five hundred
pounds to the King, to pay cost of suit, I was committed to the new prison
there to remain during the pleasure of the Court, and enjoined to make a
public recantation in such words as should be set down by the Court.

And although Master Denison had prevailed thus far, and that I was laid up
in prison, yet was he not herewith satisfied, but in the beginning of Hillary
term next following, he moved and requested to the Archbishop and the Court,
that he might preach at Paul's cross the last Sunday in the said Term, and
that I should be brought to stand there before him during his Sermon, which
his request as unreasonable and unnatural as it was, (by Sir Henry Martins
means) was soon granted him. And I was by a Pursuivant and a keeper, the same
day, brought to stand there before him, in the view of the people, and being
come to the place, they having a Paper containing the chief things of the
sentence, Written with large Letters, which I taking in my hand, protested
against unto the people, as falsely charged upon me, and falsely, by false
witnesses, deposed against me. But they, the Pursuivant and keeper laying hold
of my arms, took the Paper from me, and pinned it on my breast, and so held me
till I entreated them to let my arms loose, and promised that I would not
remove it, that so he my adversary and prosecutor might make open show of me
the person whom he had so long hunted for, and having me now under his claws,
might prey on me at his pleasure, and make known to all men, that what he had
done before in his Pulpits, without and against all Law and Christianity, he
could do now boldly with authority. And how maliciously, contemptuously, and
falsely, he there spoke and dealt, (reviling me by the names of) this seducer,
this Woolfe John Etherington, that stands here before you, this Varlet,
Heretic, Faruilist, with sundry other vile, false, and evil speeches which
he there uttered of me, many that then heard him can witness.

And so, I having stood there before him about the space of three hours, he
took forth a Paper wherein the words for my recantation (which the Court had
ordered) were Written, and began to read them, saying; Whereas I John
Etherington stand by the depositions of sundry witneses judicially convicted
before the Kings Majesty's Commissioners appointed for causes Ecclesiastical,
for that since the 20 of December 1623, I have maintained etc. (The words
following being all the matters contained in the sentence which they would have
had me to acknowledge as justly proved and so condemn my self, and justify
all their proceedings.) So he having read a part twice over, called upon me
twice to say after him, which I refused to do, knowing my self to be clear,
as I have before declared, only I answered and testified to the people, that
the witnesses were false witnesses, and their testimonies false, and that he
had delivered many lies and false things of me, and so I was taken away from
the Cross to the prison again.

And yet, further, for after all this, he got license to publish a Book of
that Sermon in Print, partly refined of some of the palpable untruths, and
bitter reviling speeches he then uttered, and partly filled with more malice
and falsehood, by which, in the most disgracefullest manner, as (I think) ever
was known. He has devised to defame me, my name, and posterity for ever, if
it be possible for the spirit of wickedness by evil inventions and lies to
do it.

And except Christ had foretold, that men should not only revile and persecute
his servants, but that they would falsely say all manner of evil against them
for his name sake, all manner of evil, nothing excepted, that the evil heart
of man can invent, I should never have believed that there had been or would
be such manner of evil things invented, spoken, and practiced, published, and
believed, against any one, as has been, all fasly (God knows) against me,
the most unworthy to be so blessed, and to have such cause of rejoicing, as
Christ testifies and promises to such, though for the present as touching the
body and outward name and estate: I with my wife and children do suffer and
undergo distresses, scandals, defamations, and reproaches of the world.

In all which, how unchristian-like, and unnaturally I have been dealt withal,
by this Steven Denison, how evil, false, and dishonest his witnesses have
manifested themselves to be in their practices and depositions, And how rightly
and upon what just grounds the Court has proceeded, judged, imprisoned,
appointed, and given way for all these things to pass and be done against me,
I refer to the judicious understanding Christian Reader, of what estate or
calling soever, to weigh and consider.

I do confess, that after Master Denison had done his pleasure against me at
the Cross, I having complained of the great wrong I had sustained by him and
his witnesses, first by a letter that I wrote to the Bishop, then of Durham,
now of Winchester; whom I made bold to acquaint with the matter, by reason I
had been with him some few days before this unexpected sentence was passed
against me, to speak with him about the conveyance of water to his house of
Akeland in the County of Durham, and was by his apoyntment to come to him
again to speak further of the same; but being now prevented by imprisonment,
I wrote, giving him to understand the cause thereof, (for he was not at the
Court when I was cenred. And requesting his favorable help to relieve me, who
hereupon with the Bishop of Rochester took the matter into their
consideration, and began to commiserate my case, so that when my Petitions of
complaint came to the Court, they were willing to have them read, and moved for
me to the Archbishop that things should be yet further examined according to
my request. Whereupon the matter was referred unto them, and I acknowledge they
took pains therein, and were very willing to relieve me, perceiving that I was
wronged, and as they found the falsehood of the accusations, and of the
depositions of the witnesses caused the Register to write them down. But
Denison my adversary, accuser, and prosecuter, being there present at my elbow,
when things were now examining, and knowing that my clearing would discover his
unjust and evil dealing, moved the Bishops with another point, not in the
sentence, concerning Baptism, which I could not deny; but indeavored to
maintain for a truth, and they much apposed me in, and alleged the words of
the Book of Common prayer, that God had sanctified the flood Jordan and all
other waters, to the mystical washing away of sin, and said unto me, as thou
do convey water in thy Pipes, so is grace conveyed in the act of Baptism,
and so it was by Circumcision etc. And Doctor Cozens he being by, withstood me
also in that I said, and affirmed withal, as touching the Lords Supper, that
the very flesh of Christ was eaten with our teeth, which I could not but say
was gross Popery, so upon these occasions the Bishops displeasures were
kindled against me, things were left without any further examining, and I was
sent again to prison wherewith straighter usage then I had before, I have now
endured above these twenty months, and he my accuser was now further allowed to
publish what he listed against me, not only in Print, but in his Pulpits also,
as he still does, his Book he presents to the King, and made suite as I
here, to have me put to death, for it was my blood he thirsted after, as his
Sermons and Books do prove, the cause you have seen related.

Otherwise if this point of Baptism, which he (as it seems) knew, would
moove the Bishops against me, had not been by him forced unto them, I had no
doubt been cleared by them. Therefore, because Inow suffer for it as well as
for any things else, I will declare my mind therein more fully.

The point or tenent is this: That outward Baptism does neither confer nor
confirm grace to the heart of any man no more than Circumcision did; in the
aforesaid book against Anabaptists, page 61. Which I do acknowledge and
justify to be true, in defense of the Baptism and doctrine of the Church of
England against Anabaptists, Arminians and Papists; against Anabaptists who
held that all such as they Baptized with outward Baptism, were thereby
confirmed to be true Christians, inwardly in the sight of God; against
Arminians and Papists, who hold that outward Baptism does confer grace to
the heart, and makes a Christian inwardly; From which doctrine of each,
falling away after regeneration from the estate of salvation to everlasting
condemnation, does necessarily follow, free will; and other absurd and unsound
points of doctrine, which they likewise hold and teach; contrary to the
doctrine of the Church of England, (which are also disproved in the same Book
against Anabaptists; the Book being viewed over by the Bishop of London, and by
himself allowed as is aforesaid; I do acknowledge as I also believe, that
outward Baptism is a visible sign or outward signification of the new birth
from above, and of that Baptism wherein we are said to be buried with Christ
and risen with him, and to put him on, and which saves; and that it does
signify and set forth the same unto us; and I do believe also that it is a
seal or token of the Covenant which God has made with the faithful and their
seed, as Circumcision in the flesh was to faithful Abraham and his seed, as in
Genesis 17. 7. 8. 11. and Romans 4. 11. Not all that came of Abraham after the
flesh, nor all that were circumcised or that are now Baptized in the flesh, but
(...) God said to Abraham, In Isaac shall thy seed be called (that is, as Saint
Paul says) they which are the Children of the flesh, these are not the
Children of God, but the Children of the promise are counted for the Seed, Romans
9. 78. they that are Circumcised in heart, and are of the same faith, As Romans
4. 16. for that is the sure seak of the covenant.

And on our parts we do thereby give our names to Christ and Covenant with
God to be his people, and to serve him; and so it gives us the name and state
of a Christian outwardly, as circumcision on the flesh did the name and state
of a Jew outwardly; It does no more give or confer grace to the heart to make
a Christian inwardly, then circumcision in the flesh did to make a Jew or a
Christian inwardly; for, to be a Jew inwardly, and to be a Christian inwardly
is all one in truth; as also to be circumcised in heart, and to be baptized
in heart is all one in truth, as Saint Paul declares; Coloss. 2. 11. 12. and
so it follows, that Circumcision in the flesh, and Baptism in the flesh are
both one in signification and operation.

Wherefore if these things be so, and that he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly; nor that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, not
in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, as Paul says, then,

Neither Circumcision in the flesh nor Baptism in the flesh does give or
confer or work grace in the heart, to make a Jew or a Christian inwardly;
neither are they or either of them any part of the new birth, from above, or of
that Baptism wherein we are said to put on Christ, and to be buried with
him, and which saves, as Saint Peter also confirms saying; The like figure
whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us; not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 3. 21.

Otherwise if either Circumcision or Baptism on the flesh did confer grace
to the heart, then all are thereby set in the state of salvation; and so the
error of falling away, which the Anabaptists, Arminians and Papists hold, will
necessarily follow; because it is evident that all are not saved, that have
been circumcised or baptized in the flesh; or, if either of them were a part
of regeneration, then no one could be saved without the one or the other,
because every part of regeneration is of necessity to salvation.

But it is certain, that many are saved which were never circumcised nor
baptized in the flesh, as (besides all those faithful that lived before either
Circumcision or Baptism on the flesh was instituted) all the holy women of the
Jews; That every part of regeneration is of necessity to salvation the Lord
Jesus has irrevocably concluded saying; Except a man be borne of Water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; John 3. both the parts of
this new birth are of necessity to salvation.

These words, except a man be borne, do stand as firm for the first part (of
Water) as for the second part, of the Spirit.

And under the name man, every child of man, born of flesh young and old, male
and female, are comprehended, so that whosoever dies without the first part of
this birth, the Baptism of water here meant, shall as certainly be excluded
from entering into the Kingdom of God, as he that dies without the second
part, the Baptism of the spirit; That the first part of this birth from above
is something called in Scripture by the name of Baptism, besides that which is
called the Baptism of the holy Ghost, is out of question (I think) to all.
Outward baptism it cannot be, for the reasons before mentioned, because one
may be saved that is never baptized therewith, as has been proved; Then without
all doubt it must be some special necessary principle of Christ called in
Scripture by the name of Baptism, and signified also by outward Baptism,
because it is laid down in the first place as a necessary part of the new
birth, and first plantation of a Christian.

And there is no principle of Christ so special and necessary called by the
name of Baptism, and signified by outward Baptism, that is required to the
first plantation of a Christian (besides the Baptism of the Holy Ghost) but
only repentance; That repentance is a special principle of Christ is evident
by Mark 1. 1. 2. 3. 4 Luke 24. 47. Act. 20. 21. Heb. 6. 1. That it is so
necessary is also evident by Christ's own testimony in Luke 13. where he
urges it with the same words of necessity saying, Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish; Verse 3. That it is called by the name of Baptism,
and signified by outward Baptism, is manifest by Mat. 3. 11. Mar. 1. 1. 2. 3.
4. Luke. 3. 3 Act. 10. 37. Act. 13. 24. Act. 19. 4. And that it is required in
the first place to the first plantation of a Christian is also manifest by
sundry Scriptures where the Holy Ghost says, Repent and believe the Gospel,
Repent that your sins may be blotted out; Repent and be Baptized every one of
you, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins; and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Mar. 1. 15. Act. 3. 19. Act. 2. 38.

Therefore the first part of regeneration is the Baptism of repentance, even
the same which John the Baptist a special Minister and pattern thereof
preached in the power and spirit of Elias, wherewith he made ready a people
prepared for the Lord, as it was prophesyed of him Esaias 43. Mat. 4. 8.
And is a turning and dissolving of the heart, which naturally through sin, is
hard and stony, to water as it were, to flesh, as the Scriptures speak, even
to weeping and mourning and humble confession of sins unto God, as Christ
himself expresses it in a Parable saying: We have lamented unto you, Mat.
11. 17.
and ye have not wept, and is caused by the special power and working of the
Holy Ghost, and is of the Gospel, and not of the Law.

The second part of this birth from above is that Baptism of Christ which John
the Baptist also spoke of to his disciples, whom he had prepared by the
Baptism of repentance, saying, Mat. 3. 11. 12.
I indeed Baptize you, with Water to repentance; but he that comes after me
is mightier then I, he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, as
if he had said, I indeed through the power and Spirit of God preaching unto
you repentance, have prepared you ready for the Lord. I have brought you into
the travel of the birth, to weep and mourn for your finnes, the first laver
of regeneration. But Christ which comes after me, he is mightier then I, he by
a more excellent gift of the Spirit (as it were with fire) will purge and
sanctify your hearts by faith and so justify you from all your finnes, he
will deliver you that labor and are heavy laden and accomplish in you the new
birth, comfort you that mourn, bind up your broken hearts, and speak peace to
your souls: For although repentance be a part of the Gospel in a general
confideration, the first principle, and of the purchase of Christ, as it is
manifest by Luke 24. 47. 48. Act. 20. 20. 21. Heb. 6. 1. etc. yet the Word
preaching peace by Jesus Christ the glad tidings of remission of sins to the
repentant is the Gospel, and so called in a special distinct manner from
repentance, and the preaching and the enjoyment thereof by faith is a more
excellent thing then the ministry and enjoyment of repentance. And in this
regard he that is the least messenger of the latter, is greater then he that
is the greatest messenger of the first. as Christ himself testifies, Matthew.
11. 11.

This is it which the Prophet Esaias prophesied of before concerning Christ,
saying, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, Esaias 61. 1. 2. ^.
and he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor and to bind up
the broken hearted etc. he says not to all or every one in the world, but the
poor, the broken in heart only. etc.

This is that word preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is said to begin to be
preached after the Baptism of repentance which John peached, Act. 10. 37.
Not but that it was preached before this time even in all ages from the
beginning, Act. 13. 23. 24.
but because no one did receive it or had it so preached unto him in such a
special peculiar manner, but such a one as was first prepared by repentance,
therefore it is said to begin to be preached after.

And because it was now to be done in a more plentiful and larger manner then
ever it was before. Therefore was John sent before the face of the Lord in the
power and spirit of Elias to prepare his way before him.

This is it which Christ sent John word of saying, Go tell John, Mat. 11. 5.
The blind do see, the lame do walk, Luke 7. 22.
and the poor have the Gospel preached unto them, as much as to say, the
humble repentant sinners, the poor and contrite in heart, they have the glad
tidings of peace and remission of sins preached unto them, and ministered unto
their souls according to the prophecy of Esaias, and they receive the same, or
believed it with joy and peace in their heats, for this preaching implies such
a believing or receiving. And so does Saint Paul interpret the words of John
concerning this Baptism of Christ in Act. 19. where he says John verily
Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that they
should believe in him which should come after him, that is in Christ Jesus,
John's words being, He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. So
that, as, to be Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, is to repent, to
weep and mourn for our sins, washing them as it were in this first laver:
So, to be Baptixed with the Holy Ghost and with fire, is to believe in Christ,
to be justified and purged from our sins by faith in him.

These are the true parts of regeneration, the special and most necessary
principles of Christ, the foundation, as Saint Paul calls them the brief or
sum of the Gospel, Heb. 6.
as Christ declares. Luke 24. 47. 48.
This did Christ Preach at the first, saying Repent and believe the Gospel,
this did the Apostles Preach after him as he commanded them, Mar. 1. 15.
Act. 2. 38 Act. (...) and Act. Act. 2. 38.
20. 20. 21. Where Saint Paul says, I kept ^^ching back that was
profitables, Act. 3. 19.
but taught and testified both to the Jews and also to the Greeks repentance
toward God. Act. 20.
and says in our Lord Jesus Christ. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
This did Moses and the Prophets also, before Christ came in the flesh, Preach
and require of the people, as the most necessary things to be attained if they
would be saved.

This Abel, Hen cb, Noah, and all the blessed of their times attained unto, and
had it wrought in them from above. Esaias 57. 14. 15.
And Abraham also before circumcision in the flesh, was required. This all the
holy Patriarchs, Prophets and righteous men and women of the Jews had. Esaias
66. 1. 2.
And that woman which is so specially remembered unto us in the Gospel, Iere.
4. 4.
whose Baptism of repentance is so truly manifested by her plentiful tears
wherewith she washed Christ's feet. Hose. 10. 12.
And her Baptism of the holy Ghost and justification by faith from her sins,
Joel 2. 12. 13.
by her true and much love to Christ expressed in her washing and kissing his
feet, Psalm. 51. 16. 17.
and anointing them with oil. Psalm. 95. 7. 8. 11. etc.
For every one that is borne from above, of water and of the Spirit, is
inwardly of the same heavenly nature all the days of his life after, whose
fruit does always in his due times and seasons, according to his measure,
(like the tree planted by the river side) show forth the fame.

This all the elect of God that ever were, now are or hereafter shall be, have
had, have and must have, yea the youngest child dying in the birth or the womb,
if not in outward expression, yet inwardly in the true nature thereof, for no
one child of man begotten of flesh can be saved, except he be begotten from
above, of water and of the Spirit, and so changed or renewed from the polluted
and inthralled estate of nature, which we all had and received originally in
the very conception, into the estate of grace and love with God in Christ.

And God may work this change, this new birth, or rebegetting, in the womb if
it pleases him, as he did in John the Baptist, or at the time of outward
baptism, if he so please, or before it, as he did in Abraham before
circumcision in the flesh, and as in the Apostles times he did to some, or
after it, as he had done formerly after circumcision and now most usually does,
since all are so generally baptized in their young estate. For we may not limit
God, neither has he tied himself to any time or estate of nature in us, nor
to any one outward action performed by man unto us, although he has ordained
sundry excellent, holy out ward means whereby he does direct and lead us, (as
it were by the hand) to the things that are spiritual and indeed necessary,
which we are bound to embrace with much thankfulness to God, and to use with
reverence, and not to despise the least of them, nor in any part wilfully
neglect them, in pain of Gods high displeasure.

But the death and resurrection of Christ, the sacrifice of his body and blood,
the value, virtue, price, and purchase thereof, he has tied himself unto, so
as that without it, and some powerful administration the same to the soul of
man, there is no salvation, as Christ pronounces saying, Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.
53.

The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, have both respect unto this.
Baptism to the new birth, wherein wear set in the estate of life thereby; the
Lord: Supper to the continual Commmunion which every one that is once made
alive by it, has therein to eternal life, and so the flesh of Christ Is meat
indeed, and his blod is drink indeed, to them, according to the word of
Christ, John 6. 54. 55.

Not as if any man did or could eat the very flesh or drink his blood
carnally, as Doctor Cosins affirmed; not that the bread of the Sacrament or the
wine is turned into the flesh or blood of Christ, either before we receive
them, or after, and so conveied into us as some would make us beleev; nor any
other kind of way is the flesh or blood of Christ conveied, or infused into our
bodies or sonles, to set us in the estate of life, or to continue us in the
same; nay, then how could they that were before Christ came in the flesh be
saved? for the same necessity of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, was
to them then, even from the first fall of Adam, as is now to us; but it is the
grace purchased thereby, which we do receive in our hearts by faith, and which
by his mediation is continued with us. For as the Law (which is the Minister of
death) came by Moses, ^o^ grace and truth which brings life, is by JESUS
GHRIST; And therefore the Apostles so often Write and say, Romans 16. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you etc.

For although the very body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 24.
be the price of the purchase, 2 Cor. 13. 14.
and in that respect the only mediate cause of our life and salvation, Gal. ^.
18.
yet does not his body and blood enter into us to revive and save us; Philip.
4. 23.
nay, so it profits nothing, 1 These. 5. 28.
as Christ himself said against some that conceived his words, Rev. 22. 21.
in such a carnal manner as now at this time many do; What and if you shall
see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit and they are life; John 6. 62. 63. Neither do we by the acts of
eating the bread or drinking the wine of the Sacrament, eat or drink the
grace of God purchased by the body and blood of Christ, neither is grace
conferred, or any way secretly conveied to our hearts in the bread or wine, or
by them, nor by any thing inferior unto it self; but it is conferred to the
heart of man by the Spirit of God, through the word of his promise, therefore
called the word of his grace.

And the instrument, hand or mouth wherewith we do receive the same, is faith
in the heart, caused also therein by the operation of the same spirit, 2 Cor.
3. 3.
as Paul declares, for the habit and estate of eternal life, Col. 2. 12.
and the promise of raising up at the last day; which Christ does certify to
those that eat his flesh and drink his blood, John 6. 54.
does he assure to them that believe in him; Ver. 35. 40: and 47.
so that to believe in Christ, is to eat his flesh and drink his blood,
according to his meaning; and therefore a sinner is sometimes said, to be
justified by grace, sometimes by the blood of Christ, sometimes by faith,
because in the act of our justification, all these do concur, and are
together, the grace of God the Father, being the prime and chief cause thereof;
the body and blood of Christ the second principal or mediate cause, and faith
the isntrumental and inferior cause; and the justified are said also to live,
and to be saved by the grace of God, by the flesh, and blood, and life of
Christ, and by faith.

And in this consideration, (because Christ is the only mediator and
reconciler between God and man) does he so often speak of himself, and say,
My Father gives you the true bread from heaven; the bread of God is he which
comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world, I am the bread of
life; this is the bread of life which comes down from heaven, that a man may
eat thereof and not dye; I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world; except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: who
so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise
him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed; he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him; as the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that
eats me, Ioh. 6. 32. 33. 35. 48. 51. 53. 55. 56. 57. 58. etc.
even he shall live by me. etc.

And in this manner spoke he afterward of the Sacrament of the Supper, which
he left and commanded unto his Church to be done to show forth his death,
until his second coming; saying of the Bread, Take ^ eat, this is my Body,
and of the Cup; Drink ye all of this, for this is the Blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins Matthew. 26. 26. 27.
28. And Saint Paul likewise says of the same Sacrament; The cup of blessing
which we bless is it not the communion of the Blood of Christ? and the Bread
which we break is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? for we being
many are one Bread, for we are all pertakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
17. as if he should say is not this the spiritual intent and true meaning or
signification thereof? does it not show forth and give us to understand the
Communion that is between Christ and his Church and every member of it? how
he has purchased it and life, and eternal salvation for it, with his own
Body and Blood, and that although the members thereof be many, yet they being
by faith made partakers of him, the true and living Bread, are all in a
spiritual manner, one body with him, and one bread, and do live by him.

The like whereof he had said before to the same Corrinthians, of the
forefathers: Moreover, brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant, how
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and
were baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they
drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ,
1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4.

So that all the holy fathers, not only they that had passed through the Sea
with Moses, whom Saint Paul does here instance for proof, but all that were
before them and after them to his days, were baptized with the same spiritual
Baptism, wherewith he himself and all the faithful to this day have been
and are Baptized, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the
same spiritual drink, as we now do; having all the same benefit of Christ
and of the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, as we now have, and are all of him
and one body with us, and we with them, as Saint Paul also further manifests
saying; For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of
this one body being many, are one body; so also is Christ; For by one spirit
are we all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we
be bond or free, and have been all made drink into one spirit. 1. Cor. 12 12.
13.

For although Christ dyed but once in the latter time, and in one place of the
world, yet his death was as avayleable with God, (with whom all things to come
and past, are present) before his coming in the flesh, and death as since; and
as effectual to his elect of all nations, in all times, and in all places,
then, as now; for there is but one way of salvation in him, and by him, unto
all, in all times, and in all places, though it be not declared in a like
manner and measure to all, in all times, and in all places.

These things I do believe to be true, for which, if I shall still be judged
vile, and continued a prisoner, I must still have patience: If otherwise and
that I shall find relief, I hope I shall be thankful unto God, and not forget
my duty to my relievers.

From the new Prison in Maiden-lane in London, 1627.
I do now confess again, that after all these things I having endured three
years imprisonment, and having often petitioned to the Court within the same
time, showing my wrongs and grievances, and requesting my liberty (those two
forementioned Bishops of Winchester and Rochester, Doctor Ne^, and Doctor
Buckridg, furthering my request to the Archbishop) I was discharged and
released without any kind of justification, either of the Courts proceedings or
the witnesses depositions, or any part of Denisons doings, or acknowledging my
self guilty of the things wherewith I was charged further then I have
declared. The last Court day of Michaelmas term, in the year 1629. for if I
would but have acknowledged to the Court that I had been judicially convicted.
which I could not do, I might have been discharged long before.

But notwithstanding this, that I am now at liberty from prison, yet the
scandalls and reproaches of my adversaries, remain still all over this Land,
and other parts likewise, by reason, not only of that unrighteous sentence of
the Court passed on me upon those insufficient and false depositions, but
especially of those wicked infamous Sermons and books which my accuser and
prosecutor Denison has published against me, and are dispersed through the
Kingdom. So that not only my person, but my name is odious and hateful to
many, my friends, my children, and all that bear my name suffer by this
means. But why should it so much grieve me, or trouble them? seeing that the
more any one suffers for the truth sake, the more he has cause to rejoice,
because so much the greater is his reward in heaven, as the Lord himself, Who
is the way, the truth, and life, has said, Mat. 5. So commending the judicious
true Christian Reader, To the grace of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ; I
rest his true Christian friend,

JOHN ETHERINGTON.


And if any shall think I have not yet answered that Book of the Sermon
preached against me at the Cross, tituled, The white w^olfe, by Doctor Denison,
(for he has now by reason of that work as it seems, obtained the name of
Doctor, which before he had not) let such a one but consider well without
partiallity, what is declared in this my defense, and I hope he shall see every
thing in the Doctors White w^olfe that conserneth me, in substance fully
answered, and whether he or I have played the ravening Woolves part, I refer to
the judicious Christian Reader (that has read both) to consider. And so I rest
his christian friend, wishing him all true wisdom from above whereby to
discern between truth and falsehood, and between true Prophets, and false,
that so he be not deceived.

I. E.

Errata.
IN page 1. l. the last after invent, read spoken against him. In page 2. l.
19. read mind i^, In page 12. l. 23. for dares read dares not. In page 31. l.
the 1. for his read this. In page 36. l. 18. for Sabbath read Sabbaths. In page
38. l. 19. read could not In page 38 1. 25. for oposition read exposition. In
page 38. l. 28. for used read uses. In page 39. l. the last. recit read
receive. In page 41. l. the 7. for answers read adversaries. In page 41. l. the
16. for suscribe read subscribe. In page 42. l. 6. for or may, read are, may.
In page 44. l. 14. for walks read walt.


