Mundus Muliebris: OR, THE LADIES Dressing Room UNLOCKED, And her TOILETTE
SPREAD.

In Burlesque.

Together With the FOP-DICTIONARY, Compiled for the Use of the FAIR SEX.

The Second Edition. To which is added a most rare and incomparable Receipt, to
make Pig, or Puppidog-Water for the Face.

-- Tanquam famae discrimen agatur,
Aut Animae: tanta est quaerendi cura decoris.
Juvenal. Sat. 6. Such care for a becoming Dress they take,
As if their Life and Honor were at Stake.
LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1690.

PREFACE.
THis Paper was not to come abroad without a Preface, as well as Comment, for
Instruction of our young Master, who newly launched from the University (where
he has lost a year or two) is not yet Traveled, or if happily he has made le
petit Tour (with the formal thing his Governor Whom the French call Maitre des
ours, a Bearward.
) having never yet Read Tully's Offices through, since he came from School,
sets up for a Bean, and Equipped for the Town at his Return, comes to seek
Adventures in an Ocean full of Rocks, and Shelves, and wants a Skilful Pilot to
Steer him, as much as any Vessel that goes to the Indies; and oftentimes
returns home Leaky, and as poorly Freighted, as those who have been near
Shipwrack'd, or lost their Voyage.

It is for direction of such as are setting out toward this Great and Famous
Emporium (whether the design be for Miss or Marriage) what Cargo he must
provide; not as Merchants do for America, Glass-Beads, and Baubles, in exchange
for Gold and Pearl; but Gold and Pearl, and all that is precious, for that which
is of less value than Knives and Childrens Rattles.

You see, Squires, what you are to prepare for as Adventurers, or by way of
Barter, if you think to Traffic here, and to carry the Fair One, especially if
she be at her own disposal (or being come some considerable time out of the
Country) has been initiated into the Conversation of the Town* The Refined Lady
expects her Servants and humble Admirers should Court her in the Forms and
D^^encies of making Love in Fashion: In order to this, you must often Treat her
at the Play, the Park, and the Music; present her at the Raffle, follow her to
Tunbridge at the season of drinking of Waters, though you ^ave no need of them
your self: You must improve ^^l occasions of celebrating her Shape, and how
^^ll the Mode becomes her, though it be never so Fantastical and Ridiculous;
that she Sings like an Angel, Dances like a Goddess; and that you are Charmed
with her Wit and Beauty: Above all, you must be sure to find some Fault or
Imperfection in all other Ladies of the Town, and to laugh at the Fopps like
your self: With this, a little Practice will qualify you for the Conversation
and Mystery of the Ruelle; and if the whole Morning be spent between the Glass
and the Comb, that your Perruque sit well, and Cravat-Strings be adjusted as
things of importance; with these and the like accomplishments you will emerge a
consummate Beau, Angl^ce, a Co -- But the Dancing Master will still be
necessary to preserve your good Mien, and fit you for the Winter-Ball.

Thus you see, young Sparks, how the Style and Method of Wooing is quite
changed, as well as the Language, since the days of our Forefathers (of
unhappy Memory, simple and plain Men as they were) who Courted and chose their
Wives for their Modesty, Frugality, keeping at Home, Good-Housewifery, and
other Oeconomical Virtues then in Reputation: and when the young Damsels were
taught all these in the Country, and their Parents Houses, the Portion they
brought was more in Virtue than Money, and she was a richer Match than one who
could have brought a Million, and nothing else to commend her. The Presents
which were made when all was concluded, were a Ring, a Necklace of Pearl, and
perhaps another fair Jewel, the Bona Paraphernalia of her prudent Mother, whose
Nuptial Kirtle, Gown and Petticoat lasted as many Anniversaries as the happy
Couple lived together, and were at last bequeathed with a Purse of old Gold,
Rose-Nobles, Spur-Royals, and Spankers, as an House-Loom to her Granddaughter*

They had Cupboards of Ancient, useful Plate, whole Chests of Damask for the
Table, and store of fine Holland Sheets (white as the driven Snow) and fragrant
of Rose and Lavender for the Bed; and the sturdy Oaken Bedstead, and Furniture
of the House, lasted a whole Century; the Shovel-Board, and other long Tables
both in Hall and Parlour were as fixed as the Freehold; nothing was moveable
save Ioynt-Stools, Black Iacks, Silver Tankards, and Bowls: And though many
things fell out between the Cup and the Lip, when Nappy Ale, March Beer,
Metheglin, Malmesey, and Old Sherry got the Ascendant amongst the Blew-Coats,
and Badges, they sung Old Simon, and Chevi Chase, and danced brave Arthur, and
were able to draw a Bow that made the proud Monsieur tremble at the Whizze of
the Grey-Goose-Feather: 'Twas then Ancient Hospitality was kept up in Town and
Country, by which the Tenants were enabled to pay their Landlords at punctual
day: the Poor were relieved bountifully, and Charity was as warm as the
Kitchen, where the Fire was perpetual.

In those happy days, Sure-Foot, the Grave and steady Mare, carried the Good
Knight and his Courteous Lady behind him to Church, and to visit the
Neighborhood, without so many Hell-Carts, Rattling Coaches, and a crew of Damme
Lacqueys, which a Grave Livery Servant or two supplied, who rid before and made
way for his Worship.

Things of Use were Natural, Plain, and Wholesome, nothing was superfluous,
nothing necessary wanting; and Men of Estate studied the Public Good, and gave
Example of true Piety, Loyalty, Justice, Sobriety, Charity, and the good
Neighborhood composed most differences: Perjury, Suborning Witnesses, Alimony,
Avowed Adulteries, and Misses (publicly owned) were Prodigies in those days,
and Laws were Reason, not Craft, when Men's Titles were secure, and they served
their Generation with Honor; left their Patrimonial Estates improved to an
Hopeful Heir, who passing from the Free School to the College, and thence to
the Inns of Court, acquainting himself with a competent Tincture of the Laws of
his Country, followed the Example of his worthy Ancestors; and if he Traveled
abroad, it was not to count Steeples, and bring home Feather and Ribbon, and
the Sins of other Nations; but to gain such Experience as rendered him useful to
his Prince and Country upon occasion, and confirmed him in the Love of both of
'em above any other.

The Virgins and Young Ladies of that Golden Age, Prove. 31.13.19.
quaesierunt lanam and linum; put their hands to the Spindle, nor disdained
they the Needle; were obsequious, and helpful to their Parents; instructed in
the Managery of the Family, and gave Presages of making excellent Wives; nor
then did they Read so many Romances, see so many Plays, and smutty Farces; set
up for Visits, and have their days of Audience, and Idle pass-time. Honest
Gleek, Ruff and Honors, diverted the Ladies at Christmas, and they knew not so
much as the Names of Ombre, Comet, and Basset. Their Retirements were Devout
and Religious Books, and their Recreations in the Distillatory, the knowledge
of Plants and their Virtues, for the comfort of their poor Neighbors, and use
of the Family, which wholesome plain Diet, and Kitching Physic preserved in
perfect Health: In those days, the Scurvy, Spleen, etc. were scarce heard of,
till Foreign Drinks and Mixtures were wantonly introduced. Nor were the young
Gentlewomen so universally afflicted with Hysterical Fits; nor, though
extremely modest, at all Melancholy, or less Gay, and in good Humor; they
could touch the Lute, and Virginal, sing like to the Damask Rose -- and their
Breath was as sweet as their Voices: They danced the Canarys, Spanish Pavan,
and Selengers Round upon Sippets, with as much Grace and Loveliness, as any
Monsieur, or Italian of them all, can Teach with his Fop-call, and Apish
Postures.

To show you then, how the World is altered among us, since Foreign Manners,
the Luxury (more than Asiatick, which was the final Ruin of the Greatest,
Wisest, and most Noble Monarchy upon Earth) has universally obtained among us,
corrupting ancient simplicity; and in what extravagant Form the young Gallant
we described, is to Court the Sex, and make his Addresses, (whether his
Expedition be for Marriage or Mistress) it has been thought good by some
Charitable hands, that have contributed to this Catalogue, to present him with
an Enumeration of particulars, and Computation of the Charges of the
Adventurer, as follows.

A VOYAGE to MARRYLAND; OR, THE LADIES DRESSING ROOM.
NEgotii sibi volet qui vim parare,
Navim, and Mulierem, haec duo comparato.
Nam nullae magis Res duae plus Negotii
Habent, forte si occeperis exornare.
Neque unquam satis hae duae Res ornantur,
Neque eis ulla ornandi satis satietas est.
Plaut. Poenelus. Act. 1. Scen. 2.
WHoever has a mind to abundance of Trouble,
Let him furnish himself with a Ship and a Woman,
For no two things will find you more Employment,
If once you begin to Rig them out with all their Streamers.
Nor are they ever sufficiently adorned,
Or satisfied, that you have done enough to set them forth.
HE that will needs to Marry-Land
Adventure, first must understand
For's Bark, what Tackle to prepare,
Against Wind and Weather, wear and tare:
Of Point d'Espagne, a Rich Cornet,
Two Night-Rails, and a Scarf beset
With a great Lace, a Colleret.
One black Gown of Rich Silk, which odd is
Without one Colored, Embroidered Bodice:
Four Petticoats for Page to hold up,
Four short ones nearer to the Crup:
Three Manteaus, nor can Madam less
Provision have for due undress;
Nor demi Sultane, Spagnolet,
Nor Fringe to sweep the Mall forget,
Of under Bodice three neat pair
Embroidered, and of Shoos as fair:
Short under Petticoats pure fine,
Some of Iapan Stuff, some of Chine,
With Knee-high Galoon bottomed,
Another quilted White and Red;
With a broad Flanders Lace below:
Four pair of Bas de soy shot through
With Silver, Diamond Buckles too,
For Garters, and as Rich for Shoo.
Twice twelve day Smocks of Holland fine,
With Cambric Sleeves, rich Point to join,
(For she despises Colbertine.)
Twelve more for night, all Flanders laced,
Or else she will think her self disgraced:
The same her Nightgown must adorn,
With Two Point Wastcoats for the Morn:
Of Pocket Mouchoirs Nose to drain,
A dozen laced, a dozen plain:
Three Night-Gowns of rich Indian Stuff,
Four Cushion Cloths are scarce enough,
Of Point, and Flanders, not forget
Slippers embroidered on Velvet:
A Manteau Girdle, Ruby Buckle,
And Brillant Diamond Rings for Knuckle:
Fans painted, and perfumed three;
Three Muffs of Sable, Ermine, Gray;
Nor reckon it among the Baubles,
A Palatine also of Sables.
A Sapphire Bodkin for the Hair,
Or sparkling Facet Diamond there:
Then Turquois, Ruby, Emrauld Rings
For Fingers, and such petty things;
As Diamond Pendants for the Ears,
Musts needs be had, or two Pearl Pears,
Pearl Neck-lace, large and Oriental,
And Diamond, and of Amber pale;
For Oranges bears every Bush,
Nor values she cheap things a rush.
Then Bracelets for her Wrists bespeak,
(Unless her Heart Strings you will break)
With Diamond Croche for Breast and Bum,
Till to hang more on there is no room.
Besides these Jewels you must get
Cuff Buckles, and an handsome Set
Of Tags for Palatine, a curious Hasp
The Manteau 'bout her Neck to clasp:
Nor may she want a Ruby Locket,
Nor the fine sweet quilted Pocket;
To play at Ombre, or Basset,
She a rich Pulvil Purse must get,
With Guineas filled, on Cards to lay,
With which she fancies most to play:
Nor is she troubled at ill fortune,
For should the bank be so importune,
To rob her of her glittering Store,
The amorous Fop will furnish more.
Pensive and mute, behind her shoulder
He stands, till by her loss grown bolder,
Into her lap Rouleau conveys,
The softest thing a Lover says:
She grasps it in her greedy hands,
Then best his Passion understands;
When tedious languishing has failed,
Rouleau has constantly prevailed.
But to go on where we left off,
Though you may think what is said enough;
This is not half that does belong
To the fantastic Female Throng:
In Pin-up Ruffles now she flaunts,
About her Sleeves are Engageants:
Of Ribbon, various Echelles,
Gloves trimmed, and laced as fine as Nell's.
Twelve dozen Martial, whole, and half,
Of Ionquil, Tuberose, (don't laugh)
Frangipan, Orange, Violett,
Narcissus, Iassemin, Ambrett:
And some of Chicken skin for night,
To keep her Hands, plump, soft, and white,
Mouches for pushes, to be sure,
From Paris the tre-fine procure,
And Spanish Paper, Lip, and Cheek,
With Spittle sweetly to belick:
Nor therefore spare in the next place,
The Pocket Sprunking Looking-Glass;
Calembuc Combs in Pulvil Cafe,
To set, and trim the Hair and Face:
And that the Cheeks may both agree,
Plumpers to fill the Cavity.
The Settee, Cupee, place aright,
F^elange, Fontange, Favorite;
Monte la haut, and Palisade,
Sorti, Flandan, (great helps to Trade)
Burgoine, Iardine, Cornett,
Frilal next upper Pinner set,
Round which it does our Ladies please
To spread the Hood called Rayonnes:
Behind the Noddle every Baggage
Wears bundle Choux in English, Cabbage:
Nor Cruches she, nor Confidents,
Nor Passagers, nor Bergers wants,
And when this Grace Nature denies,
An Artificial Tour supplies;
All which with Meurtriers unite,
And Creve-Coeurs silly Fops to smite,
Or take in Toil at Park or Play,
Nor Holy Church is safe, they say,
Where decent Veil was wont to hide
The Modest Sex Religious Pride:
Lest these yet prove too great a Load,
It Is all comprised in the Commode;
Pins tipped with Diamond Point, and head,
By which the Curls are fastened,
In radiant Firmament set out,
And over all the Hood sur-tout:
Thus Face that E'rst near head was placed
Imagine now about the Wast,
For Tour on Tour, and Tire on Tire,
Like Steeple Bow, or Grantham Spire,
Or Septizonium once at Rome,
(But does not half so well become
Fair Ladies Head) you here behold
Beauty by Tyrant Mode controlled.
The graceful Oval, and the Round,
This Horse Tire does quite confound;
And Ears like Satyr, Large and Raw,
And bony Face, and hollow Jaw;
This monstrous Dress does now reveal
Which well placed Curls did once conceal.
Besides all these, it is always meant
You furnish her Appartiment,
With Moreclack Tapestry, Damask Bed,
Or Velvet richly embroidered:
Branches, Brasero, Cassolets,
A Cofre-fort, and Cabinets,
Vasas of Silver, Porcelan, store
To set, and range about the Floor:
The Chimney Furniture of Plate,
(For Iron's now quite out of date:)
Tea-Table, Skreens, Trunks, and Stand,
Large Looking-Glass richly Iapan'd,
And hanging Shelf, to which belongs
Romances, Plays, and Amorous Songs;
Repeating Clocks, the hour to snow
When to the Play it is time to go,
In Pompous Coach, or else Sedan'd
With Equipage along the Strand,
And with her new Beau Fopling manned.
A new Scene to us next presents,
The Dressing Room, and Implements,
Of Toilet Plate Gilt, and Embossed,
And several other things of Cost:
The Table Miroir, one Glue Pot,
One for Pomatum, and what not?
Of Washes, Unguents, and Cosmeticks,
A pair of Silver Candlesticks;
Snuffers, and Snuff-dish, Boxes more,
For Powders, Patches, Waters store,
In silver Flasks, or Bottles, Cups
Covered, or open to wash Chaps;
Nor may Hungarian Queen's be wanting*
Nor store of Spirits against fainting:
Of other waters rich, and sweet,
To sprinkle Handkerchief is meet;
D'Ange, Orange, Mill-Fleur, Myrtle,
Whole Quarts the Chamber to bespertle:
Of Essence rare, and le meillure
From Rome, from Florence, Montpellier,
In Filgran Casset to repel,
When Scent of Gousset does rebel,
Though powdered Allom be as good,
Well strewn on, and well understood;
For Vapors that offend the Lass,
Of Sal-Armoniack a Glass:
Nor Brush for Gown, nor Oval Salver,
Nor Pincushion, nor Box of Silver,
Baskets of Fil'gran, long and round,
Or if Iaponian to be found,
And the whole Town so many yield,
Calembuc Combs by dozens filled
You must present, and a world more,
She Is a poor Miss can count her store.
The Working Apron too from France,
With all its trim Apurtenance;
Loo Masks, and whole, as Wind does blow,
And Miss abroad's disposed to go:
Hoods by whole dozens, White and Black,
And store of Coiffs she must not lack,
Nor Velvet Scarfs about her Back,
To keep her warm; all these at least
In Amber'd Skins, or quilted Chest
Richly perfumed, she Lays, and rare
Powders for Garments, some for Hair
Of Cyprus, and of Corduba,
And the Rich Polvil of Goa,
Nor here omit the Bob of Gold
Which a Pomander Ball does hold,
This to her side she does attach
With Gold Crochet, or French Pennache,
More useful far than Ferula,
For any saucy Coxcombs Jaw*
A graceful Swing to this belongs,
Which he returns in Cringe, and Songs,
And languishing to kiss the hand,
That can Perfumed blows command.
All these, and more in order set,
A large rich Cloth of Gold Toilet
Does cover, and to put up Rags,
Two high Embroidered Sweet Bags,
Or a large Perfumed Spanish Skin,
To wrap up all these Trinkets in.
But I had almost quite forgot,
A Tea and Chocolate Pot,
With Molionet, and Caudle Cup,
Restoring Breakfast to sup up:
Porcelan Saucers, Spoons of Gold,
Dishes that refined Sugars hold;
Pastillios de Bocca we
In Box of beaten Gold do see,
Inchas'd with Diamonds, and Tweeze
As Rich and Costly as all these,
To which a bunch of Onyxes,
And many a Golden Seal there dangles,
Mysterious Ciphers, and new fangles.
Gold is her Toothpick, Gold her Watch is,
And Gold is every thing she touches:
But tired with numbers I give over,
Arithmetic can add no more,
Thus Rigged the Vessel, and Equipped,
She is for all Adventures Shipped,
And Portion e're the year goes round,
Does with her Vanity confound.
THE Fop-Dictionary; OR, AN Alphabetical Catalogue OF THE Hard and Foreign
Names, and Terms of the Art Cosmetick, etc.

Together With their Interpretations, for Instruction of the Unlearned.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1690.

THE Fop-Dictionary. OR; An Alphabetical Catalogue of the hard and foreign
Names, and Terms of the Art COSMETICK, etc. together with their
Interpretations, for Instruction of the Unlearned.
Attache. ANy thing which fastens to another, etc. Bas de soye shot through.
Silk^Stockings with Gold, or Silver thread wove into the Clock. Berger. A
pla(...) Lock ( a la Shepherdess) turned up with a ^uff. Bourgoigne. The first
part of the Dress for the Head next the Hair. Branches. Hanging Candlesticks,
like those used (...) C^^rches. Brasiere. A large Vessel, or moving-Hearth of
(...) for Coals, transportable into any Room (...) used in Spain. Calumbuc. A
certain precious Wood, of an agreeable Scent, brought from the Indies.
Campaine. A kind of narrow picked Lace. Casset. A Dressing Box. Cassolet.
Perfuming Pot or Censer. Choux. The great round Boss or Bundle, resembling a
Cabbage, from whence the French give it that name. Cofre-fort. A strong Box of
some precious or hard wood, etc. bound with gilded Ribs. Colbertine. A Lace
resembling Network, of the Fabric of Monsieur Colbert, Superintendent of the
French Kings Manufactures. Collaret. A sort of Gorget. Commode. A Frame of
Wire, covered with Silk, on which the whole Head-Attire is adjusted at once
upon a Bust, or property of Wood carved to the Breasts, like that which
Perruque-Makers set upon their Stalls. Confidants. Smaller Curles near the
Ears. Cornet. The upper Pinner, dangling about the Cheeks, like Hounds Ears.
Cosmeticks. Here used for any Effeminate Ornament, also artificial Complections
and Perfumes. Creve-coeur. Heart-breakers, the two small curled Locks at the
Nape of the Neck. Crochet. The Hook to which are chained the Ladies Watch,
Seals, and other Intaglias, etc. Cruches. Certain smaller Curles, placed on the
Forehead. Cuppee. A kind of Pinner. Echelles. A Pectoral, or Stomacher laced
with Ribbon, like the rounds of a Ladder. Engageants. Deep double Ruffles,
hanging down to the Wrists. Favorites. Locks dangling on the Temples. Ferula.
An Instrument of Wood used for Correction of lighter faults, more sensibly
known ot Schoolboys than to Ladies. Fil-grain'd. Dressing-Boxes, Baskets, or
whatever else is made of Silver Wire-work. Flandan. A kind of Pinner joining
with the Bonnet. Firmament. Diamonds, or other precious Stones heading the Pins
which they stick in the Tour, and Hair, like Stars. Frelan. Bonnet and Pinner
together. Font-Ange. The Top-Knot, so called from Mademoiselle de Fontange, one
of the French King's Mistresses, who first wore it. Gris. The Gray Furr of
Squirrels bellies. Iaponian. Any thing Varnished with Laccar, or China
Polishing, or that is odd or fantastical. Iardinee. That single Pinner next the
Bourgogne. Loo Mask. An half Mask. Martial. The Name of a famous French
Perfumer, emulateing the Frangipani of Rome. Miroir. In general, any
Looking-Glass; but here, for the Table, Toilet, or Pocket Sprunking-Glass.
Molionet. The Instrument used to mingle Chocolate with the Water. Monte la
haut. Certain degrees of Wire to raise the Dress. Mouchoir. It were Rude,
Vulgar, and Uncourtly, to call it Handkerchief. Mouches. Flies, or, Black
Patches, by the Vulgar. Meurtrieres. Murderers; a certain Knot in the Hair,
which ties and unites the Curls. Palatine. Formerly called Sables, or Tippet,
because made of the Tails of that Animal. Palisade. A Wire sustaining the Hair
next to the Duchess, or first Knot. Passagere. A Curled Lock next the Temples.
Pastillo di Bocca. Perfumed Lozenges to improve the Breath. Pennache. Any Bunch
or Tassel of small Ribbon. Plumpers. Certain very thin, round, and light Balls,
to plump out, and fill up the Cavities of the Cheeks, much used by old
Court-Countises. Polvil. The Portugal term for the most exquisite Powders and
Perfumes. Rags. A Compendious Name generally used for all sorts of Point,
Lace, etc. whence the Women who bring them to Ladies Chambers are called
Ragg-Women; but whilst in their Shops, Exchange-Women. Rare, le meilleures.
Best, and most Excellent; but in Language de beau, rare and le meilleure,
happily rhyming with Mont pellier. Rayonne. Upper Hood, pinned in Circle, like
the Sunbeams. Rouleau. Is Forty Nine Guineas, made up in a Paper Roll, which
Monsieur F -- Sir I -- and Father B -- lend to losing Gamesters, that are good
Men, and have Fifty in Return. Ruffles. By our Forefathers called Cuffs.
Settee. The double Pinner. Sorti. A little Knot of small Ribbon, peeping out
between the Pinner and Bonnet. Septizonium. A very high Tower in Rome, built by
the Emperor Severus, of Seven Ranks of Pillars, set one upon the other, and
diminishing to the Top, like the Ladies new Dress for their Heads, which was
the Mode among the Roman Dames, and is exactly described by Iuvenal in his 6 th
Satyr. Tot premit ordinibus, tot adhuc Compagibus altum
Aedificat caput; Andromachen a front videbis
Post minor est --
Such Rows of Curles pressed on each other lie,
She builds her Head so many Stories high,
That look on her before, and you would swear
Hector's tall Wife Andromache she were,
Behind a Pigmy --
Spanish Paper. A beautiful red Color, which the Ladies, etc. in Spain paint
their Faces withal. Spagnolet. A kind of narrow-sleev'd Gown, a la Spagnole.
Sprunking. A Dutch term for Pruning, Tiffing, Trimming, and setting out, by the
Glass or Pocket Miroir. Sultane. A Gown trimmed with Buttons and Loops.
Surtout. A Night Hood covering the entire Dress. Toilet. Corruptly called the
Twilight, but originally signifying a little Cloth. Tour. An artificial Dress
of Hair on the Forehead, etc. Tree fine. Langage de Beau. Extremely fine, and
delicate, cum multis aliis.
For besides these, there are a world more, as Assasin, or Venez a moy, A
certain Breast-knot, as much as to say, Come to me, Sir, etc.

Duchess. A Knot next the Hair, immediately above the Tour, etc. with
innumerable others now obsolete, and for the present out of use; but we confine
our selves to those in Vogue.

To conclude, Those who have the curiosity, by comparing these Terms with the
Ancients, thereby to inform themselves, how this Elegant Science is improved,
especially since we have submitted to, and still continue under the Empire of
the French, (for want of some Royal or Illustrious Ladies Invention and
Courage, to give the Law of the Mode to her own Country, and to vindicate it
from Foreign Tyranny) may for Divine History consult Isaiah 3 d. chapter ver. 16,
etc. and for Profane, read Plautus his Poenulus, Act. 1. Scen. 2. and his
Aulularia, Act. 3. Scen. 5.

To Make Pig, or Puppidog, Water for the Face.
TAke a Fat Pig, or a Fat Puppidog, of nine days old, and kill it, order it as
to Roast; save the Blood, and fling away nothing but the Guts; then take the
Blood, and Pig, or the Puppidog, and break the Legs and Head, with all the
Liver and the rest of the Inwards, of either of them, put all into the Still if
it will hold it, to that, take two Quarts of old Canary, a pound of unwash'd
Butter not salted; a Quart of Snails-Shells, and also two Lemmons, only the
outside pared away; Still all these together in a Rose Water Still, either at
once or twice; Let it drop slowly into a Glass-Bottle, in which let there be a
lump of Loaf-Sugar, and a little Leaf-gold.

FINIS.

