EVERY WOMAN Her own MIDWIFE: Or a COMPLETE CABINET Opened for CHILDBEARING
WOMEN.

FURNISHED With Directions to prevent miscarriages: During the time of
Breeding, and other Casualties which usually attend Women in Childbed

Published for the Public Good.

To which is annexed Cures for all sorts of Diseases incident to the Bodies of
Men, Women and Children.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Neale, at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in
Bedford-street in Covent Garden. 1675.

A SHORT COMMENTARY, Concerning the Care ought to be had of Women which are
with child, such as are ready to bring forth, such as are brought to bed, and
also of Infants.
SInce many sad and incommodious things are wont to happen to women with child,
and in bringing them into the world by ignorance and carelessnesse: I thought I
should undertake a thing not unbeseeming a Christian Physician, if I should
reduce, as it were, into a brief Comment, what things were fit to observe, as
well in their time of bearing, as also in the birth, from which, being somewhat
more instructed, they might better enjoy their health, preserve their
offspring, and after birth better defend their bodies.

CHAP. I. What things are to be taken heed of in the two first Months.
SO soon as the woman shall begin to be with child, which she shall easily
know, by stopping of her monthly flux, without disease, or ancientnesse of
years; she shall abstain from all vehement motions and excrcise, whether she
walk on foot, or ride on horseback, or in a Coach, or be carried in a
Horse-litter; For where the body is too much stirred, the internal membrane of
the Womb is either accustomed to be broken, or to be loosly resolved, and
thereupon abortment presently follows.

To these things the woman with child must diligently beware, that she lift not
her arms up too high, nor carry great burdens, nor repose her self on hard
and uneasy seats: But instead of exercise, which may always in some precede
before meat, she may walk on foot gently, or suffer her body and arms gently
to be rubbed and stroked, or may stretch them forth with spinning or carding.

Let her moderately use meat of good juice and easy concoction, and Wine not
too strong and too sharp, but a little mingled with water, or if she be
abstemious, she may use water wherein Cinnamon is boiled: But she may not feed
on sweet meats, sharp, and windy; she must also avoid fasting, thirst,
watching, mourning, sadness, anger, and all other perturbations of the mind.

Her familiar friends must present no unwholesome thing to her, nor so much as
name it, least she should desire it, and not be able to get it, and so minister
her an occasion of abortment, or the Child carry with it some foul
impressions. But if she desire chalk, clay, or coals, let beans boiled with
sugar be given unto her: or if she cannot get her longing, let her presently
drink a large draught of pure cold water

CHAP. II. Order for the third Month.
BEfore the fourth month be ended, she must neither be let blood, nor have her
body evacuated with any purgative medicine.

But if too much blood abound, or some incident disease happen, which may
require evacuation, you shall use cupping-glasses with scarification, and a
little may be drawn from the shoulders and arm, especially if she have been
formerly accustomed to them.

CHAP. III. From the fourth Month.
When now the fourth month is past, bloodletting and physic is permitted,
especially if it be gentle, and mild, such as best may agree with women with
child, and tender or delicate persons: And by Hyppocrates precept may be
conceded even until the seventh month.

CHAP. IIII. From the fifth,, sixth, and seventh Month,
FRom that time forward none of the before mentioned remedies is wont, or ought
from thence to be used, because the Babe being now become greater, stands in
need of greater nourishment and blood, and also can bear no commotion of
physic.

Although sometimes I have met with women, which have so much abounded with
blood, that unless they had been let blood in the second month, they would
have aborted in the third; others again, unless they should attempt the same
in the seventh or eight month, they could not carry their great belly so long,
or else would be delivered of a dead issue.

But since these things happen but to few, they may not be granted to all, but
we must provide for every one according to their nature and constitution.

And this is to be prohibited to all which are with child, that they give not
way to take any blood from the ancle bone of the foot, during the whole time of
the woman's going, but in stead thereof, if the disease so require, an ounce of
Manna in the broth of a Cock, or so much Cassia fistula, or of Sirrups made of
Damask-roses infused in May dew, about the quantity of an ounce, with a little
water of Cinnamon, may safely be taken a little before meat.

But if the belly be bound only without any apparent disease, the broth of a
Chicken, or of Veal sodden, with Oil, or with the decoction of Mallows, or
marsh-Mallowes, Mercury, and Linseed, put up in a glister by the lower parts
will not be amiss, yet in a lesser measure then is wont to be given in other
Children, to wit, of the decoction five ounces, of common Oil three ounces, of
Sugar two ounces, of Cassia fistula one ounce. But sharper Purgations, as also
Suppositories made of Honey and Salt, are altogether hurtful to great bellyed
women, or such as lie in childbed. But of fat Pork, which they call Lard, or
the yolks of Eggs without salt, Purgations and Glysters are commended. But if
she will not take a Glyster, either for modesty or otherwise, because she was
not accustomed to take it, one or two yolks of new laid Eggs, or a few Pease
pottage warm, with a little salt and sugar, supped up a little before meat,
will be very convenient.

But if the belly shall be sometimes distended and stretched out with wind, a
little Fennelseed and Anniseeds reduced into powder, and mingled with Honey or
with Sugar, made after the manner of an Electuary will do very well.

But if the thighs and feet swell, let them be anointed with Oxphrodinum
(which is a liquid Medicine made with Vinegar and Rose Water) mingled with a
little Salt.

CHAP. V. The eighth Month
IN the eighth month, which is usually perilous, the better diets, rather
than plentiest, will be most commodious. But as they must abate their diet, so
their bodily exercise must increase. And because then women with child, by
reason of the sharp humors alter the belly, are accustomed to weaken both
their spirits and strength; they may well take before meat an Electuary of
Diarrhodon, or Aromaticum Rosatum, or Diamargariton, in the morning before
meat, and sometimes they may lick a little Honey; even as they which loath and
nauseate their meat, may take green Ginger condited with Sugar, or the rindes
of Citrons and Oranges condited; as also it is usual sometimes to take
specificall Sirrups. Moreover, let the woman with child often use Honey for the
strengthening of the Infant. When she is not far from her labor, or bringing
forth, she shall eat daily seven tosted Figs before meat, least the seconds may
be bound up; but if they shall be restrained and stay firm, they may be
resolved: But the woman with child may not eat salt and powdered meats, least
the child be born without nail^.

CHAP. VI. In the ninth Month.
IN the ninth month, being near their time, they must not be idle, neither sit
much, nor stoop much, nor lie on their sides, so that the child may not well
turn it self, but ought to lie with her face upward, neither shall she bend her
self much, lest the child be infolded and wrapped up in the umbilical ligaments
and bonds, by which means it oftentimes perishes; but she must walk, and
stir often, and exercise her self, rather by going upward than downward: Let
her use light and easy meats of digestion, as damask-Prunes with Sugar, or
Figs and Raisins, before meat, and also the yolks of Eggs, flesh and broth of
Chicken, Birds, Patridges and Pheasants, and Fish living in stony places, with
good broth.

And such meats shall not only be convenient for this month, but also for the
two succeeding months, that the natural parts by them may be dilated.

Also astringent meats, and roasted meats, and also Rise, hard Eggs, Millet,
and others of that kind will be very profitable. Baths of sweet water, with
emollient herbs, used with intermission is meet: But the hot house, which they
call a stow, is hurtful. After the bath, let the belly be anointed with oil
of Roses and Violets; but the natural parts with the fat of Hens, Geese, Ducks,
with oil of Lillies, and the decoction of Linseed and Faenugreek, boiled with
oil of Linseed, Marshmallows, grains of Quinces, or with this which follows.

A Liniment.

Take of Mallows, both of them cut and sliced of each one ounce.

Of marsh-Mallowes, both of them cut and sliced of each one ounce.

Of Linseed also one ounce. Let them be boiled from twenty ounces of water to
ten; let them take three ounces of the boiled broth, of oil of Hour-deluce,
and of Almonds, of each one ounce, three ounces of Deer suet; Bath this from
the rest, and anoint her with it warm.

Also they may use, for fourteen days before the birth morning and evening, to
bath and moisten the belly with Muscadine and Lavender-water, that the child
may be the more strengthened thereby.

She may every day eat toasted bread, that nothing may grow to the child.

The natural parts may also be gently stroaked down with this Fomentation.

The Fomentation.

Take three ounces of Linseed.

Of Mallows, and of marsh-Mallowes sliced, of each M. i.

Let them be put in a bag and boiled moderately: Let the woman with child,
every morning and evening, take the vapor of this decoction in a hollow
stool, taking great heed, that no wind or air come to her in any part; and
then let her wipe the parts so anointed with a linen cloth, that she may
anoint the belly and groins, as at the first.

Being near her time to bring forth, so that she be within ten days thereof,
if the woman with child shall begin to feel difficulty and pain, let her daily
use this Bath.

The Bath.

Take of Mallows, Marsh-Mallowes, ana M. i. Cammomil, Mercury herb,
Maidenhair, ana M. ss. Of Linseed four ounces.
Let these be boiled in a sufficient quantity of water, as may suffice to make
a Bath therewith.

But let not the woman sit too hot on the seat, nor higher than a little above
her Navill, nor let her sit longer on it than about half an hour, least her
strength languish and decay; for it is better to use it often, than to stay too
long at once in it.

But if she cannot endure to sit over the water, let her cherish her natural
parts, with a sponge or with clothes wet in it.

A Laconick and sweating Bath is not convenient at that time but hurtful,
though we think women may use it.

After the Eath she shall always anoint her natural parts of her loins, her
flanks, navil, sides, and other parts ^djoyning thereto, with the ointment or
fat made of the fore-prescribed thing, or cherish them with the fat marrow.

And also fats melted sometimes, and rightly put up into the natural parts,
with a sponge or glister-pipe, if the womb be hot and dry, and the party with
child be of a lean and slender body.

Fumes also used, applied to the womb, conduce to facilitate delivery.

S^ffumigations of the genitals, to facilitate delivery.

Musk, Ambergreace, Gallia Moscata, Aloes-wood, put upon hot coals, and also
sweet Herbs, Mint, Penniroyal, ^alamint, Origanum, Majoram, are of a pleasant
and grateful smell, and open women's passages, and draw down conception.

But we must beware, that such sweet smells of this kind be not used to the
nostrils, but rather Balls of Galbanum, Assa foetida, Mirrh, or Rue.

What Meat is most useful.

Then Pottage of Hens, Capons, and such like are most in use; and I should
advise them then to drink thin generous Wine allayed with water.

What manner of Chamber, the woman with child should lie in.

It does not a little avail to the happy delivery, that the Chamber, wherein
the Childbearing woman lies, be temperate, and be neither too cold nor too
hot, for that shuts up the mouth of the womb, and this disperseth and
digesteth the strength. In Summer time therefore if heat scorcheth, the Chamber
may be strowed with Willow leaves, and Vine leaves, and Rose Water, with a
little Vinegar. In Winter, a high or upper Chamber, moderately kept warm, shall
be convenient, which shall be kept warm with a continued fire, as is accustomed
to be done in Italy, France, and other hot Countries.

But this is expedient every where, that the natural parts, and those nearest
unto them, be moderately rubbed with hot clothes.

CHAP. VII. What is to be done at the birth.
THe birth being at hand, and pains oppressing them, it shall be fit, if the
belly do fall down of its own accord, but if it be bound, it must be provoked
with a gentle Glyster; for the excrements being cast out, the womb and the
passages, thorough which the Child issues, are less pressed, and so the birth
follows more easy

These things being well prepared, the childbed woman must be put into bed, if
tender, weak, gross, and fleshly; but it ought to be made ready after this
manner.

How, and wherewith, the childbed woman's bed ought to be furnished.

A large boulster made of linen cloth, must be stuffed with straw, and be
spread on the ground, that her upper part may lie higher than her lower; on
this the woman may lie, so that she may seem to lean and bow, rather than to
lie drawing up her feet unto her, that she may receive no hurt.

CHAP. VIII. To whom the seat may agree and be fit.
LEt the strong and lusty women be placed in a chair, which also must have the
lower part not upright, but stooping a little, that the childbearing woman may
sit, as it were, bending backward, clothes, or close compassing garments, being
cast about their backs.

In this the belly, together with the whole burden, may sooner go down than
in a bed; but it often comes to pass, that the whole Babe lies at the mouth
of the womb, before that it shall get forth, more loosly and openly with the
adjoining places, and by that means is compelled to stick longer there, from
whence arises no small danger of life,

CHAP. IX. What the Midwife shall do in the very moment of the birth.
When now the pangs of childbearing women increase more and more, let the
Midwife inwardly anoint the secret or natural parts with oil of Cammomil, and
white Lillies, nor let her set the woman in the seat, before she perceives the
womb to be loosed and resolved, and the humors to flow over more plentifully.

Moreover, she may not bring her to labor and struggling, before the birth show
it self to her view; for they do but labor in vain, and do violently distort
and wrest away the strength of the laboring woman, that afterward, when she
shall have need, it will not be able to work it forth.

But she shall sit fitly over against the woman in labor, and shall diligently
observe on what part the birth moves it self; for if it come the right way,
she shall anoint and cherish the secret parts with odoriferous Oils; and if it
declineth to the sides, she shall with both hands govern and dispose the belly,
that it may fall to the mouth of the womb.

And if the hand or feet show it self first, the Midwife, with a soft and
gentle hand, moistened with broth of Fenugreek and Linseed, shall gently reduce
it into the place.

Certain women have the mouth of their womb so straightened, that without great
help, scarce or never they can part with the child. And that comes to pass by
reason of diverse causes; for either some strong heat coming from the natural
parts, does two much streighten the inward parts, or the Creature is to big, or
the childbearing woman is to gross and fat, or the child is dead, who cannot
by motion be furthering and helping to nature, or else cold for the most part
in the winter, especially in young ones, who have a narrow passage of the womb,
does more astringe and bind it up; or sometimes heat in some is so dissolved,
that their strength fails them in the birth.

Therefore when there appears difficulty in bringing forth the Child, Jesus
Christ, the only preserver and saver in danger, is heartily to be called upon,
that with his gracious favor he would be pleased to be Assistant to the
wretched party in travel.

CHAP. X. When the Infant is come into the world.
When now the Child, or Issue, comes into the world, either with the head or
feet, the Mother must be encouraged, that as much as in her lies, she keep in
her breath and restrain it, that by that endeavor she may put forth the Child.
And the Midwife, in the mean time, must with her hand gently compresse and keep
down the region of the womb, which is above the navill, and urge the Infant to
the lower parts: And although the astriction of the womb causes the bringing
forth to be more difficult, the parturient woman is to be set in a Bath, in
which Mallows, Faenugreek, Linseed, and Barley are sodden, and the sides, hips,
and flank, must be anointed, with oil of Roses and Violets: let the thighs be
well rubbed, with Oxysacchar. and half a dram of Mint, and as much of
Wormwood, be exhibited in drink to her: The woman bringing forth may gently be
led to her bed; and they which assist her at her labor, must not look or gaze
in her face, as such who are ashamed in their bringing forth, that after it, as
it falls out, she strive not to bring forth her young one with sharper pain.

CHAP. XI If the Secondines break not readily.
BUt if the Skin containing the young one, called the Secondine, because it is
brought forth after the birth, be less easily broken, but stiffly resists,
the Midwife must either break it with her nails, and laying hold on it with her
fingers, cut it with a pair of Sizzers, taking care that the Child may be
preserved safely in doing it: On the contrary, when the skins are broken or cut
in pieces, if all the humors presently shall overflow before the child come
forth, and the natural places shall be dried up, let Goose grease, with oil
of white Lillies melted, be poured in warm, or the white of an Egg with the
yolk be put up.

What is to be done after the child is born, if yet the Secondine, or
afterbirth, be retained.

If the Child being born, the Secondines be as yet pertinaciously retained,
sneezing must be provoked, if it come not voluntarily, putting Ginger or some
other sharp thing up into the nostrils; or a scruple of Unicorns horn bea^en
into powder ought to be drunk hot in white Wine (in want of Unicorns horn use
good Hearts horn, or Bezar four grains) or the juice of Borrage exhibited in
drink brings them down, because it easily moves vomit, and they thereby are
brought forth.

Another approved Remedy for drawing them forth.

Take of Sesely, Cinnamon,

Of Mirrh, and of sweet Cassia, of each equal parts.

Let these be exhibited with Mugwort-water.

Another Receipt.

Take powder of the Jet stone exhibited in Mugwort-water, or else about a
dram of the powder of Mallows seeds exhibited in hot water, or the
suffumigations of Horse hoofes.

CHAP. XII. To draw forth a dead Child.
IF the child be dead, an equal quantity of Rue, of Mugwort, Wormwood, and
black Pepper, being each of them reduced into fine powder, and boiled in Wine,
must be exhibited, or Vervain boiled in Wine, or Water, or Vinegar; or Savory
bruised and tied upon the belly brings forth the Child, whether it be yet
alive or dead; or Butter with Honey boiled in Wine; or decoction of Hysop well
dried exhibited in hot water: but if it yeildeth not, nor comes away with
these, let Rue, Mugwort, Oppoponax, and Wormwood dried, with a little Oil and
Sugar, be laid to the groin, or the navill; and moreover, the skin of a female
Snake put about the woman in the manner of a girdle. Also the stone Aetites,
tied unto the thigh, after the Child is brought forth, ought presently to be
taken away, least the womb, after the Child be brought forth, come forth also.

Moreover, sneezing alone accellerateth delivery, but it ought to be ^sed with
the mouth and nostrils close stopped, and Ginger, or some such thing, put up
into them; for from hence a great force of the spirits is thrust thence unto
the inward part.

CHAP. XIII. How the bellies of childbearing women, being costive or bound may
be loosned.
IF the belly do not evacuate the excrements, the first days of her being
brought to bed, bring a Fig, cut in the middle, into the form of a sharp tent
fashioned like a man's Yeard, and put it up into the Fundament instead of a
Suppository; or else put a grain of Coriander, confected with Sugar, up into
that place; or put a piece of Swines flesh powdered, or Lard, brought into the
same form, up into the same place, or frame a Suppository of white Soap, and
apply it thereto.

About four or five days after the birth, you may use a gentle Glister of half
a pound of Sallade oil, with a quartern of Barley boiled in broth, with two
ounces of Sugar, with the yolke of an Egg, beaten together.

But if at the eighth day the belly answer not their expectation in looseness,
let three drachms of Cassia newly extracted, well confected with Sugar, be
taken morning and at evening before supper in the manner of a bole, and
presently let her eat thereupon.

CHAP. XIV What things are to be applied to the natural or secret parts.
SO soon as the Child is born, let this astringent Fomentation be applied unto
the natural parts.

The Fomentation.

Take of red Roses two pugils; a pugill is the quantity you may take up at once
between your first three forefingers.

Let them be boiled to a third part, in high red Wine inclining to a blackish
color, with a fourth part of water put thereunto, then put into the decoction
a whole Egg, and let it be mingled together, and applied to the place, with
flanen rowlers, and kept on for the space of two days.

Another.

Take of oil of Hypericon four ounces.

Of Rose Water two ounces.

Of the juice of Solomon's Seal one ounce.

Mingle these well together, and let the rowlers dipped in them be applied to
the secret parts.

An Ointment.

Let the belly be forthwith anointed with this Ointment, least it become
wrinkled or deformed, and that it may be thereby better strengthened, and may
return to the old form.

Take two ounces of Rose Water.

An ounce of Mirtles.

Half an ounce of Cats fat.

These things ought to be melted, and mingled with the before recited Oils.

A Girdle for the belly.

After the Unction, put on a Girdle of Dog-skin, well prepared by a
Leather-dresser, and anointed with two ounces of oil of Mirtles, and one
ounce of oil of Mastick, and half an ounce of oil of Hypericon mingled
together.

But it must be so large, as it may comprehend or compass the whole belly a
little above the naviil, even unto the natural parts, and must straightly bind
up the same, but without pain. And this will be fitly done, if it be sowed
together with thread on the left side, and be put hot enough to the belly, and
be compassed with four or five double linen clothes, binding them with fit
strings together, that the belly may be kept warm.

But let linen clothes, anointed with an equal proportion of oil of
Mirtles, and oil of Hypericon, be applied unto the natural parts, from the
second day until the seventh.

CHAP. XV. The order from the seventh day after the woman is brought to bed.
SIx days being finished or past, on the seventh day let the natural parts be
fomented and cherished with this Decoction.

Take of red Roses,

Of Agrimony,

Mellilot,

And Cammomil, of each one handful.

Of the leaves of Hypericon,

Of the leaves of Quinces,

And of Myrtle, of each two pugils.

Let them be boiled in red Wine thick and astringent, with a little water to a
third part, and let the natural parts be fomented therewith morning and at
evening before sleep.

On the eighth day.

It is convenient to put to the belly, a plaster made with the white of an
Bgg, and a little Pepper, and taken with flaxen rowlers, or boulsters.

On the ninth day.

If this plaster please not, besmear a Dogs skin again with oil of Mirtles
and Mastick, and apply it unto the belly, and it will avail and profit much, to
keep it tied with swaddling clothes unto the end of her childbed.

A Liniment to scatter and disperse the Milk.

That the Milk flowing back to the breasts, may without offense be dissipated,
you must use this ointment.

Take of pure Wax two ounces.

Of Linseed oil half a pound.

When the Wax is melted, let a Liniment be made wherein linen clothes must be
dipped, and according unto their largeness, be laid upon the breasts; but when
it shall be discussed, and paineth no more, let other linne clothes, dipped in
distilled water of Acorns, be put upon them. But this I only advise them which
cannot nurse their own children: And if swelling in their which give suck do
arise from abundance of milk in their breasts, seem to threaten an
inflammation, use the former Ointment, but abstain from using the distilled
water of Acorns.

When, and what Bath they must use.

From the twentieth day, if it be a male Child, if it be a female, from the
five and twentieth day, this Bath may be used.

Take of Majoram, Of Penniroyall, Mellilot, Hypericon, or Saint John's wort, Of
Millefoile, And of Pimpernel, of each M iii. Of Bay leaves two pugils. Three
ounces of Pomegranades rindes. Of old Bean meal five pounds. Of Barley meal two
pounds. Of Cummin bruised and beaten into powder, lb. iii.
Put the herbs, small chopped, into a bag, but the beans, and Barley, and Cummin,
one upon another severally: Let them be sod altogether in a great Cauldron,
which may contain two parts of Water, and one of Wine, let them be boiled the
day before she would use the Bath, and be poured forth into a tub, which must
be well covered: The next day heat the water of the Bath; but they must take
heed they sit not on the Bath too hot; but two hours will be sufficient to sit
before meat in the morning, and at evening.

But let the childbed woman sit on the bag, wherein the bran or meal is put,
but not lower than the region of the mouth of the Ventricle.

Another.

Let a barrel, wherein the dregs of white Wine are yet sticking, be filled
with river water, and let it be stirred to and fro, that all may be well
mingled together, then let the dregs settle, and boil in this water,

Of Bay leaves, Of red Roses, With both the Comferies, Of Hypericon,
Penniroyall, And Pimpernel, of each p. ii. Of old Bean meal lb. v. Of Barley
meal lb. ii.
Let the childbed woman sit on the bag, in which the meals are, or on
another, which may contain the brans of wheat.

CHAP. XVI. Against the gripings of the belly in childbearing women.
THe gripings and gnawings of the belly, especially those which are contracted
from the great striving and labor of the belly in bringing forth, and
sometimes from a chollerick matter contained therein, and sometimes of wind
retained.

Outward Remedies.

Exceedingly therefore are useful Musk, and Civet outwardly laid to the
navill; moreover, oil of Dill, chafed on the belly as hot as well may be
endured.

Inward helps in their meats.

In stead of meat, the broth of an old Cock or Capon is best, being well sodden
with a little Dill, and so taken.

A Drink.

For the drink, a water made up with Cinnamon and Sugar, which they call
Hippocras, which is made after this manner.

Put unto water boiled, and hot, and drawn, unto. xx.

Of Cinnamon half an ounce, Of Sugar three or two ounces. Three grains of black
Pepper.
Mingle them well, and infuse them for six hours, and then strain them in a
bag, which the Apothecaries call Hippocrates sleeve. Let the childbearing
woman use this potion warm, but very sparingly; but if she loath this, let her
use thin, small, and clear wine, unless a Fever shall hinder her.

A Potion also is made of Honey and white Wine, of each two ounces, to
mittigate pain by reason of flatuous humors retained.

Some exhibit the jaws of the Pickerell, with Amber, and Ginger, ana. finely
powdered to drink in white Wine.

CHAP. XVII. The government of the Nurse.
LEt there be given unto the Infant new born Honey to lick, after let it be
nourished with the Mothers Milk, which of all things best agrees with it. But
if by reason of some necessity it cannot enjoy it, a sound healthy Nurse is to
be chosen, neither younger than four and twenty years, nor elder than five and
thirty, of a white and ruddy complexion, which is not infected with other
vices, nor yet has too lately been brought to bed, nor has not long given
suck; let her not have sore Dugs or Breasts, nor to big, but a large Breast,
and moderately fat. Let her use choice meats of easy and light concoction,
engendring good blood or juice; let her abstain from hot aromaticall Spices, as
Pepper, Ginger, Cardamome, and such like; also from Leeks, Onions, Garlic,
Salt, austere and tart things: Let her avoid strong Wines, as also cold water:
Let her eschew immoderate eating and drinking, for that corrupts the Milk,
and begets in children lepry, or scurfe, and other contagious diseases: Let
her abstain from cares and vexations, and let her take heed, least she provoke
her menstruous disease.

She must not sleep much, or be given to sleep, for that makes the Milk
phlegmatic; she likewise ought not to watch more than is meet, for from hence
the Milk comes to be more hot, sharp, and distasteful to the Infant; she ought
moderately to excrcise her self, especially her arms, to wit, either in
sowing, spinning, or knitting, for by this means evil humors are consumed,
as by ease and sloth they are augmented.

Also copulation of the Nurse exceedingly offends, and hurts the Child, as
that which chiefly retracteth and diminishes the Milk, and makes it of an
unsavory taste, tasting hot, and rank, or goatish, which brings no small
inconvenience, and hurt to the Child. For which cause, in times past, Husbands
were driven away from their Wives, and restrained from their companies.

But if the Milk decrease, Pultesses of Bean meal, and Rise, are meet to be
used; also like paps made of Bread, with Milk, and Sugar, to which may be added
a little Fennel-seed.

And if the Milk be thick, it must be made thin, with slender diet, and
subtle Wine, and Sirrup of Vinegar, as also with exercises: But if it be too
thin, and waterish, gross, and strong meats, and longer sleeps will be
convenient and meet. For the corruption of the Milk, a litile Mugwort grossly
bruised, and put into a linen cloth, and so into broth, with a little Honey
added thereto, will do very much good.

The care of the Infant.

And if the Childs belly be loose, the food ought to be more gross and
strong, and her sleeps longer: But children may suck so long, as till they have
brought forth sharp and great teeth: But if you suffer them to drink Wine, or
strong drink, or other Potions, before they have toothed them, they will be
corrupted; but when they have gotten these teeth, their arms, and back bones
are gently to be rubbed after their sleep.

CHAP. XVIII. A Bath of sweet water, very profitable for children, as by whose
means they may grow up and increase.
THey are, fasting, to be bathed in water before meat, for the space of a
quarter of an hour, yet so, that the belly may first go down or be emptied,
and then they are to be anointed with oil of Olives made hot.

And it is not of little concernment, in what swaddling clothes children are
wrapped; for when they are not tied up at all, or the clouts are too loose,
they are subject to Fluxes, Imposthumes, apt to be crooked backed, and other
discommodities; but especially when their knees are too strictly tied and bound
up, and their thighs left at liberty, they are lamed.

When they cry, or feel pain, or will sleep, they are to be pacified, either by
showing the breast, or by singing, or by rocking, either in Cradles, or hanging
Beds, or by carrying up and down. But we must observe, that children may lie
strait whenever they lie down, and ought not to be covered too much, or hot
with coverings, nor yet with too few, least they may catch cold. Moreover, let
the linen cloth, wherein they are wrapped, be neat and clean, for children are
offended, and infected by foul and filthy excrements.

From three years of age till the seventh, they are to be educated gently and
kindly, not to be severely reprehended, chidden, or beaten, for by that means
they be made throughout their whole life after too timorous, or too much
terrified, astonished, and sotted.

Being yet in their first years, they are not to be compelled to going, for
seeing all their bones are soft as Wax, and the body fall the heavier, they
either become lame, or universally resolved in their feet.

Food must be daily given them thrice a day, till they are three years old; for
if they be much filled, they are subject and accustomed to be troubled with
Convulsions, and other diseases.

In the sixth or seventh year of their age, they are to be sent to school, and
committed to the breeding and instruction of courteous and temperate
Schoolmasters, who may not terrify them.

Before these years they are not to be compelled or forced to harder labors;
otherwise they will not thrive well, but stand at a stay, and keep little, or
become Dwarfes.

CHAP. XIX. The Diseases of Infants.
When as the Infant begins to grow sick, as for example, from a cold
disease, the Nurse is to be nourished with hot and dry meat and drink, so that
thereby forthwith it may grow well again; so also if it be taken with other
diseases, as with an Ague, the Nurse shall use plantain water, and such like
things, Paps made for children of crumbs or morsels of bread broken or sliced,
are more wholesome, than made of meal or flour.

Till two years old give them Honey often, for that keeps them from
Convulsions, and costivenesse of the belly, and that the milk they eat hurt
them not.

When Infants cast up their milk, a Corrall should be hung about their neck
down to their middle; for it is useful for them in teething, and Ivory also is
good for the same purpose.

Diseases and Symptoms, proceeding from the birth, in women with child.

Gripings and pangs come often upon women from their birth, for the womb, as a
wild beast, by reason of her sudden evacuation and emptiness, by wandering up
and down hither and thither, disposes it self.

Therefore the belly must be covered all over with Barley meal, and the white of
an Egg, mixed together, with juice of Elder; also drinking of hot Wine wherein
Cummin has been boiled, is very convenient and useful

Also Suffumigations of Styrax calamita, Frankincense, and Smallage seed, of
each one dram, will very much avail.

CHAP. XX. Against the Rupture of the Cods and perinaeum, and the part between
the rising of the Yeard and the Fundament, which proceeds from difficulty of
bringing forth.
TO help the Rupture of the natural parts, which arises from hardness in
bringing forth, the powder of the great Comfery root dried, with Cummin and
Cinnamon, are very good, put up into the womb.

In some the wrinkled skin of the Cods is broken from the birth, so that there
is but one hole between the womb and the fundament, and the same course,
whereby oftentimes the womb goes forth and is hardened; therefore the diseased
parts must be cherished with hot Wine, in which Butter has been resolved,
until the Matrix be softened, and then it must be gently put up: after the Cod
skin is broken in three or four places, it must be sowed up with a silken
thread; presently let a linen cloth be put upon the belly, according to the
largeness of it; lastly, let it be anointed with Tar, for the womb, by reason
of the evil scent, is drawn in again. At last we heal the Rupture with powder
of both Comferies, and Cummin, sprinkled upon them. But a childbed woman is to
be put to bed, so that she may have her feet lie the higher; let her lie there
eight or nine days continually, and let her take her meat, ease her self, and
make water there.

She must abstain from bathing so long as possibly she may, also from all those
things which may provoke coughing, and from meats which cannot easily be
digested: And for preventing this danger in bringing forth, let a long ball of
linen cloth be made, and put up into her Fundament, and as often as the
childbearing woman striveth to bring forth the Infant, let her strongly
compresse and keep in her belly, that no disruption or rupture be made in these
parts.

CHAP. XXI. For windiness or Colic of the belly.
IF the secret or natural parts receive wind in, which being kept in brings
forth pain, a Fomentation made with the decoction of Mustard or Onions, is very
good.

Also sometimes in others so great plenty and abundance of wind oppresses
them, that they seem broken, or as those troubled with the Iliack passion, for
whose ease, a Bath made of Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, and the like, must
be used, and the belly often kept soluble.

But she ought to stay the longer in the Bath, and when she comes out of it, a
plaster of the juice of Mullein, or Turnup, and Barley meal, must be laid on
hot, and then let her use her Bath again,

CHAP. XXII. For the Itch.
IF those parts itch, so that women by scratching take away the skin, whereupon
blysters arise, which greatly molest and trouble them, they ought to be
anointed with the Ointment prescribed for burnings.

Take an Apple, Bole armoniack, Mastick, Frankincense, Oil, hot Wine, Wax, and
Tallow, and thus you may prepare it. Purge the Apple from the outward rind, and
the core, and put it in a pot to the fire, with the Oil, Wax, and Tallow, and
when it shall be hot, the Mastick and Frankincense, being reduced into powder,
must be put in, and then being mingled strained through a cloth.

CHAP. XXIII. For the Flux of blood.
FOr those unto whom an immoderate Flux of blood happens, it shall be
convenient to give the juice of Mugwort, Sage, Pennyrovall, and of other herbs
of that kind, made up into the form of a Sirrup.

Also Baths made for the same disease of the said herbs, are good; or by a
plaster made up with Clay and Vinegar, which must be applied to the right side.

If the Flux of blood come from the nostrils, it must be applied to the
forehead and temples, having a respect to the contrary side: For blood uses
not to flow out of the nostrils, unless a male Child be begotten.

CHAP. XXIV. For the falling down of the Matrix from the birth.
A Bath made of Mugwort, Flea-bane, Juniper, Camphire, and Wormwood, boiled in
water; let the childbed woman sit in this up to the breast, afterward let her
be gently put into her bed, and let her lie with her feet drawn backward, that
the Matrix may return into its place.

The Womb being put into its place again, put powder of Penniroyall, of
Galingale, Spikenard, Nutmegs, Avence, with oil of Nutmegs, and Penniroyall
into a fine thin cloth, and in manner of a Ball or Pessary bind it up, and
put it into the Womb, and shut up the orifice of the Matrix, that it fall not
down again: But have a care, that it may pierce backward toward the reins, and
there it is to be bound up, but before that be performed, a plaster of Bay
berries, of Mustard, Frankincense, and of Cinnamon, of each as much as shall be
sufficient, being brought into powder, and being heated at the fire, mingled
with Honey, and let it be laid to the back being yet hot, and bound up with a
swath, wherewith the Pessary, put up into the Matrix, is tied.

But let the woman brought to bed lie in her bed upward for the space of nine
days or more, if need require, so that she may not move her self up and down,
unless great necessity urges her; and such meat shall be given her, which may
not easily pass through her belly, or may not often provoke her to make water:
But now going abroad after her delivery, we must put on an entire garment that
may keep it in, least it go out again, unless it be when she makes water.
The third day we must make ready a Bath, and then, least they should swell,
powder of Ginger, Pellitory of the wall, and Cinnamon, of every one by equal
parts mixed must be blown up.

CHAP. XXV. For the Piles after the birth.
We use to cure the Piles, arising from the fault of the bringing forth, with
a Bath of Wormwood, Southernwood; Cinnamon rind, and the bark of Cassia
fistula, boiled well in Wine; when the woman delivered goes forth of the Bath,
put Bombace, or Cotton, with powder of Alloes mixed with oil of Penniroyall
unto her lower parts.

CHAP. XXVI. Against pain of the Breasts, contracted by too much Milk.
CLay kneaded with Vinegar, after the manner of a plaster, is available to
astringe and keep back the Milk, but the place is first to be suppled with hot
water.

CHAP. XXVII. For the Imposthume of the Breasts.
A Plaster of marsh-Mallowes, Mallows, Wormwood, Mugwort, and Swines grease,
made up according to art is very profitable; when the swelling is come unto the
height, lay Nut kernels bruised to pieces; unto it: And if the Imposthume break
not, let it be launced with a Launcet or Penknife, and squeeze it a little,
least by the sudden evacuation a worse mischeevious Imposthume may come upon
it; and when it is broken, put in a linen cloth, twice or thrice a day,
smeared with the yolk of an Egg and Turpentine, which strengthens
exceedingly: And if the Imposthume chance to pass into a Fistula, put into it
a root of black Hellebor dipped in Oil or Honey; or sprinkle powder of the
colt-Bur upon it, for with these is every Fistula purged and destroyed, so as
it be not between the bones; wherefore these Medicines are so long to be
administered, until it dye, and be dried up, and afterward the Ulcer be cured.

Some few additionall Observations, concerning the passages in ths former
Treatise.
CHAP. XXVIII. What is to be administered unto the Child, after it is born, for
the first thing it takes.
ARnoldus de villa nova, a most learned Physician, writes, that if you give
unto a Child half a scruple of Corrall finely powdered, with woman's milk,
first, before it takes any other thing, after it is born, that it shall never
be troubled with the falling Sickness.

Also,

I know persons of good quality in this our Country of England (I presume,
instructed by some able Physicians) who give unto all their own children (and
advise all other women, where they are desired to be assistant at the birth) to
exhibit unto the children new born, the first thing they take, a little Salt
well mingled in a spoonful of Saxifrage, or Hysop water, to prevent the
trouble of frets, and other diseases in children following their birth.

Conceiving also, as they suppose, they have some ground for their action, from
the fourth verse of the sixteenth Chapter of Ezekiel, where the Lord, reckoning
up the Midwives duties about children, at that time of their nativity, thus
speaks.

And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born, thy navill was not cut,
neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all,
nor swadled at all.

CHAP. XXIX. For Infants troubled with wind and phlegm.
MAny Midwives advise the Nurses, to give them a little pure Sugar-candie
finely bruised in Saxifrage water, or Scabious water in a spoon, well mingled
together.

CHAP. XXX. A most excellent Medicine to cause children to teeth easily.
TAke of pure Capons grease, very well clarified, the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
twice as much of pure Honey, mingle and incorporate them well together, and
three or four times in a day anoint the Child's gummes when they are teething,
and they will break flesh easily, and prevent torments, and Agues, and other
greifs, which usually accompany their coming forth.

CHAP. XXXI. For Agues in Children.
TAke a spoonful of good oil of Populeon, and put thereunto two spoonfuls of
good oil of Roses, mingle and incorporate them well together, and then warm it
before the fire, anoint the Child's bowing places, his arms, legs soles of his
feet, and also his forehead, and temples twice a day, chafing the ointment well
in.

CHAP. XXXII. For Worms in Children.
TAke of Mirrh, and Aloes, very finely powdered, of each a pennyworth, and
with a few drops of Chymicall oil of Wormwood, or Savine, with a little
Turpentine, make these up into a plaster, and lay it to the Childs Navill.

CHAP. XXXIII. For Heart-Wormes.
HEberstreit, Skonkius, Hollerius, and other Physicians affirm, they have seen
them in persons dissected: One in a Prince, another in a Citizen of Florence;
and our London Physicians of late years have seen two in London (as appears
in Doctor Mayes book of Mr Pennant of Saint Giles in the Feilds) who dyed
having a Worm like a Serpent in his heart.

The Cure.

Skonkius out of Stocherus affirms by certain experiment, that the juice of
Raddish, Garlic, and Mustard, kills these Worms, which breeding in the
chest of the heart, cause swoundings, Epilepsies, and many times death.

CHAP. XXXIV. To cause a young Child to go to stool.
CHafe the Child's navill with May Butter before the fire, then take some black
Wool, that grows between a Sheeps legs, and dip it in the May Butter, and
then dry it, and lay it unto the navill, and it will procure a stool: This is
also good for one in years, who can take no inward Medicine.

Another certain Experiment.

Take a good big green Mallow strig, and strip off the outward skin, and
anoint the strig well with fresh Butter, and put it up into the Childs
Fundament, and let it stay a while there, and in very short space it will
procure a stool.

Courteous Reader, I pray accept kindly of these few Additions.

THis Treatise might have been enlarged farther out, by addition of other
Experiments, but my Friend; being of the same opinion concerning Medicines,
that Seneca the Philosopher was of Books: Non refert quanta, sed quam bona
medicamina; has confined them to their own limits, only with a few necessary
Observations inserted.

M. A.

FINIS.
Choice and select Medicines, collected by a Physician for his own private use,
and Alphabetically digested by him, and from him communicated for public use.
A For the Ach in the bones.
REcipe. A pennyworth of good Aqua vitae, and as much of oil of Bays, and mix
them well together warm in a Sawcer, and anoint the place grieved, and chafe
it well in (but not by the fire) when it is well dried in, wrap it up well.

For all Aches and lame Members.

. Rye, and Rosemary, ana. M. ii. put them into common oil, and Malmsie, ana.
one quart, let these things sees half an hour together, then let the same
Member b^ bathed therewith, being first chafed with a cloth very well, and
after bathing wrap it up in a Lambs skin the woll side inward; do this to
bedward for the space of three weeks together; this helped a man which could
neither stand nor go, Probatum.

An Ointment for all Aches which come from cold causes, shrunken Sinews,
strains in man or beast, it is incomparable, and will keep forty years, but
it must be made only in May.

. Mallows, Groundsell, Strawberry leaves, Lavender-cotton, Birch leaves,
Chickweed, Comfry, Parsley, Sage leaves, Bay leaves, Rue, Balm, Plantain,
Sorrel, wild Briony, Betony, Wound wort, Carduus, Succory, Majoram, Lungwort,
Cammomill, Adders tongue, Ox eye, ana. M. iii. Chop these herbs very small,
and beat them in a Mortar, then take Rosin four pound, May Butter clarified in
the Sun eight and thirty pound, Sallade oil a gallon, Turpentine four pound,
Frankincense two pound: Melt the Rosin and Frankincense together first, then
put therein the May Butter, and the rest aforesaid, and twelve pound of Hogs
grease, and half a pound of Verdigrease, and when all these are melted
together, then put in the chopped and pounded herbs, and let them boil half a
quarter of an hour, then carefully stir it a quarter of an hour after, and
when it is cold, put it into pots close covered, and set them in a horse
dunghill a yard deep for one and twenty days, then take them out, and put all
the ingredients into a Kettle, and set it over the fire again, and boil them a
walm or two, then strain it, and put thereto oil of Spike two pound, and stir
it well; and when you use it, warm it a little in a Sawcer, and rub it by the
fire.

To counterfeit beyond-Sea-Azure.

. Common Azure, and beat it very well with Vinegar, and anoint therewith a
thin plate of fine Silver, and put the same over a vessel full of Urine, set
it over hot ashes and coals, and let it be stirred until it be like
Beyond Sea- Azure: This is the best way, Mizaldus says, he had this out of an
old written book.

To know good Azure and pure.

Lay some of it upon a hot burning Iron, and if then it will not be burned, nor
any little stone is found therein, then it is pure and perfect, and not
sophisticate and adulterate: Mizaldus.

For an Ague.

When Jesus saw the Cross whereon he should be crucified, the Jews said unto
Jesus, Art thou afraid, or have thou an Ague? Jesus said, I am neither afraid,
nor have an Ague: Whosoever shall wear these words, shall neither be afraid,
nor have an Ague, Amen, sweet Jesus, Amen.

For a Tertian, or double Tertian Ague.

. A good quantity of Celandine, one spoonful of Salt, and the bigness of an
Egg of Leven, and as much Allicant, or Spanish Soap; stamp them well in a
Mortar, and make a plaster of them, and apply them to the Patients feet, one
hour before the access of the fit, add thereto four or five yolks of Eggs.

. Of Anniseed water the best you can get, half a pound of oil of Vitriol,
shake them well together, and drink one or two spoonfuls hereof one hour before
the access of the fit: Probatum.

This Medicine is excellent to cure all kinds of Agues that are.

B For a short Breath.
TAke the roots of Hollyhockes lb. i. dry them into fine powder, clarified
Honey four pennyworth set these on the fire, and stir them well together until
it come into the form of an Electuary, whereof let the Patient take often.

. Of choice Manna called Manna Granata two ounces, flower of Cassia newly drawn
half an ounce, Penidios three ounces, oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn half an
ounce, the Lungs of a Fox finely beaten to powder two ounces: powder what is to
be powdered, then mix them all together, and make an Electuary with Sirrup of
Hysop.

An Electuary for the shortness of Breath.

Take a pint of the best Honey you can get, set it on the fire, and scum it
very clean, then put into it a little Hysop bound in a bundle bruised a little,
let it boil till the ^oney taste well of the Hysop, then take it out, and
wring out all the Honey, and put into it the weight of sixpence of Angelica
root grated, or cut very small, as much of Elacampane root, of Ginger the
weight of two pence, as much of gross Pepper, of Licorice eight penny weight
cut very small, of Anniseeds eighteen penny weight, put these altogether after
the Hysop is taken out, and let it boil a walm or two on the fire, stirring it
a little; then take it off, and put it into a glass or pot, and put thereto
three spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, and stir it well together, and take it on a
tufted Licorice stick, at morning about ten, and at four in the afternoon, and
when you go to bed, letting it melt down out of your mouths.

For a Bruise or Squat.

. White Dasie roots, leaves, flowers and all, pownd them, and strain the juice
of them into strong March Beer, or Sack, and give the Patient a good draught
thereof: Or sees them in Ale, and make a Posset thereof, and let the Patient
drink thereof as of the former, and let him eat the leaves if he can, and let
him sweat after.

. Of Comfry M. i. when it sprouteth forth the youngest leaves, wring them with
your hands, and put them into fresh Butter out of the Churne unwasht into a
Drying Pan, and hold it a good way off the fire, and so let it boil together
till it be green, then strain it, and keep it for your use: Probatum.

A Restorative for the Back.

Take of stale Ale two pound, of Germander half a handful, of unset Hysop, and
of unset Thyme, and of Clary, ana. M. i. a branch of Rosemary, and a good
quantity of English Saffron, a dish of sweet Butter, and a good piece of Sugar,
then boil all together till half be consumed, then strain it, and let the
Patient drink it morning and evening.

For Aches in the Back.

. Bores grease, and Nerve oil, ana. p. ae, and as much Turpentine, boil them
a little together, and anoint the greived place downward therewith.

For Bleeding at the Nose.

Take a Toad and kill him, and take three Bricks, put them into fire, and then
take out one of them, and put the Toad upon it, then take out another, and put
him again on that, and when he is almost cold, take off the Toad and put the
Brick into the fire; then take the third Brick, and do so till the Toad be
consumed to ashes, then take the ashes and put them into a Taffata bag, and
when any one bleedeth, apply the bag upon the heart, and it will instantly stay
the bleeding, either of the Nose, or any Wound,

For Burning, or Scalding.

. A spoonful of Sallade oil, and the white of an Egg, beat them well
together, and anoint the burnt place with it often, then take a linen rag,
and wet it in the oil, and lay it over the sore, and keep it still wet, till
you find the fire be drawn out of the Wound, then take away the rag, and
anoint the place with a feather, and put Hart's-tongue leaves to it, and so
bind it up, and dress it thrice a day for two or three days, and after that
but once a day, and this will cool it without any scarre.

2.. The reddest Onyon you can get, and take off the rind, and beat the Onyon
with Bay Salt in a wooden dish, till it be made very small: then put it very
thick upon the burned place, and renew it three or four times, and this will
take out the fire, and then you may apply any healing Medicine to it to skin it.

C For a Cough of the Lungs.
REcipe. Of clear running water three pound, of good Sugar half a pound, with
nine Figs sliced, half a spoonful of Anniseeds bruised, a spoonful of
Licorice bruised, of great Raisins, having their stones taken out, one
handful, of Maidenhair one penniworth, boil these together till one half be
consumed away, then strain it thorough a fine linen cloth, and every morning
take two spoonfuls of it lukewarm, and you shall find present remedy:
Probatum.

For purging of Colds, Coughs, and comforting the Lungs.

. Rubarb two drachms, Sena half an ounce, Anniseeds one ounce, steep them in a
pint of white Wine, and put to it one ounce of brown Sugar Candy: set it over
the fire to be kept stewing all night, stop the pot very close that no water
come out, and in the morning, when it is blood-warm, strain it, and take a
pretty quantity of it, and put two drops of oil of Sulphur into it, and drink
it fasting, and fast two or three hours after, then take a little broth and
keep you warm.

A Julep for a Cough.

. A pottle of Spring water, and put into it ten branches of Hysop, and two of
Rosemary, Licorice clean scraped and thin sliced two ounces, of Anniseeds
bruised two ounces, French Barley which has been cleansed in one water, boil
these till half the water be consumed, then strain it, and put to it three
drops of oil of Sulphur: take two spoonfuls of this when you begin to Cough,
this will loosen the phlegm, and cause you to bring it up easily.

Another.

Boil three sprigs of Rosemary, and as much Maiden Hysop in two pound of white
Wine, of Mace two flakes, of Nut-Neg two or three slices, Saffron six or eight
blades, burn the Wine, and after sweeten it with brown Sugar Candy, and drink a
good draught warm, mane and vesperi, and two or three spoonfuls in the
afternoon.

For Canker in the mouth.

Mingle the juice of Agrimony with raw Honey, and anoint the lips with it, and
it will heal it: Probatum.

Richard Jones cured a young man which had the Canker both in his tongue and
lips, only with good Roman Vitrioll dissolved in spring water, and making it
as milk warm from the Cow, with a stick and a linen cloth fastened to the end
of it, he washed his tongue, mouth, and lips herewith every morning and
evening, and cured him in short time.

But if it be in an old man let run too long, that it eat still, and Vitrioll,
Salves, nor other waters will cure it, there is no other way to save this man,
but to wash carefully his lips, or mouth, with a very little oil of Vitrioll,
to cauterize the veins, and stop the malignant humors that comes from the
brain and feeds it. But this course must not be taken unless the Patient be in
intole^able pain, and in a desperate case, for do it herewith never so little,
yet this oil of Vitrioll will gnaw, and bite, and put the Patient to great
pain, that was oppressed with great pain before, unless you mitigate the pain by
often and continual dipping of a linen cloth kept wet in spring water; after a
very little time that you have anointed the cankered veins and places, with
very little oil of Vitrioll upon a feather as may be, and so let him endure
the pain as long as he well can, that this may cauterize and sear up the veins
the better, that so he may be cured, which otherwise will corrode and eat
continually, although he may purge and vomit also, and so this at last will
kill him.

For a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs.

. Coltsfoot, Betony, Burnet, and red Rose leaves, ana. M. i. of Comfry roots
scraped and sliced; M. ii boil all these in a gallon of Spring water till it
be consumed to a pottle, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, then
take a pound of double refined Sugar, and put it into it, and let it boil over
a soft fire about a quarter of an hour, then take it off, and put it up, and
drink of it six spoonfuls, morning, and evening, and at four in the afternoon.

2.. Of Saccharum Saturni one scruple in a quarter of a pint of Goats milk, and
give the Patient mane and vesperi two or three weeks together, and this will
help them, but first give the Patient some gentle diet-drink to purge them,
before you give the Saccharum and Milk: Probatum.

For Colic, and pains in the back.

. The tender tops of a Bucks horn which is Velvet headed, and cut it in pieces,
and put it into a new pot well covered, and set it in an Oven where it may be
dried and made into powder, of which give to the Patient with a little Pepper
in good Wine a pretty draught, and this will presently release the pain and
give ease: Probatum.

2.. The decoction of Hollyhockes, mix it with Honey and Butter, and drink
thereof blood warm: Probatum.

For the Cramp.

. The leaves or little sprigs of Rosemary, and put them between every toe, and
if you are much troubled with the Cramp, use it continually, and this will cure
it.

2. Anoint the part cramped with Vnguentum Brioniae, and this will help it:
Probatum.

For a Canker.

. Burnt Salt, burnt Eggshels, burnt Copperas, burnt Bones, burnt Verdigrease,
Wormwood, and Rue, burnt, ana. p. ae. make powder thereof, and mingle them well
together, and strew the powder into the Canker, and let no water come to it.

Another.

Take Hog-lice, stamp them till they come to an oil, and anoint the place
therewith.

For a Canker in the lips.

. The juice of Agrimony, and mingle it with raw Honey, and anoint the lips
with it, and it will heal them: Probat.

A Water for a Consumption.

R. Rose Water three pound, of Muscadine three pound, of new Milk a pottle, of
gross Pepper one ounce, of Cinnamon two ounces, of sliced bread a penny loaf,
the yolks of three new laid Eggs, of Sugar one pound: Distill all these as long
as any water will come; take of this water with a little Pepper a draught
fasting, and you will find much good.

For the Cough.

. Of the best Flores Sulphuris, one ounce and half, as much white Sugar Candy
finely poudered, mix them together, and take as much hereof as will lie upon
sixpence, mix them well in the yolk of an egg, and swallow it down; then walk
upon it until you sweat, and keep your self warm; and use it four or five
mornings together, to take it, and walk after it.

For a Cough, or shortness of Breath.

. Of Aqua vitae or Annise-seed water four ounces, mix it with white Sugar Candy finely poudered two ounces, boil it in a peuter dish, over a
chafing dish, till it be dissolved, and indifferent thick like an oil, and
take a spoonful of this when you go to bed for three or four nights together.

Elacampane roots cut into small pieces, of Hysop, Penniroyal, and Liquorice,
ana M. ii. sees them in a gallon of pure spring water, till it come to a
pottle, then strain it well, and keep it in a clean pot or glass close stopped,
and use this every day thrice; First and last, and one hour after dinner, for
seven or eight days.

For a Consumption.

. Three sheeps hearts, slit them, and take out the strings and blood, and lay
them in water to soke a night and a day, then wash them clean, and put them
into a Pipkin, lay in the bottom of the Pipkin, stalks of Rosemary in the
manner of a Gridiron; then lay the hearts on them, every heart being stuck with
three cloves, and half a quarter of Sugar being put into every heart: Then stop
up the Pipkin very close with paste, and put it in an Oven with household bread,
and when you think it is sufficiently stewed, take out the Pipkin again, then
every morning and evening take a spoonful of this Sirrup.

D For the Dropsy.
REcipe, Half an eggshel full of the juice of Ireos, of Mellicratum four
ounces, with ponder of the best Rubarb, half a dram: Take this hot in a
morning once a week. This is held for an excellent help.

Another.

. A lap-full of green Juniper tops, chop them small, and take a great bathing
tub, and put them therein, and set the Patient in the tub, so that he may not
touch the water, wherein these tops were sodden, but put a cricket under his
feet, and cover him well up to the throat; let him sweat so long as he is able,
and when he comes forth of the bath, take care he takes no cold, but
carefully put him into a warm bed.

E For pains in the Eyes.
REcipe, brown Fennel, white Rose-leaves, or other Rose-leaves, Rue, Vervain,
Celandine, and Eyebright, ana p. ae. distill it, and keep the water in a Violl.

For sore Eyes by salt Rheum.

Pound Housleek M i. in a mortar, and take the juice strained through a linen
cloth, put it in a new laid eggshel, and put a quantity of white Sugar-candie
to sweeten it: Set the Egg over some Embers, and let it stand, and as the scum
arises take it off with a feather; and being clear take it off the fire, and
when it is cold, wash your eyes herewith ever and anon.

Mr. Nepier commends Rulandi aqua opthalmica, to be the best for sore eyes,
Pin and Web, of all waters.

To clear the Eyesight.

Rain water of the clearest you can get one gallon, let it settle and clear by
it self at least one day and night, and after put it into a fair basin of earth
glased, or of silver, then put thereto of Roch Allom, the bigness of a Pigeons
Egg, and and a quarter of as much white Coperas, and let them stand 24 hours
well covered, then scum it clean with a feather, and drein it into another
basin; then take away the scum, and the grounds, and so do it every 24 hours,
till it be clear without scum or grounds, and when it is perfectly purified,
put it into a full pint of the best Rosewater which is white, and put it into a
good big glass, then set it in the Sun thirty days or more. Afterward take
it in, and wash your eyes with it three or four times in a week, when you are
in bed, or oftener till you be eased; when you wash your eyes, lie upon your
back, that it may the better soke into them, and if it be too sharp, then abate
it, by mingling some spring water with it. The best time to make it is in
April or May; but if need be at any time in the Summer.

If you take the rainwater in glasses, or glased earthen pans as it falls
from heaven, free from dirt, sand, or other filth, that will be much better.

F For the Flux.
REcipe, A Basin, and set it forth in the rain, and save the rain that falls
therein, then take a few Violet leaves, and boil them in the water, then boil
some Almonds, but blanch them not, and make Almond milk of the same water; If
the Flux be very sore, boil the Almond Milk, and put thereto a little
Cinnamon, and Sugar, and drink it.

For the Flux.

. The nether jaw of a Pike, and make it into fine powder, and put it into drink
or broth, and it will stop the Flux.

For the bloody Flux.

. An old Cock, and dress him, put into his belly of Sow-thistles M. i. and put
him into a fair earthen pot, and put to it five pieces of Gold, four Dates, ten
Prunes, and a quart of Malmsey; then close up the mouth of the pot as close as
you may; then put it into a brass Pot with fair water, let it boil the space
of twelve hours, but take care that none of the water come into the earthen
Pot; and when the flesh is consumed from the bones take it up, and let it run
thorough a clean piece of lochram; then put it up into a clean Gallypot, and
when it is cold it will be like jelly; put two spoonfuls hereof into broth or
other meat which the Patient uses to eat.

For the bloody Flux.

Sees a good proportion of Plantain in fair water, till it wax yellow, and all
the strength be boiled out of it, then strain the water, and heat a clean piece
of Iron red hot, and quench it in the said water, do so nine times, and give
it the Patient.

2. Sees a pint of Milk, and when it is boiled, put into it as much Alum as
will make a Posset, of which mane and vesperi drink a good draught.

3.. That which is shorn from Scarlet, make it to a powder, and give the
Patient half a spoonful thereof in a pretty draught of Tent, and use this five
or six times.

4. Dry the powder of an Hare, and give it the Patient, in red Wine, and it
will help him.

For the bloody Flux.

Cut Hollihock roots in small pieces, and boil them in red Wine, strain it
well and give the Patient; and if he have a Fever, or Ague, sees the roots in
water with some Plantain leaves, and let the Patient drink it.

2.. Yarrow, and Plantain, ana. p. ae. strain them together, and put thereto
old red Wine, called Hollock, or Tent, strain it well, and let the Patient
drink a good draught of it first and last, for three or four days together.

3.. Plantain, Ribwort, and Sheapherds purse, ana. M. ss. stamp them small in a
Mortar, then put thereto Bole armoniack, and Terra sigillata, and stamp them
again, and lay it plaisterwise to the forehead cold.

4. Mingle Mint water with sirrup of Mint, drink it cold fasting; this will
stop both flux and vomit.

For the bloody Flux.

1.. Hay well boiled, and keep it over the fire, and every time the Patient
goes to stool, let a wispe thereof be put into the stool.

2.. Two quarts of Milk, and boil in it of Sage four handfuls washed; boil
these to a quart, then put to it a little beaten Cinnamon, and let the Patient
take this blood warm, instead of other drink when he is thirsty.

3.. A Nutmeg, pare a great hole in it, and roast it in embers full of Sanguis
draconis, and eat it all up: This was Colonel Hambletons Secret.

4.. red Bryer leaves, and boil them well in Milk, and sweeten it with Sugar.

5. Give Dates stones beaten to powder in warm Wine fasting.

. Of the best Treacle one dram, in four ounces of Carduus benedictus water,
give the Patient hereof three mornings or nights to drink blood warm, and it
will take away the fumes of the head in the disease of the Flux.

If the fumes of the head be not assuaged, let the Patient take four ounces of
Carduus water, and the yolk of a new laid Egg, and a little Salt, mix these,
and drink it; this is also good for an Ague.

An Ointment for the Flux.

, Two pound of May Butter, or a gallon of Cream; if of May Butter, take Lunaria
sanicle, Salomons Seal, Mouseare, Plantain, Adders-tongue, ana. one handful,
stamp these small, and put them into the May Butter, and boil them half an
hour with a soft fire, scumming it with a feather: If you use Cream, boil it
till it come to an oil, which oil as it rises take off with a spoon, and put
your Herbs into it, as into the May Butter; when it has boiled, strain your
Herbs thorough a thin cloth, and let it stand till it be cold, after which,
set it over the fire again till it begin to boil, then put it up in pots.

This is also good for burning, scalding, or Aches, but especially for the
Flux, for which, when you use it, observe this direction: Take the quantity of
a Nutmeg of this Ointments, and melt it by the fire, and stroke down the reins
of the back till it be dried in, use this for seven days and nights together
if your Flux continue.

For all Fluxes of blood, and other Fluxes, pains in the Back or Liver, and for
inward effects.

. Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Opium, ana. two drachms, Mirrh, Pepper, and
Galbanum, ana. one dram, stamp them, and mix them with a little clarified
Honey, and make it into a lump or mass, give thereof at night two round pills
about the bigness of a Pea in the pap of a roasted Apple, and let not the
party drink for two hours after; and if his pain and grief be never so great
it will ease him within one hour or two, and perhaps cause him to sleep
soundly: you may give it two or three nights together, if the Patient be
strong, but if they be very weak, give it every other night three or four
times; but if he be in extreme pain give it when you list: If the stomach be
full of meat or phlegm, it will work less effectually. Probatum.

A powder for the Flux.

. Half ripe Blackberries, dry them, and make them into powder, give the Patient
a draught thereof in a little Tent, or old red Wine, in the morning and evening
for five days if the Flux continue.

A Glister.

. A quart of new Milk from the Cow, and put three or four gads of Steel into
the fire red hot, and quench them in the Milk till half the Milk be consumed;
then take the weight of eight pence of Deeres suet, and stamp it into the Milk,
and mix it well together, and put it in a boulter bag warm; this you may use
four or five times if need require.

For Morphew, or Scurf of face or Skin.

. Of Brimstone beaten into powder two ounces, mix it well with as much black
Soap that stinketh, and tie the same in a linen cloth, and let the same hang
in a pin of strong wine Vinegar, or red Rose Vinegar, for the space of nine
days; then wash any kind of Scurfe or Morphew, either in face, or body,
dipping a cloth in the same Vinegar, and rubbing the face or body therewith,
and let it dry by it self: also drink the water of Strawberries distilled, or
tincture of Strawberries, it certainly kills Morphew or Scurfe: Probat.

To blanch the Face.

. The meat of Lemons having taken away the kernels, and a quantity of fine pure
Sugar, still these, and keep the water to wash your face with every night.

To smooth the Skin.

Mix Capons grease with a quantity of Sugar, let it stand for a few days
close covered, and it will turn to a clear oil, with which anoint your face.

Morphew and Freckles.

Anoint the face with the blood of a Hare, or Bull, this will take away
Morphew, and Freckles, and smooth the skin.

G. For the Gout, or Ache in the joints, knobs, or knots in the flesh. Probat.
REcipe, Of May Butter four ounces, of Cummin seed beaten into fine powder,
half a pound, of black soap, four ounces, of Rue, M. i* of clarified Mutton, M.
ss stamp these in a mortar together, and put to it an Ox gall, and a spoonful
of Bay salt, and fry them together till it be thick, then lay it on a woollen
cloth, and apply it hot to the ach as may be suffered, and let it lie a whole
week unremoved: Then lay on another as long a time, and so lay on a third
plaster as long, which will be three weeks in the whole time; and this will
give ease.

For Gout or Bone-ach.

Take of the best Aqua vitae one penniworth, and another of oil of Bays, mix
them well together, and anoint the place grieved therewith by the fire, warm
the ointment by the fire, and then chafe the place till it be dried in, then
cloth it up warm. Probat.

For the Gout, or Joynt-ach.

The juice of Sage, of Aqua vitae, of oil of Bays, of Vinegar and Mustard,
and of Ox gall, ana p. ae. put altogether in^o (...) bladder, and chase it up
and down with your hand for the space of an hour and half* and keep it for your
use, and anoint the grieved place with it morning and evening.

F^r the Gout.

Stamp well lb iii. of Wallwort, then melt ten pound of May Butter, and put it
thereto, and let it stand nine days together, then boil them half and hour
over a soft fire, then strein it, and anoint the grieved place.

For Gout or Bone-ach.

Anoint the place grieved with very good Aqua composita by the fire, and let
the same drink in; do this three or four times, and whilst it is wet, cast
upon it powder of Olibanum, and sow a cloth thereon, and let it lie on for four
days. Probat.

H Hermes Tree.
FIrst grind to an Amalgame one ounce of Mercury, with one ounce of clear
Spring Water, then put a round vial glass, half full of Rose water, or clear
spring water; then put therein your aforesaid Amalgame, then drop therein one
drop of the best Aqua fortis that can be gotten, and after a quarter of an hour
another drop, and so every quarter of an hour one drop, till you have dropped
therein ten or twelve drops; then with a very gentle heat, on sand or hot
embers, vapor the water away softly, and a brave tree of silver, shall grow in
the galsse to your admiration.

I A Plaster to help any Stitch, or Imposthume wheresoever.
REcipe, The roots of Hollihocks washed clean, and cut in pieces, M. i. sees
them in fair water, until the roots be tender, then take out the roots, and
put into the water, of Fenugreek, and Linseed, ana M i. being first stamped or
bruised, and sees them together in the water, until the water rope like
birdlime, then stamp the Hollihock roots before boiled, and put them to the
Fenugreek, and Linseed, with a handful of Barlie meal, and fry them together,
and if need be, put to some Sheeps suet, and lay a plaster thereof to the
sore, as hot as may be suffered; Let it lie twelve hours at least, and then lay
another to it, and within nine plasters it will work the full effect: It
dissolveth the Plurisie also in applying of three Plaster.

For an Imposthume of the Stomach.

Whosoever shall daily take in a draught of Ale or Beer, a spoonful of the
powder of Matselon, or Scabios, it will destroy any Imposthume within him.
Probat.

A good Oil to bring in joints which have been out seven years, to give
strength to veins and sinnews, and to keep them brought in, in their places.

You must first bathe the place thoroughly that is out for three or four days,
with Oil of Cammomil, then against the Patient goes to bed, you must have two
Neats feet, or so many of them as may cover the dislocation, with the peelings
round about: then lay the insides of the feet in thick and broad flakes to the
place, as hot as the party can endure it, and in the morning remove them, and
after with it anoint the place and the flakes aforesaid with Oil of Cammomil,
and then apply fresh peelings. This for certain has brought in joint, that
which has been out of joint six years, and gives strength to the veins and
sinnews, and will keep the joints i^ their first place; and the effect will
appear in three or four dressings.

For the Black Jaundies.

Spread Wheat-straw abroad upon a clean floor in a close house, and put in
Geese, and watch them when they dung: take their dung up with a knife, and
scrape away the white about the dung, until you have a good quantity of it,
then dry this in an Oven, make powder thereof, and drink of it morning and
evening warmed in Ale, and it will cure both the black and yellow Jaundies.

2. Dry the gall of a Raven, and grate it into powder, and take a quantity of
it in a spoon, temper it with Beer or Ale, and drink this fasting three
mornings together: Or take nine or ten seeds of Hemp, do away the husks, and
bruise them, and put them in Ale, and drink this fasting, for eight or nine
days.

For the black Jaundies,

. Of Herb Ambrose, Betony, Mugwort, ana. M. i. three or four Dock roots clean
picked, washed, and scraped, stamp all these together in a Mortar, till they be
beaten indifferent small; then take Spicknard, Turmerick, and Gallingal, ana.
p. ae. stamp them in a Mortar likewise, then put the Herbs into a clean cloth
by themselves, and tie them fast with strings, and hang them in a gallon or two
of good Ale newly ready to be tunned up, and after three or four days, drink a
good draught thereof every morning next to your heart, and fast after it three
hours, and do so the like when you go to bed.

To make Hartshorn Jelly.

. Two ounces of Hartshorn being small rasped, and a pint of fair water, one
Nutmeg sliced, one race of Ginger, a branch of Rosemary, boil all these
together in an earthen Pipkin over a soft fire, till it be very clammy, then
strain it into a Basin, and put to it Rosewater and Sugar.

For (...) yellow Jaundies.

. Celandine, English Saffron, and powder of Ivory, sees them in white Wine,
and drink thereof eight or nine days mane and vesperi.

2.. The Urine of the Patient, and drink it with the juice of Horehound.

3. Sees the juice of Cammomill, Morrell, and Mouseare, in white Wine twice,
and drink of it fasting.

For the yellow Jaundies.

. The pap of a roasted Pippin, and put as much powder of Saffron as will lie on
a penny, and twice as much Hartshorn finely scraped, mingle them well
together, and give the Patient three mornings together the quantity of a
Nutmeg, and as much at going to bed.

2.. Of the inner rind of Barberry bark, and Goose dung that feeds on grass,
and wash the white of it, and a little Saffron, steep these in Ale, and let the
Patient drink it in the morning fasting.

3.. Of red Nettle-tops M. i. sees them in a pint of Ale, and drink the same
four or five mornings together.

4.. Alicant, or hard Spanish Soap, and a little stale Ale in a Cup; rub the
Soap against the bottom of the Cup till the Ale be white, then shave a little
Ivory, and let the Patient drink of this first and last till he be recovered:
Also take Celandine leaves, and put them into your Stockings next to your feet.

5. Put a good handful of Celandine leaves into a quart of white Wine, boil
them to a pint: in the winter use the roots, and drink thereof morning and
evening.

6. Cut out the core of a good big Apple, put into the place some sweet Butter,
a little Turmerick, and English Saffron, cover it with the top you cut off,
roast it tender, and let the sick eat of this three or four mornings together.

7.. One pennyworth of Turmerick, of the middle rind of the Barberry bark M.
ii. of Celandine M. i. sees the Celandine, and the bark, in Ale-wor^^ putting
to it a gallon of new Ale at the tunning, and when it has stood two nights,
draw it at the spicket, and warm it with a gad of fine Steel, and put to it the
powder of the Turmerick, and drink of it first and last.

8.. The juice of Liverwort, and the scrapings of Ivory, and of Saffron, as
much as you shall think fit, of French Soap as much as a Chestnut, bind them
all in the corner of a linen cloth, and swinge them up and down in fair water,
till all the virtue be gone into the water, and give the Patient to drink of it.

L. For a lame Leg.
REcipe. Aqua composita, and oil of Roses, anae. p. ae. mix them together
well, and anoint the greived place with it morning and evening, but let the
Patient first be well rubbed with a warm cloth. Probatum.

For the same.

. Oil of Exter, oil Olive, and Aqua vitae, and Beast^ gall, ana. p. ae. Mix
them all well together, and anoint the lame leg therewith twice every morning
and evening, for the space of a fortnight; but always use to rub the place
first very well with warm clothes.

For chopped Lips.

Rub them with your sweat behind your ears, and this will make them smooth and
well colored.

A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption.

. Of Earth-wormes two pound, in a May morning, those with black heads are best,
you may gather enough; put these in white Wine for three or four hours then
slit and wash them in the same Wine, and in another Wine, and lay them in an
earthen pan on straw or sticks laid a cross, and put them into an Oven after
the bread is drawn, and so use them till they be so dry, that you may pownd
them, then searce it, and beat it again till it be as fine as flower: then keep
it for your use, which you must take twice a day, in the morning when you wake,
and at four in the afternoon, as much as will lie on sixpence, or eightpence;
take it in a spoonful of warm Broth, or mulled Sack, or Mace Ale, and drink a
pretty draught of the Broth to wash it down: if you take it in mulled Sack, or
Mace Ale, take not above four spoonfuls, use this for a month, but be careful
of taking cold.

To make a Laxative Whey.

. One pound and a half of clarified Whey, Sena half an ounce, four penny weight
of Annise seeds, of Hops half a handful, of Borrage, and Buglosse, ana. half a
handful, Fumitory p. i. sees all these in the clarified Whey until half be
consumed, drink of it two mornings together.

A good Laxative for a Child.

. Of Violets three handfuls (if you cannot get them, as much of the leaves,)
sees them in running water, from a pottle to a quart, then take of Almonds one
pound, stamp them small, and temper them with the water, and make an Almond
Milk of it, and let the child eat and drink of the Milk, and also if need
require, of the water by it self with a little Sugar.

To cause Looseness.

. Coloquintida and mix it with Honey, and Bulls Gall, then apply this
plaister-wise to the belly, and this will do it: Also take Wool, or Silk, and
dip it in the juice of Sowbread roots, and Wine, and use it as you use a
Suppository.

For a costive by burnt Choler.

. Of Mallows, Mints, Wormwood, and Violet leaves, ana. half a handful, sees
these in the water of the sick, and when they are well sodden, press out the
water from the Herbs, and stamp the Herbs in a Mortar, and fry them in May
Butter, or fresh Grease, and make a plaster of it, and apply it warm unto the
belly, and change it once a day,

For Rheum procuring a Cough of the Lungs

. A quarter of a pint of good Sack, of Elacampane roots half an ounce, as much
Licorice, powder them very finely, of the best refined Sugar half a pound,
boil them together, till they rope in nature of a Sirrup, then take hereof the
quantity of a big Filbert mane and vesperi, and after as often as the Cough
tickles you.

2. Take Virgin Honey, and old Conserve of red Roses, ana. p. ae. mingle them
well together, and take at morning and night three Pills as big as a Nutmeg,
and keep warm after it.

A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs.

. A pottle of spring water, put into it of Oak leaves, M. ss. of Colts foot, of
Butter burr, roots and leaves, ana M. i. of S. John's wort, Mousear, Maiden
hair, ana p. i. 3 or 4 Hearts tongue leaves, a little Liverwort, 6 branches of
Maiden Hysop, 3 or 4 branches of Rosemary, pick and wash all these clean, 16
Figs slit in two: Set this over the fire, and let it boil softly, till half be
consumed, then take it off the fire, and strein it, and put into it of loaf
Sugar lb ss. and when it is melted, put unto it six of seven drops of oil of
Sulphur, and put it into a glass, and shake it well, and drink every morning
eight spoonfulls, which you must drink leasurably, that it may the better fall
on the Lungs; about four of the clock in the afternoon you must take as much:
this will both cleanse, and heal the Lungs* and stop the coughing.

M A cooling Almond Milk.
TAke Lettice, Spinach, Succory, Violets, langde Beef, Endive, and red Fennel,
ana. half a handful, three spoonful of Anniseseeds, five whole Maces, and one
Nutmeg cut into pieces, sees all these in a pottle of running water to a
quart, then blanch your skins, and beat them with the cold seeds, and so draw
it with this decoction, and put into it Sugar, and Manus Christi, to sweeten it.

N A Water to restore Nature.
TAke of good new Milk three pound, of red Wine-one pound, the yolks of four
and twenty new laid Eggs, having their whites taken out, beat the Eggs well
with the Wine and Milk, and put thereto as much fine Manchet as will almost
suck up the liquour, distill this with a soft fire, take two or three spoonfuls
of this usually in your broth two or three times a day: this is rather to be
used in Hectic Fevers then in other diseases, because they are always hot in
the palms of their hands, and in the soles of their feet, both after sleep,
and after meat, which show the consumption of the solid, and fleshy parts of
the body.

To restore Nature consumed.

Steep the yolks of two new laid Eggs in six ounces of Vinegar six hours,
then take them out, and with four Dates, and a pint of Muskadine, or Alicant,
make a Cawdle therewith as follows: Take of Rosewater one pound, a pint of
Muskadine, boil therein a dishful of the Pithes of an Ox back clean picked, a
large sawcer full of good Currants clean washed, four yolks of Eggs, six Dates,
a stick of Cinnamon, and a good Nutmeg; make a Cawdle of this with Sugar, and
having so done, strain it, and drink thereof at morning fasting, and at four in
the afternoon: it is singular good for a weak back, and decaying of nature.

P For the French Pox.
REcipe, Of Lignum vitae, lb i. of Sarsaparilla, v. of Sena Alexandrina, iv. of
Sassafras iv. of Bole Armon. i. of Chalk, i. of Hermodactilis, ii. of French
Barlie ii. bruised, of long Pepper a half penniworth, of Saffron one
penniworth, of London Triacle i. Boil all these in four gallons of spring water
till half be consumed, when it is to be boiled put in the long Pepper, Saffron,
London Triacle, Bole Armoniack, and the Hermodactilis: What is to be pounded,
pound; and what to be bruised, bruise; let it boil a good while after those
Ingredients are put into the pot, close stopped: Then strain it, and with the
dregs you may make a smaller drink for the Patient to drink at meat, or when
he is dry; but of the fomer drink he must drink iiii thrice a day: Viz. at
eight of the clock in the morning, at noon, and at 10 at night: He must eat
dried Biscuit, and great Raisins, and his meat must be mutton, dry roasted
without Salt. The party must also take this ensuing Purge twice, before he
drink the drink: viz. six penniworth of Pulvis Sanctus, with i. of Sirrup of
Roses solutive, well mixed in lb ss of white Wine, drink it blood warm,
fasting two hours, and then take some warm broth.

Another.

Two or three doses of Doctor Vanhocks Rosa vitae, given at several times is
very good in this disease.

Another.

. Of Diaphaenicon, ii. as much e succo rosarum, drink this in the morning at
six or seven a clock with iv. of white wine, bloodwarm, for three four or five
days: It is an excellent purge, and will give you six or eight stools within
two hours. Probat.

A Posset good in all cold Agues, or Pestilentiall Diseases.

Make a Posset with small Beer, with a quart of milk, as clear as you can, then
take of Goats rye, M. i. when you have taken off the curd from the Posset, put
the Goats rye into i^, and let it boil a good while; then put three or four
branches of Scordium into it, then take it from the fire, and cover it a while;
then strein it, and give the Patient near a pint of it at a draught warm, an
hour before his sit comes; then let h^^ lie still one hour to sweat, or two, or
longer if he can endure it, use this for three times; but let the Patient be
careful he take no cold.

The Plague Water.

. Hearts horn rasped, i. one root of Saxifrage, the stems and seeds of red
Sage, Rue, Elder leaves and berries, red Bramble leaves, one root of Angelica,
or the leaves thereof, Tormentill the roots and Leaves, ana M. i. two Oranges,
English snake-weed the roots and leaves, Virginia snake-weed a small quantity,
which is much better then ours, of Goats rue; ana, M. i. Butterburr leaves and
roots, and Pimpernel, ana M. ss. Scordium six branches, Marigold Flours, and
Borage flours, and Rosemary flours, ana M. i. White Ginger ii. dried Figs
eight, old Ivy Berries black, two spoonfuls, Walnuts forty, stamp them all in
a mortar, and steep them twelve hours in White wine, lb ii. and white Wine
Vinegar, lb ss. then strein it through a fine strong linnen*cloth; and add
unto it i. of Bole Armoniack finely poudered, and a little Pomecitrine rinds
one penniworth, and distill it in a dry Still, and take morning and evening one
spoonful. This is good for any Fever, ague, small Pox, Measels, or any
Infection: If it purges, as it will if there be any infection, you must give
the Patient two spoonfuls of this till it has done his working.

An Antidote against the Pestilence, by Dr. B.

. Three pints of good Muscadine, of Rue, M. i. of brown Sage as much, bruise
and boil the Herbs in the Muscadine till a third part be consumed, then put to
of Ginger ss. of Nutmegs thirty two, a penniworth of long Pepper grossly
bruised into the Wine, and let it boil one walm, then take it off and strein
it, then put into it a penniworth of Mithridate, two penniworth of London
Triacle, and a quarter of a pint of Angelica water, drink one spoonful of
this every morning fasting one hour after; but if the party be infected, then
let him drink two spoonfuls, and sweat upon it.

For the shaking Palsy.

Take of Cloves two or three ounces, as much of Nutmegs, powder them small, and
mix them with oil of Lavender, to make them sit for a plaster, spread it on
Leather, and lay it to the nape of the neck, and wrists of the hands; Or as I
have proved, Take three penniworth of London Triacle, a penny pot of Neat
oil, a penny pot of Sherrie Sack, mix these three things together well, and
eat a spoonful or two every morning fasting, and at any time of the day; after
this once or twice a day if you please take a spoonful, or eat it upon new
white bread. This will help the shaking Palsy, and trembling of the heart, and
make a man cheerful and merry. Probatum. I had the shaking Palsy by working
in Mercury, no man more, and this in fourteen days cured me; God be praised.

Another.

Steep Mugwort in Rosewater, wash the hands therewith, and it will cure their
shaking and trembling.

To restore lost Speech.

Lay a thin piece of raw Beef to the forehead of them that have lost their
voice, and let it lie one all night.

To restore speech to an Apoplectick.

Beat the Kernels of Peach stones together into powder, and give the Patient a
good draught thereof in Rennish Wine.

A Restorative Electuary.

Take of great Raisins cleansed from their stones, lb ii. of Licorice scraped,
and bruised, i. put these in lb ii. ss. of clear water, sees them well, and
strein them, and put into their streining, of Mirabolans, Hebal, Citrine, and
Indic, cleared from their stones, ana ii. of Emblick and Bellerick, ana ii.
boil them, press and strain them, then put thereto of pure Sugar, lb i. and
when they are boiled up to the thickness of a Sirrup; add in the end of choice
Cinnamon, ss. Cloves and Galingal, ana ii. of Nutmegs, number. ii. of Fennel, and
Annise-seed, ana i. Make it into an Electuarie, and put it up into a clean Box,
agreeable to the complexion of the Patient that shall use it; as for the
spleen, in a Tamarisk, or Ash box, or Juniper for phlegmatic persons, and so
accordingly of others.

In this Electuary are Medicines for principal Members, viz. the Heart, the
Head, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Generative parts. It is first hot, then
moist, after cold, and last dry.

This Medicine was invented by Arnoldus de villa nova for hindering old age,
conservation of health, prolongation of life: it not only comfort, but
purges superfluities remaining from the nourishment past, keeps back gray
ha^res strengthens the stomach, and gives a good color to the whole body.

A Restorative good in all diseases.

Take Elder flours, the E^e of S. John Baptist at Midsummer, according to the
Planet which is Jupiter, or according to the Sun dial at twelve a clock: Dry
these in the East, stamp and powder them, then take Borage water, and put into
it seven or nine grains of the Pissle of a Deer, dried and grated to powder,
with a spoonful of the powder of the flouers aforesaid: Infuse them for 12
hours, in three or four ounces of the water for the Patient to drink for 15.
days together. It restores old age, and strengthens the back. In fine, this
is miraculous for all diseases.

For the Rickets.

Take of cream two pound, and boil it to an oil or take of unsalted Butter, lb
ii. take three or four good handfulls of Cammomil, mi^ce it small, and put it
into the oil or Butter, and let it boil on a soft fire till the herbs become
crispe, and that it be very bitter; then strein it, and anoint the child's
sides downwards, and the bottom of the belly and thighs morning and evening:
Also to give the child*thrice a day half a dosen spoonfuls of Hart's-tongue
water, in which you have steped seven or eight Cloves, and some b^own Sugar Candy to sweeten it: If the child mend not with this; Of shoomakers shreds,
two or three M. boil them in fair water, and take off the oil, and anoint the
child, as before prescribed: If the child be not weaned, you must wean it,
otherwise no Medicine will recover it: Also you must carry it as little as you
can in your arms, but when you do, be stirring it, and make it try to use the
legs, if it be of that bigness.

Doctor Vanhecks Rosa Vitae.

. Mercury sublimate sublimed with iv. of Roman or Danisk Vittriol, Antimonie
crude, ii. grind them well together an hour and half; retort these with sand
half way up the body of the glass, with a gentle fire five hours, and then
increase the fire by degrees, till with a good fire red begins to come (into an
Urinal half full of water) which precipitates that which is distilled out into
a snow white powder, which powder wash three or four times with fair water till
the sharpness be gone. Then make an extract of Zedoarie, Cinnamon, and
Galingale, ana, i. and red Sanders ii. with spirit of Wine vi. mingle this
Extract with i. of the foresaid white powder, and grind them together well,
and it will dry it self into a red powder.

It is given for the French Pox about four grains in the pap of an Apple with
butter, this will give some five or six vomits; It also helps Agues and
Fevers, Dropsy and diverse other diseases, and is constantly sold for three
shillings four pence the dose, Probat per me T. S.

S A Sear-cloth for diverse causes.
REcipe, Of Oil olive, lb i. ss. red Lead, lb i ss. of white Lead, lb i.
Castile Soap iiii. Oil of Bays ii. Put your Oil olive in a Pipkin, and put
thereto your Oil of Bays, and the Castile Soap. Sees these over a gentle
fire of Embers till it be well mingled and melted together, then strew a little
red lead and white, being mingled together in powder, still stirring it with a
great spatter of wood, and so strew in more of your Lead by little and little,
till all be in, stirring it still by the bottom to keep it from burning, for
an hour and half together; them make the fire somewhat bigger, till the redness
be turned into a gray color. But you must not leave stirring it, till the
matter be turned into a perfect black color as Pitch; then drop a little upon
a wooden trencher, and if it cleave not to the trencher, nor your singer, it is
enough: Then take long linen clothes, and dip them therein, and make your
Sear-cloths thereof, they will keep 20 years; let your powder of your Lead be
searsed very fine, and shred the Soap small.

The Virtues of this Sear-cloth are; Being laid to the Stomach, it does provoke
appetite, and takes away any pain in the stomach; being laid to the Belly, it
is a present remedy for the Colic: Being laid to the back, it is a present
remedy for the Flux, and running of the Reins, heat of the Kidneys, and
weakness of the Back: It helps all swellings and bruises, and takes away
Aches. It breaks Felons, and other Imposthumes, and heals them. It draws
out any running humor, and helps him without breaking of the skin, and being
applied to the Fundament, helps any disease there: It helps all old Sores,
and will be made in six hours.

For the Stone.

. The Claws of a brown Pionie root, and the root, and Jet Beads, ana p. ae.
dry the claws and roots, and powder them, and the jet also very finely, then
mingle them, and in Ale or White wine drink a little of the powder.

2. Peel a red Onyon, slice him and put him into a pint of good white Wine, let
him lie six hours, then strein it, and drink of it twice in a sit, and it
will expel the stone.

For Stone, Strangurie, and Colic.

Take the inner rind of the young branches of a Hasell tree, boil them in
small Ale till half be consumed, and let him that has the Strangurie, drink
half of it at a draught, let the Patient drink a draught of it first and last,
for nine days together, for it never fails.

For the Stone in the Bladder.

. Of Turpentine iiii. and burn it to powder, then mix two drachms thereof with
four ounces of Saxifrage water, and give it twice a week, in the morning to the
Patient, and this will not only preserve him from the stone, but drive it out,
if any use this but two months. Probat.

2. Stamp two Bees in Beer and drink it, and it will cause Urine to come.

To break and drive out the Stone.

. The juice or water strained out of Raddish roots, mix it with White wine,
and the powder of Turpentine, dried in the Sun, and so drink: This is an
excellent Medicine to drive out the stone.

To cause Urine and break the Stone.

Take Parsely, and stamp it in White wine, then strain it well, and drink a
good draught thereof, and this will cause you to make water, and break the
stone; but you must use this five or six times. Probat.

. Powder of Brionie berries, and drink it in water, wherein Watercresses have
been boiled, and it will both help you, and give you ease.

For the Stone.

. The blood of two Hares, as much Sheeps or Goats milk, mingle them well
together, and boil them in a new pot to a coal, beat it to powder, and searce
it finely, and give the Patient hereof a good quantity in a little fountain
water, lukewarm, this will break the stone to dust, and make it come away. To
try this, put the stone into it, with a little water bloud-warm, and in half an
hour it will dissolve it into pieces.

2. Take five Cloves of Garlic, and stamp, and strain them in a draught of
Rhennish wine, and so drink it. This being taken three times together is a sure
Remedy.

For the Stone in Reins and Bladder.

1. Scrape Seahorse pissle to powder, and drink thereof every morning with
white wine, and a little oil of Almonds, and this will cure the stone of the
Kidneys and Bladder, being given four ounces at a draught.

2. Powder of Manati, which is a stone growing in a Sea-cows head, being
exhibited in the aforesaid manner, will do the like. The white for the man,
and the yellow for the woman.

3. Spikenard, Carraway, Fennel, Annise, and Cumminseeds, Cinnamon, and
Galingale, ana, ss. Gromwell seed, and Liquorice, ana i. beat them all into
powder, and take half a spoonful of this powder in Ale or Beer warmed, and
after walk an hour before you eat or drink, do this four or five times, and
you shall find a notable operation.

A Posset for the Stone.

Make a Posset very thin and clear with a quart of Milk, and put into it
eight or ten roots of Althea, and two Parsley roots, having their pithes taken
out, and two Asparagus roots picked and washed clean, so that no dirt be on it,
and let them boil well in the Milk-Posset; then strain it clean, and let the
Patient drink a good draught, put into it as much Sal prunellae as will make it
somewhat Brackish; this is a safe and admirable Medicine.

2.. The brains of a Magpy newly killed, and put it into a wine Glass of
white Wine, and stir it well till it be thoroughly mixed, and then drink it, and
this will presently cause Urine, and ease the pain.

For the Spleen.

Sees the rindes, and keys, of an Ash tree very tender and well in white
Wine, and drink a good draught thereof for six or seven mornings together, it
does much ease the Patient: when you drink this, anoint the Spleen with
Dialthea every morning and evening, applying Emplastrum de Meliloto pro Spleen
to the place. Probat.

Another.

Put of oil of Gold one dram, into half a pound of Anniseseed-water, shake
it well together every time you take of it, and take a spoonful at a time, and
it will help you. Probat.

Heat a pair of Tongs six times red hot, and quench them in white Wine; drink
this nine mornings together, and this will help the Spleen.

For Swelling of Arms, Legs, and Feet.

. Linseed, Wheat, Bran, Brooklime, Chickweed, and Groundsel, ana. one handful,
sees them in a pottle of white Wine altogether till it be thick, then lay a
plaster thereof to the swollen place as hot as you can suffer it, and it will
help it with three or four plaster.

For Sinews, and Nerves, cut asunder.

. Of Earth-wormes one handful, put them in a cloth, and cleanse them well from
the earth, that done, take Sack half a pound, and of Sallade oil half a pound,
mix them together, and infuse the Worms in this until they be suffocated,
then stop the pot very close, and lute it well, and set the pot in hot horse
dung for eight and forty hours, till the Worms be rotten, then take them out
and press them, and add thereto of common Oil half an ounce, of Venice
Turpentine two drachms, then relute your pot, and set it on a soft fire for
three or four hours.

For Bruises, or streined Sinews.

1. Anoint the place greived with Aqua composita, and Neat-foot oil
lukewarm, laying hot clothes thereon.

2. Stamp live Earth-wormes, and apply them to Sinews cut.

For shrinking of Sinews.

. Two Swallows nests that are ready to fly, of Lavender Cotton, the tops of
young Thyme, the strings that run out of Strawberries, Cammomil, and Hollihock
leaves, ana. one handful; stamp the Swallows quick and the Herbs together,
till no feathers be seen, then put thereto of May Butter one pound or two, and
stamp it again to a salve, and let it stand again close for seven days; then
sees it the space of two hours with a quick fire, stirring it still; then
strain it thorough a course cloth, and anoint the joints therewith, or any
other place where the Sinews are shrunk, and use often to stretch out the
joints and splint.

For Sinews shrunk, and to supple impotent Limbs.

. Rosemary, Thyme, Parsley, Hysop, Bays, Sage, Lavender Spike, Lavender Cotton,
Balm, Cammomil, Roman Wormwood, Brooklime, Smallage, Yarrow, red Nettles,
Lovage, Herb Robert, Plantain, Rag-wort, Vervain, Adders-tongue, Daises,
Nightshade, Comfry, Orpine, Strawberry strings, Violet leaves, Walwort, Amber
leaves, Southernwood, Knot-grasse, Vine tops, Valerian, Honisuckle leaves,
Polipodium of the Oak, Dill, Mallows, Perwinckle, Rue, of these one handful,
slice them a little, and stamp them very small in a Mortar, with powder of
Cloves bruised small, put thereto oil Olive, and Neats-foot oil, so much that
they may swim, mixing them together, set it on the fire till all the strength
of the Herbs be boiled out, and take heed it do not burn; then strain out the
Herbs, and clarify it over the fire, then put to it a little Wax to harden it
withal: this Ointment should be made between May and Bartholomewtide. Probat.

To cure an old Sore.

. Of fresh Butter one pound, put it into a pot in the month of April, then
take of Violets, of Rosemary, red Sage, Buglosse, Wormwood, Broom, Hysop,
Pennygrasse, Vervain, Selfeheal, Hypericon, and Speedwell, ana. one handful;
gather them as they be ready, and put them into the pot with the Butter, and
set them into the Sun until Michaelmas, then take it out of the pot, and beat
it in a Mortar, then make it up plaister-wise, and reserve it for your use.

For the Scurvy.

Chop small the knotted place of a Pine Tree, and boil it well in A^e or ^eer,
that the steem may come out; and drink of it, and it will cure the Scurvy: This
was Colonel Hamiltons Secret.

To cool the Skin, and heal a Sore.

. Of oil Olive one pound and a half, Wax six ounces, of Minium two ounces,
Litharge of Gold two ounces, Ceruse one ounce and a half, Camphire one ounce
and a half; first boil your Oil and Wax till it be melted, then take it from
the fire, and put in all the aforesaid things, being beaten very small and
searced, and stir them together till they be cold, and as occasion serves
anoint the sore place.

To help pains in the Stomach.

. Four grains of Mastick, Swallow them every night to bedwards; this
preserves the Stomach from all pains, and cures the same.

An Ointment for the Stomach.

. Capons Grease five pound, Origanum, Wormwood, the tops of Rosemary, Stomach
Mints, ana. M. i. and a few Buds of red Roses picked; chop the ^earbs very
small, and pownd them in a stone Mortar, afterward boil them in the Capons
Grease, till you see the goodness of the Herbs boiled out, then strain them,
and put so many more Herbs as aforesaid, and let them lie all night, then
boil them all again, till the virtue of the Herbs be boiled out; then strain
them, and take of Cloves, and Mace, ana.. i. beaten very small, and let it
boil a walm or two, keeping it still stirring that it may not grow black, then
take it from the fire, and put it into a pan, or broad dish, and stir it till
it be almost cold, and put into it a pint of Aqua vitae, and a quart of the
distillation of Vine leaves; this is good for any thing that lies heavy upon
the stomach, being anointed therewith.

T For the pricking of a Thorn.
REcipe. Of Violet leaves one handful, of Mallow leaves one handful, stamp them
together, and take a quantity of Bores Grease, and of Wheat Bran one handful,
set it on the fire in clean water, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to
the grief.

To draw a Thorn or Splinter out of the flesh.

Moisten the tongue of a Fox, and make it soft with Vinegar if it be dry, put
this on the thorn, or any place where you would have any thing drawn out, and
it will do it.

2. Black Soap laid to it, will also do it.

For the Toothache.

Take of Opium i. distill it in ii. of the best Aqua vitae, and hold a spoonful
of this in your mouth, and it will ease you Probatum.

To keep Teeth White, and kill the Worms

Take a little Salt in the morning fasting, and hold it under your tongue till
it be melted, and rub your teeth with it. Probatum.

W To take away a Wen.
Take the powder of unslak'd Lime, and mix it well with black Soap, and anoint
the Wen therewith, and this will waste it, and when the root is come out,
anoint it well with Oil of Balsome, and this will heal it.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
THis Treatise has passed the view and ^pprobation, both of juditious
Physicians and Chirurgians and has been judged worthy to have a new vesture
put upon him, and to be vindicated from the obscurity and darkness it has
lain involved and eclipsed in this many years; being collected out of the
Authorities of the most excellent, both former and later Writers, and
confirmed, strengthened, and approved, by the late experiences of many well
practitioned Chirurgians; being formerly commended to public view, by the
approbation of a late famous Servant, and Chirurgian to King James deceased;
who seriously considering the sacilenesse of providing the Medicines, with
their approvednesse in a necessitous time, and in places remote, both from able
Physicians and Chirurgians, the danger of the present Infection requiring
speedy help, to such as might have occasion to make use of these Medicines; not
doubting, but the charitable intentions of the careful Author, publishing it
on purpose for the public good, shall find the acceptance of so necessitous a
work, as is wished by

A. M.

The Author to the Reader.
Whereas there are diverse Receipts set down in this Book, which are written in
Latin, in Characters used by Physicians and Apothecaries, which cannot so
fitly be brought into our English phrase; and because their quantities are set
down according to the Latin order observed in the making up their Receipts
prescribed, I have, for the better ease and understanding of the Reader, set
down the signification of their weights and measures, according to their
Characters.

A Handful is written thus M. 1. Half a Handful thus M. ss. A little small
Handful thus P. 1. A Scruple thus. 1. Half a Scruple, x. Grains, or thus. ss.
A Dram thus. 1. An Ounce thus.. 1. Half an Ounce, or half a Dram. ss.. ss.
A Grain thus Gra. 1. A Drop thus Gut. 1. The number of any thing thus Nu. 1.
etc. Half of any thing thus ss. A Pound, or Pint, thus lib. 1. Twenty Grains
make a Scruple. Three Scruples make a Dram. Eight Drachms make an Ounce
Twelve Ounces a Physic Pound. Ana. is, of either of them so much. P. ae. is,
equal parts, or parts alike. S. a. Secundum Artem, according to Art. So much
as shall suffice is marked thus q. s
A defensative against the Plague.
The first Treatise
CHAP. I. What the Plague is.
THe ancient Physicians in times past have greatly doubted, what the essential
cause of this disease, which we commonly call the Plague or Pestilence, should
be; yet all do agree, that it is a pernicious and contagious Fever, and
reckoned to be one of the number of those which are called Epidemia, chiefly
proceeding of adusted and melancholy blood, which may be easily perceived, by
the extreme heat and inflammation, which inwardly they do feel, that are
infected therewith; first assaulting the heart, and astonishing the vital
spirits, as also by the exterior Carbunkles and botches which it produces;
whose malignity is such, both in young and old, rich and poor, noble and
ignoble, that using all the means, which by Art can, or may be devised, yet in
some it will in no sort give place, until it has by death conquered the party
infected therewith.

CHAP. II. Cause of the Plague.
THere are diverse causes whereof this disease may proceed, as sundry Writers
do allege, as by over great and unnatural heat and drought, by great rain
and inundations of waters, or by great store of rotten and stinking bodies,
both of men and beasts, lying upon the face of the earth unburied* as in the
time of wars has been seen, which does so corrupt the air, as that thereby
our Corn, Fruits, Herbs, and Waters, which we daily use for our food and
sustenance, are infected: also it may come by some stinking dunghils, filthy
and standing pooles of water, and unsavory smells, which are near the places
where we dwell, or by thrusting a great company of people into a close, narrow,
or straight room, as most commonly we see in Ships, common Gaoles, and in
narrow and close lanes and streets, where many people do dwell together, and
the places not orderly kept clean and sweet. But most commonly, in this our
time, it is dispersed amongst us, by accompanying our selves with such as
either have, or lately have had the disease themselves, or at least have been
conversant with such as have been infected therewith: But for the most part it
does come by receiving into our custody some clothes, or such like things, that
have been used about some infected body, wherein the infection may lie hidden a
long time, as has been too too often experimented, with repentance too late in
many places, It may also come by Dogs, Cats, Pigs, and Weasels, which are prone
and apt to receive and carry the infection from place to place. But howsoever
it does come, let us assure our selves, that it is a just punishment of God,
laid upon us for our manifold sins and transgressions against his divine
Majesty: for as Seneca says, Quicquid patimur ab alto venit, What crosses or
afflictions soever we suffer, it comes from the Lord, either for a trial of
our faith, or a punishment for our sins. Wherefore to distinguish any farther
thereof I think it needless, for my intent is in brief sort, so exactly as I
can, to show the means how to prevent the same, as also how to cure it when we
are infected. But before I enter to treat thereof, I think it not amiss, to
show what forewarnings and tokens are given us before hand of the coming
thereof, thereby the better to prevent the same by prayer and repentance.

CHAP. III. Warnings of the Plague to come.
AVicen, a noble Physician says, that when we see the natural course of the
air, and seasons of the year to be altered, as when the spring time is cold,
clowdy, and dry, the harvest time stormy, and tempestuous, the mornings and
evenings to be very cold, and at noon extreme hot, these do foreshew the Plague
to come. Also when we see fiery impressions in the firmament, especially in the
end of summer, as comets and such like, and that in the beginning of harvest we
see great store of little frogs, red toades, and myse on the earth abounding
extraordinarily: or when in summer we see great store of toades creeping on the
earth having long tails, of an ashy color on their backs, and their bellies
spotted and of diverse colors, and when we see great store of gnats swiming on
the waters, or flying in great companies together, or when our trees and herbs
do abound with Caterpillars, Spiders, Moaths etc. which devour the leaves on
the trees and herbs on the earth, it shows the air to be corrupt, and the
Plague shortly after to follow. Also by the beasts of the field we may perceive
it (especially sheep) which will go mourning with their heads hanging down
toward the ground, and diverse of them dying without any manifest cause known
unto us. Also when we see young Children flock themselves together in
companies, and then will feign some one of their company to be dead amongs
them, and so will solemnize the burial in a mournful sort, this is a token
which has been well observed in our age to foreshew great mortality at hand.
Also when we see rivers of water to overflow without any manifest cause, or
suddenly vanish away and become dry: And when clear well-springs do suddenly
become foul and troubled. Also when the Smallpox does generally abound both
in young and old people, all these do foreshew the Plague to come.

CHAP. IIII. Shows how to prevent the Plague.
THere are three principal means how to prevent this contagious disease: The
first and chiefest is to acknowledge our manifold sins and wickedness unto
almighty God our heavenly Father, with a hearty repentance and amendment of our
former sins committed against his divine majesty.

The second means is to fly far off from the place infected, and as Rondoletius
says, not over hastily to return thither again for fear of an after-clap:
which saying is confirmed by Valetius in these words, Non enim morietur in
bello, qui non est in illo: and the farther from it, the safer shall we be, yet
were it a very uncharitable course that all which are of ability should do so,
for then how should the poor be relieved, and good orders observed: but for
Children it were best to send them far off from the place, because their bodies
are most apt to receive the infection, as also for that they cannot so
continually use antidots and preservatives, which by their great heat may
endanger them almost so much as the disease it self.

The third means consists chiefly in three points, which are these: Order,
Diet, and Physical helps. For the first you shall have a care that your houses
be kept clean and sweet, not suffering any foul and filthy clothes or stinking
things to remain in or about the same: and in summer season to deck your
windows, and strew your floors with sweet and wholesome herbs, flowers, and
leaves, of Mints, Balm, Penniroyall, Lavender, Thime, Majoram, red-Roses,
Carnations, Gelliflowers and such like for your windows, your floors to be
strowed with green Rushes, and Mints, Oaken and Willow leaves, Vine leaves and
such like: your windows which stand toward the North and East, do you always
keep open in the day time, if the air be clear, and that no infected and
unsavory smell be near the same, as Fogs, dunghils, etc. and every morning
before you open either your doors, or windows, as also in the evening when you
go to bed, cause a good fire to be made in your Chamber, and burn some
odoriferous or sweet perfumes in the midst thereof, as hereafter I will show
you, or in stead thereof some Juniper, Frankincense, Bay leaves, Rosemary,
Lavender, Majoram, or such like, which you must always have dried in a
readiness, and so in the fume or smoke thereof to breath and perfume the
clothes which you are to wear.

A good perfume in summer season.

. Rose water and Vinegar, of either six spoonfulls: Rinds of sower Citrons and
Lemons, Bay Leaves, of either the weight of two pence which is. i. Camphire,
the weight of three pence, which is. ss.

The herbs and rinds must be dried and put all together in a perfuming pan, or
instead thereof a peuter dish, set on a chafer of coals, will serve the turn.

Another good perfume in winter.

. Red-Roses Majoram and Myrtles, of either a little handful: Callamint,
Juniper berries, Laudanum, Benjamin, Frankincense, of either. i. which is
weight of seven pence.

The herbs, berries, and Roses being dried, must be made in gross powder, as
also the gumms, and so mixed together, and when ye list, cast some part
thereof on a chafer of coals, and receive the fume thereof.

CHAP. V.
NOw having received the fume as aforesaid, before you go forth of your
chamber, eat some Cordial electuary or preservative, as hereafter you shall
find choice, which I have alwais used with good and happy success, after taking
of the Cordial wash your face and hands with clean water, wherein you must put
a little Vinegar, and then if you list, you may break your fast wirh some good
bread and butter, and in winter season a potch'd Egg is good eaten with some
Vinegar, and for plethorick and melanchole bodies, it were good to drink a
draught of wormwood wine, in the morning fasting, because it resists
putrefaction in the plethorick, and purges bilous matter in the melancholy.

An excellent good preservative which I have always used with good success.

. Conserve of Roses and Borrage flowers, of either two ounces: Minardus
Mithridate, Andromachus triacle, of either half an ounce: Dioscordium, two
drachms, Dialkermes one drachme, Powder of the seed of Citrons pilled, one
drachme, Sirrup of Lemons and sower Citrons, of either half an ounce.

Compound all these together in the form of an opiat, you may eat hereof every
morning the quantity of three beans, and drink a draught of Rennish wine,
Beer, or Ale after it: but for Children and such as are of tender years, so
much as a bean thereof is sufficient, and give them only Beer or Ale after it:
the taking hereof every second or third day will suffice, if you go not into
any suspected company.

Another excellent good preservative.

. Kernils of Wallnuts and Figs, of either four ounces: Leaves of Rue, one ounce
and half, Tormentill roots, four drachms, Rind of sour Citrons, one drachme,
right Bolarmoniak, six drachms, fine Myrrh, two scruples, Saffron, one scruple,
Salt, half a dram: Sirrup of Citrons and Lemons, four ounces.

The herbs, roots, and rinds must be dried, the nuts must be blanched, and the
bolarmoniack must be made in fine powder, and then washed in the water of
Scabios, and dried again, you must pound the figgs and wallnuts in a stone
mortar severally by themselves very small, and the rest must be made in fine
powder, and so mix them altogether in the mortar, and then add thereto sirrup
by little and little, and so incorporate them altogether: you may give this in
the same quantity, and in like sort as the other before.

Another very good.

. Of the confection aforesaid made with Nutts. iiii. Minardus mithridate, four
drachms, Andromachus Triacle, ii. fine terra Sigillata, four scruples, Sirrup
of Limons,. i.

Compound all these together in the mortar, as the other before, you may give
hereof the weight of a groat or six pence, every second or third day, and drink
a draught of Rennish or white wine after it in Winter season, but in the heat
of the year, Sorrel water is best, and in the Spring Scabios or Carduus
Benedictus water.

Also, so much Triacle of Andromachus description eaten every morning as a
bean, with a little conserve of Roses, is a very excellent good preservative.

Valetius does greatly commend the taking of three or four grains of the Bezar
stone every morning, in a spoonful of Scabios water.

I cannot here sufficiently commend the Electuarie called Dioscordium, which is
not only good to resist the infection, but does also expel the venomous
matter of those which are infected, being taken every morning and evening the
quantity of a bean, and drink a draught of Rennish or White wine after it in
winter season, but in Summer a draught of Beer or Ale is best.

In strong and rusticall bodies, and such as are daily laborers, Garlic only
eaten in the morning with some Butter and Salt at breakfast, drinking a cup of
beer or ale after it, has been found to be very good, which is greatly
commended by Galen, who calls it the poor man's Triacle, but in the sanguine,
dainty, and idle bodies it may not be used, because it over-heateth the blood,
causes headache, and universally inflameth the whole body.

CHAP. VI.
NOw when you have taken any of the foresaid Preservatives, it were good and
necessary to wear upon the Region of the heart, some sweet Bag or quilt that
has power to resist venom, and also to carry in your hand some sweet
Pomander, Nodule, or Nosegay, that will comfort the heart, resist venom, and
recreate the vital spirits, as here following is specified and set down.

An excellent quilt or Bag.

. Arsenike cristaline,. i. Diamargaritum frigidum, ii. Diambrae, i.

You must grind the Arsenike in small powder, and then with some of the
infusion of Gum Dragagant in Rose water, you must make a paste, then spread it
on a cloth which must be six inches long, and five inches broad, and spread it
thick: then cover it with another cloth, and so quilt it together, which being
done, fasten it in another bag of crimson taffetie or Sarsenet, and so wear it
against the heart all the day time, but at night leave it off: and here you
must take heed, that when you sweat, you do take it away, for otherwise it
will cause the skin to amper a little. There are some writers which do utterly
forbid the wearing of Arsenike, but thus much I can say, that I have given this
bag unto diverse to wear, with most happy and good success, for never did I
yet know any one that has worn this bag, and used any of the Electuaries
aforesaid, that has been infected with the plague, but for any inconvenience
or accident that has happened thereby, I never found any hitherto, other then
the ampring of the skin as aforesaid.

Another Bag.

. Ireos, ss. Calamus aromat. Ciperus, ana.. i. ss. Storax Calam. root of
Angelica, ana.. iii, Cloves, Mace, ana. i. Red roses dried,. iii.
Pellemountain, Penniroyall, Calamint, Elder flowers, ana.. i ss. Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Yellow Sanders, ana. i. Nardi Italicae,. i. Amber greece and Musk,
ana. six grains.

You must pound all these in powder, and then quilt them in a bag of Crimson
Taffatie as aforesaid.

A Pomander good in the Summer time.

. The rind of Citrons, Red Roses, Nenuphare Roses, Yellow sanders, ana. ss.
Storax liquid, Benjamin, ana.. i. Myrrh,. ii. Ladanum,. i. ss. Musk and Amber,
ana. six grains.

Powder all that is to be powdered, and then work them together in a hot mortar
with a hot pestell, adding unto it in the working some of the Musselage of
dragagant dissolved in sweet Rosewater, or Rosevinegar, and so make your
Pomander.

Another good one for the winter time.

. Storax liquid, Benjamin, Storax calamint, Ladanum, and Myrrh, ana, half a
dram, Cloves one scruple, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each half a scruple. Red
Roses, Yellow Sanders, Ligum aloes, and Ireos, of each half a dram. Calamus
aromaticus, rind of a Citron, ana. four grains, Amber greece, Musk and Civet,
of each six grains.

You may make up this as the other before with some Musselage of the infusion
of Gum dragagant, infused in Rosewater.

A good Nodule for the Summer season.

. Flowers of Violets, red Roses, and Nenuphare, of each one dram, Red, White,
and Yellow sanders, of each half a dram. Camphire, xii grains.

Cause all these to be beaten in gross powder, then knit them all together in
a piece of Taffetie, and when you will use it, then wet it in Rosewater and a
little Vinegar, and so smell to it.

Another Nodule for the Winter season.

. The dried leaves of Mints, Majoram, Thime, Penniroyall, Lavender,
Pellemountain and Balm, of each a little handful. Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Angelica roots, Lignum aloes, of each one dram. Saffron, two scruples.

Cause all these to be infused in Rose Water and Vinegar one whole night, then
wet a sponge in the liquor thereof, and knit it in a piece of Taffaty, or your
handkerchief, whereunto you must smell oftentimes.

A Nosegay for the same purpose.

. Herb grace, three branches: Rosemary, Majoram, Mints, and Thime, of either
one branch: Red-Rose buds and Carnations, of either three or four.

Make your nosegay herewith, then sprinkle him over with Rose Water, and some
rose-Vinegar, and smell often unto it. Also when you suspect to go into any
dangerous or infected company, do you always carry in your mouth a piece of
the root of Angelica, the rind of a Citron dried, or a great Clove, which must
be first infused or steeped one whole night in rose water and Vinegar.

CHAP. VII.
FOr that there is not a greater enemy to the health of our bodies then
costiveness, both in the time of the Plague and otherwise, I have here set down
how and by what means you may keep your self soluble, which you must use once
four and twenty hours, if otherwise you have not the benefit of nature by
custom.

A Suppository.

Take two spoonfulls of Honey, and one spoonful of Bay Salt small pounded,
boil them together until it grow thick, always stirring it in the boiling,
then take it from the fire, and if you list you may add one dram of Ihera
picra simplex unto it, and so stir them well together, and when it is almost
cold, make up your suppositories of what length and bigness you list: and when
you minister any, you must first anoint it with Butter or Sallet oil: you may
keep these a whole year if you put them in Barrowes mort or grease, and so
cover them up close therein.

A good Glister.

. Mallows, Mercury, Beets, Violets, Red-Fennell, of either one handful: Seeds
of Fennel, Annis, Coriander, of either one dram.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of Water, until half the water be
consumed, them strain it, and keep it in a glass close stopped until you need,
for it will keep a whole week. Take of the same decoction, a pint.

. Mel Rosarum, or common Honey, one spoonful: Oil of Violets or oil of
Olives, three ounces, Salt, one dram, They yolk of an Egg or two.

Mix all these together in a mortar and so give it warm in the morning, or two
hours before supper: and if you add unto this one ounce of Diacatholicon it
will be the better.

Raisins laxative how to make them.

. White Wind, three pints and a half, Senuae, half a pound, Fine white sugar,
one pound, Currants, two pound. You must infuse the Senuae in the wine in a pot
close stopped, and let if stand in a warm place four and twenty hours, then
strein it and add to the straining the Currants, being clean picked and washed,
and lastly the Sugar, boil all together on an easy fire, until the wine be
consumed, having care that you do always stir it about in the boiling for
fear of burning, then take them from the fire, and put them up into a clean
galley pot, you may eat one spoonful or two of them a little before dinner, at
any time.

A good Ointment to k^ep one Sollible.

The gaul of an Ox, Oil of Violets, of either one ounce: Sheeps tallow, six
drachms.

Boil them together on a soft fire until they be incorporated, then take it
from the fire and add thereto Alloes cicatrine, one ounce. Bay Salt half an
ounce.

The Alloes and Salt must be both made into fine powder before you put them
into the oil, then stir them together until it be cold, and when you are
disposed to have a stool, then anoint your fundament therewith, both within
side and without, and if you anoint your navell therewith, it will work the
better.

Good pills to k^ep one soluble, and they do also resist the Pestilence.

. Alloes Cicatrine, one ounce, Chosen Myrrh; three drachms, Saff^on, one dram
and half, Amber Greece, six grains: Sirrup of Lemons or Citrons, so much as
shall be sufficient to make the mass.

You must grind the Aloes, Myrrh, and Saffron into small powder severally by
themselves, then incorporate them together with the sirrup: you may give half a
drachme or two scruples thereof in the evening half an hour before supper tw^se
or thrice in a week: Rases would have you to take half a drachme or two
scruples of these Pills every day, without using any other preservative at all,
and he has great reason so to esteem of them, for Galen, Avicen, and all
ancient Writers in Physic do hold opinion, that Aloes does not only comfort,
but purge the stomach from all raw and chollerick humors, and does also purge
and open the ve^nes called Miserayick, and resists putrefact^on: Myrrh does
altogether resist, neither will it suffer putrefaction in the stomach: Saffron
does comfort the heart, and has also a pro^riety in it to carry any medicine
that is given therewith unto the heart, but to conclude, these Pills will purge
all superfluous humors in the stomach, and principal members, and preserves
the blood form corruption.

CHAP. VIII.
I Must here give you to understand* that the infection does oftentimes lie
hidden within us, without any manifest sign or knowledge thereof at the first,
and therefore were it good for sanguine bodies, and such as do abound with
blood, in the summer season to draw six or eight ounces of blood out of the
Basilica vein in the right arm, which is a good means to prevent a further
danger, (as Avicen witnesses) but for full and plethorick bodies, it were best
to purge themselves once in seven or eight days with some easy and gentle
purgation, as hereafter I will show you: but for lean and spare bodies, once
in fourteen days will be enough at most: for wisely says Rondoletius, that it
is not only the venomous and contagious air which we receive that does kill
us, but it is the present communicating of that contagion with some superfluous
humors in our bodies, as in his treatise De P^ste appears: therefore now will
I show you how to purge the body.

Pills good to purge.

. Alloes Cicatrine, ten drachms, Agarick of the whitest,. iiii. Myrrh, Mastick,
of either two drachms: Saffron two scruples.

Make these into fine powder, then compound them together in a mortar, with so
much Oximell simplex, Sirrup of Lemons, or of Staecados, as shall be
sufficient, you may give one dram, or a dram and half of these Pills, half
an hour before supper: but for a choleric body, you must leave out two drachms
of the Agarick in making of the receipt, and in place thereof add two drachms
of Rubarb, and for the melancholy, two drachms of Epithimum, and give the same
quantity in weight.

A good purging potion.

Raisins, the stones being picked out and washed, of either one ounce: Polipode
of the Oak, Elecampane root dried, roots of wild small Sorrel, Succory roots
cleansed, of either half an ounce: Leaves of Burrage, Bugloss, Burnet, Scabios,
Morsus diaboli, of either a little handful: Flowers of Burrage, Bugloss,
Rosemary, Violets, Broom, of either a little handful: Seeds of Fennel, sour
Citrons, of either two scruples: Shaving of Hearts horn, half a dram.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of fair water until half be
consumed, then strain it. Take of the decoction aforesaid, three ounces.

Rubarb, two drachms and half, Cinnamon, half a dram.

Slice them both, and put them with the liquor in a close cup, and so let it
stand to infuse in a warm place twelve hours, then strain it out strongly, and
add thereto one ounce of the Sirrup of Maiden-haire, and so drink it warm in
the morning about six of the clock, and refrain from meat, drink, or sleep two
hours after it, this is good in lean and spare bodies: you may for the
phlegmatic body, add in the infusion, one dram of Aggarick Trosciscated.

A purging powder for such as cannot take Pills.

. Alloes Ciccatrine, one ounce, Myrrh, Cinnamon, of either two drachms,
Saffron, one scruple.

Make them all in fine powder, and give one dram in a draught of White Wind.

Flowers stopped, how to provok them.

For that women which have not their natural course on them, are most prone to
receive and take the infection, I have here set down good Pills, which I have
always found excellent not only for that purpose, but will also resist the
danger of infection.

. Alloes Ciccatirne, one ounce, Roots of Gentian, Aristolochia rotunda,
Dittander, Saffron, of either half a dram: Roots of garden Madder,
Methridate, of either one dram.

Cause them all to be ground in small powder, then mix it with the Methridate
and some sirrup of Artemesia, or Mugwort, give one dram of these Pills every
morning twelve days together, or until her terms break.

Issues commended against the Plague.

IN plethorick and full bodies, I have found nothing more safer in the time of
the Plague, then to make them an artificial Issue, either in the leg or arm,
for never hitherto have I kn^wn any one which has had an Issue, or Ulcer
running on him that has been infected with the plague. Palmarius and Forestus,
do both affirm it to be true and certain, but here some ignorant people do
hold opinion that having once an Issue, he must be constrained to keep it
always, which is most erroneous, for then those which have had Ulcers running
upon them, some six, ten, yea sixteen years, may not be cured without some
Issue to be made in some other place, but therein they deceive themselves, for
my self by good proof have often found the contrary in diverse people which I
have cured, some six, some ten, yea sixteen years past, and yet to this day do
remain in perfect good health without any Issues.

CHAP. IX. What Diet we ought to keep.
FOr our diet as Hippocrates teaches us, we must have a care not to exceed in
eating and drinking but to keep a mean therein, and in any case to beware of
surfeting and drunkenness, which are enemies both to the body and soul, but as
we may not exceed in eating and drinking, so to endure great hunger and thirst
is most dangerous, our meat ought to be of a facile and easy digestion, partly
tending to a drying quality; as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Pullets, Partridge,
Pheasants, Quails, Pigeons, Rabbets, Kid, Veal, Mutton, Birds of the
Mountains, and such like; but Beef, Pork, Venison, Hare and Goats flesh is to
be refused, and so are all water fowls, as Duck, Swan, Goose, Widgen, Teal, and
such like, because they are hard to digest, and do increase ill blood, and
naughty juice in the body: Lambs flesh, because of his exceeding moisture is
also to be refused, Eggs in the Summer not good, but in Winter tolerable: All
Fishes which are of a hard flesh, whether they be of the Sea, or fresh Rivers
are to be allowed. In fresh Rivers the Perch, Barble, Gudgeon, Loch, Cool,
Trout, and Pike are good; and for Sea fish, the Gilthed, Turbet, Sole, Rochet,
Gurnard, Lobster, Crab, Praunes, Shrimps, Whiting, and such like eaten with
vinegar. There are some Authors which hold opinion, that Fish is better to be
eaten then flesh in the great fervent heat of the year, because they do make a
more cold blood in the body then flesh; another reason is, because they do
live under the water, they are not infected with any contagion of the air, as
Beasts and birds may be, and therefore more wholesome, but in my judgment flesh
is more wholesome, because it does breed a more pure, and fine Juice in the body
then any ^ish whatsoever; your bread ought to be made of pure wheat, not too
new, nor too old, but of one days baking, or two at most is best: Rye bread is
to be eschewed, because of his great moisture: year drink is best beer or ale,
not too strong or new, but the staler and clearer it is the better, at your
meals a draught or two of Claret wine is tolerable, but in hot weather it were
good to allay it with a little water, for wine does warm the stomach, help
digestion, and comfort the heart.

For your Portage you may take in the Summer.

Parsley, Lettice, Sorrel, Endive, Succorie, Sperage, Hopbuds, Burnet, Burrage,
Buglosse, Thime, Mints, Hysop, but in Winter, Balm, Bittanie, Thime, Marigold,
Hysop, Majoram, Mints and Rue are good. For your Sallets take Pimpernell,
Purslane, Mints, Sorrel, Hore-hound, Young cole, Hop-buds, Sperage, Th^me, Tops
of Fennel, Tarregon, Lettice, and Watercresses are good.

Capers are greatly commended being preserved in Vinegar, and eaten with a
little oil and vinegar, and so are Olives very good also.

For your sauce, the juice of a Limon, Citron, or Orange is best, the juice of
Sorrel and Vinegar is also good.

All raw fruits are to be refused, except those which tend to four taste, as
Pomgranates, damask Prunes, Pippins, red and sour Cherries, and Wallnuts,
Quinces, and Pears preserved are very good eaten after meals.

All kind of Pulse is to be refused, as Beans, Pease, and such like, because
they increase wind, and make raw humors and ill juice in the body.

Refrain from Garlic, Onyons, Leeks, Pepper, Mustard, and Rocket, because they
do over-heat the body, make adustion of the blood, and cause fumes to ascend
into the head.

Cheese is not good, because it does engender gross and thick humors. Milk is
also to be refused, because it does quickly corrupt in the stomach.

CHAP. X. Shows what Exercise and Order is to be kept.
YOu must beware of all vehement and immoderate exercise, which does provoke
sweat, as is Tennis, dancing, leaping, running, football, hurling, and such
like, because they do overmuch heat the body, and open the Pores of
respiration, whereby the infected air has the more scope to enter our bodies,
but moderate exercise is very convenient, the use of hot houses at this time I
think very dangerous, because it does too much open the pores.

Walk not into the open air in the morning before the Sun has had some power
to cleanse and clear the same, and in any case go not abroad when great fogs
and mists are upon the earth, for it is dangerous: but if urgent occasions move
you, then before you go forth of your doors be sure to eat some preservative
first, and then take some good and odoriferous Pomander, Nodule, or Nosegay in
your hand, as before is showed you. The extreme heat of the day is likewise to
be refused to walk in, because it chafeth the blood; as also in the evening
after the Sun is set, for then unsavory and unwholesome Fogs arise out of the
earth, and in any case if you can avoid it come not near any any place
infected, but use to walk in the open air and dry ground.

Use Venus combats moderately, but none at all were better, the best time to
use them is three or four hours after supper, before you sleep, and then rest
upon them.

Beware of anger, fear, and pensiveness of the mind, for by their means the
body is made more apt to receive the infection.

Use pleasant and merry recreations, either with music, pleasant company to
talk withal, or reading some good books.

Bewar of sleeping at noon, but specially in the Winter season, but in Summer
to take after dinner a nap of half an hour or an hour is tolerable in elderly
bodies.

Watch not long in the evenings but two or three hours after supper is a good
time to take your rest.

CHAP. XI. Teaches what orders Magistrates, and Rulers of Cities and Towns,
should cause to be observed,
FIrst, To command that no stinking dunghills be suffered near the City.

Secondly, Every evening and morning in hot weather to cause cold water to be
cast in the streets, especially where the infection is, and every day to cause
the streets to be kept clean and sweet, and cleansed from all filthy things
which lie in the same.

Thirdly, And whereas the infection is entered, there to cause fires to be made
in the streets every morning and evening, and if some Frankincense, Pitch, or
some other sweet thing be burnt therein, it will be much the better.

Fourthly, Suffer not any Dogs, Catts, or Pigs to run about the streets, for
they are very dangerous, and apt to carry the infection from place to place.

Fifthly, Command that the excrement and filthy things which are voided from
the infected places be not cast into the streets or rivers which are daily in
use to make drink, or dress meat.

Sixthly, That no Chirurgians, or Barbars which use to let blond, do cast the
same into the streets or rivers.

Seventhly, That no Vauts or Privies be then emptied, for it is a most
dangerous thing.

Eighthly, That all Inholders do every day make clean their stables, and cause
the dung and filth therein to be carried away out of the City: for by suffering
it in their houses, as some do use to do, a whole week or a fortuight, it does
so putrify that when it is removed, there is such a stinking and unwholesome
smell, as is able to infect the whole street where it is.

Ninthly, To command that no Hemp or Flax be kept in water near the City or
Town, for that will cause a very dangerous and infectious savor.

Tenthly to have a special care, that good and wholesome Victuals and Corn be
sold in the markets, and so to provide, that no want thereof be in the City,
and for such as have not wherewithal to buy necessary food, that there to
extend their charitable and godly devotion: for there is nothing that will more
increase the Plague, the want and scarsity of necessary food.

Eleventhly, To command that all those which do visit and attend the sick, as
also all those which have the sickness on them, and do walk abroad, that they
do carry something in their hands, thereby to be known from other people. And
here I must advertise you of one thing more which I had almost forgotten (which
is) that when the infections is but in few places, there to keep the people in
their houses, not suffering any one of them to go abroad, and so to provide,
that all such necessaries as they shall need may be brought unto them during
the time of their visitation: and when it is stayed, then to cause all the
clothes, bedding, and other such things as were used about the sick, to be all
burnt, although at the charge of the rest of the Inhabitants you buy them all
new, for fear least the danger which may ensue thereby, do put you to a far
greater charge and grief: all these aforesaid things are most dangerous, and
may cause a general infection, to the destroying of a whole City, and
therefore I do wish that great care be had thereof.

CHAP. XII. Does show what you must do when you go to visit the sick.
FIrst before you enter into the house, command that a great fire be made in
the chamber where the sick lies, and that some odoriferous perfume (...) burnt
in the midest of the chamber, and before you go to him, eat some cordial
preservative, and smother your clothes with some sweet perfume, then wet your
temples, ears, nose, and mouth, with Rose Water and Vinegar mixed together,
then take in your mouth a piece of the root of Angelica, the rind of a sower
Citron, or a Clove prepared as before is showed, and have some Nosegay, Nodule,
or Pomander, appropriate in your hand, which you must always smell unto, so
may you the more bouldlier perform your intent: but herewithall you must have a
special care, that during the time you are with the sick, you stand not
betwixt the sick body and the fire, for that is dangerous; because that the
fire of his nature draws all vapors unto it self; but keep you always on the
contrary side, so that the sick may be betwixt you and the fire: and for such
as are to let any sick infected body to bleed, it were good they did cause the
keeper of the sick body to lay open that arm or leg which is to be let blood
before he approach near: the reason is, for that most commonly all that are
sick in this contagious disease, are for the most part in a sweat, and
therefore suddenly to receive the breath thereof, would be very dangerous.

Now when you have been with any one so infected, before you go into the
company of any whole and sound people, it were necessary you do stand by a good
fire, having all the clothes about you which you did wear when you were with
the sick, and then turn and air your self well thereby, so shall you be sure
the less to endanger others by your company. Thus have I as breefly as I can
devise set down all the ordinary means which my self have used, and by others
known to be used for preserving you from this contagious and dangerous disease,
which in the most part of people will suffice, but for such as dwell whereas
they may have the counsel of a learned Physician, I do wish them to take his
advice, especially for purging and letting blood, because none can so exactly
set down in writing the perfect course thereof (which may be understood rightly
of the common sort) so well as he which has the sight of the body: for that
many bodies are oftentimes troubled with some one humor abounding more then
another, which here to treat of would be ^oo tedious, neither can it profit the
common people, for whose sakes I have taken this pains: and now will I show
the signs to know when one is infected therewith, as also which are the
laudable signs, and which are the contrary, and lastly the means (by God his
assistance) how for to cure the same.

CHAP. XIII. Shows the signs of infection.
THe signs and tokens hereof are diverse, as first, it is perceived by the
sudden weakness, loosing and overthrowing of our natural strength, without
any manifest cause thereof going before, and sometimes it does begin with a
gnawing and biting in the mouth of the stomach, the pulse will grow weak,
feeble, and unequal, with a great straightness and heaviness about the
heart, as if some heavy burden or weight were laid thereon, withshortness of
breathing, vomiting, or at least a great desire to vomit, great pain in the
head: insatiable thirst proceeding of their great interior heat: sluggishnes,
and universal faintness of all the body, with a great desire to sleep, and an
astonishment of the mind and vital spirits: and for the most part they
complain of a great pain which is felt in some one place or places of their
bodies, where the botch or blain is by nature intended to be thrust forth, yet
some at the first have them appearing: and for the most part, they are taken at
the first with a sharp and rigorous fever.

Good signs.

When the botch or Carbunkle comes out in the beginning of the sickness with
a red color, and yellowish round about it, and that it does quicklycome to
maturation, the fever to cease, and the party finds himself eased of his
grief, and quickened in his spirits, these are good and laudable signs of
recovery.

Evil signs.

When the botch at the first comes out blackish, or black in color, also
when the botch is opened, the flesh within does look blew, and that then there
appear not any matter or quitture in the wound, but as it were a spume or froth
issuing out thereof, are ill and deadly signs,

When the botch waxes so hard that by no means it will come to suppuration,
but resists whatsoever is done unto it for the furthering thereof; and so
returns in again into the inward parts suddenly, is a token of sudden death
at hand, and so it is, if either before or after it is broken it look of a
bluish color, or of diverse colors, like the Rainbow, round about it.

When the Carbunckle or Blain does suddenly dry up, as if it were scorcht with
the fire, and that the place round about it does show to be of a wannish blew
color, is a deadly sign: if in the skin appear green or black spots; the
excrements of diverse colors with worms in it either dead or living, having a
vile stinking savor, and spitteth stinking and bloody matter, does betoken
death.

When the sick complains of great and extreme heat in the inward parts, and
yet cold outwardly, the eyes staring or weeping, the face terrible, the said
excrements or urin passing away, and the party not knowing thereof, are evil
signs.

When in the fourth or seventh day they are taken with a frenzy, or do fall
into an extreme bleeding at nose, or have a great flux with a continual
vomiting, or a desire to vomit and do it not, extreme pain at the heart,
watchfullness, and the strength clean gone, are deadly signs. When the party
being very sick, yet says he feels himself well, his eyes sunk deep in his
head, and full of tears, when he thinks all things do stink, his nails looking
blew, the nose sharp, and as it were crooked, the breath thick and short with a
cold sweat in the breast and face, and turning and playing with the clothes, the
pulse creeping or scarcely to be felt, and grievous unto him to speak, these
are infallible signs of death at hand. Some, before any of these signs are
perceived, do die, and some likewise which have diverse of them appearing, and
yet do escape, such is the uncertainty of this disease: there are many other
symptoms which do happen in this contagious disease, which would be too tedious
to declare, but these as the chiefest may suffice.

The end of the first Treatise.
The Second Treatise, showing the means how to cure the Plague.
CHAP. I.
When we perceive any to be infected with this contagious disease, we must
with all possible speed seek all the means we can how to prevent the malignity
thereof, whose property is at the first to assault the principal part, which
is the heart, and therefore requires present help; for unless something be
done within eight or four and twenty hours, little will it then prevail to
attempt it, for by that time nature is either subdued, and clean overthrown, or
else has thrust the same to the exterior parts, or otherwise digested it: yet
may we not neglect at any time, to use all the means we can, in helping and
furthering of nature to the uttermost of our endeavor, because we do
oftentimes see nature so wearied, and weakened in expelling of this venomous
matter, that unless some help be added to assist and comfort her, the party,
for lack thereof, dies, which otherwise might be saved: For I have oftentimes
seen by diligent helping of nature, that to be effected and brought to good
pass, which I have judged most desperate. There are four intentions required
for the curing thereof; that is, by bloodletting, Cordials, sweat and purging:
but the manner how to execute the same, has bred great contention both amongst
the old and later Writers, which here to treat of were too tedious, for unto
the learned it were needless, and for the commonalty little would it avail
them, therefore in brief will I show you what I have observed touching the cure.

First, if it be in a Plethorick, sanguine, and strong body, and has pain in
the head, great heat at the heart, thirstnesse, the pulse strong, and
laboring, or beating strongly, and has great and large veins appearing;
these ought presently to be let blood in that side where ye perceive the grief
does proffer it self to come forth, and not visibly appearing, tending to
maturation: For then we may not draw blood, but use all other means we can
devise, in helping nature to expel it, neither may you draw blood, if the
party have a flix or lask (which is an evil sign) in the beginning of the
disease, for by that means you shall hinder nature greatly, but only give the
party Cordials; neither may you stop the flix in the beginning, but if it be
extreme, and that it stay not the second day, then must you give some
purgation, which may leave an astringency behind it, as hereafter in the cure
of the flix shall be showed. For as Hyppocrates, in his first book and one and
twentieth Aphorism, does admonish us, we must consider and mark, how nature
does incline her self, for that will teach us what we are to do.

Now if you perceive the botch or carbunkle to appear underneath the chin about
the throat, then presently draw blood in both veins under the tongue, and
immediately after that apply a cupping glass, with scarification in one side
of the neck next unto the sore, thereby to draw it from the throat, for fear
least suddenly it choke him up, and then apply Chickens rumps, or Hens rumps to
the botch, the feathers being first plucked away from the rump, and a grain of
Salt put into the tewell, and so hold the bare place to the grief until the
Chicken die, which will be within half an hour, and then apply another, and so
continue in changing them so long as they do die, and lastly apply a
mollificative Cataplasme or plaster to the same place, as in the fifth Chapter
following is showed, which is made with Vnguentum basillicon, and to the botch
apply the Epithemation and Cataplasme in the seventh Chapter following. But if
it be in the neck, he does complain, then let him blood in the Cephallica vein
in the arm, of the same side where he complains.

If in the groin or flank he does complain, then let him blood in the foot on
the same side, and open the vein called Maleola, or Saphena, the quantity must
be according as the age and strength of the party requires, but at most draw
not above six or eight ounces: For Avicen wills us, to preserve blood as the
treasure of nature.

But in a weak, spare, and cachochimious body (as Galen teaches us) we may not
draw blood at all, for thereby should you greatly endanger the Patient, but
help such by Cordials and sweat.

And here you shall understand, that unless Phlebotomy be done at the first,
that is, within six or eight hours at most, it will be too late to attempt it,
neither may you do it if the sore do appear up in height tending to
suppuration, for then should you hinder nature, which like a diligent workman,
has discharged and thrust forth that venomous matter, which otherwise would
have killed us.

And here touching Phlebotomy or bloodletting, you must have this special
care, that you draw not blood on the opposite side, as if it be on the left
side the sore appear, then draw not blood on the right side; if it appear in
the flank, then draw not blood in the arm, but in the foot, for otherwise you
shall draw that venomous matter from the ignoble unto the noble parts, and so
kill the body.

And although the party complain not more in the one side then the other, yet
by the pulse shall you perceive on which side the venom lies hidden, for on
that side where nature is oppressed, there shall you find the pulse more weak,
feeble, and uneven, greatly differing from the other side.

And here you shall understand, that in some it has been seen, that nature of
it self at the first, has thrust out that venomous matter in some place of the
body, with a botch appearing high, and tending to suppuration, or a carbunckle,
or spots called purples. Now here if you draw blood, you do then greatly
endanger the body; but in this case you must only give Cordials, and use all
the means you can to bring it outward, either by maturation, or evaporation,
as hereafter shall be showed you.

And here you shall further understand, that where the age, constitution, nor
strength of the party will permit that Phlebotomy be done, yet for the better
help of nature you must apply Ventoses, with reasonable deep scarification,
unto the next place adjoining, where the party complains, thereby the more
speedily to draw the venomous matter unto the superficial parts, and there to
apply the rumps of Chickens, as before is taught you, and so apply to the place
some strong maturative, and atrractive plaster, or Cataplasme, as hereafter
shall be showed you. If the grief be in the head or throat, then apply Ventoses
to the neck: If it be in the emunctuaries of the heart, then apply them to the
shoulders: If in the emunctuaries of the liver, then apply them to the buttocks
or thighs, now when this is done, either by Phlebetomy, or Ventoses, then
within an hour or two at the most after it, you must give the sick some good
Cordial Medicine, which has power to comfort the heart, resist the venomous
matter, and also procure sweat, whereof out of the following you may make
choice as you list.

An excellent good Powder to expel the Plague, which also provokes sweat.

. Roots of Gentian, Bittanie, Petasitis, ana,. i. Roots of Tormentill,
Dittander, ana, iii. Red Sanders ss. Fine Pearl of both sorts, ana,. i. Fine
Bolarmoniack prepared, fine Terra sigillata, ana, vi. Rindes of Citrons, red
Corrall, Roots of Zedoiar, shaving of Ebony, bone of a Stags heart, ana,
sixteen grains: Fragments of the five precious stones, ana,. ss. Shaving of a
Unicorns horn, Succini, ana,. ss. Leaves of Gold and Silver, ana, one and half
in number,

Make all these in fine powder, every one several by himself, and then mix
them all together, and give thereof. i. or. iiii. more or less as occasion
requires, either in Sorrel, Scabios, or Carduus benedictus water two or three
ounces, whereunto you must add a little Sirrup of Lemons, or sour Citrons, and
give it warm, the Bolarmoniack must be pounded small, then washed in Scabios
water, and so dried.

Another good Powder.

. Leaves of Dittander, called Dictami cretici, Roots of Tormentil, Bittanie,
Pimpernell, Gentian, Zedoiar, ana,. i. Terra lemnia, Alloes Cicatrina, fine
Myrrh, Rinds of sour Citrons, ana i. Mastick, Saffron, ana, half a dram.
Bolarmoniack prepared as beforesaid, ii.

All these must be made in fine powder, and so mixed together, you may give two
scruples, or one dram thereof with any of the aforesaid waters.

A good Opiat to expel venom, and provoke sweat.

Conserve of the flowers of Burrage, Bugloss, Violets, Bittanie, ana,. ii.
Venus Triacle. ii. Red Terra sigillata, Terra lemnia, Mithridate, ana. i.
Shaving of Ebonie, And Hartshorn, Orient Pearls, Roots of Tormentill, ana i.
Shaving of Unicorns horn, Root of Angelica, ana half a dram. Sirrup of the
Juice of small Sorrel and Bugloss, ana, so much as shall suffice.

Mix all these together in the form of an Opiat, then take of the same Opiat,
one dram and half. Scabios water, Balm water, ana ii.

Dissolve the Opiat in the waters, and drink it warm, then walk a little upon
it, and then go to bed and sweat.

Another excellent good means to expel the venom, and procure sweat.

Take a great white Onyon, and pick out the coar or middle of him, then fill
the hole with good Venus Triacle, or Andromachus Triacle, and Aqua vitae, then
stop or cover the hole of the Onyon again, and roast him in the hot ashes until
he be soft, then strein it strongly through a cloth, and give it the sick to
drink, and the rest that remains, pound it small, and apply it to the sore,
and sweat upon it.

Now when he has taken any of the aforesaid Cordials, if he chance to vomit it
up again, then wash his mouth with Rosewater and Vinegar, and then give him
more of the same again, which must be proportioned according to the quantity
vomited, for if all were vomited, then give so much more: (if less) then
according to the quantity vomited, and if he vomit that also, then give him
more, and so continue it to the third or fourth time, if cause so require, but
if at no time he do reta^n it, then is there small hope of recovery; I have
known diverse, which have vomited their Cordials three or four times, and at
last, giving the juice of the Onyon as aforesaid, has kept that, and sweat
upon it, and so recover their health.

Also Minardus Triacle, or And^om^chus Triacle being taken two Scruples with
one Scruple of Diosco^dium, and dissolved in two o^ three ounces of this water
^^llo^ing, or Carduus benedictus, Sor^ell, and Scabios water, has been found
excellent good and available, both to procure sweat, and expel the venomous
matter.

An excellent good water against the Plague, and diverse other diseases, which
is to be made in May or June.

Take Angelica, Dragons, Scabios, ana three handfuls. Wormwood, Sage,
Salendine, Mugwort, Rue, Rosemary, Varvein, Endive, Mints, ana one handful.
Tormentill, Pimpernell, Agrimonie, Bittanie, ana two handfulls. St. John's wort,
Fetherfew, and Pionie, ana a little handful.

You must mix all these herbs together, then bruise them in a stone mortar
grossly, then put them into a clean vessel of glass or earth, and add thereto
a pottle of White wine, or three quarts, a pint of Rose Water, and a pint of
Vinegar: then mix them well together, and press down the Herbs close
together with your hands, then stop the pot close, and so let it stand to
infuse two days and two nights, then distill it in a stillatorie, this water
has been found excellent good, both to preserve one from the Plague, being
drunk three or four spoonfuls of it in the morning fasting, as also to expel
the disease, being drunk with any of the Cordials aforesaid.

CHAP. II. Shows what is to be done after taking of the Cordial.
NOw so soon as the party has taken his Cordial, (if he be able) cause him
to walk upon it in his chamber a pretty while, then lay him into his naked
bed, being first warmed if it be in cold weather, and so procure him to sweat,
but in any case have a special care to keep him from sleep all that day,
because thereby the blood and vital spirits are drawn to the inward parts, and
there does hold in the venomous matter about the heart; but if the sore appear,
or be perceived to present it self in any place near the heart, then to defend
the malignity thereof before he sweat, it were good to anoint the place
betwixt the region of the heart and the sore with Triacle, or with this Unguent
following.

A good defensative Unguent.

Take Triacle,. ss. Terra, lemnia, Red sanders, ara. i Mix them together with a
little Rose Water and Vinegar in a mortar, to the form of an Unguent, and so
use it as aforesaid.

And unto the sore place apyly chickens rumps, as before has been told you,
and then anoint the place grieved with Oil of Lillies; and then Epithemate
the heart with any one of these Epithemations following.

Epithemation.

Take the Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum, i. Triasandalum,. vi. Ebeni, ii.
Saffron,. ss. Lettice seed, i. Waters of Roses, Bugloss, and Sorrel, ana vi.
Vinegar. ii. boil them altogether a little.

Another.

Take the waters of Roses, Balm, Bugloss, Carduus benedictus and white wine,
ana iiii. Vinegar of Roses ii. Powder of red Roses, Cinnamon, Triasandalum,
Diamargaritum, Frigidum, ana ss. Mithridatum, i. Triacle,. ss. Boil them
together a little, and being blood warm, Epithemate the heart therewith, which
being done, then procure him to sweat, and after sweat, and the body dried,
then apply this quickly to the heart.

A Quilt for the Heart.

Take the flowers of Nenuphare, Burrage, Bugloss, ana, a little handful:
Flowers of Balm, Rosemary, ana iii. Red sanders, Red coral, Lignum aloes,
Rind of a citron, ana, i. Seeds of Basil, Citrons, ana i. Leaves of Dittander,
Berries of Juniper, ana i. Bone of a Stags heart, half a scruple, Saffron, four
grains.

Mix all these in gross powder, and put them in a bag of crimson Taffetie, or
Lincloth, and lay it to the heart, and there let it remain. All these things
being done, then procure him to sweat, having a good fire in the chamber, and
windows close shut, and so let him sweat three or four hours more or less,
or according as the strength of the sick body can endure, and then dry the body
well with warm clothes, taking great care that the sick catch not cold in the
doing thereof, and then give him some of this Julep following, and apply the
aforesaid quilt or bag to the heart.

A cordial Julep.

Take Waters of Endive, Purslane, and Roses, ana,. ii. Sorrel water, half a
pint, Juice of Pomgranats, and for lack thereof Vinegar, iiii. Camphire. iii,
Sugar, one pound. Boil all these together in the form of a Julep, and give
three or four spoonfuls thereof at a time.

Another Julep.

Take Sirrup of Ribes, Sorrel, Nenuphare, ana. i. Juice of Limons, i. Sorrel
water, viii. Mix all these together, and take two or three spoonfulls thereof
oftentimes, which will both comfort the heart, and quench thirst.

And if in the time of his sweat he be very thirsty, then may you give him to
drink a Tysane made with water, clean Barley, and Licorice scrapt clean and
bruised, boil them together, then strein it, and unto a quart of the liquor add
three ounces of Sirrup of Limons, and give thereof at any time; small beer or
ale is also tolerable, or you may give a spoonful of this Julep following at
any time.

A Julep to quench thirst.

. Sorrell-water, four ounces, Burrage-water, Scabios water, of either one
ounce, Sirrup of Lemons and sour Citrons, of either one ounce.

Mix all these together and so use it as occasion requires at any time: and
give oftentimes a cake of Manus Christi, made with Perls for him to eat. But if
in the time of his sweat you see the sick to faint or swoun, then apply to his
temples, and the region of the heart, this mixture following.

. Conserve of Roses, Burrage, Bugloss, Broom flowers, of either one ounce:
Mithridate, four ounces, Triacle, one ounce, Flowers of Violets,
Pellamountaine, Red Roses, of either one drachme, Roots of Ireos, one dram,
Musk, Sivet, of either eight grains.

Mix all these together with a quantity of Rose-Vinegar in the form of an
Opiat, this must be spread on Plasters, and applied to the heart and temples,
and to the soales of the feet apply this plaster following.

Take of the aforesaid Opiat, ii. unto the which you must put so much more of
an Onyon, which must have the middle part thereof taken out, and the hole
filled with Mithridate, and Aqua vitae, and so roasted in the ashes, and then
mix it with the Opiat, and apply it to both soales of the feet.

Now when all this is done, and that one hour is past after his sweat and body
dried as aforesaid: it were good you did give the sick some good comfortable
broth, although he vomit it up again, then let him rest two hours, and then
offer him more, which you must do oftentimes, and but little at a time.

And if after all this done he continue still weak and faint without any
amendment, then give him another Cordial, as ye did at the first, and so cause
him to sweat again so long as his strength can well endure it, and after sweat
give more of the Julep aforesaid, for by this means you shall oftentimes see
the sore, which did offer it self to come forth, will be clean discussed and
consumed away: but if it do not by this means go away, ther^ use all the means
you c^n to bring it to suppuration, and then open it with some caustic or
incision, as hereafter shall be showed you at large.

The next day after his sweat, you may tolerate him to sleep one hour or two
in the forenoon, whereby to prevent pain of lightness of the head, which may
chance through want thereof: and if after his sleep the party be sick and
faint, then immediately give him some good Cordial, according as the state of
his body requires, either in temperate or extreme heat, as before is showed:
and in one hour after that give him some comfortable broth made with Veale,
Mutton, Chicken, or such like, wherein some ^urrage, Bugloss, Pimpernell, and a
little Hysop, with some Parsley roots, the inner pith being taken out, must be
bolled, whereof he must take a little at a time, three or four times a day, and
betwixt times in taking of his broth, give him three or four spoonfulls of this
Julep following, which does resist venenosity from the heart, and also quench
thirst.

A Julip to quench thirst and resist Venenosity.

. Water of Scabios, Burrage, Sorrel, ana. ii. Sirrup of Lemons, sour Citrons,
and the juice of Sorrel, of either one ounce.

Mix all these together, and give thereof as cause requires.

Then at night he may sleep three or four hours more, and the next day, being
the third or fourth day of his accubet, you may purge him with one of the
purgations here following, but in any case you must take heed that you do not
purge with any strong or Scammoniate medicine, because it may cause an extreme
flux, which will be most dangerous, because it will overmuch weaken the body,
and hinder concoction, for most commonly in this disease the body of it self is
subject to fluxes.

A good Purgation in a strong body.

. Rad. Cichoriae,. iiii. Rad. Petasitis,. ss. Fol. Scabiosae, Card. Benedic^us
Pimpin^llae, Acetosae, ana M. i. Flor^m Cord. P. i. Prunor^m dumma^ no. x. Sem
Coriandri, ss. Aquae font.. ix.

Boil them until a third part be consumed, then strain it.

. Decoct. col.. iiii. Fol. Senna,. iii. Rhab. elect.. iiii. Spica. G. iii.

Infuse them together twelve hours, then strain it strongly, and add thereto
these things.

Sir. de Cichoriae, cum Rhab. vi. Oxisacchari, Simp.. ii.

Mix them altogether, and drink it in the morning refra^^^ing from meat, drink,
and sleep three hours after, and then eat some good broth.

Another in a plethorick and full body.

. Fol. Scabiosae, Buglosae, Card. B. ana M. i. Florum Cord. P. i. Rad.
Tormentillae.. iii. Rad. Fenic. licho. ana. iiii. Passularum enucleat,. i.
Pruncrum dammas. no. vi. Sem anis. Coriandri, Oxialidis, ana. i. Sennae,
Polipod. q. ana. i.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until half the water be
consumed, then strain it, and keep it.

. Rhab. elect.. ii. Agarici, tros.. i. Croci.. ss. Aquarum scabiosae,
Borraginis, Card. B. ana. iiii.

Infuse these together twelve hours in a warm place, then strain them strongly,
and add thereto Sir. ros. lax. Mannae. Calabriae ana. i. Decoct. col.. ii. vel.
iii.

Mix all these together, and take it as the other before.

A good purgation for a weak body.

. Fol. sennae,. iii. Rhab. elect,. i. Sem. anis. ss. Schenanthi,. ss. Aquae
Acetosae,. v.

Boil them a little, then take it from the fire, and let them stand infused
together twelve hours, then strain it out strongly, and add thereto Sir. ros.
lax.. i. and then drink it as the other before.

Another gentle purgation.

. Aquarum scabiosae, Card. B. Aquae ad pestem, ana. i. Rhab elect,. ii. ss.
Cinamomi,. ss.

Infuse them together twelve hours, and strain them strongly; then add to the
straining Sir. ros. lax.. i. Sir. de limonibus, four ounces.

Mix them together, and so drink it as the other before, you may either add or
diminish of the Rubarb unto any of these potions as you list.

Now when you see the purgation has done working, then give the sick some
Cordial thing, as heareafter follows, which he must also take the next
morning following.

A good Cordial to be taken after Purging.

. Conserva Burrag, Bugloss, Mali-Citri, ana. iiii. Confect. Alkermis. i. Boli
Very,. ss. Specierum diarhod abb.. ii. Diamarga. frigid.. i. Manus Christi
perlati,. i. Sir. de Lemon, iiii.

Mix all these together, and give the sick thereof so much as a chestnut at a
time, you must oftentimes eat thereof if the sick be in no great heat.

Another good Cordial to be given where great heat is.

. Conservae Borag, iiii. Conservae fol. acetosae, i. Bolarm. very,. i. Manus
Christi cum perlis,. i. Sir. de Lemonibus, q. v. misce.

You must oftentimes give of this where great heat is, so much as three beans
at a time.

A good Cordial potion.

. Aquarum buglossae, Acetosae, ana. i. Pull. diamarga. frig.. ss. Conf^ctio
alk^rmis, G. ii. Sir. de accto, Citri, vel de Lemon.. i. misce.

All this you may take after purging as aforesaid, at any time.

And here you must understand, that if it be in a plethorick body full of ill
humors, it were good that you purge him again the next day.

CHAP. III. Shows what symptoms ^ften chance, and how to help them.
FOr that in this contagious disease there are diverse dangerous symptoms which
do oftentimes chance, I will here show you good means how to help the same.

For lightness of the head through want of sleep.

. Hordei m^ndi. P. i. Amigd. dull. depilatum. i. ss. Sem. iiii. Frigid. ma.
mund. ana. i. Aqua font. q. 5. fiat decoctio. Decoct. col. l. i. Sir. de
Lemonibus, de Papa, ana. i. ss. Sacchari perlati,. i.

Boil them together a little, and then keep it to your use, you must often
times give two or three spoonfulls thereof to drink, and anniont his temples
with this ointment.

Ointment to provoke sleep.

. Unguent popillieris,. iiii. Unguent. Alabastrini, Ol. Nenuphariae misce, ana.
ii.

This ointment is not only good to provoke sleep but will also ease the pain
of the head, if the place grieved be anointed therewith.

For raveing and raging.

If the party rave, then give him one scruple of the powder of Hartshorn
burnt, with half an ounce of the sirrup of Violets and Lemons, and apply this
sacculus following to the head.

A good Sacculus for raving and raging.

. Florum Nenupharis, P i. Cort. Pap.. ii. Santali albi, Rub. Citri, ana.. i.
Florum ros. rub, P. i. Florum Viol. P. ss. Florum camomil. Betonicae, ana. i.

Shread them all small, then pound them grossy, and quilt them in a bagg, and
apply it to the head, and it will help you

Aphtham, to help it.

In this contagious disease, there does chance an ulceration of the mouth,
which is called Aphtham, it comes by means of the great interior heat which
the sick is oppressed with in the time of his sickness, which if it be not
well looked unto in time, it will greatly endanger the body, for Remedy whereof
use this Gargarism.

A good Gargarism for the mouth.

. Clean barley, one handful, wild Daysie leaves, Plan^aine leaves, Strawberry
leaves, Violet leaves, of either one handful: Purslane seed, one scruple,
Quinse seed, one scruple and half. Licorice bruised, four drachms.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until the water be half
consumed, then strain it, and take one pint and half thereof, and add thereto
Sirrup of Roses by infusion, and sirrup of dried roses of either four drachms:
Diamoron two ounces.

Mix these together, and gargarize and wash the mouth therewith oftentimes
being warm, and it helps.

Vomiting extremely, how to help it.

If it come in the beginning of the disease, as most commonly it does, there is
no better means to stay it, then by giving of Cordials and by sweating, by
which means that venomous matter which is the cause thereof is expelled, and
breathed out, but if after Cordials given, and sweat, it does not stay, it is a
very ill and dangerous sign: yet what means I have used to stay the same, I
will here show you.

A good bag for the stomach.

. Dried leaves of Mints, Elder, Origanie, Wormwood, Calamint, Mugwort, Thime,
Balm, Pellemountaine, tops of Dill, of either a little handful: Seeds of
Card^us Ben^dictus, Fennel, Annis, of either four drachms: Roots of Ciperus,
Calamus aromaticus, of either four drachms: Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, of either
half a dram.

Make all these in gross powder, then put it into a linen bag, which must be
made so broad and long, as will cover the stomach: then take Rose Water and
strong Vinegar, of either ten spoonfulls, wherein do you dissolve one ounce of
Mithridate, then must you first wet the said bag in two parts of clean water
and a third part of White or Claret Wine, and let him soak therein a little
while, the liquor being first warmed on a Chafer and coals, and then wet him
in the Rose Water and and Vinegar being warm, and so apply it to the stomach,
and when he waxes cold, warm him therein again, and let him remain half an
hour in all, and then take him away, and dry the stomach with a warm cloth, and
then anoint it with this ointment following.

. Chymicall oils of Rosemary, Sage, of either one dram: Vinegar, Mithridate,
of either one dram.

Mix all these together, and so use it, and if the party be costive, then were
it good to give him a glister, wherein dissolve two drachms of Mithridate, it
is also good to apply Ventoses unto the buttocks and thighs.

Yoxe, or yexing, to stay it.

. Dill seed, two scruples and half: White Poppy seed, Purslane seed, of either
one scruple and a half.

Bruise them a little, then knit them in a fine linen cloth, and let it soak
in the drink which he uses, and when you give him drink, wring out the bag
therein, and let him drink it, and that will stay it, also the order aforesaid
to help vomiting, is good to stay the yoxe, or yexing, but if neither of them
prevail, then will the ^^ex hardly escape death.

Flix, how to stop it.

You must first give the patient this purpation following, which does not only
purge away those sli^n^e humors which is the cause thereof, but does also leave
an ast^ingencie behind it.

. Rhab. elect. iii. Cinamoni, ii. Aquarum Endiviae, Borraginis, ana. ii.

Infuse them together twelve hours, then strain it out strongly, and add
thereto one ounce of Sirrup of roses laxative, and so drink it warm, refraining
from meat, and drink, and sleep three hours after it: and at night when it
has done working, give this confection following.

. Conserve ros.. iiii. Dioscordit,. i. ss. Pull. Diatragag. frigid.. i,
Dialkerm^s, G. x. Sir. de Lemon.. ii. misce.

When you have given this confection, then do you Epithemate the region of the
heart with this Epithemative following,

Epithemation for the heart.

. Aquatrum Buglossae, Burrag, Rosarum, Oxialidis, ana. iiii. Throchiscorum de
camphera,. i. Pull. diamargarit. frigid.. i. Aceti alb.. i. Offa de cord
cervi,. ss. Santal. Rub. Coral. Rub. misce. ana. i.

With this you must Epithemate the Region of the heart warm a quarter of an
hour, and if by this means it stay not, then the next day give some of this
confection following, which I have found excellent good for the stopping of any
flix whatsoever.

. Conserve ros. siccae.. i. Pull. Rhab. troschiscat. i. Terrae lemniae. ss. Lap.
Hemattitis, Sang. Draco. Bolarmoni. ana. ii. Mithridatii, misce,. i.

You must every morning and evening give two drachms hereof, and drink some
Plantaine water after it.

Now here you must understand, that if the flix come in the beginning of the
sickness, and that no botch, Carbunkle, not spots appear in the body, then in
any case you may not go about to stop it, but suffer nature to discharge it
self, and only help nature with Cordials, and Epithemations applied to the
heart, but if by the continuance thereof, the Patient grow very weak and faint
therewith, then is it to be repressed, as before is showed, but it must be the
third day before you attempt to do it.

But if this flix come when the botch or Carbunkle does appear, and tending to
maturation, then is it very dangerous, for by that means the venomous matter
is drawn back again into the principal parts, and so kills the Patient.

CHAP. IIII. Shows the general cure of a botch when he appears outwardly.
FIrst, give Cordials, and use the defensive before taught you in the second
Chapter, thereby to keep it from the heart, and then bring it to maturation as
follows.

A good Maturative.

Take a great Onyon and roast him in the ashes, then pound him with some powder
of white Mustard Seed, and for lack thereof some Triacle, and pound them
together, and so apply it to the grief warm, and renew it twice a day, which
within three or four days at most will bring it to suppuration.

Another.

Take white Lilly roots, Enulacompane roots, Scabios, and Onyons, of either two
ounces.

Roast all these together in a Cole leaf, or a wet paper, then pound them with
some sweet Butter, and a little Venice Triacle, whereunto do you add some
Galbanum, and Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and strained from the fesses and
dregs, and so mix them altogether, and apply it, renewing it twice a day.

Another, where no inflammation is.

Take Vnguentum basilicon. iiii. sour Leaven. ii. Oil of Li^ies, sweet butter,
ana.. iiii. Triacle. i. ss. yolks of two Eggs.

Mix them together, and so apply it, and when it is come to suppuration, then
open it in the lowest part, either with a potentiall Caustic, or by inscition,
but the Caustic is best, and when you have opened it, if no matter flow out,
then apply the rumps of Chickens to the sore, as before has been showed: after
that put into the wound a digestive as follows.

A Digestive,

Take the yolk of an Egg, clear Turpentine. iiii. clarified Honey. ii.
Mithridate, or Triacle. ss.

Mix all these together, and use it in the wound until it be well digested,
which you may perceive by the great quantity of white and thick matter that
will flow out of it, and upon the fore lay this Cataplasme until it be
digested.

A digestive Cataplasme.

. Fat Figs, and Raisins the stones picked out, ana. ii. Sal nitrum. iv. four
Leaven. iii. Honey. i. oil of Cammomill. i. ss.

You must shread and pound the Figs and Raisins very small, then commix it with
the rest in a mortar, in form of a pultis, and use it.

And when it is digested, then you must mundifie it with a mundificative, to
which purpose Vnguentum virid, or else Apostolorum mixed with Vngnentum
hasilicon will serve, and when it is clean mundified, then to mearnate and heal
it up, do you only anoint or strike it over with a feather wet in Arceus
linament, which must be molten in a saucer, and over all lay a plaster of
Diaculum, or a plaster of Kellebackeron, which is excellent good in all
Imposthumes and tumouts, and in this order do you proceed, until the grief be
whole.

CHAP. V. Shows how to bring the botch out, that lies deep within the body
or flesh.
FIrst you must consider, that oftentimes the botch, or carbunkle does offer it
self to come forth in some place of the body, and yet no apparent sign
thereof, but lies deep hidden within, because nature is not of sufficient
strength to thrust it forth; which is easily perceived by the great and almost
intolerable pain, that by some is felt in the place where nature intends to
expel it, which in the most part of people, by blond-letting, Cordials, and
sweat, is clean taken away and evacuated; but if after all this is done it go
not away, then unto these you must use all the means you can to bring it to
the outward parts. First, by giving to the sick oftentimes some Cordial
Electuary to keep it from the heart, then (if no great pain be in the outward
part) you must apply a cupping-glasse with scarification, directly against the
place where the grief is felt, and let it remain thereon a quarter or half an
hour, then take it away, and presently apply the rumps of Chickens, Hens, or
Pigeons to the place (as before has been showed) that being done, then lay
some attractive and maturative plaster or Cataplasme to the place, which here
following is showed, and every sixth hour you must apply the cupping-glass, as
also the rest, until such time as you have brought the venomous matter to the
outward parts, there to be visibly seen, or at least, by feeling to be
perceived, which commonly is effected at the second time, then use no more
cupping, but only apply a maturative to the place.

A good Maturative Cataplasme.

. Rad. simphyti, ma. Liliorum, Ceparum, Allium, ana,. i. Fol. Oxialidis M. i.

You must pound all these together a little, then wrap them in a cole leaf,
and so roast them in the hot embers, then pound them in a mortar, whereunto
add Ol. liliorum, Auxungiaeporc. ana.. i. Fermentiacris. vi. Mithridatii. i.

Mix them altogether in form of a Pultus, and so apply it warm, and renew it
twice a day.

Another

. Galbani, Apopanacis, Ammoniaci, ana.. iiii.

Dissolve these in Vinegar if the botch be hot and inflamed (but if it be not)
then dissolve them in Aqua vitae, and being dissolved, then strain it from the
dregs, and add thereto Unguent. basillici, Mithridat. Fomenti acris, ana, iiii.

Mix all these together, and apply it.

Another which is sooner made.

Take a great Onyon, make a hole in the middle of him, then fill the place with
Mithridate or Triacle, and some leaves of Rue, then roast him in the hot
embers, and when it is soft, then pound it with some Barrowes grease, and apply
it to the sore, and that will ripen it in short time, then open and cure it as
in the Chapter before,

But if the pain and inflammation in the place be so great, that the party
cannot endure cupping glasses to be used, then must you apply a Vesicatory to
the place, in the lowest part of the grief.

A Vesicatory.

Take Cantharides bruised in gross powder. ss. sour Leaven. ii. mix them
together in a mortar with a little Vinegar, and apply it, which within twelve
hours will raise a blister, which you must open, and then lay an svie or Cole
leaf to the place, and upon all apply any of the Cataplasmes aforesaid, and
dress it twice a day, and once a day at least, give the Patient some Cordial,
and when it is come to a softness, and that you perceive it is imposthumated,
then open it, and so proceed to the cure, as before is showed.

When the botch will not come to Maturation, but continneth always hard.

Sometime it is seen that the botch, although it appear outwardly, yet will it
not come to maturation, which commonly is accomplished within three or four
days, but will resist whatsoever you apply to it, and remain and continue
always hard; now here you must presently open it, either with a Caustic or by
inscition, for fear least it strike in again or at least grow to gangrena, but
before you open it, you must Epith^mate the grief with this Epithemation
following, and every morning and evening give the sick some Cordial, and
betwixt the sore and the heart anoint it with the defensive before in the
second Chapter.

An Epithemation.

Take leaves of Mallows, Violets, Cammomill, ana, M. i. Flowers of Dill,
Mellilot, ana.. i. Holle hock roots. iiii. Linseed. ii.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until half the water be
consumed, and then wet some Wool or Flax therein, being first well beaten and
picked clean, and lay it upon the sore warm, and as it cools, do you take it
away, and lay on another warm stewse, and so continue it half an hour together,
and then open it as beforesaid, and immediately apply to the wound Chickens or
Hens, as before in the first Chapter has been showed you: and if you cannot
get Chickens nor Hens, then a Whelpe or a Pigeon cloven asunder by the back,
and so applied warm will suffice, which must be renewed so oftentimes as cause
requirech, and when that is done, then apply unto the wound a digestive, made
as follows.

A Digestive.

Take Turpentine. ss. Honey. ii. Mithridate, or Triacle. ss. the yolk of a new
laid Egg.

Mix all these together and use it in the wound, and upon all lay the digestive
Cataplasme beforesaid, which is made of Figs, or a plaster of Kellebackeron,
or of Diaculum magnum, and dress it twice a day, and every dressing Epithemate
the grief as beforesaid, when it is digested, then mundifie, incarnate, and
sigillate it, as in the Chapter before is showed you.

CHAP. VI. Shows what is to be done when the botch strikes in again.
SOmetimes you shall see the sore will appear outwardly, and suddenly vanish
away again, which is a very dangerous and deadly sign; now when this does
chance, then presently give some good Cordial that has power to expel the
venom, as in the first Chapter of this Treatise you may find choice of, and
immediately apply this Pultus to both the soales of his feet, which must be
made with Culver-dung, and Vinegar mixed together, and spread on a Cole leaf,
and so applied; you must give the Cordial every third hour, and immediately
after the first giving of the Cordial, you must Epithemate the heart with the
Epithemation before expressed, in the second Chapter of this Treatise; and when
that is done, then cause the sick to sweat, if you may, and after his sweat,
and the body well dried, then give him an easy Glister, the next day purge him
with some gentle purgation, as before is showed you. And if by these means you
prevail not, then small hope of life is to be expected; yet Petrus Forestus
wills you, first to give a Glister, and then within two hours after it, to
draw some blood in the same side where the grief is, and to anoint the place
greived with Vnguentum resumptivum, mixed with some Oil of Cammomill, and then
two hours after it to give a Cordial, and procure sweat upon it, and so
following the rest of the orders aforesaid, did recover diverse.

CHAP. VII. Shows how to draw a botch from one place to another, and so to
discuss him without breaking.
FIrst you must apply a cupping glass next adjoining to the lower part of the
sore, on that side where you would have him to be brought, and next unto that
glass apply another, so near the first as you can, and if that be not so far
as you would have the sore to be brought, then apply the third glass, and let
them all remain a quarter of an hour, then take away the last glass, but
suffer the first to remain, then presently apply him again, and let it remain a
quarter of an hour more, and do so three or four times together, but always
suffer the first glass next the sore for to remain; now when you have thus
done, then take all the glasses away, and presently apply a Vesicatory to the
place where the last and uttermost glass did stand, suffering it to remain
there twelve hours, then open the blister, and lay an Ivy or Cole leaf to the
place, and upon all lay a plaster of Kellebackeron, or Diaculum magnum, and
dress it twice a day, the longer you keep it running the better it will be,
and at length heal it up as other Ulcers are cured.

Now so soon as you have applied the Vesicatory, you must presently epithemate
the botch with this Epithemation.

Epithemation.

Take Mallows, Violets, Cammomill, Dill, and Mellilot, ana, M. i. Hollehock
roots three ounces, Lin-seed one ounce and a half.

Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until half the water be
consumed, in this decoction you must wet some unwashed Wool or Flax made clean
and well beaten, then being wrung out a little, apply it warm to the place, and
renew it every hour, during the time that the Vesicatory is in working, and
when you have opened the blister that is made thereby, then only apply this
Cataplasme to the botch it self.

Take Mallows, Violets and Cammomill flowers, of either one handful.

Boil them in water until they be tender, then cut them very small with a
shreading knife, and add thereto Oil of Cammomill and Lillies, of either two
ounces: Barrowes mort two ounces, Wax one ounce.

Moll the Wax in the Oiles, and then put it to the Hea^bs, and boil them
together a little, then take it from the fire, and add thereto Barley and Bean
flower, a handful of either of them, and so mix them altogether, and apply it
to the grief, renewing it twice a day, which within three or four days will
resolve and discuss the botch; but if it do it not by that time, then use all
the means you can to bring it to suppuration, as before is sufficiently showed
you.

CHAP. VIII. Shows how to know a Carbunkle or blain, as also the cure of the
same.
THe Carbunkle or blain does first begin with a little Pustula or wheal, and
sometime with diverse Pustulaes or wheales together, with a great burning and
pricking pain in the place, which Pustulaes are like a scalding bladder,
seeming to be full of water or matter, yet when you open it, little or nothing
will come out of it, and when they are broken, will grow to a hard crust or
scarre, as if it had been burnt with a hot Iron or Caustic, with a great
ponderosity or heaviness in the place. In some it comes in the beginning,
without any Pustula at all to be perceived, but with a hard black crust or a
scarre; sometimes it lies hidden in the inward parts without any outward
appearance at all, as if it be in the lungs, then there is a difficulty of
breathing, with a Cough and foul spitting.

If it be in the Liver or Spleen, then the party feels a great pain and
pricking in the same side; if in the Kidneyes or Bladder it does chance, then
is there suppression or stopping of the Urine, or great pain in the making of
water; if it be in the Brain, then a delirium follows, but howsoever it
chance to come, the party infected there with has a Fever, with other
accidents, as before in the 13. Chapter of the first Treatise is declared; if
it begin with a green, black, or blew color, or of diverse colors like the
Rainbow, then is it a deadly sign, and so is it, if once it appear and then
suddenly vanish away; but if it be red or yellowish, so it be not in any of the
principal parts, or emunctuaries of the body, as the heart, stomach, armpit,
flank, jaws, or throat, then it is laudable, otherwise in any of these places
very desperate and dangerous to be cured, but wheresoever it does chance,
unless it may be brought to suppuration, it is deadly.

The cure of the Carbunkle.

First, the Universal means must not be neglected, as bloudletting, cordials,
epithemations, sweet and gentle evacuation by purging, as the time and cause
requires, which before in the beginning of this Treatise has been showed at
large, and the same order which is used for the cure of a Botch, is also to be
kept in the cure of a Carbunkle, and to rectify the air of the house by
strewing it with vine and willow leaves, red Roses and such like, as also to
sprinkle the floor with Rose water and Vinegar, and cause the sick oftentimes
to smell unto a cloth wet in Rosewater and Vinegar is very good: these things
being done, then use all the means you can to bring it to Suppuration, for
which purpose this Cataplasm following is very good.

A Maturative Cataplasm.

Take Fat Figs iiii. Mustard seed, i. ss. Pound the seed small by it self, the
Figs must first be cut very small, and then pounded likewise, and then add
thereto so much Oil of Lillies as will suffice to make it in the form of a
stifie Pultis, and apply it warm, renewing it twice a day, this must be
continued until the scar begin to grow loose and moveable, and then apply this
following to remove the scar.

Take unsalted butter, the yolk of an Egg, and wheat flour mix them together,
and apply it until the scar do fall away, then do you mundifie it with this
mundificative.

Mundificative annodine.

Take clear Turpentine, iiii. Sirrup of red Roses, i. Honey of Roses, iiii.
Boil them altogether a little, then take it from the fire, and add thereto
Barlie and wheat fl^^r of each. vi. the yolk of a new laid Egg, and mi^ them
altogether, and apply it three days, and then use this following.

Another Mundificative.

Take clear Turpentine, iii. Honey of Roses, ii. Juice of Smallege, ii. Barlie
flower, i. ss. Boil them altogether saving the Barlie, until the Juice be
consumed, then take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold, add the
Barlie thereto, and mix them together, and use thereof to the grief until it
be clean mundified, and then incarnate it with Vnguentum Basilicon, and lastly
sigillate it with Vnguentum de cerusa decocted.

Sometime you shall find a little pustule to appear, without any elevation of
the parts adjoining, or outward hardness. Now here to bring it outwardly you
must apply this Cataplasm.

Take Lilly roots, Onyons, and sour Leaven, of either one ounce. Boil them in
water until the water be consumed, then bruise them in a mortar, and add
thereto Mustard seed, Culver-dung, White Soap, ana. i. ss. Snails without
shells, vi. in number. Mithridate, Triacle, ana, half a dram, Yolks of four
Eggs.

Mix all these together, and apply it warm to the grief, renewing it thrice a
day, this order must be continued until you see the place elevated tending to
suppuration, then apply a Maturative, and so proceed as next before this is
showed you, and during the whole time of the cure, I hold it better to use
rather Poultises then plasters, because they do not so much stop the Pores,
but give more scope for the venomous matter to breath out.

When the Carbuncle does come with great pain and inflammation, how to help it.

You must first bath and soke the place well with this bag following, and then
presently apply the Cataplasm ensuing, for by this means you shall not only
ease the pain and abate the Inflammation and Fever, but also prevent the danger
of Gangrena which may chance thereby.

The Bag.

Take Mallows, Violets, Plantain, Liblong, ana one handful. Fat Figs, i.
Hollihock roots, Lilly roots, ana. i. Lin-seed, i.

You must shred the herbs grossly, and cut the Figgs and roots small, then
bruise them in a mortar, and mingle them altogether, then put them into two
little bags of linen cloth, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of clean
water, until the water be half consumed, then take out one of the baggs, and
wring out the water a little, and apply it to the grief warm, and when it is
cold, take it away, and lay on the other, and do so half an hour together
every dressing, which must be twice a day at least.

The Cataplasm.

Take Mallows, Violets, Sorrel, Liblong, ana two handfuls, Henbane, a little
handful.

Wrap them all in a ball together, and roast them in the ashes, then bruise
them in a mortar, and add thereto, Mel rosarum, iiii. Triacle, i.ss. Saffron
in powder, half a dram, Yolks of five Eggs.

Mix them together with the rest, adding some Barley flower thereto to thicken
it, and apply it warm, renewing it always before it grow dry and stiff, and
every dressing you must Epithemate the grief first with the baggs aforesaid,
and this order must be continued until the pain and Inflammation be gone, then
to bring it unto Suppuration, if you add to the foresaid Cataplasm some oil
of Lillies, and sweet Butter unsalted, it will be very good, or you may make
this Cataplasm following.

Take Soot of the chimney,. iii. Bay salt, i. ss. Yolks of two or three Eggs.

Mix all these together in a mortar, and apply it to the grief warm, which must
be always renewed and changed before it grow dry and stiff, this order must
be continued until the sore come to suppuration, then to remove the scar, and
finish the cure, do you follow the order prescribed in the beginning of this
Chapter.

There are other dangerous accidents which do sometimes chance in the botch or
Carbuncle, which here to treat of would little avail the unexpert people,
because they know not the means how to execute the same, but if any such thing
chance, then do I wish you to seek the help of some learned Physician, or
expert Surgeon, whose counsel I do wish you to follow.

The End of the Second Treatise.
A Short Treatise of the Small Pox, showing the Means how for to govern and
cure those which are infected therewith.
CHAP. I. Shows what the Small Pox and Measels are, and whereof it proceeds.
FOr that oftentimes those that are infected with the Plague, are in the end of
the disease sometime troubled with the small Pox or Measels, as also by good
observation it has been seen, that they are forerunners or warnings of the
plague to come, as Salius and diverse other writers do testify: I have thought
it good and as a matter pertinent to my former Treatise, to show the aids and
helps which are required for the same.

I need not greatly to stand upon the description of this disease, because it
is a thing well known unto most people, proceeding of adusted blood mixed with
phlegm, as Avicen witnesses, which according to both ancient and latter Writers
does always begin with a Fever, then shortly after there arises small
Pustulaes upon the skin throughout all the body, which do not suddenly come
forth, but by intermission, in some more or less, according to the state and
quality of the body infected therewith: for in some there arises many little
Pustulaes with elevation of the skin, which in one day do increase and grow
bigger, and after have a thick matter growing in them, which the Greeks call
Exanthemata or Exthymata: and after the Latins Variola, in our English tongue
the small Pox, and here some Writers do make a difference betwixt variola and
exanthemata; for say they, that is called variola when many of those Pustules
do suddenly run into a clear bladder, as if it had been scalled, but the other
does not so, yet they are both one in the cure, they do most commonly appear
the fourth day, or before the eight day, as Avicen witnesses.

What the Measels or Males are.

Avicen says, That the Measels or Males is that which first comes with a
great swelling in the flesh, with many little Pimples which are not to be seen,
but only by feeling with the hand are to be perceived, they have little
elevation of the skin, neither do they grow to maturation, or end with
ulceration as the Pox does, neither do they assault the eyes, or leave any
deformity behind them as the Pox does, neither are they so swift in coming
forth, but do grow more slowly, they require the same cure which the Pox have,
they proceed of choleric and melancholy blood.

The cause of the Pox and Measels.

The primitive cause as Valetius says, is by alteration of the air, in
drawing some putrified and corrupt quality unto it, which does cause an
ebullition of our blood.

The cause antecedent is repletion of meats, which do easily corrupt in the
stomach, as when we eat milk and fish together at one time, or by neglecting to
draw blood, in such as have accustomed to do it every year, whereby the blood
does abound.

The conjunct cause is the menstruall blood, which from the beginning in our
mothers wombs we received, the which mixing it self with the rest of our
blood, does cause an Ebullition of the whole.

The efficient cause is, nature or natural heat, which by that menstruall
matter mixing it self with the rest of our blood, does cause a continual
vexing and disquieting thereof, whereby an unnatural heat is increased in all
the body, causing an Ebullition of blood, by the which this filthy menstrual
matter is separated from our natural blood, and the nature being offended and
overwhelmed therewith, does thrust it to the outward pores of the skin as the
excrements of blood, which matter if it be hot and slimie, then it produces
the Pox, but if dry and subtle, then the Measels or Males. But Mercurialis an
excellent writer in Physic, in his first Book, de morbis puerorum, cap. 2.
agreeing with Fernelius in his Book De abdit is rerum causis, c. 12. does hold
opinion, that the immediate cause of this disease does not proceed of menstrual
blood, but of some secret and unknown corruption, or defiled quality of the
air, causing an Ebullition of blood, which is also verified by Valetius, and
now does reckon it to be one of the hereditable diseases, because few or none
do escape it, but that either in their youth, ripe age, or old age, they are
infected therewith. The contention hereabout is great, and mighty reasons are
oppugned on both sides, therefore I will leave the judgment thereof unto the
better learned to define; but mine opinion is, That now it proceeds of the
Excrements of all the four humors in our bodies, which striving with the
purest, does cause a supernatural heat and ebullition of our blood, always
beginning with a Fever in the most part, and may well be reckoned in the number
of those diseases which are called Epidemia: as Fracastorius in his first Book,
De morbis contag. cap. 13. witnesses this disease is very contagious and
infectious, as experience teaches us: There are two special causes why this
disease is infectious: The first is, be cause it proceeds by ebullition of
blood, whose vapor being entered into another body, does soon defile and
infect the same, the second reason is, because it is a disease hereditable; for
we see when one is infected therewith, that so many as come near him,
(especially those which are allied in the same blood) do assuredly for the
most part, receive the infection also.

CHAP. II. Shows to know the signs when one is infected, as also the good and
ill signs in the disease.
THe signs when one is infected are these, first he is taken with a hot Fever,
and sometime with a Delirium, great pain in the back, furring and stopping of
the nose, beating of the heart, hoarsnesse, redness of the eyes, and full of
tears with heaviness and pain in the head, great beating in the forehead and
temples, heaviness and pricking in all the body, dryness in the mouth, the face
very red, pain in the throat and breast, difficulty in breathing, and shaking
of the hands and feet with spitting thick matter.

When they do soon or in short time appear, and that in their coming out they
do look red, and that after they are come forth they do look white, and
speedily grow to maturation, that he draws his breath easily, and does find
himself eased of his pain, and that his Fever does leave him, these are good
and laudable signs of recovery.

When the Pox lie hidden within and not appearing outwardly, or if after they
are come forth they do suddenly strike in again and vanish away, or that they
do look of a black, bluish, and green color, with a difficulty and
straitness of drawing breath, and that he do often swoun, if the sick have a
flix or lask, when the Pox were found double, that is, one growing within
another, or when they run together in blisters like scalding bladders, and then
on the sudden do sink down and grow dry with a hard black sear or crust, as if
it had been burnt with a hot iron, all these are ill signs.

Avicen says, there are two special causes which produce death unto those
that have this disease: either for that they are choked with great
Inflammation and swelling in the throat called Angina, or having a flix or lask
which does so weaken and overthrow the vital spirits, that thereby the disease
is increased, and so death follows.

How to know of what humors this disease comes.

If it come of blood, then they appear red, with general pain, and great heat
in all the body.

If they come of choler, then will they appear of a yellowish red and clear
color, with a pricking pain in all the body.

If they come of phlegm, then will they appear of a whitish color and scaly, or
with scales.

If they come of melancholy, then will they appear blackish with a pricking
pain.

CHAP. III. Shows the means to cure the Pox or Measels.
THere are two special means required for curing this disease, the first is
to help nature to expel the same from the interior and principal parts unto
the exterior: the second is to preserve both the interior and exterior parts,
that they may not be hurt thereby.

For the first intention, if the age and strength of the sick will permit, and
that the Pox or Measels appear not, it were then good in the first, second, or
third day to draw blood out of the Basilica vein in the right arm, if he be
not under the age of fourteen years, but the quantity must be at the discretion
of him that draws it, either more or less as occasion is offered: but for
children and such as are of tender years, and weak bodies, it were not good to
draw blood out of the arm, but out of the inferior parts, as the thighs, hams
buttocks, and the Emeroidall veins, especially if the party be melancholy, or
else to apply ventose^ to the loins, buttocks, or hams, which may boldly be
used both before and after they do appear, either with scarification, or
without, as cause requires, which is a special good means to draw that
Ichorous matter from the interior to the exterior parts; but for sucking
Children, it were best to apply bloud-suckers unto any of the foresaid places,
which is a thing that may be used with more ease then ventoses, neither do I
wish either of them to be used unless necessity require it, which is, when the
matter lies lurking in the interior parts, not offering it self to appear
outwardly: otherwise I hold it better to leave the whole work unto nature,
specially in sucking children: for when we see that nature is ready, or does
endeavor to expel the malignity which is in the interior parts to the
exterior, which may be perceived by reviving of the Spirits, and mitigating of
the Fever: here we ought not to use any means at all, but leave the whole
operation to nature, which we must only help by keeping the sick body in a
reasonable heat, being wrapped in a scarlet, stammell, or red cloth, which may
not touch the skin, but to have a soft linen cloth betwixt them both, and then
cover him with clothes in reasonable sort, and keep him from the open air and
the light, except a little, and also from anger, using all the means you can
to keep the sick in quietness, and if the body be very costive, then to give
an easy Glister.

A Glister.

. Barley, two handfuls, Violet leaves one handful: Boil these in three pints
of water until half be consumed, and strein it: then take of the same
decoction twelve ounces.

Oil of Violets three ounces, red Sugar and Butter, of either one ounce,

Mix them together and give it to the sick warm you may increase or diminish
the decoction or ingredients according as the age of the party requires: but
if the sick have great heat, then may you add one ounce or four drachms of
C^ssia newly drawn unto it, and when he has expelled the Gl^ster, then rub the
arms, hands, legs, and feet, softly with a warm cloth, which is also a very
good means to draw that ^chorous matter from the interior to the exterior
parts, when all this is done, then if the body be inclined to sweat, you must
further the same by covering him with warm clothes, having a care that you lay
not more on him then he can well endure, for otherwise you may cause faintness
and swouning, which are ill in this case, yet must you always keep the sick
warm, and suffer him not to sleep, or permit very little until the Pox or
Measels do appear: and here you must have a special care to preserve the eyes,
ears, nostrels, throat and lungs, that they be not hurt or offended therewith,
as hereafter shall be showed you, which you must use before he sweat and also
in the sweat if need be.

Eyes, how to preserve them.

. Rose Water, Plantaine-water, of either two ounces, Sumack, two drachms.

Let them boil together a little, or stand infused a night, then mix
therewith half a spoonful of the oil made of the white of an Egg, then wet
two clothes five or six double therein, then lay them upon either eye, cold,
which must be always kept upon the eyes until the Pox be all come forth, and
as they grow dry, wet them in the same liquor again, and apply them, but if
there be great pain and burning within the eye, then must you also put a drop
of this musselage following into the eye: take quinse-seed, half a dram,
bruise it a little, then let it stand infused in three ounces of Rose Water a
whole night, then strein it, and put one drop thereof into the eye three or
four times a day at least, or take of this water.

. Rose Water,. ii. Woman's milk,. i. Myrrh finely powdered six grains.

Mix them together, and use it in the eye as before is showed: this does ease
the pain, resists putrefication, and preserves the sight.

For the ears, you must put a drop of oil of Roses warm into them before he
sweat.

For the nostrels, cause him oftentimes to smell to the vapor of Rose-vinegar,
or else Vinegar, red-roses and Sanders boiled together.

For the throat, let him always hold a piece of white sugarcandy in the
mouth, and as it melts swallow it down.

For the Lunges give the sick oftenimes some sirrup of quinses, or conserve of
Roses, a little at a time.

And for his drink, the decocted water of barley, boiled with a little licorice
is best, being mixed with the juice of a Lemon, Citron, Pomegranate, or Rybes:
which the sick best likes, for either of them is very good.

And for his diet, he must refrain from all salt, fat, thick and sharp meats:
and from all sweet things either in meat or drink, his meat must be of a facile
and easy digestion, and that has a cooling property in it, as broth wherein
burrage, bugloss, sorrel, and such like are boiled, and for ordinary drink,
small beer or ale is best.

CHAP IIII. Teaches what is to be done when the Pox or Measels are slow in
coming forth.
NOw when you perceive the Pox or Measels are slow and slack in coming forth,
then must you help nature, with cordials, and by sweat to thrust it out from
the interior and principal parts, unto which purpose I have always found this
drink to be excellent good here following.

. Hordei mund. M. i. Lentium. excort. P. i. Ficuum. No. x. Fol. capil. v.
Lactucae. ana M. ss. Fol. acetosae. M. i. Florum cord. P. i. Semen fenic.. ii.
Semen. 4. frigid. ma. ana. ss. Aqua font. lb. iiii.

Boil all these together until a third part of the water be consumed, and
then strein it.

. Decoct. col. lb. i. Succus granatorum vel ribes,. iiii.

Mix all these together, and give the sick four or six ounces thereof to drink
every morning and evening, which will provoke sweat, and expel the disease,
and if you cannot get the juice of Pomegranats, nor Rybes, then you may take so
much of the sirrup of either of them.

Another good drink to expel the Pox or Measels.

Take a quart of posset-ale, a handful of Fennel seed, boil them together
till a third part be consumed, then strein it, and add thereto one dram of
Triacle, and one scruple of Saffron in powder: mix them together, and give two,
three, or four ounces thereof to drink every morning and evening as cause
requires.

But if it be for a strong and elderly body, you may give any of the expelling
electuaries which are used to expel the Plague, as in the first Chapter for
the curing of the Plague does appear.

But if the sick be so weak that he cannot expel the disease in convenient
time, then it is good to epithemate the heart with this epithemation following.

Epithomation for the heart.

. Aquarum ros. Melissae, Card. b. Buglos. Morsus diaboli, vini alb. ana. iiii.
Aceti Ros. ii. ss. Pull. Ros. rub. Trium santal. Cinamoni, Elect, diamarg.
frigid. ana. ss. Mithridati,. i. Theriacae,. iiii.

Mix all these together, and let them boil a little, and so warm Epithemate
the heart: and when you have done it, then give some expulsive drink or
electuary as cause requires, and then cause him to sweat upon it, for by this
means you shall obtain your desire by Gods permission.

Thirst, how to quench it.

Now if in the expelling of the pox, the sick be very thirsty and dry, then
give this Julep to drink morning and evening, which I have found very good.

. Sirrup of Jujubes, Nenuphare, and Burrage, of either four drachms: Water of
Burrage, Cichore, and Bugloss, of either two ounces.

Mix them together and give the sick one half thereof in the morning, and the
rest at night, and cause him oftentimes to lick of this mixture following.

Take the conserves of Nenuphare, Violets, and Burrage, of either six drachms:
Manus Christi made with Perles, four drachms: Sirrup of Nenuphare and Ribes of
either one ounce and half.

Mix them together: and with a Licorice stick clean scraped, and a little
bruised in the end, let the sick lick thereof.

CHAP. V. Shows what is to be done when the Pox are all come out in the
skin.
FOr that oftentimes the face and hands, which is the beauty and delight of our
bodies, are oftentimes disfigured thereby, I will show you what means I have
used with good and happy success for preventing thereof: which is, you may not
do any thing unto them until they grow white, and that they are come to
maturation, which when you perceive, then with a golden pin, or needle, or
for lack thereof a copper pin will serve, do you open every pustulae in the
top, and so thrust out the matter therein very softly and gently with a soft
linen cloth, and if you perceive the places do fill again, then open them
again as you did first, for if you do suffer the matter which is in them
toremain over long, then will it fret and corrode the flesh, which is the cause
of those pitts which remain after the Pox are gone, as Avicen witnesses: now
when you have thus done, then anoint the places with this ointment following.

Take Elder leaves, one handful, Marigolds, two handfulls, French Mallows,
one handful, Barrowes morte or grease, six ounces.

First bruise the herb in a mortar, and then boil them with the grease in a
pewter dish on a chafer and coals, until the juice of the herbs be consumed,
then strein it, and keep it to your use, the best time to make it is in the
middle or the latter end of May.

You must with a feather anoint the places grieved, and as it dries in,
anoint it again, and so continue it oftentimes, for this will soon dry them
up, and keep the place from pitts and holes, which remain after the Pox are
gone.

Also if you anoint the Pox with the oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn three
or four times a day, which you must begin to do so soon as the Pox are grown
white and come to maturation, it will cure them without pitts or spotts, and
eases the pain and burning, and helps excoriation.

Some do only oftentimes wet the places with the juice of Marigolds in the
summer season, and in winter the juice of the roots will serve: and by that
only have done well.

Mercuriales does greatly commend this decoction following to be used after the
Pustulaes are opened.

Take Barley, one little handful, red Roses, a handful, red Sanders, white
Sanders, of either one ounce: Saffron, two scruples, Salt, four drachms, Clean
water, three pound.

Boil all together until a third part be consumed, you must oftentimes touch
the sores therewith, with a fine cloth wet therein, and as it dries in, wet it
again, this in a short time will dry them up.

I have heard of some, which having not used any thing at all, but suffering
them to dry up and fall off themselves without any picking or scratching, have
done very well, and not any pitts remained after it.

When the Pox, after they come out, do not grow to maturation, how you shall
help it.

Sometimes you shall find that it will be a long time before those pustulaes
will come to maturation, or grow white: now here you must help nature to bring
it to pass, which you may well do with this decoction.

Take Mallows, one handful, Figgs, twelve in number, Water, a quart.

Cut the Figgs small, and boil altogether, until half and more be consumed,
and then wet a fine soft linen cloth therein, and touch the place therewith
oftentimes, which will soon bring them to maturation, and also ease the pain,
if any be.

Vlceration, to help it.

If in the declining of the Pox they chance to grow unto Ulcerations, which is
oftentimes seen: then for the curing thereof use this order here following.

Take Tamarinds, leaves of Lentils, Mirtils, budds of oaken leaves, red Roses
dried, of either a little handful.

Boil all these in a pottle of clean water until half be consumed, then
strein it, and with a fine cloth wet therein do you wash and soak the place
well, then wipe it dry with a soft and fine linen cloth, and then cast into
the place some of this powder following.

Take Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocoll, and red Roses, of either two drachms.

Make all these into fine powder severally by themselves, the^ ^^i^ t^em
together, and so res^^e (...) thy (...).

A very good unguent for the same purpose.

Take oil of Roses, vi. ounces, white Wax, one ounce, Ceruse washed in Rose and
Plantaine-water, one ounce and half, clear Turpentine, iii. drachms, Camphire,
half a dram.

You must first melt the wax in the oil, then put in the Ceruse by little and
little, always stirring it with an iron spalter, and let it boil on a gentle
fire of charcoles until it grow black, but stir it continually in the
boiling, for fear least it burn: then take it from the fire, and add thereto
the camphire, and lastly the Turpentine: this unguent is good both to mundifie,
incarnate, and sigillate.

For extreme heat and burning in the soales of the seet, and palms of the
hands.

Petrus Forestus wills to hold the hands and feet in warm water, and that
will ease the pain and burning, and may boldly be used without any danger.

For to help the soreness and ulceration of the mouth.

Sometime it chances in this disease, that there is a great ulceration or
excoriation in the mouth and jaws, called Aptham, which if it be not well
looked unto in time, will grow to be Cankers, now to cure and prevent the same,
this gargarisme is excellent good.

Take Barley-water, a quart, red Roses dried, a little handful, Sumach, and
Rybes, of either two ounces, juice of Pomegranates,. iii.

Boil them altogether, saving the juice of Pomegranates, until a third part
be consumed, then strein it, and add thereto the juice of Pomegranates, with
this you must often wash and gargarise, as also hold some thereof in the mouth
a pretty while.

Also to prevent the same, the kernel of a Pomegranate held in the mouth is
very good, and so it is excellent good to lick oftentimes some Diamoron, or
juice of a Pomegranate.

For inflammation and pain in the tonsils and throat.

Take Plantaine-water, a pint, Sirrup of Pomegranates, two ounces.

Mix them together, and gargarise therewith oftentimes being warm.

Another.

Taste Nightshade-water, a pint, Seeds of Quinces, four scruples.

Boil them together a little, then strein it, and add thereto two ounces of
the sirrup of Pomegranates, and gargarise therewith oftentimes.

How to open the eyelids that are fastened together with the Pox.

Sometimes the eyelids are so fastened together that you cannot open them
without great pain and danger: then to open them you must foment or bath them
well with a decoction made of Quince seed, Mallows and water boiled together,
wherein wet some fine linen clothes five or six double, and apply them warm,
and continue it until you may easily open them, and then if you perceive any
web or filme to be grown over the sight, then thrice a day do you put some
powder of white sugar candy into the eye, or if you list, you may dissolve the
sugar in Rose Water, and so use it in the eye, which will fret it away, and
preserve the sight.

A good Collery for a Web or Vngula in the eye.

Take the juice of Rue, Fennel, Salendine, Mallows, of either two ounces.

Boil them together in a vessel of glass, or peuter, over a chafer with
coals, and scumme away the froth that does rise thereof, then add thereto the
gaul of an Eel, one dram, and let them boil together a little, then put
thereto four scruples of white copperas, and one scruple of verdigreace in fine
powder, boil all together a little, then let it run through a fine linen
cloth, and keep it in a glass, you must every morning and evening put one drop
thereof into the eye, provided that first due evacuation be made so well by
phlebotomie as purging.

CHAP VI. Teaches how to help diverse accidents which chance after the Pox are
cured and gone.
For redness of the face and hands after the Pox are gone, how to help it.

TAke Barley, Beans, Lupins, of either one handful: bruise them all in a
mortar grosely, and boil them in three pints of water until it grow thick
like a jelly, then strain it, and anoint the face and hands therewith three
or four times a day, for three or four days together, and then you must wet
the face and hands so oftentimes a day with this water following.

Take Vine leaves, two handfuls: Beane-flower, Dragons, wilde-tansey, of either
one handful: Camphire three drachms, two Calves feet, the pulpe of three
Lemons, a pint of raw cream.

You must shred the herbs small, as also the Lemons, and break and cut the
Calves-feet small, then mix them together, and distill it in a glass still,
also the water of May-dew is excellent good for any high color, or redness of
the face.

For spots in the face remaining when the Pox are gone.

Take the juice of Lemons and mix it with a little bay salt, and touch the
spots therewith oftentimes in the day; for it is excellent good.

A good ointment for the same purpose.

Take oil of sweet Almonds; oil of white Lillies, of either one ounce:
Capons-grease, Goats-tallow, of either four drachms: Sarcocoll, half a dram:
Flower of Rice, and of Lupins, of either one dram: Litharge of gold, one
dram and half: Roots of Brionie, and of Ireos, of either one scruple:
Sugar Candy white, one dram.

Make powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and searce them
through a searce, then put them all in a mortar together, and labor them with
a pestle, and in the working do you put the water of Roses, Beane-flower, and
of white Lillies ana a great spoonful, which must be put in by little and
little in the working of it, and so labor them altogether until it come to an
unguent.

You must every evening anoint the face therewith, or hands, and in the
morning wash it away in the water wherein Barley, Wheaten-bran, and the seed of
Mallows has been boiled.

For holes remaining when the small Pox are gone.

For helping of this accident I have showed many things, yet never could find
any thing that did perfectly content me, but the best means that I have tried,
is one day to wash the place with the distilled water of strong Vinegar, and
the next day with the water wherein Bran and Mallows have been boiled, and
continue this order twenty days, or a month together.

Running of the ears, how to help it.

Sometimes the ears do run very much in this disease, which in any wise you
may not go about to stop in the beginning, but suffer it so to run, and the
ears to remain open: but if there be great pain in them, then wet a sponge in
warm water and oil of Roses mixed together, and lay it upon the ears.

For stopping of the nostrills, to help it.

Sometimes the nostrills are greatly pestered by stopping them with the Pox
growing in them, which does oftentimes cause ulceration in them, therefore to
prevent the same, take red-Rose, and Plantaine, of either one handful: Mirrh
in powder half an ounce.

Boil all these in a quart of water until half be consumed, and so being
warm, cause the sick to draw the sum thereof into his nostrills oftentimes.

Also if the sick does oftentimes smell unto Vinegar, it is good.

For hoarsenesse remaining when the Pox are gone.

Take Licorice, Sebesten, Jujubes, of either two ounces: Fat-Figgs, four
ounces, clean water, four pints.

Boil all these together until half be consumed, then strain it, and give one
spoonful thereof to the sick oftentimes, and it helps.

For filthy and moist scabs after the Pox are gone.

Take Lapis calaminaris, Litharge of gold, and of silver of either two drachms:
Quick br^mstone and ^eruse, ana ii.

Bring all these into fine powder, and then labor them in a mortar with so
much Barrowes-mort or grease as shall be sufficient to make up an unguent, and
anoint the place therewith every morning and evening.

FINIS.
Some other few additionall observations concerning the passages in this latter
Treatise.
PAge the eighth of this precedent Book, a Quilt or Bag is commended to be very
excellent; it is reported to be Pope Adrians Bag, which he used against
infection, and in the great last Sickness in London, it was commended to many
great Persons of worth by some Apothecaries, who kept it as a great secret, and
affirmed, it would prevent infection, and preserve them safe in that dangerous
time; and thereupon sold it unto them at a very great rate: But that you may
not be deluded in the prescription, I have set down the true receipt thereof, as
it was delivered unto me from the hands of a very noble friend.

A Preservative against the infection of the air, and the Plague, often
approved by Pope Adrian, and many others of great rank and credit.

Take Arsenick two ounces, Auripigmentum one ounce, make little tablets thereof
with the whites of Eggs, and Gum Dragacanth, and hang them about the neck
against the heart.

I have also set down a red Cordial water, very good against infection, which
I had also from that noble friend.

Take a quart of good spirit of Wine, or very good Aqua vitae, infuse it in one
ounce of good Mithridate, with as much good Venice Triacle: let it be close
stopped some few days in the infusion before you use it, then pour the spirit
clear off, and reserve it for your use.

But to discover what opinions other Physicians have held of that and the like,
I have annexed hereunto their several judgments hereafter, that amongst so
many choice Medicines, they may select out the best and safest for their own
preservations, when need shall require.

And to give them the better satisfaction, I have annexed, out of some choice
Manuscripts, some approved Experiments, of some of our London ablest Doctors,
as also out of some other Authors.

Several opinions against wearing of Arsenick Amulets, as Preservatives
against the Plague.
THe poisonous vapors of Arsenick being sucked or drawn into the body, when
they find no contrary poison with whom to wrestle with, as with an enemy, (for
in an infected body there cannot be health; but we suppose him to be well, whom
we desire to preserve so) those vapors must needs imprint a malignant and
venomous quality on the spirit and heart, most adverse and pernicious to nature.

And by Galens own doctrine, all Alexiteries do in a manner, if they be used
too liberally, greatly offend and weaken our bodies; how can we then think,
that rank Poisons and Dilaetories, (such us Arsenick is) being applied, as to
penetrate into the noblest region of all other, will no whit violate and wast
our natural, vital, and radical heat? Galen libr. de simp. cap. 18.

Nor did Galen, or any of the ancient Fathers and Professors of Physic, use to
preserve from the Plague, or any other poison, by administering some other
poison inwardly, or prescribing outwardly Applications, but proceeded by
Antidotes, and Alexiteries, as will appear in libr. de Theriaca ad Pis. cap,
16. Wherefore, unless we will utterly disclaim or relinguish the method and
prescripts of these worthy Ancients, and prosecute new ways and inventions, to
oppose this man-yelling Monster, we must attempt it not with Poisons but
Antidotes. And Galen defines those to be Poisons, which agree not with nature,
either well or ill affected at any time; for though there are some Poisons,
which if they meet in the body with a contrary venom, so fight with it, and
oppose it, that both do perish in the conflict betwixt them; so that the
party, by their colluctation and struggling together, escapes with his life: yet
all of them agree in uniform opinion together, that where they meet with no
opposition, they ruin the party: And therefore conclude, that Arsenick, worn
by a healthy man, finding not only no contrary Poison to make conflict with,
but no Poison at all, must necessarily thwart, and oppose, and make an onset on
nature her self.

And to confirm their opinions, I have purposely introduced the judgments of
other learned Physicians concurring with them.

Gerardus Columbus, a learned Physician, reports, that it has been observed,
that the wearers of these Amulets, upon unusual heating their bodies, have
fallen into sudden Lipothimies, and Swounings, with other fearful accidents,
which continued upon them till the Amulets or Placents were removed from them;
and that others, though not instantly, yet after some time, have by late and
woeful experience discovered their malignity, by falling into malignant and
pestilent Fevers, some of them ending with death.

Franc. Alphanus, a Physician of Salerne, relates of one, who wearing
Arsenick, and heating himself with playing earnestly at Tennise, fell down
suddenly dead.

Mattheus Hessus also thus writes, As Cordial Bags or Amulets ought not to be
disavowed, so empoysoned Amulets can be no way commended; nor do I remember,
that ever Antidotes: But this I certainly know, that diverse persons, who c^ry
about them Quicksilver in a Nutshell, by the vain persuasions of some
Imposters, have died of the Plague, and the counselors and advisers of such
like Amulets, have been the first have betaken themselves to their heels,
confiding more in their running than cunning: and yet these Quacks persuaded
the ignorant people, with glorious promises and protestations, that whosoever
carried Quicksilver or Arsenick about his neck, should be as safe, as if he
had purchased a protection from the King of Heaven

Historians also report, that Caracalla, though he were a wicked Emperor,
prohibited by public Edict or Proclamation, that no man should wear about him
superstitious Amulets.

And Theophrastus the great (not without cause) esteemed Pericles to have a
crazed brain, because he saw him wear an Amulet about his neck.

And hereunto Doctor Francis Herring, an able Physician, as a Corollary to what
has before been written, adds the experience of some London Physicians, who
report, they have seen foul holes made in the breasts of those that have worn
those Amulets, and have observed diverse to die, who have religiously worn them
about their necks, as well as others.

And whereas the venters and setters out of these deceitful wares, make them
as a scout, to discover the infection when it begins to seize on a man, by
clapping close to the heart, to guard that principal part, as the chief Tower:
It is a mere deceit and collusion: for whenever the body is heated, this
event follows necessarily, though no other infection be near, but the
poisonous and venomous Arsenick it self, whose salutation is rather Joabs
embracing, or Juda's kissing, than friendly preservatives.

Causes of the Plague.

There are two special causes of the Plague.

First, An infected, corrupted, and putrified air,

Secondly, Evil and corrupt humors ingendered in the body.

The air is infected, when the temperatenesse of the air is changed from his
natural state, to excessive heat and moisture, which is the worst temperament
of the air, the vapors drawn up by the heat of the Sun being unconsumed, rot,
putrify, and corrupt, and so with the venom infect the air: Also dead
Carkases lying unburied, as it often chances in Wars, evaporations of
Pooles, Fens, Marshes, stinking and noisome sents and Kennels, and Astronomers
say, Aspects, Conjunctions and Oppositions of ill Planets, and Eclipses of the
Sun and Moon.

Also disordering ones self, either in diet or exercises brings one into the
Pestilence; therefore in time of contagion, outrages and surfets are to be
avoided, as also all excess of eating, drinking, sweating, bathing, lechery,
and all other things that open the pores of the body, and enter thereby ill
aires, which invenome the lively spirits.

Signs of the Plague.

The signs which declare one infected already are many; but the secret token
of all to know the infected of the Plague is, if there arise botches behind the
ears, or under the armeholes, or about the share; or if Carbunkles suddenly
arise in any member, for when they appear, they betoken strength of nature,
which being strong, labors to drive the poison out of the body; but if
botches do not appear, it is more dangerous, for it shows, that nature is
weak and feeble, and not able to expel and thrust forth the venomous humors,
and then you must have respect to the signs before rehearsed.

The infection of the Plague enters into a man after this sort.

In a man are three principal parts (that is) the Heart, Liver, and Brains,
and each of these has his cleansing place: If they appear in the neck, they
show the Brains to be chiefly vexed, if under the arme-holes the Heart, but if
they appear in the share, the Liver is most infected,

For when a man has taken infection, it presently mingleth with the blood, and
runs to the heart, which is the chief part of man, and the heart puts the
venom to his cleansing place, which is the arme-holes; and that being stopped,
puts it to the next principal part, which is the liver, and it passes it
to the next principal part, which is the liver, and it passes it to his
cleansing place, which is the share, and they being stopped, pass it to the next
principal place, that is, the brains, and to their cleansing places, which
are under the ears, or under the throat, and they being stopped, suffer it not
to pass out, and then it is moved twelve hours before it rest in any place,
and if it be not let out within the space of four and twenty hours by bleeding,
it brings a man into a pestilentiall Ague, and causes a botch in one of those
three places, or near unto them

The Cure of the Plague.

When thou feel thy self infected, bleed in the first hour, or within six
hours after, drink not, and tarry not above twelve hours from bleeding, for
then when the blood is flitting too and fro, the venom is then moving, and not
yet settled, and after it will be too late; those that are fat may be let blood,
or else not.

If the matter be gathered under the arme-holes, it comes from the heart by the
Cardiacall vein, then bleed on the same side by the Basilica vein, the
innermost vein of the arm,

If the botch appear behind the ears, above the chin, or in any other part of
the face or neck, bleed out of the Cephalica vein on the same side; you may
bleed with cupping Glasses, and Scarification, or Horseleeches.

If the botch appear in the share, bleed in the ankle on the same side, in any
case not in the arm, for it will draw up the matter again.

But if no botch appear outwardly, draw blood out of that side where you feel
greatest pain and heaviness, and out of that vein, the grief of the members
affected shall point thee out.

If you perceive the Plague invade you at meat, or on a full stomach, vomit
speedily, and when your stomach is empty, take some Medicine that may resist
Poison, as Mithridate, or Triacle, or some of these following, which, as choice
Medicines, I have inserted, as being Doctor Edwards Experiments.

For the Plague.

Infuse two pieces of fine pure Gold in the juice of Lemons four and twenty
hours, and drink that juice with a little Wine, with powder of the Angelica
root: It is admirable, and has helped diverse past all hope of cure.

Another.

Take two drachms of Juniper berries, of Terra lemnia i. make both into fine
powder, and mix it with Honey, and take of it as much as a hasell Nut in three
drachms of honeyed water made up thus: Take a pint of Honey, and of water eight
pints, sees and scum it at an easy fire, till the fourth part be wasted: It
is an excellent Antidote against Poison and Plague; if the Poison be taken
before, it will expel it by vomit, if not, the Medicine will stay in the
stomach.

Another.

Take Zedoary roots the best you can get, great Raisins, and Licorice, champ it
with thy teeth and swallow it, if you be infected it preserves without danger.

Another fo^^botches, boyls, and tokens.

Take of ripe Ivy berries dried in the shade, as much of the powder as will lie
upon a groat or more, and put it into three or four ounces of white Wine, and
lie in bed and sweat well; after your sweat is over, change shirt, and sheets,
and all the bed clothes if he may, if not, yet change his shirt and sheets.

Some have taken this powder over night, and found themselves well in the
morning, and walked about the house fully cured.

One having a Plague sore under the thigh, another under the left arme-pit,
taking this powder in the morning, and again that night, the sores brake of
themselves, by this excellent Medicine sent by Almighty God: It is good for
Botches, Boyles, Plague-sores, Tokens, Shingles, Erisipella, and such like, etc.

Thus far Doctor Edwards Doctor in Physic and Surgery.

Experiments tried by my self.
For the Plague.

TAke of Pillulae pestilentiales, called Ruffi, or of Panchy Magogon (or for
want of it) of extraction Rudii, of each half a dram, mingle these, into six
pills for two doses, whereof take three at a time in the morning fasting, for
two days together.

Another excellent approved Remedy.

Take eight or nine grains of Aurum vitae, either in Triacle water, or made up
in Diascordium, fasting.

Another excellent sweating powder for the Plague.

Take of the powder e Chelis Cancrorum, of Aromaticum rosatim, and of Corusa
Antimonii, of each half a scruple, mingle these up together in a diaphoretick
powder, and take it in four spoonfuls of Triacle water well mingled together.

The Cure of Diseases in Remote Regions.
The Calenture,
Happens to our Nation in intemperate Climates; by Inflammation of blood, and
proceeds often of immoderate drinking of wine, and eating of pleasant fruits,
which are such nourishers thereof, as they prevent the means used in curing
the same.

To know the Calenture.

At the first apprehension it afflicts the Patient with great pain in the head,
and heat in the body, which is continual or increasing, and does not diminish
and angment, as other Fevers do; and is often an Introduction to the Taberdilla
or Pestilence, but then the body will seem very yellow.

To cure the Calenture.

So soon as you perceive the Patient possessed of the Calenture, (except the
Surgeon, for danger of the sign defer it) I have seen the time of the day
not respected, open the Median vein of the right arm, and take such quantity of
blood, as agrees with the ability of the body; but if it assuage not the heat
by the next day, open the same vein in the left arm, and take so much more
like quantity of blood at his discretion; and if the body be costive, (as
commonly they are) give him some meet purgation, and suffer him to drink no
other then water cold, wherein Barley and Annise-seeds have been boiled with
bruised Liquorice. And if within 4. days the party amend not, or being
recovered, take it again, open the vein Cephalic in one or both hands, bathing
them in warm water, until there come so much more blood as cause requires.
Suffer not the Patient to drink seven days after he is perfectly recovered,
any other drink, then such water, as is before herein directed.

The Taberdilla,
IS a disease so called by the Spaniards, by the Mexicans, Cocalista, and by
other Indians is named Taberdet, and is so exceeding pestilent and infectious,
that whole Kingdoms in both the India's have been depopulated by it, for want
of knowledge to redress themselves of it.

To know the Taberdilla.

It first assaults the Patient vehemently with pain in the head and back: and
the body seeming yellow, is some sign thereof, and within 24 hours it is so
torturous, that the possessed thereof cannot rest or sleep, turning himself on
either side, back or belly, burning in his back most extremely. And when it
grows to perfection, there will appear red and blue spots upon the Patients
breast and wrists. And such persons as have not presently requisite means
applied to them to prevent it, will be, by the vehement torment thereof,
deprived of their wits, and many to cease their pain by loss of their lives
have despairingly slain, and drowned themselves.

The Cure of the Taberdilla.

When you perceive it afflict the Patient, permit him not to lie very warm, nor
upon feathers (for of what quality soever he be in Spain, having this sickness
he is laid upon wheatstraw:) Then immediately open the Median Vein, first in one
arm, and the next day in the other, taking a good quantity of blood: Let him
have water cold, wherein Barlie and Annise-seeds have been sodden without
Liquorice (for the Spanish Physicians hold Liquorice to be hurtful unto them)
so much as he will desire, which will be every moment; but no other drink, nor
any (...) f^uits: As Soon as the spots appear, give him some C^^dia^^ potion:
and laying him upon his belly, set six Ventoses ^^gether on his back, between
and beneath the shoulders; and sca^^^ing them, draw out (if it be a body of
strong constitution) 18 ounces of blood. After which, and that he has sle^^,
he will find ease within twenty four hours, and such alteration in himself, as
he will think he is delivered of a most strange torment. Then give him
moderately nourishing meats, (for he will desire to eat much) the fourth day,
give him some convenient Purgations. And if in the mean while he is costive,
provoke him every day by Clisters; and warn him to forbear 15 days all other
drink then what is ordained: And be very careful of his diet, for if this
Taberdilla, which we call here in England Gods Tokens, come again unto the
Patient, he can hardly escape it. And it is no less Infectious, then the
usual English Plague.

The Espinlas
IS a strange sickness, usual in those parts to such as take cold in their
Breasts, after great heat or travel. It comes most times to those that lie
with their breasts upon the ground (especially) in the night.

To know the Espinlas.

The Party having it, will be giddie in the head, and have pain and pricking at
his breast, as with many thorns; from whence I think it is called, for Espina
in Spanish signifies a thorn; and there will be upon the Focell, being the
upper bone of his arm, a hand breadth above the wrist, a little kernel by the
which it is certainly known: He that has this disease, will have appetite
neither to meat, nor drink, nor can digest meat though he be invited and moved
to take it.

To cure the Espinlas.

The Espinlas appearing by the former signs, take presently oil Clives, and
therewith chafe the kernel upon the Patients arm, using so to do twice every
day, until it be dissolved; and laying oil likewise upon his breast, stroke
it upward somes hat hard with the hand; then spread fine flax upon it and the
kernel, making it fast with a rowler, and within two or three days the
diseased will be recovered thereof, whereas else it is very dangerous to
deprive them of lire.

Camera de Sangre.
LAxativeness, or Blondy Flux, proceed in those parts of diverse causes: As by
eating Grapes, Oranges, Limons, Melons, Plantains, and especially a great fruit
growing in the West Indies called Pina, like a Pineapple, but bigger then four
of the greatest which I have seen, which the Spaniars hold for the most
delicate fruit that is there, and many other fruits. Also by sudden cold, or
sitting (being very hot) upon a cold stone, or being hot by drinking water
abundantly. And also eating of Butter, ^yle, and ^ish is so hurtful to the
parties that have it, that they must refrain to eat thereof, and whatsoever
else, that may engender any slimie substance in the Intrals.

The Cure of the Bloody Flux.

There is more possibility of cure, by how much more expedition the medicine is
ministered: and detracting it, the Patients often die suddenly, without feeling
much grief. For speedy and assured remedy, the Patients body must be cleansed
of the sliminess, engendered in the passages of the nutriments, before any
sustenance can remain in his body. To that purpose purge him in the morning,
with half a pint of white wine cold, wherein half an ounce of Rubard being
small cut has been sodden, putting some Sugar Candy to it, to sweeten it, and
immediately after he has so purged, keep at his navell Rosemary sod in strong
Vinegar, applied in the morning and evening very hot, until it be stayed;
giving him often Quinces bruised, and rouled in Marmalade like Pills, which he
should swallow whole, and none of the fruits or meats before recited, nor any
more white wine, but red wine of any sort: And if it be one the land use the
Livers of Goats, (especially) Sheeps, or Bullocks roasted; not willingly
permitting the Patient to eat any other meat: And if at Sea, Rice only sodden
in water, rather then any thing else usual there, until the infirmity be
perfectly assuaged.

The Erisipela,
Reigns much in those Countries, proceeding from the unwholesome aires and
vapors those hot Countries do yield, whereof many perish; and if it be not
prevented by Medicines presently ministered to the Sick Patients, it proves
incurable.

To know the Erisipela.

He will be swollen in the face, or some part of him, and it will be of yellow
color mixed with red. And when it is pressed with the finger, there will
remain a sign or dint of the same, and then by degrees it will fill again to
the former proportion. It speedily infecteth the inward parts, because such
swellings come sooner unto perfection in hot places, then in temperat
Countries, and therefore the diseased thereof, must immediately be provided of
remedy.

To Cure the Erisipela.

The Savage people first found out perfectly how to cure this disease, (though
it is the Spanish name of the Malady) by bruising so much Tobacco as will
yield four spoonfuls of juice, and to drink it presently after they are
infected therewith, and to lance the places swollen, thereunto putting Casade
wet, and made into paste, continuing in cold and shadie places near Rivers: and
not to travel and labor till they be recovered: The Spaniards in India do
recover themselves by taking the same juice of Tobacco, and setting so many
Ventoses upon the swollen places as they can contain, scarifying them, and
drawing out the corrupted humor so congealed, using the like in two or three
other parts of the body, where the disease does not appear.

The juice of Tobacco is very excellent to expel poison, and is the ordinary
remedy used by the Indians, and other Savages when they are poisoned, and
bitten with Scorpions, or other venomous creatures: But they make presently
some incision where they are bitten or stung, and wash it with the juice of
Tobacco, then applying the same bruised thereunto two or three days, they heal
it up with dried Tobacco.

The Tinoso or Scurvie.
IS an infecting disease sufficiently known unto Sea-fayring men, who by
putrified meats, and corrupted drinks, eating Biscuit flourie, or foul crusted,
and wearing wet apparel (especially sleeping in it) and slothful demeanor,
or by gross humors contained in their bodies get the same,

To know the Scurvie.

Many have perished when they returned out of hot Regions into cold Climates,
where they have had the parts of their bodies, which with heat, were nimble and
tractable to every motion of the Spirits, dulled and benumbed with cold, which
is a token that this disease is ingendring in their joints; and soonest appears
by swelling of their ankles, and knees, and blackness of their gums, or
looseness of their teeth, which will sometimes come forth, when there is no
remedy used in season.

Preservatives against the Scurvy.

You must have a care to preserve those things before rehearsed well
conditioned, the badnesse whereof, in part breed this d^sease; they must use
exercise of body, and such as are exempt^d from doing of labor, must hang or
swing by the ar^es twi^e or th^ice every day; they must not have scarcity of
drink in hot ^limates, and coming into the cold, must be da ^y ^eleeved with
Aqua vitae or Wine: It is also an assured Me^^^^^e against this disease, to
have such quantity of Beer brewed will gra^nes and long Pepper, as in the
morning, twic^ every w^ek, there may be given a good draught to a man,
p^^portioning three quarters of a pound of grains, and three quarters of a
pound of long Pepper, to a Hogshead of Beer: Also white Wine, or Syder, boiled
and brewed with grains and long Pepper in like quantity, is very singular
good: And it is not fit to suffer the gu^mes to abound with flesh, and
therefore sometimes let them bleed, and clear them with strong Vinegar.

To cure the Scurvy.

If the Scurvy be settled in his mouth, the corrupted and black flesh must be
taken away, and his mouth washed with strong Vinegar, wherein grains and long
Pepper have been infused and brewed, and give him daily the drink that is
before prescribed; and as well such as have it in their mouths, as those that
are swollen in their limbs, must have some meet ^u^gation presently; but those so
swollen or stiff (for so some will be without swelling) to scarifie the parts
infected, and to apply thereto a Poultis or Cataplasme of Barley meal, more hot
than the Patient will willingly suffer it; so doing every morning, permit him
not to rest two hours after, although being nummed or faint, he be supported
to walk, and suffer him not to eat any salt meats, if other meats may be had.

My self having eighty men, eight hundred leagues out of England, sick of the
Scurvy, I used scarifiing, and to the places scarified (being destitute of the
helps mentioned) I applied Poultisses of Biscuit beaten in a mortar, and sod in
water, which, with the comfort of some fresh meats obtained, recovered them all
except one person, and they arrived in England, perfectly sound.

Other Observations concerning the Scurvy taken out of other Books.
1. THose that are troubled with the Scurvy, their thighs are stained with a
violet color, that one would think, that something of that color were spread
upon it, their gummes are corrupted, and their teeth loose; these ever are
signs of that disease.

2. Some are only pained in their teeth and gums, some otherwise; some do
never break out, others their whole thighs are stained.

Observations out of Sennertus, concerning the Scurvy.
1. MUltitude of passions, and change of diseases in it. 2. Grief of mind, and
uneasy breathing and stopping. 3. Corruptnesse of the gums, and ill savor of
the mouth. 4. Ach of the teeth. 5. Spots. 6. Urine. 7. Pulse. 8. Vein of the
legs about the ankles, together with the hands and fingers, the nuch, the
knees, and the moving of many parts, with swellings. 9. Pain in the belly;
about the forepart of the belly, about the short ribs. 10. Feebleness and ache
in the joints. 11. Pains of the reins, and strangury. 12. Headache. 13.
Plurisie. 14. Gout. 15. Benumming, and the Palsy. 16. Trembling, and panting
of the heart, and shaking. 17. Cramp, pricking or shooting Aches, and
Epilepsie. 18. Contractions, and stiffenesse of limbs. 19. Apoplexy. 20.
Overmuch Sleeping. Watching.
21. Fear and sadness. 22. Madness. 23. Abundant bleeding about the nose. 24.
Memory weak. 25. Ache in the shoulders. 26. Appetite decayed, thirst and
dryness of mouth. 27. Belching upwards. 28. Disposition to vomit, or vomiting.
29. Continual spitting. 30. Looseness in the belly, sometimes with blood. 31.
Belly bound at other times. 32. Muck sweat, with ill savor of the body, and
Ptysick. 33. Ill color of the face, and yellow Jaundies. 34. Swelling of the
legs, and Dropsy of the belly. 35. Mighty heat. 36. Fevers. 1. Quotidian. 2.
Tertian. 3. Quartain. 4. Continual.
37. Plague or Pestilence. 38. Swelling, or puffing up of the flesh. 39.
Lamenesse of the thighs and whole body. 40. Saint Anthonies fire. 41. Gangrean,
when the sore parts rot and mortify.
A Water to make a man see within 40. days, though he have been blind seven
years before, if he be under fifty years of age.
TAke Smallage, Fennel, Rue, Betonie, Vervain, Egrimonie, Cinquefoil,
Pimpernel, Eyebright, Celydonie, Sage, ana a quartern, and wash them clean and
stamp them, do them in a fair mashing pan, put thereto a quart of good white
wine, and the powder of thirty Pepper corns, six spoonfuls of life Honey, and
ten spoonfulls of a man child's urine that is innocent, and mingle them well
together, and sees them till the half be wasted, and then take it down and
strein it, and afterward clarify it, and put it in a glass Vessel well
stopped, and put thereof with a feather into the eyes of the blind, and let the
Patient use this Medicine at night when he goes to bed, and within forty days
he shall see. It is good for all manner of sore eyes. Wild Tansey water is
good for the eyesight; and eating of Fennel seed is good for the same.

For the Web in the Eye.

The Leaves of white Honie-suckles, and ground Ivy, ana, ground together, and
put every day into the eye, cures the Web.

Salt burnt in a flaxen cloth, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather
anointed on the eyelids, kills worms that annoy the eyelids.

For Wind in the Side, that makes the Head swim.

Take of Cammomil three ounces, a penniworth of powder of Cummin sewed in a
Poke like a stomacher, boil it well in stale Ale, lay it to the side hot, and
when it is cold renew it again hot.

Contra Surditatem.

1. Betonica saepe injecta tepide, mire proficit contra aurium dolorem and
surditatem, and alia vitia, and sonos extraneos non sinit manner.

2. Roast an Onion as hot as you may suffer it, lay it upon the ear with a
linen cloth laid between. Probatum est.

Cont^^ lupum, venit saepe s^per oculum aut pedem. If it be incurable, it
stinketh, fretteth, and the wound waxes black.

Take Salt, and Honey, and ^^^^lty, ana, burn them in an Oven, wash the wound
with Vin^gar, and dry it with linen clothes, and then lay on the powder, and
do so till it amend,

Pro Cancro and Lupo.

Take half a pint of Juice of Mollein, and half a pint of Honey, sodden to the
thickness of honey, and mingle with these pouders, and lay on the sore. Take
Orpiment and Verdi-grease, of either a dram and a half, juice of Walwort a
pound and a half, honey a quartern, Vinegar, boil them altogether till it be as
thick as honey, lay thereof on the hole of the sore twice every day, with juice
of Ribwort, and drink juice of Avence.

Ribwort stamped and laid on the sore will kill it.

Pro Oculis.

1. Lac mulieris quae masculum genuit, sed praecipu^ quae gemines masculos
genuit, mixtum cum albumine ovi, and in lana comp^situm passiones and lachrymas
oculorum mitigat, et desiccat, si fronti lac^ymantis imponatur: and proficit,
etiam ad oculum ictu percussum, and sanguinem emittentem, vel epiphoras
habentem, vel in dolor constitutum.

2. Si quis duarum faeminarum, matris and filiae lacte perunctus fueri^, qui
uno and eodem tempore masculos habent, in omni vita sua dolorem oculorum non
habebit.

3. Eyebright juice, or water, is excellent good for the eyes.

4: Anoint a red cole leaf cum albumine ovi, and quando is cubitum oculo
applica.

For Bleared Eyes.

Take the juice Peritory, temper it with the white of an Egg, and lay it all
night to your eyes, and quando removes, lava cum succo.

Corn^s.

Anoint thy corns often with fasting spittle: Or cleave a black Snail to it.

Take Woodsoure and say to the c^^^^, and that shall gather out the Callum
thereof, and be whole, but you must first cut it about with a kni^e.

Apostema.

1. Gentian used twice or thrice in a week ad quantitatem pili destruit
Apostema.

2. Drink water of Endive, Petty Morrell, with the pulp of Cassia Fistula.

3. Take Scabios, red Pimpernel, Solsickle and Fumitorie, make these into
powder, and use a spoonful thereof in the morning, especially in May. Probatum
est.

Pro stomacho frigido.

1. Oats parched and laid in a Satchell upon a cold stomach, is an approved
cure.

2. The crust of a brown loaf made hot and sprinkled with vinegar, and laid on
a cold stomach, Salvabit. 3. A tile stone made hot and sprinkled with Vinegar,
Eysell or Ale, wrapped in a clout, and laid to the stomach, is good.

Pro dolor stomachi.

1. Stamp Fennel, and temper it with stale ale, and bibat tria ccclearia
sin^ul. Sees Penniroyall and bind it to his Navel as hot as he may suffer it.

For wind or gnawing in the Belly.

Take Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, and a little Fennel seed, Cloves, and
Cinnamon, grate or beat them together, and take them in powder, or drink them
with ale.

For the Small Pox.

Take Almonds, and make Almond milk, and take the cr^am thereof, and bath the
face twice or thrice, though all the Pocks be pulled away, it shall not be Pock
fret.

Anoint often the Patients eyes with a linen cloth wet in the juice of
Sengreen, and it will save them from the Pox.

For a stroke in the eye.

Juice of Smallage and Fennel, and the white of an Egg, mingled together, and
put into the eye.

Bloodshed in the eye.

Five leaved grass, stamped with Swines grease, and with a little salt bound to
the eye.

Pro Oculo and Aure.

Sint calida quae aure imponuntur, and frigida quae in oculo.

For a Venomed sore.

Take Lavender, Marigolds, Sengreen and Betonie, and stamp them together, and
lay them to the sore.

To make a swelling break.

Take piss and Vinegar, and Sage M. i. stamped, and flour, and boil them
together, and lay it hot on a cloth to the sore.

For the Squinsie.

Bray Sage, Rue, and Parsely Roots, and lay them hot to the throat.

For Biting of a mad Dog.

Stamp Mint, and clear Leeks, and lay it to the sore.

To break a Botch.

Make a Plaster of Woodbine leaves, and lay to the sore.

For gnawings.

Take Herb Bennet, and Sheeps tallow, and oil Olive, fry them together, and
lay it to the sore place.

To increase Milk.

Powder of Annise, and the juice of the bark of Fennel root drunk.

If milk be thick.

Eat mints, and boil mints in wine and oil, and lay on the breasts.

For Botches, Wounds, and Sores, a salve.

Boil black Rosin, red Lead, and oil Olive together; and fiat emplastrum.

Qui bibit novem dies simul propria^ urinam, nec habebit epilepsiam, paralysin,
nec colicam.

Venenum.

1. Qui bibit propriam urinam, sanabitur a sumpto veneno.

2. Garlic, Rue, Centaury, grains of Juniper, valent contra venenum.

3. Powder Hempseed, and mingle it with Goats milk, and let them boil a
little, and use this drink three days, valet contra inflationem, venenum,
Bubonem, Felon, and squinanciam.

Pro Auribus.

Green Ash leaves burnt, and the liquor that drops out of them impositum valet.

Euphorbium pounded with Oil Citron, and laid hot on the ears, cures sounding
of the ears, tingling, and Fistulaes.

Caput-purgium.

Take the juice of Ivy, and powder of Pepper, mingle them, together, and drink
it.

For the bloody Flix.

The yellow that grows in red Roses put into pottage, and so eaten, is good
for the bloody Flix.

Vermes Stomachi.

The same yellow drunk in Ale* valet contra Vermes.

For a Felon.

Scabious stamped small, a good quantity of Tar, and grease ana. temper them
together, and all raw, lay them to the sore place.

For the Reins of the back.

Boil your own water well, scum it, then take a quart of that water, oil of
Bays one ounce, oil of Roses one ounce, boil all in a pot, and therewith
anoint well the reins in the hot sun, or against the fire.

Vnge renes, cum nasturtio and propria urina jejunus saepe, and juvat renes.

Coque mel and butyrum simul and unge renes coram igne.

Sees Smallage, and temper it with Wine, and drink it fasting, and you shall
be healed.

For them that cannot go upright for pain in their back and reins.

Take a fat Hen, and scald her, and draw her, and fill her with Seen c^ddes 1d
weight, and Polipody of an Oak, and of Annis, 1d weight, boil her well, and
strain her into a vessel, and take two spoonfuls thereof, and give it the sick
first and last.

For the Stitch.

Take three handfuls of Mallows, sees them in a litte raw Milk, and put
thereto a handful of wheat bran, and let them boil together, and then wring
out the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often.

Take a few leaves of Rue, and Yarrow, stamp them together, and wring out the
juice, and drink it with a little Ale.

For the Stitch in the side.

Make Balls of red Wortes sodden, and burn them in a new pot, and then grind
them to powder, and mingle them with Honey and old Grease, and make a plaster,
and lay it thereto when it is well sodden.

To heal Wounds.

Take Ribwort, Plantain, Smallage, ana. take well nigh as much May Butter as of
the juice, mingle it together, that it be standing, and put it in a Box that no
air come thereto, and make an Ointment, and this is the securest Medicine for
healing Wounds.

For swelling of Joints.

Bray Mallows, and boil them in new Milk, and make it into an emplaister, and
apply it to the place.

To knit Sinews or Veins that are kicked or broke.

Take two Onions in summer, when thou find two Worms knit together, cut off
the knots, and lay them to dry against the Sun, and make thereof powder, and
cast it in the Wounds, and it will do as aforesaid.

Ut virga hominis nunquam erigatur.

Formicas istas pulverisabis, misce cum vaccinio lacte and da euivis in potu
etc.

Verrucae, Porri, ficus.

Cortix salicis combustus and temperatus cum aceto, and appositus, verrucas,
porros and ficus tollit. Portulaca fricata tollit verrucas. Agrimonia trita and
emplastrata cum aceto verrucas tollit

Stercus ovis si misceatur cum aceto, and fiat emplaistrum, tollit variolas and
verrucas.

For Corns.

Take Beans and chew them in thy mouth, and lay them to the Corn, do this at
night.

For Warts.

1. Purslane rubbed on the Warts makes them fall away.

2. The juice of the roots of Rushes applied, heals them.

For a Wound that bleedeth inwardly.

Take Filago, and temper it with Ale or Wine, and give it him, and anon the
blood shall go out by his mouth; and if the Patient cannot open his mouth,
open it with a key, and put it in, and he shall receive his speech, this has
been proved.

If men have any blood within them of any hurt.

Let them drink Eufrase sodden with water, and anon they shall cast it out by
vomit.

Aqua proscabie, tumore, and prurita.

Ashes made of green Ashen wood sifted clean, and mingled with clean water, and
often stirred, all a whole day, the water thereof, that is clear gathered, and
mingled with a little Vinegar, and a little Allome, and sodden together, is a
precious water to wash with, sores of swellings, and for itchings, and
cleansing of diverse sores.

An vulneratus vivat, vel non.

The juice of Pimpernell drunk with water, if it come out at the Wound of a
wounded man he shall dye, if it come not he shall live.

Also give him Trefoile to drink, if he cast it out he shall die.

To destroy an Imposthume, in what place soever it be.

Take the roots of marsh-mallowes, wash them and boil them, afterward take
the same water, and boil it with the seed of Fenugreek, and Line, then bake it
with the bran of Barley, afterward fry it with Bores grease, make thereof an
emplaister, and apply it hot, and within a short time the Patient will be cured.

For Warts.

1. Agrimony stamped with Salt, and tempered with Vinegar, and laid on the
Warts, within four days does take them away.

2. Take the yolk of an Egg well roasted, stamp it with oil of Olive, or oil
of Violets, and make it in manner of a plaster, and this will do away the
Warts in a night.

3. Rub them often with oaken Apples, and bind a plaster thereof on them, and
bray blossoms of Golds, and Agrimony with Salt, and lay them to as a plaster.

4. Burn Willow tree rind, and temper the Ashes with Vinegar, and utere.

Oleum Nucum.

Take Nuts whole, sees them in water, and then break them, and take out the
kernels and stamp them, and then wring them through a cloth, and that Oil is
noble and mollificative.

Vnguentum Dialaehaeae optimum pro podagra.

Take Brocks grease, Swines grease, Ducks grease, Capons grease, Ganders
grease, suet of a Deer, Sheeps tallow, ana. p. ae. melt them in an earthen pan,
then take the juice of Rubarb, marsh-Mallowes, Morrel, Comfrey, Daysie, Rue,
Plantain, Mace, Heyrif, Matfelon, and Dragons, ana. p. ae. fry them in a pan
with the foresaid grease, secretum pro podagra.

For the Colic and Stone.

. Cepas Rubras, pista commixta cum mulvasceto, and bibe calide.

Aqua propter ulcera and malum mortuum.

. Aquam fabri potell. i. salviae, cuprifolii nasturtii and modicum mellis,
coque ad medium, and lava locum.

Aqua pro alceribus.

. Apii, Salviae, Sempervivae, ana. M. i. pista and coque in una lb. 8. aquae
currentis, postea cola and add,. iiii. Aluminis, Mellis, lb. ss. Bulliet
alumen modicum, add. iiii. Camphora and reserva.

Capitis dolor.

Coque Cumium in malvazeto, and lava caput.

Pista rutum, cum sale, and fiat emplastrum.

For Bones broken in a man's Head.

Agrimoniae Contisam fiat emplastrum. Item bibe Betonicam p. i. and resurgant
ossa and sanatis pro acto vulnera.

Capitis dolor.

. Rutae, hederae terrestris, folia lauri, coque in aqua vel vino and fiat
emplastrum super caput.

. Celidoniam, pista and coque cum butyro versus dolorem capitis etsi cranium
cecidit de loco, etc. and lava cum decoctione ejusdem erbae.

Corvi albi.

Attend cum corvus habet ova, and unge ter vel quater cum melle, and pulli
eorum erunt albi.

Ebrii.

Qui prius biberit crecum quam ad potationem inierit, crapulam vel ebrietatem
non incurret.

Acetum.

Vt acetum redeat in vinum semen porri immitte per duas noctes.

Ova rotunda producunt gallinas, longa vero gallos.

Fistula.

Hebba Roberti Fistulae emplastrata, vel succus ejus in eam posita eam curat.

Succus caprifolii naribus impositus, polypum recentem and cancrum, and
fistulam curat.

Pro virga virili combusta cum muliere.

. Sum morellae and sedi and axungiae porcinae, p. ae. frixa and suppone.

Contra exitum any.

. Vrticas rubras pista, and in olla terrea coque in vino albo ad medium, postea
bibe mane and sero calide, and faeces superpone.

Contra fluxum.

1., Cornu cervi, and conchas ostrei, combure and da pulverem mane and sero 9
dies.

Plaster of Paris.

2. Pulverem alabastri misce cum albumine ovi, pone super tempora and alia loca.

An virgo corrupta.

Pulveriza fortiter flores lilii crocei quae sunt inter albos flores, da ti
comedere de illo pulvere, and si est corrupta statim minget.

Ut dens cadat*

Pulvis stercoris caprae positus supra dentem, facit cadere: cave alia.

Pro combusto cum muliere.

Take powder of a linen cloth when it is well burnt, and take the yolks of
eggs, and mingle them well together, and therewith anoint the sore, and put
the powder into the hole.

A Drink that heals all Wounds without any Plaster or Ointment, or without
any taint most perfectly.

Take Sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, ana, p. ae. stamp them in a mortar, and
temper them with wine, and give the sick that is wounded to drink twice or
thrice in a day till he be whole. Bugle holds open the wound, Millfoil
cleanses the wound. Sanicle heals it, but Sanicle may not be given to him
that is hurt in the head, if the brain-pan be broken, for it will slay him, and
therefore it is better in another place: This is a good and tried Medicine.

Vnguentum genistae.

Take Flores genistae, flowers and leaves of Woodbind, ana, p. ae. stamp them
with May Butter, and let them stand so together all night, and in the morning
make thereof an ointment, and melt it, and scum it well: This Medicine is good
for all cold evils, and for sleeping of hand and foot.

Unguentum Augustinum is good for all sore legs that be red and hot.

Take Groundsell and Petty Morrell, and stamp them, and temper them with May
Butter, and put them in a pot fast closed, and let them stand so nine days,
and then fry it over an easy fire, and strein it through a cloth, and put it
in a box for your use.

Unguentum viride is good pro erectione virgae, and for the mormale; no
ointment works stronger then this.

Take a pound of Swines grease, one ounce of Verdigrease, half a scruple of Sal
gemmae, this ointment may be kept 40. winters: Valet contra cancros, and for
running holes, it fretteth away dead flesh, and brings new, and heals old
wounds; put it within the wound that it fester not: Put to this ointment,
Pitch, rosin, and wax, and it will be a fine heat for old bruises, swellings,
and Mormales.

Unguentum nigrum, for wounds, heating and burning.

Take a quart of oil of Olive, and boil it well, then cast in a quart of red
lead, and stir it well with a slice, and boil it till it be black, and then let
it cool; and keep it for drawing and healing.

Vnguentum Rubrum.

Take a pint of honey, half a pint of Vinegar, and a portion of Verdigrease,
boil them together, and it is good for all manner of sores.

Contra vomitum.

1.. Rosewater, powder of Cloves, and Mastick, and drink it hot.

2. Take Mints three ounces, Roses half an ounce, Mastick one ounce, Barlie
meal, and a crust of bread tosted, and this manner of Plaster apply to the
stomach.

3. Rutae cochleare i. bibe cum vino vel cerevisia, multum valet.

4. Powder of Gilliflowers strewed on his meats, stancheth immediately.

Note, He must eat no meat whilst he casts (ut virtus maneat.

Fluxus sanguinis narium.

1. Hens feathers burnt, and the smoke thereof applied to the nostrils stinteth
it.

2. A pigs turd burnt, and made into powder, blown into the nostrils.

3. The juice of Smallage drunk restrains bleeding. Probat.

4. Succus menth^^ and rutae mixtus curat fluxum narium.

Contra Sciaticam.

Stercora leporis temperata et calido vino applica forma emplastri dolori.

Freckens of the face.

1. Grease your face with oil of Almonds, and bibe succum plantaginis.

2. Anoint your visage well and often with Hares blood.

To know if a man be a Leper or no.

Let him bleed, and put the blood into water, and if the blood swim above, he
is a Leper, and if it descend, he is clean.

For ache in the loins.

Take Waybread, and Sanicle, stamp them, and put thereto Bores grease, and
forma emplastri calide dolori applica.

For a scald Head.

1 Wash thy head with Vinegar, and Cammomil stamped and mingled together, there
is no better thing for the Scall. Probat.

2. Grind white Hellebor, grind it with Swines grease, applica capiti.

3. Take Culver dung, with Salt, and a little Vinegar, and stir them well
together, and therewith wash thy head, and sanabit capitis faeditates.

Ad ornatum faciei.

Take fresh Bores grease, and the white of an Egg, and stamp them together,
with a little powder of Bays, and therewith anoint the visage, and it shall
clear the skin, and make it white.

If the Liver rot.

Eat raw Parsely 9. days, and 6. days after eat Sage, and that will cleanse
that the Parsely has wrought.

Note, All Herbs whose roots be medicinable, are best in April.

For stopping of the Pipes.

. I eaves and tender stocks of Horehound, stamp them and sees them well in
Butter, then wring it through a cloth, cool it, and add to that powder of
Liquorice, and of Hysop, mix them together, and keep it in a Box, and when
thou will, take a spoonful, and temper it with hot wine, and use it when thou
go to bed.

Aliud.

. A good quantity of Hysop, sees it in half a gallon of good wine, till half
be fodden away, and let the sick use it first and last, at evening hot, and at
morning cold. Probat.

Aliud.

. The juice of Cinquefoil stamped, and drink a sup thereof with wine or ale,
and it shall clear thee of much phlegm, above and beneath.

The Plague Water.
TAke a handful of Sage and a handful of rue, and boil them in three pints of
Malmsie, or Muscadine, until one pint be wa^ted, then take it off the fire,
and strain the wine from the herbs, then put into the wine two penniworth of
long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmeg, all
grossly bruised, and let it boil a little again: This done, take it off the
fire, and dissolve it in half an ounce of good Venic^ Tria^le, and a quarter of
an ounce of Mithridate, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Angelica
water; so keep it in a glass close stopped for your use: For preservation you
shall take every morning a spoonful warm, and lay you down to sweat upon it,
and so continue to take it twice a day until you perfectly recover. This water
likewise cures the small Pox, the M^asels, Surfets, and Pestilentiall Fevers.

A Cordial Water good for the Plague, Pox, Measels, all kind of Convulsions,
Fevers, and all pain of the Stomach.

Take Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Celandine, Seabios, Agrimonie, Mugwort, Woormwood,
Pimpernel, Dragon, Carduus benedictus, Rosa solis, Betonie* Marigold leaves and
flowers, Centurie, Polipodium, Scurvie grass, of each a handful, wash them
and swing them in a clean cloth till they be dry, then shred them small, and
take the roots of Zedoarie, Tormentill, Enula campana, Angel^^a, Licorice, of
each half an ounce scraped, and sliced, ther^take of the best white wine eight
pints; put them all into an earthen pot well leaded, let them stand two days
close covered, and stir them once in the day, then still them in a Limbeck,
with a temperate fire; it will be two days and a night in the still: keep the
first pint by it self; of which you may take a spoonful at a time; of the next
quart take twice so much; of the next pint you may give to little children a
spoonful at a time: Lute the still well, that no air come forth, and keep it
in close glasses.

For a Child that has the Ague.

Take the Herb called Hartshorn, stamp it, then mingle it with bay Salt, and
three or four hours before the fit come apply it, spread upon a linen cloth,
to the Child's wrists, and when the fit is past, apply a fresh one before the
next fit, and in a few fits, God willing, she shall be cured.

For a burning Fever.

Take red mints two handful, boil them in a quart of running water, to the
consumption of half, strain it, and put thereto four or five spoonfuls of white
Wine Vinegar, and as much Honey, boil it to the height of a Sirrup.

Take of Endive two handfuls, boil it in a quart of water, to the consumption
of half, take two spoonfulls of this, and one of the Sirrup, in the morning
fasting, and at any other time you please.

For the Jaundies black or yellow.

Take of White Wine one pint, steep therein of the root of Caelidon, the weight
of twelve pence, of Saffron one pennyworth, a raze of Turmarick; bruise all,
and bind them in a fine piece of Laun, and let it infuse in the Wine a night,
drink a part thereof in the morning, one other part at noon, and the rest at
night.

To bring down the Flowers.

Take of Alligant, or Muskadine, or Clarret, a pint, burn it, and sweeten it
well with Sugar, put thereto two spoonfulls of Sallet oil, then take a good
Bead of Amber in powder in a spoon with some of the wine after it, take it
evening and morning.

To stay the Flowers.

Take Amber, Corrall, Pearl, Jeat, of each alike, grind them to a fine powder,
and searse them; take thereof as much as will lie upon six pence with conserve
of Quinces, and drink after it a draught of new milk, use it every morning.

For the Mother.

Take a brown tossed of sour bread of the nether crust, and wash it with Vinegar,
and put thereto black Soap, like as you would butter a tossed, and lay it under
the Navill.

For the Stone.

Take Saxifrage, Pellitorie, Parslie, Eyebright, wild Thime, of each two
handfuls; of Raddish roots two or three, steep all in a pottle of red cowes
milk a night, then still it, make of this quantity two stillings.

You must take at a time nine spoonfuls, as much Renish or White wine, and the
juice of a Lemon, sweeten all with Sugar, and take it fasting, if your stomach
be cold, slice a little Ginger, and put into it.

For a cold, cough, Ptissick, or any defect of the Lungs.

Take Horehound, Maiden hair, Liver-wort, Hearts tongue, Germander, Hysope,
Agrimonie, of each a handful, wash them and boil them in six pints of running
water in a pipkin, till four pints be consumed at least, strain it, and put the
liquor into another clean Pipkin, put thereto of the root of Enula campana in
powder and searsed one ounce, of Licorice so used two ounces, of pure honey
eight or nine spoonfulls; boil it till it wax somewhat thick, then set it to
cool: Take the quantity of half a nut at a time, as often as you please.

The best time to make it is in May.

For a Stitch.

Take of stale Ale, two pints, clarify it, and boil therein of the tops of
green broom a handful, then sweeten it with Sugar, and give thereof to the sick
warm to drink.

Also take Beer, make it very Salt, put a little Nutmeg thereto, and drink
thereof bloud-warm.

Apply upon the grief outward, Fennel seed, and Cammomile made wet with
Malmsie, as hot as can be suffered, three or four days together.

Or take a tossed of Rye bread tosted on a gridiron, and spread Tar thick
thereon, lay it hot next the skin, and let it lie 9, or 10 hours, and if the
pain be not gone at first, apply it again.

For a Consumption.

Take a Leg of Veal, cut away the fat, and take a red Cock, scald him, and wash
him clean, then let the Cock and Veal lie in water the space of three hours,
sees them with two pottles of fair water, and scum it clean: as the fat
rises, take it off, and sees it till half be consumed, then put in a pottle
of the best Claret wine, and let it sees together till it come to a quart,
clarify it with three or four whites of Eggs; let it run through a Jelly bag;
then set it on the fire again, and put to it of Sugar a pound, let it sees a
little, then drink of it warm three or four spoonfuls at a time, as often as
you please*

For the Green sickness.

Take an Orange, cut off the top, and pick out some of the meat, then put
therein a little Saffron, roast it gently, when it is roasted, put it presently
into a pint of white Wine, keep it covered, and drink thereof fasting.

A special Water for all Sores.

Take of running water four pints, of Sage, Smallage, of each three handfulls,
of Housleek a handful and a half, sees them together to the consumption of
half, then strain it, take of Alum two ounces, of white Copperis an ounce and
a half, of Camphire two drachms, beat all severally into fine powder, put all
into the water, and let it boil a little, then put thereto of clarified Honey
half a pint, and let it simper a while then reserve it in a glass close
stopped.

Wash the sore therewith, and wet a cloth therein, and lay thereto; if it heal
too fast, lay dry lint therein.

For the trembling of the Heart

Take a spoonful of the spirit of Tartar when you find your self troubled.

Or take Lignum aloes, Riponticum, Eupatorium, red Sanders, of each two ounces,
beat them, and boil them in fix pints of fair water till two pints be
consumed; of the four pints that remain, being strained, make a Sirrup with
Sugar, and while it is hot, put thereto of Saffron one scruple, of Ginger one
dram, of Musk two carets, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each a scruple and a half, keep
it in a glass close shut, take thereof a dram at a time in a little Broth,
or Burrage water, fasting.

For a Flux of the Womb.

Take Chalk finely scraped, stir thereof in whites of Eggs till it be thick,
spread thereof on brown paper, and lay it on a Gridiron on the fire until it
stiffen a little, bind it hot upon the Navill.

Take Milk and set it on the fire, when it seeths, throw in a piece of Alum,
which will turn it to a Posset, of the thin thereof, give a Glister in the
morning, and at four in the afternoon.

A purging drink for superfluous humors, for Aches in the joints, sinews, and
for Agues.

Take Sarsaperilla, Sasafrass, Polipodium, of each a handful, Hermodactiles
the third part of an ounce, Licorice one ounce, cut and slice the abovenamed,
and put them into a new Pipkin glassed, and having a cover, and put thereto
five quarts of spring water, let all infuse four and twenty hours, then put
thereto of Fennel seed two ounces, Raisins of the Sun stoned and picked four
ounces, Carduus benedictus, red Sage, Agrimony, Maidenhair, of each a
handful, put all into the Pipkin, and close it with paste, set it within a pan
of warm water on the fire, and let it boil two hours, then put thereto of
Sena one ounce, let it boil again half a quarter of an hour, and take it out,
letting it stand covered two hours, then strain it without wringing, and keep
it in a glass or stone bottle.

You must take at a time half a pint in the morning, and fast one hour after,
it will not purge in five or six hours, you may use it at any time in the
year, but in extreme heat, and in frosts.

A precious Eye-water for any disease of the Eyes, often proved.

Take of the best white Wine two little glass fulls, of white Rose water half
a pint, of the water of Selendine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two
ounces, of prepared Tutia six ounces, of Cloves as much, Sugar rosate a dram,
of Camphire, and Aloes, each half a dram.

The Tatia is thus prepared.

In a Crusible (such as the Goldsmiths use) put your Tutia and with a charcoale
fire let it be made red hot six several times, and every time quenched in
Rose Water and Wine mixed together; the last time cast the water away, and
grind the Tutia to very fine powder.

You must mix the Aloes with the water after this manner

Put the Aloes in a clean Mortar, and pour upon it of the mixed waters, with the
Pestill grind it too and fro, and as it mixeth with the water pour it off,
putting more water to it, till it be all dissolved.

To bring the Camphire to powder.

In a clean Mortar beat one Almond, then put in the Camphire, and beat it to a
fine powder, without which it will not come to a powder.

Likewise beat all the Cloves to a fine powder, then mix all together in a
strong glass, stop it close and lute it, that no air enter, and let it stand
forty days and nights abroad in the hottest time of summer, and shake it well
thrice a day.

The use.

Drop a drop of the water into the eye thrice a day with a black Hens Feather,
the infirm lying on their back, and stirring the eye up and down.

If there be any thing grow upon the eye.

Take four drops of oil of Amber rectified, and mix with half an ounce of the
water, dress the eye as before.

For any Ague.

Take a quarter of a pint of Canary Sack, put into it a pennyworth of oil of
Spike, a pennyworth of Sirrup of Poppyes, and one grain of Bezar, mingle these
together, and let them stand infused all night, and exhibit it next morning to
the Patient fasting.

For an Ague.

Boil two ounces of Roch in a Pipkin, in a pint of Ale, about a quarter of an
hour or better, then give the party grieved to drink of it pretty warm, some
two hours before the fit comes, about half of it, and what the party cannot
drink at the first draught, let it be warmed against the second fit, and give
it as before, after two hours be past, let the party drink as much posset
drink as he can.

Another.

Take the quantity of a Wallnut of black Soap, and three times as much crown
Soap, mix them together, then shred a pretty quantity of Rue, and half a
spoonful of Pepper finely beaten, and a quarter of a spoonful of fine wheat
flour; mingle all these together, then take as much strong Beer as will make it
spread upon a linen cloth, whereof make two plasters, and lay to each wrist
one, and sow them fast on for nine days; this must be applied as the cold fit
begins to come upon them.

To make Pills to cleanse the back.

Boil Venice Turpentine in Plantain water, then take the Turpentine, and bray
it in a Mortar to very fine powder, take the powder and mingle it with powder
of white Amber, powder of Oculorum cancrorum, and powder of Nutmeg, of each
half a dram: mix them up into Pills, and take three of them in a morning.

A Bath.

Take Mallow leaves, Violet leaves, Endive, Motherwort, Mugwort, Rose leaves,
Lettice, Cammomill, Bay leaves; boil of all these one handful, in a
sufficient quantity of pure running water, and set in the Bath about an hour,
then go into a warm bed and sweat awhile, and when you come out of your sweat,
and are pretty cool, eat Strawberries and Sugar, this will clear the body and
purify the blood.

For the Cough of the Lungs, and defluxions.

You may take sometimes of Sirrup magistrall, of Scabious and of Oxymell
Jutianizans, of each one ounce, and of Diacodium half an ounce, and of Sirrup
of Diasereos half an ounce: Mingle these all well together, and mingle with it
also a dram of pure flower of Sulphur finely searced; and take of this the
quantity of a large Nutmeg three or four times in a day, at morning, an hour
before dinner, an hour before supper, and last at night; it will cut the phlegm,
and carry it gently away, without any perturbation or violent trouble of
coughing, and cause quiet rest.

To cause a woman to have her Flowers.

Take of Gladwin Roots about a handful, boil them in Vinegar, or in white Wine
till they be very tender, and after put this into a Vessel on the ground in a
close stool, so that the woman may sit over it very close stopped, so that the
heat may strike up into her body: This Medicine is reported never to fail, but
to bring them down: But you must have a special care that no woman being with
child have this Medicine administered to her.

For the Cough of the Lungs.

Take of Coltsfoot two handfuls, of Hysop, and the tops of red Nettles, of each
one handful, of Horehound, and Maidenhair, of each half a handful, of Raisins
of the sun, having their stones taken out three ounces, of Liquorice sliced
half an ounce, and of Elecampane roots sliced one ounce, of Anniseseeds half an
ounce grossly bruised, boil all these together in a gallon of water in an
earthen Pipkin with a gentle fire, till the third part be boiled away, then
strein it, and take a quart of the decoction, and put to it two ounces of
Sugar-Candie beaten, and let it boil a little over the fire again, till the
Sugar Candy be melted, then take it off the fire, and put it up into a glass
close stopped, and drink of it three or four spoonfuls morning and evening so
long as it lasts, a little warmed.

For Cramp or Numnesse.

Take a penniworth of Saffron, put it into a little bag, then put it into three
ounces of Rosewater, and stir it well in the Rosewater, then take four
penniworth of Camphire, and infuse that in the Rosewater, and being so infused
and mixed; chafe the place with it warm, and smell to it, as he bathes the
place.

For a Cough, Wind, and a cold Stomach.

Take four ounces of good Annise-seed water, mingle it with one ounce of spirit
of Mint, and dissolve it with two ounces of pure white Sugar candy, beaten
into very fine powder; set it upon a chafingdish of coals in a peuter dish, and
when it begins to walm, burn it with a paper as you do wine, stirring it
well together with a spoon, then take it off the fire, and evening and morning,
take a good spoonful of it first and last. It will comfort the stomach, and is
good against cough and wind.

For a Cough and Consumption.

Take of Lungwort, Liverwort, Hysop, Violet, and Strawbrrie leaves of each one
handful, Licorice sliced, and scraped, Annise-seeds, and Fennel-seeds, of each
one penniworth a little bruised, a Parsley and a Fennel root clean scraped,
pithed, and cut into small pieces, twelve figs sliced, four ounces of good
great Raisins having their stones taken out; boil all these together in a
pottle of clear running water, till it come to three pints, then put into it
two ounces of pure white hard Sugar, dissolve it upon the fire with the other
decoction, then take it off, strein it, and drink thrice a day of it, that is
in the morning, about four in the afternoon, and last at night, three or four
ounces of it at a time, and it will assuage the dryness and thirst, and open
the obstructions and stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and cause your Phlegm to
com away with more ease.

For a Cold Dropsy.

Take Olibanum, and roast it in a Fig, and apply it to their great Toe: But if
they be swelled in their face or head; then take anew laid Egg roasted hard,
take out the yolk, aend put into the hole so much Cummin Seed as will fill it,
and apply it as hot as it may be endured to the nape of the neck.

For the Dropsy.

Take a pottle of White or Rhenish Wine, an ounce of Cinnamon, and a pint of
green Broom ashes, put them together in an earthen pot eight and forty hours,
the Cinnamon being first bruised; stir them all often, and then put them up
into a white Cotton bag, and let the liquor drain out of them, put it up again
twice upon the lees, and then use four times a day of it, drink it cold, in the
morning, one hour before dinner, one hour before supper, and when you go to
bed, at each time drink a quarter of a pint; if the grief be not fully removed,
use a second or third pottle so made up, but with most persons one pottle
suffices.

For an Ague.

Take as much black Soap as a Wallnut, and three times as much crown Soap, and
mingle them together, then shred about a pugill of Rue, and put thereto half a
spoonful of Pepper very finely beaten, and with a quatter of a spoonful of
fine wheat flour, or as much as shall suffice; mingle all these together, then
take as much strong Beer as will make it spread upon a linen cloth, and make
it up into two plasters, and apply to each wrist one, and keep them fast on
for nine days together; you must apply the plasters just as the cold fit
begins to come upon them.

Sweat is held by all experienced Physicians, to be very good to cure an Ague,
but they must be put into their sweat before the cold fit come upon them; you
must use this twice or thrice before the Ague will be quite cured; and let them
drink no other drink during their sweat but Aqua vitae and small Beer mingled
together, but you must not make it too strong of the Aqua vitae.

To comfort and strengthen the Joints and Sinews.

. Of the flowers and seeeds of Saint John's Wort three ounces, steep them three
days in sufficient Wine, and then sees them in a brazen Vessel till the Wine
be consumed, then strain them, and put to the straining as much of fresh Saint
John's Wort stamped, and steep it again three days, and afterward add
thereunto, of Turpentine three ounces, of old Oil eight ounces, of Saffron one
scruple; of Mastick ss. of Myrrh, of Frankincense, ana.. ii. ss, afterward put
in the straining the space of a month, of the flowers and seed of Saint John's
Wort one handful and half, of Madder brayed, of sine grain wherewith Scarlet
is died, ana. three drachms, of the Juice of Yarrow two ounces, sees them to
the consumption of the Juice, with earth Worms washed with Wine two ounces,
and a little Wine odoriferous.

For obstructions of Liver and Spleen.

. Flowers of Burrage, Buglosse, Marigolds, Violets, Endive, of each a handful,
Dates stoned three ounces, of the best blew Currants two ounces, sweet
Fennell-feed half an ounce, Grains and Coriander, of each one dram, whole
brown Watercresses nine leaves, Hysop stripped downwards nine little branches,
of french Barley three ounces; boil all these together in a pottle of spring
water till a third part be consumed, then strain it, and when it is strained
add of the conserve of Barberries three ounces, Sirrup of Lemons and of
Quinces, of each three ounces, this is to be taken morning and evening, nine
spoonfuls at a time.

The Flowers are to be had at the Apothecaries, dry all the year.

For the Palsy in the head.

For the Palsy in the head, take of the oils, of Amber, Fox, and Beaver, and
mingle them together, and anoint the nape of the neck with them evening and
morning, chafe it in with a warm hand, and chafingdish of hot coals.

And take of the oil of Amber alone, and with your finger put some of it every
morning into your nose, and take two or three drops of it, and rub it into your
head upon the mould thereof.

And take two or three drops of the same Oil, and put it into your Beer or Ale
for your mornings draught, especially at the change or full of the Moon, for
four or five days together.

Be sure to keep warm, and avoid going abroad in rain, misty, or moist weather.

Oil of Saint John's Wort for ache and pain.

Take a quart of Sallet oil, put thereto a quart of flowers of Saint John's
Wort well picked, let them lie therein all the summer, until the seeds of that
herb be ripe, the glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or in water, all
the summer until the seeds be ripe, then put in a quart of Saint John's Wort
seeds whole, and so let it stand twelve hours, the glass being kept open,
then you must sees the oil eight hours, the water in the pot full as high as
the oil in the glass, when it is cold strain it, that the seed remain not in
it, and so keep it for your use.

For the knitting together and strenthening of bones.

Give inwardly Knotgrasse, Plantain, or Ribwort water, with Sirrup of the
greater Comfrey, to three spoonfuls of the water exhibit one of the sirrup, so
often as they use it: There are also vulnerary Potions prescribed for this
purpose in the Dispensatories.

For the Courses.

When you give Oculos cancrorum (truly called Lapides cancr^rum) to provoke a
woman's Courses, you must give her almost a spoonful of it, mixed with some
water of Motherwort, called Artemisia, causing her to drink a good glass-full
of the water immediately after it; the best time to exhibit it, is to give it
hot in the morning by four of the clock, and let her sleep after it, you must
give it about those times she ordinarily expects her Courses; if you cannot
get Morherwort water, you may use in stead of it Penniroyall water.

You may dissolve your powder of Lapidum cancrorum, either with juice of
Lemons, or with distilled Vinegar, and spirit of Vitrioll; If you put a greater
proportion of Vitrioll, then of the other, it will sooner dissolve, you need
but cover it with the juice or spirits, and after some few hours pour off the
spirits from the powder.

A Cordial excellent good for melancholy, panting and trembling of the heart,
swounding, fainting, coldness, and rawnesse of the stomach, and also for many
other greifs arising from a cold and moist complexion, often proved with happy
success.

Take of Saffron half an ounce, of Angelica roots finely sliced one ounce, of
Cloves six drachms, Balm two handfuls, Rosemary tops four handfuls, shread the
herbs and roots, and beat the spices grossly, then put them, with half a pound
of Sugar, into three pints of small Cinnamon water, or of small Aqua vitae, and
let them stand infused three or four days together, after boil them, and let
the Aqua vitae burn, stirring them well together, till near a pint thereof be
consumed away, then strain it, and when it is settled pour off the clear from
the bottom; keep the clear for your own use, and reserve the bottom, which
you may give away unto poor people, for it will be good and comfortable, though
not so strong: The way to use it, is to take every morning fasting a spoonful,
and after every meal, at each several time, a spoonful.

A sudden way to make up this excellent Cordial.

Take of the best of Doctor Mountfords water, ana.. iiii. Of very good Angelica
water ana.. iiii. Of Clove water, ana.. iiii. Of Rosemary water, ana.. iiii. Of
Balm water, ana.. iiii. Of spirit of Saffron. ii.
Mingle all these together, and with as much sirrup of pure Sugar as shall
suffice mingled, make it up, and put into either of these two Medicines, of
Musk and Ambergrease, of each a grain. Both these are excellent Cordials for
all the greifes before rehearsed.

Pills to purge phlegm and Wind.

Take of the best Aloes succotrina nine drachms, of Rubarb, Jallop, and
Agarick, of each six drachms, of Mastick four drachms, of red Rose leaves three
drachms, let all these be beaten severally into very fine powder, and searced,
then mix them well, and beat them up into a paste, with sirrup of damask Roses
as much as shall suffice, at the end add unto it twenty drops of oil of
Anniseeds: when you have occasion to use these Pills, take about two scruples
thereof for one dose made up into three Pills.

For the Gout.

Take of new extracted Honey two spoonfuls, a pennyworth of red Nettle seeds
finely bruised, mingle them well together, and apply it to the Gout: Let the
party drink every third day for a sevenninght in the morning in his bed half a
pint of new Milk, of a red or black Cow.

For the Gout, My Lord Denni's Medicine.

Take Burdocks leaves and stalks, cut them small, and stamp them very small,
then strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done put them into
glasses, and put pure oil of Olives a top of them, and stop it close from the
air, and when you would use it for the Gout, pour it into a porrenger and warm
it, and wet linen clothes in it, and apply it warm to the greived place,
warming your clothes one after another, as they grow cold that are on.

Another, very good for the Gout.

Take the Yest of Ale, and spread it upon brown paper, and apply it upon the
greived place pretty warm, the space of twelve hours: some first warm the
pickle of Olives, and then bath the greived place therewith, putting their feet
into it, and after use the former Medicine.

My Lord Denni's Medicine must not be taken till three days after the change
of the Moon, then after it must be taken six days together, then six days
before the full it must be taken twice a day.

To stay the Courses when they come down too violently.

Take half a dram or a dram of Diascordium, dissolve it in a dram of
posset Ale, wherein formerly has been boiled half a handful of Shepherds
purse, and as much knotgrasse, and of the greater Comfrey, and drink thereof a
good draught at a time morning and evening.

For the Whites.

Take a quarter of a handful of white Archangell, Plantain, Sheaphards purse,
and of the greater Comfrey, of each half a handful, of the herbs Horse-taile,
and Cats-taile, of each half a handful, boil all these in two quarts of Milk
till half be consumed away, then strain it, and sweeten it with good white
Sugar Candy finely beaten, and drink of it twice a day for ten or fifteen days
together.

To keep the body soluble, and to purify the blood.

Take Maydenhair, wild Germander, wood-Sorrell, and Balm, of each a pugill, of
wild Mercury half a handful, of damask Roses two handfuls, of clarified Whey
six pints, let it stand scalding hot for an hour stirring it sometimes, after
an hour is past strain it, and drink it twice or thrice a day a good draught of
it; and if you wash your hands in Beef broth after your taking it, it will take
away all roughness and hairs of the hands, it may be taken safe of a woman
with child

For the green Sickness, or yellow Jaundies.

For cure hereof first purge universally with this or the like purgation.. of
Hiera picra four scruples, of Rubarb, and Trochisces of Agarick, of each half a
dram, of rasped Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each half a scruple, of Cinnamon six
grains, of Saffron four grains, of Diacatholicon half an ounce; infuse these
things in the Whey of Cows Milk, or in the distilled water of Alkakengie, or in
Dodder water, or Endive water, you may add Oxymell thereto.

An Electuary for the green Sickness.

Take of Diatrion santalon, and Diarrhodon abbatis, of each one dram, of
Diacurcuma, and confection of Alkermes, of each half an ounce, of Diamargariton
frigidum, and Calidum, of each two drachms, of rasped Ivory, and Hartshorn, of
each one dram, of all these make an Electuary, and give it evening and
morning by it self, or with Dodder or Endive water, the dose is one dram, pro
tempore uno.

An excellent Powder for the green Sickness.

. four scruples of Gentian made into fine powder, of rasped Ivory, and
Hartshorn, of each two scruples; make these into a fine powder, and give a
spoonful thereof with white Wine, or the like, at once.

Another Medicine.

. Three or four spoonfuls of flemish Madder, boil it in two quarts of white
Wine, with a piece of Sugar, to the consumption of half of it, strain it, and
let the Maiden drink thereof morning and evening a good draught warm, and walk,
or use some exercise to heat the body, but take no cold; use this for eleven or
twelve days together.

A singular purging Potion against the green Sickness, and all opilations of
the Liver, and causes young Maids to look fresh, and fair, and cherry-cheek'd,
and will bring down their Courses, the stopping whereof causes this grief, and
it is good against all manner of itch, scabs, breaking out, and manginesse of
the body, purifying the blood from all corruption.

. Of the roots of Monks Rubarb, that is red Dock, and of red Madder, ana. half
a pound, of Sena four ounces, of Anniseseed, and Licorice, of each two ounces,
of Scabious, and Agrimony, of each one handful; slice the roots of Rubarb, and
bruise the Anniseseed and Licorice, break the herbs small, and put them all
into a pot with four gallons of strong Ale, and infuse them all the space of
three days, then drink of this drink, for your ordinary drink, for three weeks
at the least, the longer the better, and make new as need requires; it cures
the Dropsy, and yellow Jaundies also, if you put in of Cammomill one handful.

For the green Sickness, or Jaundies.

. Of white Briony root sliced half an ounce, boil it in a pint of Ale gently a
quarter of an hour, and drink a good draught thereof, and sweat, and in your
sweat drink it all, or as much as you can, the next day make new and drink
again, but without sweating, and use some exercise to keep the body warm; use
this last order twelve days together, use good Cordials and Restoratives, with
sirrup and conserve of Fumitory.

For the green Sickness, and Jaundies.

Boil of Rue, and Sage, of each a bundle, in a quart or three pints of Ale,
with one scruple of Saffron.

To cure this disease, the Electuary of Steel is excellent, if the body be
first purged, for it does open all obstructions: but the Patient must use some
exercise after the taking it, to stir up natural heat the better; the dose
is half an ounce at a time to take of it.

The Steel for the Electuary is thus prepared.

. Of the filings of the best Iron, or Steel, as much as you please, grind it
subtly and finely, upon a Porphiry, or red Marble stone, with Vinegar, then
dry it at the Sun, or at the fire, and grind it again with Vinegar as at the
first, and do thus seven times one after another, and thus you have the Steel
prepared fit for you.

The Electuary of Steel is made up thus.

. Of the filings of Steel so prepared half an ounce, Cinnamon, Nutmegs
condited, of each three drachms, of chosen Rubarb two drachms, of the species
of Aromaticum rosatum half a dram, of chosen Honey, and of fine white Sugar,
of each one pound and one ounce; mingle these all together over a soft fire,
and make it up into an Electuary. After the taking of this Electuary, let the
Patient in all cases use some bodily exercises, being first universally purged,
for this Electuary is most excellent against all obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, or other disease, and for the green Sickness.

For the green Sickness, or green Jaundies.

The green Sickness, or Jaundies comes of yellow choler mixed with corrupt
or putrified phlegm, and corruption of blood, debility of nature, and faintness
of heart; it happens also when the Liver is weakened that it cannot convert
the nourishment into blood, but the digestion is raw and crude, so that the
whole body is filled with water and phlegm instead of good blood; it is chiefly
found in young Maidens, who desire to abate their fresh colors, and, as they
conceive, to be fine, and fair, and foolishly feed upon trash (which alters
the color and state of their bodies) as of unripe Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cherries, and raw Fruits, and Herbs, or Meal, Wheat, Barley, raw Milk, Chalk,
Lime, and the like, and they that have this disease are very pale and greenish;
if they chance to cut their finger, no blood, but water, will follow; they
feel great pain in their head, with continual beating, are faint,
short-breathed, and their natural Flowers are stopped and stayed, to the
prevention and cure whereof, the body must first be well and orderly purged, as
by the Medicines before prescribed.

FINIS.
The Table for the Child-Bearers Cabinet.
WHat things are to be taken heed of in the two first Months page 1 Orders for
the third month page 2 From the fourth month page 3 From the fifth, sixth,
and seventh month ibid In the eighth month page 4 In the ninth month page 5
A Liniment page 6 The Fomentation ibid The Bath page 7 Suffumigations of the
Genitals to facilitate delivery ibid What meat is most useful page 8 What
manner of Chamber the woman with child should lie in ibid What is to be done at
the Birth ibid How and wherewith the childbed woman's bed ought to be furnished
page 9 To whom the seat may agree and be fit ibid What the Midwife shall do in
the very moment of the Birth ibid What to be done when the Infant is come into
the world page 10 If the Secondines break not readily page 11 What is to be
done after the child is born, if yet the Secondine, or Afterbirth be retained
ibid Another approved Remedy for drawing them forth page 12 Another Receipt
ibid. To draw forth a dead child ibid How the bellies of Childbearing women,
being costive or bound, may be loosned page 13 What things are to be applied to
the natural or Secret Parts ibid The Fomentation ibid Another page 14 An
Ointment ibid. A Girdle for the Belly ibid. The order from ^he seventh day
after the woman is brought to bed page 15 On the eighth day ibid. On the ninth
day ibid. A Liniment to scatter and disperse the Milk ibid. When, and whath
Bath they must use page 16 Another page 17 Against the gripings of the belly in
Children ibid. Outward Rem^dies for the same ibid. Inward helps in their meats
ibid. A Drink ibid. The government of the Nurse page 18 The Care of the Infant
page 19 A Bath of sweet water very profitable for Children, as by whose means
they may grow up and increase page 20 The diseases of Infants page 21 The
diseases and symptoms proceeding from the birth in women with child ibid.
Against the Rupture of the Cods, and perinaeum, and the part between the rising
of the Yeard and the Fundament, which proceeds from difficulty of bringing
forth page 22 For windiness, or Colic of the Belly page 23 For the Itch
ibid. For the Flux of the blood page 24 For falling down of the Matrix from the
birth ibid. For the Piles after the birth page 25 Against pain of the Breasts
contracted by too much Milk ibid. For the Imposthume of the Breasts ibid. What
is to be administered to the Child after it is born, for the first thing it
takes page 27 For Infants troubled with wind and phlegm page 28 A most
excellent Medicine to cause Children to teeth easily ibid. For Agues in
Children ibid. For Worms in Children ibid. For Heart-Wormes page 29 The Cure
ibid. To cause a young Child to go to stool ibid. Another certain Experiment.
ibid.
The Table of the Cures for several Diseases.
FOr Ach in the bones 33 For all Aches, and lame Members ibid. An Ointment for
all Aches which come from cold causes, shrunken Sinews, strains in man or
beast, it is incomparable, and will keep forty years, but it must be made
only in May 34 To counterfeit Beyond Sea Azure ibid. To know good Azure and
pure 35 For an Ague ibid. For a Tertian, or a double Tertian Ague ibid. For a
short Breath ibid. An Electuary for the shortness of Breath. 36 For a Bruise
or Squat ibid. A Restorative for the back 37 For Aches in the Back ibid. For
bleeding at the Nose ibid. For burning or Scalding ibid. For a Cough of the
Lungs 38 For purging of Colds, Coughs, and Comforting the Lungs ibid. A Julep
for a Cough 39 Another ibid. For a Canker in the Mouth ibid. For a Consumption,
and Cough of the Lungs 40 For Colic, and pains in the Back ibid. For the
Cramp 41 For a Canker ibid. Another ibid. For a Canker in the Lips ibid. A
water for a Consumption ibid. For the Cough 42 For a Cough or shortness of
Breath ibid F^^ a Consumption ibid F the Dropsy 43 ^^^other ibid (...) pains
in the Eyes ibid (...) ^sore Eyes by salt Rheum ibid To clear the Eyesight 44
For the Flux ibid Another 45 For the bloody Flux ibid Another for the same
ibid A^^ther for the same 46 Another for the same ibid An Ointment for the Flux
47 For all Fluxes of blood, and other Fluxes, pains in the back or Liver, and
for inward effects ibid A Powder for the Flux 48 A Clyster ibid For Morphew, or
Scurf of the face or Skin ibid To blanch the Face ibid To make the Skin smooth.
49 For the Morphew and Freckles ibid For the Gout, or Ache in the joints ibid
For the Gout or Bone-ach ibid For the Gout, or Joynt-ach 50 For the Gout ibid
For the Gout or Bone-ach ibid Hermes Tree ibid A Plaster to help any Stitch,
or Imposthume wheresoever 51 For an Imposth^me of the Stomach ibid A good Oil
to bring in Joints that have been out for the space of seven years, to give
strength to veins and sinnews, and to keep them brought in, in their places
ibid For the black Jaundies 52 Another for the same ibid To make Hartshorn
Jelly. 53 For the yellow Jaundies. ibid Another for the same ibid. For a lame
Leg 54 For the same ibid. For chopped Lips 55 A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs,
and Consumption ibid. To make a Laxative Whey ibid. A good Lax^tive for a Child
ibid. To cause Looseness. 56 For a costive by burnt Choler. ibid. For Rheum
procuring a Cough of the Lungs ibid. A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs 57 A
cooling Almond Milk ibid. A Water to restore Nature ibid. To restore Nature
consumed 58 For the French Pox ibid Another 59 Another ibid A Posset good in
all cold Agues, or Pestilentiall Diseases. ibid The Plague Water 60 An Antidote
against the Pestilence, by Dr. B. ibid For the shaking Palsy 61 Another ibid
To restore lost Speech ibid To restore speech to an Apoplectick ibid A
Restorative Electuary ibid A Restorative good in all diseases 62 For the
Rickets ibid. Doctor Vanhecks Rosa Vitae 63 A Sear-cloth for diverse causes. 64
For the Stone 65 For the Stone, Strangury, and Colic ibid. For the Stone in
the Bladder ibid. To break and drive out the Stone ibid. To cause Urine, and
break the Stone ibid, For the Stone 66 For the Stone in the Reins and Bladder
ibid. A Posset for the Stone 67 For the Spleen ibid. Another ibid. For Swelling
of Arms, Legs, and Feet ibid. For Sinews, and Nerves, cut asunder 68 For
Bruises, or streined Sinews ibid. For shrink^ng of Sinews ibid. For Sinews
shrunk, and to supple impotent Limbs 69 To cure an old Sore. ibid. For the
Scurvy ibid. To cool the Skin, and heal a Sore 70 To help pains in the Stomach
ibid. An Ointment for the Stomach ibid. For the pricking of a Thorn 71 To draw
a Thorn or Splinter out of the flesh ibid For the Toothache ibid To keep Teeth
White, and kill the Worms ibid To take away a Wen ibid
A Table for the Treatise concerning the Plague and Small Pox.
What the Plague is 1 Cause of the Plague ibid Warnings of the Plague to come
3 How to prevent the Plague 4 A good perfume in Summer season 5 A good perfume
in Winter Season ibid An excellent good preservative against the Plague 6
Another preservative ibid Another very good 7 An Excellent Quilt or Bag 8
Another Bag ibid A Pomander good in the Summer time 9 Another for the Winter
season ibid A good Nodule for the Summer season ibid Another Nodule for the
Winter season ibid A Nosegay for the same purpose 10 A Suppository ibid A good
Clyster 11 How to make Raisins laxative ibid A good Ointment to keep one
soluble ibid Good Pills to keep one soluble, and they do also resist the
Pestilence 12 Pills good to purge 13 A good purging Potion ibid A Purging
powder for such as cannot take Pills 14 Flours stopped, how to provoke them ibid
Issues commended against the Plague ibid What diet we ought to keep 15 What for
your Pottage you may take in the Summer 16 What exercise and Order is to be
kept 17 What Orders Magistrates and Rulers of Cities and Towns shall cause to
be observed 18 What you must do when you go to visit the sick 19 The signs of
the Infection 21 Good signs ibid Evil signs ibid The means how to cure the
Plague 23 An excellent Powder to expel the Plague 26 Another good powder ibid
A good Opiat to expel Venom, and to provoke sweat 27 Another excellent good
means for the same ibid An excellent good water against the Plague, and diverse
other diseases, which is to be made in May or June 28 Directions what the
Patient must do after the taking of the Cordial ibid A good defensative
Unguent 29 Epithemation ibid Another ibid A Quilt for the Heart 30 A Cordial
Julip ibid Another ibid A Julip to quench thirst 31 A Julep to quench thirst,
and to resist Venenositie 32 A good purgation in a strong body 33 Another in a
plethorick and full body ibid A good purgation for a weak body ibid Another
gentle purgation 34 A good Cordial to be taken after Purging ibid Another good
Cordial to be given where great heat is ibid A good Cordial Potion ibid What
Symptoms often chance, and the manner how to help them 35 For lightn^sse of the
head through want of sleep ibid An Ointment to provoke sleep ibid For raving
and raging ibid A good Sacculus for raving and raging 36 An Aphtham to help it
ibid A good Gargarism for the mouth ibid Vomiting extremely how to help it ibid
A good Bag for the Soomack 37 Yex, or yexing to stay it ibid Flix how to stop
it 38 Epithemation for the heart ibid The general cure of a Botch when it
appears outwardly 39 A good Maturative ibid Another ibid Another where no
Inflammation is 40 A Digestive ibid A Digestive Cataplasm ibid How to bring the
Botch out, that lies deep within the body or flesh 41 A good Maturative
Cataplasm ibid Another 42 Another which is sooner made ibid A Vesicatorie ibid
When the Botch will not come to Maturation, but continues always hard 43 An
Epithemation ibid A Digestive ibid What is to be done when the Botch strikes in
again 44 How to draw a Botch from one place to another, and so to discuss him
without breaking ibid Epithemation 45 How to know a Carbuncle or blain, as also
the cure of the same 46 The cure of the Carbuncle 47 A Maturative Cataplasm
ibid Mundificative Anodines ibid Another Mundificative ibid When the Carbuncle
does come with great pain and Inflammation 48 A Bag good against it ibid A
Cataplasm 49
The Table of the Treatise concerning the Cure of the Small Pox.
WHat the small Pox and Measels are, and whereof they proceed 50 What the
Measels or Males are 51 The cause of the Pox and Measels ibid To know the signs
when one is infected, as also the good and ill signs in the disease 52 How to
know of what humors this disease comes 53 How to cure the Measels or small
Pox 54 A Clyster 55 How to preserve the eyes ibid What is to be done when the
Pox or Measels are slow in coming forth 57 Another good drink to expel the Pox
or Measels ibid Epithemation for the ^eart 58 How to quench the the ^t ibid
What is to be done when all the Pox are come out ibid When the Pox, after they
be come out, do not grow to maturation, how you shall help it 60 How to help
ulceration ibid A very good Unguent for the same purpose 61 For extreme heat
and burnings in the soles of the feet, and palms of the hands ibid For to help
the soreness and ulceration of the mouth ibid For inflammation, and pain in
the tonsils and throat 62 Another ibid How to open the eyelids that are
fastened together with the Pox ibid A good Collary for a Web, or Ungula in the
eye ibid How to help diverse accidents which chance after the Pox are cured and
gone 63 For redness of the face and hands after the Pox are gone ibid For
spots in the face remaining when the Pox are gone ibid A good Ointment for the
same purpose 64 For holes remaining when the small Pox are gone ibid Running of
the Ears how to help it ibid For stopping of the Nostrils to help it 65 For
hoarsenesse remaining when the Pox are gone ibid For filthy and moist Scabs
after the Pox are gone ibid
The Table of the additionall Observations.
A Preservative against the infection of the Air and Plague, often approved by
Pope Adrian, and many other of great rank and quality 97 A Cordial water
against the Infection ibid Several opinions against wearing of Arsenick
Amulets, as Preservatives against the Plague 98 Causes of the Plague 100 Signs
of the Plague 101 How the infection of the Plague enters into a man ibid The
cure of the Plague 102 Another 103 Another ibid Another ibid Another for
Botches, Boyles, and Tokens 104 Experiments for the cure of the Plague 105
Another approved Remedy ibid A sweating Powder ibid
The Table of the cure of Diseases in remote Regions.
THe Calenture 106 To know the Calenture ibid To cure the Calenture ibid The
Taberdilla 107 To know the Taberdilla ibid The cure of the Taberdilla ibid The
Espinlas 108 To know the Espinlas ibid To cure the Espinlas 109 Camera de
Sangre ibid The cure of the bloody Flux ibid The Erisipela 110 To know the
Erisipela ibid To cure the Erisipela ibid The Tinoso or Scurvy 111 To know the
Scurvy ibid Preservatives against the Scurvy 112 To cure the Scurvy ibid
Sennertus his Observations of the Scurvy 113 A water to make a man see within
forty days, though he have been blind seven years before, if he be under
fifty years of age 115 For the Web in the eye ibid For the Wind in the side,
that makes the head swim ibid Against Deafness ibid Contra lupum veniens
super oculum aut pedem 116 Pro Cancro and lupo ibid Pro oculis ibid For bleared
eyes 117 Corns ibid Apostema ibid For a cold Stomach ibid For the pain of the
Stomach ibid For wind, or gnawing in the belly ibid For the small Pox ibid For
a stroke in the eye 118 Bloodshed in the eye ibid Pro oculo and aure ibid For a
venomed Sore ibid To make a Swelling break ibid For the Squinsie ibid For
biting of a mad Dog ibid To break a Botch ibid For gnawings ibid To increase
Milk ibid If Milk be thick ibid A Salve for Botches, Wounds, and Sores ibid
Venena 119 Pro auribus ibid Caput-purgium ibid For the bloody Flix ibid For
Stomack-Wormes ibid For a Felon ibid For the Reins of the Back ibid For them
that cannot go upright for pain in their Back and Reins 120 For the Stitch
ibid For the Stitch in the side ibid To heal Wounds ibid For swelling of Joints
ibid To knit Sinews, or Veins, that are kicked or broke ibid Ut virga hominis
nunquam erigatur ibid Verrucae, Porri, ficus 121 For Corns ibid For Warts ibid
For a Wound that bleedeth inwardly ibid If men have any blood within them of
any hurt ibid Aqua pro scable, tumore, and pruritu ibid An vulneratus vivat,
vel non ibid To destroy an Imposthume, in what place soever it be ibid For
Warts 122 Oleum Nucum ibid Unguentum Dialaehaeae optimum pro podagra ibid For
the Colic and Stone ibid Aqua propter ulcera and malum mortuum ibid Aqua pro
ulceribus ibid Capitis dolor 123 For Bones broken in a man's Head ibid Capitis
dolor ibid Corvi albi ibid Ebrii ibid Acetum ibid Fistula ibid Pro virga virili
combusta cum muliere ibid Contra exitum any ibid Contra fluxum 124 Plaster of
Paris ibid An virgo corrupta ibid Ut dens cadat ibid Pro cumbusto cum muliere
ibid A Drink that heals all Wounds without any Plaster, or Ointment, or
without any taint most perfectly ibid Unguentum genistae ibid Unguentum
Augustinum is good for all sore Legs that be red and hot ibid Unguentum viride
is good pro erectione virgae, and for the Mormale; no Ointment works stronger
then this 125 Unguentum nigrum for Wounds, ^eating and burning ibid Unguentum
Rubrum ibid Contra Vomitum ibid Fluxus sanguinis narium ibid Contra Sciaticam
126 Freckles of the face ibid To know if a man be a Leper or no ibid For ach in
the loins ibid For a scald head ibid Ad ornatum faciei ibid If the Liver rot
ibid For stopping of the Pipes ibid Two more of the same 127 The Plague Water
ibid A Cordial water good for the Plague, Pox, Measels, all kind of
Convulsions, Fevers, and all pain of the stomach ibid For a child that has the
Ague 128 For a burning Fever ibid For the Jaundies black or yellow ibid To
bring down the flowers 129 To stay the flowers ibid For the Mother ibid For the
stone ibid For a cold, cough, Ptissick, or any defect of the Lungs ibid For a
Stitch 130 For a Consumption ibid For the green sickness ibid A speci^ll water
for all Sores ibid For the trembling of the heart 131 For a Flux of the womb
ibid A Purging drink for superfluous humors, for aches in the joints, sinews,
and for Agues ibid A precious eye water for any disease of the eyes, often
proved 132 Tutia is thus prepared ibid You must mix the Aloes with the water
after this manner ibid To bring the Camphire to ponder with the use 133 If
there be any thing grown upon the eye ibid For any Ague ibid To make Pills to
cleanse the back 134 A Bath ibid For the cough of the Lungs and defluxions ibid
To cause a woman to have her flowers 135 For the Cough of the Lungs ibid For
Cramp or numn sse ibid Fir a Cough, Wind, and a cold Stomach 136 For a Cough,
and a Consumption ibid For a cold Dropsy ibid For the Dropsy 137 For an Ague
ibid To comfort and strengthen the joints and sinnews ibid For obstructions of
Liver and Spleen 138 For the Palsy in the head ibid Oil of Saint John's Wort
for ach and pain 139 For the knitting together and the strengthening of bones
ibid For the Courses ibid A Cordial excellent good for Melancholy, panting, and
trembling of the heart, swouning, fainting, coldness, and rawness of the
stomach, and also for many other griefs arising from a cold and moist
complexion, often proved with happy success 140 A sudden way to make up this
excellent Cordial ibid Pills to purge phlegm and wind 141 For the Gout ibid My
Lord Dennis his Medicine for the Gout ibid Another for the Gout 142 To stay the
Courses when they come down too violently ibid For the whites ibid To keep the
body soluble, and to purify the blood ibid For the green sickness, or yellow
Jaundies 143 An Electuary for the green Sickness ibid An excellent Powder for
the green Sickness ibid Another 144 A singular purging Potion against the
green Sickness, etc. ibid
FINIS.

