THE PATHWAY TO Peace and Profit: OR, Truth in its Plain Dress.

WHEREIN Is Methodically set forth a sure and certain Way for the more speedy
and effectual Building and Repairing Their Majesty's Royal Navy, by such Means,
as may be saved more than One Hundred Thousand Pound per Annum.

TOGETHER With a proposed Method for the Raising and Saving of Moneys for
Monthly Payments accordingly. As also proper Rules and Methods, observable
toward the making a Regulation in Their Majesty's Yards.

By GEORGE EVERETT, Ship-wright.

Licensed,

Feb. 17. 1693/4. Edward Cook.



LONDON, Printed for the Author; and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, M DC XCIV.

TO THE King and Queen's Most Excellent MAJESTY'S.
May it Please Your Majesty's,
IT is not Ambition, but a hearty and zealous Inclination, humbly to Devote my
self to Your Majesty's Service, with my weak, but sincere Endeavors for the
more speedy and effectual Building and Repairing of Your Majesty's Royal Navy,
by such Rules and Methods, as may save 100000l. per Annum, to the great Benefit
of Your Majesty's, the Ease of Your Subjects, and the general Welfare of the
whole Nation; all which with my self, I humbly beg to Prostrate at Your Royal
Feet, in Hopes of Your Gracious Protection, together with Your Acceptance and
Encouragement of the same. And that God Almighty may for ever Preserve Your
Majesty's in Safety, Support and Direct You in Your Great Undertakings, and
that Your Kingdoms and Dominions may be Settled in Peace and Tranquillity, that
Your Reign may be Long and Glorious, is, and shall be the continual Prayers of

Your MAJESTY'S Most Dutiful, Obedient and Devoted Subject and Servant, Geo.
Everett.

To the Right Honorable the Lords of Their Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council.
With Humble Submission,
WHEN having considered that this present War so well begun, and carried on by
Their Majesty's and others the Supreme Magistrates and Rulers of this Kingdom;
so highly tending to the General Good and Preservation of the whole Nation,
which, if well managed in all its Parts, could not fail of a happy Issue; but
such is Our Misfortune, That too many there be Entrusted in the Management
thereof, who, too Regardless of the Public Good, do in their several Stations
proceed in the Management of this so great Affair, with so much Indifferency as
may be justly feared, will in a great measure, retard and circumvent the Design
of this so Pious and well-grounded Undertaking; I mean the War. The chief
Subsistence next under God, and Their Majesty's, is Money, which, being hard to
Raise, in Regard of the General Poverty of the Nation occasioned thereby,
together with the Want of Trade, ought to be managed with all frugal Care and
good Husbandry; for Want of which, the Treasure of the Nation is much
exhausted, and great Part of that which ought to be employed to encourage
Virtue and Industry, is destroyed by Idleness and Extravagancy, as is fully
demonstrated in the following Proposals: For, if those Persons Entrusted in the
Management of the same, especially those in the Lower Sphere, would, in their
several Stations, Discharge their Trust with that Care and Fidelity as they
ought, the Burden of the War would be far more easy, and all those seeming
Clouds of Sorrow and Despair that do Annoy would soon vanish, and all its
Attendants of Complaints and Poverty must then give Way to Courage and
Magnanimity, which is the only means to vanquish and overcome Our Insulting
Foes, and thereby advance the Glory of the English Nation; and to this End,
being moved by a zealous Design of serving and preserving as much as in me
lies Their Majesty's and the Public, rather than any Private Interest, or
Vain Desire of Profit or Preferment, I humbly take Leave to lay before your
Honors these my following Proposals, as they were presented to the Right
Honorable the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High-Admiral of
England; together with a Brief Account of my Proceedings, before that
Honorable Board as they are Inserted in this following Tract, all which with
Submission, I most humbly offer to your Honor's further Consideration.

Your Lordship's most Obedient and Faithful Servant, Geo. Everett.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament, Assembled.
I Do humbly Address my self to this August and Honorable Assembly, by whose
great Care and Generosity the Charge of the War is supported; and who by your
great Wisdom and good Conduct are justly Styled the Great Council of England;
not that I do intend hereby to Invade the Royal Prerogative, but rather Support
and Maintain it: And to that End I do most humbly recommend these my following
Proposals to your more Prudent Consideration, most heartily desiring your
Honors will be pleased to peruse the same; and if any thing herein may be
accounted profitable or useful to Their Majesty's and the Public, That then
you will encourage the same by a timely Recommendation thereof to Their
Majesty's, and others concerned therein, for the promoting and advancing the
Interest and Well-Being of the Present Government, which is the hearty Desire of

Your Honor's most Faithful and Obedient Servant, Geo. Everett.

To the READER, especially the Judicious, Loyal and Faithful People of England.
Gentlemen,
MANY Notions and Propositions have been the Product of this Age, most of them
being founded on sandy Ground, have rendered them altogether fruitless; others,
that might have been useful to the Public, for want of due Encouragement,
have been buried in Oblivion: To avoid the like Fate, I could have been content
to have been silent, had not the present Necessity of Affairs obliged me to
appear in this kind. For who can observe the great Undertakings of Their
Majesty's for the general Preservation of this Nation, and stand idle and mute
at such time as the Public Affairs require the Assistance of all its Members?
As for my part, I do affirm that it is my Duty to appear in this general Cause,
considering those Honorable Assemblies, the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
whose great Care it is to raise Money to carry on the same. I therefore hope it
will not look amiss in me, humbly to set forth these following Proposals,
intended for the saving such considerable Sums, which may be of great Use in
this Juncture, and will also avoid a great Inconveniency that attends the
Impresting of Men for Their Majesty's Yards, which by the ill Practice of some,
is as terrible as Death it self. Which by an ill Custom used in the Management
thereof, is become one of the Public Grievances of this Nation; not that I do
intend herein, to charge any particular Person or Persons with their Neglect of
Duty, but rather submit in that Point to better Judgments. But so it is, let
the whole Charge of performing that Work be what it will, it may be presumed,
the full Half Part thereof, is wasted and consumed; all which, may seem very
hard and grievous, that the Industrious Part should be Rent and Racked, to
maintain others at so great Expense and Charge, in Idleness and Extravagancy:
For by Impresting and Forcing so many Men into those Yards, Workmens Wages
abroad is raised to an exorbitant Rate, and the Price of Building so highly
advanced thereupon in these Parts, that the greatest Part of Building is of
late carried from hence into the Country, and is ready to take Wing for Foreign
Nations; all which is occasioned by means of the Press for those Yards, which
may be more fitly called Oppression: For that Work may be sufficiently carried
on, to the great Advantage of all, with a likely Possibility of saving 2 or
300000 l. per Annum, as is more fully demonstrated in the following Proposals.
These Public Grievances, being acted in this lower Sphere, although very
heavy-and oppressive, it may be supposed that the Noise and Sound thereof, may
not have ascended the Ears or Knowledge of our Great Deliverers, Their
Majesty's, and others in Supreme Authority, from whom a Redress of all our
Sufferings is desired and expected.

Having near Twelve Months since Presented to each Lord of the Admiralty, a
Copy of my Proposals, and the same being now made Public, have by their Noble
Character of Truth and Strength, not only passed the general Applause of all
their Judicious Inspecters, but are also become Acceptable to many Eminent
Persons, who, as a Mark of their Favor, have been Pleased to Commend and
Encourage the same; I did on the Second of this Instant February, Present to
the Honorable, the Lords of the Admiralty, by way of Application, a Copy of
these Lines following, viz.

Right Honorable,
HAving formerly Presented to your Honors some Proposals, wherein is set forth
a sure and certain way for the more Speedy and Effectual Building and Repairing
the Royal Navy, by such Methods as may be fairly saved 100000l. per Annum or
more, to the great Benefit of Their Majesty's and the whole Nation: And the
same having been Communicated to many Worthy and Eminent Persons of several
Ranks, who have given all due Encouragement thereunto, I humbly desire that a
time may be assigned me, to lay the same before this Honorable Board, in Order
to the Promoting so Great and Profitable an Undertaking.


Their Honors in Answer thereunto, were then pleased to Appoint me a Hearing
on Thursday the Eighth of this Instant, and did also direct, That I should give
an Account in Writing, how Money should be Produced to carry on this
Undertaking; which accordingly I did, which with my Proposals, was Read at the
Admiralty-Board, in the Presence of the Right Honorable, the Lord Falkland,
Sir John Lowther, and Captain Prestman; the Honorable Commissioners of the
Navy being then Present, and was as follows.

The Humble PROPOSALS of George Everett, Shipwright, in Rotheriff, in Behalf of
Their Sacred Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary.
WIth Submission to your Honors, having upon frequent View and Observation
taken into Consideration the many Irregular Practices of Shipwrights, and
others employed in Their Majesty's Yards, wherein is Lost and Destroyed by
Idleness and Extravagancy near 100000 l. per Annum, by such Ways and Means as
tend not to the Profit of any, but great Prejudice to the whole Nation; which
said Sum, or more, may be saved according to the following Proposals, wherein
is briefly set forth a sure and certain Way for the more speedy and effectual
Building and Repairing of Their Majesty's Royal Navy, by such Rules and Methods
as may be saved near one half of the whole now expended in the said Yards, to
the great Benefit of Their Majesty's, the Comfort and Happiness of those
employed therein, and the Ease and Welfare of the whole Nation.

AS the Beginning of the War is wholly intended for the common Good and Safety
of the whole Nation, and the End thereof uncertain; so it may be highly
necessary, That in the Management thereof every Person employed therein should,
in their several Stations, act with so much Courage, Frugality, and good
Husbandry, as to make the Burden thereof both Light and Easy: Imitating
therein Their Majesty's most Pious Endeavors (who for the Benefit and
Wellbeing of Their People and to preserve them in Safety, do Expose Their Royal
Persons, even with the Hazard of Their Lives, into the most dangerous
Attempts;) and also the most August and Honorable Assemblies, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament; whose
indefatigable Care and Industry is such, in Raising and Granting suitable
Supplies for so great a Work, That the Burden and Charge thereof is not
sensibly felt by the meaner sort of Subjects.

Whilst some others of Inferior Rank, and employed in the Management of the
War, do not so sincerely endeavor the Welfare and Well-being of their
Majesty's and People, as in such times of Exigency they ought to do; by which
means the Burden and Charge for carrying on the same is the more Heavy and
Uneasy to the Nation.

For Remedy thereof, I most humbly offer to your Lordships these following
Proposals, in Hopes of your Gracious Acceptance and Encouragement of the same,
for the Service of Their Majesty's, the Ease of Their Subjects, and the Benefit
of the whole Nation, as follows, viz.

Under the Notion of Shipwrights is comprehended Ship-Carpenters, Calkers,
Mast-makers, Boat-makers, etc.

If the New work be let out by the great, the Management thereof will wholly
depend upon the Undertakers.

If the Work be so let out by the Great, there may be as much Money saved in
one Month as will pay the Charge of the next two Months; and in times of
Exigency, more than twice the Work may be performed by the same Number of
Workmen; and all Charge and Trouble in Pressing for such Yards avoided; and
Men would not expect to be Idle or Injurious.

This foregoing Paragraph being the Basis hereof, is confirmed by the Company
of Free Shipwrights, in the Eighth Article of their Case, formerly delivered to
the Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England.


I. That for the common Good and Benefit of Their Majesty's, and the whole
Kingdom, it is most humbly proposed, That if Shipwrights Wages in Their
Majesty's Yards were Advanced, and good Payment Monthly made, for Working
Weather only (as in Merchants Yards) the Work may be performed with less than
half the Number of Men; who, for fear of being Discharged, would Labor hard.
Or the greatest part of the said Workmanship may, as in other Yards, be let out
by the Task, or Great, to able Workmen; whereby having Respect to Work, Wages,
and the Number of Officers, whose Pay is continued as well in wet as dry
Weather, as also the extravagant Waste made in Timber and Plank by many idle
Persons employed therein, the said Work may be substantially performed with
less than half the Number of Men, and more than half the Charge of Workmanship
thereby saved, without prejudice to the Builders, who with their Assistance may
have the Power of Ordering and Directing as heretofore.

II. That in impresting of Shipwrights for the said Yards Their Majesty's are
at great Charges, and the Persons impressed think themselves injured, to be
compelled to serve therein for two Shillings and one penny per Day, and that
running in Arrears, when in other Yards there is allowed near twice the Wages,
and ready Money; which is a great Discouragement to industrious persons, who
are willing to take pains; which brings a Dislike and Unwillingness of the
Workmen, who go into such Yards as if they were going to Prison; which by a
Regulation as aforesaid would be esteemed as a Palace: So that many employed
and impressed therein do, for such Reasons, become very negligent in the
performing their Duties, and spend great part of their time in Idleness:
Together with Apprentices, whose Wages being fixed, and no regard had to
Deserts, their Masters are indifferent whether they work, or not. And many such
take no Care or pains more than to answer to the Call, and to provide a Bundle
of Chips, oft-times of more Value than their Wages; whereby Their Majesty's are
highly injured, and many such Apprentices by ill Management, after Seven Years
Servitude, are altogether ignorant and useless. All which seems very
Unreasonable, That those Yards which ought to be the Encouragement of Industry
and Frugality, should be the Promoters of Idleness and Extravagancy, at such
times as persons of so useful a Trade, and Money the Life of all, is so much
wanting to the Public.

III. In the general Repairing of Their Majesty's Great Ships, wherein Custom
is observed more than the common Interest of the public, after a vast Charge
therein spent, to take such Ship or Work to pieces, the Timber and Plank so
taken out seldom comes to any Account; and the Ship to be so Rebuilt, or the
Value thereof, is in it self wholly lost, yet another between Old and New is
brought forth, though untimely, out of the pretended Ruins of the Old, at a far
greater Charge than such New Ship might have been wholly Erected and new Built
from the Keel. So that therein accrues a double Loss to Their Majesty's; for
such Old Ships might be of great Value and Use, if but sold to break up; and
the Timber and Plank now destroyed would for many good Uses supply the place of
New, and be a means to make it more cheap and plenty; and the Workmen whilst
taking to pieces the Old would half build such a New. So that in the Repairs of
some one Ship Their Majesty's may save Two, Three, Four, and sometimes Eight or
Ten Thousand Pound, or more; besides the Advantage of having the Use of such
New Ship in half the Time.

IV. It is also to be observed, If it happen that any Ship of Their Majesty's
do by any means miscarry or perish at Sea, the Loss thereof is very grievous;
but in the Building of Two, according to the Custom used in Their Majesty's
Yards, there is One lost of the same Burden, or the Value thereof, for want of
good Management; yet such Loss is neither minded, nor regarded. Whereas, if
Wages be advanced and paid, according to each Man's Deserts, they would put
themselves forward in Hopes of Reward, as in Merchant's Yards; and by that
means, if well managed, Thirty or Forty Men may do as much Work as a Hundred
Men now do: So that in Workmanship may be saved Two or Three Thousand Pound, or
more, in Two Ships; which, by such means, may be Built sooner than One, besides
the Wast of Timber and Plank, made by some near equal with their Wages.

V. If it should be objected, That such Regulations may be of great Difficulty
and Prejudice to Their Majesty's, or any Person concerned or employed under
them: The PROPOSER humbly offers to perform the Regulation effectually in any
one of Their Majesty's Yards in the Space of one Week; and in Nine, or Twelve
Months, to prove the Advantage thereof, to the great profit of Their Majesty's,
and Benefit of Their Subjects. It being not his Design to propose any thing
herein that may be Injurious to any, but of great Advantage to all. First, in
respect to Their Majesty's; in whose Yards there is allowed Two Shillings and
One Penny per Day to Workmen, and to Apprentices Thirteen or Fourteen Pence per
Day, for the first Year; increasing yearly a Penny per Day: Which Wages
accounted but small is large in respect, if the Uncertainty of Weather be
considered, which never proves to the Disadvantage of those therein employed;
whilst others in Merchants Yards, having Three or Four Shillings per Day, are
put by their Work for every Flurt of Rain, or Snow, or other intemperate
Weather; who often, by such means, do not work more than Four Weeks in Six. So
that by Computation each Man's Wages in both Yards are near equivalent, but the
Labor of Workmen is far different; insomuch that Thirty or Forty Men in the
Merchants Yards and employed in Their Majesty's Work, do substantially perform
more Work than a Hundred Men in Their Majesty's Yards, and in less Time.

VI. It may be further objected, That this may prove prejudicial to the
Officers of Their Majesty's Yards. It is answered, That many of them have but
Two Shillings and One Penny per Day, and having no prospect of Advantage (let
their Deserts be never so great) they still follow the common Road of Custom:
Yet, in Case of Regulation, it is supposed they would for suitable
Encouragement deport themselves in their several Stations with more Order,
Courage and Industry, in the well Management of the several Workmen under
their Charge, more especially their Apprentices, who in hopes of Gain may be
made capable of deserving more in One Year than some may now in Seven: By which
means Their Majesty's might save much Money, the Nation be more plenty of able
Workmen, their Masters encouraged to train up Youth, and such hereafter be
capable of getting a decent Maintenance for themselves and Families. It may
likewise be supposed that at sometimes, as well in War as Peace, the same
Number of Men in Office may be sufficient to perform the greatest part of the
Work.

If such Payment were to be made, it would be of such Advantage that many who
now (in recard of Poverty) are exempted may be capable of paying suitable Taxes
on all Occasions.
VII. That the Workmen employed in Their Majesty's Yards are, for want of
ready Money, obliged to take up all their Necessaries they want upon Credit;
and the persons with whom they deal are, for that Reason obliged to do the
like. So that it is most certain, that Workmen, especially Strangers, impressed
therein, are obliged to pay double Extortion, and with Curbs and Abuses accept
of any thing; who otherwise, with ready Money, might buy what, and where they
please, and be treated with Civility and Respect as others are. So that by such
a happy change many would be preserved from Ruin.

VIII. That if such Regulation be made in Their Majesty's Yards, the one half
or more of the Workmen employed therein may be discharged, which cannot be
less than Four or Five Hundred Men; which being to distribute themselves into
other Yards, will cause the extravagant rate of Wages to abate and fall to the
old rate of two Shillings, or two Shillings and Sixpence per Day; whereby the
Charge of Building Shipping may be as cheap in time of War as in times of
Peace; which will much contribute to the Benefit of Their Majesty's, and the
whole Nation.

IX. So that if a general Regulation were to be made, and well managed with
Frugality and good Conduct; it may be presumed, that the one half Charge of the
whole now expended therein may be saved, to the great Benefit of the Nation
without prejudice to any, which could not amount to less than 100000 l. per
Annum or more, and one third part of what may be so spared may be sufficient to
pay the Workmen and Officers employed therein.

X. If there be any superannuated Ancient Men in the said Yards, which by Falls
and Bruises, may be in a great measure disabled and unfit to seek employment
abroad, it may be better, and will be less Charge to maintain them out than in
the Yards.

XI. That impresting of Shipwrights being very Chargable to Their Majesty's,
and prejudicial to the Subjects, more especially the Master Shipwrights, who
are great Sufferers in their Apprentices; whose Parents of good Esteem do
frequently give large Sums of Money to bring up their Children to so good and
useful a Trade, who are by the press hurried and taken away before they
understand any part thereof; whereby such parents are injured, their Children
totally ignorant for want of Experience and Instruction, and the Masters being
limited to a Number, not to exceed three or four, are become destitute of
Servants to carry on their Trade; and often damnified by the Loss of an
Apprentice Forty, Fifty, or an Hundred pound thereby*

XII. That such a practice and prospect of idleness in such Yards in an
Allurement to Apprentices, who having a place of Refuge to maintain them
therein, they are under no Government, but are become insolent and masterless:
And in such employments are of no profit, either to the public, their Masters,
or themselves: But do for the most part spend all their Wages, or otherwise
lose it by running from place to place, or from Ship to Ship.

The Proposer most humbly desiring he may be allowed to Answer and give Reasons
to all Objections that may be made touching the premises.

All which, with Submission, is most humbly offered to your Honors
Consideration.
A Proposed METHOD for the Raising and Saving of Moneys for Monthly Payments,
according to what has been Proposed.
May it Please your Honors,
THAT having on the Second of this Instant proposed to this Board, a Method for
the saving 100000l. per Annum in the Building and Repairing the Royal Navy,
wherein it is humbly proposed for the Encouragement thereof, That all Officers
and Workmen Employed therein, be duly paid every Month.

Your Honors were then Pleased to Direct, That I should give an Account to
this Board in Writing, how and where Money should be Raised to carry on the
same, pursuant thereunto. I most humbly offer my Sentiments as follows, viz.

I. That the Raising of Money must be as formerly, by Parliament, and not by
any single Person, especially of my Capacity.

II. That Half the Money so Raised and Allowed for such Purposes, had been, if
well managed, sufficient to have defrayed the whole Charge, without running on
Arrears, and the other Half might have been useful to other Purposes: And this
ought to have been the particular Care of all Officers, to whom the Management
thereof has been Committed.

Thus having described the Fountain from whence the Moneys must arise, as also
a Sufficiency of defraying (if well ordered) the whole Charge, with less than
Half the Sum. I humbly proceed as follows.

III. If the Number of Workmen in Their Majesty's Yards at present, be 3000,
and the yearly Charge of maintaining them therein be 93600 l. then the
Quarterly Charge will be 23400 l. and that generally paid Quarterly. It is
further proposed, That the superfluous Number Employed therein, may be
discharged, which cannot be less than 60 out of every 100, so that the 3000 as
aforesaid, may be reduced to 1200; which if well managed, will be sufficient to
carry on the whole Work; and by such means the Charges will be lessened to
39440 l. per Annum, 9860 l. Quarterly, and Monthly, 3286 l. Here it may be
supposed that where there is a Probability of paying 23400 l. per Quarter,
there may be a Possibility of paying 3286 l. per Month. The Charges and
Difference so Stated, I most humbly proceed to give my Judgment for saving and
providing Money to defray the Charge Monthly, viz. If the present Charge as
aforesaid, be 93600 l. per Annum, it is supposed that Money may be produced as
formerly for Quarterly Payment, which may amount to 23400 l. per Quarter: Let
the Number of Workmen be reduced as aforesaid, the Monthly Charge may be 3286
l. then supposing such Regulations were agreed, and to begin this Day, One
Month being expired, let Money be provided to defray the Charge. The Question
is, how and where? Here lies the Difficulty. To which I answer, If it cannot be
provided otherwise, let it be borrowed at 10 l. per Cent. for the First Month,
and so likewise for the Second against the Third Month. It may be supposed that
the Quarterly Sum may be provided as formerly, which is supposed to be 23400 l.
out of which is to be paid the Two borrowed Sums, with Interest, viz. 3286 l.
with Two Months Interest, and 3286 l. with One Months Interest, and 3286 l. the
Charge of the Third Month without Interest. These together, will amount to 9890
l. or thereabouts, which being deducted out of the aforesaid Sum of 23400 l.
supposedly provided for the First Quarterly Payment, the Remainder will be
13510 l. which if preserved in Bank for the purpose aforesaid, may defray the
Charge of the next Four Months, and to spare, in which Four Months may be saved
sufficient to defray the Charge of the next Six Months, and so proportionably
for a longer time: So by this Rule may be saved in Wages, 54090 l. in One Year,
besides the Waste that is made in those Yards, which cannot be less than Twice
the Value, which by Computation, will amount to in the whole, 162120 l. per
Annum, besides the great Trouble and Charge expended in Pressing for such
Yards. If it should be further Objected, That Money cannot, or may not be
provided out of the Treasury at the end of the said Three Months, it may then
be further provided as aforesaid, at Interest for Three, Four, or Five Months
or more, until a sufficient Stock may by such means be saved for the carrying
on the same; which I humbly conceive may with little Trouble, be gained in the
First Three Months: This with Submission, I hope, may be a satisfactory Answer
to the Question proposed. And by this means also may be spared out of those
Yards, 1800 Men, who may be of great Use in carrying on the General Trade of
the whole Nation. I have been the larger in clearing this Point, as knowing it
to be the Basis on which the whole Work depends: So by this it does plainly
appear, That the providing of 6 or 7000 l. to defray the Charge of the First
Two Months, the whole Work may be sufficiently performed by such means, as may
be saved to the great Advantage of Their Majesty's, 100000 l. per Annum, or
more.

Which being Read, was Allowed and Approved, save only in this, that I should
give Security for the Performance thereof; to which I humbly answered, That I
did not desire to handle the Public Treasure, my Proposals having passed the
general Consent of their Honors, together with the Approbation of many the
most Eminent and Credible Persons, several in Places of the greatest Trust; and
being in it self no way doubtful, might have been sufficient to have made the
same Practicable: But their Honors were farther pleased to insist on this
Point, which I did humbly take as a final Answer. To which I add, That Truth
and right Reason, with such Harmonious Consent as aforesaid, may be sufficient
Security for the Management of this so great Affair. And farther, That the same
ought to be put in Practice, partly to avoid those great Injuries occasioned by
the Press; and chiefly for the general Preservation of Their Majesty's and
Public, in saving such Considerable Sums of Money, so much wanting for other
Purposes.

Proper RVLES most humbly offered toward the making a Regulation.
For the making a Regulation in Their Majesty's Yards, it is humbly Proposed,
That these following Rules and Methods be observed, viz.
I. That 60 out of every 100 Employed therein, may be discharged, and the
others continued as follows; having respect to the Wages allowed in Merchants
Yards, to be monthly altered, as Occasion may require.

II. That the Workman-ship of all new Boats, as also of all Mast-work, be let
out by the Great, by which means, One Man may do more Work than Four; and the
Care and Management thereof, will wholly depend upon the Undertakers.

III. That every Person being a Master Foreman of any Ship-work, may be allowed
Four Shillings per Day.

IV. That every Quarter-man and other Officers, having Charge of Workmen, be
allowed Three Shilling and Six Pence per Day.

V. That every Able Workman, be allowed Three Shillings per Day, and under,
according to each Man's Deserts.

VI. That every Apprentice Employed therein, may be allowed One Shilling per
Day for the First Year; that being expired, his Wages to be advanced according
to Deserts; all such Wages as aforesaid, to be accounted only when they work,
or shall be so Employed, and not otherwise.

VII. That all Sawyers may be debarred of Chipps, and in lieu thereof, each
Pair to be allowed Four Pence per Day, and Two Pence per Hundred more Wages; by
such Means may be saved Three times more Money than their whole Wages amount
unto.

VIII. That in Repairing Their Majesty's Ships where the Charge is like to be
great, such Ship may be opened within Board and without, in such Places as
shall appear to be most deficient; and being then surveyed, if it shall appear
by computing the Charge thereof, to be near equal the Value of such new, then
to dispose of the same as may be most Convenient and Advantageous.

IX. That when, and so often as any new Ship of the First, Second, or Third
Rate, shall be erected or set upon the Stocks, another of the Fourth, Fifth, or
Sixth Rate, may also be erected, to the end, that all Timber, Plank, and other
Stuff under Size for the one, and accounted but as Waste, may be useful in
Building the other, according to a Proverb of great Note in Merchants Yards,
that is, To build a small Ship out of a great one's Chips.

X. That if a Ship should happen to prove tender sided, it will be far better,
and less Charge, to proportion the sailing Materials to such Ships, than such
Ships to the Materials, by taking the Body to pieces; which too often happens,
to the great Prejudice and Hindrance of Their Majesty's Affairs.

XI. That Timber, especially small and straight, may not be laid into the said
Yards in such great Quantities, which being almost useless, creates a great
Charge in Carriage from one Place to another, and often lies and rots, whilst
Money Employed on such Occasions, is wanting for purposes far more useful.

XII. That the Overseers may be allowed to Inspect all Naval Stores therein
Received and Delivered.

XIII. That Money being provided and monthly paid, according to the Methods
herein specified, such Change may be happily made, by which means it may be
presumed, the one Half Charge now expended, may be saved, to the great Benefit
of Their Majesty's and the whole Nation, and all Charges and Trouble of
Pressing for those Yards avoided.

XIV. Lastly, Much more may be added, which for brevity is omitted; it being
humbly prayed, That the Overseers thereof, may with Consent of your Honors,
have Leave to make all advantageous Alterations, as well not mentioned as
otherwise. So humbly desiring that Trial may be made according to the Rules and
Methods herein specified, Proof and Experience, which are the best and surest
Demonstrations, will soon discover the great Profit and Advantage that may
accrue by what has been most humbly offered.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF it should be Objected, That in times of Expedition Their Majesty's Affairs
may be prolonged in Prejudice to Their Great and Honorable Undertakings, it is
Answered, That since it is so plainly demonstrated and generally believed, That
30 or 40 Men can, and may perform as much as 100 now do, no Detriment can ensue
thereby. But to prevent all further Doubts that may arise, it must be allowed,
That Their Majesty's upon all Occasions, may have the same Liberty, without the
least Restraint or Restriction, to cause Men to be Impressed as formerly. But to
avoid the same, it is humbly presumed, That those Yards may in such times of
Exigence, be better supplied in One Day by Letters directed to the
Master-Wardens of each Company of Ship-wrights, than in One Month; and 100 such
Persons Employed on the Terms aforesaid, may perform as much as 300 compelled
unwillingly to serve therein by the Press, and all the Charge thereof avoided.
Again, It seems very hard in the Judgment of all good Men, that Moneys raised
with so much Care and Trouble, and intended for the Encouragement of
Industrious and Deserving People, should be so vainly destroyed in Idleness and
Extravagancy, at such time as it is so much wanting to the Public.

Again, If Charity should so far abound, as to maintain such Superfluity of
Idleness, it may be presumed, that for the Public Good of Their Majesty's and
the Nation, it will be far less Charge to allow many Employed therein 20 s. per
Week to maintain them out, rather than 10 s. per Week to have them in such
Employment, as being a Pattern of such evil Examples to others.

In all that has been Proposed herein, it was not designed as Reflection on
any. For what is practiced therein now, is not to be looked on as a New Method,
but rather as an Ancient Custom of long standing, which by such Custom and evil
Example has been received from One Age to another; and so not any Person to be
much blamed, although it is apparent that by long Use, it is every Year grown
worse and worse.

But however, Let the Measures or Methods be what they will, if it does appear
by what has been Proposed, that better may be now taken, and such as may be of
so great Use and Advantage, it cannot be thought unreasonable to lay such Old
Methods aside, to make way for New, (especially such as may be so Advantageous
and Profitable) no more than for a Prudent Mariner, who foreseeing a Storm,
does make for a good Harbor, to avoid Shipwreck.

Although it is commonly objected that Proposals of this Kind (let them be
never so profitable) do seldom prosper, except brought forth and managed by
Persons of Honor and Grandeur. To which it is humbly Answered, That the Matter
it self being Just and Honorable, and of so great Use and Benefit to Their
Majesty's and the whole Nation, it ought not to be slighted for the Author's
sake; especially when considered how far Loyalty and Duty, accompanied with a
firm and constant Mind, has often produced in all Ages, great Advantages to
the Public.

Thus having for the general Good, exposed my self to the public Censure in a
Matter of so great Importance, in so mean and plain a Dress; which may be
justly attributed to the want of Education rather than want of Judgment.
However, for what I have written I desire no Praise but Patience, being
altogether unworthy to be accounted a Workman in this kind, knowing it is
impossible for me as well as others, to please all. And although there be many
carping Zealots, who in Envy to the Cause more than the Author, may be ready to
cavell with me for the same, I shall little regard the evil Censure of those,
who I never did intend to make my Judges, but shall in all things submit to the
Judgment of the more Prudent and well Affected to the Government.

All which I shall conclude in the Words of the Reverend Doctor Burnet, in his
Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons the 31 st. of January,
1688. His Conclusion was, That there be no breaking in, nor going out; nor no
complaining in the streets. Then with the Psalmist, Happy is the People that is
in such a case; yea, and happy is the People whose God is the Lord.

If Sparing it be Thrift, as Wise Men hold,
Then let us spare our Silver and our Gold:
'Twill make our Cannons Roar, and Hero's sing
God Save Great William and His Royal Queen
MARY,
The Glorious Pattern of true Majesty.
Whom God Preserve in Peace and Righteousness,
And Crown their Deeds with Glory and Success.
FINIS.

