THE EXACT ACCOUNT And solemn manner of Assembling THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND
ON The first day of their Convention AT EDINBOROUGH On Thursday the 28th of
July, 1681.

BEING A true and full Relation, of the Ancient Order and Custom then
performed in their passage to the Parliament House, before his Majesty's High
Commissioner, His Royal Highness, James Duke of York and Albany, etc.

AS It was drawn up and presented to his Royal-Highness, and the Right
Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council in that Kingdom, By Lion
King at Arms.

As also the Proclamation Preparatory thereunto.

London, Printed for Rand^lph Tailor. 1681.

EDINBVRGH, the nineteenth day of July, 1681.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Kings most excellent Majesty, to call a
Parliament of this Kingdom to meet at Edinburgh, upon Thursday the
twenty-eighth of July instant; His Royal Highness, His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Lords of Privy Council, do hereby Command and Require, the
Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, and Pursevants, to pass
to the Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and there, by open Proclamation, to Warn all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Officers of State, Commissioners of Shires
and Buroughs, to convene at Holyrud-House, the said twenty-eighth of July, by
nine of the Clock in the forenoon; the Lords furnished with their Gowns, Robes,
Horses, and Footmantles; and the Commissioners of Shires and Buroughs, with
their Horses and Footmantles, to attend His Royal-Highness. His Majesty's
High-Commissioner, on Horseback, in his going to the Parliament House, and in
his return. And to the end, it may be known who are to be admitted as
Commissioners for Shires and Buroughs, that all Persons having Commissioners
any Shire or Burgh, deliver in their Commissions to the Clerk of Register, upon
the twenty-fifth instant, in the forenoon, in the Parliament House, that
accordingly they be admitted as Commissioners to this Parliament.

WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Printed by the Relict of Andrew Anderson, Printress to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1681. And Reprinted at London.

The Manner and Order of the Procession, and other things preparatory thereto,
according to Custom, in Riding to the Parliament H^^se at Edinburgh, in
Scotland on Thursday the 28th of July, 1681.
1. THe Regi^ter and Lion King at Arms, meet and adjust the Rolls of
Parliament, and each of them take an exact Duplicate thereof.

2. His Majesty's Privy Council some days before the Sitting of the Parliament,
use to give Lion King at Arms, such Orders as are necessary to the orderly
proceeding; especially, to determine who shall carry the Honors, viz. The
Crown, Scepter and Sword, and usually the Marquess of Douglass carried the
Crown, the eldest Earl the Scepter, and the next the Sword.

3. The Citizens in Arms make a Lane from the Entry to the Parliament Closs, to
the nether Bow, and the Kings Foot-Guards make a Lane from the nether Bow, to
the Palace.

4. It is always ordered, that there be no Shooting, under the highest Pains
and Penalties all that day, neither displaying of Ensigns, nor beating of
Drums, during the whole Cavalcade.

5. The Constable and Marshall-Guards of Partisans must make the Lane from the
Lady-Steps, the Constable without, and the Marshal within the Door.

6. There must be four conveniences with easy Steps or Degrees, that the
Members without difficulty may mount and dismount, two above the Cross, and two
at the Abbey.

7. Every Member of Parliament must Ride on Horseback, and the absent Members
fined, conform to the Act of Parliament made 1663.

8. Where there be double Elections of Members, neither of them are to Ride, by
Act of Council 1669.

9. The Officers of State not being Noblemen, must Ride in their Gowns.

10. The Nobility to Ride in their Robes and Foot-mantles, and the rest with
their Foot-mantles.

11. The whole Members to Ride Covered, excepting those that carry the Honors.

12. Lion King at Arms, the Heralds, Pursevants and Trumpets to Ride
immediately before the Honors, Lion with his Coat and Robe, the rest in their
Coats and Foot-mantles barcheaded, conform to an Act in 1606.

13. The two Mace-Bearers of Council and the four Mace-Bearers of Session to
Ride on each side of the Honors Bare-headed.

14. The highest of Degree, and the most honorable of that Degree to Ride last.

XV. Every Duke to have Eight Lackeys; every Marquess, Six; every Earl, Four;
Every Viscount, Three; every Lord, Three; every Commissioner for Shire, Two;
every Commissioner for Burghs, One: Every Nobleman to have a Gentleman to hold
up his Train, by Act of Council in 1669. And they may have their Pages also,
though not mentioned in that Act.

XVI. The two Archbishops are to have each of them Eight Lackeys; and every
other Bishop, Three. And, if they please, they may have a Gentleman to hold up
their Trains.

XVII. The Noblemens Lackeys to have over their Liveries short Velvet Coats,
with their Badges, Crests, and Mottos done in Plate, or Embroidered, on the
Back and Breast, as has ever been the Custom, and now to be observed, for the
Decency and the Antiquity thereof.

XVIII. The High-Constable and the Marshall going to the Abbey in the Morning,
to receive the High Commissioners Commands, and returning privately, the
Constable comes out of his Lodging on Foot, and having viewed the Rooms, under
and above, of the Parliament House, puts on his Robes, and being attended with
his Friends, and having his Battoon in his Hand, seats himself in a Chair at
the Entry of the Parliament, close under the Lady-Steps, by the outmost of the
Guards; from which he rises, and salutes the Commissioners as they alight from
their Horses, and recommends them to the Gentlemen of his Guards, to be
conducted to the Mareschal's Guards.

XIX. The Marshall also attends in his Robes, being set in a Chair at the Head
of his Guards, and receives the Members (having his Battoon in his Hand) as
they enter the Door.

XX. The Great Officers of State, so many of them as are within the Kingdom,
ride up from the Abbey, about half an hour before the Cavalcade, in their Robes,
attended with their Friends on Horseback, and wait within the House; and when
the Commissioner enters the House, the Chancellor takes his own Purse, and
Ushers him from the Bar to the Throne, except when the King is present, or that
now His Royal Highness being Commissioner, the Chancellor receives him at the
Door, and Ushers him up to the Throne.

XXI. The whole Members of Parliament wait on the High Commissioner in the
Guard-Hall, the Noblemen in their Robes; and their Servants and Horses attend
in the outward Close.

XXII. The Lion King at Arms, in his Coat and Robes, and Battoon in his Hand,
to whose Charge the Order of the Procession is committed, with the Six Heralds,
Six Pursuivants, and Six Trumpets, in their Coats, attend there likewise.

XXIII. So soon as the High Commissioner is ready, the Register and Lion
standing together, each of them having a Roll in his Hand, and the Roll being
read, the Lion calls the Names of such as are to ride, according to their
Order, and a Herald cries aloud at one of the Windows, and one other Herald
stands at the Gate to see them do accordingly.

XXIV. The Members ought to ride as they are called; and if they think
themselves prejudiced, they must protest in such manner, as at the calling of
the Rolls in the House it self.

XXV. The Dukes and Marquesses to make the Train, and ride after the
Commissioner, by the Act of 1606.

XXVI. When the King is present, the Master of the Horse rides easy, but a
little aside, by the same Act in 1606.

The whole Assembly being in the manner aforementioned met at the Abbey, to
convey his Royal Highness thence to the Parliament House, the Procession begins
in Order as follows.

1 The Lord Chancellor and Lord Privy Seal, with all their Friends and
Followers, being come up on Horseback; the Chancellor on the Right Hand, with
the Purse and Mace born before him; and the Privy Seal on the Left. 2 Two
Trumpets, in their Coats, Bare-headed, Usher the Way. Two Pursuivants, in their
Coats, Bare-headed, Usher the Way.
3 The Commissioners from Burghs, Two and Two. 4 The Commissioners from Shires,
Two and Two. 5 The Officers of State, not Noblemen, Two and Two. 6 The Lords
and Barons of Parliament, Two and Two. 7 The Bishops, Two and Two. 8 The
Viscounts, Two and Two. 9 The Earls, Two and Two. 10 The Two Archbishops. 11
Four Trumpets, in their Coats, Bare-headed, Two and Two. 12 Four Pursuivants,
in their Coats, Bare-headed, Two and Two. 13 Six Heralds, in their Coats,
Bare-headed, Two and Two. 14 The Usher, Bare-headed. 15 Lion King at Arms, with
his Coat, and Robes, and Footmantle, and his Battoon in his Hand, Bare-headed.
16 The Sword of State. 17 The Scepter. 18 The Crown. 19 On each side the
Honors, Three Mace-bearers, Bare-headed. 20 A Nobleman, Bare-headed, with a
Purse, and in it His Royal Highnesses Commission. 21 His Royal Highness, High
Commissioner, attended with His Pages and Lackeys. The Duke of Hamilton with
the Marquess of Huntley on His Right Hand, and the Marquess of Montross on his
Left. 22 The Captain of His Majesty's Guard, at the Head of his Troop.
And they return in the same Order back to the Palace; only the Constable and
Marshall ride on the Commissioners Right and Left Hand, with Caps of
Permission; and that the Chancellor and Privy Seal stay behind until all march
away, and then return a little behind.

FINIS.

