The Evil Eye plucked out: OR A DISCOURSE PROVING That Church-Revenues cannot
be Alienated by any Secular Persons or Powers, without a manifest Violation of
the known Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and of Public Justice, and
Common-honesty.

MAT. XX. 15. Is thine Eye Evil, because I am Good?

Frustra legis auxilium invocat, qui in legem committit.

Si Judicas, cognosce. LONDON: Printed for Rob. Clavel, and are to be sold by
H. Brom at the Gun near the West End of St. Paul's. 1679.

The Invasion, or Alienation, of Church-Revenues by any Secular Person or
Power, not only Sacrilege, but contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Land,
and to the Principles of Justice and Common-honesty.
SOme there are that have attempted to persuade the World, that the Devil is
not so black as he is painted; and that the name of Sacrilege, or its
appropriation unto the invasion of Church Lands, is but a trick and device, a
mere bugbear to affright conscientious and fearful men from their laying hands
on those sweet possessions of others. To make this the more specious, and
withal, to unravel the force of all the Arguments that have been laid before
the World to discover the iniquity of it, they have at length found this new
artifice, to heap together the various senses of this word Sacrilege, some
Proper, some Metaphorical; to show that it had been used in relation to
Persons, Words, Places, and Things: and thence they infer, That if such or
such a thing be Sacrilege, then this is not. After which way of discoursing, I
believe any wickedness in the World might be freed from the imputation of guilt
or enormity. I may as well argue, that because Idolatry is called Adultery, and
Incest Fornication, that there is no other Adultery or Fornication; that
because Murder is used in many senses besides, therefore wilfully to kill a Man
is no Murder: And so in every transgression that can but have a Metaphorical
sense, or be referred to more objects than one. It might indeed have concluded
thus, There are other sorts of Sacrilege, therefore this is not the only
Sacrilege.

But now, because men are ready to reject, or at least not to have any great
regard unto such things, where variety of Opinions takes off the edge of
Arguments, and will never allow themselves convinced, if there remain any
Loophole through which they can peep; I shall endeavor to make good this
Proposition:

That Church Lands and Revenues cannot be alienated from the Clergy, nor
invaded by any Secular Persons or Powers, without a wilful and determinate
violation and breach of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and of the Principles
of Justice and Common-honesty.

And truly, if this be made good, we shall not so much need to dispute the
signification of Sacrilege: For in a Christian State and Kingdom, none will
believe That an ungodly invasion of the Rights of others, can be countenanced
or endured; especially where the Law speaks no less than Death to little
Robbers on Highways, to Pirates on Seas, and makes Thirteen pence half penny
by violence or wrong taken, inexpiable, unless it be by the blood of the
Criminal. Nay, any thing taken above the value of twelve pence, without the
consent of the owner, is felony by the Law, Stamford fall. 14. b.
Stat. West. 1. cap 15. Furtum est contrectatio rei alienae pluris quam
duodecim denariorum valentis, animo furandi, invito illo cujus res illa fuerit
Theft is the seizing of the Goods of another above the value of one shilling,
with an intent of stealing, and without the consent of him to whom it
belongs. Nor do I know any other way to specificate Theft, than the Property
of the Possessor before it be taken, and the ignorance or unwillingness of the
Possessor to part with it. And therefore the Law determines, that the stealing
of Wild Beasts, or Fishes out of a River, which have liberty to change their
places from one persons Royalty to another, shall be neither Felony nor
Larceny, because they are nullius in bonis; Stamford fol. 25. b.
and so for TREASOUR TROVE, for Treasure found, if it be taken, not Felony,
Quia Dominus rerum non apparet. But to take even these very things is yet
unlawful, because (to whomsoever they belong, yet) they belong not to him that
takes them, having no right to them. How then and with what pretense can any
greater and more valuable rights be alienated from Possessors without their
consent? Justice it is, suum cuique reddere, to render every man that which is
his; and it is common honesty, to be content with our own: so that, that which
justifies a Possession is Property or Right, and that which gives boundaries
and security to Property and Right, are the Laws. Not that there was any other
Original of Property, but the Law of Nature; and so, even that Eighth
Commandment insinuates, for if there had not been property, to take from
another could not be to steal; so that as thou shall kill, does defend the life
of a man which he has most right to; Thou shall not commit Adultery, does
intimate the propriety that every man had in his own Wife; so, Thou shall not
steal, does intimate the propriety that every man had in his own Goods and
Possessions: And thence arises that Maxim of the Civil Law, Jure naturae
aequum est, Pomponius, Lib. 9.
neminem cum alterias detrimento fieri locupletiorem. Hence it is also that
Religion ever so vigorously asserted, and all humane Laws ever defended
Property. As early as Abel and Cain, we see a Property of Goods in the Flocks
of one, Genesis 4.
and the Husbandry of the other; from which each man brought his Offering,
which truly would have been but a dull present, if it had been out of the stock
of a Community, where the right of all might have made the gift of any one of a
small account; and he that was most Religious, would have but commended his
service to God, by that which cost him little or nothing. 1 Reg. 24.24.
Much less would the fatness of the Sacrifice been noted by God himself:
Obtulit Hebel de primogenitis gregis sui, and de adipe eorum. Which
first fruits or first-lings, does signify the prime or principal, expounded by
the fat in that verse; and by the Apostle accordingly, Hebrews 11.4. (...),
praestantius and majoris pretii sacrificium; a better and more valuable
Sacrifice. And therefore on the consideration of the Petition of Right, An.
1640.
Anno 1640. the Convocation, holden at London, agreed this, amongst other
Articles, Though Tribute, Customs, Aid, and Subsidies, and all other manner of
necessary support and supply be respectively due to Kings from their Subjects,
by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations, for the public defense, care, and
protection of them; yet nevertheless Subjects have not only a Possession of,
but a true and just Right, and Title, and Propriety to, and in all their Goods
and Estates, and ought for to have. And these two are so far from crossing one
another, that they mutually go together, for the honorable and comfortable
support of both: For as it is the duty of Subjects to supply their King, so it
is the part of the Kingly Office to support his Subjects in the propriety and
freedom of their Estates. And truly all Magistrates are to guard this;
therefore it was the less wonder that that brave Roman Emperor should make his
whole Army stand still to do right to a poor Widow. But to this chiefly are the
Kings of this Island so much obliged, that it is the principle Article of the
Coronation Oath, which the King swears to maintain.

Sir, Will you grant, Archbishop.
keep, and by your Oath confirm to your people of England, the Laws and
Customs, to them granted by the Kings of England, your lawful and Religious
Predecessors; and namely, the Laws, Customs, and Franchises, granted to the
Clergy by the glorious King St. Edward your Predecessor, according to the Laws
of God, the true Profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom,
agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the ancient Customs of
this Land?

King. Ex Libro Regali.
I grant and promise to keep them. To which he afterward swears.

Now the Rights and Franchises granted by St Edward first, are contained
chiefly in the Magna Charta, and in the Charta de Foresta, 9 Hen 3.
made 9 Hen. 3. of which this is the History.

This poor Island torn to pieces by innumerable Factions, for the support of
the particular dominions of the Heptarchy, was at last gotten into the hands of
Canutus the Dane, An. Christi 1018.
yet so as by Conquest, where all under his subjection were at his mercy; for,
wherever a Kingdom is overrun and grasped by Conquest, the Kings will is the
only Law. Quod principt placuerit legit habet vigorem. The Kingdom in this
condition descended to St. Edward, An. 1043.
called, for his excellent Holiness, the Confessor; who considering the
uncertain estate of a Governor, who has nothing but the point of his Sword to
guard him; considering that the surest fortress was the love of the people, and
withal, that nothing could gain so much upon their affections as Liberty and
Emancipation; he took this course to caress them; to infranchise them, and
remit the standing Revenue that had been formerly paid to the Crown, in
acknowledgment of their Vassalage, called Daneguilt; being 40000 pounds per
annum. And that their Persons, or Estates, might not be subject to the Will of
any violent person, but be protected by a Law, he digested a body of Laws out
of the Customs and Ordinances of four Countries, An. 1044.
which was the beginning of our Common Laws. But when William Duke of Normandy
came on this Kingdom, An. 1066.
and made a new Conquest, his Sword cut all former Charters asunder. Those that
were then his Vassal, must submit to his pleasure both for Lives and Estates.
He that had gotten a great Kingdom with great dangers and difficulties, used
the English with little Mercy. The whole Nation was in such a condition, that
they knew not what to call their own. Stows Chron.
He deposed the greatest part of the English Nobility, and distributed their
Earldoms, Baronies, Bishoprics, and Dignities to his Normans: On the Commons
he laid what Restraints, Burdens, and Bridles he pleased. For thirty Miles
together in Hampshire, without Mercy or Conscience, he depopulated and laid
wast a great number of TOWNS, VILLAGES, and CHURCHES, without any satisfaction
to the Inhabitants, to make a Chase for Wild Beasts, which is now called the
New Forest. He charged, at his pleasure, what Soldiers he pleased on the
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Shiriffs, etc. He caused the whole Kingdom to be
Surveyed in a book, to understand what Land every Baron did possess, how many
Knights-fees, how many Plough-Lands, how many Villains, how many Beasts or
Cattle every man possessed within this Kingdom, Such strange doings continued
all the time of Will. Rufus.
from the greatest to the least; and (as the Historian affirms) the Land was
full of mischiefs that came of this doing.

Hen. 1. his Son, well weighing the sad inconveniences of this Tyranny, took
other courses; He restored the state of the Clergy; Ans Reg. 1.
he assuaged the grievous payments; restored again St. Edward's Laws; and at
length, gave once more a manumission and complete emancipation to the Kingdom,
Stows Chron.
and made us a free people: Afterward confirmed and ratified by the Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta, in the 9 year of the Reign of Hen. 3. Which
particularly, and in the first place, does enfranchise the Church: 9 Hen. 3.c.1.
We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for us,
and for our Heirs for evermore, that the Church of England shall be free, and
shall have all her holy Rights and Liberties inviolable. And truly, before the
Promulgation of that Charter, all the Kingdom were Slaves, and at the will of
the Sword, both for their Estates and Lives. Nay, even after this Charter, many
great Pregogatives were claimed and held by the succeeding Kings: As the
bestowing of the youngest Daughter of any deceased Baron in Marriage, as he
pleased, with all her Fathers inheritance; although the Eldest were Married in
their Fathers life time, and with his liking. Si aliquis Baro dicti Domini
Regis, tenens de Rege, obiisset, and non haberet haeredem nisi filias, and
primogenitae filiae maritatae sunt in vita patris; Dominus Rex daret postnatam
filiam quae remanet in haereditate patris alicui militum suorum, cum tota
haereditate patris sui, de qua obiisset seisitus; ita quod aliae filiae nihil
reciperent adversus postnatam filiam in vita sua. Et omnes Reges habuerunt hanc
dignitatem a conquestu. And some Prerogatives continue to the Crown at this day
of a like nature, notwithstanding the Property of the Subject by the great
Charter: As, in defailance of Heirs, the King inherits, so that the last
Possessor, cannot dispose or alienate it by Will. In Treasure Trover, in whose
Land soever found, it goes not to the Proprietor of the soil. In the case of
Mines discovered of perfect Metals, they go to the King in whose Land soever
they are found.

Now although this great Charter was so early granted, yet some succeeding
Kings invading the Property of the Subjects, and Ruling according to their own
Lusts, was the occasion of those fearful Civil Cammotions, called the Barons
Wars: Particularly the insolent and intolerable Violence and Tyranny of King
John; Stows Chron. in the Reign of K. John.
For there were many Noble men's Wives, and Daughters, whom he oppressed and
defiled; othersome with great Exactions he brought into great Poverty; the
Friends and Parents of some he banished and turned their Inheritances to his
own use, Anno 12 13. An. 12 13.
He disinherited some Noble men without judgment of their Peers: He Robbed
Baynards Castle in London: Poisoned Maude the Fair, because she would not
consent to his Lust: After he had spoiled Religious Persons (when the foulness
of those Practices were like to undo him) he constrained them to give him
writings, wherein they acknowledged that they had willingly given him all that
he had with Violence taken from them.

This was the cause that the Barons so determinately demanded the confirmation
of the Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, of that Hen. 3. his Son and
Successor, without which they looked on the whole Land to be perfectly
enslaved. This he granted; and it was with all possible Faith and Assurance
publicly ratified. And this is the Fundamental Law of this Land, concerning
the Right and Property of every Subject, both Lay and Clergy: And if this be
broken, there is no security of any Man's Possessions. Nay, even those that hold
by Escuage, Serjeancy, or by any other services, if they perform those services
as they are due, no Power without illegal and unconscionable Violence and
Oppression, can Invade or Disseise them, without their consent, this being a
common Principle and Maxim in all Laws, Quod nostrum est, sine facto nostro
transferii non potest: That which is mine, without my deed cannot be
transferred to another.

Thus far it is visible and clear, that by apparent Right, and by the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, that the Clergy stand on the same Basis and
ground, in their Estates, and Possessions, with the Laity. And least it should
be doubted, what Liberties are intended to be granted to them, the Laws have
(in many things) explained them. As, the right of Advowsons and Presentations,
that belong to the Church to be kept inviolable, 25 Edw. 3.3.7. 25 Edw. 3.3.7.
The right of their Forests, and Chaces, and Parks to the Archbishops and
Bishops. Charta de Foresta, Charta de Foresta, c. 4. 9 Hen. 3. Mag. Chart. c 37.
cap. 4. The Liberties of all their either Rights and Possessions: Magna Charta,
cap. 37. All that even before the Conquests of Danes or Normans had belonged
unto them, such as an exemption from Murage, Pontage; Cook. Inst. vol. 2. fol.
1, 2. Fitz-Herb. Not. Brev. fol. 175.
Cook Institut. vol. 2. fol. 1, 2. An exemption from Secular Offices. Si home
qui tient certain terres ou tenements par reason de se terres dever estre
elect Baillie, ou Reve, ou en auter tiel office pour se terres, ore si tiel
home soit fait Clerk, ou deins sacres Orders, donc il ne devan estre elect
pour se terres en tiel office. And if he be returned in such an Office, by the
Kings Writ he shall be discharged; the words of which Writ are these, Cum
secundum leges and consuetudines Regni nostri Angliae infra sacros ordines
constituti ad officium Ballivi, etc. eligi non debent. And again, Acceperimus
quod magistrum C. Officium Ballivi, etc. manerii de. L. assumere compellere
nitimini in ipsius grave damnum, and contra legem and consuetudines
supradictas. Precipimus quod districtioni and compulsioni, etc. omnino
supersedeatis, etc. An exemption from distresses on Glebes of Ecclesiastical
Livings: A Writ being issuable, Id. fol. 174.
Quod distress ne soit pris en le Glebes de Parsons, ne Vicars, ne auter
Minister found sur le Statute, de Articulis cleri: cap. 6. the words of which
Writ are these, Rex Vicicomiti salutem, etc. 9 Edw. 2.
Cum nuper ingressus fuisti in terris and tenementis Rectoriae de C. and
Dominum. S. graviter distrinxisti, and indies distringere non desistis in
ipsius prejudicium and libertatis Ecclesiasticae manifestam laesionem, and
contra formam Articulorum de Clero, etc. Nos libertates Ecclesiasticas illaesas
observari volentes, precipimus, etc. An exemption of the Clergy from paying
Subsidies among the Laity, or by their taxing: In which case a Writ also lies,
Id. fol. 176.
Rex taxatoribus X. and XV. per communitatem Regni nostri Angliae, nobis ultimo
concessarum, etc. Vobis mandamus quod S. Prebenda de B. in propriis bonis suis
quae inter Spiritualia ad decimam taxantur and de quibus dat nobis decimam:
ratione X. and XV. nobis per Laicos concessarum non molestetis sive in aliquo
gravetis, etc. To exempt them from Nor did our Law allow more in this than the
Pagan Prince Artaxerxes allowed to the Jewish Priests and Levites, Ezra 7.24.
who commanded that they should not impose Tolls and Customs on them.
Passage, Castleguard, Murage, Pontage, etc. A Writ also lies, That no
Prohibition shall lie against the Proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts in case
of Tithes, Mortuaries, Oblations, or Commutation of Penance on the instance of
an Offender: Art. Cleri. 9 Edw. 6.2.1 2.3. That the Kings Prohibition shall not
lie in Excommungement, unless where the Kings Liberty is prejudiced: Art.
Cleri. cap. 12. 9 Ed. 2.12.
And several other the like Liberties and Immunities.

Nor do the too frequent and impudent Rapines of violent and tyrannical Powers,
make the depilation of the Church, or the plundering of the Clergy become ever
the less Illegal or wicked, A facto ad jus. non valet consequentia.
any more than frequent Rapes and Adulteries, or numerous Piracies and
Robberies can change the nature of those facts, and make them ever the less
Villainies. So that when on one side, we shall read in our Chronicles, Matthew
Paris.
the Symony of William Rufus; or on the other side, Will. Malmesbury.
his encouragement of the Jews to fight against the Christians, promising that
if they overcame, he would become a Jew. We judge his Justice and Religion to
be much of a sort, in one and the other. Stows Chron.
For King John to spoil and plunder the Clergy; or to disseise his Barons, to
condemn them without judgment of their Peers, and convert their Estates to his
own use, are practices a like justifiable by the Fundamental Laws of this Land.
And who would not have taken it to have been a complete character, that that
insatiable gulf of Lust and Avarice, Hen. 8. gave of himself, that he never
spared Man in his Rage, nor Woman in his Lust; if he had added but this one
thing more, that he never pitied the helpless in his greediness? But those
practices against his own Servants, and these against Gods Church, have a like
countenance by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and more became a Robber
than a Prince; for Subditos spoliare and opprimere, non regnum est sed
latrocinium: To spoil and oppress Subjects, was more like a Robber than a King.
Nay, it is not to be questioned, that this design of his, for the spoil of the
Church, had went on, whether the Parliament had enacted it or no; for in the
year of our Lord 1532. Hen. 8.24.
and Anno Regni 24. He suppressed the Collegiate body of the Holy Trinity in
London, and gave their Plate and Lands to his new Favorite and Keeper Sir
Thomas Audley; and did not tarry for the Act of Parliament, which came not
forth till the year of our Lord 1535. 27 H n 8.
and Anno Regni 27. Nor durst the Parliament do less than humor him, for fear
of their heads; he had so awed them, in not sparing the blood of their
Predecessors. And those who had the greatest integrity and courage, he quickly
cut off out of the way of his designs. But do you judge now, would it not have
been thought a blessed and a just act of himself and the Commons, had they thus
cut off the Revenues of the Barons? or if himself and the Lords had thus
divested the Commons of their Estates? or if himself and the Clergy in their
Convocation had thus enacted the disseizing of the Laity? But good God! What
will not a powerful Leacher do, when Revenge and Gain spur him on one side, and
he is sure to meet with nothing but helpless tears and words to oppose him? It
is certain, there has not been in the whole World so great a dishonor, and so
vile a scandal to the Protestant Religion, as the impious practices of this
dissolute Prince. And yet after all this, that he might gather together the
fragments of this shipwrack't honor, which he had so rashly prostituted in the
sight of all Christendom, he began at length to stick some little Feathers of
the Geese that he had plucked, and made some small show of Love to the Church
whom he had Ravished, by raising, toward his latter end, here and there a
little Bishopric, which by their indowments may be discerned to have proceeded
from a very moderate zeal, and by the slenderness of their Revenues, in respect
of the rest of the Kingdom; as the Bishopric of Oxon. 31.32.33. Hen. 8.
valued in the Kings books at 354 l. 16 s. 4 d. ob. founded Hen. 8.33.
Peterborough valued per annum in the Kings books 414 l. 19 s. 11 d. founded
Hen. 8.31. Gloucester valued per annum 315 l. 17 s. 8 d. Hen. 8. 31. The
Bishopric of Bristol valued per annum 338 l. 8 s. 4 l. Hen. 8.31. c. 9. And
although he fingered the Revenue of the Bishopric of Norwich, yet he
substituted other Lands, and, to excuse the exchange, alleged that they were
of more value than those he took, as is expressed in the Statute, Hen. 8.32.47.
32 Hen. 8.47.
This was a poor pittance in proportion to that he took, and yet was engaged by
his Promise and Princely Word, to advance the glory of God; without which, the
Commons (notwithstanding that dastardly fear they were possessed with) would
never have past that Act for the Dissolution, 27 Hen. 8. So that we have a here
fair example, how much such persons design the glory of God, or any countenance
to Religion.

Nor does that argument, which some have brought from any emergent Necessity of
Affairs for any robbery or depilation of the Church, signify any more to
justify such a proceeding, than the former, brought from a number of impious
facts. For first, Evil is not to be done that Good may come of it; and such it
must be confessed to be, to take away men's Properties, and to spoil the
Innocent. Nor is every thing that is called a necessity, such indeed; or if it
were, Justin. Iastitut tit. digest. 162.
Quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non debent in argumentum trahi. Nor is
it equal for any sort of men to spoil and disseise another sort on the pretense
of pure necessity, when it is indeed to the security and ease of themselves;
for this were to make those that are Parties Judges, which no Law ever allowed,
nor themselves would be content to suffer: Or supposing that necessity should
supersede all right; supposing, it should be lawful, Caiaphas Maxim, Joh.
11.50.
to kill one Man to save a Nation, or to undo one sort of men, to save the
rest; and withal, that such a necessity should fall on this Kingdom, I would
fain know by what Law of God or Man, the Clergy only should be the devovoted
people, and that their maintenance should be sacrificed more than the Estates
of others? Joseph's example in Egypt will hardly allow this, who for the
preservation of the Lives of the Egyptians, when he took the Estates of other
men to the Kings advantage, Meddled not with the Lands of the Priests, Genesis
47.26.
but left their Revenue as free as Pharaohs, much less did he sell it to
maintain or ease others. If necessity must fall, let it fall on all men alike;
Where all lift together the greatest load will become portable. And truly,
Maxim of the Common Law.
In pari necessitate potior est conditio possidentis: In like necessity the
condition of the possessor is most advantageous.

The Law tells us, Bracton Lib. 2. fol. 12.
that the Church is in the condition of aminor: Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris.
And it is a strange piece of degenerous inhumanity to spoil a minor. Justin
Iastitut tit. digest. 110.. 2.
Pupillus pati posse non intelligitur. That Pupils should be exposed no
Government ever allowed or endured. It Is true, there are some causes for which
Clergymen, as well as others, may be disseised, as in case of Treason, and the
like. Mag. Char. cap. 29.
But no man must be disseised before he is convict: Nor, when he is convict,
can he loose more then he had, which in Ecclesiastical preferments is only for
the life of the Clerk; after his death, they do cedere successori, go to the
successor. And in the vacancy no wast is suffered by the Law, 14 Edw. 3. pro
Clero, cap. 4, 5.
in Manors, Parks, Ponds, or Warrens, etc. no fines are to be levied of
Tenants, nor any under woods to be felled, nor any other thing done which may
tend to the disherison of the Church: 14 Edw. 3. c. 4. and 5. pro clero. Nor
will any consent of the possessors, if they should be so perfidious, make an
alienation ever the more legal; for though they are usufructuaries, their
interests extend but to their own times. Ulpian. lib. 46.
Nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest quam ipse haberet: No man can
transfer to others a greater right than himself had. And if such Estates should
ever discontinue from that use and end, whereunto (by the grants and wills of
the Donors) they were orignally designed, they ought both in Equity and Law, to
return to them again, or to their Heirs. This is certain, that it is the most
reasonable thing in the World, that every man should do what he thinks fit with
his own; and this is as certain, that to pervert or frustrate the Will of the
dead, is most inhumane. Testamentum authenticum nullus abrogat aut aliquid ei
superaddit, Gal. 3.15. A Testament though it be but a man's, yet no man
disanulleth, or adds thereto. And truly, if the designs of those Donors
should ever be frustrated, why should the Estates go any other way than to
their Posterity? For this is most sure, That if they could have but suspected,
that these Estates should ever be taken from those bodies to whom they granted
them, they would never have granted them from their own families. And therefore
that Oracle of the Law, my Lord Cook, Cook on Littleton, Lib. 1. fol. 13.
plainly affirms, That if Lands be given to a body Politic, such as a Mayor
and Communalty, or to a Dean and Chapter; if the body Politic be dissolved,
the Donor, or Grantor, and his Heirs shall reenter. And this Law is so far from
being New, or the judgment of a private person, that it was urged by Edw. 3. in
the like case, against the Pope, in a Letter written to him. For whereas the
Pope, to make the dependence of all Clergymen more absolutely on himself, had
usurped a Power of disposing of Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical
Dignities, without Elections of the Chapters: The King in the behalf of the
Crown, lets him know, This Lerter is to be seen in Tho. Walsingham.
That forasmuch as at the request of diverse Popes, his Progenitors had
graciously given the Authority of Elections unto the particular Chapters, that
if he would not suffer them to use that freedom and Authority that was so given
them, that right devolved again on the first Grantor, which was the King. The
equity of this Law was so obvious, that the Pope a long time after never
interposed. For it is sure, that no distance of time can defeat succeeding
Heirs of their right. Qui per Successionem, quamvis longissimam, defuncto
haeredes constiterunt, non minus haeredes intelliguntur, quam qui haeredes
principaliter existunt. This therefore is an implied and tacit Condition of
all Grantors (but withal a most equitable Condition) that where they cannot
have their Ends, which are so honorable and pious, their Grants should return
unto themselves, or (which is Viventis enim non est haeres. A Max me of the
Common Law. Cooks Instit.
equivalent) to their Heirs; which no Succession can spoil him off.

But methinks there is one thing more that puts the Right and Interest of the
Church, in their Lands and revennues, out of all dispute in the World; and
makes them appear by Law to be steadfast and unalienable for ever; and that is
the Terms that the Laws bestow on Lands that are dedicated to Religious uses;
viz. that they are in Mortmain, which is thus defined. Mortmaine est lou terres
dones a Deane and Chapter, ou a un auter Company que sont corporate per le
grant du Roy, donque cest terre est devenu en mortmaine. Mortmain is where
Lands are given to a Dean and Chapter, or to any Corporation which are
incorporate by the Kings grant, then this Land is come into Mortmain; that is
to say, into a dead hand. So that what is confirmed by Law so given; to take it
again, is just so much honesty, as it is, to rob the dead. Magna Charta cap.
36. 7 Ed. 1. W. 2. c. 31. 13 Ed. 1.34. Ed. 1.15. Ric 2. c. 5. 23 Hen. 8. c. 10.
Now although the Statutes of Mortmain do determine that all things for the
future given in Mortmain without such a legal License and allowance as they
appoint, shall be void, and return to the Lords of the Fee, and for their
neglect to the King; yet does this (beyond all question) ratify all such
Estates given before those Statutes, or at any time since those Statutes given
with such License; for the obtaining of which License this is the process, that
a Writ be issued out of the Chancery, ad quod damnum, that is; whether such a
Donation be any way detrimental to the King or others; and if the Inquest
returns that there is no wrong to the King nor others; the King grants his
License, which then makes them firm and unalterable (where, by the way, we may
take notice how strictly our Laws protect men's properties; that no man shall be
wronged, although it be for the sake of God; much less, that God and his
Servants shall have their properties alienated to others (without their
consent) the words of the Writ are these. Fitz-Herbert Not. Brevium Brief ad
quod domnum.
Rex dilecto sibi J. de R. Escheatori suo in comitatu L. salutem, Praecipimus
tibi quod per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum, de baliva tua, per
quos rei veritatem melius sciri poterit, diligenter inquiras, si sit ad quod
damnum, vel prejudicium, nostrum, vel aliorum, si concedamus B. quod ipse unum
mesuagium, centum acras terrae, Decano and capitulo de M. and eorum
successoribus, dare possit, and assignare. What then can be more clear than
this, that if Lands given in Mortmain without the Kings License, since those
Statutes, shall be forfeite; then those Lands given before those Statutes; or
since those Statutes with such License, are confirmed; this being a most
confessed axiom amongst all, Cook Institut. lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 3.
Exceptionem confirmare regulam. That an exception confirms the rule. To be
plain, the interest of the Church is so steadfastly founded by the Laws of
England, that those that have been any time the Authors of
Sacrilegious-designes against the Church, have thought it their most
successful method, to bring some slurres and contempt, on those that are the
dispensers of public Justice, and whose continual studies and business the
Laws are; and therefore (besure, as there shall be occasion) they will speak
meanly and unworthily of them, that they may be thought to be persons of little
use, or illends. Nay, sometimes have the professors of the Laws, (when there
have been aims at the spoil of the Church) been prohibited the Parliament
(that they might do things without consideration of right or wrong, of what is
legal or illegal) and by express order, been rendered incapable of being
elected. As in 6 Hen. 4. Stow Chron. Anno 1402.
The Parliament at Coventry was held without Lawyers, being by the Writ
forbidden to be chosen; the words of the Writ are these. -- Nolumus quod tu,
sive aliquis alius Vicecomes Regni nostri praedicti, aut Apprenticius, aut
alius homo ad legem aliqualitur sit electus. We will that neither your self nor
any other Sheriff, or under-Sheriffe, (for so I conceive the word Apprenticius
signifies there) nor any other person any way relating to the Law, be chosen.
On occasions of which, our Historians call this Parliament, Parliamentum
Laicorum. A Parliament of mere Laics; For although this exceeding learned and
excellent Function (which requires vast study and experience to perfect it) be
not sacred, yet in the sense of our Laws they are Clerks too, that are
exceedingly well read and Learned as Clergymen are, or should be. From which
use of the name Clerk (by I know not what cause) there are no Pen and Ink-horne
men now relating to the Law, termed Clerks but those that use Pen and Ink, in
Courts, as Clerks of Parliament Roles, Clerks of Chancery, etc. But blessed be
God that the Laws of this Kingdom are not so little cultivated or understood
especially by Gentlemen of any note or account in this latter age, but that the
interests of the Church and religion are sufficiently conceived, and that by
the constitution of this state, the Lands, both of the Clergy, and themselves
are so founded, that one cannot be attacqued, or invaded, without a manifest
wrong, to the very settlements, and freedoms of the other. And therefore little
doubt that so many hundreds or thousands should ever combine, to do any acts of
wrong and unrighteousness to them, and therein (besides the violation of their
trust and consciences) weaken and enfeeble themselves and their posterities for
ever.

Nor have these Church-preferments been entailed to the offspring of the
Peasantry, and common people, which (for the most part) have not ability to
give Education unto their Children, to qualify them for such Offices; but have
generally been the reward and support of some branches of the most ancient, and
frequently of the most Honorable families of the whole Kingdom; insomuch as
those that have been born to sit with Princes, have not disdained (by a
sedulous and studious life) to fit themselves for those dignities. Nor did the
Policy of any former ages esteem them ever the less qualified to serve their
Princes, when they were so well prepared to serve God and his Church.

This little Catalogue that I have subjoyned, will let you see that the
dignities of the Church have been the Seats for several of the greatest
families of this Nation; which for the more speed I have set down
promiscuously, without any orderly marshalling: Thus, Agelnothus Bishop of
Cant. was Son of Earl Agelmare. Athelmarus Bishop of Winton was Son to Hugh
Earl of March and Queen Isabel. Henry de Bloys Bishop of Cant. was Brother to
King Stephen. Hugh de Pudsey Bishop of Durrham, was Earl of Northumberland.
Boniface of Savoy Bishop of Cant. was Uncle to Queen Eleanor wife of Hen. 3.
Richard Talbot Bishop of London, was Allied to the Talbots after Earls of
Shrewsberry. Henry Beaufort Bishop of Lincoln was Son of John of Gaunt. Will.
Courtney Bishop of Cant. was Son of Hugh Courtney E. of Devon. Giles de Bruise
Bishop of Hereford was Son of Will. Lord de Bruise. George Nevil Bishop of Exon
was Brother to Richard Nevil Duke of Warwick. Thomas Peircy Bishop of Norwich
was Allied to the Piercies E. of Northum. Lionel Woodvil Bishop of Sarum was
Son to Earl Rivers of Sarum. Thomas Vipont Bishop of Carlisle was Allied to
Viponts then Earls of Westmoreland. Marmarduke Lumley Bishop of Carlisle was
Allied to the house of Lumley's. Walther Bishop of Durrham was Earl of
Northumberland. Julius de Medices Bishop of Worcester was Allied to the house
of Medices in Italy. Nicholas de Longespee Bishop of Sarum was Son to Will.
Earl of Salisbury Will Dudley Bishop of Durrham was Son of Jo. Lord Dudley.
Walter de Cantilupo Bishop of Worcester was Of a great house in Normandy. Jews
Beaumont Bishop of Durrham was Of the Blood Royal of France. Thomas Arundel
Bishop of Cant. was Son to Rob. Earl of Arundell and Warren. James Berkley
Bishop Exon was Son to the Lord Berkley. Rich. Scroope Bishop Cov. and Litchf.
was Brother to Will. Scroope Earl of Wiltshire. Thomas Bourchier Bishop Cant.
was Son to Hen. Bourchier Earl of Essex. Roger de Clinton Bishop Cov. and
Lichf. was Of the same family with Geofery de Clinton. Jo. Stafford Bishop
Cant. was Son to the Earl of Stafford. Will. de Vere Bishop Heref. was Brother
to the Earl of Oxon. Richard Beauchamp B. Hereford was Allied to Beauchamp then
Duke of Warwick. Jo. Grandison B. Exon was Of the house of Grandisons Dukes of
Burgundy. Edmund Audley B. Heref. was Allied to Audley E. of Gloucester. Hen.
Burwesh B. Line. was Nephew to the Baron of Leeds Jo. Zouch B. Llandaff. was
Brother to the Lord Zouch. Hen. Beaufort B. Linc. was Allied to the Beauforts
E. of Dorset. Fulco Basset B. Land was Lord Basset. James Stanly B. Ely was
Brother to the Earl of Darby. Simon Montacute B. of Ely was Allied to the
Montacutes then Earls of Salisbury.


I might extremely enlarge this, if there were either time, room, or need so to
do. And as for the Gentry, and the Lawyers, and Merchants, which according to
the constitution of this Kingdom are to be had in no small regard; very few of
all the Bishops of this Kingdom have been from any lower families than such;
or if here and there one have risen from small beginnings, it has been
extraordinary merit, parts, and industry, that have been the means of their
promotions. And such unthought-off advancement is common to the Laity, as well
as the Clergy, amongst whom, many of the now highest rank, may attribute their
rise purely to the grace and favor of Princes, who (as one says) have so much
of God in them (whose deputies they are) that they oftentimes raise the poor
out of the dust, that they may set than with Princes, even with the Princes of
their people. And although these preferments and dignities in the Church, have
in this latter age, fallen more generally to the hands of such, that have been
the Branches of Knightly and Gentile Families, and not to those that are the
Sprouts of Peers, there is no reason that the Peers should envy this honor and
advantage unto those Worthy Families, and neither accept of those employments
themselves; nor be content that others enjoy them; there is no cause that while
they esteem those advantages too small for the least Peers, they should
conclude them too liberal, or splendid, for the best Commons. Especially when
by a chargeable Education and a painful and industrious Life they have acquired
learning and parts to be able to undergo them, to the glory of God, and the
honor of their houses. It were most unreasonable and disingenious, for the
Nobility after themselves are entered into the Court of Honor to pull up a
Draught-Bridg and shut to the Gates that none else may enter. There are but
these two ways for the Commons by merit to aspire unto honors; by the Gown;
and by the Sword. And if this way should ever be bayed up, the rest, of the
paths of the Gown, would become so wondrous rough and uneven, that there would
hardly any ready way for them to come unto dignities remain, but what they
could dig out with the Sword. For, as for riches, It is much more uncertainly
attained by all industry, than Wisdom and Learning; and if the rewards and
encouragement of Learning and Piety should without all sense of Law, be ever
withdrawn, we were likely to have Statesmen no further accomplished, than the
sight of a Court, and the instruction of a Theater could do it; which at most
would be but this; that the first will teach them a fantastical dress, and the
other as fantastical a Discourse; which would much prepare them to treat
Ladies, but nothing at all enable them to contribute any thing toward the
steering of a State.

As now things stand, Religion and the house of God have something else besides
their native purity and holiness, to invite the Gentry to take this Yoke on
them; for if there be not a splendid, yet there is a convenient encouragement
and maintenance for them; and if they are designed for other employments; the
road by which they are to trace Learning (that must fit them for great
undertakings) is not without considerable helps. This (if I mistake not) is
well enough understood; for there are very few families, especially under the
Equestrial degree, but either have now, or have had some branches of them
provided for in the Schools, University, or the Church, or in all of them. Who
are now for the most part the Scholars of the Schools of the most ample
foundations of Winton, Westminster, Eaton, but Gentlemen's Sons? who generally
in the best endowed Colleges of the Universities, but Gentlemen's Sons? And in
the whole Churches of England, where there is one person dignified that is not,
there are three that are Gentlemen. Nay, what Family under the degree of honor
in the whole Kingdom, is there, that has neither Son, nor Nephew, nor Father,
nor Uncle, that are not, or have not been encouraged, if not maintained, by the
revenue of the Church? I am sure, very few. And what ready way have Gentlemen
that by misfortune, or illness of times fall to decay, to provide for their
Children, but this? when none else will do any thing for them, the solicitation
and mediation of their friends will prevail that the most hopeful and
promising of their offspring will in this prudent and Religious manner be
provided for. Whereas if ever the revenues of the Church should be taken away,
the consequent will be inevitably this; Learning shall decay, such Families be
helplese, and Religion as a low and contemptible thing come into the hands of
none but those, that are, de Foece plebis, of the Scum and basest of the people.

And whereas those Harpies that gape for the spoil of the Church, to consume
it on Fiddlers and Whores, do usually suggest the Prodigality of their
Predecessors, in so liberal indowment of the Church: as if all the maintenance
of the Clergy, and all the endowments of Schools and Colleges; and as if all
the public buildings, the monuments of piety and charity of the former Ages,
had been Money out of their Purses, and merely the good works of the Laity
only; this is a very gross error and mistake. I cannot indeed deny, but God
has in all times raised up some Pious and Munificent persons amongst them to
be benefactors, especially by several Godly Kings to do glorious things to the
encouragement of Religious men, (and truly of whom should good be expected if
not of those whose Office it is, to be nursing Fathers to Gods Church) yet many
of the most ample foundations, and the best endowments for Learning, and Piety,
have been shafts from the quiver of Clergymen themselves, especially when they
lived single, and made Conscience to leave their Inheritances in the Lap and
Bosom of her from whence they had received it. This the Law it self
confesses; and therefore although in the Statutes of Mortmain before
mentioned, there is so perfect an investiture of the Lands given (without leave
first obtained) in the Lords of the Fee, and in their neglect in the King: yet
if Prelates, Clerks beneficed, or any Religious person have purchased lands and
have put the same in Mortmain, although they cannot show that they have entered
by due process, after license obtained, they shall yet be gently received to
make convenient Fine, 18 Ed. 3. pro Clero. cap. 3. 18 Ed. 3. pro Clero. cap. 3.
I might fill a Volume if I should attempt to give instance in all particulars
of the pious works and Indowments that the Clergy in former Ages have done.
But as a taste of the rest, I shall only give examples of some of the most
conspicuous and visible of them; such as Colleges dedicated to Learning, and
Churches, especially of the most stately and magnificent structure, dedicated
to the honor and worship of God, and the like public monuments; which I shall
set down promiscuously, as they follow.

Christ Church in Canterbury (i. e.) the Fabric now standing Built by Arch
Bishop Lanfrank, and continued by William Corboyle, and perfected by their
successors. Our Lady Church in Sarum was Founded By Richard Poor Bishop of
Sarum, and finished by Bishop Bridport. St. Andrews Church in Wells that now
stands was first Founded By Bishop Robert, 18th Bishop of that See; and
finished by Bishop Joseline. St. Peter's Church in Chichester new built by
Radulph 3d Bishop, after that was consumed by fire, was rebuilt by Sissifridus.
St. Mary's Church in Lichfeild which now stands was built by Roger de Clinton
Bishop of that Diocese. St. Daniels in Bangor after it was ruined by the Revel
Owen Glendowr, was built by Henry Deane Bishop of Bangor. Trinity Church in
Winton now standing begun by Bishop Walklin continued by his successors,
finished by William of Wickham. St. Mary's Church in Oxon Founded by Dr. Fitz
James afterward Bishop of London. St. Peter's Church in York, which now
stands erected by Tho. the 25th Bishop of that See. The Church of Ely that is
now standing, built by Bishop Norwold, Kidall, and others. The Cathedral Church
of St. David's, built by Peter 48th Bishop of that Diocese. St. Peter's in
Exceter as now it stands To Warlwast Quivil and Grandison three owes it self
to three Bishops of the same See. The stately Structure of the Cathedral Church
of Gloucester was first Founded by Aldred Archbishop of York. The now standing
Cathedral Church of Hereford was the work of Bishop Reinelme and his
successors. The Cathedral of Lincoln was first Founded by Bishop Remigius
enlarged by Alexander, and perfected as now it is hy Hugh of Burgundy his
successor. The Church of Saint Paul in London, having once before been burnt
and consumed with fire, was rebuilt by Mauritius, Richardus, Bishops of London,
and others their successors. The Trinity Church in Norwich was first built by
Herberius Iosinga Bishop there, and being twice burnt was twice after rebuilt,
the first time by John John of Oxford, the Second time by Bishop Meddleton. The
Church of Peter-burgh afer it was burnt by the Danes was again built by
Ethelwoldus Bishop of Winton. The Cathedral Church of Worcester was new built,
by Oswald the 18th Bishop, but after it was burnt by the Danes, it was brought
to that perfection it now has, by Wulstan a succeeding Bishop. St. Andrews
Church in Rochester was rebuilt by Gundulphus Bishop of that See. The Cathedral
Church of Durrham was Founded by Aldwynus Bishop of the same. That which now
stands was begun by Bishop William de Carileso, and finished by Ranulphus
Flambard his successor. Magdalen Col. in Oxon with the Chapel annexed, was
Founded by William of Wainfleet Bishop of Winton. Trinity Col. Originally
Founded by Tho. Hatfield Bishop of Durrham. All Souls Col. by Hen. Chichely
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Merton Col with the Chapel and Tower annexed, by
Walter Merton Bishop of Rochester. Exceter Col. by Walter Stapleton Bishop of
Exceter. Queens College in Oxon, by Robert Eglishfield Chaplain to Queen
Phillip. Wife of Ed. 3. New Col. and the Appendant College and School of
Winton, by William of Wickham Bishop of Winton. Lincoln College was Founded by
Richard Flemming Bishop of Lincoln. St. John's Col. in Oxon Originally Founded,
before the dissolution by Hen. 8. by Hen. Chichely Archbishop shop of
Canterbury. St. Crosses Hospital and Church Founded by Henry Beaufort Bishop of
Winton Catherine Hall in Cambridg Founded by Robert Woodlark DD. Jesus College
in Cambridg Founded by Jo. Alcock Bishop of Ely. St. John's College in Cambridg
was first Founded by Nigellus the Second Bishop of Ely, afterward endowed and
enlarged by Hugh Balsham a succeeding Bishop.

So that it appears that many of the best and most ample foundations, of the
most noble and admirable Piles and structures, of the most costly public
works and buildings, that beautify Cities and Universities, that make this
Kingdom famous in foreign parts; and that here serve for the glory of God, and
the public good, have been founded and endowed by the Clergy. The builders of
the first Tower in the World that we read of, were justly chastised with
confusion of their Language, for their rebellion against God, for they said,
Genesis 11.4. Let us build us a Tower whose top may reach to Heaven; not that they
designed that it should indeed touch Heaven, for then the whole Plain in the
Land of Shinar had been too little for the foundation, nay, it may be the whole
Earth it self; but the meaning is, a very high Tower, such as might be a place
of sanctuary to them, against any future Deluge. For whereas they understood
that the Waters in the Flood prevailed on the earth but fifteen cubits upwards,
as Cap. 7.20. they imagined that this mole (so much above the tops of the
highest mountains) would secure them in the like case, and being made of
Bricks too (which had endured the test of fire) might protect them from the
force of that furious Element, which they had traditionally received, should be
the means of a second destruction of the World. Thus they thought to elude
Divine vengeance, and to arm themselves against the force of Heaven, which
nothing is able to effect but innocence and holiness of Life. And truly had
they not thus erred in the main, the other lower ends of this work would not
have failed them, which they express in the next words; Let us make us a Name,
least we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth: For certainly it was a
very likely means to perpetuate their Name and Glory, and was besides, as a
Standard to which they might at any time repair in case of dispersion. What
these designed, though rebelliously against God, is really performed to us, by
those noble and stupend structures devoted to Gods honor; it gets us both a
name, and is as standards for us to apply to in case of dispersion; as holy
sanctuaries to fly too to seek the God of salvation; and cannot choose but be
exceedingly the glory of the Nation, that is so much for the glory of the Lord.
And this is a thing so confessed and certain, that Cromwell (that great enemy
to every thing that was good) merely for the greatness of the Works, and
because they were such Ornaments to the places where they are built, saved them
from ruin, when nothing sacred was spared besides. But to conclude, If it were
not for Cathedral Churches, and the Sees of Bishops, our Noblest and most
renouned Cities in the whole Kingdom, would be of no more account then the
poorest, basest, and most pedling Buroughs. John, Mayor of Brackley would
govern as noble society of men, as the Lord Mayor of London; and Wotton-Basset
contend with Bristoll. For the Law defines a City thus, City est teil ville
corporate que ad un Evesque and un Eglise Cathedral, A City is a
Town-corporate, which has a Bishop and a Cathedral Church. And so Cassanaeus
affirming that there are in France 104. Cities, gives this reason of it, Pur
ceo que la sont plusours Sees de Archieuesques and Euesques; because there are
so many Sees of Arch Bishops and Bishops. I know very well that there are too
many factious and giddy people, that aim at nothing but parity and levelling in
Churches, Cities, Clergy, and People, in all persons and societies; and that
John may be a Lord, would have every Lord a mere John. They would debase and
bring down all dignities and h nours to the rate and sieze of their own
education and merits. But I spupose that I write to men of sobriety and reason;
to men that have honors or estates to loose; and such I believe do well
understand that the only way to prevent ruin and confusion is the stability
of the Laws, and the stedfastness and continuance of the constitutions and
Sanctions of this Kingdom. Non capitur, qui jus publicum sequitur. He shall
never be ensnared, that depends on the known and public Laws. But if this
dependence be ever removed out of the hands of that generation of men that have
fitted themselves for holy services, the Laws that gave a security of those
encouragements, are turned into mere trapps and snares to invite them into
Offices, Dignities, and Imploiments, and there leave them exposed, naked, and
derided. Just as some Factious persons would have the Act of Uniformity become
to all the Sober and obedient Clergy of the Kingdom, (that when it has
(under the severe penalty of Deprivation) exacted a Subscription and an exact
Conformity; and by this means, drawn in a vast number of men, that were not
altogether so well satisfied in some particulars; because they would not incur
the censure of unpeacable men, of Separatists, of being stiff and stubborn
against National Laws; thinking, that for peace and order sake, it was but
reasonable to lay aside some contracted prejudices, and submit their private
sentiments to the judgment of a Convocation and Parliament, especially for
this, because they might not otherwise exercise their Ministry) that now some
Law of Tolleration should be made, to let in all the stubborn and unpeaceable,
and consequently, make the most obedient and honest hearted Clergy, pass under
the character of Cowards, Temporizers, Men of a large conscience, and the like,
to their infinite reproach, and discouragement; the consequent of which (if it
could be effected) would be inevitably this, that all sober and wise men (if in
any thing they dissent from the public opinions) shall be for ever
discouraged from yielding up their apprehensions to the public quiet; least
when they have done it, they be exposed to scorn and contempt, for their
obedience. There is no prudent Man (I conceive) can have so low and
dishonorable esteem of the greatest and gravest Council of this Kingdom, the
Parliament, to imagine that they should be so unstedfast to themselves or
others, to hearken to such suggestions, and so toss the Interests of the whole
State like Shuttlecocks; or think so poorly of their Faith or Honor, that they
should by severe penalties and strict Laws, hunt men into an intricate and
troublesome duty and condition, upon hope of encouragement and reward, and then
leave them in the lurch; or that Lawgivers should ever unravel the whole
texture of the present constitutions, to set up unrighteousness by a Law.

FINIS.

