

PANACEA; OR The Universal Medicine, BEING A DISCOVERY of the Wonderful
Virtues OF Tobacco Taken in a Pipe, WITH Its Operation and Use both in Physic
and Chyrurgery. By Dr EVERARD, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, near the
West End, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sr James Drax, Alderman Maniford, M. Wainright, M.
Ieffreys, M. Allen, M. Stacy, M. Ienkins, M. Pet, M. Newman, M. Phillips, M.
Boggs, Capt. Fox, Capt. Price, Capt. Read, Capt. Pensax, Capt. Butler, Capt.
Odiam.
AND To all the worthy Merchants and Planters of Tobacco, for and in the
WEST INDIES, and AMERICA.
Right Worshipful,
IT is well known, and confirmed by certain Experience, that by the great care,
cost and charges of the Merchants; and by the great industry and labor of the
Planters of Tobacco in the West Indies, multitudes of people that are under the
present Government, are plentifully maintained, and very many of them get great
estates for themselves and families, and the Customs of it are no small profit
to the Commonwealth. I think there is no one kind of foreign Commodities that
yields greater advantage to the public; and there is scarce any to be compared
with it. Wherefore I dedicate this short History of Tobacco unto you, that are
the Merchants and Factors in it, wherein you may at your leisure observe some
thing that may conduce to your further content, if you please but to take
notice of the great virtues it has both in Physic and Chyrurgery. But if we
reflect upon our Forefathers, and that within the time of less than one
hundred years, before the use of Tobacco came to be known amongst us, (For
Captain Richard Grenfield, and Sr Francis Drake were the first Planters of it
here, and not Sr Walter Raleigh, which is the common error) we cannot but
wonder how they did to subsist without it; For were the planting and traffic
of Tobacco now hindered, millions of the Nation, in all probability must perish
for want of food, their whole livelihood almost depending upon it. So many
Druggists, Grocers, Tobacco-shops, Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, Victuallers,
Carriers, Cutters and Dryers of Tobacco, Pipe-makers, and the like, that deal
in it, will prove no less.

The necessity of Tobacco, and maintaining the Plantations of it, is almost as
great, if we do but consider who they are that buy it only for their own
drinking, and cannot abstain from it. Seamen will be supplied with it for
their long voyages: Soldiers cannot want it when they keep guards all night,
or are upon other hard duties in cold and tempestuous weather: Farmers,
Plough-men, Porters, and almost all laboring men plead for it, saying, they
find great refreshment by it, and very many would as soon part with their
necessary food, as they would be totally deprived of the use of Tobacco. The
Nobility and Gentry, who find no fault with it, but that it is too common
amongst the Vulgar, do ordinarily make it the complement of all their
entertainment, and oft-times all their entertainment besides is but a
complement. Scholars use it much, and many grave and great men take Tobacco to
make them more serviceable in their callings. Tobacco is grown to be not only
the Physic, but even the meat and drink of many men, women and children. In a
word, it has prevailed so far, that there is no living without it; that
notwithstanding the vast Plantations of it in the West Indies, all our
cornfieldsd would soon be turned to gardens of Tobacco, were not men restrained
from it by the Civil Magistrate. It is like Elias Cloud, which was no bigger at
first than a man's hand, that has suddenly covered the face of the earth: The
Low Countries, Germany, Poland, Arabia, Persia Turkey, almost all Countries
drive a Trade of it; and there is no commodity that has advanced so many from
small fortunes to gain great estates in the world. Don Ulafc^ of Amsterdam,
who, as I am told, never knew his own name nor parentage, by selling Tobacco,
hangs out the sign of Don de Velasco, under whom he was once a poor soldier,
and is called now by his Generals name. But though they that traffic in it
seldom miscarry, yet others by the intemperate taking of it, have sometimes
brought themselves and great estates to ruin by it, in whom this Martial Plant
has occasioned more diseases of the mind, than it can cure diseases of the
body, though it be of very great use in Physic.

I confess that Tobacco is a plant of Gods making, and it has many admirable
faculties in it, and the fault is not in the leaf, though it be sophisticated
by some, and inordinately abused by others; yet there is some reason to
suspect, that there has been much of the cunning of the Devil, and of man's
perverse understanding employed in the large propagation of it, because that
Christians, Jews, Turks and Infidels, almost all mankind, who are naturally so
averse from all that is good, and prone to nothing but mischief, are so much
delighted with it. But in my opinion, the providence God intended by
discovering this herb to Christians amongst the Indians, that by their daily
commerce, the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be made known to those Heathen
people, who sit in darkness and the shadow of death. The Devil was much afraid
of it, as I was informed by one born in England of Spanish parentage. For when
the Christians came first among the Indians, and began to convert them to the
Christian Faith, (as there appeared some symptoms of zeal at the beginning,
though it grew soon cold at the sight of gain) the Devil threatened to revenge
himself on the Christians, by teaching them to take Tobacco, which having once
tasted they should never be able to refrain from it. We see indeed that
Christians are so much affected with it, that they cannot forbear it; but the
Devil seems to be more afraid than hurt, to think that Christians now adays
are so zealous of Gods glory, as to make it their aim to withdraw those
barbarous people from his service; forasmuch as I can understand they have made
this the least part of their employment, not regarding the purpose of God, nor
his dispensations for the saving of men's souls, who deseended from Adam as well
as themselves, and may have a part in the righteousness of Christ as well as
they; who had they but a glimpse of that light Christians have, would
doubtless bring forth better fruits than Christians do, who by their jarring
and differences one with another, and by minding so much their own profit and
advantage, have given great cause to those ignorant people to blaspheme the
name of God, and to abhor the Sacrifices of the Lord. Insomuch that when they
were told that the Spaniards went to Heaven, they said, They would go to Hell,
that they might not be where those wicked Sp^niards were. So that it is likely
that God seeing Christians now unworthy of his service, has reserved the
conversion of that people, until such time as Christians shall be more
charitable and more composed in love and unity amongst themselves. I must not
tire your patience by writing a Volume upon this subject, left the portal prove
too great for the house. I shall only speak something more concerning Tobacco.
And

First, It is no great friend to Physicians, though it be a physical plant; for
the very smoke of it is held to be a great Antidote against all venom and
pestilential diseases. It is also singular in Clysters against the windCholick,
and therefore King James merrily said, That was the way to take it: But the
Duke of Savoy who was so cured by it was of another mind. The Irish they are
altogether for snuff Tobacco to purge their brains. The Indians swallow down
the smoke against weariness, till they fall into an Ecstasy. The upper Scout of
Amsterdam, as some report, chews it against all diseases, and likes it better
than Partridge or Pheasant. But the ordinary way to suck it from a pipe, and
puff it out again, is held the best way to cure Rheums and disti^lations from
the head. It works such contrary effects, that Philosophers contend almost
about it, as much as Chemists do concerning Mercury: they cannot certainly
conclude, whether it be hot and dry, or cold and moist, for it quenches
thirst, and yet is the fittest shoing-horn to draw down drink, and to make men
dry; it abates hunger, yet is excellent to provoke a man's appetite to meat: It
is a fit companion for mirth or melancholy; it will make one sleep, who wants
rest; yet will it keep a Scholar waking in his study, and a soldier upon his
guard. It puts Physicians to a nonplus, for it agrees with all ages, sexes and
tempers. D. Venner in his Via recta ad vitam longam, allows any man, be he
Choleric, Phlegmatique, Sanguine or Melancholique, six pipes a day. Wherefore
some object, That it is a vain thing. I answer with Solomon, so are all things
else, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Yet I should counsel no man to take
it, who does not stand in need of it; and those that do, to use it with that
moderation as is required in the use of all other things. When thou have found
honey eat not too muah of it; Ubi mel, ibi fell, where honey is, there is gall;
and in every thing in this world there is something to be avoided. Nature her
self speaks the same to us with a loud voice in this Tobacco plant as much as
in any thing in the world. For those two groundleaves that grow upon it, which
the Spaniards call Bascheros must be cut off, and thrown away, they smell and
taste so unpleasantly, that should they be mingled with the rest, they would
spoil all. As therefore the Planters are very careful to cast these leaves
away, so should Christians be in the use of all temporal things, to cast away
all earthly thoughts and desires that are too near the ground, all that is
vicious and offensive to God or man, that all their thoughts, words and deeds
may be sweet sented in the nostrils of God, that they may be at length
transplanted from their uncertain Plantations here on earth to an everlasting
Plantation in Heaven, which is the prayer of him for your Worships, and for all
the worthy Merchants and Planters of this Nation, who is

Your Worships in all Christian duty I. R.

THE PREFACE.
IT is an Axiom of Aristotle in the first Chapter, Analyt. Post. All kind of
Learning, and all Discipline proceeds from some precedent knowledge. I suppose
that this Axiom belongs to all teaching whatsoever, that is undertaken
concerning any matter according to the Rules of Reason, if it be Methodicall
and handsome: and if the Philosopher does not affirm the same, I am certain he
does not contradict it. Wherefore because I am minded to discourse of Tobacco
by rule perfectly, I am bound to take great care, that I do it in a fit Method,
as I ought to do; and this I shall perform if I do it orderly, as is observed
almost by all Authors in almost every matter propounded. First, Therefore I
shall briefly Treat of the Etymology, or Reason of the Name of this Universal
Remedy. Secondly, I shall lay down the differences of it. Thirdly, I shall show
the Temp^rament. Fourthly, I shall teach the time when it must be Sowed, and
when gathered. Fifthly, I shall enquire in what place it prospers best. Sixthly,
I shall in brief set down the way to prepare the Leaves, which few Men know.
Seventhly and Lastly, I shall search into the singular forces of it, and the
known proved effects, and shall speak of all V^guents made with Tobacco,
Plasters, Balsams, Liniments, Cerats, Anodyus, etc. I shall discover how to
make these to help the Apothecaries, and studious Men, that every one may be
able to provide them himself, and when need is he may bring them out as from a
storehouse of his own.

PANACEA, Or The Universal Medicine; Being a Discourse and Description of
TOBACCO, With its Preparation and Use.
The Reason of the Names.
SInce that Galen. 1. de Meth. c. 2. etc. 3. and. lib. 1 ad Thrasybul, faith;
That to undertake to know a thing, without the knowing of the explication of
the Name, is but to labor in vain: It is my part to Discourse first of the
Names of this great Panac^^, and of their first Originals, and who they were
that first taught us the use of it, which I shall exactly examine.

Tobacco took the Name from the Name of that Country which is a Province in new
Spain, in the We Indies, or the new World, about Forty four Miles above
Mexico, the Metropolis of Hispaniola. In this lay the Province Tobacco which
was under subjection to the government of Iucatan, (the Spaniards afterward
called it the Province of the Blessed Victorious Virgin, because in the Year,
1519. Ferdinand Cortesius, Founder of new Spain, won a great victory in that
place) here was this Noble Plant first found, that Cures almost all Diseases,
and from thence afterward it borrowed the Name. Those of Pern call it Petum,
so do almost all the people that live toward the Antartick-Pole, or Picielt, as
Monardis holds, l.Hist. 11. 6.5.
or Perebecenuc, as Oviedus will have it (yet this is not the proper name for
Tobacco, but is ascribed to some other Indian Plant by Authors, and it differs
from Tobacco, as it appears to me.

Vulgarly it is called Nicotiana, or Nicosiana, from D. Johannes Nicotius of
Nismes, who was Counselor to Francis the second King of France, and Master of
requests afterward, and of petitions in the Court, who first discovered this
Herb to France, (as that most famous Knight and Sea Admiral. Sr Francis Drake,
about the Year 1586. made it known in England) for whose sake it ought to be
gratefully received in Memory of him by all Men, unto whomsoever the same of
this healing Plant shall be brought. This D. Nicotius, when in the Year 1560.
he was sent by his King to be Ambassador in Portugal. It happened on a day
that he went to view a Prison, or rather a work house for such as are punished
at Lisbon, where at that time the Kings Court was. There a certain Noble Dutch-
Man who was the chiefest keeper of the Kings Archives, presented him with this
Plant, as being a stranger and newly brought thither from the Island Florida;
The Ambassador gladly received the Plant, and being rare and come from beyond
the Seas, and which he had never seen before he takes, great care to have it
planted in his Garden, for he understood before by hear say, of the great
Virtues it had to cure Wounds and Ulcers, it having been often used with happy
success.

Wherefore the Fame of this Herb spread over all Portugal, and the Spaniards,
and Portugals speak much in praise of it, and it began to be called the
Ambassadors Herb. Not long after he returning for France, preserved some of
the Seed of it to Catharina de Medicis, Queen of France; She understanding
that this Plant was excellent for curing malignant Ulcers and Putrified Sores,
and admiring at it, as being a new Universal Remedy, gave it her Name; and
after that, all France over, it was called the Queens Herb, and Catharinaria,
and Medicea. Pares prafat.in Chirnrg.
The Virginians call it Vppowoc, others call it the great Priors Herb, because
he sometimes Sailing from France to Portugal, and being entertained at
Lisborn, by D. Nicotius, had many of these Plants bestowed upon him, which he
transplanted and made th:^ to grow in their Gardens. Most Inhabitants of
Hispaniola, call it Cozolba. The Lombards call it Tornabon^, See Petr. Martyr,
Dec. 1.^ 9. Of the new world.
because it was still brought into Italy, by means of the Nephew of Alphansus,
Tornabonius, Bishop of Burg. who was also Bishop there himself, but at that
time Ambassador with the French King. By Schwenckfeldius, and others that
spoke highly of the Virtues of it, it is called the Sacred Plant; Camerarius
calls it the Vulnerary Indian Plant; others call it Piperina: but upon what
reason I know not. They of Lions call it the Antarctick Bugloss, by Renealmus,
(...). Dodonaus a most famous Writer upon Plants, gives it the name of Henbane
of Peru, but falsely, as I shall show in its place. Cordus gave this name not to
Tobacco, but to Strammonia. The Reverend Cardinal of S. Cruce, when he was
sent from Rome the Popes- Nuntio into Portugal, brought it first from thence
to Rome, and therefore there they called it the Herb of S. Cruce. Some call it
Sa^a Sancta, not without a Catalogue of the great praises of it, fetched from
evident experience. The Dutch's and English call it Taback. The Germans name it
Heylig Wundkrat, Indianisch Wundtkraut, Indianissche Beinwelle. Theuet the
French Cosmographer, (who was in that Expedition, which Anno. 1555. Nicolaus
Durandus Villagagnonus made to Brasil) in his Book called Antarctick France,
names it Angoulmoisine, and boasts that he was the finder, and the first man
that brought this Seed into France. I know not whether he spoke the truth; It
seems to me to be an old Wives story. Fabius Columna mentions Arabian Tobacco
different from ours; which we do not know. Read what the most Learned Columna
has written in his (...) of Plants that are not well known. p. 142. There are
many uncertainties in the writings of the Arabians, for that Nation has but a
few things of its own, and commonly the Arabian Authors have not well set
things together, because they understood not rightly the Writings of the
Greeks. Also the most famous Herbarist, D. Guilandinus, in his conjecturall
synonimas of Plants, calls this Plant Onosmyos of Aegineta.

The Differences.
WE have observed three sorts of Tobacco, the greater with broad Leaves, the
greater with narrow Leaves; and the smaller Tobacco.

The first Kind.
THe broader Leaf large Tobacco, has a thicker stalk, and sends forth shoots
from the Roots, that are woody, and are fortified by many small Fibras, they
are White, bu^ inwardly Yellow and bitter, the Stalk is as thick as a staff,
and sometimes grows three Cubits high; it is green and has a thin down over
it, it is Unctuous especially when it is grown up, and is full of a White Pith,
and has many Leaves; this is Fenced about from a broad Basis of the windings
of the stalk, with Leaves resembling great Comfrey, but they are bigger, and
about the middle more large, and as it were branched or Gibbous, and by degrees
they grow to be very sharp pointed, they shine with a watery green, having no
pleasant smell; they are full of juice, and are smeered over almost with a
clammy Humor, so that it will stop small Creatures which sit upon them; they
taste sharp with some clamminess; Amongst the frequent Branches of the Leaves,
the Flowers come forth single out of the indented Leafy cups, standing several
upon a firm stalk, and from a narrow Basis, toward the upper part they are by
degrees dilated as it were into a bordered Pentagon, resembling a Trumper,
being White and pale Red, (which is called Carnation Color) they Blush; In the
middle whereof are five threads that compass about the stalk, that is of a Pale
Green, and sticking forth, when these decay, there follow the hollow long Cups,
that something end in a point at the top, that are full of very small duskish
or reddish black, but at first with green round seeds. The Herbalists vulgarly
call this the Male Tobacco. Some think this is (...), Dioscorides speaks of;
but I know not how those words can concern Tobacco. If conjecture may serve,
that (...) seems to be great Comfrey from the likeness of it, as the famous and
learned D. Bauhinus observes in his Synonim^'s, wherewith he adorns Matthiolus.

The second Kind.
GReat Tobacco with narrow leaves has woody stalks, cut in many jags, and
hairy, with infinite fibras; the stalks are about a foot and half, plaited,
green, full of branches, to which by a small stalk are fastened leaves like to
Nightshade, which is called Bella Donna, yet somewhat larger and greener,
downy, thick, full of juice; the flowers ou the tops of the stalks and branches
are purple color, and represent a round narrow Cup toward the basis, and are
of a pale green. The husks succeed the flowers, and are rather long than round,
and at the top they have a long furrow, in the middle whereof there comes forth
a thick little point, but very short and red. From the extreme part of each
furrow there is drawn a trench to the basis, which is apparent in a yellow
circle. The seed contained in it is small and yellow.

Aegidius Everardus says, That this kind often springs from the seed of Male
Tobacco. For (says he) if any of the grain of Male Tobacco fall to the ground,
when it swells with seed, namely, to the ground, where Tobacco grew before; this
narrow leaved Tobacco will doubtless grow up there the next year, and this is
called Female Tobacco. Also if you sow the seed of Male or large leaved Tobacco
in ground not hot enough, or which is barren, it will produce the Female, for
the Male, in such abundance, that you will hardly get it out again, but it will
yearly spring of it self. Renealmus calls this sort (...), because the leaves
are born up by a small stalk, which the Greeks call (...). Pennius calls it,
Nicotiana minor. Lobelius, Tobacum minus; Herba Sana sancta minor. The French
call it, Nicotiane Petite. The Dutch, Kleyne Taback. The Germans,
Schmalblaterch, Indianisch Wundtkran^.

The third Kind.
THe third fort, called the lesser Tobacco, is but a foot and half high, and
far lower than the former. The root is white, going deep downwards, the
length of a span, as thick as ones finger, and is much set about with leaves on
the sides. The stalk is round, fat, with fine down upon it, of a pale green,
upon which the leaves are green, somewhat round, fat, full of juice, somewhat
hairy, not unlike to mad Nightshade, but they are greater and more white. The
flowers are of a yellow pale color, standing in dented leafie cups, far
smaller than those of great Tobacco, they are hollow, and are unfolded into
five blunt once divided edges, and when these fall, there remains roundish
heads, that are full of pale wan seeds, like to the small ones of the former
Tobacco, but they are bigger and round. Bauhinus calls this kind yellow Henbane.
Matthiolus calls it, the third sort of Henbane. At Lions they call it, black
Henbane. Dodoneus will have it yellow Henbane; so will Lonicerus. Gesner and
Camerarius, Tabernomtanus, calls it Henbane of Peru. Gesner calls it Priapaeja of
the Garden, and Caesalpinus a kind of Tornabona. The Neotericks call it smaller
Tobacco like Henbane; and at Lions the lesser Tobacco. The Germans name it
Wundbilsam, gelb Wundtkraut. Lobelius calls it a doubtful kind of yellow
Henbane, with leaves of Nightshade. But I with the most learned Herbalist
Dalechampius, do not think this herb can be referred to Henbane, for their
faculties are quite contrary, for the seed of this tastes sharp; as also the
leaves, if you chew them they are a long time of a hot taste in your mouth, and
it cannot be extinguished, but in long time; and this is a great argument of
heat. Wherefore the famous Donanaeus did not well to call it Henbane of Peru,
nor any of the rest, for it cannot be referred to any kind of it, for the
leaves are notably acrimonious, which argues a hot and no cold temperament,
like to Henbane. Noble Clusius calls this the fourth kind of Tobacco.

The Temperament.
What concerns the faculties of the Male Tobacco (for in this Discourse I
chiefly treat of that) there is great dissension amongst learned men. Monardes
holds it to be hot and dry in the second degree, and moderate in the rest; and
Dalechampius holds the same. Caesalpinus faith, it is hot in the first, and dry
in the third degree. Edward Done an English Writer, holds it to be hot and dry
almost in the third degree. Others deny it to be hot, but say it is extreme
cold, because the smoke troubles the mind, and brings a man almost into an
Extasis; and therefore they refer it to some kind of Henbane, as I gave
notice of before. Bauhinus he says as much, moved thereto by its stupefying
quality, and likeness of the form that it has with Henbane. Mercatus says,
it is extreme hot. Iacobus Gohorius dares not give his opinion, but puts it off
to some other time. Lobelius thinks it is hot intensly in the second degree;
and he answers Dodonaeus, that it bites in taste, and is hot in the mouth; yet
Dodonaeus afterward changed his opinion. I with Renealmus say, that the green
leaves are hot and dry in the second degree (which temperament the Sun gives
to them, as it does to the root and stalk by its heat, and the Moon gives them
their color) but when they are dried, they are hot and dry in the end of the
third degree. Tobacco is acrimonious, and causes thirst, troubles the mind,
makes the head heavy, which could not be, unless some hot vapor flew up, and
filled the brain. They do but sport, that say it is cold, for it has all
symptoms of heat.

The Time.
IT is sowed in the Island Hispaniola, as also in other hot clymates about
Autumn, where almost all the year long it brings leaves, flowers and buds. It
will grow with us, if continual care be to help it. It is not sowed with us
before the warm Spring, that is, about the Ides or Nones of April, as the
weather is hot; for it is chill, and at the first fall of the leaf or cold
weather it fades, wherefore it must be well fenced from cold. Noble Clusius
thinks it should be sowed in August or September, because the small seed lies
very long under ground before it spring forth, and being sowed in March, or in
the Spring, in August it will bring flowers, and now and then seed. But we find
by experience, that the seed of Tobacco sowed in April, in our Country,
springs forth more happily and sooner, and the stalks are more fruitful and
longer, and the leaves are far greater and fatt^^, than when the seed is
sowed in September. The Plant is gathered, when the Sun is in the 18, 19. and
20. degree of Leo. Being once planted, when the seed comes to be ripe, it will
sow it self plentifully of its own accord in many Gardens and Fields, whether
it is carried by force of winds. It is sowed in the increase of the Moon, and
cut when the Moon decreaseth. The seed is dedicated to Aquarius and Mars, being
very hot, which quality it has from Mars. In Winter it can hardly be kept but
in pots or wooden chests, or little baskets made with osiers, and that in
Panteries, and places under ground, or hot houses, or stowes, and so it may be
preserved without hurt for three or four years. Caesalpinus would also have the
stalks planted, yet Basilius Beflerus Eistettensis says, he tried that in his
Garden, but it proved in vain.

The Place.
IT loves a fat and pleasant soil, the Bed to be plain, smooth, black, well
dressed; it loves not sandy nor clay ground, nor does it delight in gravel;
wherefore it is no small charge, if every other year it be dunged with Ox
dung; some fifth ashes very fine and mingle them, but that comes forth very
slowly, and makes it long before it come to perfection. It wonderfully desires
water, and therefore it must be watered, especially in such days as are very
fair when there falls no rain.

Let the Lands upon which you sow it be long, and about three foot broad, that
by the furrows between he may pass on both sides, that must pull or cut off the
superfluous leaves, (for otherwise these will suck to themselves the force and
nutriment of the greater leaves) dig the earth with your finger, or a little
stick, and make a hole in it, and put into it ten or twelve grains, and put a
piece of Ox dung both at the botom and top of them. Do not put fewer seeds
into one hole, for they are so small, that they would be choked and lost. It
hates cold exceedingly (as I told you;) and therefore you must raise a wall
with clay or stone upon the North side of it, that it may lie open to the S^uth
Sun, that so in Winter it may receive some warmth, for then it must be ^enced
and covered with mats and straw.

The Preparation of the Leaves.
IT may at first be sowed in an open field, and when it is grown forth to the
height of the leaves or tender branches of Col^worts, it may be transplanted,
and be set apart in the f^resaid long bed^, three foot broad, and they must be
planted in that order, that every plant may stand three or four foot off from
another, least when the plants grow big, the greater leaves should touch and
hurt one the other, and this would prove to be very great damage. B^t when they
are grown so great that the flowers begin to peep forth, presently before the
flowers open themselves, you shall cut away all the young shoots and tops, with
all the small twigs on the sides, and the lesser leaves that use to grow
between the rest. For Tobacco must not bring flowers or seeds, if you intend to
preserve the force of it entire. Moreover at the lower end of the stalk of it
there are commonly two leaves found (the Spaniards call them Bascher^s) which
take away the pleasant taste of Tobacco, if they be mingled with the others.
You shall therefore be sure to cut off these with the rest that are
superfluous, and do not use them in any use with the rest (for they taste ill,
and do not smell well) and leave but ten or twelve great leaves upon the stalk
commonly, when the foresaid smalleaves with the shoots on the top, and the two
lowest, and such as are to be rejected, are cut off But have an esp^cial care
that the Tobacco you desire to sell into these Germane Countries, England, or
France, you suffer it not to run to flower, for all the forces of it will be
lost when it flowers.

Moreover you shall mingle and bruise together the foresaid smaller leaves cut
off with the small sprouts and buds of the flowers, (utterly rejecting those
two greater leaves at the bottom called Boscheros, as being good for nothing,
and unprofitable) and having pressed forth the juice, you shall boil it in the
best sweet strong Spanish Malago wine (others add to it Dants Ale, and you
shall skim it well, and when it is well purified, you shall put in good store
of salt, that the juice may be as salt as Sea water, then cast in a good
quantity of Anni-seed, and Ginger beaten into very small powder, and let it
boil one hour longer, then let it stand, that the dregs may settle to the
bottom, and pour off all that is clear.

You must keep this juice thus boiled (the Spanis^ call it Caldo) in a vessel
close stopped, that the forces may be kept within, until such time as the
greater leaves, which you lef^ upon the stalk (for in these resides all the
strength of the plant) are grown full ripe, which when they are come to, you
shall presently cut them off next to the stalk; and you shall se^ the foresaid
juice or Caldo upon the fire, and boil it almost (yet it must not boil, for
should it boil, the strength of it would fly away to nothing) and you must dip
all the said leaves in that juice severally. But if it be too troublesome to
dip all the leaves in one by one, you must spread a woollen cloth on the ground
upon a floor, or in a barn, or place where the wind has no power, though it be
in the open air; and upon this y on shall lay a row of leaves, as close as to
touch one the other, and upon this rank of leaves you shall lay another rank of
leaves in the same order, yet not wet in the foresaid juice; and taking into
your hands a great watering vessel, which you must dip into the said juice or
Caldo, you shall water by sprinkling all the foresaid leaves, and those being
watered, you shall lay upon them a third and fourth rank, and so forward a
fifth rank, and upon that a sixth of new leaves, sprinkling all the rows with
the foresaid Ewer, or with a brush, still observing the same order, until such
time as the leaves thus disposed in order, rise to be a foot and half high.
Then you must cover the leaves, yet hot with the liquor, newly sprinkled upon
them, with other woollen clothes, that all the rows of the leaves may hold
their former ^eat and lie to ferment. But if that heat or fermentation cannot
be procured by those woollen clothes covering the leaves, you may lay Horse
dung upon those clothes, to raise the heat, to cherish the leaves, and make
them stand in a constant fermentation. But that they may not grow over hot, you
must often look upon the leaves, until they change color And if by the heat
they begin to look any whit red, and to appear so (which may be seen, if the
leaves be held against the light) it is time to uncover the leaves, and to take
the coverings away; for being too much heated, they would grow black, which is
a sign of burning, and of corruption, and there must be principal care taken
that that befall not, for this is the chiefest thing to be ob^erved.

Tobacco being thus warmed and fermented, the foresaid leaves must be hanged up
with small packthreds, thrusting the needle through the greater nerve of the
leaves, that is on the backside, and so they must be hanged up in a windy
place, but not very high, where the Sun shines; for by the Suns heat all
their forces would vanish. When the wind has dried them enough, they must be
bound in bundles, binding them with cords as hard as you can, so that each
bundle must be as great about in the circumference of it, as a great Spanish
Daller; but above all, take care that they be most closely bound together. The
leaves of Tobacco thus prepared, must be diligently and closely packed in
vessels, thrusting them in as much as you can. And by this preparing and
preserving of Tobacco, it will have excellent force and virtue.

Note (in Spanish or Malago wine) This way of preparation is of later time, and
invented by the Spaniards for the use of themselves and strangers. For it is
probable that the Indians, that are the Inhabitants (until such time as wine
was brought unto them from other parts beyond the Seas) used wine of Dates, or
of Coccos, or some other liquour, (not to say piss, which is reported of them
to their disgrace) to prepare this juice or Caldo: also the use of Aniseeds is
from the Spaniard.

To stand constantly to ferment) we say Broyen, This signifies a moderate heat,
next to strong heat, yet ^ot come so far as to burn, but only to foster and
ferment. Such a heat Depilatories bring to the parts, and Birds to their eggs,
when they sit to hatch their young. The Egyptians produce such a heat in their
Ovens, when they by Art hatch abundance of Hen Eggs, as Bellonius observes.

Some despise the use of T^bacco that grows with us, yet Experience teaches us
that our green Leaves will cure Wounds, Ulcers, and other Diseases, sooner and
more certainly, than the dried Leaves brought from the Indies; It is cr^dible
that those dried Leaves coming so far, have lost great part of their strength
oft-times. Others there are that maintain that our Tobacco Leaves dried and
prepared after the Indian manner, are more effectual here, than the Indian
Tobbacco, because that our Leaves be they what they will, agree better with our
temper, and we can have the choice of the fresh Leaves better than of those
that are brought to us from other parts, whereof the greatest part is to be
suspected, as being most frequently Sophisticated, (Agrippa lib. de Vaintate
Scient. c. 84) says, Adulterated, or such as are to be rejected, or are
Suffocated in the Ship in the Passage, or Sobbed in the water, or corrupted,
with age, or not gathered in fit time and place, whereby there may be danger.
The same Author says well, it is folly to fetch out of India what we have
plenty at home, not being contented with our own Land or Sea, prefering Foreign
Commodities before those of our own Country, things costly before those that
are cheap, and things hard to come by, before such as are easy, desiring to
fetch them from the Worlds end, etc. At this day in Zeland there is a Merchant
that sows yearly about five Acres of ground with Tobacco Seed with great
cost, and the Plants that grow he dresseth after the Indian manner, he dries
and prepares the Leaves as the Indians do, and he sels them ^very where, which
hitherto has brought him ^^ small profit. And now almost ten years, the use of
this Tobacco has so prevailed here, that men do not much care for Virginy
Tobacco, or what comes from other Countries.

The Virtues:
Tobacco, an Antidote to poison.
THe Spaniards have learned that Tobacco is an enemy to the most deadly Poison
that the Cannibals were wont to dip their Arrows and Darts in. It happened that
some Cannibals Sailed in their boats to St John's Port, to shoot all the Indians
and Spaniards they could find and kill them with their Arrows, when they were
Arrived they wounded some Indians and Spaniards, and some they killed. These
wanting Sublimate (which they were wont to strew upon their Wounds in such
Cases) they were taught by an Indian to annoint their Wounds with the juice of
Tobacco pressed forth, and to lay a bruised Lease upon them: The pains
presently ceased, and all those Symptoms which use to attend such Wounds, the
Poison was quickly conquered, and the Wounds were cured.

It chiefly opposes Hellebore; Against Helebore.
the King of Spain would needs try this, and commanded a Huntsman to wound a
Dog in the throat, to strew Hellebore into it, and after that to put in plenty
of the juice of Tobacco, and lay on the bruised Leaves; this was done
presently, and the experiment was made, the Wound being bound up, in a very
short time the Dog was recovered, which made them all to wonder at it.

A History.
I shall here add what Aedigius Everhardus, reports concerning his Panacaea; It
fell out that at Antwerp one gave a Gentle Woman's Cat that was somewhat fierce
Poison to drink; The Cat run madding up and down, trying but in vain to vomit
up the Venom. The Gentle Woman thought of a way how to wrap up a Leaf to
Tobacco bruised in butter, and to thrust that down the Cats throat, this was
done, and the Cat soon cast up the Poison and escaped.

It stays hunger and thirst.
It is worth observing what the most Learned Monardes Writes, that the Indians
do stop hunger and thirst by the use of Tobacco in this fashion. They burn some
shells of shell Fish of the Rivers, and then break them like Lime, they take as
much Tobacco Leaves as of this Lime, and they chew them until they come into
one Lump, and of this they make Trochesks greater than Peace, and they dry them
in the shade, and keep them for their use, when they journey in desert places
where they cannot easily come by Meat or drink, they put one of these Pellets
betwixt their lips and lower teeth, and they suck it, and they swallow down the
moisture that comes from it instead of meat and drink, when that is spent they
take another. This way they will live without Meat or Drink for three or four
days, and be never weary or lose any strength; for by continual chewing of
these Pellets they draw Flegmatique Humors from their Brains, which their
stomach digests into nutriment for want of better food. See Strabo lib. 15. and
Cael. Rhodigin. li^. 24. c. 21.
Pliny, l. 7. c. 2. Reports that at the furthest part of the Indies Eastward,
toward the Fountain of Ganges, there are men called Astomi, that want mouths,
and live only by the Air, and sweet smells they draw in by their Nostrils; they
have neither Meat nor Drink, but they live only by the sweet and fragrant sents
of Roots, Flowers, and wild Apples: which could not be unless they were truly
nourished: for life and nourishment are almost all one. Johannes Alexandrinus
opening that place of Hippocrates sexto Epidemiorum, says, Laert. 1.9 de vit
and morib. Philos.
that Democritus the Abderite a Philosopher (when the Feasts of Ceres was nigh,
being requ^sted that he would not pollute his house) lived only with the
vapor and sent of Honey for four days. This is the opinion of some men, from
whom he relates it, but others say it was done by the smell of new bread hot
from the Oven, Oribasius, 1. Aphor. Com. 12. mentions the same thing, saying,
The Philosopher relates that one Man lived forty days by the sent of Honey.
But h^re is a most notable mistake to put 40 for 4. Valleriol. lib. 2. l^cor.
commuu. Cae^ius l. 24. cap. 21.
but by the figures it might be quickly overslipt. Also we read in the Book
that has that Title, who ever was the Author, that Aristotle lived for
sometime only by the smell of an Apple. Some there are that dip hot bread in
good Wine and apply it to the Nostrils of sick people; and if we apply it
likewise to the Temples and sides, it will very much restore strength. Ferror
l.9. Meth.
Also Conciliator Aponensis reports that he used to restore his life, when he
was dying, with Safron and Cas^oreum bruised and mingled together with Wine,
and that he gave that composition to old people, and it did them as much good
by smelling to it, as by drinking it. But these are no wonders, for as by Meat
and Drink, whatsoever of the solid substance is wasted, is repaired again, so
by Air and smoke is regained what is spent of aeriall, and moist substance. If
therefore Air and smoke only, (which is nothing else than a thin substance
and aeriall quality) do nourish, (as Galen teaches elegantly, l. 1. de
Sanitat. tuend. c. 2.) much more will an Odoriferous quality perform this,
Whether the smoke of Tobacco can nourish.
when it is mixed with a quality that is friendly to nature. Also Mathi^lus
after Theophrastus reports that the Scythians will be content with Licoris only
for ten or twenty days, and desire no other Meat or drink.

Object. 1. Truly for the Negative part very ma^y Arguments may be brought, as
that of Aristotle, 2. de Anima, c. 3. Where he says, that touching is the
sense of Nutriment, as if he had said, that al^ment, as it is t^sted, is the
Object of touching, for tasting is a kind of touching, wherefore smoke being
not to be touched cannot nourish.

Object. 2. Again, Nothing can give nourishment to a body, unless it first
concocted in the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen ( as Galen says, 1. de temper. c.
1.)

Object 3. The same is the matter of Nutrition and Generation of the same,
(Galen 1. de sem c. 16.) wherefore Man being not Born of Smoke, cannot be fed
by smoke. Many more Arguments may be urged.

Answ. We answer that smoke may be understood two ways. First, Formally, and
then it is an insensible quality different from the first qualities, yet
resulting from the actions of them. Secondly, Materially, that is for the
substance it is inherent in, and that is Tobacco here. Now this is hot and dry,
to be considered of for its heat and thin substance: I say then that an
Aromaticall sweet smell does refresh the forces, and strengthens the brain,
heart and stomach, for it is a most welcome quality to these parts, and
therefore it preserves their temperament and substance; and the vital and
animal sprits are renewed and made most fit for natures operations, by a smoke
joined with a sweet sent, and sucked in with that Aromaticall Vapor.

Apposition and Fasting together, Another question.
must go before Nutrition, and this fume seems to be to thin and simpler than
that we can imagine it can glue and fasten any where: Arg. 1.
therefore it cannot be said to be the matter of nourishment.

Secondly, Water cannot nourish de usu part. and 3. acut. Com. 17.) Therefore
smoke that is more thin and unmixed cannot nourish, and Galen says 10 Me^h
2.9. That the Liver receives no profit by the Air that is drawn in, and of
things we Eat and Drink, the Liver has less profit than the stomach; yet it
receives some benefit as it is manifest; Confirmation.
and that reason is confirmed by Galen's Doctrine, 3. de usu. part. c. 1. and
often elsewhere, when he faith, That the common, and greatest, and first way of
nourishment is by the Mouth, and from thence the food is carried to the
Stomach, as to the common Storehouse for all the parts, and set in the middle
of the living Creature, where being once concocted it penetrateth to the liver
to be turned into Blood, whereby all the parts are fed; but this smoke is not
sucked in by the liver to be concocted into Blood theref^re it cannot nourish.

For the other side.
But Hippocrates may be produced for the other part, lib. de Aliment, where he
says, that an Aerie smoke drawn in by the throat may nourish, his Words are,
The beginning of nourishment are, the Air, Nostrils, Mouth, Throat, Lungs, and
Breathing, etc.

Not (...)
To un^y this knot, observe, first, That a man being in continual motion, and
consisting of a double matter, namely Earthy, and Watery, which forms the solid
and fleshy parts, and of an Aerie and fiery, which forms the Spirits, another
principle of life; Hence it is that he wants a double matter to repair the
decayed and dissipated substance of them both; Namely, Meat and Drink to
restore Earthy and Watery part consumed, but Fire and Water to make up the
spiritual part, as Galen does plainly teach, 1. de s^nit, c. 2.

The second Note is, That though Hippocrates does say, ( lib. de Aliment, now
cited) That the Spirits are no^rished, yet they are not truly nourished, since
they are not the true and living parts of the body, nor have they any natural
faculty to nourish them, whereby they may change Aeriall matter like
themselves, into their own substance, but they are perpetually bred fresh, by
the most powerful force of the heart and strong heat, tempering the thin
vapors of blood with the Air that is drawn to it. But Hippocrates says they
are fed, because the life is perceived to be very much recreated and refreshed,
when the proper instrument is refreshed, and again, when the Spir^ts are
decayed, the life deprived of its proper instrument decaies also. Wherefore the
Spirit is bred, not of its own faculty, but from that which is inserted into
all the principal parts; and they are bred the same way almost as the Chylus
is made in the stomach, and blood in the Liver; yet not so as if the Spirits as
well as they, were the matter of nutriment, for they are so thin and subtle,
that they can stick and join to no part.

Answer.
These things being first laid down it will be easy to answer the contrary
Arguments.





I answer to the Confirmation, Answer to the Confirmation.
That it is true that Meats and Drinks can indeed be converted into
nourishment, no where but in the stomach and liver, but I deny that the Air
wants those Transmutations. But to return whence I digressed;

Thomas Hariot in his description of Virginy, The esteem of Tobacco amongst the
Barba^i^^^.
reports that Tobacco is so much esteemed amongst the barbarous people, that
they are persuaded (...) gods take delight (...) also, wherefore they kindle
sacred fires, and instead of Sacrafice they cast this in in powder, and when
they sail, they will cast the powder of it into the Air, and Water. They
observe the same custom) says the same Author) making strange mimicall apish
gestures (sometimes stamping the earth with their feet, sometimes leaping,
sometimes rejoicing, clapping their hands, and lifting them up on high,
sometimes looking toward Heaven, and speaking incongruous words) if at any
time they escape any great danger.

I cannot let that pass, that you shall hardly meet any one of these Barbarians
who has not hanging about his neck a small bundle of Tobacco, with pipes made
of Palm tree Leaves, and who also taking with his companions, does not draw
the smoke of it as through a tunnel, by his mouth and Nostrils, until he be
almost in an exstasie.

There are some of them who to take away weariness, It takes away weariness.
and to be refreshed in their labors, make use of this smoke, and we found
says Monardes, that by their example, our servants and the Moors that came
into the West Indies from other parts, would do the same, for being weary by
much le^ping and dancing, they draw it in by their Mouth and Nostrils. And the
same thing be^als them as does the Indians, for they lie as if they were dead
for three or four hours; after this they are lusty and are better able to
endure labor than they were before. And they take such delight in it, that
they will now and than go out of men's sight to take it in pleasure, though they
be not tired. Sometimes they grow so mad by it, that they will kill their
Masters, who are careful to burn their Tobacco, that they may take from them
the occasion of this idle pleasure. What need more words, I saw says Monardes,
our servants and the Moors, who were not suffered to be drunk with Wine, to
make themselves drunk with this smoke, wherein they take no small delight, and
they boast that it takes all weariness from them, and that they suffer no hurt
nor damage by taking of it.

Refer to this what Alexander ab Alexandr^, The Scythians will be strangly
drunk with smoke. Max. T^riSerm. 11. ^lso the Thracians, See Pon^ponius, Mela
l. 2. Solinus* c. 5. The Babilonians, Herodotus l. 1. near the end. The Indian
Priests.
l. 3. c. 11. has left to Posterity, that the Scythians when they desire to be
drunk, and abstain from Wine, that they may not break the custom, they cast
bundles of Herbs into the fire, and suck in the smoke, and so become as drunk
as if they had drank Wine. So it is a tradition concerning the Thracians that
at their banquets they go about their fires, casting the seeds of Herbs into
the fire, and the fume of that will make them like those that are drunk, and
they besotted as if they drank Wine, even like those that tasted the juice of
Nepenthes, who supposed sorrow to be removed by it. Also the Babilonians would
make themselves so drunk by burning fruits of Trees, and drinking in the smoke,
that they would sing and dance.

After the same example the Indian Priests which they call Bulgiti, being in
consultation concerning the event of any business, were wont to drink the smoke
of Tobacco, to make themselves mad, and to enquire of the Devil concerning any
business; For the Indians were not accustomed to make war, or to undertake
any business of consequence, but they would first enquire of the Devil what
should be the success of it, who answered them by the Mouths of those lying
Prophets made drunk with the smoke of Tobacco: The Priest being consulted with,
did burn the dry Leaves of Tobacco, and he drew the smoke into his mouth by a
cane or tunnel, as now a days our Country Men do too much (the more the pity)
being made so drunk with the smoke, until he fell fast asleep, being deprived
of all his Senses, and being rapt into a certain ecstasy; he fell down upon the
ground, where he lay, most part of the day or night not able to move; The
wonderful craft of the devil amongst the Indians.
when his drunkenness was over, he told them, he had conferred with the Devil,
and as he thought, so he delivered his mind; Whether they should wage war, or
not, or undertake a journey, and so he gave answers for all things they asked
him of; yet so doubtful, that let the event be what it would, he could easily
persuade the ignorant multitude, that he foretold it; and thus he miserably
deluded these barbarous people.

Also the Indian Physicians made drunk with this smoke, The custom of the
Indian Physicians
and having lost their senses, would relate a thousand things concerning the
counsel of the gods, and then they three or four times rubbed the sick Patients
body with their hands. In the mean time they held a bone in their mouth, which
the simple women afterward kept as a relic. Being demanded concerning a
disease, they answered all things to be well; if it fell out otherwise, they
had their excuse ready, the disease was mortal: and it was a capital crime for
them to neglect their ordinary customs. Thus the enemy of mankind was wont to
deceive the Gentiles.

Johannes Metellus. It prepares a Ca^a^re in a cold matter.
In some places the same men were both their Physicians, and their Priests.

But since the Effects of Tobacco are found to be so excellent, I shall
discourse of them more particularly.

In Distillations, where a cold matter is the cause, make a Fumigation of the
dry leaves of Tobacco. The Syrup of it is excellent, for this will wonderfully
stay Defluxions of Rheum. The leaves chewed or bruised in the palate, do the
same. These melt the phlegm that is in the head, and dry up the cells where the
Rheum lies, by drawing forth the moisture from the foremost ventricles of the
brain, by that part which is commonly called the Tunnel. I know not whether
there can be a more happy or more certain Remedy found out for this purpose.

Also to strengthen the memory the smoke is excellent taken by the Nostrils,
For the memory.
for it is properly belonging to the brain, and it is easily conveyed into the
cells of it, and it cleanses that from all filth (for the brain is the
Metropolis of phlegm, as Hippocrates teaches us in his book concerning the
Kernels) it must be taken three hours before meat, for so it does more
conveniently discuss and cleanse the peccant humors. I do not write this for
their sake, Note.
who by their daily miscarriage abuse themselves, and spend good time in
Tobacco-shops, and make of their brain (which is the most noble seat of the
mind, and the storehouse of all knowledge and learning) a chimney, and a
common shore, and disgrace a Medicament that is otherwise very good, and make
themselves nothing but blowers of coals and ashes. A famous Practitioner at
Leyden D. History 1.
Henricus Flor^ntius, sometimes related unto me, that Dr. Pauvius, a most
experienced and excellent Anatomist of his time, had once a subject for his
Anatomical practice, whose smelling was quite lost, and there was not any thing
left to be seen of the Processus Mammillares: And this he conjectured, by good
Arguments, to have happened by reason of the parties immoderate drinking of
Tobacco. About thirty years since (or before) that smoking Tobacco through the
nose has been suspected and spoken against, as if the continual and over-using
of it did fill the brain with all vapors, and last of all did corrupt it. Let
us hear what the most learned Dr. Iustus Rapheiengius, who deserved exceeding
much amongst Scholars, writ sometimes unto me. His I remember (says he) that
Dr. Pauvi^s, in his first Anatomical practices, dissected a strong young man,
and otherwise very sound, whose brain was totally filled with black vapors
like to soot. D. Pauvius inquiring into the cause of that accident, and
referring it to Mania, or some other disease of the head; they answered that
were acquainted with that young man, that the man was never sick, nor had he
the falling sickness, but was so given to drink Tobacco continually, that the
pipe was seldom out of his mouth, and he was always drawing in that fuliginous
vapor; whereupon D. Pauvius did co^jecture upon good grounds, that heap of
soot and smoke was contracted in the cavities of his brain by that means.

I could allege many more examples of this kind, but for brevity sake I pass
them over. Let these and the like dangerous effects teach thee, that love
this smoke to avoid them, if thou love the truth, and take heed least that
sweet Memory, which is the ^other of the Muses, and Gods delight, do turn her
eyes from thee, and thou be deprived of that divine closet and lights, which
are an incomparable treasure, as being unworthy to possess them.

But young men especially must take great care how they suck in this smoke, The
smoke of Tobacco is very hurtful for young men's bodies.
for the custom and too much use of it, brings their brains out of order, and
makes them to be over-hot, so that they lose their good temper, and are beyond
the bounds of their health, and that sacred anchor is loft irrecoverably. For
the nourishment of young men requires a gentle moisture, to strengthen them,
and to make their bodies grow to their just perfection. Especially for the
Choleric
Especially for those that are choleric, whose brains cannot endure excess of
heat, for the native heat would be oppressed by the accidental heat. See Galen
his Comment, in lib. de vict. salub.

Also this smoke does vehemently move the stomach to nauseat, It will cause
vomit.
and to vomit, (as daily experience teaches u^) namely by cleaving to the
inward parts, and so offending the pec^liar juices contained in the stomach,
and the Mesentary, it destroys their ordinary operations. For in thrusting
forth the matter from the stomach it cannot be, but also something must be cast
out, wherein the force of nature resides; and also, because when nature is
doing her office, she sends the nourishment into the habit of the body, as to
the circumference, but all disturbing and purgative things draw the juyces and
spirits to the center. Wherefore nature is wonderfully tired with these
contrary motions, for she can endure nothing less than two contrary motions at
the same time. Wherefore it is a most bitter enemy to the stomachs of very many
men, Therefore it is an enemy to the stomach.
especially if they use to take it presently after Supper or Dinner. And in
this respect it is mischievous to the bodies of all sound men, according to
Hippocrates his Rule. 2. Aphoris. 37. It is troublesome to purge those that are
in good health. For frequent use of purging Medicaments will soon make a man
old; for the forces are broken by the resolving of the solid parts, by an
Hypercatharsis of all nutrimental juice. Also Cels^^ in the beginning of his
Book affirms, That Aliments only are fit for sound bodies, and Physic for
those that are sick* But grant, It alters the body.
that it purge not (which yet is most certain, as I shall show elsewhere) yet it
alters the body, which can never be done in young and strong bodies without
great hurt. Moreover it drinks up the moisture, and augments the heat of a
perfect constitution, as the fire and Sun do sensibly heat such things as are
exposed to them.

Let us hearken to the e^ample of Plato, 2. de legibus, In the beginning (says
he) I confirm it by a Law, that children until they come to be eighteen year
old, shall be wholly ignorant of the use of wine, and we must admonish them,
that we ought not to add fire to fire, into the body and the soul, until they
become men, and begin to undergo labor; for we must take heed that young men
be not furious in their habit of body, then let them learn to be moderate in
drinking wine, until they come to be thirty years old.

If then Plato forbad young men to drink wine, because by its heat it fills
their brains with vapors, and with many hot fumes, and over-heats their
bodies, and not only hurts the body, but does exceedingly hurt the soul by the
use of it, as Galen says, 1. Sanitat.tuend. Wine must not be given to young
men, because it makes them prone to anger and to lust, and makes the rational
part of the soul dull and out of temper; and does not the smoke of Tobacco do
this far more? Wine is hot and moist, Tobacco is hotter than wine, and that
excess is the cause of its strong smell, and corroding taste: moreover in place
of moisture of the Wine, the heat of it is joined with dryness. He that has
only tasted of natural Philosophy, may easily perceive from hence, that it is a
thing full of danger for Colerick Constitutions, and disposes them to burning
Fevers, Hecticks, and Frensies, and brings them into unseasonable Melancholy:
For the unnatural heat, conquering the natural heat of the body, destroys and
wastes that, as I said, and by the same means ingenders a Melancholy distemper,
by the continual use of it. Hence it is, that the dry and hot choler is
afterward inflamed; but this is done by degrees, and insensibly in the younger
age and also by reason of the frequent drinking in of Beer, (for our
Tobacconists use to do so) and this hinders that the alteration cannot be so
suddenly made. Galen de sanitat^tuend. says, That the best manners, proceed
from the best temperament. And he writ a whole Book for that end, that he might
prove the affections of the mind, to follow the temperament of the body. Which
thing, though it be principally to be understood of that Original temperament
which we received from our Parents: Yet as that is changed either naturally by
age, or accidentally by sucking to much smoke of Tobacco, or some other
external means, so a great change of the affections and inclinations of the
mind uses to go along with it; and as heat and acrimony grow and dwell in the
blood, so rashness and fury do in the soul.

The Blood being now made thick and congealed, the mind grows stupid and sad;
and in some men this is too apparent, though others do prudently dissemble and
cover it. Wherefore I cannot see how that overmuch drawing of smoke of Tobaceo
to the brain and nostrils can be done, but it must overthrow the perfect state
of men's bodies and minds, the proportions of the cold elements being subdued,
and promoted unto heat; being spoile^d of their former condition, and that not
only in these smoaky Companions, but in their Posterity also; since the nature
and constitutions of the Parents are naturally passed over unto the Children:
and withal, the affections of the mind that depend upon them. For says the
learned Fernelius, L. 2. de siguis.
With what Disease soever the Father is troubled when he begets the Child, the
same Disease passes to the Child. And Galen writes thus: Lib de cau. sis
Morbor.
The Father gives the form, nature and essence to the Ghild. When therefore the
Humors of the body have contracted this sharp heat and dryness, by the too
much smoking of Tobacco, the Father gets a Son like himself; but such an one
as wants natural moisture, which should prolong his life, and should dispose
him to ingenuous, pleasant and sociable manners. Let Avicenna speak, Fen. 1.
p.c. It is in the power of Art to hinder that corruption shall not breed in us,
and that natural moisture shall continue longer, that it be ^ot soon dissolved
by drying and burning causes, and that every body may be made to hold out so
long as it possibly may do by its natural temperament. And he shows afterward
in few words, by what helps Art can perform this; namely, by a three fold
Caution laid down by Art. One in a due Administration of Meats and Drinks, in
the quantity, quality, substance; manner, order, and measure and time of them:
Not neglecting in the mean while, the occasion of the place, which is another
Caution to take heed of Corruption. The third is in forbidding and forbearing
those things, which since they can naturally hurt life, they do in a short time
dissolve the radical moisture, and so they cut off life in a moment. Such are
watchings, cares, griefs; also the use of things that vehemently heat and dry,
whence of necessity at length (for want of convenient food) the natural heat is
extinguished, and the native moisture: And so we die by wasting and consuming
away. Galen de Tabe, says, What is Tabes.
that Tabes is a Consumption of a living body, by reason of dryness.

By these things mentioned, it is easy to collect, that the smoke of Tobacco
shortneth men's days. For being that our native heat is like to a flame, which
continually feeds upon natural moisture, as a Lamp lighted, drinks up the Oil
by its heat; it follows necessarily, that for want of food, life must needs fly
away quickly, when the proper subject of life is dissipated and consumed: for
with that moisture, the imbred heat fails also, and death succeeds.

You understand therefore (that are Tobacconists) that the sooty fumes of
Tobacco, wherein you are wallowing (as it were) in the deepest mire, are of
great force to shorten your days. Galen speaking of opeing Medicaments,
asserts, that by the frequent use of them, the solid parts of the body are
dried, 1. de Medic fimp. facul.
and that the blood grows gross and clotted, which being burned in the Reins,
breed the stone. The same thing may be truly maintained concerning Tobacco,
which many use too frequently, and more then any do use those kind of opening
Medicaments; for this is more hot and dry then they are, and therefore is more
forcible to hurt sound and well tempered bodies. Take warning therefore you
that love Tobacco, that you do not exceed in using too much of it, and enslave
your selves to this fuliginous smoke, by hunting after it, and making a god of
it. The goods of the body, Forgetting God for smoke.
are beauty, strength, and sound health. The most grave Author Plutarch,
commending the last as the best of all, affirmed most gravely and learnedly,
Commendation of health.
That health is the most divine, and the most excellent property of the body,
and a most precious thing. There is nothing in this world better; nothhing more
to be desired, and nothing can be found to be more pleasant. Without thi^ (as
Hippocrates says) there is no pleasure or fruit of any other things. This is
it, which in this life fills all perfection: Without this no man could ever be
said to be happy: This far exceeds the greatest Honors, Treasures, and
Riches. lib. 1* ep. 2.
Whence that of Horace is a Sentence ^emarkable.

Not House nor Land, nor heaps of Gold or Brass,
Can force the sick Lords Ague to overpass:
Nor move cares from his mind; he must have health,
Who thinks to use well what he gets in wealth.
Cicero, who was both the Father and Prince of the Latin Tongue, The way to
preserve health.
seems to me, in L. 2. officiorum, to set down before all others most
excellently, the general reason of preserving health. Health (says he) is
preserved by knowing a man's own body, and observing those things that do a man
good or harm; and by moderate diet of all sorts; and in clothing to defend the
body; and in refrain^ng pleasures, etc. What could be said more divinely, or
more fully, or more eloquently by any man, I cannot perceive; for the universal
method of maintaining health, is contained in it very elegantly. It is a most
worthy Sentence, and fit to be ingraved in the mind of those who are studious
of their health. Let us use such things whereby nature is helped and refreshed:
Let us beware of such things that we find do us hurt, and that by Natures
direction. Cic. lib 2. de Sense.
Which (as Cato said) is the most excellent Leader for our life, declaring by
many signs, what things she desires, what she abhorres: And to resist Nature,
is nothing else, then to do like the Giants, and to fight against God. This
continence should be observed in all our food, clothing, and abstaining from
pleasures. Continence makes the body cheerful, healthful, and firm: And
abstaining from pleasures does the same. For as Plato writes, Pleasure is the
bait of mischief. In Philoeb. de summ^ bon^.
Since then, they that fume Tobacco, take so much delight and pleasure in it
(if that can be called a pleasure) it is a wonder how much they rejoice, not
thinking in the mean time that Nature is debilitated, and they are unmindfull
of that Verse of Ovid.

Strange Poisons under Honeys sweetness lie. lib. 1. Elig.
Socrates was wont to persuade men to avoid those Meats and Drinks that would
allure men to an appetite, Pl^t lib. de ^uend. val.
beyond what would serve to quench their thirst, and stay their hunger; because
these things, by their delight, did more entangle us, and bring great mischiefs
upon us. For it is a true saying, -- Pleasure that is bought with pain, does us
no good. Horat. 1. ^p. 12.


And is it not a filthy thing, and utterly to be detested, that man who is a
most prudent creature, should be ensnared by the wanton enticements of this
smoke of Tobacco, so that neglecting the precepts of the Art of health coveting
this sordid fume, he should, wholly devote his health to it? To be deprived of
his stomach? To consume by wasting his radical moisture? To be tormented with
Fevers, and to be vexed with many other Infirmities? Are not these brave
rewards for taking his pleasure? I think with Galen, that it were better (if
any man have brains in his head) to die a thousand times, then to lead such a
life. And if it be so (as I profess it is so) to what end is it for a man to
devote himself to these damnable smoaks, and to force nature to destroy and
murder her self? Are these things the properties of men, are they not rather
of Beasts? Pliny writes the the truth: lib. 27. c. 3.
All creatures that live, know what is good for them, only man does not. And
Senec^ is in the right: This is one of ehe causes of our misfortunes, Epist. 39.
that we live by Examples, and are not guided by Reason, but follow Custom; and
if but few do a thing, we will not imitate them. When mamany begin to do a
thing (as if that were more honest) we willingly follow them, and the Error of
the multitude is held to be right by us. And elsewhere; They cannot abstain
from Pleasures, Ep. 32.
that are grown to be a Custom; and in this they are the more miserable, that
they proceed so far, as to make things superfluous to be necessary. Wherefore
they serve their pleasures, and do not enjoy them; and they love their
miseries, which is the greatest misery of all. Then is unhappiness come to the
height, when filthiness, not only delights, but pleas^th us; and there remains
no place for remedy, when vices are grown to be our manners. But all our
Admonitions are in vain.

This Plague infects, I^enal. Sat. 2.8.
and more thereto incline,
One measeld Hog, will taint an heard of Swine.
So that all die infected, thus we see,
One rotten Grape, lets not the next go free.
To draw to a Conclusion; I deny not, but that for cold and moist bodies where
the brain is large, and where the parts are feeble, by reason of ^oo much
moisture, and where there is abundance of fleg^ joined with it, or where that
juice offends the brain with a shaking cold: (The signs whereof are paleness,
and no veins to be seen; where the hair stands straight, firm, and are yellow;
where they cannot endure cold, and where the temper of the whole body is cold
and stiff; where drowsiness and sleepiness are, and the Mouth, Nostrils, and
Eyes, are full of moisture.) this fumigation may be good to empty that sink of
naughty and corrupt matter, and to shut it out. Yet I cannot think it safe at
all, to take this smoke even in this respect, but with Cautions and
Consideration; and the chief is, that it be taken for necessity, and not for
lust and intemperance: Let there be sparing and modertaion used. But first
purge the head with sneezing, with the powder of Tobacco (as I shall say in
another place.)

I think the most convenient way is, to make the Pipes you suck it through,
very long, such as the Indians use, whereby they draw the smoke from a great
distance: And I remember, that many were wont to use the like, for the smoke
will come cooler, and be taken with more pleasure; nor will it reek forth with
so foul and sharp fume. Also, since that the brain is enter-woven with very
narrow small Veins, it will not willingly entertain those gross vapors that
penetrate with difficulty, but only such that are thin and hot.

The Persians, and the Turks also, cut Lingum Aloes small, and mingle it with
Tobacco, for Diseases of the Head, and so through a long Pipe, made of Lattone
(which they put into cold water, that the smoke may come the cooler to the
brain) they draw forth the smoke. Some add some drops of Oil of Anniseed, I
have seen others mingle Cloves with it, and some again add other things that
evacuate the cold and moist humors of the Head and of the Breast.

What Instruments the barbarous people use, What Pipes the barbarous People use.
or rather Pipes or Trunks (whereof I shall set down diverse Figures at the end
of this Discourse concerning Tobacco) of which Monardus speaks Lib. 3. simpl.
Medic. And I cannot use any man's words better then his own, which the most
learned Clusius has interpreted to us, and by which the courteous Reader may
best understand it* There are brought (says he) from new Spain, some Trunks
made of the inward part of Canes or Reeds, and smeered with some kind of gum,
which I think is mingled with the juice of Tobacco, for it tries the head: If
I am not mistaken, they anoint the Cane with that; and as it is glutinous, it
sticks fast, and is of a black color. But when it grows hard, it will hold no
longer. The Trunk is lighted at that that end where it is smeered with the Gum,
or Pitch; and the other end is put into the mouth, and the smoke is received^
and this draws all phlegm and corrupt humors out of the Breast. This they are
wont to use when they are oppressed with short breath, and are ready to be
choked. Clusius adds to the same Chapter, That in the year 1585 Wing andecow
(which is now called Virginy) being discovered to the English (to their Captain
Richard Grenfield, and is a Province of the new world, and is thirty six
degrees from the Equator toward the North Pole) they found that the Inhabitans
did frequenly use some Pipes made of Clay, to draw forth the fume of Tobacco
leaves set on fire; which grew amongst them in great quantity, or rather to
drink it down, to preserve their health. The English returning from thence,
brought the like Pipes with them, to drink the smoke of Tobacco; and since that
time, the use of drinking Tobacco has so much prevailed all England over,
especially amongst the Courtiers, that they^ have caused many such like Pipes
to be made to drink Tobacco with. These are Clusius words concerning the
English. Let me add that great part of the Low Countries, Germany, France,
Italy, Turkey, Arabia, Persia, and many of the Inhabitants of the whole earth*
(if not the greatest part) are taken with the scent of this smoke, that they do
prefer this stinking and filthy smell, before the most pleasant perfumes that
are in the world. But chiefly this ^umigation is of great esteem with with us
in the Low Countries, and the Merchandise of Tobacco prepared, is not the least
among other Trafique, and the Merchants make a huge gain by it, if they have
but any good fortune. It is a very speedy way, and a vast profit to the
Merchants of Holland and Zealand, who bring Tobacco prepared and dried from the
Indies, and send it forth to other Countries, be they never so wide off from
them, for they gain by it extraordinarily. How many thousands of men may be
found in that most flourishing and mighty City for trafique Amsterdam (to say
nothing of Rotterdam, and other Cities in this Province) who at first being but
of a small means, for the most part, by selling Tobacco, have sustained
themselves in their poverty, and also abundantly provided for their Families
for food and raiment, and other necessaries, and have gained something more for
themselves; and there are some that have heaped up great wealth by it. Yet I do
not defend them, who under a specious and fair pretense to gain food and some
small matter, by keeping Tobacco shops, (as also others that keep Wine Taverns,
tap-houses and the like) do in the mean time increase their estates by keeping
Whores and Bawds which they live by. But that the Curious Reader may see how
mightily this Merchandise of Tobacco increases amongst the Dutch. I say
undoubtedly that this may be foreseen and foretold by it, and it must be
confessed, maugre all opposition, that the most illustrious and most mighty
States of Holland, by a small and very tolerable tribute to be paid, imposed by
them upon Tobocco, (which I understand was lately done by them) may collect
above thirty thousand franks yearly at their pleasure, by the only custom upon
Tobacco for the public treasure, from the Merchants that are careful to bring
it from the Indies unto us.

But to return again from whence we digressed. I said that this sum can draw
forth wat^y and cold humors from the head; yet Hippocrates his Doctrine seems
to be against this, An Objection.
5. Apharism. 28. Sweet Aromaticall smells will provoke the terms, and the same
would be often good for other matters, did they not cause the head to ache. The
negative part.
Where he teaches, Galen subscribing in his commentary, that the whole body
being duly sumed, will send forth by the Matrix in all cold and moist
dispositions, were it not that we are afraid of that heaviness of the head,
which proceeds from these fumes. Since then for a Flegmatique matter lying in
the head, those things are not requisite, which load and fill the head, but
rather those things that send ease and lighten it, fumigations that are made of
things, that fill the head, as Galen himself teaches, cannot be good to be
used in such a disposition of the brain, nor yet in any other.

The affirmative part.
But there are many most grave Authors for the other part, who exercise their
practice with great praise, and teach and highly commend fumigations in such,
or the like accidents, and to these men not only daily experience, but also
most strong reason subscribes. For to cut and consume a cold and moist humors
collected in the brain, Reason.
no fitter Remedies than those can be found, which have power to strengthen,
attenuate, and dry the brain, and it is certain that the sum of Tobacco has
such a faculty. For it heats, cuts, attenuates, opens and resolves: Therefore
this smoke drawn in by the Mouth and Nose to dry and heat the cold and moist
excrements of the brain, may be proper and useful.

To answer the former argument that is against it, Note.
observe that it is very necessary to consider, for the use of this remedy,
what the temper of the brain is as I said, and what the humor is that abounds
in it, for if it be hot it will be much filled and burdned with the smoke of
Tobacco, and the cause of this event lies in the heat of the part, (for heat
naturally attracts heat) and also in the largness of the passages of a hot
head, whereby it easily admits the Vapors that ascend: but if the brain be
over cold and moist, and then heap up such excrements, it will not be filled
with this fume, but will rather be refreshed and dried, unless perhaps by
reason of so great natural weakness, or weakness contracted by a disease, it
can admit no vapors without pain and heaviness.

Answer to the opposite argument.
These things premised, I answer to the contrary Argument, that Hippocrates in
the quoted Aphorism, must be understood concerning those, who have a brain that
is very hot and moist and weak withal, and that easily is offended with pain
and heaviness. For a cold and moist brain filled with cold and moist
Excrements, a hot and drying fume (such as is the smoke of Tobacco,) is most
convenient, especially drawn in by a Pipe the way I mentioned before. Yet I
think they ought to abstain from it, whose heads are not only weak, but are
also of a delicate nature, and are easily disturbep and pained not only with
fumes but with the most temperate smells.

Here follows another question, Another question whether the smoke if Tobacco
swallowed into the stomach can bring forth sufluous moisture of the Brain.

The affirmative part.


namely whether the fume of Tobacco swallowed into the Stomach (which custom I
find to be in continual use with many men, but chiefly amongst our Sea men)
can draw and purge superfluous humors out of the head and brain?

Reasons are very forcible for the affirmative part. The first is taken out of
the 7. Aphorism, 30. of Hippocrates who say thus; Whosoever they be that in a
diarrhaea void frothy excrements by stool, those excrements flow from the head,
and from thence it is inferred that humors may be drawn from the head to the
stomach by the faculties of purging medicaments, being derived by the tunnel.
The second is taken from Actuarius, M^sues, and other approved Authours^, who
commend Agarick to purge flegmatique humors contained in the head and the
breast, which they would never have done, if the head and breast could not be
vacuated by the belly.

The Argument for the Negative part is, For the negative part.
because according to Aristo 1. Sect. Probl. Quest. 42. When medicaments come
to the belly, and are resolved, they are presently carried to the Veins by the
same way that the meat is, and when they cannot be concocted, but remain
conquerours, they slip back again, and carry with them those things that stay
by them, How purging is made.
and that is called purging. And from the stomach to the brain or breast, there
are no passages found whereby a purging medicament can pass to allure the
humors to it: Therefore the humor that is contained in the brain or thorax,
cannot be drawn forth by the fume of Tobacco, as by a purgative medicament,
which opinion also of Aristotle the most Learned Fernelius, 3. Meth. c 7. seems
to defend.

Note therefore for the resolving of this difficulty, that the more corpulent
substance of this fume does not pass from the stomach to purge the brain, but
stays in it, or sticks in the Intestins, and from thence it draws forth those
humors that are agreeing to it, which may be proved body, and yet they cannot
proceed so far as to purge the humors. Secondly, Serapiows argument proves the
same, for says he, if a medicament should pass to a humor, that is far off
from it, it would join lovingly with it, and would never draw forth that it
delights in the society of; as the Loadstone joined to the Iron, does not draw
the iron to some other place, but detains and holds it there. Wherefore we must
confess that some thin fumie substance does rise from the stomach, by the
veins and other secret passages, not only to the brain, but also is diffused,
we cannot say how, to all parts of the body.

Hence it is clear, Aristotle's reason confu^ed.
that Aristotle said not right, that purgatives pass all the body over, and so
draw the peccant humor, as taken captive into the stomach.

The question decided.
Those things being thus observed we answer to the difficulty, that purgatives
do not pass through the body to attract humors that agree with them, but they
stay in the stomach, and by their force and Virtue they draw them unto them
from all parts of the body by ways, that though they are unknown to us, yet
they are not unknown to nature.

Another question whether the Brain can be dried, other parts of the body
remaining in medioerity. The negative part.
Here rises another question, Namely, whether to much Drinking of Tobacco in a
Pipe, can dry the brain, and yet leave the other parts of the body in a good
temper?

For the Negative part, the Argument is this; Because the great or small
quantity of the humor of the whole body, follows the temperament contracted
from the first generation. Since therefore the temperament belongs to the whole
living Creature, and not to one part alone, the humor cannot be dried up in
the brain nor in any other part of the body, but it must also be dried up in
the whole body.

Now that the temperament must be ascribed to the whole body, and not to one
part only, is proved from the 1. and 3. Books of Hippocrates Epidem. From the
grayness of the eyes, sharpness of the voice, and black hair, you may conclude
that the temperament of the whole body is either hot or cold; as if one part
could not be hot or cold, but the whole body must be so also.

But Galen is for the contrary part, The contrary part.
2. de temper. c. ult. where he proves by many arguments, that it is not
necessary tha^ all the parts of the body should follow the temper of the whole.
For though in a temperate body and very well constituted an equal temper may
be found over all the body, but in others that are different from this
exquisite temper and just dispensation, it cannot be Universally true; for a
man may have a large breast and full of hair, and therefore like a Lion have a
most hot heart, and be exceeding bold; yet it follows not that all^his body
over must be so hot. So we find daily (to pass by other examples) that many men
have hot livers, and yet cold brains, and the contrary in others, that it is no
wonder that if one man who has the rest of his veins of his body swelling
forth, have the veins of his head and brain after a sort dried up. For Galen
adds that this may be done, and that the excess of Intemperance in one part,
may be the cause of the contrary excess in the rest, and make them weak, or the
strength of one part may be answered by the strength or weakeness of another.

To answer the contrary argument; when Hippocrates collects from the color of
the eye or sharpness of the voice, Answer to the argument contrary.
what is the temperament of the whole body, this may be taken, as if he did
search for the same things in the equal temperament of the whole body, whereof
he finds some tokens in the parts; or he may be understood thus, when other
signs in the whole body concur to signify the same. For example, if there be
signs of heat in the whole body, and a great voice and large breast be joined
with them, it is evident by these signs that the whole body is hot: which must
also be understoode concerning the complexion of the brain, and other parts,
that must be compared with the temperament of the rest. I say that such who for
many years and by much taking of it are used to this smoke in their mouth and
nostrills, to those it does less harm, For custom is nature acquired, as Galen
says, 2. Custom, what?
de motu musc. and 2 de tempament, or it is Hippocrates, 2. Aphorism. 50.
speaks thus. Those things that we are accustomed to, though they be worse; yet
they do us less harm, than those that we are not used to, and therefore we must
use what we are wonted to. This is a most true axiom and cannot be
contradicted; For all things that are accustomed, as they are so, are less
hurtful than things we are not wonted to: for by custom things that are worse
are made familiar to nature, and therefore are not dangerous. For what nature
is acquainted with, is wont to be harmless. Custom is of such consequence,
that from that in preserving of health or curing of diseases we may have great
indication, and not much less than we can from nature, as both Hippocrates and
Galen intimate in many places. For since nature always delights in what it is
used to, (as Galen says, 8. Method.) it is certain that every one ought to
keep his custom: for from custom as well as from nature and age, great
conclusions may be made. Since then Hippocrates and Galen affirm that we must
hold to what we are wonted to; what a great danger would it be to leave off
this custom which is confirmed by so many years, as this is to smoke Tobacco,
in a Pipe at the Mouth and Nostrils, and to change this to a contrary way,
especially if it be done suddenly or immediately, as I am persuaded all men can
easily perceive? Whence Celsus also speaks, l. 1. c. 3. He is in danger who
both once, and he that twice eats in a day contrary to his usual custom?
Again, sudden ease from violent labor, and sudden labor from great ease
cannot be safe. When therefore any man thinks to leave off this drinking of
Tobacco for a time, he must not rashly nor suddenly change this custom, for it
is almost as strong as nature. Therefore they who use to smoke it, easily bear
it, and they that are not used to it cannot so well away with it. Custom makes
not only healthful things to be useful for us, but also it makes those things
healthful, which were they not accustomed to us, would be the most dangerous.
For it is of such force that it overcomes the malignity of any thing taken, and
which is more to be wondered at, the very violence and virulency of poisons is
conquered by it, and it spoils them of their malignity; so I read of a maid
that was fed with Wolfs-bane, and in time by degrees she used it for her
nourishment, Galen, 3. simpl. c. 18. speaks of an old woman of Athens, Avicen.
6. 4. tr. i.c.1.
who beginning from a small quantity of Hemlock, proceeding by degrees learned
to feed on it in great quantity and found no harm by it. We read also of a
certain Maiden at Collen, Caliu^ l. 11.c.13.
who when she was but three years old would catch the Spiders creeping upon the
walls and eat them, and being delighted with that kind of diet grew
exceedingly; Mithridates King of Pontus taking poison daily, Plini. ^.25. c.2.
made it so familiar to him, that when he would have poisoned himself, that he
might not fall into Pompeys hands, Martial,. 5. 17.
he drank deadly poison without any harm. Often Mithridates eating Poison got,
That the most cruel Poisons hurt him not. Sleydan, lib. 9. Writes, that Pope
Clement the 7. being old, died of a great pain of his stomach, having changed
his diet by the advice of Curtiu^ his Physician. What should I say much of a
thing confirmed of daily examples. We see that they who use to purg often have
need of stronger physic than what they used to take before: for those that are
usual will hardly move them. So if one often take Clysters, the belly will
hardly be moved, no^ yet yield to other remedies, as it befell the Duke of
Albanie, who could not go to stool without a Clyster, for nature had forgot her
self, Heurn. in meth. ad prax. l.3. c. 17.
and depended wholly upon Physic. He that will read more concerning custom,
let him read what Theophrastus l 9. c. 18. concerning the History of Plants,
has written of Thraciae and Eudemius Chius.

FINIS.
Dr Everard.

Dr EVERARD HIS DISCOURSE Of the Wonderful EFFECTS and OPERATION OF TOBACCO.
I Am chiefly induced to write the History of Tobacco, a most excellent Plant,
and for Physical use, of admirable Virtue, because many have written
singularly well of Plants; yet besides Nicolaus Monardus a Spanish Physician
(who writ a peculiar History of Plants and Spices brought forth of the new
found World) very few have sufficiently set forth the worth of this noble
Plant. But since, I doubt not but that many earnestly desire to know the
Effects of it, that such may no longer be kept from their Enjoyments, as they
know it by Name, they shall farther know the Virtues thereof. I willingly
undertake this work, that I may as briefly and faithfully as I can, publish to
the world, what I have partly got by reading, and by the relation of other men,
and what I have had experience of my self, adding what others have scattered in
their writings here and there, and what I have since by long study herein,
approved to be effectual.

The kind.
Tobacco in the form and faculties of it is much like to Comfrey, that I may
not without reason think it to be of that kind, rather then a yellow Henbane,
as some have supposed.

The differences.
It is observed to be of three sorts, the Male, the Female, and a third sort,
more imperfect then them both.

Description of the Ma^e.
The Male has large leaves, that are thick, long, fat, of a watery green co^our,
sharp at the top, a little hairy, and clammy, but with no cuts in them; so
^licking to the stalk, that they seem in a manner to embrace it: They smell
strong, taste sharp and hot, and are larger at the top, then at the bottom; It
produces a most upright stalk, which sometimes rises to four or five foot
high, and sometimes to some Yards, as the ground is hotter, that it is planted
in, and is fatter and well dressed.

The branches that from the knots at a distance spring forth, The branches.
part the stalk a foot, or half a foot distance assunder. In the top of the
branches a flower comes forth, that is white and red which they call a
Carnation color, 'like a small bell, and it comes out of a Pod as out of a
Cup, which at length swelling round like to an Apple, when the flower witheres,
is filled with very small seeds, very like to the yellow Henbane, which being
ripe or black, but first they are green. The Root.
At the root there is great plenty of syowrs, which does after a sort renew it
self, whereas the roots are but small threads, some greater and shorter then
others, as the Plant is in height. They yield as the leaves do, a fat and
rosine juice, that is yellow, and smells like Rosin, not unpleasant, and the
taste is sharp and biting. The most flourishing Plants have thicker and woody
roots, which exceedingly abound with shoots of a yellow color, bitter in
taste, which are supposed to be equal to Rheubarbe in Virtue, though this be
not sufficiently found out.

The Female has a smaller and lower stalk, the leaves are shorter, smaller and
not so gummy. The flower is not so open and gaping, nor so ruddy a color: The
branches are not so tall nor stretched forth as the Male Tobacco branches are;
wherefore they are out exceedingly that think this to be a kind of Satyrium.

Description of the Female.
For this which we call Female Tobvcco, is not like to Satyrium either in form,
fashion, root, color or any other way. For it has many small roots, a hairy
stalk, many branches, many leaves, and those long and large; and it is hot and
dry, like to the Male Tobacco: but Satyrium has fewer and thicker roots, the
stalk is not knotty, it has no branches, it has fewer leaves, the flower
appears on the top of the stalk, without any Pod or seeds, and is hot and moist
to the third degree, and is most fit to provoke lust.

The third sort of Tobacco is in all things smaller, the leaf is rounder, The
third sort of Tobacco called commonly black or yellow, Henbane.
somewhat blackish, fat, somewhat hairy, though it be full of juice: The flower
is less, and round on the outside, and of a pale color, and it is not above
twenty years since it was known in Europe. Dodoneus called it yellow Henbane,
but Mathielus before him called it black Henbane.

It is sowed about the Calends, Ides, The time.
or Nones of April, or near that time: sometimes sooner or later, as the
weather is hot; though the Indians in Peru, and the Inhabitants of new Spain,
sow it in Autumn. In hot Countries it bears leaves, flowers, and buds at one
and the self same time, for nine or ten Months together. But in the low
Countries it flowers from August until Winter, and forthwith brings forth
seed; after that, when the frost first comes, it fades and quite decays, and
it can hardly be kept all the Winter, unless it be in Pots or Baskets, and that
in Stoves, or Store houses, or other places that are kept hot.

The Lote Tree.
This requires a fat and well manured ground, and in their cold Countries, the
ground must be exceedingly well dung'd, and the dung (especially Horse-dung)
must be so mingled with it, and incorporated, that it may seem to degenerate
altogether into the Earth. Moreover it requires a shadowed and moist ground,
and it must be large, and affording room enough: For where the place is narrow,
it will not prosper nor yield any branches. It delights in a South Sun, and
where there is a wall or sluice behind it, that it may be thereby defended from
the injuries of the North winds that follow, and that the Sun beams lighting
upon the wall, may reflect upon it. It must be free from all Tempests, because
it is exceeding tender, and very great; yet when it has taken deep root, it
has almost escaped the danger of winds. It wounderfully delights in water, and
therefore being oft^times watered, especially where the Climate is very hot, it
thrives the better. It can endure no cold, and therefore in winter it must be
preserved in hollow places, and where Chimneys or Stoves are provided for this
purpose. Or else it must be compassed about with a double Mat, and a Painthouse
upon the wall over it, and a coverlid raised up, and it must be covered with a
covering of straw, in a shelter that lies right against the Sun at noon day
shining clear, that the Plant may be refreshed by the heat.

Before you sow it, The way of ^sowing it.
you must make a hole in the earth with your finger, and casting into that hole
^ten or twelve grains, you shall diligently cover them with the same earth. But
do not cast in three or four grains into a hole, for they would be choked
being so small. If the Climate be very hot, you must water them for fifteen
days after you have sowed them; also they may be sowed as Lettice seed, and
other seed of that kind: namely by cu^iously mingling the earth and heaping of
it together. Some there are who mingle the most pure and fine Ashes with the
earth, but a very little, for it grows very gently and slowly. When it comes
up, it must be accurately defended against all injuries of cold and frost, and
in the night chiefly it must be covered when it grows up: and thus it will for
ever keep its native vigor and splendour uncorrupted.

Transplant^tion.
When the Plant is grown a foot high, because all the grains severally bring
forth their stalks, and the fibras of the roots stick together, and are in a
manner glewed, you must cut the earth round about with your Knife, and cu^ the
turf round, and then take up the earth, and cast it into a bucket full of
water, that the earth may the sooner be separated, and the small stalks may
swim on the top. These you must take severally whole, and wrapping them up in
their own earth, you must transplant into a ground that is well dunged, some
three or four foot off from the wall, but somewhat deep, that the stalk may
grow the stronger. But if the Earth near the wall or fence be unfruitful, you
must help this barrenness by trans-planting the stalks and by diligent watering
of them.

Nicotiana took its name from Johannes Nicotius, The name.
by whose direction it first was made known to the French: as also many Plants
and Stalks bear the names of Men both amongst the Greeks and Latins, who by
their care and study brought them into their own Countries, and Planted them
there, where they were unknown before. This Nicotius Counselor to the French
King, being in the Years 1559 and 1560. Ambassador for his King, in
Portingall, and was minded on a day to go to see the Castle at Lisborn; A
certain Noble Man of the Low Countries showed unto him this foreign Plant, and
gave it him freely; saying, he brought it from Florida. Nicotius accepted it
and took great care to have it set and maintained in his Garden, and to be
propagated, until being grown up, it showed forth wonderful miracles of the
faculties it had.

Thus it began to be esteemed much at Lisborn, The Ambassadors Plant.
and to be called the Ambassadors Herb. But because it was sent from Nicotius
to Francis the second King of France, and to the Queen Mother, and to some of
the principal Countries, some called it the Queens Plant of Medicea, and
honored it with that name; for she gave it to diverse to be Planted and to be
made increase all France over.

Some called it also the Plant of the great Prior, The prior Plant.
because he sometimes passing from France into Portugal, and being entertained
by the Ambassador, and Feasted, received of him many of these Plants, by way
of gift, and setting them in his Garden, he took great care to make them grow
there above all the rest.

The Spaniards call it Petum and Tobacco, Petum. Tobacco.
from the name of the Island wherein it was first found, where it grows in
abundance, and thence it got the name.

Picielt, the Herb of the holy Cross.
The Indians that inhabit there call it Picielt; The most illustrious Cardinal
of Santa Cruce, being the Popes Nuncio, for the Church of Rome into Portingall,
brought it first from thence to Rome, and therefore there it was called the
Herb of Santa Cruce. Many call it the holy or sacred Plant, by reason of the
divine and strange Virtues and forces of it. Many again call it Petum the Male,
to distinguish it from the Female, and that is the most proper and native name
of it, that the Inhabitants of Florida use to give it, from whom it came to us.

Yet it is fit and reasonable, Whence it is called Nicotiana.
that we should call it Nicotiana, in regard of the Honorable memory of the
foresaid Ambassador Nicotius, who first endowed France with so excellent and
divine a Plant.

The Second kind of Tobacco, Female Petum.
as I said, is to be called the Female Tobacco, for experience the Mistress of
all things teaches us that it comes next to Male Tobacco, in form, root, and
seed; and more then that, because it often grows from the seed, of the Male
Tobacco. For if it chance that any of the seed of the Male Tobacco, when it is
full of Seed, fall to the ground, Namely, the same ground where Tobacco grew
before, doubtless the next year Female Tobacco will grow in that very place.
And if you sow the Male Tobacco Seed upon ground, that is not hot enough, but
if barren and sandy; In place of the Male, it will bring forth the Female, and
in such abundance, that it will be hard to root it out of that place, but it
will every year grow in of it self; and this is an Argument that there is a
double sex in Tobacco, as it falls out in most Plants, where there is an
affinity betwixt them.

By its Rosiny smell, not unpleasant, and it is sharp and biting taste, The
tempera meant of Tobacco, Male and Female.
it seems to be hot above the Second degree, and dry in the First, being very
fit to Cleanse, Resolve, and Consolidate, and for this it is miraculously
effectual; for because by its Smoke it sometimes makes men drunk, that does
not prove it to be a sort of He^bane, though it be very like it, both by the
Leaves, Cups, Stalks and Seed; for it is not credible it will do it so soon as
Henbane, nor is it the effect of extreme cold; but by the Aromaticall Vapor,
that proceeds from it, which fill the cells of the brain.

But the temperament of the Third sort of Tobacco, or rather nightshade yellow
or black, is cold and moist.

If you consider the effect of Tobacco, the Leaves are the principal, The use
and effects.
and next the Seed, though the Seed be far below them. The Leaves must be
used either greenwhen they are ripe, or else dried, and in Winter brought to
powder, for they are of the same force, as the juice of the Leaves is. The way
to dry them is this; run a thread through the fairest Leaves of Tobacco, and
those that are moderarely large, and hang them in the shade, in the roof of a
Chamber, where neither the Sun, nor Fire, nor Wind may come at them. Others
show us another way to keep them any time of the year. Put the dry Leaves of
Tobacco into a Viol full of Oil of Olives; and when you will use them, power
off the Oil, and wiping the Leaves with a thin Linen Cloth, use them as if they
were now gathered.

It takes away weariness.
Further, Amongst the effects of it this seems chiefly to be wonderful. The
West-Indians and the Inhabitants of Peru and Florida use this to take away
weariness, and to make them cheerful of their work, and says Nicolaus
Monardus, we found that by their example our servants and the M^ors that come
strangers into the West-Indians, used to do the same. for when they are weary
and tired with many leapings, and danceings, they draw this Herb in by their
Mouths and Nostrils, and so the same thing befalls them, that does the Indians;
for about three or four hours they seem as if they were dead; after this they
are well refreshed, and more able and cheerful to work, then they were before:
And they take such pleasure in this, that sometimes they will go out of sight,
that they may the more freely take it though they be not weary. Yea, they grow
so mad, that sometimes they are therefore punished for it by their Masters, who
also take care that their Tobacco may be burnt, that so they may take from them
all occasion of this pleasure. What need more words? The juice of Tobacco makes
one drunk
I saw, says Nicholaus Monardus, both the Servants and Moors, that were not
suffered to make themselves drunk with Wine, to drink the juice of Tobacco, and
make themselves drunk, wherein they take not small pleasure, and they boast
that it takes away weariness from them.

It is also as strange and wonderful that the Inhabitants of Florida at some
set times of the year, A fume from the dried leaves of Tobacco.
will feed on the smoke only of this Plant, which they suck into their Mouths
by horns made for this use. The Mariners are sufficient witnesses, and many
more that newly returned from Florida, and more are daily coming back, who
having some things like horns or tunnels, tide about their necks, made of Palm
tree leaves, are much delighted with Reeds or Canes, in the ends whereof these
Leaves are fastened in Bundles, when they are grown dry, and withered. Then put
lighted Coals to the more narrow part of the Tunnel, and draw with open mouth
the fume that is raised, as much as they can, and they swear and maintain it,
that hunger and thirst is thereby abated, their Strength is restored, their
Spirits are cheared, and their Brain is comforted with a kind of pleasant
Drunkenness, and the superfluous Humors of it are consumed, and an incredible
quantity of Flegmatique Humors are drawn into their mouths.

To stay hunger and thirst.
Like to these, is that which the said Mona^dus left in writing in his own
Spanish Language: The Indians (says he) use Tobacco to stay hung^r and thirst,
and to drive it away for some days, that they may not need to eat or drink*
when they have cause to go abroad into Woods and Deserts, and inhospitable
places where meat and drink can hardly be got. For they chew the leaves, and
mingle them with powder of great Cockle shells, and these they hold in their
mouths together, until they come to a Mass, and of that they make Trochisks
so great as Pears, which being dried in the shade, when occasion is, they use
after this manner. They put this pellet under their lips and fore-teeth, and
suck it as they travel; and having sucked it all, they swallow it down instead
of meat and drink, and fill their stomach. By this means they will fast for
three or four days, and lose no strength, preserving (as I think) their native
heat by the plenty of phlegm which being sucked into the mouth, is swallowed down
with it; and the stomach for want of better juice, turns it into nourishment.
To these things I shall add what the most famous Physician to the Emperor,
Rombertus D^doneus a great Scholar, and who deserved much for his great skill
in Plants, reports in his late History of Plants. I understand by the relation
of my Friend (says he) that drinking the juice of this Plant about four or
five Ounces in weight, their belly is mightily troubled, A History for the
Dropsy.
and they purge up and down, after that they fall into a long and deep sleep.
There was a Country man that was strong, of a middle age, who had a Dropsy,
and he took this juice, and he when he awakened demanded for me^t and drink,
and after that he was well. He relates also, that he cured many Contrymen of
Agues with the distilled water of the leaves of Tobacco, dr^nk a little before
his fit come* But with the powder or the dry stalks and rabbish, he soon cured
gallings, not only of men but of horses and other creatures. These ar^ Dodon^us
his words.

For Diseases of the Head.
But to come more particularly to the Effects of Tobacco. First of all the
powder of the leve^ of Tobacco, finely beaten and sifted, and blown into ^oth
No^trils in the morning through ^ Quill, is good against Catarr^s, and all
de^luxions upon the eyes, Catarers.
and for pains and giddiness of the head, if these proceed from a cold cause.
It purges all Humors that trouble the head, marvellously, like to an Errhine
or nose-Purge, and diverts them, so we use it in the morning for some days,
the body being well purged before.

Headache.
The pains of the head, legs, armsf coming of wind or cold, abate, if you lay
on one of Tobacco leaves green, roasted on the fire, upon the part; If you want
green leaves, use those that are dry, which you must moisten in Wine, and lay
under hot embers, then sprinkling them with water of Naphtha, they will be
applied happily to the part. You may do as much with the powder of the leaves
dried, mingling such things as are proper for these Diseases. But you must
repeat the cure so often until the pain be gone. In Convulsions and such like
Diseases, the leaves of Tobacco will do good, if they be laid to the nape of
the Neck.

Carolus Clusius affirms, Dimnes^.
that the distilled water is good for clouds of the eyes, to discuss them, and
to preserve the sight, if you often wipe the eyes with it warm.

It cures deafness, Deafness.
especially from a cold cause, if you drop in one drop of the oil or juice
warm, into the ears, for some days together.

Doctor Monardus writes, Ozena.
that he saw a man, who for a long time, had Ulcers in his Nostrils, from
whence there ran much fretting matter, and filth that eat his Nostrils; but at
length, when by his advice he snuft up the juice of Tobacco into his Nostrils,
first he hawked up above twenty small worms, then greater, until there were
none remaining; so that the inward Ulcers of his Nostrils (you would have
thought it a kind of Polypus) were cured, but the parts corroded and eaten up
were not to be repaired, and so it had been with all the rest, had he not had
the Physicians advice.

Redness of the face.
The juice and ointment of Tobacco takes away the redness of the face, if you
dip a fine rag in it, and apply it to the cheek-bones; Anointing with the oil
does the same, or washing with the water of it.

Toothach.
A little leaf of Tobacco wrapped up into a lump, be it a green or a dry leaf, and
this held in the mouth (but the teeth must be first rubbed clean with a linnin
cloth wet in the juice of Tobacco) does presently ease the pain of the teeth,
coming from cold or wind, and takes away all corruption: but this remedy is
nothing worth, if the pain proceed from a hot cause: Also it is good to rub
aching teeth with the di^^lled water of Tobacco.

To cure the Thrush and Ulcers of the Gums, The Ulcers and fores of the Gums
a mixture is made with Honey of Roses, and the juice of sour Pomgranats, which
maudifies, scoures, and breeds flesh.

The leaves of Tobacco ro^sted under the hot embers applied to the pained part,
Swelling of the Throat from Rheum^
ease the pains of the Throat over-cooled by rheum, and all other Diseases of
the body proceeding from cold causes. And a gargarism may be made of the
decoction of this Herb alone, or mingled with other Herbs, proper for this
Disease.

It wonderfully helps Diseases of the breast, Diseases of the Thorax. Short Wind.
and those that spit bloody matter. Also for short breath, and other inveterate
Diseases, if a decoction of it be made with Sugar, and the Stomach being first
purged, it be taken for some days together. So the leaves of Tobacco, boiled
in water and Sugar put to the decoction: Or rather juice of the leaves press^d
forth, and boiled into a syrrup, Apozeme or Julep, taken daily upon an empty
stomach, two or three ounces (...) a time, An old Cough.
abates the difficulty of breathing, and an old cough. It brings forth thick,
clammy, corrupt humors; but the sick must be first well purged, and generally
his body must be well emptied by Physic. Also a Syrrup may be made of other
pectoral means, adding the leaves of Tobacco to them, or Liquorish, Reasins,
Jububes, Figs, Prunes, Dates, and Herbs fit for this use; as Maydenhair,
Scabious, Horehound; and the like.

Take Maydenhairs white and black, Horehound, Coltsfoot, of each one handful;
Tobacco leaves two or three* Reasins without stones, whole Barley of each one
Pugill; Liquorish scraped two drammes; make a decoction to a pint, sweeten it
with Sugar and Honey what is sufficient.

Another that attenuates and cuts more: Take Scabious, Horehound, Maydenhairs,
Wall-Ru^. of each one handful and half, Figgs ten, Reasins one ounce; Tobacco
leaves five, Liquorish scraped two drammes; make a decoction in a pound of
Ho^ied water, until two parts be consumed; Add to the strained Liquor of
simple Oxymel, Syrrup of Maydenhair, of each two ounces, Oxymel compound one
ounce, mingle them.

Water of Tobacco, with Eybright water, drank daily upon an empty stomach, does
the same; as Doctor Iarnacus Goverour of Rochel has proved, who was an
intimate acquaintance of Nicotilus and private to the counsels and businesses
of the French King, and whom he chiefly desired to communicate the Knowledge of
this Plant to. This man being at a Banquet of the Kings, with the Embassodour,
professed that by this means he cured one of an Asthma. I (says Nicolaus
Monardus) observed some men (troubled with an Asthma, returning from the
WestIndies or from Peru) chewing Tobacco leaves in their mouths, and
swallowing the juice of them, to make them spit forth corrupt matter: but
though* these men were drunk by it, it appears they found much good by it, to
bring out matter and phlegm that stuck in their stomach^.

The dry powder of Tobbacco performs the same, Use of the powder of Tobacco.
if you hold as much of it as you can take between the top of your forefinger
and thumb, at the root of your tongue, near your palate (taking care that you
swallow not the powder) for in a short space you shall perceive great plenty of
flegmatique humors to run forth at your mouth, and this will endure until
that you may fill a small dish with phlegm. When you think this watery hu^our is
come forth in sufficient quantity, wash your mouth with some good white Wine:
Do this every morning upon an empty stomach. If this be to troublesome, do it
every third day, always according to art, premising universals.

Stomach pain.
The same way it is profitable for the Diseases of the Breast, and the parts
adjoining, as the Lungs, Wesand, Throat, offended by afflux of humors.

It is wonderful good for pains proceeding from a defluxion of humors upon
the mouth of the stomach, or bred there; and for all old pains of it, or
preternatural long-during pains of the Reins, and for contractions of parts,
from chronical and lasting Diseases, to chew the powder of dry leaves of
Tobacco in the mouth, to make an Apoph^egmatism with them.

The women of the West- Indies Crudities.
mightily commend the leaves of Tobacco, because they take away the crudities
of the stomachs of young and old; and dispell winds, restore concoction, soften
the belly, if it be first anointed with oil of Olives; and the leaves being
made hot under hot embers, be applied to the region of the belly, and be
renewed as often as occasion is: The ashes must not be wiped off, but more must
be laid on to make it more effectual.

Also, Surfeit.
if you lay the said leaves so prepared, to one that is surfeitted with meat or
drink, you shall very much remove his Crapula, and repletion. The same reason
serves for the powder of the dry Herb, if you put so much of it as you can hold
between your finger and thumb, into a spoonful or two of Aqua vitae when you
go to bed: For it takes away your surfeit, and makes you sleep, and resolves
phlegm.

Swounding.
They that swound away, presently recover their former strength, if the smoke of
the leaves come into their mouths or nostrils, drawn by a Pipe or Reed.

The Colic.
Tobacco wonderfully helps the torments of the Guts and Belly, and pain of the
Colic, and other pains proceeding from wind, or cold, if you lay the leaves
on very hot, and change them often, until the pain abate.

The powder of the leaves dried, is good for the same use, taken in white Wine,
or some other liquor when you go to bed, about half a dram or a dram weight, or
thereabouts.

The Iliac.
The leaves used the same way, cure the wringing of the small Guts, and it is
proper to put this Herb with others in decoctions for Clysters, as also to use
them for Plasters and Fomentations, that will do great service.

For Example, take Mercury, R^e, Marsh Mallows, Little Cent^ury, of each one
handful; Hysop, Calamint, Wormwood, of each one handful and an half; Tobacco
leaves six, roots of Marshmallows half an ounce; Linseed, Fenegrek, of each
three drams; Cumminseed, Anniseed, of each one dram and half: let them bo^l in
sufficient quantity of water, until the third part be consumed, then take of
the liquor boiled and strained, one pound; Hiera Picra, half ^n ounce,
Benedicta Laxativa, ^ix drams; fresh Butter, Honey of Rose^ strained, of each
six drams; Oil of Rue and Dill, of each one ounce and half; common Salt one
dram: Mingle them all, and make a Clyster. The Liver.


If Tobacco leaves be distilled with Fumitary, it wonderfully helps all
Diseases of the Liver: But observe, you must take less quantity of Fumitary
then of Tobacco.

The juice of the leaves of Tobacco, bruised with a little Vinegar, The Spleen.
or the Ointment of them rubbed in the morning upon the place of the Spleen
obstructed or hardened, from a cold cause, softneth and dissolveth it; but
after ann^inting, you ^ust apply a leaf to it roasted in the embers, or a
cloth wet in the juice of the leaves. Others use instead of this, unguents
proper to this Disease with which they mingle the juice of the leaves, and add
also the leaves themselves; and by this means it is found out, that hard and
inveterate humors may be dissolved. The Dropsy.


The distilled water drank daily upon an empty stomach, wonderfully helps
hydrophical persons. Moreover, if you put the dry leaves of Tobacco upon the
live Coals in a Kettle, and so roste them, and draw in the smoke of them by
your mouth, with a Pipe or Reed, or Tunnell, haveving your head and throat
close covered, you shall spit out so much phlegm, and clammy humors, that you
shall be so lank, as if you had fasted a long time. Wherefore it seems that a
Dropsy not yet confirmed may be cured by this fume, since it chiefly does good
to A^^hmaticall short^winded people, and such as are vexed with an old cold,
and with Rhumes; for it makes them to spit out much thick and clammy matter.

The juice of the Leaves of Tobacco Clarified, Worms.
and with Sugar ^ade into a Syrup, and taken in the Morning in a small
quantity, drives forth Stomach and Belly Worms; yet you must bruise the Leaves
and wrap them in a Cloth, and lay them to the Navel of the Patient, and give
him a Clyster of Milk and Sugar.

Also the powder of the same alone or mingled with other Le^itives, ^mrods.
is a present remedy for the Emrods: for it perfectly cures them.

The Leaves heat under the Embers as I showed before, The Womb.
do with no less force drive away pains of the Matrix, if they be laid to the
Navell, but it must be first Anointed with Oil wherein the juice of the
Leaves is boiled. Suffoca^^-^ on of the Matrix.
But the suffocation of the Matrix is taken away, by receiving the fume of the
Leaves by the privities.

Hip Go^t it abated, Sciatica.
if you rub it with Oil of Olives, and apply one Leaf of Tobacco Roasted at
the fire.

This is good for any Gout coming from Cold; Some bid the Patient chew every
Morning fasting some of the ^eaves, to free him from pains of the Gout. This
will draw much Fl^gme into his Mo^th, and hinder it from running down upon the
lower parts. Wherefore the powder of the dried Leaves will preserve m^n from
pains of the Gout of the Feet that came at certain times, if they use to Snuf^
up this Powder often into both Nostrils. Likewise they that are now in pain
with it, shall manifestly find an abatement of it, and the Disease to decline,
if they Snuff up the Powder into their Noses, and in time often using it they
will be freed from it. Also the Powder may be held in the Mouth instead of an
Apophlegmatism: for either way it draws much Humors from the head, and directs
them from falling down upon the parts affected, by reason of Defluxions.

Lastly, The fresh Leaves of Tobacco, laid on hot to resolve the cold are good
for any part of the body affected from a cold cause: for they take away the
pains, and forcibly resolve them; either applied by themselves, or with other
Remedies, good for the same Diseases, where there needs strong resolving means.

Take Sagupenu^, Bdelli^m, Gri^^^l^^y, of each one Dram; dissolve them in
Vinegar, and about the end add of the Leaves of powder of Tobacco dried one
ounce, Oil of Camomile one ounce, wax what is sufficient; make a Plaster
according to art, for this most powerfully resolves, and abates pain; Also you
may make it thus.

Take Tacamaha^, Caranna, of each three Drams; dissolve them according to art,
in Wine, or a little of the strongest Vinegar; after this add powder of
Tobacco six Drams, Oil of Lillies, and of Wall Flowers, five Drams, wax what
is sufficient, make an Em^plaister according to art.

To these add Tumors, Tumors, Impostumes, Kibes.
Impostumes, Inflations, and Childrens kibe heels, or any sort of Itch; for the
Leaves of Tobacco laid to them, or the juice warm, with Rags, or Lint wet
therein cure them, for they resolve the Humors and ease the pains.

To cure Kibes, the part affected must be Anointed with the juice, and be
rubed with Linen Rags; but first, putting the Feet or Hands, if the cold be
in them, into very hot water, wherein you have put a little Salt, for this is
often proved to do good.

For Burns.
It is tried that Tobacco will cure Burns; A certain drunken Companion had a
Glass of Beer in his hand, and he stumbling, and loath to break the Glass, fell
into the fire and burned his hand. Women laid their heads together, and they
after an hour or two, laid on some Clay. This did no way ease the pain, for he
could not sleep by day nor by night, wherefore being no longer able to endure
the pain, he comes to a Matron of Antwerp, and asks her advice, who, as he had
heard, knew the Virtues of Tobacco. She strewing the brims of the burnt place,
with the powder of Tobacco, attempted to help him, but for three days little
good was done by it. When therefore he grew impatient, he murmured at the Woman
secretly, because he came to her to be cured, and She went to make experiment
of the Virtues of Tobacco upon him, and he commanded that such Medicaments as
are gentle should be applied: but the pain being nothing lessened with this, he
comes back to the Matron, desiring her to go on with the cure as She began,
and She (as She was a very good Woman) strewed the Powder on again, and in
three days made him well.

Moreover, for inveterate Wounds, Old Wounds, Scabs, malignant and cancerous
Ulcers, Tetters, Scrophulus.
malignant cancerous and spreading Ulcers, Scabs, Noli me tangere, Itch,
Tetters, Scrophula's, Bubo's, Impostumes, fleshy Excrescences, and the like
almost innumerable Diseases, it is very effectual, if the juice be applied
with rags or lint.

Green Wounds, Green Wounds.
if they are not to deep, are cured in one day, by the juice of the Leves and
Lint. But if the Wound be very deep, it may be washed with Wine, and be bound
with bands wet in the juice. And it is excellent to heal a Wound quickly, to
wash it with the juice of the Leaves, the Inflammation being over. Not long
after that the Ambassador came to have the knowledge of Tobacco at Lisbon, one
of his Cooks had almost cut off his whole Thumb; the Steward presently runs for
Tob^cco, which being sometimes applied to the Wound, the Cook was well cured;
And thus this Herb grew to be so much esteemed at Lisborn, where the Court them
was, and it began to be called the Ambassadors Herb. It is as good for
contusions and all hurts, to which nothing else uses to be applied besides the
juice with Rags, and the part affected must be swathed with a Roller. But diet
must be chiefly ob^erved, and if need be, the Patient must be well purged, and
this is often proved good.

F^ux of Blood.
Tobacco has notable force to stay blood running forth immoderately from a
Wound, or from the Nostrils, or from any hurt, only applying the juice with
with Lint to the Wounds, ^ut the juice must be sn^ffed up into the Nostrils, or
the Powder must be drawn into the Nose by a Cane or Tunnell.

To cleanse and heal foul Ulcers of the French Pox, Sordid Ulcer of the Pox.
and in dainty people; especially if the part that is Ulcerated be of exquisite
feeling, the decoction of Tobacco in a Gargarism is very effectual, or mingled
with other things. Such a remedy you find in the small Book of Julius
Palmarius, concerning contagious Diseases; Take two pugils of whole Barley,
Agrimony, Tobacco, Plantane, Chick-Weed, Red Roses, of each one Handful, boil
all in four Pounds of water to three Pounds, and strain it, th^n mingle with
it Honey of Roses, and Syrup of dried Roses, of each three Ounces, burnt Alum,
burnt Vitrioll, of each half a Dram; This Remedy is very abstergent and drying,
and cures Ulcers.

The falling off the hair of the head, old corrupt Ulcers of the Arms, Legs,
Old Ulcers.
and other parts, and ready to G^ngreen, are by this brought to Cicatrize if
they be first washed in white wine or Urine, and wiped with a wet Cloth, with
one or two green Leaves of Tobacco bruised, and be made moist with the juice of
it, which man also be used alone, and bound on with a Swath of Linen; this
being continued for some days, makes them perfectly well. If green Leaves be
wanting, strew upon the Leaves the Powder of the dried Herb, but the Patient
must first be Purged by the Physician, and if need be, a Vein must be opened,
and and a good Diet observed. Yet let no man be dismayed, if he see the Sore
grow bigger by degrees; for so all faulty flesh is consumed, and good flesh
will come in the place, without Chyrurgery or use of any other Medicament.

A certain Noble Man, who was Father to one of the Ambassadors Pages, A speck
on the Face, Ulcerated
hearing the report of this Plant, came to Lisbon, he had an eating Ulcer upon
his Leg for two whole years, when he had for ten or twelve days used the Plant
as the Ambassador directed him, he was well cured and returned home.

A certain young Man had a foul eating Ulcer hard to be cured upon one of his
Cheeks, and it began to seize upon the gristle of his nose. He first made
trial of this Herb, without the Ambassadors knowledge, wherefore applying
Lint with the juice of the Leaves ^o the Ulc^s, he found incredible help by it.
Which when the Ambassador understood by another of his Pages Kinsman to the
other that was in this Case, he called the young Man to him, and he observing
for eight days the same way of cure, rooted a Noli me tangere quite out; but
in the mean while that he was curing of him, he sent him to the chiefest
Physician of the King of Portugal, that he should set down the order of his
cure; and he being eight days after called for by the Ambassador to look upon
his sore face, he professed openly that the Noli me tangere was quite killed
and dead, and it was more clearly known by that, because the young Man
complained not any more of a pain of his Cheek.

A Woman had a horrible Tetter in her Face, you would think She Painted, and
She was cured in eight days by help of Tobacco, and departed home, giving
great thanks to the Ambassador before abundance of People.

It will not be impertinent to add one Memorable example which Monaerdus
relates in his book of simple Medicaments, brought from the new found World. A
Matron says he that had the charge of a Knights Daughter of Spain, remembering
what I had said concerning the Virtues of Tobacco in the audience of many
People, undertook to cure the Child committed to her Charge, (whose Head was
overrun with a foul Scall, and to whom I and others had applied many Remedies
in vain) with Tobacco, which She fetched of me, nor did She loose her Labor.
For when She had rubbed the Scab so sharply with Tobacco Leaves, that for pain
the Child fainted often away the same day, the day following, not regarding her
crying or pains, She rubbed the Leaves on again, until such time as the S^als
falling of by degrees, the Girls was cured, yet when She saw the S^als fall,
She rubbed her Head something more gently.

A Captain of Soldiers, who had a Son miserably afflicted with the Kings
Evil, For Scrophulas
was resolved to send him into France, (because the common opinion is that none
but the King of France can cure that Disease) this Captain came to the
Ambassador, who made trial of Tobaco in this case, and in a very few days,
he cured the Boy of his Disease; The way of cure is this. Apply Lint wet in the
juice of Tobacco, taken from the bruised Leaves, but do it nine or ten times.

If a man apply the juice of Tobacco or Lint wet in it, For the stinging of
Nettl^s.
or the green Leaves bruised with his hands, to any part of the body stung with
Nettles, he shall presently perceive the pain gone, and the part cured.

It is good to cure Warts, if you lay the juice with Lint upon the Wart, Warts.
making first an open place in it with your Penknife until the Blood come, or
else Annoint the place only with U^guent of Tobacco, this I know to be true;
and may be it may do the same to Corns that grow upon the joints of the Feet.
Corns.


So also the juice of Tobacco applied to any pestilent Carbuncle is a present
Remedy. A Plag^* Carbuncle.


Venomous stings and bites of mad dogs.
Also used the same way, it is good for Venomous Stings, Pricks, and Bites. So
it heals the Bitings of Mad Dogs, if it be applied presently in a quarter of an
Honre after the bite is given.

It is good also for the Indians called the Carybes; Poisoned Weapons.
for it is a singular Antidote for the venomous weapons of their Enemies. For
when they go to War they carry with them two hoofs of hearts, Against Poison.
in one of them there is a present Venom, which so soon as it Wounds but the
skin, that it may come at the Blood, it brings present death: but in the other
they carry the juice of Tobacco, and applying this, they are freed from Death,
as experience Witnesses: If they have no green Tobacco, they use the dry, or
beaten into Powder. The Carybes Indians, in the Province of Savina, Were the
first that ever made trial of this, when in a Battle they were many Wounded
and Killed. For when as they were wont, to cured venomed Wounds with Sublimate,
for want of that they used the juice of Tobacco pressed forth of the leaves,
and this presently took away the pain, and made them well; trial has been
often made of this in Spain.

Moreover, the leaves and juice of Tobacco, applied with lint, For Cattle.
cures all hurts that befall bruit Beasts; and kill the worms in foul Ulcers,
and all creeping Ulcers, like as sublimate does.

Also this cures hard flesh, growing upon the legs of Cattle, Hurts of Horses
or other Beasts by galling.
and Pack-horses, whose backs are galled with burdens and Pack-saddles, or if
they be more hurt, though the wound or wounds incline to a Cancer; only apply
the leaves or juice with lint, or use the dried Herb. They will be so well
cured without any other Medicament, that you need not to forbear your Journey.

Tobacco is an Antidote against Hellebore. Against Hellebore
The Hunters of Spain are wont to use Hellebore, because it is a present poison
to kill Deer, and wild Beasts. The Catholic King to try the truth of it, bad a
Hunter to hurt a little Dog in the throat, and to put Hellborne into the wound,
and by and by after, the juice of Tobacco upon lint, An Experiment of a Dog
poisoned.
and so to bind all up, and the Dog received no harm, to the wonder of them all.

The like happened last Winter at Antwerp, An Experiment for Venom.
where one gave to a Cat, of a Matron of the Town, a Bolus mingled with venom,
because the Cat was to fierce. After this, the Cat could stay no where, but ran
up and down, and tried in vain to vomit up the poison; the Matron observing
this, found a way to open the Cats mouth, and to thrust in a little Ball of
Tobacco, made up with butter: The Cat presently after, cast up the poison and
escaped death.

The use of Female Tobacco.
Thus much for Male Tobacco; but the use and faculties of the Female, are almost
the same as of the Male: and when the Male is wanting, we used the Female (as I
have directed you before for the Male) to cure by.

To cure Breasts with Cancers.
Observe this, that the leaves of the Female Tobacco are good in decoctions for
Clysters: They are excellent against Dysenteries, and the Balsam of it yielded
to no Medicament to cure a Cancer, especially of the Breasts.

The third sort of Tobacco, The third sort of Tobacco.
which some call black, others yellow Henbane, is contrary to Tobacco in nature
and qualities, and therefore they do ill, that foolishly use it for the true
Tobacco. Yet it may serve to revulse hot humors, and in part to resolve hot
Impostumes; also in a Cancer it may restrain the heat of black choler. Johan.
de vigo. capite de hernia, uses Henbane to resolve humors. It is strange
(says Monardus lib. 3. of simple Medicaments, that are brought out of the new
world) what notable virtues and faculties are daily discovered in Tobacco: For
besides those related, I can (says he) relate as many were, which I have heard
others speak of, and I my self have observed

The juice pressed out of the fresh leaves of Tobacco, The forces of the juice
of Tobacco.
and drank the quantity of two ounces, vehemently purges water and phlegm
above and beneath, and therefore it is profitably given in Dropsies and the
Falling Sickness.

Also, water is distilled from the leaves of Tobacco cut in pieces, The
distilled water,
in a glass Limbeck, which is afterward rectified in the Sun. This is almost
as good as the juice of the Plant, chiefly for Wounds, Tumors, Kibes, and for
nails that fall off from the fingers of themselves, if the water be but poured
into the part affected, or now and then a lint or cloth wet in it and applied.

Leo Suavius bids us gather the leaves in July, bruise them, and distill them
in a double Vessel with glass Instruments, presently set it in the Sun, and
keep it a year.

This water taken fasting, the quantity of an ounce or an ounce and half, is
good for an Asthma, and an old cold.

The Oil by infusion is thus made. Take the leaves torn or cut in pieces, Oil
by Infusion.
boil them in Oil Olives, which will be colored; press it for^h rejecting the
leaves: then infuse fresh leaves, and expose them to the Sun in a Violglass, or
boil them until the juice be consumed; this is good against Scabs, Wounds, and
Ulcers: It cures pains of the head, and foulness of the skin.

Also, Oil of the Seeds.
Oil may be drawn from the Seeds of Tobacco, which drank in a small quantity,
is excellent against venom and bites of Vipers.

Distilled Oil is made by descent (as the Chemists call it) is a Glass retort.
Oil distilled.


Salt is made by the Art of Chemistry from Tobacco, The way to make Salt of it.
and both of these, namely the Oil distilled, and the Salt far exceed the
leaves or juice, the powder, or distilled water, to cure Diseases; because the
most thin and excellent essences of it, are separated, which are better then
the terrestrial matter; for these are the next and immediate seat and subject
of the faculties themselves. Let no man despise or scornfully laugh at the name
of Essence; for Galen used it, explaining the thing very fitly. For I
understand nothing else then he does, when he says, that some Herbs are of a
more thick; thin, or fiery nature and essence then others are.

Iacobus Gohorius of Paris, shows the way to make Salt of Tobacco, thus. The
first way.
Calcins Tobacco, dissolve the Calx, strain, filtrat, evaporate it; there will
be a Salt which will do no harm in a Caustic, and not so Corrosive in
dissolving malignant Ulcers; wherefore this is the common way to extract Salt
from all Vegetables. Burn the Herb in the fire, the place being swept clean
with Brooms (some first set it in the Sun, others dry it in the shade) let it
burn until it stick together in a lump: Or if you proceed further to burn it,
to burn it to ashes, you shall have more Salt. Put the ashes into a glazed
earthen Pot, and pour fair water upon them, and let it sees some hours at the
fire; pour it forth into another Vessel, and when the dregs are settled, strain
it through a linen cloth; set the strained liquour at an easy fire with few
Coals, that the water may evaporate, and the Salt remain in the bottom.

Another way.
The next way is more curious. Burn the dried Herb in an ^arthen Pot covered, by
a long and strong fire, until the ashes come to be pure white, and that is a
sign it is perfectly calcined: then let it boil in Rain or distilled water in a
Glass vessel, in sifted ashes; let it boil until a fourth part of the water
be wasted, then let it stand a while: Pour it into another Glass, and putting
in some new very fine Tongues to filter it, the pure and salt water will be
strained into the Receiver underneath it. What is filtrated, must be evaporated
at an easy fire, in a Glass Vessel, and the salt will remain at the bottom
clear and pure.

The third way is the most exact: The third way.
Gather the Herb green, and bruise it, distill the water of it by a Limbeck,
calcine the faeces at a moderate fire, the Vessel being stopped, until they
come to ashes. Let the fire be gentle, that it may not consume the proper and
radical moisture of the Plant, for that will make it run to glass; pour the
water upon the earth of it, and it will thirstily devour it: Digest it in
Horse dung, or in a Bath some days. Pour it out as before, that it be not
mingled with the faeces, then filtrat it, lastly evaporate what is filtrated.
These are the various ways to make artificial Salt, not only of Tobacco, but
of all Vegetables that are prepared by the fire, and the use of them may be
wonderful in curing those that are dainty, and such as abhor all
Medicaments, putting that Salt in their Broth, or Salt-seller to season their
meat.

Compound water.
To this may be referred what the famous Physician and Philosopher of his age
Liona^dus Fioravantus has witten in his Physical Observations. I took (sath
he) Tobacco, with Seed and Root, and I stamped them all; the leaves weighed LIVE
ounces, I hid them in Horse dung to ferment thirty days, and that they might
not corrupt, I put some salt to them, and six ounces of aqua vitae; then I
distilled them in B^l^eo M^riae, until all the moisture were drawn from them,
and that it might keep the better; I added so much Oil of Brimestone as might
make it taste sharp. I used this composition in many things. In all Fevers, a
spoonful drank cured them: Wounded men, if they drank it, or anointed their
wounds with it, they were cured to admiration.

Oytments are made of Tobacco diverse ways, though the Herb used by it self is
far more effectual.

Take the fairest, greatest, greenest most rosiny leaves of Tobacco, Ointment
of Tobacco
freed from all filth and dust diligently, that are no ways wet with Rain or
Dew, one pound; bruise them with a Pestle in a Mortar of Marble, or of Wood;
half a pound of Hogsgrease prepared, that is purged from all its skins* and
melted in a brazen Vessel: to this must be added the juice of Tobacco, and the
thick substance bruised: Let them boil together upon a Trevot in a brazen Pot,
with a very small gentle fire, namely live Coals being put under the Trevot, or
else in Balneo, until you see the watryness of the juice to be vanished and
gone, and the unguent brought to a Consistence. Otherwise
Or an unguent may be made of the manifold infusion of Tobacco, in Oil of
Roses, three or four times renewing the leaves in Balneo; and when you press it
out, adding so much of the juice of the same Herb, and wax what may suffice,
and make an ^nguent according to art. Or thus,

Otherwise
Take juice of Tobacco, one pound, common Oil, new Wax, Rosin of the Pine Tree,
of each two ounces; Oil of St John's Wort, one ounce: Let them boil at a gentle
fire for three hours; strain it, and add to it two ounces of Turpentine. Boil
them to the consistence of an unguent. It is good for old Ulcers of the Pox,
Scrophulas, Ulcers or Spots contracted by the fire in Winter. Kibes, chaps of
the hands; especially if you rub the part affected first with the green Herb,
and put it into hot salt water. and after anoint it with the said unguent.

Otherwise
Take Pitch, Rosin, new Wax, Turpentine, of each three ounces. Let them melt and
boil together in a brass Vessel with live Coals under it; when all are melted
and boiled, then add of the juice of Tobacco and bruised substance, one pound;
let all boil together five or six hours at an easy fire, upon a Tripod in a
double Vessel, that is a Kettle full of boiling water: move them constantly,
until all the watryness be consumed, and the rest be thickened to an unguent;
then press them out through a thick hempen cloth, and put them again into the
brass Skillet, adding half an ounce of Venice-Turpentine yet let them not boil,
but stir them carefully, then let them cool, and keep them for use.

Take leaves of Tobacco bruised, Otherwise
one pound; Yellow Wax, Turpentine, Oil Olives, Pitch, white Rosin, of each
three ounces: Let them boil together two hours in a new Pipkin, to the
consistence of an unguent, then use it in a small quantity, spread on leather
or linnin.

Some there are that in both descriptions do not add the juice of Tobacco with
the thick substance, but they only strain it, and crush it through a thick
cloth; and they reserve the juice alone, which is not the best way. But the
first unguent is farmore effectual for Wounds, cancerous Ulcers, Tetters, Itch,
Knots upon the face; because it has a greater force to resolve and cleanse
away, which is the property of Tobacco, if it be not hindered by other things
that are joined with it. The latter is better to heal wounds, and repair flesh;
to resolve Impostumes, to ease pains, and such like Operations.

But it seems needless to Iacobus Gohorius, to edde new Wax, Rosin, common Oil,
Turpentine; because one of these is sufficient for the clamminess of Tobacco.
For such an heap of Simples that are in that Ointment, make the Ointment only
fit for Wounds, which otherwise is good for cancerous Ulcers, Itch,
Imposthumes, Tetters, and other Maladies. It is no reason also, so to waste the
juice of Tobacco, that nothing should remain besides the bruised substance, and
strange Ingredients.

Another against Wounds with Gunshot.
It will not be amiss to set down an unguent to cure wounds made with Gunshot,
and fit for all other purposes; the proper making whereof is taught by Josephus
Quercetanus. Take the juice of Tobacco, one pound, Turpentine five ounces;
compound Oil of St John's Wort, eight ounces; the best white Wine, half a pound;
let these digest for eight days: afterward, boil them until the Wine be
consumed, then add Colophonia, Wax, of each three ounces; Mummie, Amber, of
each two drams; melt them again at the fire, and make an unguent according to
Art.

Iacobus Weckerus teaches to make an unguent against the Scabs, Another for
the Scabs. Another for Wounds.
thus: Take the juice of Tobacco, one ounce and half; powdered Brimestone, Salt,
of each one ounce; Oil of Tobacco, Oranges, of each two ounces; Oil of Wax,
Goats suet, of each two ounces; make an unquent according to art.

Iacobus Weckerus says, That he received another unguent from a Frenchman to
cure wounds. Balsam of Tobacco.
Take juice of Tobacco, one pound; new Wax, Pitch, Rosin, common Oil, of each
two ounces; boil all together until the juice be consumed, then add Venice
Turpentine, three ounces; strain all through a linen cloth, and keep it in a
Box. This cures Wounds and Ulcers certainly. Add to all this, that a most
fragrant Balsam is compounded of Tobacco; Take as many leaves of Tobacco as you
please, bruise them in a Mortar, and press forth the juice; cast away the gross
body, and set the juice with an equal part of Oil of Olives in a glass Viol in
the Sun for a long time; stop the glass close with Gums and Wax, and fasten it
with a sound skin of leather: Or if you like it best, set it in a Kettle full
of boiling water, or in Balneo, or hide it in Horse dung, and leave it there
full forty days, renewing the dung sometimes; when the forty days are ended,
you shall find a Balsam in the Glass, no less effectual for all Causes, then
the Quintessence of Tobacco it self.

Another for wounds of Gunshot.
Quercetanus describes another kind of Balsam for Wounds made by Gunshot,
after this manner. Take the glewy substance of Tobacco and Comfry, of each four
ounces; Oil Turpentine, one pound; Flowers of S^ John's Wort, and Mallou's, of
each two handfuls; Elm-tree, Aples, three ounces; of the poplar buds, four
ounces; Spirit of Wine, one pound and half: Digest them in Horse-dung, or leave
them in a hot stove, in a glass Vessel, well stopped for a whole month; then
press them, and strain them forth: Add Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, of each
two ounces; Dragons Blood, half an ounce; Mummie six ounces, Terpentine half a
pound, Benivio one ounce. Circulate them together in a Pellicane for eight
days, then distill of the Spirit of Wine, at a moderate fire, and there will
remain in the bottom a most precious Balsam.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed and Sold by Simon Miller,
at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be
reprinted with large Additions. The Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of
Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our
late unhappy differences are paralleled in many particulars. A general History
of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James, containing the
principal Revolutions and Transactions of Church and State, with Political
Observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of Godscroft. The
History of this Iron Age. Mr Paul Baine on the Ephesians. The Queen of Arragon,
a Play: In fol.
In Quarto large.
Io. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command.
Quarto Small.
Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true Faith of Gods Elect: By John Nicholson Minister
of the Gospel. The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Stroad. Three Treatises: 1.
The Conversion of Nineveh touching Prayer and Fasting. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding
to Repentance. 3. Sovereign preservative against distrustful Thoughts and
Cares: By Will. Attosall Minister of Gods Word at Isfield in Sussex. Ay^sworth
on the Canticles. Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial. Gralle against Appolonius. A
Treatise of Civil Policy, being a clear Decision of 43 Queries, concerning
prerogative, right and privilege, in reference to the supreme Prince and
People: By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland.
Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government, containing
the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princet and
Magistrates. Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.
Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided. Wells his
Souls Progress. 4o. Christ Tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain
Exposition on the fourth Chapter of St Mathews Gospel: By John Gumbledon
Minister of the Gospel: In 4o. The Saints Society. Dr Stoughto^s 13 choice
Sermons, with his Body of Divinity: In 4o. The Reasons of the dissenting
Brethren concerning the PresbyterianGovernment, together with the answer of the
Assembly of Divines: In 4o. Camdens Remains. The Harmonious Consent and
Confession of Faith, of all the Protestant Reformed Churches in Christendom:
In 4o.
Large Octavo.
Florus Anglicus, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in Brass. The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two
thousand seeming Contradictions are fully and plainly Reconciled. Evidences for
Heaven, containing infallible Signs and real Demonstrations for assurance of
Salvation, published by Edm. Calamy Minister of Aldermanbury, Land. The Life
and Reign of King Charles from his Birth to his Death, By Lambert Wood. The
Night-Search, the second part: By H. Mill. 8o. A view of the Jewish Religion,
with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.
Small Octavo.
Ed. Waterhouse Esquire His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the
Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admirable Nature and Virtues of
Tobacco: By Dr Everard and Others. A view and defense of the Reformation of the
Church of England, very useful in these times. Mr Pet du Moulin, his Antidote
against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the Priests
and Jesuits who are now very busy amongst us. Herberts Devotions, or a
Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and Prayers, useful upon all
occasions. Ovid de Ponto, in English. The Loves of Clivio and Lozio a Romance.
Mr Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue. A Book of Scheams or Figures of
Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of times, and very useful for all
Astrologers. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of
William to the death of the Late King. Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue,
and the five Senses for superiority: a serious Comedy. The Spirits Touchstone;
being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know whether he be truly taught
by the Spirit of God, or not. The Poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion. Physical
Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, for
the cure of all Diseases Incident to man's body: By R. Williams. To which is
added the Physical Mathematics: By Hermes, Tres. Maggistus. The Idol of
Clowns, or the Relation of Wat Tiler's Rebellion* The Christian Moderator, in 3
parts. The Golden-fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England. Dr Sibbs
his Divine Meditations. Vigerius Precepts of Idiolismes. 8o. Grotij Poemata.
8o.
Duodecim.
Doctor Smith's Practice of Physic. The Grammar War. Possellius Apothegmes.
Fasciculus Florum. Crashaw's Visions. The Juniper Lecture.
Helvicus Colloquies.
The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil.
Hensius de Crepundiis.
The History of Russia, or the Govern* of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the
manner and fashions of the people of that Country. Drexeliu's School of
Patience. Drexelius his right Intention of every ones Action. 12o.
Viginti Quat.
The New Testament. The third part of the Bible. Sr Richard Baker's Med. and
Prayers for every day of the Week. 24o.
Plays.
The Ball. Chawbut. Conspiracy. Obstinate Lady.

