An Exact and True RELATION OF The DANGEROUS and BLOODY FIGHT, Between His
Majesty's Army, and the Parliaments Forces, near Kyneton in the County of
Warwick, the 23 of this instant OCTOBER.

Sent in a Letter to JOHN PYM Esquire, a Member of the House of COMMONS.

Which Letter was signed by Denzell Hollis, Ph. Stapleton, Tho. Ballard,
William Balfour, Io. Meldrum, Charles Pym. Who were then present.

ORdered that this Relation be forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Dom.

LONDON, Printed for FRANCIS WRIGHT. 1642.

SIR,
WE should do our Army a great deal of wrong, and not discharge our duty of
thankfulness toward God, if we took not the first occasion to declare his
goodness, in giving so great a blessing as he has now done to the resolute
and unwearied endeavors of our Soldiers, fighting for him in the maintenance
of his Truth, and for themselves and their Country, in defense of their
Liberties, and the privileges of ^arliament. This makes us give you now a
Narration of a blessed Victory which God has given us upon the Army of the
Cavaliers, and of those evil persons, who upon Sunday, the 23. of this
instant, engaged his Majesty in a dangerous and bloody fight against his
faithful Subjects, in the Army raised by Authority of Parliament, for the
preservation of his Crown and Kingdom; We marched from Worcester, Wednesday
the 19. upon Intelligence that the Army was moved from Shrewesbury, and
Bridgenorth, and bending Southward; our Train of Artillery was so unready,
through want of draught Horses, and through our omission of Monsieur du Boys,
that we were forced to leave it behind to follow us, and with it the Regiments
of Colonel Hambden, and Colonel Grantham; and staying for it, we could
advance no further then to a little Market-towne, called Kyneton in
Warwickeshire, six miles from Warwick, whither we came the Saturday night,
with 11. Regiments of Foot, 42. troops of Horse, and about 700. Dragoones, in
all about ten thousand men; there we intended to rest the Sabbath day, and the
rather, that our Artillery, and the Forces left with it, might come up to us.
In the morning, when we were going to Church, we had News brought us, That the
Enemy was two miles from us, upon a high Hill, called Edgehill; whereupon we
presently marched forth into a great broad field under that Hill, called The
vale of the red Horse, and made a stand some half a mile from the foot of the
Hill, and there drew into Battalia* where we saw their Forces come down the
Hill, and draw likewise into Battle in the bottom a great broad company:
Their Forces appeared to be much greater then we could possibly have conceived
them to be; by the confession of the prisoners we have taken, they that say
least, say fourteen thousand, which is the Earl of Lindsey's Relation, who
was their General; but others say, eighteen thousand, and above 4000. horse
and Dragoones: The wind was much for their advantage, and they endeavored to
get it more, which to prevent, we were enforced to draw out our left Wing to a
great breadth, and by that means, before the Battle was done, gained it
wholly from them: In our right Wing were three Regiments of Horse, These two
Regiments were led by Sir Io. Meldrum, and were of his Brigado.
the Lord Generals commanded by Sir Philip Stapleto, Sir William Balfore, and
the Lord Fieldings, Sir John Meldrums Brigado had the Van, Colonel Essex was in
the middle, and Colonel Bullard with the Lord Generals Regiment, his own,
the Lord Brooks, and Colonel Hollis in the Rear: In the left Wing were 24.
troops of Horse, commanded by Sir James Ramsey, their Commissary General. In
this posture we stood, when the other Army advanced toward us, the strength of
their horse were on their right Wing, opposite to our left Wing; In their left
Wing they had but ten troops, but their Foot which appeared to us, divided into
nine great Bodies, came up all in front, and after some playing with the Canon
on both sides, that part of it which was on their left, and toward our right
Wing, came on very gallantly to the Charge, and were as gallantly received, and
charged by Sir Philip Stapletons and Sir William Balfore's Regiments of Horse,
assisted with the Lord Roberts and Sir William Constables Regiments of Foot,
who did it so home thrice together, that they forced all the Musketeers of two
of their best Regiments to run in and shroud themselves within their Pikes, not
daring to shoot a shot, and so stood: When our Rear came up, and then charging
all together, especially that part of our Rear which was placed upon the right,
and so next unto them, which was the Lord Generals Regiment, and the Lord
Brooks, led on by Colonel Ballard, who commanded that Brigado, forced that
stand of Pikes, and wholly broke those two Regiments, and slew and took almost
every man of them: The Earl of Lindsey, his son the Lord Willoughby, and some
other persons of note are prisoners, Sir Edmund Varney, who carried the Kings
Standard, was slain by a Gentleman of the Lord Generals Troop of horse, who did
much other good service that day, and the Standard taken, which was afterward
by the Lord General himself delivered unto his Secretary M. Chamber^, with an
intention to send it back the next day unto His Majesty; but the Secretary
after he had carried it long in his hand, suffered it to be taken away by some
of our Troopers, and as yet we cannot learn where it is: The other two
Regiments of our Rear* Col. Hollis, and Col. Ballard charged those which were
before them, and then the whole Body of the Kings Foot, except two other
Regiments ran away* by this time it grew so late and dark, and to say the
truth, our Ammunition at this present was all spent, that we contented our
selves to make good the field, and gave them leave to retire up the hill in the
night: But before we come to this, we will give you an account of what passed
in the other parts of our Army, before our Rear came up to charge. Our battle
at the very first wholly disbanded and ran away, without ever striking stroke
or so much as being charged by the Enemy, though Col. Essex himself, and
others that commanded those Regiments, in chief did as much as men could do to
stay them; but Col. Essex being forsaken by his whole Brigado, went himself
into the Van, where both by his direction and his own execution he did most
gallant service, till he received a shot in the thigh, of which he is since
dead: Now for our Rear, thus it was, before it* toward the out side of it
stood our left wing of Horse, advanced a little forward to the top of a hill,
where they stood in a Battalia lined with commanded Musketeers, 400 out of
Col. Hollis Regiment, and 200 out of Col. Ballards; but upon the first charge
of the Enemy they wheeled about* abandoned their Musketeers, and came running
down with the enemies horse at their heels, and amongst them pell mell, just
upon Col. Hollis his Regiment, and brake through it, though Col. Hollis
himself, when he saw them come running toward him, went and planted himself
just in the way, and did what possibly he could do to make them stand, and at
last prevailed with 3 Troops to wheel a little about and rally; but the rest
of our horse of that wing, and the Enemies horse with them, brake through, and
ran to Kineton, where most of the Enemy left pursuing them, and fell to
plundring of our wagons, by which many of us have received very great loss,
and by name, your servants that now write to you: Notwithstanding their
breaking through Col. Hollis his Regiment, it was not dismayed, but together
with the other Regiments of that Brigado marched up the hill, and so made all
the haste they could to come up to fight, and got the wind of the Enemy, and
came on (if we may say it ourselves, but we must do the soldiers right) most
gallantly, and charged the enemy, who were then in fight with our Van, and the
right wing of our Horse; and as was said before, helped to defeat the two
Regiments forementioned, and made all the rest run, but two other Regiments
which retired orderly, and at last made a stand, and having the assistance of
Canon, and a ditch before them, held us play very handsomely: And by this time
it grew so dark, and our Powder and Bullet so spent, that it was not held fit
we should advance upon them; but there we stood in very good order, drew up all
our Forces both Horse and Foot, and so stood all the night upon that place
where the Enemy before the fight had drawn into Battalia, till toward Morning
that the enemy was gone, and retired up the hill: And then we returned also to a
warmer place near Kineton, where we had quartered the night before, for we were
almost starved with cold in that bitter night, our Army being in extreme want
of victuals. And about 9 or 10 of the clock drew out again into Battalia, and
so stood 3 or 4 hours, till the Enemy was clean gone from the hill, and then
we drew again into our quarter, and there have lain this night, and purpose
this day, God willing, after we have buried our dead, to march to Warwick to
refresh our army, which is exceedingly wearied with so many nights watching, and
so long a fight which held from noon till dark night: Two particulars must not
be omitted, one of Sir Wi. Balfore, who in the beginning of the day broke a
Regiment of Foot which had green Colors, beat them to their Canon, where they
threw down their Arms and ran away, he laid his hand upon the Canon, and
called for nails to nail them up, especially the two biggest which were
Demy-Canon, but finding none, he cut the Ropes belonging to them, and his
Troopers killed the Canoneers: Then he pursued the flyers half a mile upon
execution, and after returned to Sir Philip Stapleton, who in the mean time was
charging of the red Regiment, where the Kings Standard was, and had charged it
home to push of Pike with his single Troop; and they then, together with the
help of some of the Foot of our Rear, utterly broke it, as you had it before:
The other particular was of Sir Phil. Stapleton, who, when five Troops of the
Enemies horse returned from pursuit of our left wing, and from plundering some
of our wagons and passed by the out side of our Rear upon the left hand, went
and charged them with his Troop and made them run; but they finding a gap in
the hedge got away, and returned to the rest of their broken Troops, where they
fallyed and made up a kind of Body again* If we had time we could relate unto
you many more observable passages, but what you have here shall serve you til we
meet* This only will we say, some of both sides did extremely well, and others
did as ill, and deserve to be hanged for deserting and betraying as much as lay
in them their party, but God alone is to be praised who fought with us, and for
us, and made it his own work to give the victory unto his Servants: We have
lost of note* only Colonel Essex, and we fear the Lord Saint-iohn wha^ was
dangerously wounded; We here send you a George, found in the field by a common
Soldier, and bought of him for twenty shillings by one Captane Ski^^er; We
have promised him he shall have it again; we only send it you as one of our
Trophies that you may see it: we believe you will hear of very many of great
quality slain on the other side; The Kings foot are either slain, or most of
them run away, and are now very weak, and should have been pursued by us, but
that we must of pure necessity refresh our men for three or four days, and
then we shall, God willing, address our selves to finish the work. In the mean
time it is very requisite, Letters from the Committee should be writ into the
Countries, which are Southern, to stir them up that they may rise and cut them
off, or assist us at least against them; which hoping you will forthwith do;

We rest, Your faithful and humble Servants. Denzell Hollis: Ph. Stapleton:
Tho. Ballard: William Balfore: Io: Meldrum: Charles Pym.

Our Lord General went last night to Warwick, and is there very well, and had
he been with us, we should not have presumed to have given you the first
Advertisement. His Excellence did gallantly adventure himself that day in the
From against the Enemy, exposing himself to more danger then we could have
wished.



FINIS.

