AN Exact and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE SESSIONS, Begun at the
OLD-BAYLY, On Wednesday January the 17th. 1682.
Giving an ACCOUNT of the TRIALS and CONDEMNATIONS of the several PRISONERS
brought thither.
Printed by Authority.
ON Wednesday January the 17th. The Sessions began at the Old-Bayly, where the
Court being met, the several Offenders were brought up in order to their
Trials. And the first that appeared on Middlesex side, was Mary Page, who was
Indicted for stealing 2. s. 6. d. from Francis Bautam, and after hearing all
the Witnesses on both sides, the Jury brought her in Guilty of Felony.

The next was Elizabeth Neal, who was Indicted for murdering her Male-infant
Child, by choking and strangling, and it appearing undeniable, she was found
Guilty of the Murder.

Then Martha Harvy received her Trial, she being Indicted for that she the 4th.
of January 1682. should steal three Silk Hoods to the value of 16. s. 6. d.
which being positively proved upon her, she was found Guilty of Felony.

Nathaniel Daughty was the next that was tried, who was accused for stealing a
Silver Tankard and Salt from Christopher Vennon, and a Horse valued at 5. l.
and was, upon hearing all Circumstances, found Guilty.

The next that appeared was William Williams, for stealing, on January the
15th. 1682. the Goods of Humphry Middleton, viz. fifteen weight of Iron, valued
at 2. s. and Tools to the value of 2. s. was found Guilty to the value of 10. d.

Then John Marsh was tried for stealing the Goods of John Eugnal, and upon full
Examination of the Witnesses on both sides, the Jury brought him in Guilty of
the Felony.

The next was Samuel Sadler for stealing a Horse valued at 4. l. 10. s. on the
26th. of December, 1682. of the Goods and Chattels of Christopher Neal, and was
thereupon found Guilty of Felony.

Samuel Brooks was the next that received his Trial, he being indicted for
stealing a Silver Tankard the 4th. of December, 1682. from Isabel Risen, and
was brought in Guilty by the Jury.

The Joan Wilson and Ann Martin came to their Trials, for stealing seven and
twenty Shillings in December 1682. from James Bailey, but it appearing otherwise
to the Jury, they were brought in not Guilty.

The next was John Summers for stealing forty Deal-boards, on the 5th. of
January 1682. from Robert Golding, was found Guilty thereof by the Jury.

Edward Williams was the next that came on, and being Indicted for stealing
several Parcels of Linen on the 20th. of December, 1682. from Sarah and Thomas
Green, he was found Guilty to the value of 10. d.

Then James and William Greffis were brought to the Bar, where they were
Indicted for that they the 15th. of December 1682. stole a Canvas Bag, and
ninety nine Guineys of the Goods and Chattels of Thomas Middleton; however they
were brought in not Guilty.

The next was Mary Quarles, who was arraigned for steeling a Goat on the first
of December 1682. of the Goods and Chattels of Stephen Smith, to the value of
10. s.

Mr. Duncumb Abercrony was the next that appeared, he being Indicted for that
not having the Fear of God before his Eyes, but being moved and seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil, did kill William Godolphin, Esquire on the 7th. of
December 1682. and the Jury, upon hearing the whole Matter, brought him in
Guilty of Manslaughter; but the Prosecutors telling the Court they would bring
in an Appeal, he was obliged to give Bail to answer the same next Sessions.

The first that came to her Trial on London side, was Mary Hollingsworth, for
steeling a Silver Tankard in February 1682. from William Daws, but it being not
positively proved, she was brought in not Guitly.

Then Geerteny Dewick was tried, who was Indicted for steeling eleven Yards of
Venetian Silk, on the 11th. of December 1682. to the value of 13. l. 4. s. from
William Young, which Felony being palpably proved on him, he was brought in
Guilty of the Indictment.

Richard Carter was the next, who stood Indicted for steeling a Silver Tankard
on the 22th. of December 1682. to the value of 5. l. 10. s. from Samuel Moor,
and was brought in Guilty of Felony.

Lastly Ann Slow alias Ebram was indicted for steeling, on the 27th. of October
1682. four Holland Smocks, and other Linen, and 5. l. of the Goods and
Chattels of Henry Randall, and upon hearing of all the Witnesses on both sides,
the Jury brought her in Guilty of Felony.

Which being all over, the Court adjourned till the next Morning.

January the 18th. 1682. The Adjourned Sessions being again met this Morning,
Richard Fuller was Arraigned and Tried for killing his Servant Henry Atkins the
2 d. of October 1682. the blow being given with a Tobacco-pipe on Thursday,
whereof he dyed the Saturday following, and the Jury brought him in Guilty of
Felony and Murder.

Also John Francis was found Guilty of Felony, he being indicted for steeling
a Sword from Mr. Cressets side the 21st. of December 1682. to the value of 10.
s.

Likewise Robert Gilford was Indicted for steeling a Silver Spoon from John
Moor the first of January 1682. of which he was found Guilty.

Isabel Stewardson being indicted for steeling Linen, etc. from Richard Friars
in August last, was tried, but brought in not Guilty.

John Nicols and John Wise were found Guilty of steeling Brass Andirons, and
Silk from John Moss the fifth of January.

Samuel Painter was brought in Guilty for steeling a Spice Box, a Bible, and a
Sheet, the second of January, from William Sherriff.

Andrew Whitehand and Joan Hope, were tried for Clipping and Diminishing twenty
pieces of Silver, Queen Elizabeth's Shillings, twenty of King James's Shillings,
and twenty pieces of King Charles's, but were cleared.

Also Stephen Gaul and Alexander Noble were tried for vending false Money, and
counterfeit Coin to Sarah Germy, but were cleared.

Ann Saxby alias Bell alias Cole, was Guilty of steeling Silk, Plate, Linen,
and other Goods, the fifth of December, from Thomas Wards, to the value of 60.
l.

Stephen Nod being Indicted for steeling a Sword, was cleared.

Thomas Aylet was found Guilty of steeling a Sow and two Pigs, to the value of
3. l. on the sixth of December, from Margaret Stanly.

Robert Brand was Indicted for steeling a Copper Pot, the second of January,
and eighteen Yards of Silk from Joseph Roe, and broke open the House at four a
Clock in the Morning, and was found Guilty to the value of 7. s.

William Heywood was found Guilty of Felony, for steeling an Ewe and Sheep the
thirteenth of January.

Katherine Sawyer and Thomas Summers were Indicted for steeling two Hogsheads
of Wine, Sheets, and a Hat, the Fourth of August, from William Metchlife, but
were cleared.

Mary Whaley was Indicted for being accessory to a Robbery, perpetrated by
Edward Johnson, but was also brought in not Guilty.

John Smith was convicted of Felony, for steeling a Gelding from Phillip Earl
of Pembrook, to the value of 30. l.

Charles Beckwith was Indicted for the same, but was cleared.

Sarah Parns and Susanna Smith for robbing Margaret Peck of 20. l. on the
Highway, but were cleared.

William Dotty was found Guilty of steeling a Horse from Nicholas Bell, to the
value of 5. l.

Mary Quarls being Indicted for steeling a Coat and Westcoat, and other Goods,
to the value of 50. s. from Zachary Smith, was brought in Not Guilty.

There were fourteen Persons burnt on the Hand, viz.
Daniel Cauly and John Summers for steeling the Goods of Bernard Gold, to the
value of 23. s. 4. d. John Francis for stealing the Goods of John Cresset, to
the value of 10. d. Robert Gilford for steeling the Goods of John Moor, to the
value of 5. s. John Nicols and his Wife for steeling the Goods of John
Boughton, to the value of 16. s. John Aylet for steeling the Goods of Katherine
Stanly, to the value of 4. l. Robert Brand for steeling the Goods of Joseph
Row, to the value of 3. l. 10. s. William Heywood for steeling the Goods of
James Golder, to the value of 10. s. Ann Saxly for stealing Goods, to the value
of 9. s. Richard Carter for steeling Goods to the value of 5. l. 10. s. from
Samuel Booth. Samuel Painter for steeling Goods to the value of 9. s. from
William Sherriff.
Judgment is deferred for Martha Page and Duncomb Abercrony.

There were two Persons to be whipped.
Will. Williams for steeling the Goods of Hum. Middlemore, value 10. d. Edward
Williams for steeling Goods to the value of 8. d.
There were twelve Persons that received Sentence of Death, viz.

Richard Fuller for murdering his Servant Henry Atkins. John Smith. Elizabeth
Neal for murdering her Infant Boy. Martha Harvy for steeling the Goods of
Edward North, to the value of 13. s. 6. d. William Dotty. Nathaniel Doughty
for stealing Goods valued at 3. l. John Marsh for steeling from John Buckland
valued 3. l. Samuel Sadler for steeling Goods to the value of 4. l. 10. s.
Sarah Brooks for steeling Goods to the value of 8. s. Geertery Derrick for
steeling from William Young the value of 15. l. Ann Slow alias Abraham, for
steeling the Goods of Henry Randal, to the value of 41. s. and 5. d. in Money.
Francis Musgrove for steeling the Goods of George Bagnal, to the value of 10. l.

And several Persons that were bound over, having made their appearance, the
Sessions ended about eight of the Clock on Thursday night.

London, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against Baynard's
Castle, 1682.


