ELEGY, Occasioned by the Death of The Reverend Mr. Samuel Smith, LATE ORDINARY
of NEWGATE. Who departed this Life on the 28th. Day of August School. Aged 72
Years.
WHAT, shall a Man so justly famous Dye,
And no one yet to write his Elegy?
No threadbare Author Squeez a doleful Tale
Out of a Penny Brick, and pint of Ale,
To tell the wondering World that Smith is Dead,
And just like other People in his Bed.
Ye Meager Bards who high in Garrets dwell,
Near Jewin street, and drink at Crouders Well
Whose every moments fertile work produces
Wast. Paper for the Cooks and Grocers uses.
A while suspend your other News, and give
This Man a Verse that He again may Live,
And from Your Muse, receive his Breath that is fled
To Preach a Sermon after he is been Dead.
But see the fondling scriblers rather choose,
To dwell upon their dear Familiar News,
And keep to forgeing Blazeing Stars, or tell
How Felons hanged, and much lamented fell.
These are the Themes which others like, but I
Will Sing of him, who taught the rest to Dye,
Forgive, Dead Priest, if I not well express
Thy worth, or make thy Well-known Merits less,
If this my Pen, should not perform its part,
In giveing holy Sam his due desert.
For if those Men whom Sinners hate, are good,
And Sinners hate those not by Sin subdued,
Thou surely might thy Goodness chiefly boast,
For of all Mortals thou wast hated most.
Witness the many Dying Folks, who here
Would even so much as take thy proffered Prayer,
And though for want of Holy Men distressed
Would Dye Repentless, not by thee Confessed.
How often has thy Counsel been refused,
And Thou without Absolving fee abused?
When Criminals thy Knowledge would disgrace,
And dared to send for Learning in thy Place.
But Heaven at last has heard the Prisoners Prayers
And took Thee from this Worlds attending Gares;
Aged in Years, and Worn with Grief, to see
Thy Counsel lough'd at, as they lough'd at Thee.
And let the Silent Graye thy Body take,
Offenceless now, because it cannot Speak.
The EPITAPH.
Under this stone here lies a Priest
Whose Praying, nor his Preaching
Could never Edefie the least,
Though He was allways Teaching.
Others his good advice could lead
With calmness to the Gallows:
But chose Himself to dye in's Bed,
Not Hang amongst such Fellows.
LONDON, Printed (...) and Sold by J. Read near Fleet Street. School.


