Ex ungue Leonem: OR, A PROOF (by ten Dozen) OF Sixty one Gross EPIGRAMS
Designed for the year 1656.

(...). Printed at London, by JAMES COTTREL. 1654.

TO THE Gentlemen-READERS.
HAving digested into six score Centuries a body of Twelve thousand Epigrams,
which, for my own recreation, I had, at spare hours, composed, some few years
ago; and having put them in a dress so suitable to the various subjects whereon
they treat, that much of their perfection consisting in this proportion, it did
not lie in the power of my skill to discern betwixt the best and worst of them;
because amongst them there was not any, which (according to my opinion) did
not, in some peculiar point or other surpass all the rest, supplying what was
deficient in any one thing thereof, with a precellency and advantage in another
point of the same.

Yet, knowing that all men are not of a like mind, and that whatsoever
pleases some, will to others prove very distastful, I resolved to retard their
Publication, until I had communicated my design unto some friends of mine,
whom nevertheless, to put (or yet my self) to the labor of reading over all, I
thought it unnecessary; seeing by a few, one might as well judge of the
remainder, as of the liquor of a whole tun by one spoonful.

Therefore upon debate, what Epigrams, and how many, should be made use of as
touchstones whereby to try he value of the rest, (it being supposed many would
think, that to pick them out with deliberation, would in a manner be but to
cozen the Reader, (as some Ken ish fruit-sellers use to do their customers, in
making them pay so baskets of rotten apples the whole rate, as if the ware were
sufficient) by means of the cheat of a small scantling of choice fresh Pepins,
strowed on the top, which the innocent buyers rejoice to see, thinking all the
residue to be of a like goodness with that deluding parcel) it was held very
expedient, that, by way of centesimation, taking one only out of every
Century, the number should be just a hundred and twenty: and also deemed most
agreeable to the ingenuity of a discreet Author, that they should be excerpted
by mere chance, as fortune should adjudge, without any formality of proposed
selection.

To this effect, the sixscore Centenaries, in so many distinct bundles, were
spread in order on a long table, upon the which was forthwith set down a very
handsome and large Timber-Square, made of Box-wood, of half an inch in
thickness, wherein was inscribed a Circle of four inches Radius, the whole
circumference whereof was divided into an hundred equal parts, cyfred
accordingly, and on the centre-speck fitted with a whirling Index of brass,
which, being to receive the turning brangle from the hand, some sixscore
several times in all, and after the manifold rapid circumvolutions of each, to
point, in its closing rest, at some one or other number, from an unite to an
hundred inclusively, did, out of those sixscore above-written parcels, direct
us to these subsequent Epigrams, one after another, and in the same order, that
they are here inserted and digested.

And though I was of mine own accord engaged, to allow of the value of the
remnant, by the standard of what is here set down, I may with confidence
avouch, that there are many thousands amongst my other Epigrams, equal to the
best of these, and those written on Subjects, which will be infinitely more
acceptable to a solid and judicious Reader: nor must it be omitted to express,
that the few ensuing Epigrams have not that appearance of acumen, vivacity,
grace, or luster in this Enchiridion, which they were projected to have in the
stock whereof they are but the subdecimal portion.

For being, in the first place, divulsed, rent, and torn from their
fellow members, unto which they were with an apposite symmetrie most
methodically united, they like fingers and toes cut off from the hands and
feet, (though quantified in matter of bulk as before) do not participate of
that life, which by the conjunction animates the whole, and every part: and, in
the next, by reason of the nature of the Lemma's or superscriptions, adorned
with significant proper names, (other then are here specified) which are to be
prefixed to these Epigrams, when reduced to their own peculiar stations, they
suffer a great diminution of worth, with the more perceptibility of their
eclipsed illustration, that, in the contexture of the aforementioned Lemma's
and Names, there is no less of art, industry, and invention requisite, then for
the contrivement of the Epigrams themselves; and much more use in matter of
application, as by a thousand several instances is easy to make apparent.

After this manner, when these ten dozen were pricked down and extracted, it
pleased the aforesaid Gentlemen to grace them (after perusal) with their joint
approbation; which prompted me, for the better encouragement of Stationers and
Printers, in their undertaking for the residue, to allow an Imprimatur to these.

This course seemed to me the more rational, that Stationers, (who never esteem
of the goodness of Books, but by the benefit which thereby accrueth to
themselves) having never been much accustomed with Tractates of this nature, and
those few, brought to their hands, not proving in every thing answerable to
their expectation of gain, which always fuit, est, and erit the (...) of their
Profession) would have startled at the presentment of the immense Volume of a
Dodecachiliad, not possible to be made ready for sale, without vast
disbursments both for paper and printing: the charge whereof they would have
been the more unwilling to undergo, that (the general estimation held of books,
being the chief precursor of their emolument) their hopes, in this unusual
undertaking, would have in the brood been stifled by the contempt, which this
kind of Poetizing has of late most undeservedly fallen into.

At this undervaluing of what the Muses, in their greatest frolicks, are most
delighted in, I oftentimes have very much admired; nor could I conceive any
other reason for it, but that the prime Poets of this Land (setting before
their eyes the imitation of Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Ariosto, Petrarcha, Bembo,
Dubartas, Ronsard, Lopedevega, Guarini, and suchlike, rather then of Martial,
and others of his ingenious fraternity) have been pleased to couch their
Fancies, (wherein, without flattery, to give them their own due, they have been
and are as yet in nothing inferior to any in the best Nations of the world)
and to digest them in any other kind of Poetry rather, then that of the
Epigrammatical strain.

But what it might be which moved them so to do, who had abilities for all
manner of Poems, is only known unto thimselves: for truly I cannot imagine
why, to English Poets, that manner of Versifying should not have been most
agreeable, which is most consonant with the propriety of the English Idiome;
and that (in my opinion) is the Epigram.

As for the precellencie, which, in the Heroic vein, the Greek and Latin have
above the English, and all our other Vernaculary Languages, is easily
understood by those, that are well acquainted with the majestic pace of the
Dactyl and Spondae feet, which is of a much more graceful and lofty trip, then
can be performed by our lame Iambos.

Another sort of gallant Poesy there is, called the Lyrick, wherein are
comprehended Sonnets, Madrigals, Hymns, Ballets, Odes, (whether amorous, rural,
military, symposiastick, or what you will) Epithalamions to Nuptials,
Epinicions for Victories, Genethliacks on Nativities, Congratulatories, and
suchlike copies of Verses, which cannot be expressed by any known Language in
the world with more advantage, then in the Italian: the whole words whereof,
(some few syncategorematical monosyllables only excepted, and those not above
six in all) most smoothely terminating in vowels, and consisting of syllables
(by reason of their paucity of consonants) exceeding neatly materiated, do
afford a Phraseologie so admirably fluent, that the very sound more then most
sweetly dropping in the ear, bedews (to the inexpressible ravishment of the
hearers) the nimble spirits of the brain, with Nectar and Honey
deliciosissimamente.

Yet in matter of Elegies, Threnodies, or any long-breathed Poem on luctiferous
subjects, the Spanish and French Tongues may come in competition with the best.

The latitude of Poesy extending yet a great deal further, there is a species
thereof called the Drammatick, which includes Tragedies, Comedies, Interludes,
Masks, Entertainments, Dialogues, Satyrs, Frolicks, Georgicks, Pastorals,
Piscatories, Nauticals, (which last three pass commonly by the name of
Eclogues) and other suchlike, in all which to the English I would allow a
comparative, but no superlative degree.

For that, and no less in so far as concerns the English, I would reserve to
the only Epigram, even in its utmost extent, as it comprehends Epitaphs,
Characters, Emblemes, Devices, Motto's, Hieroglyphics, Definitions, Aphorisms,
Distributions, Paradoxes, Rebus, Problemes; Charientilogetick Quirks, in
facetious Encounters; Gnomologetick, in Sentences; Paraemial, in Adages;
Ethological, in Moral Precepts; Epistemonical, in Sciences; Technical, in
Liberal Arts; Mechanologetick, in Manual Trades; Cabalistick, in Mysterious
Speculations; Philistoretick, in Narratives; Palaestrick, in Field-exercises;
Umbratilary, in House-games; Paidathyreutick, in Childish Sports;
Androgynathletical, in Amourets betwixt man and woman: Polemick Knacks, in the
Milice; Politic, in the State; Mythological, in all manner of Fables;
Aenigmatick, in Riddles; Arithmologetick, in Numbers; Biographical, in the
institution of a man's life; Zoopaedeutick, in observing for our instruction the
actions of mere Animals: Rhetorical Whimseys, whether Ironical for Similitudes,
or Antipophoretick for Discrepances: Epitatick Hyperboles, in Exuperancie, or
Hypocoristick in Extenuation; with all the other Tropes and Figures, not
omitting the Pathologie thereto subservient; ingenious Fallacies in and extra
dictionem; Encomiasticks, Vituperatories, Scoffs, Sarcasms, Witty Gybes, Jeers,
Jests, Tales, Quibbles, Clinches, Quips, Bulls, Anagrams, Chronograms,
Logogriphs, Acrosticks, Teleuticks, Palindromies, Retrogrades, Antistrophs,
Criticisms, Dipnosophisms. Technopaegnions, and, in a word, all manner of
succinct and concise Poetry, on what subject soever, purely fancied, and in a
quaint diction apparelled: for if in either of those qualifications it fail,
though it may possibly merit the style of an Epigram, yet will it always be
with the addition of a scurvie, paltry, and bad one.

The Epigram therefore, I again avouch, is that which of all manner of Poetizing
does best befit the Systeme of the English Language; because it is that (I
mean, the good one) which, of all Poems, requires the richest and most
pregnant conceit, a sublime and piercing acumen in the close, to be sprucely
worded, and in few terms; which last clause (to wit, shortness) being in a
manner essential to the Epigram, as circularity (or more properly, orbicularity)
to the Heavens, makes that kind of Poesy, by reason of the
Polymonosyllabicalogies of the English, more convenient and suitable to that
Idiome, then to any of the abovenamed Languages.

Truly, as for composing Poetical Treatises upon Didascalary subjects, as did
Lucretius; Epistolary, after the manner of Ovid; Historical, like Lucan; or any
other such long-winded Tractates upon serious purposes, whatever the subjected
matter be, Divine or Humane, it will not, in my opinion (still salva
doctioribus reverentia) relish near so well in Verse as Prose; which, set afoot
once by a dextrous Writer, cannot be (with any appearance of truth) said to walk
on crutches, more then Verses do: for it having answerable to the metrical feet
in the learned Tongues, and parity of syllables tipped with semblable
terminations (vulgarly called Rhymes) in the vernaculary, another kind of
feet, every whit as proportionable, swift, and vigorous; on which being set
forward an Isocoly of members, closing in correspondent desinences without
Homoiotely; the discoursed or treated-on subject, will, on such lively props,
run along the field of the Period, stop, change, turn, fly out again, and,
with a most sprightly motion, full of alacrity, by excitating Passion, and
persuading Reason, forcibly seize, at last, upon all the both upper and under
faculties of the soul, and shut them up as close prisoners in the final close
of the expression.

Hereby as I must acknowledge my self obliged, in the parallel of Prose with
Verse, to ascribe the pre-eminence unto Prose, even in the English, as well as
in all other Languages: so, on the other part, when one kind of Poem comes in
competition with another, and that it shall be asked me, which in the English
would prove most graceful, my answer truly will be, for the reason above
recited, that what rank soever the Epigram keep in other Tongues, it should
above all other Poetry obtain the superiority in the English.

This in very deed proved no mean motive to me, when my Genius led me in the
vein of Poetizing to any favorable opportunity, of embracing a diversion with
the sacred Quire of Parnassus, to set aside all other manner of Poems, and lay
hold on the Epigram: but that which incontroversibly may be called the main
cause of that my choice, was my unavoidable want of leisure, to ply the Muses
in any long purpose of great deliberation. For although my mind had been never
so much bent upon the prosecuting of another strain, and that the English
diction had been able to furnish me with advantages beyond any other Speech for
such a task: yet for having been always so unfortunately involved, either in
public interests, private difficulties, businesses of friends, disturbances of
foes, or other suchlike entanglements, oftentimes with an accumulative
impetuousness thronging upon me all together at once; that I do not remember,
the sun ever shined that day, (since the time elapsed of my subferulary age)
wherein I was master of the space of two whole hours, which I might be sure to
call mine own, without the urgencie of some pressing interruption: I could not,
with pretext of reason, or show of understanding the proportion of the measure
of motion, to the actions thereupon depending, have adventured to launch forth
my little Skiff of Invention, Poetically rigged, into the large and profound
Ocean of Polystichetick undertakings; or yet spun out, with any deserved
praise, the thread of those long-breathed Poems, which secessum and otia
quaetunt.

Thus did the Epigram become my darling-Poemation; because I was never thereby
withdrawn from doing any thing else: proving oftentimes the more successful in
it, the more I was in aliud agendo occupatus; and the more numerous, the less
solitary I was. For very often in a day, wherein I have ridden four and twenty
miles, have I composed just so many Epigrams, without hinderance to my
partaking of any occurring discourse with my fellow-travellers: and as often,
when a grievous and deplorable accident, one or more (squadrons whereof, in
these, calamitous times, have been too frequently obvious to the best of the
Land) would obtrusively press in upon me, at any qua data porta of the brain,
some curious Epigrammatical subjects would on a sudden be introduced by those
emissary spirits, who, from the glandulary fort, seated in the middle of the
Epicranidian citadel, were commissionated to fly out, and make excursion upon
the disturbers of their intestine tranquillity; to the end that by the
additional strength of such faithful and trusty confderates, they might, with
the greater ease, keep off their dull and lamentable adversaries, from taking
possession of any room, or quarter in the aforesaid multicellulary Garrison: and
for the better encouragement of those Epigrammatical Auxiliaries, some of the
Trained band, spirits of the soldiery of Terpsichore, would make it their
employment to trim and trick them up with a la mode fancies, even to the very
Codpiece and Placket, procuring thereby their admission unto a free quarter,
through the favor of the Commander in chief, who, to shun deeper
inconveniences, was pleased to give way thereto: for although at first, these
light aerial subjects seemed, in regard of those other ponderous objects of a
trist and plangorous consideration, to be but as a Zannie, compared to a
buskined Actor on the Stage; yet seeing a heavy, doleful, and discontented
wretch, seldom obtains that reception, which is allowed to a jovial, pleasing
guest, little Hilarulo Gringalet for his mirth was often entertained with
welcome, when for his morosity, and sullen melancholy, Don Adolentado de
Pesadumbre Cuydoso, was for all his gravity very justly rejected.

I will not deny, but that I found my vein to operate the more easily in these
Epigrammatographical Exercitations, that, according to my own fashion, in all
other Disciplines and Faculties, (as well as that of Poetry) of preferring
Reason to Testimony, and Truth to Plato, and all his disciples, I was so averse
from setting before mine eyes the imitation of any, that contrary to the
commonly-received custom of terminating every verse with a masculine Rhyme, I
chaped my lines now and then with female desinences, and sdrucciola's, which
Last the Latinists call Dactyls; it not seeming very reasonable unto me, that
because of the multiplicity of monosyllabical and oxytonal words in the
English, we should not Rhythmically also make use of the paroxytonals, and
proparoxytonals, whereof there is likewise great store: but unnecessarily
defrand our selves of the benefit of many thousands of right important
teleuticks, thereby dissenting from the approved practice of all other knowing
Nations, and laying of a new divisam ab orb foundation of our own, as if we
were ambitious to bring our Roesie to an elevation Antarctick to the Italians,
which is incapable of any other Rhyme, but of a female or Sdrucciola; although
the Tuscan Versificators, by these two alone, without the help of the male,
brag that they have brought Poesy in that Language to the greatest height it
did ever reach unto in any Tongue whatsoever.

Nevertheless it is my opinion, which notwithstanding I will not obtrude upon
the tender credulities of any, otherwise then they shall find good reason for
their adherence thereto, that these Italianized Rhymes are with us to be served
in with such animadvertencie, and discretion, that to no Heroic Poem in the
English they ought to be admitted, nor yet to the Elegy, and, in a word, to no
kind of Verses to be set forth, either in a majestic or mourning gravity:
albeit the French, even in their Alexandrian Lines, make it one of the precepts
of their Poetic art, to interlace the female alternatively with the masculine
Rhyme.

This liberty which I have always been pleased to assume unto my self, of
terminating my lines promiscuously with what Rhythmical desinences I thought
fitting, did hurry my vein into such a facility of Epigrammatizing, that what
number of Epigrams I have composed, is totally unto my self unknown; most part
having been imbezeled, plundered, and destroyed, and a great many others
dictated from my own mouth, whereof I never had any copy: yet some twelve
thousand having providentially escaped the rage of the victorious Enemy, and
villainous unworthy hands of the base unmerciful Sequestrator; I make account (
Deo favente) out of that gross, to publish, by the first of January 1656. a
Body of Three hundred sixty and six several Books, which, consisting each of
Four and twenty Epigrams, are, in their wholes and parts, to represent the days
and hours of that year, to the number of Eight thousand seven hundred eighty
and four: and those so aptly adjusted with Lemma's, and other ornaments thereto
requisite, that, out of Greek, Latin, Spanish, and Italian, the four fittest
of all known Languages, for proper and Gentile denominations, have been by me
extracted near upon Seven thousand names, all of them in the aforesaid Volume,
significant of the subject of the Epigram to which they are respectively
prefixed and applied.

I verily believe it will be affirmed by many, that it exceeds the sphere of my
ability, to perform what I speak of; and that, in a manner, I do but promise
impossibilities.

Good Gentlemen, how shall I in this case convince these Incredulists? To offer
them the usual way of reasoning, is to small purpose: for if they be acquainted
with me, they know I have already performed greater tasks, and on harder
matters: and if they never saw me, nor heard of me, they being but blind
judges of my sufficiency, no man is bound to give any credit to their
assertions.

Therefore by a new way of mine own, to reduce these Nullifidians to some kind
of conformity, and confute their irregular Positions with a Syllogistick
argumentation, I will make use of this Assumption and Conclusion in Darii:

I have a mind to keep my head on my shoulders:

Ergo, I will publish these Three hundred sixty and six Books, by the first of
January, 1656.

Now although the Dictum de omni, out of which this minor (to bring the mood to
Darii) is subsumed, be altogether unreasonable; yet if any undertakers will
resolvedly undergo the condition of performing the aforesaid task, or losing
their life, it will in that case frame an hypothetical Syllogism, reducible to
the same mood, no proposition whereof can be denied.

This engagement will I take, and enter so far into it, That if his Highness
the Lord Protector will be pleased to lay a Wager against me of 20000 l.
English money, that, on the first of January 1656. I shall not have published
these Three hundred sixty and six books, as is aforesaid; I shall be content,
for assurance on my part, in matter of their publication, to pawn all I have
above the shoulders, as a pledge by me valued at a far higher rate, then the
above-written sum, and which I shall subscribe my self well pleased to lose, in
case of nonperformance: provided violent obstructions be withheld from me, and
that I may enjoy my own spirits with so much freedom, as is needful for the
accomplishment of such an undertaking.

If my Lord will not descend so low, as to hearken to this overture, Then my
humble desire is, that I may have my liberty granted to me, together with the
enjoyment of my own means, and the removal of the Garrison out of my house; and
I shall perform it howsoever, upon the pein above specified.

Now if none of these demands can be obtained, and that it be though expedient,
I shall still continue (as I have done these whole three years past) totally
deprived of the possession of any thing (whether of real or personal estate)
that is mine, nothing allowed me anywhere in compensation thereof, nor yet for
my own subsistence, and nevertheless said open, and exposed without protection,
to the rigor and highest severity of the Laws of this Isle, and that at the
suit and instance of the most injurious, unconscionable, merciless, and
implacable men, that ever the earth produced; I must needs, in that case say,
That so much may be said thereto, that I will say nothing.

Therefore, Gentlemen-Readers, farewell; and wish well to him, who, had he not
been debarred from the fruition of his own, would before this time have
presented you with that, which you would have deservedly valued at ten times a
higher rate, then all the demands he ever till this hour has made, did amount
to, and likewise at this instant subscribed himself otherwise then

Anonymos.

Ex ungue Leonem.
To the Elixir of Beauty, pattern of Goodness, quintessence of Worth, abstrect
of all Compleatness, Paragon of her Sex, Masterpiece of Nature, Proto-type of
Perfection, and the sublimely acceptable object of Comentment in all the female
kind; the most excellent, matchless, incomparable, transcendent, Angelick,
divinely accomplished, and never too-much-to-be-praised Aura.
YOu are the settled subject of my love;
The love of heaven, and heaven, in whose orbs move
My choice delights: delight of all my chief
Aetherial spirits: spirit of my life:
Life of my soul: and soul of my desires:
Desire of that acquaintance, which admires
And worships you: the acquaintance of the best:
The best of women; and a woman graced
With beauty: beauty, which does far surpass
What is most glorious on this earthly mass:
Mass of supreme perfection; and perfection
Of Art and Nature; thus much my Affection
Adventures in your praises to disclose,
By these gradations that you may compose
Your self in every action, thought, discourse,
To be all mine, as I am wholly yours.
The reason why women should go no longer bareheaded after they be married.
THe husband is the head, as soon's h' unlocks
The virgin-door of his espoused mate:
In sign whereof, what first was bare she cloaks,
And for his low discov'ry veils her pate.
Her head she covers, thus to gratify him:
For he is not head, till she be covered by him.
The discrepance betwixt Eve, and other women.
EVe finned first most grievously, and then
that she was naked it did her displease:
Though women now lie naked before men,
that they may sin it out with greater ease:
Eve in her innocence was naked still;
But in their nakedness They work most ill.
Of a certain very jealous man.
JEalous Gravoso, sleeping with his wife,
Whose carriage made him weary of his life,
Dreamed that there did, for curing of his evil,
Appear a joyful object to 'm, The devil:
From whom, he thought, he got a ring so fit
For his design, that so long 's he with it
Should his mid finger keep environed,
He would be sure not to be cuckolded.
His fancy was so tickled with delight
At such a gift, that he awaked straight:
But when he found his said mid finger in
The orifice of his wifes lower Gin,
Without Artemidorus art, he knew
The dream to be in either part most true:
Both that it was the devilish gave him that Ring,
And that his finger would bar Cuckolding.
How blind Adraces was served by his wanton wife.
Blind Adraces chid with his young wife Kate,
That Candles on the table were not set:
For he believed it was dark night, although
The Sun to 's setting had an hour to go.
You need not care (quoth Kate) for lacking light,
You cannot well discern 'twixt dark and bright.
That Is true (quoth he) yet is it fit I crave
That for my house, which all my neighbors have.
Well then, Sweetheart (quoth she) I hold it best
You be obeyed. With this, above the wast
She tucks up all her clothes, and, to the view
Of those could see, a naked quoniam show:
Then said, (Sweetheart) are you not now content?
He, thinking lights were brought as he had meant,
Said, (Wife) that is fit for a Princes eye,
And worthy to be seen, who ere come by.
How one Dick did cuckold himself.
DIck being come late from a long journey, did
Meet with his wife by mere chance in a hid
And narrow corner of his country house,
Where he gave her the intercrural douse,
Without so much as mum, or any word,
Either before, or whilst he was aboard:
But when the feat was done, and that his speech,
Together with the light of candles, which
Were then brought in, discovered the trick
Thus done unto her by her husband Dick;
I vow, had I known it was you, (she said)
Till we had been abed, you should have staid.
Of Moll's skll in Grammar.
MOll in the Common first of two or three
Began her Grammar; then the love virotu^
Moved her to study night and day, till she
Had by continual practice declined horum:
She likes those declensions for the vowel,
Wherein the I the Genitive befits,
And Atticizing 't in the number dual,
The female with the male-kinde she unites:
Or rather, all her Concords are betwixt
Two diverse geners, where the Masculine
Is substantively dative, and so fixed
Within the mobil of a feminine,
Whose Case is adjectively ablative;
That if she, by a jovial Interjection,
Furthered with a Conjunction cop'lative,
And inward Preposition, such perfection
Give to her Syntax, that to him that does
In the first person court her, she apply
The second in a kind will make them both
Active, and passive, participially:
Then in these her Grammatications, she
Each part to other will adapt so finely,
That how frequentative soever he be:
She Will to his Gerunds bear her self supinely.
Thus does she prove superlative, and more
Then perfect, in both Nouns, and Verbs, and all
The other parts of Speech, required for
Cupid's expression, as Grammatical.
But though there be no woman that surpasses
Her skill in Grammar, yet at all occasions,
Her flexions she so genitively caseth,
And subjunctively moods her Conjugations;
That all she knows therein, is but a plain
Construction of her lust with that of men.
Of Quintin the Bankrupt.
QUin how is drowned by his sinister fate:
What, in salt or fresh waters? no, in debt.
How one Ben, with his Mistress Pen, practiced their skill in Alchymie.
THey by aspiring both to the perfection
Of the Elixir, did together enter
Upon the several subjects of Projection,
B' a mixture natural and elementar':
Whilst in material things they co'perated,
TO incorporate their Sindon by ignition,
She th'unrefined substance sublimated,
And crowned the Magistecum b' imbibition;
Till the whole virtue of the stone being tried,
They with the touch thereof were satisfied.
Of Not and his wife.
NOw give me leave (quoth Not to's wife) to do it.
I will (quoth she) my next suit being allowed.
Content (says he) with this they fig'd it; then
Did she wish him to do it over again.
Of a young Widow, and a pretty Widower.
A Rich fair Widow, as she wept for her
Deceased husband; a young Widower
Told, that her case was (ah!) then his much better;
For (ah!) he had killed his wife with his child getter.
Oh kill me then (quoth she) with that same blade;
For (oh!) I would be dead, I would be dead.
Of Meads, and Maids.
ALl Lasses love green gowns; and see'ng that the
Best grass of any we in Meadows see,
Therefore is it, that from the word of Meads
Virgins by men are fitly termed Maids.
Of Morgan the Fiddler, and his Sweetheart Kate.
MOrgan made in his progress and retreat,
Such music with his Kyt-stick on dame Kate,
That it being like the Pitch-pipe of an Organ,
Kate was well pleased therewith, and so was Morgan.
To Procaculo, a suitor to one Doll.
THough Doll be chaste, despair not; she is a fair one:
And though you know her well, yet (...):
Of a handsome, and well-bred Girl, without a Portion.
I Put the case she be as strait 's a Plain,
As white 's the Lily, and as sweet as Honey;
Yet shall she hardly in this Land obtain
In birth and worth her equal, without money.
For to cerdogametick wooers, sucre
Is but as wormwood, where there is no lucre.
Of the scolding betwixt Joan and Jug.
GEt hence, you baggage queen, forth at the door;
For I must stay here, strumpet, punk and whore,
(Quoth Jug to Joan) Stay then (Jug) see'ng th'adjunct
Of strumpet, to the styles of whore and punk
You to your self reserve, (quoth witty Joan)
And forthwith with the baggage I Will be gone.
Of the right of Cuckolds and Cuckold-makers.
A Cuckold for the most part seems to me
To have plus juris ad rem quam in re:
But Cuckold-makers (as I think) may claim
To have plus juris in re quam ad rem.
Of one Doll, how she practiced her cunning in the Science of Natural
Philosophy.
DOll's matter being informed from the privation
Of a Virginity, she was the subject,
Whereon the mysteries of generation
Were dived into; and having for her object
A body natural as natural,
Her knowledge was in the Acro'maticks such,
That 'r nature hating vacu'm most of all,
She loved de anima but for the touch;
And speculating motion, time, and place,
Gave proofs sufficient of her skilfulness.
Why it is a proper sort of speech, to say that a man knows his wife, when he
has carnally to do with her; according to the answer of one Amphibolos, to
another that asked him the question.
AMphibolos made answer the one demanding
Why knowledge may be taken in that acceptance?
It craves in man, a piercing understanding;
In woman, a capacit' and conception:
Knowledge being as it seems in our sight,
But to conceive, and understand aright.
Of Knox the Sabbatarian.
KNox makes no conscience of Adultery,
Of Rapine, Theft, or Petty Larceny;
Yet hanged his Cat for killing of a Mouse
Upon the Sabbath Day within his house.
Of Conditional clauses.
THe clause conditional of woman is
That promises, So far as in her lies:
But of that man, that enters into bonds
With woman is, So far as in him stands.
For his erection, with her succubation,
Keeps uninfring'd their mutual obligation.
The words of one Mongo, to a Courtizan of his acquaintance; together with her
reply.
Them.
THere being a great that is long, and great that is thick;
Which of the two love you best in a --?
Answ.
The thick one I prefer: for I desire
A Tompkin rather then a priming Wire.
Yet if my wish were to be granted, Mong,
I would choose one, that were both thick and long.
Of Scotus and Aquinas.
THese stirring spirits of Aquin and Scot
May be compared to the sun in March,
Which raises humors, but dissolves them not;
For they for nine a clock at midday search,
And make to Questions subtle answers, which
Provoke far rather, then abate the Itch.
In vindication of a free-strained Epigram.
Methinks I hear the Reader mutter, (faugh!)
This is obscene and bawdy, and that a
Good Epigram cannot be scurrilous,
Though it should be quick and sententious:
Yet let him know, see'ng I have framed as many
Of such a kind, as ever yet did any,
That it could not be suitable to my
Intended method of Variety,
Not to be sometimes frolic in my lines;
For to such strictness who his vein confines,
And gravely tunes his notes at every minute,
Sings rather like a Cuckoo then a Linet:
Who likewise cannot mix with Lydian Lays
Cromatick airs, does merit no more praise
Then who, a Ladies picture having made,
Did quite forget to have it shadowed.
Therefore unto my self I did propose
Of Epigrams a body to compose,
Which should not totally consist of eyes,
Nor ears alone, of heart, brains, tongue, or thighs:
For that were monstrous; but of these, and all
Parts fit for Microcosms Poetical;
And so have symmetry, and members common
With the most perfect and accomplished woman,
Whose beauty will not please (in my account)
The sweetest lover, if she want a C --.
Nor is there any in the Universe,
Will hold that she is complete without an A --
Of the amorous Kisses which frequently pass betwixt the male and female.
SHe by receiving kisses from the male,
Brings his recommendations to the tail:
This is the cause, I think, why the word lips
Has such a full-mouthed Rhyme with that of h --.
An Apology for lascivious Writing.
WHy should we bashful be to write in sheets,
What Law both sexes t'act in sheets permits?
Unless it were a greater sin t'intrust
Paper with words, then beds with deeds of lust.
Nay, where to do a thing deserves no blame,
To speak thereof we ought not to think shame.
Of No, and Much.
THere is scarce any other word that is Spanish
And English both, but only much, and no:
For once much hatred and no love did banish
The one from the other, as their mortal so:
Yet would much trust, and no deceit make these
Two nations fully one another please.
The words of one, that was both a great Drinker, and a Wencher, in excuse of
both.
IT is not for the love of drink, that I
Carouse so much; but for the company:
No more then it is for the Nuptial cranny,
That I grimbetilolletize my Jany;
It being her belly, thighs, eyes, arms, mouth, face,
And other such appurtenances, as
Accompany the integrants, that do it,
Which so bewitchingly entice me to it.
Of Bettrice the widow of one Frederick
BEt' two hours after Fred' her husband's death,
Being su'd in terms of marriage by one Beth,
Said, Sir, I cannot yield to your demand;
For I 'm already promised beforehand.
Contraria juxta se posita, clarius clucescunt.
AS Cloris keeps a cole-black Morish girl,
That her own beauty may seem like a pearl:
So Bast to 's house does only fools admit,
That he may seem to have the greater wit.
Bridegrooms compared to Mathematical Navigaters.
BRidegrooms, like skilful Navigators, hit
The land, whereof they never saw one bit.
Of Here-bider the Dutch-man's adventure, with the beautiful Courtizan Flora.
FLora is called an Angel, yet Here-bider
Found her not so, when he with 's touchstones tried her:
For if we take an Angel as it is
A current Coin, esteemed worth half a Piece,
She is not worth a Groat; she 's course allay,
And many grains too light, base every way.
I but (says one) in beauty she is so bright,
That she is like those Angels called of light:
Yet truly she 's not so; for, in the effects
Of darkness, she most pleasure always takes:
Therefore if we must needs her Angelize,
She Is like those Angels fell from Paractise;
A ver' incarnate devilish, fiend of perdition:
For, whom she rempted has to her fruition,
And drawn within her sulfurous fiery pit,
Those she has peppered for their entering it:
Within the hell of whose concavitie
( Pandora's box-like) all diseases lie.
None knows her to b' an Angel by her wings;
But by the prickning and mischievous stings,
Which she still keeps lurking in her tail,
For the destruction of each silly male
That comes within her reach, her to embrace.
Thus Flor' 's a devilish, in a fair angel's dress.
Of one Trigion, who was in love with a holy sister named Peine.
WHen Trigion found that he did but in vain,
For diverse months, make love to Mistress Pein,
Hearing she was a Congregationer,
He to her godly meetings did repair,
That, under color of profound devotion,
He might the better prosecute the motion
Of getting his desires; which, in effect,
Did come to pass, as he did it project:
For when the lights were out, he in the dark
Did many nights together on that mark
He aimed at, give her the touch of three,
Though all this while she knew not it was he,
This did embolden him one day to try
If (as before) she would his suit deny;
And, the more strongly to persuade her to it,
Told her where, when, and how often he did do it.
You are deceived, (quoth she) I will not (Trigion)
Do that for lust, which I did for Religion.
Concerning such, as of late have received the honor, some of Lord, some of
Earl, by the names of eminent running waters.
I Know no reason why, in Scotland, diverse
Have built their dignities upon the brittle
Unstay'd foundation of impetuous rivers,
None fearing, that therein he sink his title;
Unless it be, they aim by such a wile,
TO have without eloquence a fluent style.
The relation of a single Combat, as it was fought betwixt Dan, and his
Sweetheart Anne.
H' along'd about, that she might have the proof
Of's imbrocat; and gliding swift from thence,
H' advanced again, and met her contrebuff
From a low ward: to 's strokes she makes defense,
And paries with her shield: now he re-skips,
And gives in thrusts: but lest he should escape her,
She backrisposts them: h' enters in her grips:
She countergrip'd, and past below his rapier:
Then struggling in the close, though he was stronger,
His weapon failing, he could fight no longer.
Upon one Frank.
WHen she in name alone was Frank,
She was a maid, and her womb lank:
But when she was in nature Frank,
Her belly swelled up like a bank.
Of Vir, in Virginity.
Them.
WHy has the word Virginity, Vir in 't;
See'ng maids (as such) ply not t'a viril dint?
Answ.
Because the Moon within her has a man,
And yet 's a virgin, called the chaste Diane.
Of the pretty woman Nell, most exquisitely practicing the gesticulatory cricks
and whirls of an amoreus ball.
NEll's feet express in dancing the Love-rites
(Her tongue being silent) which her heart endites:
And, with a smiling face, a twinkling eye,
A nimble body, and lascivious thigh,
Affords notorious evidence, by this
Her frolic carr'age, what her meaning is.
She paceth it so softly, that she seems
Close by the floor to fly with her stretched limbs;
Or rather, she along the Carpet sails,
To seize upon the hearts of all the males
That purposely went thither to behold her:
The more they 're like to yield, she is the bolder
TO encounter them, where they cannot resist;
And therefore in those slights does she insist,
Whereby they are caught the ground she slightly touches,
And most bewitchingly makes her approches.
Now she retireth, till her dainty foot
Make all that stands upon it wheel about:
And other while, she puts on, to show
The gallant progress of the passage: now
She turns, and veers with pleasant gambols; then
Recoyls, sets forward, and comes in again;
And to the cadence of the Lutes and Viols,
Displayeth such incomparable trials
Of her agility, that never was yet
A woman that more bravely footed it.
She to the lookers on makes her addresses,
As if they were to fall in her embraces;
And the most intim'secrets in the feats
Of marriage-consummation, counterfeits.
She trips her motion with the greater license,
That she is sure it heats the concupiscence
Of the spectators: every Iustful jert
She lanceth, is a double-forked dart,
To pierce them to the very soul: each cast
Of her alluring eyes, has them possessed
With so great fervencie, that as she glanceth,
And in delights triumphingly thus pranceth,
Her sparkling blinks do to their fancy prove
A Philtre, which impoysons them with Love.
A while she stops, reflecting on the joys
She Is taken with, in these enchanting toys:
Then in a trice falls to again, renews
Her itching wriglings, revels her reviews,
Fetches her whirls and frisks, and is so quick
In the performance of each amorous trick,
That all who see how finely she does stir,
Are over the ears enamoured of her.
Yet her activity in membral gesture,
Adorned by her gorgeousness of vesture,
And all those Mimick pranks, which she devises,
These amourets, wherein she exercises
Her toe, her heel, her eye, her total frame,
Are but the ushers of a better game:
All the pathetick fantoms, ardent charms,
She makes show of to infold within her arms,
Those antic postures, frigging minardises,
Those tickling quav'rings wherewith she entices
The Damerets of the Aphrodisian Court,
Are shadows of a more substantial sport,
Or moving pictures of that solid pleasure,
Which Nuptial Hymen, in a larger measure,
Allows a matrimoniated couple,
To reap by mutual dalliance without scruple.
But now that she is wearied with the toil
Of balling, and that all her spirits boil
With scorching flames of the blind archers fire,
Which kindles no less vehement desire
In her Inamorato's, hence she goes,
Having farewell'd the company, at whose
Earnest entreaty she was pleased to come
Into a fair and well-adjusted room;
Where though she in appearance seem enclosed,
Only to have her tired bones reposed;
One of her Suitors, who, at all adventures,
Follows upon the track, gets leave to enter:
But what they do, the door being shut, and she
Most glad there is now none more with her, but he;
Let those be judges, who, in the like passion,
Have had the leisure of such recreation.
Of Bess.
BEss is a whore, because she 's bent ad stupra;
And a Pick-pooket is, causa qua supra.
Of Pet, and his wife Kate.
SO prodigal is Pet, that sooner he
Will a good wife, then a good husband be:
And Kate is such, that, I dare pawn my life,
She Will sooner b'a good husband, then good wife.
Concerning the Bride Meg, to her Bridegroom.
HOw Meg shall fall to work she needs not ask ye;
If other teachers fail, (...).
Of the wench Frank, concerning her skill in Algebra.
THough by her Algebra Frank found Aequations,
And ways to work in rules of dark positions
Yet, to all Algorsts interrogations,
She made the root the only supposition:
By which art, she her pleasures did refine,
And like to Cossick numbers so bestow them,
That they went never alone, without some sign
Of rooted quantity annexed unto them:
But still most secrets she disclosed, when she
Tried new conclusions by the Rule of three.
Of Lasses, and Glasses.
THough Glasses and Lasses be never so little,
Yet Lasses and Glasses are ever in danger:
For Lasses and Glasses are both of them brittle,
And ready to fall in the hands of a stranger.
Though falling be common to Lasses and Glasses,
Yet is there this differ 'twixt Glasses and Lasses,
That falling breaks Glasses to pieces asunder,
But pieces bring Lasses to falling at under.
The Arithmetic of Bess the Courtizan.
BEss fitteth her acc -- unt by ternaries,
Whereof the prick denominates the value:
Yet holds that her cyfer fruitless is,
Without the right position of his fellow;
A goodly digit, which, in its due place,
May therewith frame an article of peace.
The liberality of one Mr. Rashion.
TAf from his Master brought a Buck to Rashion,
Who said, in thinking his pains worth a fee,
Take here a Groat for your remuneration.
Sir, keep your Groat; the word contenteth me:
Which possibly, had it been shorter, you
Had been well pleased more wages to bestow.
Of one Jane accustomed to Farding, whose picture the Limner drew, to represent
her face, as it was painted.
JAne's Picture her resembles not, though she
Be as like it as any thing can be.
What 's natural in her, it does not hit
So well as she has art conform to it.
She seems in being so artificial,
To be the extract, and it the original:
Her lively hue it does not so express,
As she shows it in colors on her face.
The Limner thought he portrayed her the better,
The more his art did counterfeit her nature:
But she endeavored, on the other part,
To force her nature to imitate his art.
Her shining tincture she most sprightfully
Illuminated with a glist'ring dye;
And made the luster of her countenance,
In the eyes of the beholders, so to glance,
That one would think in what they represented,
That he did only fard, but that she painted.
Yet in the table, which his pencil drew,
Her seniblance was s' apparent to our view,
That I may boldly say, If that there were
So much of life in it, as art in her,
It would both speak, and walk, and be in love,
And her own other self in all things prove.
But to determine further of their worth,
They do each others likeness so set forth,
That, in a word, they 're both but images,
It, of what she was; she, of what it is.
An Observation upon Caesar, and his Gaulish foes.
SOme names of Caesar's foes did end in x,
Such as Ciugetorix, Ambiorix.
With Dumnorix, and old Veridovix,
Orgeterix, and Eporedorix,
With Vircingetorix, and Segonax,
Which show, that with great prowess, and State-knacks;
With warlike feats, and Court-like daubing tricks,
He was to make himself Anax, and Rex.
The words of a certain Bridegroom, whilst he was about to consummate the
Matrimonial act with his Bride; together with her answer.
Sp.
SO much the more beloved of me are you,
That to my suit you did not yield till now.
Enc.
I was so often cheated in 't before,
That I resolved to do so no more.
The analogy betwixt Apples, Codlins; Maids, and Women.
AS a green Apple from a Codlin, so
Do Maids and Women differ: both of them
Must needs endure a little boiling, to
Immerge the former in the others name.
The open pores of the apples skin, admit
To the inward substance Vulcan's hot impression,
And Cupid's fire enflameth maids, till it
Interiourly enact their transformation.
Maids being made women, that the touch may feast;
And Apples, Codlins, to delight the taste.
At a penny the sheet.
THe fees of Nick the Pimp, and the Clerk Ned,
Are much alike: for Nick but two pence had
Last morning for the Courtizans bed-making,
Which for each sheet was but a penny taking.
To Philoinos.
IN all the Rhetoric of Aristotle,
The Prosopopeie of a Tavern-bottle
Is of all Figures, that which best likes you,
When it flows eloquently Glou, glou, glou.
The words of a certain jovial woman to her jealous husband, in apologizing for
Lechery, by the metapher of a Ring.
THis Ring of mine (Sweetheart) has been upon
My finger (as you know) and on your own;
And yet in every thing without amiss,
Whatever it was before, the same it is;
In measure nor in goodness does it change:
Even so, albeit my other Ring should range,
Upon enclosing more then one or two
Of suchlike fingers as you use it to,
You would not find it worse in any thing,
That Is competent to such a kind of Ring.
That in the whole composure of humane frame, amidst the variety of its most
alluring parts, the mouth affords the greatest conveniencie for the application
of a kiss.
IF Kisses did not to the taste belong,
The male and female love inspired youth
Would do the remnant of the body wrong,
In Kissing nowhere else but on the mouth.
Yet of all other, the chief reason is,
That the only mouth can interchange a kiss.
To Jupiter.
WHen Io was a cow for thee, (Great Jove)
Why did thou for the Nymph Europa's love
Become a Bull, and not for her whose shape
Had to receive thy coit been more apt?
Was it because Pasiphae, the Queen
Of thine own Isle of Creet, was to be in
The yoke of love with the bull Minotore,
Without regard of mankind; and therefore
Thou would have neither sex to Cupid be
Exempted from irregularity?
Had Io these two Ladies Cucknelized,
And the turn-bulls eachother rivalized,
They truly had done what they ought all three:
Mean while Europa, and Pasiphae,
Their womanhood had without any scruple
Gast off, to enjoy that bullified couple;
And rather then their inward touch to lose,
Put on vaccality, and turn Io's:
For men and women both their Reason quit,
When they in Venus and her son delight.
Of Love's Didimi, and the premises of a Syllogism.
AS the premises are two Propositions,
Whose charge is with an argumenting vigor
TO infer a third, as strong by their positions,
Within the limits of some certain figure:
So do the twins of Cupid hold compactly
A substance well elaboured by nature.
That through the third, they may the more exactly
Infuse the most refined of all the matter;
Yet in the sequeles we such differ find,
That this, springs from the body; that, the mind.
Of the nature of such licentious women, as do datly addict themselves to the
practice of Venery.
TO that part which is most profoundly ractil
In Courtizans, we fitly may compare
The last ca'sur' of a Pentameter;
Because it still before it has a dactyl:
And therefore Poets did or old rehearse
Their baudy songs, in the Elegiack verse.
Of two Wonchers, whereof the one was a Papist, the other a Protestant.
The Papist.
I Gladly would a Lass hinkinkiate,
That is a Protestant, to vindicate
The honor of the Pope, who still has been
By that profession called The man of sin.
The Protestant.
I would to a Popish girl an inward foyl
Give willingly, and soundly 'r dinsredonii,
Merely to be revenged of that fry,
Which terms our Religion Heresy.
The simplicity of the Girl Joan, in losing her Virginity with one Beedle.
JOan, being called to the wedding of her brother,
Was punctually commanded by her mother,
That in the company of young men, she
Should have a care to keep hea modesty.
The girl was very frolic, loved sport;
But was so simply young, that in what sort
She should obey her mothers precepts, she
Could in no manner descant: for of the
Word honesty she did not know the sense,
This being perceived by Beedle, he from thence,
As soon's her mothers back was turned about,
After some ceremony led her out.
Unto a private room, where he her told
That he had learned a secret, which he would
Impart to her, whereby she might be very
Sure of her honesty, and yet be merry:
For (says he) mark, there is a little rent
Betwixt your thighs, which will afford a vent
For your poor honesty to fly out at,
Unless it neatly be sowed up; and that
I shall perform: for here I have a needle
Will do the work. For God's sake, Master Beedle,
Do that, (quoth she:) with this, she touching it,
Together with the roundlets to it knit,
Fell back immediately, to the end he might
Enter in her mid seam his point aright:
Which he did do with great dexterity,
And pricked her to the life most lustily.
This when he once had done, he asked how she
Was pleased with his new-fashion'd taylorie?
Exceeding well, (quoth she.) Well then, (says he)
To the end that you may all this day-long be
Assured still your honesty to keep,
I will bestow upon you yet to deep
And strong-drawn stitch: which was no sooner said,
But he of new insuturates the maid.
When he had thus twice rantred pretty Joan,
He took his cloak up, and would have been gone:
Stay, my dear Beedle, yet (quoth she) and give
Me one stitch more for my rent, as I live,
So large is, that my honesty (I think)
Without more help, will fly out at the chink.
Sweet Joan, (quoth he) I can do no more now:
For the whole thread I had, is spent, I vow.
What have you done (quoth she) with the two clues
You had just now? Have you put all in use?
If so be, I admire how there was need
Of so great bottoms for so little thread?
Why so many maidenheads are lost.
THe chiefest reason why most virgins are
So often surprised, is because the Centry
So near the court de guard is in this war
Of Cupid, that the enemy gets entry
Within the citadelle, and brings 't in awe,
Before the centry can say Qui va la?
Of Ben, and Goodie Glamees.
THe reason why Ben jummed Goody Glamees,
Was optimum est condimentum fames.
How Geometrically the Mathematician Ned did court his sweetheart Meg.
WHen Ned looked on the lineaments divine
Of Meg's fair face, he wooed her in a line:
From whence ascending to her lips more gay,
He courted her in superficie:
And thence proceeding fowards (without ho)
Her body he enjoyed in solido.
The mutual taunts of an English and Spanish Ambassador.
THE Ambassadors of England, once, and Spain,
(Great Linguists both) to Paris when they would come
To treat of State, did purposely abstain
From talking each in the others Idiome.
The proud Castilian (whilst they both did stand
On their Puntilio's) said in his Romance,
Let us speak French, see'ng we are in the Land
Of your great Sovereign, the King of France.
No, (says the Br tish Lord, in the English tongue)
We in the Hebrew our discourse will frame,
Lest otherwise your Master I should wrong,
Who is the anointed of Jerusalem.
Which Jeer being to the purpose thus retorted,
They each with the others wit the rafter sported.
Concerning those who being loved, are said to possess the hearts of such as
are enamoured of them.
LOvers so spend now on their Mistresses
Their cordial spirits, pierced with Cupia's darts,
That, like to Paphlagonian Partridges,
Each fair and vert'ous Lady has two hearts:
For one cannot possess so great perfection,
And be the object of no man's affection.
Why on the Friday we ought to abstain from flesh -- to Ned.
Them.
WHy should we eat no flesh on Friday, Ned?
Answ.
It Is Venus day, who was among fishes bred;
And that on which the man and wife, being set
In Paradise, would taste no kind of meat,
But fruit and herbs: a food therefore most fit
For us that day, and fishes next to it.
The severally inflicted wounds of Cupid's dart; Love being sometimes
reciprocal, sometimes not.
BEss loves James, whose humor is so Gotick,
That for no earthly thing would he possess her;
And hates Will, whose fancy's so erotick,
That he must die, if he do not embrace her.
Alce, James despises, though he her respect
Beyond all other pleasures, wealth, and honor;
And passionately does her Will affect,
Who scorns to do so much, as look upon her.
Like shades, which fly from fol'wing bodies, hatred
Being loves reward, and love hates compensation:
These four disdainful lovers were thus fettred
With circled chains of quite contrary passion.
But Mark and Moll die each for love of other,
And both in others arms revive together.
Of Virginity.
VIr, in the Latin, yields of man the expression;
Gini, in Greek, a woman does imply;
Tie, in our Tongue imports copulation:
Which three words spell us out Virginity.
Hence, that no maidenheads are lost, we gather,
If male and female be not joined together.
Of that masculine love, which tends to lust.
MAn's love is drawn from the circumference
Inscribing the outward Pentagon of sense,
Unto that female inward tactil center,
Like a diameter, which there does enter.
To a certain Gentlewoman, concerning Cupid, and a new born babe of hers.
BEcause one lovely boy your eyes did enter,
Another issued at a lower center:
The first got access at the sight, and such,
As made the last find egress from the touch.
The babe was blind, which stepped in, and took
His passage at the sense whereby you look:
But there did sally at the part, whereat
No optic virtue is, a seeing brat.
So interlaced are the faculties
Of View and Feeling, in the exercise,
Which sets abroach an infants generation,
Or labor, which gives children procreation;
That, by their mixture, you had a full measure,
First, of the cause, then, the effect of pleasure.
The Bell-man.
BRave youths, who with your handsome sweet-hearts lie,
Charmed with a tactil sensuality,
Let each, and all of you observe your mate,
Both when she lougeth, and when she is repleat:
For be assured, that in the greater measure
You 'il please your selves, the more you mind their pleasure.
It Is a fair morning, and but one a clock,
Give therefore breath unto your hic in hoc:
For there is nothing stands, but once must fall;
And so good morrow to ye, my masters all.
Of the widow Machlis.
MAchlis, in her return from the obsequies
Of her deceased mate, finding the ways
To be quite broken in the cawsey, which
She trod on, uttered this ambiguous speech,
(Even whilst her hand was dangling carelessly
On her feminian overture) if I
But have the luck to live another year,
Many a pretty store shall be laid here:
And that in honor of my husband, who
Past several times upon it to and fro.
That it is a very natural thing in a woman, to lose her maidenhead.
SEeing Nature, to shun voids in the Universe,
Does mounting floods, and falling air embos'm;
Why shall a woman from that course b' averse,
To fill the vac'um of her Microcosm?
Vacuity with it confusion carries;
And women should eschew 't, lest mankind perish.
To a lusty strong man named Bently, on the day of his marriage with a young
weak stripling Girl.
I Would not wish you wholly to forbear,
Because the Bride is young, from colling her:
Yet this I would desire you, Master Bently,
If so the ground be tender, rake it gently.
Of the Lover Eron, and his Sweetheart Phileta.
ERron, when first the blind brat did him move
To Venery, abandoning all arts
For the enjoyment of Phileta's love,
Became a Sentry at her lower parts;
Waiting as constantly upon her nates,
As ever on Aeneas did Achates.
The reason why wearing of Gowns is peculiar to Scholars and Women.
TO call him Scholar, that knows much, is common:
A maid, by knowing man, is made a woman:
He in the head with knowledge is endowed;
She in the tail her knowledge has imbued.
This is the cause why both wear Gowns, and why
From head to tail they reach talariately.
Of one Strigo, a Farmer in Aragon, who for his matchless activity in
Love-duels, was sent for by Alfonse the then king of that country.
THe Yeoman Strigo was in reins so strong,
That he could foil ten gilts in Venery,
And please them all. This made Alphonse to long
For his acquaintance: but unhappily,
As he was coming toward him, he di'd.
The King did notwithstanding ask his son,
If, like his father, he was fortified
Against amorous debates, in the backbone?
I am not (Sir) so like my father, as
My mother, (quoth he:) but I have a sister
That is a vigorous and bouncing lass,
Known to be such, by all that ever kissed her;
Who though she be therein but a beginner,
Has right much of her fathers nature in her.
Of one Amalia, a Poetess of a very amorous disposition.
AM's best conceptions are (her vein being tactil)
Infused by Cupid, rather then Apollo:
The enthousiasm proceeding from the dactyl,
Where after one long measure, two short follow:
For she expresses to the life Love's stances,
When by this foot she scans her couched fancies.
How hard a thing it is, to judge of the mind by the outward carriage.
Signs that in nothing differ to the sense,
Give of the mind no certain evidence:
For many women make the self-same face,
At the bruise of a blistred finger, as
At the reception of a Paphian cane:
Yet the one yields pleasure; and the other, pain.
Of Dorothie, the wife of John-a-Stiles.
WHen Dorothy in the nightime had found
The Cyprian Nag of honest John-an-Oke,
Some damage fesant in her husbands ground,
She straight laid hold on him, even in her smock,
And put him legally in her pound ouvert:
For Dorothy was John-a-Stiles fem covert.
Of Women's precellencie.
ALl Lovers should their Mistresses, as often
As they can on their knees serve with affection,
Whilst these sweet thing lets, looking still aloft,
Rejoice upon their backs at man's subjection.
Hence the she 's Mistress called, as I suppose,
And he the Servant, who with her does close.
Of Tib, and her sweetheart Vere.
I Have lost my blade, (quoth Tib) come search it Vere,
Some higher, ho; some lower, ho; there, there.
Of the loving carriage of one Bosens to his wife Mary, after his return from a
great Lord.
AT each of the four times that Bosens had
Bebumped Mary in her genial bed,
He telling her that this bout was for Dick,
That other in remembrance of kind Nick;
This other yet in memory of Jack,
And finally, this last for one Ned's sake;
Which four (he said) were all of my Lords kindred.
By me ( quoth Moll then) you shall not be hindered
In this kind, your respects to testify
To the remainder of his pedigree.
But finding weariness to seize on Bosens,
She asked if my Lord had no more cosens.
Concerning the soldier John Gerthudenberg's Art of Printing; and the finding
out of Gunpowder by Bartholdus Swart, a Franciscan Friar.
FAte so ordained, who knew best how conjunct
Arts must needs be with Arms, to gain desert;
That Powder was the invention of a Monk,
And from a Soldier came the Printing art:
Since when, great things, by arts in gowns proposed,
Have often been by Mars, with guns disposed.
The expression of one, who did not love to burn for Religion.
TO Expose my self to death, I have no maw,
For this or that opinion of the Law.
Those that court Martyrdom, must have a motion
Of secret breathing toward that promotion.
They 're fittest to be Martyrs, whom God skills
With the spruce art of doing Miracles.
All I can do 's within the bounds of Nature,
Which makes me think, that, for so high a matter,
I have no call; and without a vocation,
There 's no election, nor justification:
Therefore I, in my pathway unto heaven,
Had rather live with John, then die with Steven.
Of the Widow Philandra Quadrivira.
PHilandra, who wept little when she lost
Her first three loving husbands, cried most
Atrociously at the death of the fourth,
Who was inferior to them all in worth.
The reason thereof being inquired, she told,
It was, because she could not tell who should
Her husband after that time be, as she
Knew at the burials of the other three.
That Wedlock is a mixed sort of life.
MArri, in French, imports to be sad,
And by mari, a husband is employed:
Merry, with us, expresses to be glad,
As Marry to b'in Matrimony tied:
Which four words signify no less, in brief,
Then that in Marriage is both joy and grief.
Of holy Ananias, and his spiritual sister Sarah.
WHen brother Ananias dusted had
His holy sister Sarah in a bed;
What would the wicked of the world say now,
If they (quoth he) should see what we two do?
Brother (quoth she) let us not care for what
Flows from the mouth of any reprobat.
To the Bachelor Apicrogamos, who hoped to have the wife he was to make choice
of, endowed (besides her being favored of Fortune) with manyer and more
excellent perfections, both in body and mind, then Nature readily allows.
YOu cannot love a Virgin that is proud,
Though she be rich; nor indigent, though fair.
And without beauty, you 'll have none that is good:
She must be noble, handsome, wise, and rare
In all accomplishments: being such, you will take her.
But for your wife to get so choice a maid,
You must go to Prometheus, and bespeak her:
For there is none of those things ready made:
And Kings would gain by one of such perfection,
Though they should quit their Crowns for her affection.
On Maids, and Fathers.
SOme we call maids, tho they lack maidenheads;
As milk-maids, chamber-maids, and waiting-maids:
And some without paternities, are styled
Fathers, although they never had a child.
Thus Use, on no relation grounded, gives
Things names related, sans correlatives.
The expression of a young married girl of some thirteen years of age, and
little withal, when she saw a tame mouse, tied to a string in the pocket of her
husband; who though married some three weeks before that, had, for fear of
hurting his bride, delayed the performance of his Matrimonial duty.
Sp.
IF of that pretty Mouses skin I had
A pair of Gloves, sweetheart, I would be glad.
Enc.
It is too little for that use, (quoth he.)
Repl.
Little and young, will stretch, and wider be.
Of frolic Ned, and the old houswife Gamer Gow.
Speech.
COme let me have a chicken, Gamer Gow.
Encounter.
Have I no use for chicks, but give them you?
With this, Ned falls upon her, to him tugs her,
And so with kisses and embraces hugs her;
That thinking he had been in earn'st, she said,
Take chicks, and hens, and all, sweet Ned:
Take chicks, and hens, and all, sweet Ned.
The words of a certain Captain's daughter to her fathers Colonel, and her own
Depucelator, when, after she was married, he would have embraced her, as
formerly.
SIr, the parol I must not violate,
Which I gave to my husband: for though at
The same gate which let fornication in,
Might pass adult'ry, and a greater sin;
Yet of my body now the Garrison
Being under the absolute command of one,
Who likely will not that admittance grant,
Which I did do, when I was governant:
You must withdraw, lest if the Sentry call
(As he must needs) upon the Caporal,
You forthwith be committed as a Spy,
That would betray the fort to the enemy.
Why the Pope should dwell at Rome.
THe sov'rain Pastor of the Christian flock
Should in the City built by Romulus
Have his abode, where he, on Peter's rock,
May rear the fabric of his Church: and thus
That Rome be ruled b' a Shepherd, it is fit,
Because he was a Shepherd founded it.
Of Penisecto.
BY having sailed into the Delphian Creek,
It cost him th'amputation of his pr --;
Which makes me think it was a stormy blast,
That thus enforced him to hew down the mast.
Of a Tailor, and his Sweetheart.
THe Gentile Tailor could not choose but please her
In every fashion, which she most applauded:
For with his yard he always took her measure,
Then stitched her seam, and with his needle sowed it:
Yet though he glanced a little at the rest,
The chiefest cunning was below the wast.
Of Cunnus, and Mentula.
OMnis aptatur cunnus viro soli;
And therefore is of the male-gener wholly:
But mentulam foemella recipit;
And therefore we do feminine make it.
Of four young men traveling with a Merchant (whose name was Edward) toward
Doncaster.
FOur youths being riding with the Merchant Ned,
One of the Gallants asked a Country-blade
Encountering them, How many miles there were
From that place to the Town of Doncaster.
Ten, (quoth the Hoyden.) Ten? that is not right
(Quoth Ned) I Am sure from hence we have but eight.
Well (quoth the Bumpkin) you 're a Merchant, Sir,
And therefore I will use you kindly here:
You shall have all for eight; but of these men
That ride with you, to each it shall cost ten.
Of Cynon's Courtship to his Mistress Anne, who had some skill in Arithmetic
and Algebra.
GIve me one kiss, 6561 qq. 729 cube. 81 q. 9 R.
kiss, yea sixty more, and now
Five hundred above that (dear Anne) bestow,
And yet six hundred beyond these, from the
Ambrosia of thy lip, distill on me:
For the whole being in numeration,
Six thousand and five hundred sixty one,
Its Zenzizenzick root I 'll take, and that
In solid inches put in you know what.
Geometrically thus by measure shall
I pay your Numbers Arithmetical,
And feast your touch more sweetly with my clips,
Then my taste was with honey from your lips.
Of Understanders, and Underliers.
MEn first of maids are understanders; then
Maids underliers fall to be of men.
Of Mistress Alce, and John Ackwards.
A Lice, in falling out, did cuff John Ackwards;
But John fell in with Alce, and cuff'd her backwards.
On the Merchant Kapees.
WHilst Kapees kept his shop in the old Exchange,
His wife abroad with her sweetheart did range;
And all at the free cost of Master Kapees:
Sic vos non vobis mellis'catis apes.
Concerning Nick and his wife Capraena.
NIck to his wife Capraena gave some money,
Wherewith to Dick, for tickling of her C --
She bought a bisk, Eringos, and Anchovas:
Sic vos non vobis fertis'ratra boves.
Upon the Merchant Dose, and his wife Glossinde.
THe Merchant Dose, no sooner would bestow
Upon his wife Glossinde, one piece, or two;
But she would give it straight to 's prentice Davis:
Sic vos non vobis nid'ficatis aves.
Of Grisel, and her beloved Ephebos.
GRisel maintained, upon her husbands means,
Ephebos, whom to instruct she took the pains,
In feats of love, wherein he was a novice:
Sic vos non vobis vell'ra fertis oves.
Leisure and Solitariness are great impugners of Chastity.
LAsses entrusted to their own discretion,
Roaming longst several rooms, and spacious beds,
Can hardly shun an amorous impression:
For empty chambers make lascivious maids,
And serve in thoughts, by which they are so enticed,
That when a Lover comes, they are surprised.
Of Jack and Doll.
WHilst Jack was 'twixt Doll's legs, Sir, marry me,
Quoth she, and you shall do 't, although my mother
Would not give way thereto. Come, come, says he,
We must do first one thing before another.
Then did he put her quickly to the action,
Without the leisure of one thoughts reflection.
Of the free-spoken woman Briccona.
BRiccona being desired to let us know
The place, wherein she first did undergo
The touch of man: and whether it was in
The house, or field, that she received Dondin.
In neither, (quoth she) for as Love did mount
To scale my walls, I took it in my C --.
Of Pet, and his Mistress Kate.
PEt's preparation was a complement,
She, being in his account well qualified:
Kate 's expectation was an implement,
He being in her account well quantified.
Thus all the better nature had endowed her,
He in her nature all the more imbued her.
Why the carnal union of man and woman is expressed many times by the name of
Venery.
THE act, which both sexes has so often combined
In Loves delight, is termed Venery;
Because the male and female were enjoined,
On Venus day, to increase and multiply:
That Planet shining; which we now call Venus,
When God to obey this precept did ordain us.
Of Knestiosa.
LUst is the only cause of all her love,
And love alone unto her life gives breath:
That she may live in lust, she lusts to live;
Without the which, life is to her but death.
Her signs of life, mere deeds of lust do prove;
Nor beats her pulse, but by the act of Love.
The Penance of Licentious writing.
IF any wanton lines have issued from
My unaffected Quill, I hold it meet,
They suffer like adulterers, and come
Inwrap'd before the Readers in a sheet:
That he or she may give the milder sentence,
To see them in this habit of repentance.
Of the Puritan woman Ruth.
RUth is so taken up with faith, that she
Has left no room at all for Charity:
Nor cares she for good works (her faith being ampler)
But those, which she does work upon the sampler.
Of the opposite effects of Printing, and Gunpowder, discovered to the
knowledge of the world within seventy nine years of one another.
PRinting of late has been found out, to further
Learning, whereby one boy may work more then
Ten men could do before, for our instruction:
And Powder invented was, so apt to murder,
That one therewith can now kill many'r men,
Then twenty formerly, for our destruction:
That, being in knowledge sudden; this, in Choler;
This, kills a Soldier; that, revives a Scholar.
How a certain resolute and audacious Wooer was so confident in conversing with
his Mistress, of her gracious acceptance of, and yielding to his amorous
request, that being les^ eloquent, then judicious, he broke off on a sudden,
the thread of those complements, he had not the skill to prosecute; and supplied
his lack of discourse with a more pathetically expressive action.
THe sprightly courter of a gallant Lady,
Stopping the current of his lovely speeches
Referred his mind, both time and place being ready,
TO an orator residing in his Br --;
And said, Of what I Have left yet unexprest,
The bearer, Madam, will declare the rest.
Of one Gametes.
GAm said to his wife, that it was not the fashion
Of men of great account and reputation,
To do it above once a night, or twice
At most: and that to have carnal dealing thrice,
Or oftener, was the custom but of Scullions,
Hogrubbers, Porters, Colliers, and Slabgullions.
But sore repented he, that h' had not said,
It was the fashion rather of the Mede,
Turk, Persian, Muscoviter, Dane, Polonian,
Hungarian, Tartar, Swede, and Macedonian;
Who were not to be found so easily
As Colliers, and the other scondrel fry.
Of Barnabee, and his wife Santarella.
BAr coming late to a promiscuous meeting,
Where the lights out, each brother was a greeting
His sister with a holy touch; his lot
Was to kiss his own wife, whom he knew not.
Then, falling in to be more closely buckel'd,
By his own knocking made himself a cuckold.
To one Meg, who was modest at the Table, and with her Sweet hearts in the
Chamber, lascivious.
ALthough you make two morsels of a fig,
Whereby to some you seem extremely meek,
Yet well I know it is your humor, Meg,
At no more then one bite to snatch a p --:
As if your touches stomach could digest
More substance, then the stomach of your taste.
Of such as being of a disposition kind enough otherwise, will perhaps take
exceptions at the freedom of many of my Verses.
SOme women scorn to read, or hear a word,
Whereof the sense may to the mind afford
(Without a periphrastical expression)
The plain downright, and literal impression
Of any thing they call obscene and bawdy:
As if the eyes, and ears, of all the body,
Were the sole parts must be exposed to
Chaste objects. Yet, seeing Use has made it so,
Many of my loose Verses will fall under
The burden of their censure; though I wonder
By what hypocrisy it is, they can
Hate lines for that, which they love best in man:
And therefore do I here conjure them by
Their thoughts, as being less rigorous, that they
Geld not my book: for it may furnish wit,
Will serve to engender others out of it.
Of Ralph the Logician, and his Sweetheart Grisel.
RAlph made, by virtue of his Genitories,
In spite of Grisel's dialectick Critics,
An Isagoge to her Categories,
And Hermenia to her Analyticks:
Keeping the method thus of Aristotle,
To taste the Nectar of her Paphian bottle.
Of the two robbed Merchants, Dick and Ben.
AS Dick and Ben were trav'ling to Belfast,
They met with robbers, who first bound them fast;
And having picked their Cloakbags, left them then.
O I Am undone (quoth Dick:) Be pleased (quoth Ben)
T'undo me then; for I would fain b' untied.
Thus of these two it may be certifi'd,
That each of them was fast bound with strong ropes,
And both undone, for having lost their hopes.
Of Hanse and Ned.
HAnse with an unstretch'd hand, and the palm down,
Pretending strength, said he might lay a crown,
That Ned could not, with all the force he had,
Fold in his middle and ring-finger. Ned
(Thinking Hanse spoke it out of bravery)
Employed his pith, and did those fingers ply.
Which done, Hanse fore and little one in scorn,
Did point out Ned the double-forked horn.
How a certain Lover, and his Mistress, played together on the Virginals.
THey touched the keys with lovely strokes most quaintly,
And in their motion s'uniformly dangled,
That tails did up, whilst heads went down conjoyntly,
The found-boord echoing, as the start-up brangled;
Being in their sharps and breaks, so quick and present,
That never was a harmony more pleasant.
Of the Amazonian Queen, who made a progress to visit Alexander the Great: and
of the Queen of Sheba.
NIcolia traveled to see Solomon,
And Minithea the Pollaean King,
With cross intentions: for the first went on
To taste of wit, the second of a thing
More palpable: yet both their aims did find;
This, in the body; the other, by the mind.
Of the Poet Poll, and his Sweetheart Saenura, who likewise had some skill in
Versifying.
WHen Poll met with the Poetess Saenura,
He timed and rim'd it with a mutual capture,
Scanning his dactyl still with her caesura,
To prosecute a Heliconian rapture:
Whence sprung two streams not paralleled by any
That ever flowed from the Hippocrene.
A brisk, handsome, young Semstress, whose shop was in the Loken-booths at
Edinburgh, taking occasion upon a time, about seven a clock at night, in the
Winter-season to go through St. Giles, thereto adjacent stumbled by chance
(whilst she thought there had not been any living creature in the Church but
her self) upon a pillar, where there was sitting a proper, young, gallant
Cavalier, (who but three hours before had dropped a thousand pounds for his
Composition) by which unexpected accident, she (on a sudden) falling in the
amorous embraces of that vigorous Gentleman, whose ticklesh blood, by the
glimpse which a glimmering light did afford him of her beauty, swelled up his
veins so full, with the influence of Love and Lust, that, like a valiant
Champion of Venus, (maugre her resistance) prosecuting the assault, he in a
trice stormed her fort, entered, and took possession thereof, and therein posed
his standing Centry. She in this surprisal (like those to whom sometimes bold
Intruders at first, prove afterward most acceptable Guests) taking some
pleasure, concurred with the Conqueror, whose spirits, jointly with hers,
mounting upon the same degrees of mutual delights, furnished subject, in this
adventrous Rapture, for the following Epigram.
A Pretty Lass did ask, whilst she was shaking
a loose-coat-brangle with an unknown man,
If formerly h' had seen her: I Am but making
my 'quaintance now (quoth he) as well 's I can.
By which means he so largely did imbue her,
That whether he her saw or no, he knew her.
FINIS.
Gentlemen Readers,
IF you love me, and have any fancy to this kind of Poetizing, let me entreat
you to discuss these subsequent Errata, before you peruse any of the Epigrams,
left otherwise the escapes of the Press be accounted faults of mine.

For although, as there are sins of Commission, there be likewise those of
Omission, with the stain of which latter kind, I possibly may be aspersed, for
not revising the Proofs, before they were finally locked up in the Forms; yet
may the urgent pressures, whereby in the interim I was robbed of all leisure,
serve to vindicate me of that Imputation.

It is here to be observed, that the four Tetrasticks, centonized with the
Maronian Sic vos non vobis, are to pass for one Epigram; and that the last
Epigram of this Tractate is supernumerary, inserted rather to fill up the page,
then the number of the 120 casually excerpted out of the above-specified
Centenaries.

ERRATA. In the Preface, page 7. line 21. for Ironical, read Iconical. p. 10.
l. 10. for time elapsed, r. elapsed time. p. 12. l. 25. for the Italians, r.
that of the Italians.

In l. 2. of p. 2. of Epigr. 1. for thus, r. this. In l. 3. of Epigr. 9. for
subjects, r. secrets. Ibid. l. 8. for magistecum, r. Magisterum. In l. 2. of
Epigr. 19. for acceptance, r. acception. In l. 13. of p. 8. of the third
sheet, for adventures, r. adventure.

In the Lemma of Epigr. 10. of the third sheet, for whirles, r. twirles. In
Epig. 3. of the fourth sheet, for ascending, r. descending. In the Lemma of
Epig. 7. of the fourth sheet, for dart, r. darts. In the Lemma of Epigr. 29. of
the fourth sheet, for Apicrogamos, r. Apeirogamos. In Epigr. 39. of the fourth
sheet, for six hundred, r. six thousand.

The last two lines of Epigr. 7. the last two of Epigr. 18. and the last four
of Epigr. 15. of the third sheet, should have been indented.

FINIS.

