An Exact Account of the PROCEDINGS AT THE OLD-BAYLY this July the 13, 1683
with a true survey of the TRIAL OF THE Lord Russel William Hone Ioyner John
Rouse Capt. William Blage
Who were Indicted for High Treason in Conspiring the, Kings death, and raising
Arms to Subvert the Government and alter the Religeion, and conpsreing the death
of his Royal Brother James Duke of York.

The Lord Ruslel, John, Rouse, William Hone, and one Captain Thomas Walcot,
being all 4 Condemned to be Hanged Drawn and Quartered.

William Hone, who was yesterday Arraigned being set to the Bar, and the
Indictment read, desired that the Plea which he tendered yesterday might be
accepted, which was that he was guilty of conspireing the death of the King,
but not guilty of providing Arms, or a design of raising a Rebellion; Sr.
George Gefferyes said the confession was not directly to the Indictment;
therefore they would proceed to give their Evidence, he pleading not guilty as
to the whole Indictment, the Jury was then sworn, being the same that passed
the day before, Between the King and Capt. Walcot,

Mr. West was first Sworn, who Witnessed that the 2d. of March 25, Caroli
Secondi, at the Parish of St. Michael Bishshaw in the Ward of Bishshaw in the
City of London, with Rumbold Burton, Ferguson, Holliway, Roe, Francis
Goodenough, and Richard Goodenough, and other false Traitors, he Conspier'd the
Death of the King, and the Duke of York, to Subvert the Government, and alter
the Religion both in Church and State, and the Prisoner was one of the persons
to be Employed in that wicked Act.

Then Leiling was Sworn, who witnessed that he was several times with the
Prisoner and several others; who Consulted the Death of the Blackbird, and the
Gold-Finch, meaning the King and the Duke of York.

Ho^e acknowledged that he Consulted the Death of the (...)-Bird, (...) not of
the Gold-Finch. But what Mr. West witnessed concerning his design of Shooting
the King with a Cross-Bow, out of Bow-Ste^^le on the Lord Mayors Day, he
denied. He then asked Mr. (...) what he thought of him, who said he took him to
be a very honest man, for which Expression he was severely checked. Sir Nicholas
Butler witnessed that Hone Confessed to him, that there was a design to Shoot
the King with a Cross-Bow out of Bow-Steeple and that H^ne was one of them;
Captain Richardson being Sworn, witnessed that Hone Confessed he was hired by
Goodenough, with the promise or Twenty Pounds Reward to kill the King, and that
he was to have shot him with a Cross-Bow. Hone Confessed that he was drawn in
by Goodenough to kill the King. But as to the shooting him with a Cross-Bow, he
said he was not concerned in it; but was only told that there was such a design
by some Tradesmen that lived near B^^ Ste^^le, then the Jury without going
from the Bar brought him in Gu^^^y.

Then the Lord Russell was brought in his Coach into the yard, being attended
by the Livetenant of the Tower. Being brought into Court before the Bar, the
Indictment was read, that with James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sr.
Thomas Armstrong, and Robert Ferguson, conspired the death of the King, the
Raising Arms to Subvert the Government, to alter the Religeon etc. He pleaded
not guilty, and desired that the Trial may be put of for a longer time, but
being told that the Kings Council insisted on it now, the Court could not put
it it off. He then desired a copy of the Panel of the Iury' which was told
him was matter of favor but such as was never denied, and that it was always
ready for him. And being duly Examined, it appeared that he had a List of all
the Iuries that were returned five or six days since. Then they proceeded to
call the Jury to be Sworn. John Martin, being called' The Lord Russell, asked
him if he had any Freehold in London, he answered no. Then he Challenged him,
for that cause, and desired that Council might be allowed him, which was
grantd; (Viz.) Mr. Pollexfen' Mr. Holt, and Mr. Ward' who appearing: Argued
very Streamously, that the Statutes concerning Trials in London, by such as
are not Freeholders extended not to crimin all causes, but in only Civil. But
it was answered by the Attorney General, and Sr. George Gefferys, and Answered
by the whole Court, that Satutes extend to both cases, and it was lately so
resolved in the case of Worcester. Then the Jury was Sworn he Challenging
Thirty two. Mr. Roger North opened the Indictment Sr. Georg Geffery casting the
Evidence

Collonal Rumsey was Sworn, witnessed that my Lord Shaftsbury told him, that
the Lord Russel and several others were met in Consult about an Insurrection;
and that he should go to them to know what Readiness they were in for it, who
returned Answer, that they were not yet ready, being failed of their
Expectations in the West-County, (Viz.) at Taunton, therefore they deferred it
until the 17th. of November, Queen Elizabeth's Birth Day. Then the Lord Russel
asked if he spoke any thing, or conscented to the Answer, and Collonal Rumsey
said yes.

Mr. Shepherd Sworn, witnessed that he being a Vintner Ferguson came to his
house, and told him that the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lord Russel were coming
to his House, which in a short time they did, privately in Hackney Coaches, and
being come, desired to be very private, and that none be permitted to come into
the Room, all the Servants being sent away, he himself waited on them. And that
he heard them consulting about an Insurrection, and to be the best of
remembrance, there was a discourse of seizing the Guards.

The Lord Howard of Escreek then was Sworn, who made a very large Speech, as to
the Plot, or Conspiering in the General, that the Lord Shafesbury contrived it,
and sent Rumsey to the Lord Russel, and several others, to know what readdiness
they were in, for an information, and what Resolution they come to, relateing
to Taunton that their answer was, they were failed in the West, and that they
had always told him they could not be ready at that time, but deferred it until
the ^7th of November, on which the Lord Shaftsbury grew very impatient, and
told them he had ten thousand brave boys ready at any time for his service. But
afterward the Lord Russell, was afraid there was a discovery by reason of the
Proclamation and Forbiding Bou^ires. That some time after that the Lord
Shaftsbury, went to Holland Duke of Monmo^th, Hamden Sidney, Essex. Robert
Ferguson, Lord Russel, and he himself Sat as a chosen Council, to manage the
insurrection designed and that there was a Paper contrived as a Declaration for
liberty, reckoning up all grievences pretended we then lay under, but they
thought fit to stay till they could see what intrest they could make in
Scotland, and to that purpose Engaged Sr. Hugh Cambden, Lord Mervin, Sr. Ithn
Cockrom, and others, one of them (Viz.) Sr. John Camden came to Town, about the
time of this discovery, and then concealed himself, and is now taken.

Sidney was sent by this Council to View the Guards, in what a Posture they
were in; who acquainted them them that they were very easily attained.

That they had money ready to carry on their design, but expected more from
Holland.

The Lord Russel confessed his being at the Consult, when the Message was sent
to the Lord Shaftsbury, but come in late. He was at Shephards Tavern only to
taste his Wines, and was several times in the Company, which they called the
Council, only for the sake of the Lord Howards good Company, but knew of no
Treasonable Consults.

He then called the Earl of Anglesey' and Mr. Howard and Dr. Burnet who
wittnessed that the Lord Howard Several times after (...) Discovery of this
plot, and before his being taken denied any knowledge of this conspiracy. Dr.
Tillotson and several others Wittness^d that they always took the Lord Russell
for a man of a very good life and conversation. Then the evidence being sum'd
up by the Soliceter General, and Sr. George Geffereys and the Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton the Iurey withdrew, and the Court Adjorned. After Dinner the
Court Sitting, the Jury brought in their Virdict Guilty.

John Rouse was then set to the Bar and a new Jury sworn Lee witnessed that he
had serveral times been with the prisoner who said popery and slavery were
coming in, and it was no sin to kill the King and the Duke and that they would
propose the running, for a golden ball on black heath and when they were mert
they would assault the Tower and take it.

Mr. Lee swear that Rouse had several times contrived the the death of the
King and to raise an army and he to be pay master of it.

All which Rouse denied and said that Lee proposed such things to him but he
refused it

Corbin witnessed that in 1681. Rouse told him the King had forfuted his Crown.

Mr. William Richardson, Swore that when he went to take Rouse he diso^^^^ his
Name, and said his Name was Johnson.

The Evidence being sumd up (...) Jury without going out of Court foud him
Guilty

Capt. Bluge set to the Bar, and the same Jury Sworn. Lee Swore that he
Conspier'd then to kill the King, raise Armies, and Seize the Tower.

Lee Swore that being in his Company, they discoursed the Tower may be taken,
but whether it was only to show his Opinion barely, or design he knew not,
therefore the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton left it to the Jury, to consider if
they had two Evidences for High Treason, they consulted a small time, and
brought him in not Guilty. So the Court Adjourned.

LONDON Printed by F. Mallet. 1683


