An Exact and Perfect RELATION Of every particular of the Fight at WORCESTER,
And ordering the battle on both sides of the river of Severne, from an emminent
Officer of the ARMY.

Several Letters from Scotland signifying the taking of Sir Philip Musgrave,
with several other Lords and Lairds, and 500 of their party killed and taken
near Dumfreeze in Scotland.

Also a Letter from Col. Alured, of the manner of the taking of General
Lesley, etc. at Ellitt near Dundee, with an exact List of the prisoners of
quality there taken.

Lastly, also a Letter of the taking of Dundee by Storm September 1. in which
storm Major Genesis Lumsden and 600 more of the Scots were slain, etc.

Published by special Command and Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach 1651.

A more Exact Relation of every particular of the fight at WORCESTER, etc.
Upon Wednesday morning between 5 and 6 of the Clock we began to march from
Vpton, and by reason of some hindr^nces in our march we reached not to Tame
River, till betwixt 2 and 3 in the afternoon: As soon as our boats came up,
which was much about the same time, the Bridge was presently made over the
Severn on the Generals side, and another over the River Tame on our side, we
were come as far as Poyick, half a mile on this side the Bridge with our Van
before the Enemy took the Alarm, which after they had taken, they drew down
both their Horse and their Foot from their Leaguer at St. Jones, to oppose our
passing over our bridges of boats: The General pre^^n^ly commanded over Col.
Ingolsby, and Col. Fairfax their R^g^ments, with part of his own Regiment, and
the Life Guard, and Col Hackers of Horse over the River, after these on our
side were commanded over Col. Goffs, and Major Genesis Deans Regiments, all of
which advanced toward the Enemy, who had lined their hedges thick with men, but
it pleased the Lord after some sharp dispute, ours beat them from hedge to
hedge. Col. Blake, Col. Gibbons, with Col. Marshes Regiment were commanded over
as seconds to the former, and to attempt the Enemy in other places, where they
had drawn down their men: My Lord Gray's was likewise ordered over and it
pleased the Lord in half an hour or an hours dispute the enemy quitted their
ground and fled away, only about Poyick Bridge (which they had broke down,
having the advantage of hedges and ditches) they continued a sharp dispute with
Col. Haines his Regiment, and Col. Cobbet, Col. Matthews being as reserve to
them both, and it ple^sed the Lord that the Enemy likewise quitted the ground
and run away, some of Col. Hains his men wading over the River to advance
upon them; about a mile beyond Poyick the Enemy had broken down another bridge
upon the pass, unto which place we sent some Dragoons, who with the assistance
of some Horse made the Enemy quit that place, which gave a passage over for
Lieut, Genesis Fleetwoode Regiment, Col. Twisletons and Col. Kenricks, who were
commanded to pursue the Enemy, who as we had supposed made toward Hereford or
Ludlow, but they wheeled off and run into Worcester, only some few who were
taken. The ground where we fought was full of hedges that our horse had not
much liberty to engage: but both Horse and and Foot where they had opportunity
(through the Lords presence strengthening of them) did very gallantly: After the
Enemy had run away into Worcester, they drew out their whole Army of Horse and
Foot upon our Army on the other side, supposing that most of our Army had been
advanced over the River, but the Lord made our Army there alike successful as
on the other side; being assisted by Major Genesis Desboroughs Regiment. of Horse,
and Col. Cobbets of Foot, on that side was part of the Generals Regiment, Major
Genesis Lamberts, Commissary Genesis Whalies, Major Genesis Harrisons brigade, and Col.
Tomblins with some of the Surrey and Essex Troops, those of Foot were Major
Genesis Lamberts, Col. Prides, Col. Coopers, the Cheshire Brigade and the Essex
Foot, all of these as the Lord gave them opportunity did behave themselves very
gallantly, and beat the Enemy that came out, and those of them in the Royal
Fort into the Town, and afterward in the night time possessed themselves of
the Town, but as many Horse as could got away, though I suppose not three
thousand in all escaped us: Col. Barton being commanded to Bewdley the day
before with some Horse and Dragoones, did take many prisoners in their running
away, it is said 1200. Yesterday morning by order from the General, we
commanded 1500 horse and dragoons to pursue after the Enemy (under the command
of Col. Blundell) who fled in the same way they came hither, M. G. Harrison is
likewise gone after them, and will we doubt not (through the Lords mercy)
overtake most of them, Col. Lilburn will, we hope, put a stop unto them.

The King (it is said) went away with not above 12. horse, it is thought there is
not 1000 horse of them together; In all the engagements that ever has been, I
think we have not seen a more immediate hand of God appearing than in this; I
believe there was never more courage and resolution in an Army, yet less done
by us as men; that which adds much to the mercy is that the presence of the
Lord was so immediate with us, that we may say no flesh has cause to boast,
but we must say it is the Lord has done all these things; and O that we may
have hearts to walk suitable unto what the Lord has done for us, that it may
appear by our walking and actings, that we are the people that the Lord has
done all this for.

The number of those that are taken are said to be about 10000, and near 3000
slain, but in neither can I be positive, of all that were slain on our side, I
am persuaded there is not 100: of Officers I hear but very few, Lievt. Col.
Mosely, and Capt. Jones of Colonel Cobbets Regiment were slain, Major General
Lamberts horse was shot: the number of the Arms and Colors are so many, that
as yet there can be no certain account given of them; the General did
exceedingly hazard himself, riding up and and down in the midst of their
shots, and went himself up to their Fort and offered them quarter, was then
answered with nothing but shot, the Major General likewise and all the other
Officers, did do in their several places very gallantly. In the persuit, Col.
Lilburns and the Generals Regiment of Foot have taken the Earl of Derby, Earl
of Louderdale, Earl of Cleaviland, and about 140 more persons of quality; they
are still in persuit of the rest,

September 5. 1651. near Worcester.
Letters from Scotland of the routing of Sir Philip Musgrove, several Lords,
and 500 of their Party near Dumfrieze
SIR,
Upon Friday last (being our Fair day at Beampton) I got certain intelligence,
that one Lieutenant Douglas, and Craford with some Horse and Dragoons were
designed for Naward, to surprise our horse, whereupon I forthwith sent to the
Governor of Carlisle, who forthwith sent me a Party of Musketeers, it seems
one Terrel, late a Corporal to Capt. Cicil Howard and some other Runawaies,
brought the enemy upon this business: since then I dispatched two Messengers
into Scotland, to observe what they were doing; and now one of them is
returned, and brings me certain word, that our Horse and Dragoons from
Edinburgh fell in amongst them at Dunfrieze, where there were above 500 of the
enemy, and after half an hou^s dispute our men got into the Town, killed or took
most of them, almost none escaping; and by reason that most of the Townsmen did
stand out (notwithstanding the former promise) therefore our Officers are
making an example of them, and are scouring the Country thereabouts: I hope to
day to have the particulars, for I hear Sir John Chastors, with one Cealehead,
and others are taken: I am

Naward, September 3. 1651. Sir, Your humble servant R. C.

SIR,
SInce I closed up my Packet, I have another Messenger come, who assures me of
the routing of the Enemy at Dunfrieze, and that Sir Philip Musgrave, the Mayor
of Iohnston, Kealehead, with all the Lords and Leards in that Country are
taken or killed; the manner of it was thus, 100 horse of ours came to
Dunfrieze, and after some small dispute got into the Town, and plundered part,
then retreated into Galloway, where they took up quarters; and that night the
remainder of the Body came to the same place, as was agreed before; hereupon
the Scots Countrymen, and all got together, not knowing of our grand body, and
thought in the night time to have devoured our 100 horse, but our body being
ready and expecting them, fell pell mell upon them, and as yet never a Scot
can tell what is become of his fellow, an absolute rout, scarce any escaped.

Naward Sptember 3. 1651. Yours, R. C.

Collonell Alured's Letter of the taking Genesis Lesley, etc. With a perfect List
of the Prisoners near Dunder.
SIR,
IT has pleased the Lord to give a great mercy to us in the delivery up of a
great many of the Leaders, and chief of the Scottish Forces into our hands. I
(being commanded forth with a party of Horse and Dragoons,) marched on a dark
rainy night, in rough and tedious way, to the Town near the High-Lands called
Ellit, where we had intelligence, that most of the Scots Commanders lay, which
we found to be true, and have taken there these Prisoners in this enclosed
List, nominated, not above two of the most considerable men of the Committee of
State are left, besides those who are here, the rest of the enemy were
quartered at two little Towns within a mile, but my Party, who were about 800
were so dispersed in getting such rich Prizes, that I could not possibly go any
further; but having such considerable Prisoners, thought it most convenient to
march away with them. The enemy were about 4000. who are all dispersed. Some of
our party have gotten 500. 300. 200. 100 pounds a piece, and none of them but
well rewarded for their service. I desire the Lord to give us hearts to be
truly thankful to him for this and all other his mercies toward us. I am

Sir, Your friend to serve you, Matthew: Alured.
From my Tent before Dundee Aug. 29. 1651.
A List of the Prisoners.
GEneral Lesley, Earl Marshall, Lord of Keeth, Earl Crawford, Lord Ogleby, Lord
Burginee, Lord Humby, Lord Lee, Sir James Fowls of Collington, Sir Alexand.
Fotheringham of Powery, Sir James Locker, Col. Andrew Milns, Mr. Archibald
Sidserfe, Mr. Tho. Hoburn, Lord of Humbies Son, Mr. John Brickburn, of
Ormston, Mr. Robert Norn of Strathord, Mr. John Blare, Mr. Laurence Blare, M.
Alex. Nern, M. Donell Crocket, M. Andrew Gray, M. John Ramsey, M. Will.
Leithton, M. David Duer, M. James Ogleby, M. John Belches, M. Henry Cheap, M.
James Fleming. Ministers. M. Rob. Douglas, M. Ia. Hamilton, M. Mungo Law, M.
John Smith, M. George Petilon, M. John Ruttera, M. James Sharp, M. Hugh Ramsey,
M. Andrew Carre, Cap. Andr. Wood, Cornet Tho. Brown. With about 70 Prisoners
more, being Soldiers and servants to the Noblemen.

A Letter from Leith Sept. 3. of the taking of Dundee by storm, etc.
SIR,
EVen now I received the news of the taking Dundee, it was taken by storm on
Monday last about 10 and 11 a Clock, within a puarter of an hour after they
began to storm; six hundred as my intelligence tells me are slain. Amongst
them Major Genesis Lumsden the Governor.

Leith 3. Sep. 1651.
FINIS.

