A WINDING SHEET FOR THE SCHISM OF ENGLAND, Contrived for to inform the
ignorant, resolve the wavering, and confirm the well principled Roman Catholic.

By I. E. Missioner.

Narraverunt iniqui fabulationes,
sed non ut lex tua --
Spal. 5. Veritas non erubescit nisi obscondi --
Tertull. contra Valent. -- Printed at Dublin, Permissu superiorum, 1687.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
WHEN I contemplate the many Miracles of Divine Providence that led your most
Serene Majesty by the hand through so many wonderful changes and imminent
dangers to the Throne of your Royal Ancestors, maugre all the contrivements of
Hell, and Plots of Horror and Impiety, sure all signalize you as pre-ordain'd
by the Almighty for a great work of Ages, viz. To rescue the Virgin Spouse of
Christ the Roman Catholic Church from the Jaws of the Dragon, it is your rare
Valor, and Piety, that must give the fatal blow to the many headed Hydra of
this Schism-abounding Age, this heavenly work shall eternize your glorious Name
and Memory at the Rising and Setting Sun even beyond the tracts of time, and
manifest you to be among all earthly Kings the most meek, clement, valorous,
most wise, merciful, and the most tender hearted truly Christian Prince, who
has Learning to understand, Wisdom to discern, and Powerful Authority to
command and commend that Faith be observed in your Kingdoms, which is most
conformable to the Scripture, most consonant to the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church: and most warranted from the express privileges, advantages, and
promises given by the Sacred mouth of ever glorious Jesus. --

O great JAMES, in you signally is now verified that received Maxim, A
fortibus fortes, a piis generantur pii, from a confluence of the most
transcendently august blood of the best Kings of Europe, and from your great
Grandfather, and great Grandmother; the ever blessed Queen Mary of Scotland,
mark: Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. Lo, their blood running in your most
Sacred Veins, inflames your dread Majesty to most sublimely religious
undertakings specially when in you is to a prodigy seen such a Spring of Valor
and pious Zeal for to promote, vigorously, yet mildly, the Glory of the
Almighty so as that no Posterity will keep it silent but blazon it throughout
the whole World to your eternal Glory. For can any think that the all-bountiful
God has imported all those stupendous Gifts in vain to you? No undoubtedly,
they are destined to glorious actings, for to fill the World with wonders of
your happy Reign, in drawing after you to Christ's holy Faith the hearts and
obstinate Wills of your Subjects --

Therefore may it please your most Sacred MAJESTY, this small Tract of Divine
Faith confidently flies to be shelt'red under the Wings of the gracious
Patronage of your most Serene MAJESTY, now by the Grace and Providence of God,
Defender of the Faith -- And now the most invincible HERO, the only Glory,
moving Soul, and the most Tutelar Angel of Great Britain, Y'our Prince whose
Valor and Conduct is such,
As none can praise, nor yet admire too much.
In you all is great, great in all Magnificence,
Your graces and gifts excells all Excellence,
You by grant of Liberty quite allays
The Schisms of our late sore aflicting days,
Now each of your Subjects to Faith may tread
That way which safest him to Bliss may lead.
Reign long great Prince, sure your course shall hold
Though ten hundred thousands Whigs cross you should,
Whose mad, vain, damned contrivings cannot hide
The woeful stings of their dark inner side.
They like guilty blind buzzards of the night
Shrink from the clement terror of thy might.
Lo, Christ's Faith you maintain and that in sight
Of all the World, in all the World's despite,
In glorious Jesus you always confide
Who sure for your all safety shall provide.
God on whom all sublunary things depend
Bless your designs, and you from all harm defend.
Sweet Jesus grant, that upon Sea and Land
All things prove prosperous you take in hand.
May all the blessings my wishes can invent
Prolong your days, and fill them with content.


Therefore let us all your Subjects lift up our eyes, hands, and hearts to God
on high, and let us earnestly beseech him mercifully to bless our dread
Sovereign Queen MARY, with a most holy sweet Princely Graff, a rising from so
august, high, and gloa Stock; and this for the full comfort and succor of
great Britain, to the end, that never any other hand than Stuarts, should sway
the Scepter of this Land, to this Prayer let all true Subjects say, Amen, Amen.

May it please your Majesty This is the daily Prayer of your most eternally
devoted Servant. John Everard.
Vive Iacobe diu dux optime, maxim princeps
Te divina tegat dextera, prosper abi.



TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of ORMOND.
May it please your Grace,
AS my well-intended and honest endeavors were never yet wanting to serve your
Grace, not only (by God's heavenly Inspiration) in saving your precious life
some years past, but even now also, by the direction of the same Divine Spirit,
am endeavoring to prove instrumental in the saving your more precious Soul,
that immortal Soul which is to survive either in the bosom of Glory, or in the
flames of the Damned, to all Eternity.

This small unpolished Tract, contrived by me for that purpose, I present your
Grace; the whole scope whereof may (I hope) be not unfitly applied to your
present state, in matter of true Soul-saving Faith. -- My Lord, it is
notoriously apparent that your moral Principles were all along for Monarchy, or
Kingly Government; all your life being eminently employed in real Loyalty
through very many vicisitudes of Fortune, and trials of Constancy: First,
having sacrificed your Estate and Ease, slighting all Cromwell's tempting
offers, by a voluntary banishing your self after your Sovereign into Flanders;
Secondly, in gallantly exposing your life, in coming and remaining in London
some fifteen days incognito, striving wisely and warily to pave the way for the
Restoration and happy Re-inthroning of King Charles II. of Ever-glorious
Memory, Dr. Huet and others being put to death for entertaining your Grace. Add
to this, how you being last of all Lord Lieutenant in Ireland, you proved most
Loyal, Wise, and Watchful, always striving to defend vigorously the
Prerogatives of the Crown, to render Sedition odious, to undeceive the people
of those Shams, Cheats, and Frauds that were palm'd upon them; to purge away
all venomous humors and distempers which the hellish Faction were always
infecting the Subjects with: You exposed their wild Artifices to the derision
and detestation of the World, preserving that Kingdom from fained and false
Plots tending to destroy the Peace and Tranquillity of the Land, and involve it
in Anarchy and Confusion. Such was the indefatigable Labor and Vigilance of
your Grace to put a stop (through your wise Government and prudent Counsels) to
the restless endeavors of the public Enemies of Kingly Government.

I should not forget, my Lord, your great Vigilance in relieving (even in the
dead of Winter, and to the hazarding your life) with extraordinary speed the
City of Waterford, when besieged eighteen days by the Usurper Cromwell, he
having assured all his Adherents that that City was most extremely his.

These, my Lord, your Heroic Undertakings to promote Loyalty, the same Loyalty
which now stands the top and most visible of your Grace's most Illustrious
Titles and Characters, which rendered you all along a great Favorite of our
late deceased Sovereign, and makes you now most dear unto his present Majesty
King JAMES the Second. -- These, I say, are so notoriously known, both at home
and abroad, that even base Envy and Detraction have but rendered them to be the
more acknowledged, and most illustriously conspicuous.

These, my Lord, not common actings, are patterns of your unbounded Merits;
these Heroic Efforts, Undertakings, and brave never-to-be-forgotten
Performances, proceeded sure from that your Noble Genius, or natural propension
to Monarchy, in detestation of Democracy and Anarchy. Now, my Lord, you are to
apply that your clear Eagleey'd Judgment and great Wisdom in owning and
honoring that great Monarchy which Christ established here on Earth, governed
by one Visible Head, the Universal Pastor, Vicegerent of Christ, and Successor
to St. Peter, to whom he gave special warrant to govern his Flock. And it is an
undoubted truth, my Lord, that the Interest and Conservation of Kingly
Government is twisted with true, ancient, Christian Religion, that it seems
animated with one and the same Soul; for, like to Hippocrates's Twins, they
smile and weep together, and live and die together: For even as Rebellion is
the bane of Civil Kingdoms, and Peace and Concord the preservation of them,
even so Schism is the utter ruin of the Church of Christ, Peace, Unity,
Uniformity, the special gift of God therein, and in the true Church above all
Kingdoms or Commonwealths, because it is in all points a glorious conspicuous
Monarchy, tending every way to Unity, there being but one God, one Christ, one
Flock, one Pastor, one Hope, one Faith, one Body, one Head, as the Apostle
assures us. To this heavenly Monarchy, my Lord, you are invited; all Sects, or
false newfangled Churches, cannot pretend to be a Monarchy, having no Head, nor
united Body, but a confused Chaos. I am confident that your Grace is a Master
of more solid reason than to ground your Faith upon an uncertain Foundation, or
to pin the Salvation of your Soul on the bare sleeves of any Sect whose Guides
are failable and fallible in all men's Opinions, when you may enquire and find
out a secure Infallible Guide, leading to that Eternity of Glory you were
created for. The great reason, my Lord, the great motive that excited Dr. Vane,
Dr. Cressey, Dr. King Bishop of London, the Bishop of Gloucester, with very many
more, to separate from the Protestant blind Sect, was because they found no
safe, secure, certain, human infallible, unerring, warrantable Judge, to
interpret Scriptures, and define questions of Faith without error, with any
promise and privilege from Christ, among the Protestants.

And consider, my Lord, that it is very probable that the last Verdict and
Sentence of the forlorn Protestant Sect is already written in Heaven, that it
must soon yield, and fall to nothing, as all other damned Heresies have done:
for it is but folly to pretend to secure by human arts that which God is
resolved to destroy. Are you, peradventure, afraid or ashamed that Sectaries
will blame you of inconstancy, in changing, or removing to the Roman Communion?
Sure we Mortals have above bruit Beasts the Resurrection of our Bodies; we have
above Devils to repent, reclaim, and fly from sin, especially that most
heinous sin of Schism and Heresy: for Sectae non possi debunt Regnum Dei,
Galat. 5. So as that you must want constancy only to sin: Sapientis est mutare
consilium; nullus pudor est ad meliora convertie. -- Sure it was no blemish to
St. Paul to turn to Christ from a Persecutor; it was no shame to Constantine
the Great, of a Heathen to become a Roman Catholic, Converted and Baptized by
Pope Sylvester; and it was no blemish to Louis I. King of France, to be drawn
to Christ's Faith by a Woman: Then what shame can it be to your Grace, to
forsake Schism, and come to the true Mother Church, the which King James I. of
Blessed Memory did acknowledge in open Parliament to be the only Mother Church
of all Churches?

I hope, my Lord, you are none of those who say to God, Job 21. Depart from us,
we will not have the knowledge of thy ways. I hope you are none of those which
abhor to hear good Inspirations, fly and detest good Company and Books, lest
by such occasions they might be touched in conscience, and so be converted and
saved. I hope you are none of those most unfortunate hardhearted men whereof
the Prophet ( Isa. 28.) speaks, We have stricken a league with Death, and
made a bargain with Hell it self; which is in effect as much as if they had
said, Trouble us not, molest us not with thy persuasions, spend not thy words
and labor in vain; talk to others who are not yet settled, let them take
Heaven that will, we for our parts are resolved, we are at a point, we have
made a league that must be kept, we have made a bargain that must be performed,
yea, though it be with Hell and Death everlasting. O what a wonderful fury and
obduration of an unrelenting heart is this! My Lord, when men are biased or
prepossessed, they lie open to be imposed upon to the belief of a downright
Lie, or to the disbelief of a manifest demonstration of an infallible Truth,
and so to be misled to a plausible Error.

The great reason why there are few in comparison who now-adays come to a right
understanding, and a well-grounded persuasion in matters of Faith, is, because
they are not many who make a due enquiry with sincerity and unbyassed
disposition: sure such who wilfully remain under the power of the false
Principles which were instilled in them in their Education, or who blindly
following failable and fallible Guides, whose persons they have in admiration
and veneration, resolving never to trouble themselves with a free and impartial
use of their own Judgment concerning those Doctrines which they have in their
own Opinion wisely and safely (as they imagine) taken upon trust, led away by
lofty conceits and opinion of their own Reason and Capacity, will not suffer
them to attempt any sincere ingenuous Examination of such things as imply a
possibility of being deceived in points of Faith; whence it comes to pass, that
they weigh only what is offered in favor of their own side, and make it the
great end of their search not to follow what shall appear to be true upon
enquiry, but rather to be confirmed in their present erroneous Persuasion: it is
no wonder then that such as do enquire thus, are rather hardened in Error, than
convinced of the Truth. -- I say then, that it is at once disingenuous,
dangerous, and silly, to entertain such blind thoughts.

I pray God these motives may have a strong influence upon you, by the
assistance of God's Grace, which is never wanting to those that are not wanting
to themselves, and imprint in your Soul the Character of Truth, that you may
conquer all oppositions of Understanding or Will, which may bar your ready
Obedience thereunto. First, divest your mind of all prepossessed Opinions and
worldly respects in favor of any Sect, or in dislike of the true ancient
Church, so as truly having deposed all obstinate prepossessions of your
Judgment, you will be easily persuaded that the Roman Church is the true Church,
wherein only is Salvation to be had: Pursue this Quest, my Lord, suffer not
your self to be misled by the seducing of flattering blind Guides, or
Obstinacy; Adjourn not this Quest; Say not, as Felix said to St. Paul, Acts
24.25. When I have a convenient season I will call for thee: The World expects
your happy Return to the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Alexander the
Great, my Lord, being asked if he would run at the Olympic Games, said, I
could be content so I might run with Kings. Begin then to exercise a Virtuous
Ambition, in running after Kings at the Olympic Game for an Eternity of
never-ending Glory in the Roman Communion; in so doing you may know that you
run with two and twenty brave Kings of England that were Saints; you run with
King Charles II. (whose dear Favorite you have been) who by the quick-sighted
piercing eye of his natural Judgment said in his Speech, That Christ can have
but one Church, and that the same is the Roman Catholic Church; and that
Christ left his Power to it, even to forgive sins. He desired to know, How came
that Church to lose that Power, and by what Authority men separated themselves
from it? His Majesty answers saying, That it was, that particular men raised
Schism for their own advantage. -- Here, my Lord, you see the King leaves the
heavy guilt of SCHISM at the door of the Protestant Sect. You run with our most
Sacred Liege and Sovereign King JAMES II. (whom God preserve for many many
happy years) whose Motto is, Let Life and Three Kingdoms lie at stake,
Before I damn my Soul, or true Faith forsake.
Run with King James I. of ever Renowned Memory, who did acknowledge in open
Parliament, That the Roman Catholic Church is the only Mother Church of all
Churches, See Stow, page 840. Run finally, (my Lord) with all the present Kings
in Christendom, excep those of Swedeland and Denmark, who reign in that Cold,
Cloudy, and Sin-darkned Northern Corner of the World, where Heresy is
entertained by a company of dull stupid people, that will not penetrate. Run, I
pray, with the best part of Mankind in all Ages, with the wisest Heads of the
World, for unfeigned Holiness and Learning. Run along with these irradiant
Pole-Stars, and you cannot go astray: and it is an undoubted truth, that the
Life, Example, and Heroic Actions of a Prince, have usually a greater sway
upon the minds of his Subjects, than his Laws; for the Example of a King is a
living Law, which secretly overrules men's minds, and bends them to a compliance
with it. None can deny this, but those who have their Judgments swallowed up by
prejudice, and whose blind passions have overrun their reason. -- Listen
therefore to the Voice of Heaven, Apoca. 18.24. Go out of her, my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Schism, my Lord, and damned Heresy, (to which you pertinaciously adhere) are
most grievous Plagues, from it redeem your precious Soul from forfeiture, that
has been this long time mortgaged to Death; for Sectae non possi debunt Regnum
Dei; and non est prudentia, nec concilium contra Dominum; and Sapientis est
mutare concilium. Make it, my Lord, your daily Prayer to God to settle you in
the right.

This said, my very good Lord, begin to put on (in the Name of Ever-glorious
Jesus) a Noble Resolution to shake off those Chains and Bonds of that Monstrous
Tyrant Schism, which detains you in slavery: let the scales of blind misguided
Zeal fall from your eyes, that you may see to find out a most secure Unerring
Guide in your Journey toward a happy Eternity. -- I beseech the Father of
Lights and Mercy to illuminate your Understanding with Beams of his Saving
Grace, that you may learn, embrace, and practice the Faith of Christ, which
shall be the daily Prayer of me, who entreats your Grace to bestow one Grace,
which is, to permit me to bear all my Lifetime the Title of your humble
Chaplain; being always

Your most obsequious and faithful Servant, I. E.
He may be won that longest does resist;
To pray for your Return I Will never desist.
I Will never despair of any, whilst I see
A fruitless Tree may next year fruitful be.



A WINDING SHEET FOR THE Schism of England.
CHAP. I.
THe ALMIGHTY, as a most Divine Architect, raised the Fabric of his Church in
this World as a medium to Salvation; a Man for not hearing this Church is
termed in St. Matthew. 18.18. a Publican or Heathen; Protestants segregating
themselves, and not hearing this Church, are in a most lamentable state. Sure a
natural unity and connection of the Parts among themselves, and to the Head, is
necessary for the conservation of the natural Body: Christ promised that there
should be Unity in his Church; St. John 10.16. They shall be made one Fold and
one Pastor. This Unity is most requisite in God's Church; St. John 17.11.
Christ prayed, that his Disciples should be one. And again, 1. Cor. 1.10. I
beseech you that you all speak one and the same thing, and that there be no
Schism among you, but that you be perfect in one judgment. Protestants denies,
and flies from this Unity, being divided and subdivided; Christ praying: Sure
his Prayer took effect; his People, his Flock, and Congregation, being still
one in the bonds of Peace. The pretended Reformation have no Unity, differing
in most essential Points for Salvation, therefore no true Church; the Roman
Catholic Church, and no other, stands firm and infallible against all the
tempests of Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism, and this by her Unity and
Uniformity: Sure by confession of Protestants, the Roman Church was once the
true Church according to St. Paul, Romans 1.8. First, I thank my Lord through
Jesus Christ, that your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World. And
again, v. 7. To all that be in Rome beloved of God, called to the Saints, Grace
to you, and Peace. Now I say, having it once, how could they but retain the
same Faith still infallibly? For no general Council even ever yet condemned her
of Error, none of the holy Fathers ever wrote against her, and by no authority
was she to this day reproved of Schism; for she left no Church or Company ever
yet, she went not forth from any Body or Congregation; how could she? being
infallible in her self, 1 Timothy 3.15. she being the House of God, which is the
Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Firmament of Truth; if not, why should
any be esteemed a Heathen and Publican for not hearing her? Add to this, Christ
being the Head of the Church, the Holy Ghost the Soul thereof guiding and
directing in all truth, the Church could not err, unless you will make Christ and
his Spirit an Impostor, and a Liar, which is downright Blasphemy, seeing that
he prophesied, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, viz.
Error, Falsehood, Schism, or Heresy; hence I infer by good illation, that any
Congregation of People despising Christ, forsaking his Church, and remaining
out of it, pertinaciously is guilty absolutely of Apostasy and Schism, see St.
Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises
me, etc. Lo the misery of Protestants! who are likewise really guilty of
Heresy, in adhering to so many false opinions and errors of Faith contrary to
the generally approved Doctrine of the Church of Christ, from which they
wilfully and blindly divided themselves, breaking of Communion with the
ancient, one Holy-Catholick Apostolic Roman Church: And sure that Church, to
which Apostasy, Schism, and Heresy, does agree, is a false and erroneous
Church; and this is the Church of the pretended Reformation.

The Power of glorious Jesus our Redeemer did marvelously shine in the Empire
of his Church, which his heavenly Father did put into his hands to build it,
raise it, cement it with his Sacred Blood, to illuminate it with his Light,
nourish it with his Body, to make Laws in it, establish Sacraments as
conveyances of Divine Graces, to eternize a most dread and propitiatory
Sacrifice, to create Pastors and Priests, invisibly to rule it by a visible
Head, a Power never to be shaken even to the Gates of Hell; to exercise a
Jurisdiction over Souls, to bind them, unloose them, pardon Sins, and change
Hearts; and you may know, that this ever blessed Jesus having the source of all
power in him, did in Divine Providence distribute the same, his Divine Power,
to Popes and Kings, constituting the one for Spiritual Government leading to
eternal Glory, the other for the Temporal; and it is his will and pleasure we
honor the Character of that his Divine Authority, both in the one and the
other, and not to argue, control or impugn, upon idle whimsical Fantasies
those heavenly Powers. And it is most evident, that in all times before Heresy
began, there has been rendered to Popes Vicegerents of Christ, and lawful
Successors to St. Peter, the Honor they deserved as such, and as the sovereign
universal visible Pastors under Heaven; see the Council of Calcedon, in Epist.
ad Leonam Papam, where the Pope is called, Caput omnium Episcoporum and totius
Christi Ecclesiae. Also we confess and acknowledge our Sovereign Liege-Lord and
most gra-King JAMES the Second, true and absolute Monarch of these his three
Kingdoms, singularly honoring and obeying him, and with most true, cordial,
faithful, loyal affection, loving him as an animated real Portraiture of the
greatness of the Divine Majesty; and sure there is no Science more noble, nor
more advantageous, than to honor and obey these two Powers; neither can there
be any true lasting Felicity, but in the accomplishment of the Will of the
Almighty, the Sovereign Master and Ruler of all. On the contrary, it is
observed in the History of many Ages, that dire Vengeance and Wounds from
Heaven have fallen signally upon those who have disobeyed these two Powers, for
the Wind blowing from blasphemous and seditious Mouths, returned on their own
Heads, since it is fit such Impiety and horrid Iniquity should first kill it
self with its own Poison: What the Soul is to the Body, the same is true
Religion to a Kingdom; the Body without a Soul signifies nothing; even so a
Kingdom, without true Religion, is disjoynted, confused, and comes to ruin;
whereas Divine Religion in it self is the Basis and Foundation of all Moral
Virtues, the ground and support of all just pious Laws, the cement that
strongly combine all human Society, and is the very life of upright impartial
Justice, and constant Honesty: Finally, true supernatural Religion is the
golden Chain that unites God to Man, and Man to his Duty to God, and brings
down the rich Blessings to poor mortal Sinners on Earth. O what a glorious and
most happy Kingdom is that, where are to be seen, as in a clear optic Glass,
these two most heavenly Objects, the King's most excellent Majesty prostrate on
bended knees, paying with ravishing Devotion the humble religious Homage of
Heart, Hands, and Knees, to the Divine Majesty of Almighty God! As a Member and
obedient Child of the visible Church of Christ, honoring a visible sepreme
head Vicar of Christ, and Successor to St. Peter, as Universal Pastor of all
Pastors. And it is a most undoubted truth, that Kings are not made by the
invention of active, ambitious, or politic Wits, as blind Enthusiasts Dreams;
neither are they Creatures of the People's making, or the Product of a giddy
Multitude, as the Independents, with many other seditious blind persons,
maintains; but they are grounded on the very Law of Nature in high paternal
Authority coequal with the World, they are founded on the pure Law of right
Reason, which gives a Dignity and Authority to the Firstborn over all his
Brethren, so as Kings are rooted in the Original Laws of Nations, as Cicero,
lib. 3. de legib. testifies; Omnes antiquae Gentes Regibus paruerunt, All the
ancient Nations in the World were ruled and governed by Kings: They are
confirmed by God's unerring Law, who instituted Kingly Government over his own
chosen People, Deuteronomy. 17.15. and gave express command for David to be anointed
King of Israel, 1 Samuel 16.1. Finally, Kings are prophetically promised as a
very great Blessing to his Church; Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy Nursing
Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nursing Mothers. And Plato, that Seraphick
Philosopher, calls Kingly Government the most Divine Government. Herodotus, who
is styled, Pater Historiarum, The first Historian among the Heathens, calls it,
The most ancient Government. Aristotle, the most rational of all Philosophers,
styles it, The most excellent Government, for Monarchical. Government is the
mere imitation of the Government of Heaven, which is by one God; it is the
restitution of the Primitive Government in this World, which was by one King,
and it is the mere reflection of the admirable Government of Nature, which
rules the many Members of the Body by one Soul. Daily experience proves that
Ship to be best guided which is steered by one Pylot, though trimmed by many
Saylors; that Army sure is best ordered which is commanded by one General, though
assisted by many inferior Officers; Ergo, that Nation is more happy and best
governed by one King* though advised by diverse prudent and religious Counselors.
And even Nature gives us a Hieroglyphick hereof in the Bees, whose sweet
Commonwealth is ordered by one King: See Georg. lib. 4. Quemadmodum mirantur
and omnes circumstant fremitu denso stipantque frequentes; They all follow and
obey, like little nimble Courtiers their little King, etc.

All this considered, will not a good Judgment see, that to go about to oppose
any of these two Powers, is to do that which St. Austin said, To suffer ones
self to run into a folly, which hastened into the height of Insolency and
Madness, and in the end find nothing but an Ocean of Disturbances, and
unavoidable Perdition and Ruin.

God bless King JAMES, our most gracious Pole Star, no sooner His Royal Brother
King Charles the Second, of ever glorious Memory, died, but he publicly went
to hear Mass, confiding in the mercy of ever blessed Jesus, who for him
doubtless will all Safety and Prosperity provide. O Prodigy never to be duly
pondered, for which he is through all the World praised and admired! Magna est
Veritas and praevalet. We must not meddle with things Sacred, but with due
reverence; we must not confound the true Churches Spiritual Authority, with the
Regal, Civil, and Temporal, both being distinct in Office, and severally given
and appointed by the Almighty; they are like the two Arms of his Divine Power
employed by him, and distributed to their several Uses, the one exercising the
mere Spiritual and Persuasive Power, the other the Corporal and Coercive Power;
the one holding the Pastoral-directing and Soul-corrective Staff, the other
swaying the Royal and All-subjecting Scepter; the one unsheathing the Spiritual
Sword, cutting off by Authority Disobedient, Schismatical, or Heretical Sinners
from the communion of the faithful Flock, and from eternal Life; the other
brandishing the Kingly Sword, cutting off the Lives of the Offenders of
established just Laws; and even as God holds this World in his hands that the
vast Sea and firm Land may not mix together, but observe their just bounds,
lest they should come to another Chaos; So he will not have those two sovereign
distinct Dignities be blinded into one, least Confusion, and inevitable Ruin
should follow. Sure since King Henry the Eighth revolted from the Monarchical
Spiritual Power of Christ's Church, nothing to this day followed but confusion,
misery, disasters, in this brave Kingdom of England, by degrees ascending to
height of unheard of Iniquity and Tyranny, as to cut off the best of Kings
Charles the First; assuredly those miscreant Hell Hounds that murdered him
would not stick to murder even Divinity: This is the woeful Catastrophe of
disjoyning the Spiritual, from Kingly and Monarchical Government. Now I must
say this much of the Roman Catholic Church, that, according to St. Paul, Romans
1. was, and is yet, and will continue, in perpetuum, famous for Faith,
Religion, Sacrifice, and Sacraments, throughout the Universe, for the sound of
her Doctrine has been heard every where, and her Fame to the utmost Parts of
the World, so as it is the same to say Roman, as Catholic or Universal;
whereas there, where the Roman Eagles Wings did never spread, the Roman Faith
did, reaching down to all Ages, and spreading over all Kingdoms; for who can
view Christianity in its extent, but must consider how all Kingdoms and Nations
were by Roman Emissaries converted to the true ancient Faith of Jesus, we need
not make any further Enquiries, but embrace and walk confidently in those plain
Paths in which Fools cannot err, following the footsteps of the true Flock and
the heavenly good Pastor, where alone Sanctity, Verity, and all Virtues,
inerrability, infallibility, and perpetuity, are found; for when, where, or how
she ever erred or failed, no Authentic Author have yet related, no faithful
candid Writer recorded; nor have any of those watchful Luminaries and
Sentinels, whom God has placed in his Church, ever given the least alarm of
Innovations gotten into the same, only Schismatics and Heretics combining,
conspiring, and reviling, and in vain.

CHAP. II. Of the CHURCH.
THe Church of Christ is one Society or Company of Men linked and combined
together in one and the same profession of Christian Faith, Religion,
Sacrifice, and use of Sacraments under lawful Pastors, and under one supreme
visible Head Pastor, or conservator of Peace, Union, and Verity: This is a true
notion or definition of the Church established by Christ, and propagated by the
blessed Apostles; here the true nature, essence, and constitution of a Church
is manifested, and does truly distinguish it from all Heretics and
Schismatics vain Pretenses whatsoever, for they are apparently excluded from
Christ's Church, and she appears glorious without spot, wrinkle, or any such
thing; she is described in holy Writ by the Emblems of a City, orderly governed
by one chief supreme Governor, or of an Army governed by that Military
Discipline, that requires subjection to one Generalissimo, the King had placed
over it; of the Body, each Member in due subjection to its visible Head on
Earth, and the Pope in point of Government, ruled by his invisible Head in the
highest Heaven. Hence it follows by order of good consequence, that Divine
Faith and Belief (wherein consists as well the ground and foundation of our
eternal welfare, as also the Fruit and entire Utility of Christ's coming into
this World) is to be had in the Church, made plain by the Prophet Esaias 45. he
foreshewed the wonderful Providence of God, in providing for Christians so
manifest a way of Direction for their Faith and Religion, as that the most
simple and unlearned Man in the World should not be able (but out of
wilfulness) to go astray therein, his words directed to the Gentiles are these:
Take comfort, and fear not; behold your God shall come and save you, then shall
the Eyes of the Blind be opened, and the Ears of the Deaf shall be restored,
and there shall be a Path and way, and it shall be called, The holy way; and it
shall be to you a direct way, as Fools shall not be able to err therein.

Sure the plain and direct way mentioned by Esaias, wherein no simple or ignorant
Men can err, is the general Body of Christ's visible Church upon Earth, planted
by his Apostles throughout all Nations and Countries, and continuing by
Succession unto the World's end; in which Church, who remains and believes
all things taught therein, cannot at all fall into any Error of Faith; for that
this Church is guided by Christ's Spirit, and therefore in no ways subject, or
within the compass of Error: For which cause, St. Paul, ultimo, calls it, The
Pillar and Firmament of Truth. And the same Church is so conspicuous and
evidently manifest, that it is more easy to find it out, than it is to see the
Sun or Moon when it shines brightest at Noon, or to behold the greatest Hill
or Mountain in the World; and for more declaration of this, it is to be noted,
That in the time from Christ's ascension, until the 13 th year of Nero's
Region, who first of the Roman Emperors began open Persecution against
Christians, and put to death St. Peter and St. Paul: In this time (I say) of
Toleration under the Roman Empire, (which continued the space of 36 years) the
blessed Apostles and Disciples had preached one uniform Gospel and Faith
throughout all the World, as may appear by their Acts recorded, and by the
peculiar Testimony of St. Paul to the Romans, Romans 1. which thing being most
miraculously done by the Divine Power and Virtue of Christ, Bishops, Pastors,
and Governors, being ordained in every Country and Church, for guiding and
directing the same by themselves and their Successors in perpetuum; this I say,
being once brought to pass, then the blessed Apostles, for preventing of new
false Doctrines that might afterward arise, most earnestly exhorted, and with
all vehemence called upon the people to stand fast in the Doctrine, Documents
and Traditions then received, to hold firmly the Faith and Doctrine already
delivered as a Depositum or Treasure committed to them, to be safely kept till
the last day. And above all other things, they forewarned them to beware of new
fangled Teachers, whom they called Heretics, who should break from the Unity
of the Universal Body already made and knit together, and should devise new
Glosses, Expositions, and Interpretations of Scripture, bringing in new Senses,
Doctrines, Opinions, and damnable Divisions, to the utter renting of Christ's
Church, Kingdom, City, already builded, and all this to the perdition of
infinite Souls. Hence it is, that St. Paul, Tim. 1. pronounces peremptorily of
a contentious and heretical Man, that he is damned by the testimony of his own
Judgment or Conscience; for that he abandoned the common, direct, public way,
which all Men might see, devising particular Paths and pernicious Turnings to
himself; and the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church disputing against the
same kind of People, defended always, that their Error was of Malice and wilful
Blindness, and not at all of Ignorance; for they will not behold the plain,
direct, sure, safe, unerring, and infallible way among Christians, wherein no
man can err, though never so simple, but only of blind, wilful, and obstinate
malice: Yet by promises of Christ himself in the Gospel we are absolutely
ascertained, that the same visible Congegation, Body, Commonwealth, Church,
Kingdom, and Government, which was established by Christ, and propagated by the
blessed Apostles, shall endure and continue by Succession of Followers in
perpetuum, and that no new Teacher of later Doctrines dissenting from the
first, shall ever prevail against it; albeit diverse Errors and Heresies have
sprung up, and made great blustering and disturbance for a time, yet have they
been repressed and condemned by the same Church, and her visible Pastors and
Doctors in the end. For Example-sake, in the first Age there arose up certain
seditious fellows among the Jews, as Simon Magus, Nicolaus, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Meander, etc. that were Heretics; against these, stood in defense St. Peter,
who broke the Neck and Black Art of Simon Magus, even by his Prayer: And after
him, St. Martialis, St. Dionysius Areopagita, St. Ignatius, Policarpus, and
others. In the second Age rose up Basilides, Cerdon, Marchion, Valentinus,
Tacianus, Apelles, Montanus, and diverse others; against these stood in battle
Justin Martyr, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, St. Ireneus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, with many others, their equals: And so all along downward from Age
to Age unto cursed Luther's days, whatsoever Heresy, or new false Opinions
has been raised contrary to the general consent of Christ's universal Church,
it has been checked, controlled, silenced, and condemned by vigilant Pastors
and Doctors, chief Governors of the same Body, by general Assemblies and
Councils gathered from time to time, as occasion served, in all Parts of the
World: Whereby it is evidently most manifest, that he who relieth upon this
general consent of Christ's Church, and the judgment thereof, cannot err in
matters of Belief, but walks in that sure, secure, and infallible Path,
wherein it is said in Isaiah 35.8. That a very Fool cannot go amiss.

Hence one may be persuaded of the Churches perspicuity and infallibility in
her Traditions and Doctrines through God's Divine Providence, which did and
will always preserve it from corruption, having a warrant for it out of
Scripture, Isa. 59.21. My Spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have
put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed's Seed, from henceforth for ever.
And St. Austin said, Ep. 118. That to dispute against a living multitude of the
whole Church, is insolent madness. And to say, she may err through ignorance,
wilfulness, or negligence, is most absurd and blasphemous, she having Christ
for her Head, and the holy Ghost for her Guide and Spirit, who was sent by our
Savior to teach it all Truth; wherefore to tax that heavenly Government with
errors in Faith, is either to tax the holy Ghost with them, or to blaspheme
against Christ our blessed Redeemer, by saying, He has not kept his word and
promise, in sending the holy Ghost to teach his Church all truth for ever.

King JAMES, in a public Speech made in his Parliament, acknowledged the
Church of Rome to be our Mother Church, saying, I acknowledge the Church of
Rome to be our Mother Church: This you may find in Stow, page 840. Sure the
Sacred Blood of his glorious Mother Queen Mary, the ever blessed Martyr, ran in
the Veins of this her Royal Son King James, who would do wonderful things in
favor of the Roman Catholic Church, if it were not for the black contriving
of the Gunpowder Plot by the Matchevilian Policy of crooked Cicil, only for to
hinder King James from favoring the Church of Christ; Sanguis mantirum semen
Ecclesiae. See Osburn.

Sure there is no other certain Testimony to any prudent considering Man, no
firm Ground or Motive to believe, that the Primitive Church received her
Doctrine from the blessed Apostles, these from Christ, Christ from God the
Father; nor any way to bring it down from those times to these our days, but
only the Tradition of the Church from hand to hand.

For we may observe three properties of the Doctrine of Divine Faith to be
true, to be revealed of God, to be preached and delivered by the Apostles. The
highest ground by which a Man is persuaded that his Faith is true, is the
Authority of God speaking and revealing it; the highest proof by which a Man is
assured that his Faith is revealed, is the Authority of Christ, and his blessed
Apostles, who delivered the same as descending from God; but the highest ground
that moves a Man to believe, that his Faith was preached by the blessed
Apostles, is the perpetual constant Tradition of the Church succeeding the
blessed Apostles unto this day, assuring him so much according to the saying of
Tertul. depraes. c. 21. and 37. who made his Ladder of Belief thus: What I
believe I received from the present Church, the present from the Primitive, the
Primitive from the blessed Apostles, these from Christ, Christ from God, and
God, the prime supreme Fountain of Verity, from no other Fountain different
from his infallible Knowledge: So as we must cleave to the present Church
firmly, believing the constant Tradition thereof successively. So as if any
have taught contrary points of Faith than what is revealed, the Catholic
Church has condemned them for Heretics; which is a sufficient proof, that
until such heretical Spirits, some one or more Traditions of the Church, were
universally believed: As for Example; The Doctrine of Christ's
consubstantiality, or being of the same substance with the Father, no Man of
reason will deny, but that it was generally believed in the Church before the
days of the Arch-heretick Arrius, and that the Council of Nice condemning him,
was a sufficient proof, that the Doctrine he opposed was the Universal
Tradition of the Church, by force and virtue whereof he was overthrown, and not
by Scripture only.

The various ridiculous attempts of Protestants had hitherto no better success
than Achelous had in fighting with Hercules, who took upon him several shapes,
hoping in one or other to overcome him, but was by Hercules beaten through all
his shapes, and forced at last to take his own proper shape, and yield: Even so
Protestants fighting against Roman Catholics are daily by them beaten through
all their changes, forms, shifts, and inventions, through which they wander,
yet are forced at last to take their true form of Protestancy, which is
obstinately to deny, and even protest against manifest Truth, against general
Councils, holy Fathers, and consent of all Nations. But I do heartily pray,
that it would please God to bring them to the true ancient heavenly form which
they ought to have, which is, of Roman Catholic, and not perpetually roll like
the blinded Sodomites, wander and grope in the darkness of uncertainty and
instabibity, until eternal Torments seize upon them. One great egregious fraud
you may observe amongst the Canonical Protestants, viz. That when they dispute
against Roman Catholics, they have recourse to the Scripture, and will be
tried by that only; but when they dispute against Puritans, and other
Sectaries, who can deal with them at their own Weapon, the Scripture only, then
they have their recourse to the Fathers, and the old Tradition of the Church,
just using the very same Arguments against Sectaries that Catholics do against
them; particularly in the baptising of Infants, against the Anabaptists; and
the keeping of the first day of the week holy, against the Sabbatarians who
would have Saturday, for either of which there is not any command in Scripture.
And shall Tradition serve them in those cases, and not in others? And this
shift is such a one as St. Augustine, Psalm. 80. witnesses, to be common to
Foxes, and now to Heretics; for even as the Foxes have two holes, to save
themselves by one, when they are driven from the other; so Heretics (whom the
Scripture figured out by Foxes, Cant. 2.15.) have a double passage to save
themselves, by the one when they are assaulted by the other; so that he that
will catch them, must set his Nets before both issues, and besiege both
passages: As ever yet to this day, the excellent Writers among Catholics have
done, and have left them neither Tradition nor Scripture, whereby to escape
Confusion, and the shame of Schism and Heresy; for it is but folly to pretend
to secure by human crafty Arts that which God is resolved to destroy.

AN APPENDIX.
PRotestants corrupts Scripture in their Translations most shamefully, wickedly
and impiously, for to make good and justify their Schism: To make Catholics
Idolaters, they in the year 1562. corrupted the Scripture, 2. Cor. 6. How
agrees the Temple of God with Idols! They translated and printed in the
English Bible, How agrees the Temple of God with Images! The same wickedness
they practice in 1. Cor. 5. If any that is called a Brother be a Fornicator,
Covetous, or server of Idols; they printed in the year 1562. Or a worshipper of
Images. It were too tedious a business to specify all their false and absurd
Translations, by which they brought the word of God to be ridiculous to the
world. Priest, in their Language, is Elder; Church, Synagogue; holy Ghost, holy
Wind; Soul, Carcass; Christ, Anointed; Lord, Baal; Eucharist, Thanksgiving;
Baptism, Washing; Hell, Grave; Devil, Slanderer; Beelzebub, Lord of a Fly;
Angels, Messengers: So that an exhortation to Devotion in the Protestant
Scripture Language, will move Men more to Laughter than to Piety; whereas in
the Catholic Translation and Phrase, it moves to compunction. Suppose a
Catholic Priest should exhort the People thus: I who am a Priest, placed in
the Church by the holy Ghost for the feeding of your Souls, do denounce to you
in the name of Christ our Lord, That unless you come to the Eucharist with more
Devotion, and perform better your Promises made to God in Baptism, ye shall be
condemned Body and Soul to Hell, and your Portion shall be with the Devil, I
say, with Beelzebub and his Angels: Sure this Exhortation in the Protestant
Language of Scripture goes very absurdly. Let us suppose, that a young spruse
Protestant Minister should step up to the Pulpit, and repeat the Priests
Exhortation in his own corrupt Phrase, thus: I that am your Elder, placed in
the Synagogue by the holy Wind, for the feeding of your Carcasses, do denounce
unto you in the name of the Anointed, our Baal, that unless you come to the
holy Thanksgiving with more Devotion, and perform better your Promises made to
God in washing, ye shall be condemned Body and Carcass to the Grave, and your
Portion shall be with the Slanderers, I say, with the Lord of a Fly, and his
Messengers. How therefore can any Man of reason and judgment join in Communion
with such impious Sectaries that thus corrupts the holy Word of God, for to
keep Souls in Schism, Heresy, and Damnation: Away, away! Fie, fie on such
hellish Practices!

The main thing Protestants deny, is the Antiquity of the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, saying most impudently, That the Primitive Fathers taught the
Protestant Doctrine, and not that which the Roman Church now-adays teaches,
which is found to be most false by the examination of Particulars.

Let us take a view of the Roman Doctrines as they were held in S. Augustine's
days, and the four first General Councils which were held between the year 315,
and 457, to which four Councils Protestants give much honor, and subscribe to
their Decrees: Sure in those times the Church believed in the true and real
Presence of the eating with the Mouth the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, as
Zuinglius, the Prince of the Sacramentarians, acknowledge, in these words: From
the time of St. Augustine, the opinion of Corporal Flesh had really got the
mastery; St. Aug. lib. de vera and falsa Religione cap. de Eucharistia: And was
adored with outward Gestures as the true Body of Christ; in Council. Ephesians. in
Epist. and Nestor. in Council. Nicaen. c. 14. To give prime Honor, and supreme,
to St. Peter, Bishop of the first See, as Universal Pastor and Vicegerent of
Christ; Council. Nicaen. c. 15. Council. Chalced. Act. 4. and 16. constit. c. 5.
To pray to Saints, that they may intercede for us; in Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
Prayers for the Dead offered publicly and privately in St. Augustin's time;
August. de cura pro mortuis. In those days the Church held the Fast of Forty
days of Lent as Apostolical Tradition; St. Hier. ad Marcel. Ep. 54. Fridays
likewise Confession and priestly Absolution; St. August. Homil. 49. says, The
Keys given to the Church is to some purpose sure: We must not frustrate the
words of Christ. So St. Basil, Tertullian, St. Clement, etc. And thus of all
other Points in Controversy we may find Reason, Authority, Practice, and
uninterrupted Custom in all Ages, as Napier in his Treatise on the Revelations,
page 145. confesses, saying; After 300 years, the Emperor Constantine subdued
all Christian Churches to Pope Silvester, from which time, till these our days,
the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible Church;
Protestants employment being not at all to convert Heathens, but to pervert
those already converted; Tertul. praescr. c. 42. And we may find in the
Writings of Roman Catholic Authors, Orthodox Fathers, that the Doctrine now
held by Protestants, were condemned as Heretical in those Persons that then
held them. For Example: The Protestant hold, that the Church may err; so did
the Donatists who were condemned by St. Augustine. Potestants deny unwritten
Tradition, and urge Scripture only; so did the Arrians, and were condemned by
St. Augustine and Epiphanius. Protestants teach, that Priests may marry; so did
Vigilantius, and condemned by St. Hierom, contr. Vigilant. c. 1. Protestants
deny Prayers for the Dead, so did Arrius, condemned by St. August. haer. 53.
and St. Epiphan. haer. 75. Protestants deny invocation of Saints; so did
Vigilantius, for which he was condemned by St. Hierom, contra Vigilant. c. 3.
Protestants deny the Real Presence; so did the Capernaits, and Berengarius, who
reclaimed and did Penance. Protestants deny confession of Sins to a Priest; so
the Novatian Heretics did, reproved and condemned by St. Ambros. lib. de
penitent. c. 7. So did the Montanists, condemned by St. Hierom, Epist. ad
Marcel. 54. I leave off an addition of many other Points, which makes really
the new-moulded Protestant Sect appear but a mere frippery or hodge-podge of
old condemned Heresies. Hence you may understand, that the Doctrine of the
Roman Church is this day, as it was 1600 years ago, still one, Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic, and Unchanged; grounded on such a solid unshaken Foundation, that
it is never to be brought down by the Gates of Hell, i. e. Heresy, Schism,
Apostasy, Wranglings, foolish Fopperies, Lyings, Railings, etc.

Now Sir, if you are sufficiently tossed and wearied out with variety of
Disputes, and desire to put an end to them now, follow the guide and direction
of the Roman Catholic Church in Faith, Religion, Sacraments, Sacrifice, and
Doctrine; all which are derived from Christ himself to his blessed Apostles,
from the Apostles down to us, and is to continue in the same heavenly Channel
of Succession unto the end of the World: Which Roman Catholic Church has
obtained supreme Authority from the Apostolic See, by a wondrous succession
of Bishops, by the judgment of the People, by the gravity and authority of
Councils; and lastly, by the Majesty of Miracles: And not to submit to this
Divine Authority, sure is the height of Impiety, and precipitant Arrogance, and
not to Dotages of particular idle Intruders.

Now as Rebellion is the bane of Civil Government in Kingdoms, and Peace and
Concord the preservation of the same; so is Schism, Division, and diversity of
Faith, the ruin and calamity of the Church; and Unity, Peace, and Uniformity,
the special Blessing of God therein, and in the Church above all Commonwealths,
because it is in all points a Monarchy tending every way to Unity, there being
but one God, one Christ, one Church, one Faith, one Hope, one Head, one Body,
one Baptism.

Christ's Church is a Society of those that God has called to Salvation, by
the profession of the true Faith, Religion, dread Sacrifice, the sincere
Administration of Sacraments, and the adherence to a lawful Pastor, as Head;
which Description is so fitted and proportioned to the Church, that it
resembles the Nest of the Halcyon, which according to Plutarch is of such a
just and exact size for the measure of her Body, that it can serve no other
Bird, either greater or lesser.

Since Christianity is a Doctrine of Faith, a Doctrine whereof all Men are
capable of; and since the high virtue of Faith is in the humility of our
Understanding, and the merit thereof in the ready obedience to embrace it; what
madness it is for any Man to tire out his Soul, to wast away his Spirits in
tracing out all the thorny Paths of the main Controversies of these our
backsliding days, wherein to err is easy and dangerous, what through the
malice of Authors abusing him, what through Sophistry beguiling him, what
through blind Passion and Prejudice transporting him; and not rather betake
himself to the right way of Truth, whereunto Christ, Reason, Nature, and
Experience, do all give witness; and that is, to associate himself to that
Church established by Christ, whereunto the custody of a heavenly and
supernatural Truth has been from Heaven it self committed, to weigh and find
out discreetly which is the true Church, to receive it cheerfully and
discreetly without doubt or discussion, whatsoever it delivers, without any
farther inquisition; she having the warrant, that he that hears her, hears
Christ; and whosoever hears her not, has no better place with God than a
Publican and Pagan: And what folly is it now to receive Scriptures upon the
credit of her Authority, and not to receive the interpretation of them upon her
Authority and Credit also? Sure if God should not always protect his Church
from Error, and yet peremptorily commanding Men upon pain of Damnation to obey
her always, then had he made very slender provision for the Salvation of
Mankind; which conceit concerning God would render us very ungratefully
impious. These Considerations or Motives may very easily persuade Persons of
Reason and Piety to embrace and maintain that which they know to be the
Religion of their Forefathers, before her Adversaries had a Name, her Doctrine
having had a very long continuance; which cannot easily be supposed, in the
present possessors, to be a Design, since they have received it down from so
many Ages; and it is not likely that all Ages should have the same purposes, or
that the same Doctrine should serve the several different ends of diverse Ages,
relying upon the Grounds; to wit, that Truth is more ancient than Falsehood, and
that God would not for so many Ages forsake his Church, and leave her in Error,
Schism, or Novelty.

Again; Let us consider the exceeding Beauty and Splendour of her Churches, her
solemn Service, stateliness and magnificence of her Hierarchy, the Name of
Catholic which she claims as her own due, and to concern no other Sect of
Heretics; the wondrous continual Succession of her Popes, of an honorable and
most certain Line of 250 Popes, Successors of St. Peter; both Tyrants,
Traitors, Pagans, apostate Heretics, in vain wresting, raging, combining,
conspiring, and undermining it: Let us reflect, that beside the Roman Church,
and such others as are united with it, you will find all other Churches to have
failed, and have an end or decay long since, or their beginning of late. The
Roman Church was founded by the Prince of the Apostles, with a Promise to him
from Christ, that Hell Gates should never prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. And
that himself would be assistant to it to the consummation of the World. All the
lawful general Councils that ever were in the World have approved and honored
it, condemning its Adversaries. God so miraculously has blessed it from above,
that very many famous, learned, wise, and godly Doctors in all Ages, have
enriched it with their Writings, Legions of Saints with their rare Holiness and
Virtues, Millions of Martyrs with their Blood, many Millions of Virgins with
purity of Soul and Body have sanctified and embellished it: And even at this
day of unjust Rebellions, Apostasy and cursed Schism of her revolted Children,
she stretches out her Arms to the utmost corners of the world, daily and newly
embracing whole Nations into her Bosom.

Mark how that in all Sects opposite are found inward Dissensions,
Contrarieties, change of Opinions, uncertainty of Resolutions in matters of
Faith, rebelling against Governors, and daily confusion of Order; whereas
contrariwise in the Roman Church there is Unity, Uniformity undivided, and
Resolutions unaltered, a most heavenly Order; all with admirable Harmony, and
undefective Correspondence, bending the same one way to the effecting of one
and the same work: Wherefore let no Man doubt to submit himself and judgment to
this glorious Spouse of Jesus Christ, reverently obeying her in all things;
whose Authority every Man may safely follow and rely upon, she being so happy
in being instrumental in converting all Nations from Infidelity by unfeigned
Miracles, and, among many other things, the Names of Heretics and Schismatics
which she fathers upon all those that disagree and revolt from her Bosom. This
brings me to mind that saying of St. Hierom, lib. 1. c. 14. contra Iovinian,
concerning St. Peter's Primacy: Amongst the twelve Apostles one was chosen,
that a Head being constituted and appointed, all occasion of Schism might be
taken away. Melanghton holds, that the Primacy is most necessary for the
retaining and preserving of Unity, and adhering to the Roman Catholic See.
Seeing therefore, that Controversies in Religion in these our times are grown
in number so many, and in matters so intricate, that few have time and leisure,
fewer strength of Understanding to examine them, it remains for Men desirous of
satisfaction in things of such consequence, diligently to search out which
Church has divine revealed Faith in it, and the same to embrace, follow, and
practice.

St. Paul says, That Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, and an
argument or demonstration of things not appearing to us. I wonder that St. Paul
calls Faith a Substance, when it is but an Accident; we must understand St.
Paul thus: Even as the Substance is the foundation and stress of the Accidents,
as of Quantity, Quality, Relation, etc. all cleaving and adhering to their
substance, so as if those accidents become separated from their substance, then
the substance will be reduced to a punctum indivisibile; even so Divine Faith,
if it be not whole and entire, believing all and every Article and Principle
revealed, preached, and handed down from Christ and his Apostles; then Faith
will be no Divine Faith, but is become a folly, phantasm, and illusion; it must
be a Faith animated with Charity, Piety, Obedience, etc. that will avail for
Salvation. For suppose you believe the Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension of
Christ, with all other Mysteries belonging to his Divinity and Humanity, and
not to believe the Real Presence, Auricular Confession, Purgatory, etc. you
have no Faith for Salvation: As if but one Wheel of your Pocket Watch be
broken, nay if but one Tooth of it be broken, your Watch serves for nothing; so
one Article of Faith denied, destroys Faith. Sure he that admitted a leak in
his Ship, drowns it; and he that divides Faith, believing some Points, and
denying other Points, comes to have no Faith at all; for all that comes from
one and the same Divine Authority, ought to be believed with like equality,
reverence, and submission: Doing otherwise, is to suffer ones self to run
headlong into real blindness, which hastened to the height of Insolency and
Madness; and to have nothing so assured as incertainty, nothing so undoubted as
the loss of true Faith transformed into a real Schism, the headlong descent of
a horrible Precipice, to never ending scorching Flames.

CHAP. III. Appendix to the former Chapter.
THe Almighty God independent and immense in his Extent, eternal in his
Duration, infinite in his Perfections, glorious in his Mercies, and mysterious
in the wondrous communication and dispensation of his Favors, Mercies, and
Graces to Man, above all sublunary Creatures; for the Apostate Angels are lost
without Redemption, and the punishment their insolent Pride has merited, does
pursue them without relaxation, term, or pity; it is Man therefore who must be
placed and substituted in the empty Seats of Angels. O Mercy! never to be duly
pondered! Lo God the fountain, cause, and origin of the Universe, drew Man out
of Dirt and Mortar, as the Masterpiece and prime Substance of all his
Operations; it was Man that deserved the last wondrous touches of his
omnipotent Hands; so, as Plato cries out, calling Man the Miracle of all
visible Miracles, it is certain, that of all Encomiums given to Man, the most
noble, august, and transcendent, is, that he is created to the Image of God as
a character of his Divine Nature: Herehence God's Goodness requires Homages,
his Majesty all Worship and Acknowledgments, and Affections of all Hearts. Now
we are to consider, that God, when he created Man, did not assign him to remain
in the state of pure Nature, but did out of his goodness confer on him original
Righteousness and Grace, and after did endow him with supernatural Means, which
may bring him to the supernatural end he was created for, viz. The vision,
fruition, and possession of Heavenly Glory for all Eternity.

Now a supernatural End must require a supernatural Means, whereas by no
natural helps we can arrive to be completely happy in the next Life, then of
all supernatural Means or Gifts, the ground and stress of all the rest, is
Divine, unerring revealed Faith. Now the Master and Author of that Doctrine we
must believe, the Instructor of the Actions we must perform, and the promiser
and performer of the final Happiness we may hope for is God himself, who cannot
deceive or be deceived, he being the prime Verity. Via veritas and vita. -- So
as Faith is not grounded upon our weak natural Judgment or Ratiocination, but
upon obedience to the Church.

Faith is a gift of God, a supernatural Quality infused by God into our Souls,
by which we firmly believe all things revealed to us; Without Faith, its
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. And, He that believed not, shall be
damned; Mark ult. v. 16. So as every one ought to know that there is a
sovereign and blessed end, viz. Eternal Glory; then every one ought to love and
heartily wish to attain to the same, and earnestly seek out for those means and
helps prescribed and ordained by God for the compassing it. Then in the first
place we must find out Divine Faith, which partly proceeds from God as the
source and Author thereof, as Prima veritas: And although those things we believe
by Faith cannot be known by evident Demonstration, yet because they are taught
us by supernatural means, we are more certain of their truth than of all other
things, because those things are delivered over to us by a more certainly
infallible Teacher, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost: Therefore enter I pray
into a serious consideration of the End, for which you and all were created,
viz. The Glory of God, and your eternal Happiness; and for the knowledge of the
means to attain thereunto, you may find by the consent of all Christians, this
cannot be gotten by clear and evident sight, nor by human Discourse founded on
the Principles of Reason, nor by reliance upon Authority merely human, but only
by Faith grounded on the Word of God, revealing to Men things that are
otherwise, only known to his infinite Wisdom. Now God sure revealed all these
things to Jesus Christ, and he to his blessed Apostles, as he says, John
15.15. All things which I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you:
This partly by word of mouth, but principally by the immediate teaching of the
Holy Ghost; to the end, that they should deliver them after to Mankind, to be
received, believed, and obeyed over the whole World in perpetuum, as it is
said, Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all Nations. Sure they did accordingly preach to
all Nations, as it is said by St. Mark 16.20. They going forth, did preach every
where; and so planted an universal Christian Company, charging them to keep
inviolable, and to deliver to their Posterity what they have received from them
as the first Messengers of the Gospel, as St. Paul said to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2.
The things that thou have heard of many Witnesses, the same commit thou to
faithful Men, who may instruct others. Now though the blessed Apostles and their
Hearers be departed out of this Life, yet still there remains a means now in
the World, by which all men may assuredly know what the Apostles preached, and
the Primitive Church received of them, seeing the Church to the end must be
built on the Apostles, and believe nothing as matter of Faith beside that which
was delivered of them, as St. Paul said, Ephesians. 2.20. Are built on the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief Corner
Stone.

Scripture is a Light only to the Faithful, because known from the Church's
Tradition to be from the Apostles, by the Apostles Authority confirmed by
Miracles to be of God, by God's supreme Verity, who cannot deceive nor be
deceived, to be the truth: So Scripture is a Light which must be showed by a
Superior Light, before it become light. The Church therefore must guide us to
know the truth of Scripture, as St. Austin said, Contra Epist. fundamenti, c.
5. I would not believe the Gospel it self, unless the Authority of the Church
Catholic did move me. The Word that is written tells us, that all is not
written; as St. Paul, 2. These. 2.15. exhorts us to keep both the written and
unwritten, saying, Stand fast and keep Traditions which you have learned by
word, or by our Epistle.

It is manifest, that the first Church of God from the Creation until Moses,
which was about 2000 years, had no Word of God but what was unwritten; which we
call Tradition from hand to hand. And we do not read that the Apostles were
sent to write, but to preach: And S. John denies, that he had expressed in
Writing all that he had to say, saying, Having more things to write to you, I
would not by Paper or Ink, for I hope that I shall be with you and speak mouth
to mouth, that your Joy may be full: By which it is evident, that the blessed
Apostles, beside their Writings, did preach other things which were wanting to
their faith. And it is manifest, that what the Apostles did write, was but
accidental, and upon particular occasions. See Hooker. Eccles. Pol. Lib. 1.
Sect. 15. P. 87. For instance; the Epistles of St. Peter, James, John, and
Jude, were written against certain Heretics, who misunderstanding St. Paul,
did teach that Faith only without Works sufficed to Salvation: See St. Aug. de
fide and operib. c. 14. And St. John did not preach his Gospel till his last
Age (which was very long) without writing, and took occasion to write (as St.
Ierom, de Scriptor. Eccles. affirms) by reason of the Heresy of Ebionites then
broke out. The like may be showed of the rest. And take what is worth
observation: That all Epistles were written to such persons only as were
already converted to the Christian Faith, therefore were written not so much to
instruct, as to confirm; this Zuinglius also confesses, Tom. 2. lib. de Eccl.
fol. 43. By all which its evident, that the Apostles and Evangelists did write
their Books not by Command of Christ, but upon some accidental occasion moving
them thereunto; and very many were saved before any Scripture, and that only by
Tradition, which was before Scripture; for the invention of Printing was not in
the World till about 230 years ago, and the Bibles that were written being but
few, by reason of the great labor of writing them; and those that were
written, not purchaseable but by few, because of their great price; nor legible
but by very few, because they were not printed, but written by hand; and sure
God by his Providence did and will always preserve his Church from extinction
and corruption, having warrant for it out of Scripture, and no warrant for the
preservation of the Text, the Church being a thing more easily known than
Scripture, and consisting of a living Multitude, can express it self more
plainly by the Mouth and Tradition of the Church; Tradition being plain and
easy Doctrine concerning the common, capital, and practical Articles of
Christianity; but Scripture, full of high, mysterious, and hidden senses,
furnished with variety of Parables, Examples, Histories, Revelations, Figures,
Allegories, so as it cannot be proved directly to be the word of God but by
Tradition.

The Christians of the Primitive Age, on pain of Damnation, held nothing of
Faith, but what they received from Christ and his blessed Apostles; for Moral
and Apostolical Tradition without written Scripture, or written Books, was the
means of planting and conserving Christian Religion; see St. Paul, Galat. 21.8.
Although we or an Angel from Heaven preach to you, besides that which we have
preached to you, he be Anathema. And again, 2 These. 15. Therefore Brethren
stand ye fast, and hold ye the Traditions which ye have learned, whether by
Word or by our Epistle. Sure Apostolical Tradition is the sure Guide by which
we may infallibly be assured what Doctrine for Salvation Christ and his blessed
Apostles left many years before any thing was written or printed.

CHAP. IV. The Scripture of Protestants decry'd.
FIrst, I say, that all Sectaries, though never so many, and opposite one to
another, have ever risen, and have still pretended to Scripture; nay, the Devil
urged his Temptation with a scriptum est, Matthew. 4. And so many frequently
deprave the Scriptures to their own perdition, 2 Pet. 3. I decline not
Scripture, but allow, admit, and embrace it, as containing that irrefragable
Doctrine, which eminent Persons in the Church of God penned, even a thousand
years before Printing was invented: Scripture is a good Instrument to draw Men
from Paganism to Chistianity, but not Protestants to the Catholic Faith. When
the Christian explicit Articles of Faith prepared and delivered to us by our
Primitive Pastors, according as they had received them from Christ (the prime
Inventor) were rashly annulled, taken away, and rejected by Sectaries; and the
Bible put into all hands, for to search and find out by our own skill the
Results and Principles of Religion implicitly couched in the Bible; is not this
extreme Madness and Tyranny to Souls? Is it not a tyrannous Cheat, and an Abuse
hardly to be paralleled, to put Men to seek for a thing with a fore-imprinted
prejudice of that they go about to find, and seek for Faith with a prejudice
against Faith? With suchlike prejudice do the English People read the Bible,
being aforehand advised by their Reformers fully to believe that the Catholic
Mass is abomination; the Real Presence, a late invention; the Merit of Good
Works, a Dream; fasting and mortification of sensual Appetites, folly and
madness; the indifferency of Man's Free Will to Good or Evil, an Error; the
making a Vow, a Chimera; restitution or satisfaction of Injuries done, a
prejudicial Mistake; all Expiation of our Sins, an inexpiable Crime; honor to
blessed Saints, Idolatry; Sacrifice, Altars, and the whole Priesthood of
Christ, Profaneness; the conscionable practice of Sobriety, Justice, and
Piety, necessary to Eternal Life, detestable Popery; for God's sake, what good
can accrue to the drooping Soul of an Heretic by reading of Scripture with
these Prejudices, these Diabolical Anticipations, these Antichristian
Preconceptions, these mere Obstructions to all Faith, Grace, and Salvation? Yet
thus forewarned and prepossessed, all Sectaries read the Scripture, no sound or
solid Fruit arising thence to their Souls but hardness of Heart, Pride, Schism,
sencelesness of God's Judgments, desperateness in all Sin and Injustice: Sure
the Scripture do little or no good, but as it is presented by the Church, and
received with her Interpretation, and practiced in her Bosom. The Ark of God,
so long as it was upheld by the Priests, comforted and sanctified them; but
looked into, or touched by others, destroyed them; nor was it to them an Ark of
Salvation, but an Offense, and occasion of Fall: Therefore it was a heavenly
Caution that which we received by a Voice from Heaven, Act. 10. Things that God
has sanctified, do not make common. We see Scripture takes up Figures,
Allegories, Parables, etc. wherein are enclosed Truths of a differing strain to
what the Letter relates, which will cause an obscurity almost invincible, even
to Churchmen, singularly assisted, and inspired. It is therefore but madness
to undertake Labor and Hazard for naught.

The Law and Government of the Messiah differs from the Law of Moses in this,
That one was committed to Paper, but the Doctrine of Jesus should be written in
the Heart and Entrails of his Church: He is a God that writes on the Paper of
the Heart unto Eternity indelible Tenets. The Law of Christ is written not with
Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart, promising to animate the Body of his Church with
his own Spirit, which should lead them into all Truth; so as in very truth,
Scripture of the New Testament was drawn by the Rule of our traditional
Doctrine, and explicit Faith, and not our explicit Faith gathered out of them;
neither was ever any General Council called together to teach the Church her
Doctrine, but upon the rising of Heresies judging by the Rule of Tradition,
declared against Heretical Innovations: Here I infer how they are bereaved of
Human Understanding, that do not see palpably, that a pretended Church which
begun by breach of Promises to God, by Sacrileges and Impurities of Apostates,
by general Revolt against Kings, against Divine and Human Laws, by the filth
and ordure of the Carrion and caitive Flesh, by the dissolution of good
Manners, by Blood, Furies, and Confusion, could not come and take its source
from the Divine Spirit; yet they boldly say, they find Scripture of their side.
Ah lamentable Illusion! To whom did the Scripture send them, but to the Priests
and lawful Pastors? What said the Scripture unto them, but that they ought to
keep the Traditions, and obey Prelates? That they must not trust to their own
judgment, but captivate it in matters of Faith; and that it was better to
believe with holy Simplicity, than question with a proud Curiosity: And it is
observable, how the poor deluded People in England, after using their Bible now
above a hundred years, how they have a Church without Apostolical Preachers;
these without Character, Mission, Priesthood, or Divine Jurisdiction, Sheep
without true Pastors, faithful without Churches, Christians without Sacraments,
Temples without Altars, Altars without Sacrifices, Religion without form or
fashion, a Law without Obedience, a Faith without Works and Grace; yet they all
peruse Scripture, and all is, but that they overthrow themselves by these
Scripture ways, by which they seek to establish themselves; for if we ought not
to believe any thing but that which is written, in what place of their Bible
will they find, that the revealed, positive, and affirmative Principles of our
Church must be denied and abrogated? In what place will they show, that these
words, Hoc est Corpus meum, must be understood figuratively, not really? In
what place will they find, that Sunday must be kept holy, and not Saturday?
Where will they find, that there are but two Sacraments? Where, that Children
who cannot yet believe, or answer for themselves, are to be Baptized? etc. And
so many other things of this nature, which makes us sufficiently understand,
they ruin themselves by their own Hands and Weapon, the Bible, which they
force and wrest, to fit it to their depraved purposes.

Alas poor deluded Pretenders! To whom do you trust your Souls for Salvation,
your Honors and Lives, having blindly rejected the old Belief and Truths of
your Forefathers upon a bare pretext of Scripture, cast and molded on the
heads of changeable Men?

Let us therefore follow and embrace the Generality, the Antiquity, and common
Consent; let us hold what is held every where, and always, and by all, so it be
authorized by the Divine Law, and the Catholic Church's Tradition.

Let us now see what the Ministers of Protestantism oppose against so many
infallible Proofs, to cover their want of Antiquity, Mission, Succession,
Miracles, Sanctity, Judgment, and Reason? They cease not to buzz out every
where a false pretext of Scripture (...)ich verily is the greatest illusion
that can be imaginable; for these pitiful ones seeing themselves battered on
every side from the beginning of Reformation, know well in their consciences
that the Scripture is against them; yet say they, to mock at the faith of
Mankind, and lead Souls to Atheism, We must avoid the decision of a Power
lively and lawful, we must only take color from the holy Text, we will make it
say what we list, we will maintain nothing is to be believed but what is
written, we will disguise it with glosses and consequences to catch these who
seem to have reason and wit.

Behold the only means to color their pretenses! Who are endued with
sufficient and solid Judgment, cannot but consider and discover how deceitful,
weak, and ruinous, their Foundation is. Now behold the powerful and invincible
Reasons, which made St. Austin resolve upon the Religion we profess: Many great
Reasons (said he) with much reason keep me in the obedience of the Catholic
Church, the consent of People and Nation (...)hold me, the Authority of the
same (...), which is risen up by Miracles, m(...)ed with Hope, augmented by
Charity, established by its Antiquity, the succession of Bishops holds me
therein; which begins in the Seat and Authority of St. Peter, to whom God
recommended the Care of his Flock, is maintained to this day. Lastly, the name
Catholic holds me to it, adding Contra Epist. Manichaei, He would not believe
the Gospel it self, if he were not convinced by the Authority of the Church.
What can be more clear? Yet though the Scripture does so straightly recommend unto
us in the practice of Humility (the seat of Grace) not to make our selves
over-wise, or able, Romans 12. Not to rest upon our own proper Judgment or
Prudence, Prove. 35. To hearken to our Forefathers, to obey Pastors who have
lawful Succession, to work out our Salvation in fear and trembling. What may a
Man think of a Protestant Sect which authorizeth a peculiar Spirit, which has
ever been the Seminary of all Schisms and Disorders in Church and State, which
without distinction puts the Scripture into all hands to judge of Points of
Faith: Verily, from hence it is an admirable thing, to behold how the petty
Spirits of silly Artificers, Mechanics, and even simple Women busy themselves
with their Bible, and to what degree of Pride they come, when abused by some
imaginary Text of Scripture, they are puffed up with their own poor Ability,
flattering themselves (deluded Souls) by some Text not rightly understood, with
assurance of Salvation and Predestination in the greatest Exorbitancies, and
neglects of Life: What Pride more irregular than this, to see Men not content
with the Religion practiced in England's three Conversions, doing all they can
to deifie their own Opinions? What Pharisee ever came near this height of
Pride? Yet the Bible they daily read and use. Verily I plainly see, they must
hereafter live in Reunion; it is the Spirit of God that commands it, and will
effect it in due time. Whereas now a days Shism and Faction has evidently
prevailed over Unity, Pride over humble Submission to revealed Truth, and ill
stubborn Nature over real Truth.

CHAP. V. Plain Testamonies of holy Scripture both Old and New, for the
Church's Infallibility.
WE read that the Jewish Synagogue had a Supreme Court of Judicature to end all
arising difficult controversies from whence there was no Appeal, because God
promised that the Judge there, should show them the Sentence and threatened
Death, to those who should do presumptiously, and not harken to the Priest or
Judge, Deuteronomy. 17.8. nay, Christ himself commanded the people even in his time to
do as they said, who sat in Moses Chair, but not to do as they did, Matthew.
23.3. So that till the spirit of God forsook the Synagogue it was to be obeyed,
and by consequence was secured from giving a false Sentence in necessaries to
Salvation. And can we imagine that God would leave his Spouse, his Church,
without this so great a privilege, to whom a Covenant with better promises
has been given, Heb. 8.

The Prophesies that speak of the Churches, the New Law tells us, that there
shall be in those days a way of Holiness, that the wayfaring Men, though Fools,
shall not Err therein, Isa. 35.8. Furthermore the Prophesies tells, that God
had made a Covenant with his Church, that his Spirit shall be upon her, and his
words which he had put into her mouth shall not depart out of her mouth, nor
out of the mouth of her Seed, nor out of the mouth of her Seed's Seed for ever
says the Lord, Isa. 59.20.21. Therefore no Errors, Read besides the 60.
Chapter of Isa. Say, that all Nations that will not serve Her shall perish, she
will Suck the Breasts of Kings, that her Sun shall not go down, nor her Moon
withdraw it self, but the Lord shall be to her an everlasting light, sure; this
is to secure her from teaching false Doctrine, or falling into Idolatry; the
most abhorred of all Vices.

From the New Testament, Christ promises that he will Build his Church upon a
Rock, and that the Gates of Hell (which the Fathers interpret Error and
Heresy) shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. That he will be with her
Pastors and Preachers, even to the end of the World, Amen. Matthew. 28.20. That
he will send them another Comforter, the spirit of Truth to abide with them for
ever, John 14.16. To teach them all things and to bring all that he has taught
them, to their remembrance ver. 26. And that he shall guide them in all truth.
chap. 16. v. 15. Moreover he has laid an Injunction upon all persons to hear
his Church under the severe Sentence of being looked upon as Heathens and
Publicans: Matthew. 18.17. Christ told his Disciples and their Successors, that
who heard them heard him, Luke 10.16. he commanded to teach all Nations, and
told them, that they who believed should be saved, and that they who believed
not should be damned, Math. 28.19. Mark 16.15. O Sovereign and Heavenly
Promises, Privileges, and Graces of the true Catholic Roman Churches
Infallibility.

Add to this how the Apostles tell us, that the Chuch of the living God is the
Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Sure we may securely rely upon her, and
they assure us that Christ gave his Son, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers for the perfection of the Saints; that henceforth we may
be no more Children tossed to and fro, etc. Ephesians. 4.

Are not these plain and wondrous texts of Scripture, and cannot you see
clearly an infallible assistance promised to the directing and guiding men,
that they should not be carried about with every wind of false Doctrine by the
slght and wiles of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby some lie in wait for to
deceive: No other Congregation under the Sun, but the Roman Catholic Church
can stand up or pretend to these great Privileges, it follows that Protestants
are as they aver, fallible; saying so, they tell all the World an Infallible
truth, and thereupon we may be infallibly assured that they always are failable
and fallible. And hence it follows, whilst Protestants themselve declare they
are fallible, they can no ways pretend to be the infallible Church of Christ:
For if the Word of God should have the first place, and serve as a basis, for
the perpetuating of a Church infallible, (as it is most reasonable) I
incessantly challenge Ministers to show but one only Text of Scripture express,
formal, and irreprovable, contrary to the Articles of the Roman Catholic
Church; sure this they could never yet perform, for hitherto they have produced
nothing but Semblances, Stories, Lies and Railings, for to delude weak inferior
Judgments of the giddy Multitude, being unable to make them good before
considering and learned understanding Men: And if a lawful Succession, sacred
Mission, Character and real Consecration of true Pastors be required, which is
absolutely necessary for the establishment of an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; the
Roman Church can show, that from the Apostles hitherward, our Popes and other
inferior Pastors, do all to this day successively follow one another, above two
hundred and thirty Popes -- Magna est veritas and prevalet. If the Authority of
Councils be requisite, which are the Sinews, Mouths and living Oracles of
Religion; in the Revolution of sixteen Ages, all Councils will be found, called
for to confirm the Roman Church, and confute and condemn her Adversaries. If
the Interpretations of Holy Doctors (who have been the Lights of their times,
Instruments of the Holy Ghost, and Secretaries of the Divinity) they all with
one accord and consent, speak for the Roman Church, condemning loudly the
Errors and Schism of new Sects. If Miracles, which were wrought in all Ages,
and in the sight of all Mankind, with so much approbation, that they have
evicted Confession, even from the most Incredulous, and Reverence from the most
Stupid, Millions and unfeigned Miracles, were and are daily wrought in
confirmation of the verity of the Roman Catholic Religion. So as that there is
not a Country wherein the Roman Catholic Religion is professed, which does not
produce Testimonies so prudently and evidently credible of true Supernatural
Miracles, that to deny them, were to destroy all Humane Faith.

Did not Simon Magus impiously boast, by the Spirit of his private Fancy, that
he would do wonders, as St. Peter did? who provoked by the said Simon Magus,
did prove that he had the Spirit of God, by raising a Child from Death, which
the other, with all his Black Magic Art, could not do; yet boldly challenging
St. Peter, to fly from the Capitol to Mount Aventin; while he was doing so, by
the Prayer of St. Peter, lo he came tumbling down, and brake his Leg, whereof
he died soon after.

Even so that false Apostle Calvin, for the credit of his new Damned Doctrine,
he would fain make a show to the People of doing a Miracle, hired one that was
Sick, to counterfeit himself Dead, who when Calvin should speak certain words,
was to arise, as it were, from the Dead, but he not stirring, was found dead
indeed. Withal, mark how that the Son of Calvin being bitten by a Mad Dog, his
Father not being able to cure him, sent him to St. Hubert in Arden, where the
Body of that Saint is kept with Veneration, and frequent Miracles wrought
thereby, where he was perfectly made whole; whereupon abjured his Fathers Sect,
became a Roman Catholic, and lived and died so.

Yet Protestants object, its strange themselves never see any Miracle, being so
desirous, and miracles so frequent as we pretend. Herod was also very desirous
to see a Miracle, but his curiosity excluded him from that favor: Men who
believe nothing but what they see, deserve not to see Miracles, because they
are obstinate. Yet there are few Protestants, who do not see Miracles; what
greater Miracle, than that all Catholics turn not Protestants? If the
continual Victory over natural and vehement Inclinations does require a Miracle
of supernatural Grace, we are as naturally and vehemently inclined to their
Religion, as we are to our own Liberties and Pleasures: What greater Miracle,
than that Roman Catholic sober and learned Men, should be persuaded, that
their Senses are deceived in the Sacrament of the Altar, and that they should
suffer death for the Mystery of Transubstantiation? There must be effects of
supernatural Grace, and not of Ignorance, or Obstinacy, which cannot be laid
to our charge, seeing we submit our Judgments to every definition of the Roman
Church, and our very Adversaries know we are learned Men.

Sanctity of Life, is a supernatural sign and effect of Grace, and of the true
Church. This Sanctity is evident in the Roman Church. Not to speak of Antonies,
Hilarions, or Stillitas, let us draw nearer our times, and consider the Lives of
St. Bernard, St. Dominick, St. Francis, St. Vincent Ferrer, St. Francis of
Paula, St. Charles Barromeus, St. Teresa, St. Francis Xaverius, St. Anthony of
Padua, and many more, who were known Roman Catholics, professing the same
Tenets, and Obedience to the Pope, which we now maintain against pretended
Reformation. And not to speak only of the Dead, let any indifferent Person
consider, how in all Vocations of both Clergy and Laity, we have many Persons
eminent in Virtue, far above that degree of morality.

Let our English Protestant be pleased to weigh with himself, whether young
Ladies, of as great Quality, Fortunes, and Gifts of Nature, as England does
afford, could forsake their native Country, Kindred, and Friends, contemn all
pleasures of the World and themselves, by embracing a religious, poor, and
penitent Life, in perpetual Enclosure, submitting their wills to the Obedience
and Humor of a Woman: could this, I say, be performed by so many, so
continually, and with so great alacrity and content of mind, without a
miraculous and supernatural Grace of the Almighty? In my judgment it is a
greater Miracle, that such Persons should resolve by a voluntary Banishment, to
dye to their Country, and Friends, and to the whole World, by a Religious
Profession, and to bury themselves alive in a Cloister; than if they had
restored Life to others, and banished death from Graves and Monuments.

7. Now after that our Protestant Gentleman has considered our Catholic
Monasteries, let him examine, whether in his own Church there has been, or now
is, any thing resembling so much Religion, and supernatural Virtue, as that
which amongst us is not admired (though admirable) because so ordinary. This
kind of Life is as far from Protestants Practice and Doctrine, as it is from
natural Inclination. Yet I have heard, that Master Laud of Canterbury, was once
inclined to erect some Protestant Nunneries in England. I believe it would
occasion as great stirs as his Reformation did in England, because nothing is
more opposite to the Tenets of the reformed Gospel, and first Reformers, than
to make Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. Protestancy begun, and is
founded upon the dissolving of Monasteries and Religious Vows, and is not
compatible with their observance, if things must be carried on by the same
means that acquired them a being.

8. The Conversion of Nations to Christianity, is not only a sign of the true
Church, but also the end of its Institution. This is so proper to the Roman
Catholic, even at this present, that none who heard the names of America,
Angola, China, Monomotappa, India, or Iaponia, can be ignorant of our pious
endeavors, and miraculous success, in preaching the Gospel to so remote
Nations, where nothing that is coveted in this World, could be aimed at, or
expected by our Apostolical Preachers. I will not say any more concerning the
Signs of the true Church, these being sufficient to convince any Person that
desires to be saved, that out of the Roman Church there is no Salvation, seeing
it alone has supernatural and visible Signs, whereby God does declare
sufficiently, that it is an infallible guide, to inform men of his Mysteries,
and direct them in the way he has prescribed for his Divine Service,
commanding all men to hear and obey it, as they would hear and obey God himself.

Now let us see what Luther the Apostate Apostle of Protestants says, Velit
nolit, in praise of the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic, in his Book
against the Anabaptists, who in hatred of the Pope of Rome, did reject Infant
Baptism: Nos, We confess, sub papatu plurimum esse boni Christiani, imo omne
bonum Christianismum, atque illinc ad nos devenisse; quippe fatemur in papatu
veram Scripturam Sacram esse, verum Baptismum, verum Sacramentum Altaris, veras
claves ad remissionem peccatorum, verum praedicandi officium, verum Catechismum
ut sunt articuli fidei december praecepta, etc. Dico insuper sub papatu esse veram
Christianitatem imo verum nucleum Christianitatis esse -- O magna est veritas
and praevalet.

Mark what Calvin says, Instit. c. 10.. 17. That St. Bernard was a godly and
pious Writer. Adding, Et certe Papista fuit Bernardus, and nemo est Pius sine
vera fide salutem and veritatem ab inimicis habemus. Mark lastly what
Melancthon, one of the first Followers of Luther, said to his dying Mother,
whom he perverted from the old Religion to his new one: Mother, send for a
Priest, confess your sins before you die. Illa securior haec plausibilior via
ad salutem. She did so, and died in the Communion of the old Roman Catholic
Faith, in which she was born and bred. This you will find in Florimundus de
Ortu Haeresis, lib. 1. cap. 9. What can be said more of the advantage of the
Roman Catholic Church, than what her mortal Enemies proclaim to the World for
to undeceive men, and guide them to the secure Ark of Sanctification and
Salvation?

Now to deny this Infallibility so evidently demonstrated, is the great crime
Protestant pretended Reformers are charged with; in this Infallibility is
founded all the Power of Christ's Church, obliging to believe the
inviolableness of her Government, the unjustifiableness of any Schism, the firm
security that Faith is certain, and whatever in the Church is Sacred. But
Protestants never clear themselves from Schism, upon any other grounds, that
those, which if admitted, would prove all Malefactors in the World innocent,
and make it lawful, nay an obligation in conscience, to dissolve the whole
Fabric of the Worlds Government, whereas the very posture of a Fallibility of
Faith, first lays, and in time hatches the Cockatrice Eggs of Anarchy and
Atheism. What Man ever arrived to that height of mistake, as to endeavor to
manifest his Innocence by the voluntary confession of a crime, which implies
the objected sin of Schism? Now Protestants are accused of Schism, they lay for
the ground of their excuse, that they acknowledge not Christ's Churches
Infallibility, which is charged on them, to be both Schism and Heresy, and as
the very sink of Infidelity. Sure they clearing themselves by denying the
Infallibility of the Church, does the self-same as if some Male-contented
Subject, having first outlawed himself, by denying the Laws, and rejecting the
Government of the Land, and afterward this man becoming obnoxious to those
Laws, by Robbing or Murdering, should endeavor to plead not Guilty, by
alleging, that though indeed the Subjects, who accept the Laws, and allow the
Government of England, are liable to punishment, if they offend against them.
Yet, I (quoth he) who suppose this Government Tyrannical, and the Laws unjust,
especially having a persuasion, and thinking in my Conscience they are so,
cannot be obliged to obey them, and therefore I must not be accounted a
Factious Man, nor liable to punishment if I break them. Pray what will become
of this Malefactor? Sure Protestants will clear him, in favorem Schismatis: But
I am persuaded, wiser Judgments will think him more highly deserving the
Gallows, for refusing subjection to the installed Government; then it is
manifest, that Protestants do more deeply merit Excommunication, for denying
and rejecting Church Government and her Infallibility.

CHAP. V. A Paraenetical Admonition to the People of England.
PRotestants regard the ancient Faith of Christ, whose Purity Ministers seek to
blacken, by insufferable Injuries, Lies, Invectives and Calumnies of the
deepest Dye. They full well knowing, that its Purity cannot be attacqu'd with
solid evident Reasons, nor Arguments, they found out by experience, that their
Arguments to prove their new fangled false Doctrine, makes but slight
Impression in the Peoples minds: And they daily see, that when they but
faithfully represent the Sentiments and real Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
they can neither justify their Fatal Separation, nor excuse the Extravagancies
and Impudencies of their first Reformers; they finding it impossible by these
means, to maintain the ground of their cursed Schism, they have a recourse to a
most unjust, pernicious and hellish Artifice, viz. to impute to the Roman
Catholic Church, an infinite number of gross Errors, representing them under
the hideous Idea, of a Society professing most impious Doctrine; thus no wonder
that Peoples minds, under their conduct, should be alienated, as to feel Horror
and Detestation of her Doctrine, so as their breach has been all along grounded
upon Lies, Calumnies and False Suppositions. Not being able to allege in the
behalf of their Schism, any thing that can bear weight, assuredly such
disingenuous proceedings cannot but bring a deserved disrepute shame and
confusion on the Protestant decaying Sect, even from the sober understanding
men among them. And it is observable, that Incredulity is an immortal Disease,
which has reigned from the beginning of the World, and which shall never end,
but with the Worlds Dissolution. Dreams, Lies, Illusions and Falsehood are
easily believed, because they insinuate themselves into the Hearts of men by
Charms, but glorious Truth, which can never belly her self, has much ado to
make her self entertained and understood, yet we must know that there are many
things unknown to us, wherein God does exercise our Faith, but not satisfy our
vain curiosity.

It is said, that heretofore in Smyrna, a City in Greece, there was a false
Mirror kept in the Temple, which did represent the most beautiful Faces with
notable Deformity, and on the contrary, gave to ugly and misshapen a Luster,
of borrowed and wholly imaginary beauty: It is most notorious, that the
Protestant Ministers, in the false Glass of their Preachings, and lying printed
Panphlets, represents the glorious Church of Christ the Spouse of Heaven ever
Holy, as a Monster composed of Idolatry and Abomination, as the Horrid Beast,
Whore of Babylon, etc. and on the contrary, a Protestant Sect, which begun by a
revolt from all Obedience to lawful Superiors, and by an infinite number of
Exorbitances, Sacrilege, and unparalled Cruelties, is forsooth represented
as celestial, holy and beautiful; and it is to be wondered to see even Dr.
Stillingfleet, that Hircules and prime Advocate for Schism, and who undertakes
like a Goliath, to defy the whole Host of Israel, in the false Glass of his
Roman Idolatry, p. 8. Velit nolit, represents the Roman Catholic Church, as
Idolatrous and Superstitious, and yet makes it out clearly, that she is the
true Church, to whose Communion the purest of all Christians are bound to join,
and that those who in any time did not join with it, acted against their
Christianity, and must be counted as Schismatics.

Now, noble Sirs, you are entreated seriously to reflect and bear in mind that
heavenly Virtue, of ready and true filial Obedience to lawfully authorized
Superiors, as Guides of your Souls in this Valley of Misery, and sink of Death:
this Virtue is of the first magnitude, and deserves all imaginable Encomiums;
Opposita juxta se posita magis clucescunt, said the most excellent Philosopher:
contraries are their best Illustrations: Now Schism is Disobedience, and a most
horrid Vice, considered in her own ugly shape, being carnality it self, so as
there is not any crime so heinous as Schism, not Sacrilege, Idolatry,
Paracide, nor worshipping the Devil, it is an Abridgement of all the most
damnable inexcusable, unexpiable Vices imaginable, it being impossible to
receive such an injury or provocation from Church Governors, as may make a
Separation excusable; for according to St. Austin, it is impossible that there
should be any just cause for any to separate from the Catholic Roman Church.

Sirs, such expressions as these cannot but strongly incite any understanding
unbiased man, whom a tender care of Eternity invites to seek satisfaction in
this Point, and seriously to consider, that the Decision of no one Controversy
is more nearly concerning Salvation, than this, being the hinge on which the
Ocean of particular Disputes and Controversies do hang. This said, let us see
what Dr. Stillingfleet asserts in his Roman Idolatry, p. 8. That a Christian,
by Virtue of his being so, is bound to join in some Church or Congregations of
Christians, and that those who in any time did not join with it, acted against
their Christianity, by virtue of which, they were bound to do it; he adds that
a Christian by being so, is bound to join in Communion of some Church, and to
choose the Communion of the purest; from this his Doctrine, any understanding
man must gather that he and his Protestant-pretended Church are guilty of
Schism, for separating themselves, and remaining from joining with the
Communion of the Roman Catholic Church, notwithstanding the said
Stillingfleet, strains all his Wits to palliate Schism, painting their idle
Reformation to advantage, and not at all in its true colors, proclaiming often
Roman Catholics Idolators, superstitious, etc. which is the chief Rope
whereupon he dances the Antic and triumphs; O tempora, o mores! himself and
his Proselites being in Schism over head and ears. What then I pray, are
Protestants the better for all the Sermons they hear, and Sacraments they
receive? Living in the cursed state of Schism? for sure before Luther there was
a glorious Church; by the confession even of Adversaries, this must be the
Roman, whose Communion was necessary to Salvation. Therefore the Church of
England, separating, and remaining obstinately from joining in Communion with
It, must be Schismatics, and something more to boot; and it is notoriously
evident, that the Roman Church has the strongest warrantable promises,
prerogatives, and motives, even given to it by the sacred mouth of glorious
Jesus; then sure she could not err, then sure she could not need any idle
pretended Reformation. So as that all Stilling fleet's blind preaching of
Reformation is vain, his Faith is vain, his Sacraments vain, all his
super-structures of daily printing lying new Books, and scurrilous Pamphlets,
but all vain, and by consequence himself no better than a sorry Schismatic: So
as any unbiased understanding man may plainly see, all those Arrows which Dr.
Still. shoots against Roman Catholics fall directly on his own head; Muta
fiant labia dolosa, quia narraverunt iniqui fabulationes, sed non ut lex tua.

His Objection is, That Rome was an Harlot, Superstitious, the horned Beast,
etc. It Is true that St. Jerome and other holy Fathers avers the same with
reason; but it was so called then when Rome was Gentile, infected with Errors,
vain Superstitions of all Nations, blaspheming God, adoring Stocks and Stones,
and shedding, in hatred of Christian Religion, the Blood of Saints.

But after that Rome gave her name to Christ, she can no more be styled the
Whore of Babylon, but a glorious City, faithful City, replenished with all
Grace and Righteousness, which by receiving and confessing the Faith and
Religion of Christ, purely wiped and washed off all Impurity, all Blasphemies,
and superstitious Observances; from that time it is become the Tabernacle of God
in the Sun, true Pillar and Ground of Faith; no blemish, spot, or wrinkle does
she carry. When, I pray, is any able to say he saw her brave Sun go down, or
her fair Moon withdraw? she always being a perpetual Excellence of a spotless
Light and Irradiancy. From this City of the Sun Decrees of pure Faith are daily
called for, a pure Fountain from whence to the universal world streams of
heavenly Truths, Doctrines, and Sanctity daily flow. This is the most
triumphant Tribunal of Christ, whence the real Conviction and Condemnation of
Heresies, Sects, and Errors do proceed; the Oracle of Christians, by which,
and in which alone, infallibly all arising doubts about true saving Faith are
resolved. It Is the sublime and invincible Seat of glorious Peter, wherein to
this day does reign, and invisibly as President resides Christ, never forsaking
the same. This is the holy Land, consecrated by the Sacred Blood of the
Apostles, in which 72 Popes are Saints, so many our B. Savior's Disciples were.

O glorious triumphant Hierarchy! O Queen! O invincible and ever-blessed
Kingdom of Christ! O flourishing, potent, and brave resplendent City! O Army
embattell'd in a heavenly martial order! where Christians must stand always
upon their guard, with weapon in hand, fighting here, to be crowned in Heaven;
laboring here, to rest there; sowing of tears here, to reap joys there; in a
storm here, to be in a calm there; and therefore our Roman Catholic Church is
called Militant here, but Triumphant there, both which are correlatives. I said
it is a well-ordered Army set in Battel-array, in which the King and Chief in
Command is Christ, his Under-Vicegerent, Vicar General, Universal Pastor, is
the Pope; his Colonels, the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, and Pastors; his
Captains and Engineers are all Under-Priests of all Estates; his Trumpetters
are the Evangelical Preachers; his Soldiers, all stout Christian Catholics:
This heavenly Army is furnished with all the Sacraments; Matrimony peopleth the
Army with men, Baptism presses and enrolleth them, Confirmation armeth and
strengthens them, the most Blessed Eucharist provideth the Camp with
Ammunition-bread and heavenly Victuals. O brave Church of Christ, ever
Glorious! founded on a Rock, and this was Christ, who said, Matthew. 7.25, 26.
The Rain fell, the Floods came, the Wind blew, and rushed upon the house, and
it fell not, for it was founded on a Rock; But the pretended Reformation
established by Law on the 20 th. of May, 1549? And was it not quite abolished
on the 26 th, of November, 1644, by the like failing Authority? Assuredly it
could expect but the fate of the Fool's House, It fell, for being built upon
the sandy foundations of humane Invention, and black Arts. This sure happened
by God's sweetly-chastising Mercy, that by weighing their fatal dissolution,
and the causes of it, they may retrieve their wanderings, and at length
recollect their scattered and distracted Members into the ever firmly united
Body of the One Catholic Roman Church. This made Mr. Hooker, that prudent
Protestant-writer, affirm, That the Protestant Church was not likely to
continue more than fourscore years, lib. 5. number. 79. Nor could he judge
otherwise, seeing it bears evidently the Principles of corruption and
mutability in its very constitution, viz. the materia prima of a mere secular
Basis:; the first Governors of it being none of those to whom Christ promised
his continual assistance to the Worlds end.

Forsake then, and leave (Sirs) that fleeting and unbodied shadow of Shism,
return and unite your selves to the Catholic Church, be not wandering Brethren,
dry and sapless; now seeing that as the Elements never rest contentedly but in
their Center, so you will find no rest but in the bosom of the true Church, which
is the proper place of every Christian, to which I invite the brave Nobles of
England, to begin to open their Eyes and consider that it is very strange how
that in a manner all the Nobility of England fell from their old Religion
established by unfeigned Miracles, and readily embraced a pretended
Reformation. Sure it was not for Conscience sake, some fell for liberty, some
for flattery, some for ambition, and some for sordid lucre of Church Lands. I
ask whether Henry the Eighth or the Nobles that fell with him found any fault
or exception against the Sacraments, Divine Service, or the other holy Rites of
the Church? Not at all, then, their woeful fall must proceed from their perverse
wills, which they made their Law: hinc lacrymae. Sure this dismal change in
King and Peers, was the sad inlet of all the Wars, Confusion and Calamities in
Church and State that happened ever since in this brave Kingdom this general
defection from God (against Conscience) of the Nobility, may plead in some
measure a plausible excuse, their being excited and provoked thereunto by the
example of their passionate King who has strong influence on his Subjects,
according to the Poet Claudian Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis. Mobile
mutatur una cum principe vulgus. Scilicet in vulgus manant exempla Regentum:
Sure we may perceive a just judgment inflicted on the Nobility of England after
their revolt, pray what is become of all that manly Courage, Prowess, Gallantry
and Valor, that made them still renowned in all Countries of the whole World?
All now degenerated into a shameful effeminacy, debauched cowardice and
inconstancy. Sure a touch of blindness and madness possessed them and whetted
their high Spirits on to such impious actings as to yield to Injustice,
Sacrilege, Schism and Heresy; how came they (I say) to be so stupefied as to
forget the great Zeal and courage of their Christian Ancestors? Who for some
small temporal Concern or Privilege have often bid defiance to their Prince,
yet in King Henry the Eighth's time the Nobility proved Cowards, their Spirits
low and base in the Cause of God and his old Religion, so as very few withstood
the Innovation and Usurpation of Henry the Eighth's, hinc illae lachrimae,
think you, could the Nobility (in whose hands and power it lay to impede the
innovations and unparrellell'd Sacrilege of their King) expect to escape the
Vengeance of God, who is a jealous God revenging the Crimes of Parents upon
their Posterity even to the fourth Generation, yet the floud-gate of of Gods
mercy is still open to all Sinners who with a contrite heart shall lay hold on
Jesus Christ by Conversion from Schism to his Faith found only in the Roman
Catholic Church. Fair warning take, O brave Nobility, sound a retreat, fight
not any longer against Heaven, call to mind the dishonor you have done to
glorious Jesus, trampling on his precious blood by your Sacrilegious contempt
of his Sacred Religion and Sacraments: Know that non est concilium, nec
Sapientia contra Deum, leave off to be embroiled any longer in that most
pernicious quarrel of Henry the Eighth's unjustly undertaken. -- Vna manus
vobis vulnus opemque feret. Sure your will gave you the deadly wound of Schism
and Heresy, the same must sure heal you; by perusing this small Treatise with
Gods assistance it may convince your understanding, and reduce your perverse
will to obedience.

Begin therefore to reclaim, its high time for you to return to God who binds
Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and who alone can en-noble the meanest, and laugh to
scorn the proud that presume on Nobility in contempt of the Almighty, for he is
noble that in Virtue shines, ill Life and Manners are degenerate Signs, Earth's
Nobles in Heaven's Court unknown Heaven not Gentry but the just does own,
should you in power and strength excel all other men. -- Plenty of Massy Gold
and Silver, what then? Enjoyed you Fortune's Wheel to raise thee to the Sky.
Well ordered Servants that in Duty would outvie all others, what then? All Is
but Folly and distress, but God alone to serve is true Glory to possess. The
want of a serious consideration hereof brought England to the Stage of
Confusion, Disorder, Schism, and Sacrilege, pray did not your Schism occasion
a grievious Civil War which continued for three years? soon after a gloomy
horrible Comet appeared in the Air which did usher a most raging Plague, soon
after Fire and dreadful Flames from Heaven, all but warnings and merciful
invitations for to bring England to true obedience and reunion to the ancient,
revealed and Soul-saving Faith of Christ: yet all proved ineffective: What? A
fiery Comet in the Van? What, a frightful Plague in the main Body? What,
devouring Flames as horrid Executioners of Gods vengeance in the Rear, and yet
no moving at all toward the fear of God irritated, notwithstanding all such
prodigious Judgments and Visitatious sent from a hand more then humane, all did
but harden the people of Londons hearts in Schism and Heresy: But now in a
most happy hour. Lo our great Royal James, now displays his white Flag Clemency
and Mercy to his Subjects assuring the World (out of his Princely Mature
Wisdom, and Experience) that Liberty of Conscience in England cannot but
mainly conduce as an Inlet for the reducing of all his Loyal Subjects from Dire
Schism, and Heresy, to the one true Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church of
Christ, ut fiat unum ovile, and unus pastor ovium. For his most Sacred Majesty
by his well ordered Zeal and Dei-form intention labors to promote vigorously
the common good, Spiritual and Temporal of his Subjects as he, like a most
good, just, clement, and puissant Prince holds himself bound. O brave England
do but seriously consider how the World cannot chose but discern you, ever
since your Revolt, overcast with blindness and disingenuity, your Nobles and
Gentry, become altogether most inconstant, unsteady, wavering and still
dissatisfied with any Government, Monarchical or Anarchical; even as when a
Bone is out of joint, the Patient can never be free from his pain till it be
not only set, but set right again: So England, it is not only out of joint, but
even broken in pieces suffering inexpressible miseries, changes, and calamities
both in Church and State, yet even to this day it feels no ease at all, because
none have had it in hand to cure its distempers, but such as instead of healing
its wound, have inflamed its maladies and woeful distractions. O brave Nobility
of England join with your great Prince: according to that Axiom, per quascunque
causas conponitur res, per easdem dissolvetur. Henry the Eighth began the dance
in bringing in Schism, the Nobility followed him. Now great King James begins
to chase away Schism and introduce union, peace, and prosperity, follow him a
brave Pole Star, Take this Fable to our purpose, upon a time the Frogs
petitioned Jupiter to grant them a King, he condescended, and tumbled among
them a Log, after they had leaped a while both on it and about it, and finding
it to be insensible they once more petitioned for a King active and stirring;
whereupon he sent them a Crane which fell immediately a pecking up.

The Moral hereof plainly shows, that nothing can give any lasting satisfaction
to the desire of change to the people of England, for whether the Governor be
a Frog or a Crane, passive or active, clement, or cruel, gracious or grievous,
they disrelish all, unwilling to obey any, such are their Principles, so as
that they leave no stone unmoved to unsettle or alter any Government, chosing
to be enslaved by a bad rather then endure constantly a good one, and all this
because they are blind and mad, out of all order for want of faith.

I could not forbear letting fall some tears beholding such a Mockery of Heaven
and Sacriligious Villainy performed on St. Patriarks day last, in contempt of
that Apostle of Ireland who by the Sign of the Cross wrought many Miracles,
whereof one is most notorious, viz. That he chased away from that Kingdom all
venomous Creatures even to this very day.

Any considering man may plainly see how that Schism revealed its own turpitud,
and betrayed it self to the full, on the 17 of September last: it is sure then
the semblance painted with Hypocrisy and Forgery was pulled away, then it is
Vizard and adulterated colors were quite taken away, so as Schism discovered
is a face unmasked, then sure by Schism (the Origin of our holy Reformation)
the work was done to the full; when all the grounds of Christian Religion then
were quite pulled down, Root and Branch; pray what are all our Protestant
Reformations, but the taking away the ancient Principles of Faith without any
positive institution, still proceeding by degrees from Schism, to Reformation,
from this to Infidelity and Blasphemy, until of the whole Fabric of Divine
Faith there is not left one stone upon another. The Sign of the Cross only as a
distinctive character between Christian and Pagan left, was on St. Patriarks
day last, villified and exposed to the scorn and laughter of the giddy crowds
of Protestants at London, when Bulls with Crosses in their Horns, Bears and
Dogs with Crosses in their Foreheads were seen marching through the Protestant
Streets of London, and none did appear with any touch of Zeal or Religion to
reprove, check, or punish such a villainous devillism, o tempora, o mores! What!
To see the holy Cross pulled from Churches, Altars, from the Crown of our
Sovereign, and even from Baptism, then most profanely translated to the heads
of Bears, Bulls, and Dogs; Sure such Heathenish practices suits better with
Turks and Moors: now then, what other can the Permitters, Promoters,
Applauders, and Abettors, of such profane ridiculing of the prime Mystery of
Christianity expect, then a heavy judgment from Heaven. Is this the fruit of
all the plausible Sermons in Protestant Churches on every Sunday? Is this the
end of Schism and its deformation, now it is come to the height of shame? O
plentiful Reformation, O Zealous, O Blessed, O Sober, O Godly, Protestant
thorough Reformation: Now the work is done, non plus ultra. Who sees not how
Schism produced Reformation, a disorder established by humane Law which bred
this confusion; thus Protestant Preachers teaching their Proselites to hate
Popery they have put them upon the over-acting the work; so, as to leave their
Religion a gasping: O London put on black and warning take.

FINIS.
TO THE Most Puissant, and most Renowned JAMES the SECOND KING Of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Long and Prosperous Reign
is Wished and Prayed for.
OUR bright Orient Star, King JAMES, long may shine.
With True Faith's Rays, most Powerful and Divine;
Whom the Luster of Glorious Greatness Crowned:
May God his Foes Convert, or them Confound.
Whom all Admire, whom all almost Adore,
Who to his Subjects does now all good restore.
Who for Valor, Wisdom, Piety, and Stature.
Is a wondrous Masterpiece of Nature.
His Deliverances from Plots a Miracle,
His rare Judgments, Royal word an Oracle.
He out-brav'd all Perils, his Prowess met,
A calm Spirit amidst main Storms he kept.
In Heaven's Annals, his Royal Acts are Enrolled,
His Heroic Feats are still in Flanders told:
In Spain and France his pure conduct is Renowned,
And now through the World does his Virtue sound.
Never since the Grecians called this World their own,
Or Romans theirs, was greater Valor known
Than his, if yet new Worlds to Conquer Were,
Sure Brave JAMES were the fitter Conqueror.
His Valor, and Conduct surpassing far,
Great Champions, that were Thunderbolts of War,
Bravest example of most Heroic worth,
That ever yet this later Age brought forth;
What Tongue or Pen is able to express,
His matchless Gifts, Graces, and high minds Hapiness.
-- Therefore,
Can Royal JAMES fear the VVhigs, those Scare-Crows then?
Those Bugbear VVretches, the mere shades of Men?
-- NO, NO, for
He wants no Arms to fit him for the Field,
His Prayers are his Sword, True old Faith his Shield.
He in sweet Jesus by true Faith confides:
Mark; Christ all safety still for him provides.
VVhigs when they list may for War and Storms call,
They with loud Thunder shall in fury fall:
In vain they Plot, Contrive, Conspire, Combine,
They Will fail by God, of their most damned design:
For if by Sedition they his Power contemn,
For him Christ will dire Vengeance fling on them.
For God's Transcendent Providence still bear sway,
Which Plots against Kings does with sorrow pay.
Lo! When the Rare Arabian Bird does burn,
Her Beauties are not lost, but does return,
For when her Body's laid on sweet Flames to Death,
Out of her Cindars a new Bird takes Breath.
From blessed Queen Mary's Ashes, and Royal Blood,
Y'our Sovereign Liege a Lovely Flower did bud:
For your Deiform Zeal for True Old Faith does show,
That her Blood in your Sacred Veins do flow.
Lo God printed in your Pure Serene Face,
Mild Majesty, Royal Terror, dreadful Grace.
Live long, unpeer'd great Prince, I Prayers amain
Will daily offer for your most Happy Reign,
And humbly beg of God's Eternal bounty,
That Peace, Union, One Religion, Plenty
Of all Blessings, from his most Potent Hand
Be poured down upon this thy British Land;
And on Christ's (in thy Kingdoms) Faithful Flock,
Built on St. Peter's Rome, and St. Peter's Rock.
Reign long great Phaenix now amongst Earthly Kings,
Still prosper, Great JAMES, for Wits pure managings.
Now you appear with mild, and sweet fervor,
Against forlorn Sects, Lies, Schism, and all Error;
Y'own St. Ambrose, Hierom, and St. Austin,
Before Mad Luther, Beza, and blind Calvin.
Your Majesty hates the new Sinsick Tricks,
Of deluded deluding Schismatics;
Who to new fangled Faiths are so affected,
That by them Christ's Faith is quite rejected:
Whose cursed Spawn adventured t'expose to Sale
The best of Kings, their Faith, their Souls, and all;
Who, to Rent his Church daily do devise,
And God's pure Spouse, still Harlot like despise,
Lying Pamphlets, Pulpits their black Art do try,
To stop True Faith's most Triumphant Victory.
In vain they Plot, Contrive, Conspire, Combine,
They Will fail by Gods power of their damned Design.
-- Therefore
Let blind VVhigs stoop to serve at Royal James's Feet,
Where Valor, Wisdom, Mercy and Justice meet.
Sure non can frown at King JAMES his gentleness,
But those that have an apparent Guiltiness;
Or such as at length to foul Death must run,
As Monmouth aiming at the Crown have done.
God bless our KING, defend him from his Foes,
Ill Fate befall those that will him oppose.
We bless his Birthday, and the Ground he tread,
-- FOR
His Zeal for True Faith through all World is spread.
Christ bless King JAMES, Queen MARY, and then
Let all True, Real, Loyal Subjects say Amen.
On their Seat their Seed may ever Flourish,
Which may in One Truth Three Kingdoms Nourish.
God grant that never any other Hand
Then Royal Stuarts, sway the Scepter of this Land.
May it please Your Most Sacred Majesty, this is the daily Humble Prayer of J.
E. one of Your Majesty's most devoted Subjects, Who For show of his True, Real,
Loyal Affection,
Plain Lines and Life offers to Your High Protection.
Perge age, prosper abi, Rex Vince JACOBE Secunde
Hosts Armipotens Religione, Fide.


A Divine Poem Disswasive from Shism.
IN this vast World none full content can find,
For tho, one may be rich indeed yet his mind
Is empty still, for still he covets more,
And is amidst his main heaps of riches, poor.
Lo, the Spherick figure cannot suffice
Equally to fill what is triangle wise
Lay one upon another, and you will see,
Always some corner will unfurnished be
When the Almighty made man's Soul, the same
Triangular by high Providence did frame
To represent his matchless self, and be
The image of one God in persons three,
Ordaining man to love, fear, obey, and serve
God alone, who always does reward reserve.
For, here beneath sure nothing can be found
In this low Orb that is Spherical and round
Can satisfy Man's Soul; nor can man rest
In Creatures, who is ord'red to be blessed
By Gods sweet fruition, who to him gave
The sublime being, and essence, which he have Good Sir,
Slight not eternal goods and with much pain,
For blind Schism ev'rlasting torments gain.
Renounce thy right t'Heaven and purchase Hell,
Chosing in dungeon, fire, and chains to dwell
Don't forsake Christ ways safe, true, and immense,
Pursuing lying, false doctrine to please thy Sense
Which will debase thy nature, and the fruit
Will be to leave thee level with the bruit.
What will enoble you and truly raise
Are Visions of those beams which God displays
From his reconciled sweet face shall make
Your Soul of his bles'd nature to partake
Naught Sir can here be offered to thy eye
That can the glory of Heaven outvie.
Naught here beneath of comfort does so thrive
As when God pure hearts does with grace revive
Gods light must guide thee, how grace must be used
Mercies proves judgment when they are abused.
Schism breeds blindness and beats reason back
Forgets shames blush, and does honor wrack.
By faith we know immortal Souls to be
And that for Souls there is an Eternity
Become what will of all the rest you have
Pray, Sir, mind still thou have a Soul to save.
A Soul, your only Soul which when you die
Is either saved or damned eternally.
This only thought will dark Schism control,
Saying, avaunt damned Sect I must save my soul,
Thus retreat, now convert thy self and next
Give joy to Angels, Church and Friends perplex't.
Turn, Sir, live by true Faith e're you die
Making provision for eternity.
Is your precious soul's glorious future state
Not worth caring for? Will thou inhumane be
Unto thy self? O wretched cruelty!
If you will cursed Heresy close pursue,
Turning your self from Christ, I bid you adieu:
By cautions warnings, and sad remors*
You Will feel the hazard of that thy woeful course.
How in the paths of sad Schism you do stray
And to Satanick wiles become a prey --
In Christ's most divine face with scorn you spit,
Finding but pains of that your darkn'd wit.
What Is that most perverse Sect to which you are gone
But from Christ's Church a revolted Squadron?
Turn then to your Mother who as a guide
Sure means to Heaven will for you provide.
What Angel from God came to you to tell
That errors are in Christ pure Faith and Gospel?
Sanctity of life, none could e're have seen
In any who a Protestant have been.
You Will say your Sect has Scripture on her side.
Such vain conceit none can but fools abide.
Know you not! That Heretics and Devils
Used Scripture, to cloak their damned black evils;
To fly from Christ, and his pure Faith, what worse?
To strengthen Schism deserves a double curse
Remember, Sir, that your poor soul has cost
A price too great by Heresy to be lost.
Then, Sir, withdraw your self from Apostar's place
And with speed listen to the call of Grace --
Lo, true faiths dayspring shining from on high
Will relieve you that in deaths shade do lie.
And will direct thy wandering thoughts aright
Out of dark Schism to saith's pure light.
Look, Sir, to it awake shake off those cruel bands
Of dismal Heresy, and proud commands
Of the Devils powers, return and cry
Then like the Dove to Christ's blessed arms fly,
Where Mercy's ready still to comfort all
That yields obedience to God's gracious Call,
Pray, Sir, don't resist, but without delay
Close in with glorious Jesus's voice this day.
Know, Sir, that it is truth which always bare date
That true repentance never comes too late
Be wise, beware, for he that will not take
Example now, sure must example make
Relent, reclaim, don't in Schism pleasure take,
Least you fall in flames of that fiery lake.
The scorching pile whereof is kindled by
The breath of an incensed great Majesty.
O woeful state! Those torments who can tell
Which with consuming fire for ever dwell.
Still filled with lamentations, mournings, woes
With floods of wrath that from dire vengeance flows.
Lord, who will be so mad as for empty toys
Lose for ever, pure substantial joys:
Sure it is but stark madness now to reject
Those counsels which to faith does thee direct.
How often you have extinguished that clear light
Offered by friends to guide thy soul aright
Sure there is a war that gives your mind no rest
Your judgment tells thee old faith's ways are best.
Gold, jewels, honor, high promotion, wealth
Revenues, soveraignity, pleasures, and health.
What are all these vain transient things
without true faith, souls to damnation brings.
Your Conscience checks you that you don't obey
Showing you the danger of your blind delay.
What you should do you know not, this you find
That strong convictions still assaults thy mind.
Till conscience with Gods help will interpose
And by strong grace your dark Schism overthrows.
O good, Sir, don't for dark Schism lose that place
Where Saints and Angels still beholds the face
Of God's eternal glory and do sing
Joyful Hailelujah's to their King of Kings.
Come, Sir, and tread those paths that will thee bring
Unto a glorious everlasting spring,
And on a most rich Throne thou shall sit down,
And there for ever wear a triumphant Crown
Thy Soul's immortal, Sir, look what can agree
To it is nature, sure that must satiate thee,
Nothing but the blessed fountain God that will
Suit with thy soul, and thy poor spirit fill.
All worldly pleasures thou injoyest to day
To morrow will take wings and fly away.
Though true faiths happy ways may seem to be
A thorny, rough, unpleasant path to thee:
Yet try it, Sir, for what at first seems hard,
Will prove to thee sure welcome afterward.
For when thy heart is enlarged with love
Unto those glorious things that are above
Then will thou run these ways with great delight
And wild Schism ways with all thy soul will slight.
Turn then, and believe, thy conquest shall be sure
If thou in Christ's faith till the end endure,
Ask those who follow the old faith they will say
They feed on hidden Manna in their way.
By acts of faith and love they now possess --
They feel strong sweetness which they cannot express
Often men of Note through pride are prompt to stray
Thinking themselves too great for virtues way
No truth, no faith in that Sect you profess
Which can your drooping soul with grace refresh.
No fast, nor maceration of the flesh
Of pomp, lust, and vain pleasure, full excess.
No Priest, no Mass, no moving sacred thing
That sighs from hearts, or tears from eyes may wring.
Oh, Sir, return to Christ in whom from pain
Unalter d joys, unmixed delights you will gain
To him the only object of thy love
Let thy poor panting heart and will, now move
For to true faith's old ways thou ought`st to groan
And so work for eternal bliss alone.
May Christ dissolve your Schism and pull down
All those that do oppose Christ's tripple Crown
In holy wars the Pope still triumphs alone
And when Schism's disarmed, he then extends his Throne
Christ's Gospel steers to union and true love,
And by conviction on hearts does move.
I. E.

FINIS.

