AN ANTIDOTE FOR The Newcastle Priests, TO Expel their poison of Envy, which
they vented in a Letter to the L. General Cromwell: AND IN Their Articles
which they exhibited against Capt. Everard.

With an Answer to their scandalous Exclamations, to their shame: The clearing
of himself, and satisfaction of his Friends.

Read me all, or censure not at all: For, by the Law none ought to be condemned
before they are heard.

By Robert Everard.

Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by W. L. at the Black-Moore near
Fleet-Bridge. 1652.

To the Impartial Reader.
Reader,
THe ensuing Discourse is intended as a check to a malicious and unquiet
spirit, savouring of perfection; which has ever been incident to a sort of
people, who assume to themselves the honorable Title of the Ministers of the
Gospel (though very improperly appropriated to them) whose constant practice
throughout all Ages and Nations, has a tendancy to advance their own Power and
Domination, though in the destruction, blood, and ruin of whole Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. Whatever opposes them in the Design of their own glory,
Witness the late treasonable Design of M. Love, and his Adherents.
must be accursed with Anathema Maranatha. The forementioned evil Spirit, has
(upon what account, or for what cause I know not, excepting difference of
Judgment in matters of Religion) according to its accustomed manner,
virulently calumniated the Author in his Name and Reputation; having so far
prevailed upon the minds of seven Gentlemen in and about Newcastle, (who
pretend to be Ministers of Jesus Christ) as to engage them in the promotion and
prosecution of that unworthy Design and Undertaking, complained of, and
detected in the subsequent Treatise. But how disproportionable such proceedings
are to the meekness, love, and tenderness of our Savior; as also to that
universal Rule of the Gospel, Do unto all men as you would they should do unto
you: and how unlike to the gracious and prudent carriage of the faithful
followers of the Lord Jesus, let all sober minded men judge.

It is the saying of the holy Ghost, Oppression makes a wise man mad: and I
observe some men are so mad to oppress and persecute the Saints and People of
God; that (like Paul before conversion, Acts 26. 11. they think as himself
confesses v. 9.) they may do things contrary to the way of Jesus Christ. But
for my part, I take it as my Duty (in order to the command of my God) to plead
the cause of the Oppressed, and vindicate the Innocent.

Therefore being sensible how much the traduced Author Captain Everard has
been impaired in Reputation, I could do no less in point of common Justice,
then manifest my knowledge of him, whose faithful and constant service to the
Commonwealth, and sufferings for the things of Christ for some years past his
integrity of life and sobriety in declaring his judgment during the time of his
abode at Newcastle, of which experience has informed me, was sufficient to
have exempted him from the scandal of the pens and tongues of his enemies. And
although the Author suffers in his reputation, by the misapprehension of
diverse, who take him to be that Everard that is reported to be deeply affected
with the Ranting Principle; yet all that are acquainted with his person,
judgment, and practice, know him to dissent as much, and to be as great a
discountenancer of that way and opinion, which the other Everard professes and
practices as any, of those who asperse him in writings, or otherwise.

As touching my self, though I am wrongfully blamed for countenancing Captain
Everard in that which I apprehend to be just; yet I am the less careful in my
own vindication, considering I am responsible for my actions to their
Superiors, in whose eyes I hope I shall app^ar more innocent then my accusers.

As to the ensuing Treatise, I shall say no more, but desire thee (good Reader)
duly to weigh the charge, seriously consider the answer and measure both by the
rule of Christian Charity, and judge of the equity of the case betwixt the
accusers and the accused. If thou perceivest in the answer any thing capable of
thy exception, deal with the Author as thy self would be dealt withal in
the like case.

My soul desires to see an end of these un-Christ- and un-Saint-like carriages
among the people that profess to own the Son of God. I hope the time is near
at hand, wherein the Lord whom we serve, will give us one heart, one mind, and
one lip in the things that concern his glory and Kingdom, and the mutual good
and prosperity of all his Saints, which shall be the incessant prayer of him
that is the Authors Friend and thine in all Christian service,

L. Col. John Mason.

The Author to the Reader.
SEeing my good name burning in the furnace of Envy, and the flames mounting so
high, that they scorched the reputation of my dearest friends, things being
whispered in the ears of those that had not the right understanding of them,
which occasioned many to have hard thoughts of me. And for preventing of its
proceeding, the providence of almighty God so ordered it, that I came to the
view of the Incendiaries information made to the Lord General (and other
Gentlemen having Copies from Newcastle) put me into a capacity to make known to
the world that I am not ashamed to let the world know the truth; for which
purpose I have printed their Copies; so that any well-affected people may
impartially judge by my answer, which (I hope) will prevent their race of fury,
and evil conspiracies from taking place or centring in their desired haven,
which is in the esteem of the Auditors, and so by that means many may be
undeceived whom they have captivated by many untruths, In the second line of
the first Epistle (written by L. Col. Mason) instead of perfection, read
persecution.
which they have forged and dispersed; And in this my reply, I desire that
truth (which shall be the judge of the secrets of all men's hearts) may take
place, that God may be glorified, and the spirit of malice revealed, to the
open shame of all self-interessed persons. And though I was no member of the
Army at the time of their charging me, yet they trouble the Lord General with
matters of opinions or differing judgment; And if his Excellency should be
troubled with all such cases, how uncomfortable (after his long and faithful
labors) would his life be, let wise men judge. There are two Doctrines that I
delivered, which they cried out against as dangerous errors ( viz.) the
freeing of nature from aspersions generally charged on it, and denying infants
Baptism, which they have omitted; why may not I think that they are convinced
or ashamed that ever they opposed me therein? and that they may be so, is and
shall be the desires of him, who desires the peace and welfare of the
Commonwealth of Israel, and of this Nation.

R. E.

To His EXCELLENCY The Lord General CROMWELL
May it please your Excellency,
THere is not one thing our blessed Savior and his holy Apostles in their
sacred Writings do so severely rebuke, and straightly premonish us of, as corrupt
Teachers; calling them, Sowers of Tares, false Prophets, Deceivers, seducing
Spirits, men of corrupt minds, vain Talkers, Serpents, generations of Vipers,
lying Spirits, ravening Wolves; and their corrupt doctrine they call Leaven,
Fables, profane Bablings, strong Delusions, Lies, bewitching Gangrens, Cankers,
damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils; neither do they speak any better of
the effects of such Doctrine; terming it (no less then) subversion of the
faith, soul shipwreck, swift damnation.

Yet notwithstanding, we sadly see these Soul Deceivers, openly, and with great
height of Spirit, more freely now ^hen ever venting themselves without any
restraint, which makes us more pathetical: One Robert Everard, a Captain ately
reduced since Worcester fight, crept into Newcastlle amongst our flocks,
endeavoring by all means and ways, in public and in private, to seduce them
as well as the Garrison by his perilous errors; A Catalogue of whose opinions
and carriages are here enclosed. And though the man himself be active enough to
delude poor ignorant souls, yet being set on, born up, and encouraged by Lieut.
Col. Mason (who commands this Garrison in chief, now in Col. Fairfax absence)
and by Capt. Pym, is more enabled to act be part by Authority; the Towns people
are induced, and the Soldiers warned by beat of Drum, frequently to attend his
delusions. Corrupt Doctrine (my Lord) is of a leavening nature, that takes
sooner, runs faster, and proceeds further then the Truth can do (one dram of
deadly poison, kills more then all the best medicines can cure) especially such
errors as this man vents, that are so pleasing to the flesh. Truly (my Lord)
the deep sense hereof, makes our hearts to bleed, to see the precious
Scriptures so abused, Fundamentals destroyed, and our poor peoples souls, whom
we have long labored to principle in the Truth, so much endangered: We humbly
conceive, that as Popery was heretofore, so Arminianisme and Socinianisme now,
doubtless are like to be the plagues of this poor Nation; even that cursed
Doctrine, that so much pulls down God, and sets up man, comes upon us like a
flood.

Wherefore (most Noble Sir*) our humble desires are to your godly wisdom, that
as God has made your Excellency a most happy Conqueror of our enemies, and
deliverer of three Nations from Tyranny and Slavery; for which our souls shall
daily bless him: So our most humble suits are to God and your Excellency, that
you may be a destroyer of our Errors, a Restorer of Truth, and a Restrainer
(not only of this Corrupter, but) of all such like false Teachers, crept into
the Army to deceive the poor Soldiery* and poison the Country, and if God
shall enlarge your Excellency to Endeavor further, eve^ to improve your
Interest in that Honorable and high Court, to prevent further mischief in this
kind; Your Excellency shall Act one of the most glorious works for Christ, that
ever yet you have done; which will add much to your Account in the day of
Christ. Let the uprightness of our hearts, and the love of Truth (most Honored
Sir) plead our excuse for this our great boldness: the Lord has set your
Excellency on high, and yet higher in the hearts of the Saints; who knows but
for such a thing as this? So shall our souls, and all God's people with us,
still bless God for you, and bind us ever to remain

Newcastle, March the 8th, 1651. My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble
Servants and Orators at the Throne of Grace, Rob. Jenison. Thom. Weld. Thom.
Wolfall* Sam. Hamond. Rich. Prideaux. Cuth. Sydenham. Will. Durant.


Articles exhibited against Captain Robert Everard.
1. HE maintains and divulges many gross and destructive Opinions, as the Page
following shows; which are the constant, and (in a manner) the only matter of
his preaching; the manner thereof being in a jeering and flouting way.

2. He gloryeth that he has gathered many Churches (as he calls them) of his
own Opinion up and down the Land; which if his eyes were opened, would be his
sorrow and shame.

3. He is a notorious vain Boaster, frequently and boldly biding defiance to
all the Priests (as he calls them) in England to dispute with him, when (sorry
man) he wants skill to frame an Argument: He brags he will dispute in Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew; and yet when he was put upon it, he could not read one word
in Greek or Hebrew.

4. Its his frequent practice both in public and private, to scorn and cast an
odium upon all the Ministers; calling them Priests, deluders of the People,
false Priests, saying (when he was advised to more sobriety) he will Preach
against them as false Priests; and this he speaks against all the Ministers in
England without the least exception; and for all the Ministers in New Castle he
says in the Pulpit, they are ^ool toys, and that when they will not dispute
with him themselves, they send their Dogs to bark at him: He told also M.
Durant to his face diverse times, that he lied, and was a false Priest.

By which scurrilous and uncivil dealings of his, some of his followers have
learned to be so audacious, that one of them called Doctor Jenison a Minister
of the Devil: Another sent this message to M. Wels, go tell him that I say he
is a Devil, and that the Ministers of New Castle are a company of silly
ignorant fellows, not able to answer any question, good for nothing but to
Baptize babes, and teach men to sing Hopkins jigs, and that they Preach only
for Lucre, and will turn any way, and Preach the Devil for Money.

5. He so interrupted M. Sydenham betwixt the Administrations of the
Ordinances, that it occasioned a Tumult in the Congregation; at which time he
so stank of Drink, that many suspected he had taken too much.

6. After he had preached sundry times in the hearing of many hundreds against
any Original sin in man, yet after Master Hamond in Everards own hearing had
Preached the contrary Doctrine, and Vindicated those Scriptures abused by him,
he came to M. Hamond (and to amazement to see such impudency) said, that he had
never Preached against Original sin, and that they abused him that told him so,
but that he was just of his judgment in that point, and would Preach the same
things that very afternoon that he had in the forenoon; and yet after this,
went and Preached against what M. Hamond had done, and since that also, in
public disputes maintains the contrary: so that by these and such other like
contradictions, we plainly see, that he will say and unsay any thing, to
advance his errors, and further his design.

7. Its usual for him when some of our Ministers preach the truth in the
forenoon, to step into the same Pulpit, take up the same Text in the afternoon,
and abuse both the Text, Truth, and Minister too; and tell the people the
Preacher in the morning had deluded them.

8. Such is his hatred to Orthodox Preachers, that he said in a Sermon in
public, that he had rather side with the Papists, then with the Ministers of
New Castle.

To conclude, Such have been his own and his followers insolent provocations,
that had not the fear of God possessed the Spirits of his people in this Town,
there had certainly been raised sad combustions: But blessed be God they bare
all patiently, choosing rather humbly to wait upon God, and those in Authority
to rectify such disorders.

As long as the Noble Col. Fairfax abode in this Garrison, he (through his
Pious care and prudence) kept all in quiet and Peace; but after his departure,
Lieut. Col. Mason (commanding in chief) has not only permitted this Deluder to
Act his part, but has by all means and ways authorized and encouraged him to
do what he has done.

A Catalogue of such Points as Capt. Everard holds forth.
THat Election from Eternity, has no ground from Scripture. Contrary to Ephesians.
1. 4, 5. Romans 8. 29, 30.

That such as say most part of the world go to ruin, make the Justice of God a
great Monster. Contrary to Mat. 7. 13, 14. and 22. 14.

That Adam's posterity were not guilty of Adam's sin. Contrary to Romans 5. 12.

That Infants draw no Natural corruption from Adam. Contrary to Romans 5. 12.
Psalm. 51. 5. Isa. 48. 8.

That Adam had no spiritual light. Contrary to Genesis 1. 27. Col. 3. 10.

That sin neither in Adam nor any other creature, does procure death. Contrary
to Romans 5. 12, 21. Romans 6. 23.

That no man sins except it be against his light. Contrary to Psalm. 19. 21.

And Sacrifices for sins of Ignorance, Lev. 5. 15.

That such as teach men to sing Psalms; teach men to tell lies, Contrary to
Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 5. 19. Psalm. 100.

That Christ dyed for every man. Contrary to John 10. 15.

That men under the Gospel have fallen from true faith. Contrary to 1 Pet. 1.
4. John 10. 27, 28, 29.

That God does afford every man sufficient means, or grace to believe, and be
saved, if they will improve them: and that eternal llfe does only depend upon
the improvement of them. Contrary to Acts 16. 6, 7. Romans 9. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8.

That Infants belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven, and they need no repentance,
regeneration, and conversion, till they do actually sin. Contrary to Job 15. 4.
John 3. 6, 7.

That none are condemned but for sin against the New Covenant. Contrary to Romans
2. 12.

EVERARDS ANSWER To an envious Letter, sent to the Lord General CROMWELL, by
seven men, who would be accounted Ministers of the Gopel; living in and near
Newcastle upon Tyne: Whose Naems are hereunder written.
IN the first twelve lines they speak such Truth, that no man acknowledging the
Scriptures to be the Word of God can deny; viz. That there is not any thing
more discovered and reproved then false Teachers; with suitable Titles, as
Deceivers, bringers in of Damnable Heresy, etc. Such an Authority of
Discovering and Reproving had the Apostles, and did improve it; though
oftentimes by the potencie of ill affected Governors and people, they were many
times trampled under feet by those proud malicious spirits, that is to say,
Persecuters.

Doubtless the Apostles would have been thankful to God to enjoy those
Privileges without molestation; but you have this privilege, to call them
which you judge to be deceivers, Men of corrupt minds, Sowers of Tares,
^educing spirits, etc. and what would you have more? Because you desire my Lord
General to improve his interest in the high Court, you say, to restrain such
men as I am; but what restraint you would have to please you I know not: Would
you have me silenced, whipped, gagged, my ears slit, banished or hanged?

Oh! Would you invite our noble Senators to tyranny, by exercising their humane
authority to fulfill your corrupt lusts? would you have a humane power
exercised in divine things, to punish men for differing in exposition of
Scripture texts? then must you acknowledge them to have infallibility of
spirit, to judge of error in doctrine, and punishment in relation to quality,
quantity, time and place: May not I say to you, as the Lord our righteousness
once did, You know not what spirit you are of: yet you may be known by your
actions.

2. Again, you cry out against me as a soul-deceiver, and I frequently preach
that all that God gave his Son for, or his Son died for, are elected, and
cannot be deceived by any man: if so none of them can be deceived, then I am
sure none of those that had no probability to be saved could be deceived,
unless to bring them to eternal life was a deceit, which (by your saying)
Robert Everard nor any other man can do.

3. Again you say, I crept into Newcastle among your flocks.

Answ. I rid into your town called Newcastle, and abode there about four
months, preaching the Word of God (as it is written in the Scripture) three or
four times a week, paying every man for all such things as I had use for, as
Mr. Rybbon and Mrs. Johnson can speak, where I lodged and dieted.

Those people were so far of my judgment, that they love to speak the truth,
and not envious to any; such a creeper into Newcastle was I.

I did not demand 100. l. 200. l. or 300. l. a year of them: such a creeper
was not I.

4. You say, that Lievtenant-Colonell Mason and Capt. Pym were upholders of me
to seduce the people and garrison of Newcastle, and (as you allege) to act my
part by authority, which is answered in the Epistle to the Reader. So that you
may be ashamed for slandering such civil, just and faithful men.

5. Again, you tell the L. General, that corrupt doctrines take sooner, run
faster, and proceed farther then the truth can do.

Answ. Who told you so? it was Gods saying to Adam, What, did you eat of the
forbidden fruit? I tell you what doctrine runs swift and far, and takes quick,
namely baptizing of infants, which comes by the proclamation of man; and the
doctrine of Tithes as a forced maintenance, which has spread it self all
Christendom over. If you mean these doctrines, or the like, I confess they
are corrupt; but that they go farther then the truth can do, that I deny* for
they are beleaguered round about with truth, and the people (like valiant
soldiers) are ready to spring their mines.

4. And whereas you say, I vent errors pleasing to the flesh, which foresaid
doctrines have for a long time satisfied your fleshly minds.

5. Also you say, one dram of deadly poison kills more then the best medicines
can cure: And you say it is corrupt doctrine, consisting of such errors as I
hold. Something is the matter that you do not use the best medicines; it seems
it is your judgments they will do no good, and therefore you make use of the
worst; having no experience of drawing people from the errors of their ways.

6. Again you say you humbly conceive, that as Popery was heretofore, so
Arminianism and Socinianism are like to be the plagues of this poor Nation,
even that cursed doctrine which so much plucks down God and sets up man.

In answer, If there be any doctrine that plucks down God and sets up man in
his stead, it is man's assumed authority to make laws and impose them upon the
people, which is not to be found in the records of God; and two of these
strings you have to your bow, which if once they were broken, man would be more
thrown down, and God exalted, namely forced maintenance of your bellies, which
cannot be had without an arbitrary power, by which you contend to dethrone God
and his appearance in his people, as it appears by your appealations to humane
authority, to set up your selves more then the Kingly power of Christ.

The second string you have played upon for a long time, has been the Popish
institution of sprinkling infants, persuading the people that they are made
Christians by their parents faith, though they live in covetousness, pride and
envy as well as your selves. And for further answer I refer you to a book
entitled, Old Popery in a new dress of Presbytery, sold in Pope's Head Alley at
Lodowick Lloyd his shop.

7. Again, you desire the Lord General to be a destroyer of your errors. If
you conceive your selves to be in errors as well as my self, then you should
desire no more to be done unto me then to your selves: But you are not true to
your principles; for you concluded the best medicines could not cure an error:
And what would you make of my Lord General, the best medicine put to a vain
use?

8. Again, you say the Lord General has been a happy conqueror of your
enemies in the three Nations: But upon what account you style them enemies is
best known to your selves, and in part to me. I count them enemies, because
they stood for a kingly interest, inconsistent with the freedom, peace and
safety of the Nations; who would set up the wills of men by unlawful Courts
and Counsels, to lord it over the estates, persons and consciences of men,
whereby they censured men by unreasonable fines and banishment, without legal
trialls by Juries, which is indeed the fundamental Constitution of this
Nation. Now if they were your enemies upon this account, why then go you about
to make the Lord General your Solicitor against me to the high Court to
restrain me from my native liberties? What, would you have me a prisoner at the
will and pleasure of any person, being not proceeded against in a legal way?
Does not the Law lie open? If not, how are your enemies conquered? But I more
then suppose you did not look upon the Scots as enemies upon the foresaid
considerations, being well assured, that when the Lord General with the
Commonwealths Army were in greatest straights, then the Priests of this Nation
for the most part preached with their faces to the North; yea and lifted up
their rebellious hands to heaven with strong cries and tears, praying to God
(who neither heard nor answered them) That he would be pleased to help his
people the Scots, and prosper his cause in their hands, and in the hands of
that Young man lately converted by taking the Covenant: Whereas it is eminently
known in the Counties of Leicester and Rutland, that my self and Capt. John
Freeman opposed them at their running Lectures for preaching against the Army:
And when it pleased God to give victory to our Armies, then they preached
Sermons full of lamentation, making the people groan like the Priests of
Scotland; at which time they of your calling were so far from creeping into the
army, that in time of service they crept out of the army; witness Dundee and
elsewhere.

9. Again, you say, the three Nations are delivered from tyranny and slavery,
that God has given great and many glorious victories to our Forces under the
conduct of the L. General Cromwell, is very apparent, for which you say you
bless God; and I am sure we have all cause to praise him that loves peace; but
that we are freed from tyranny and slavery in the three Nations I deny, because
there remains some of that Norman Tyranny still for the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England to remove, without which we cannot be happy, nor
rejoice, or make our boast that we are delivered from tyranny and slavery, as
long as we hear that a poor man's Cause cannot be heard for want of money.
Again, do not we see many a man impoverished by reason of delays in Courts?
and do not we see many a poor man travel to London with great expense of money
and time, and loss at home, to agree with their adversaries, which may be done
in their own neighborhood? Is not this slavery and oppression, as well as
triple damages for Tithes, which makes the people groan for want of just
proceedings in Law?

But happily you will say, these are your grievances in truth; then we may
expect better fruits then to be of a persecuting spirit, which is generally
incident to men of your profession: And, I believe, so long as a hireling
Minister remains in this Nation, it will not be absolutely free from tyranny
and slavery.

EVERARDS Answer to the Articles exhibited.
1. YOu say I maintain many destructive opinions, and that my manner of
preaching is in a jeering and flowting way.

As for the destructivenesse of those things which I hold forth, I confess
them to be destructive to many of your opinions. I shall instance one amongst
twenty; as the baptizing of those that do make confession of their sin, or
profession of the faith, which opposes childish Baptism as a devised Fable:
And at one time more especially I preached upon that point in Newcastle, to
undeceive the people who were by you captivated; and I took the Prophet Elias
method, 1 Kings 18. from verse. 22. to 27. to see if I could end the difference,
pleading that the people were very willing to see their Prophets tried; so as
it was agreed, that that God which answered by fire from heaven should be the
only God to be worshipped. So I made this proposal, calling the Scriptures
the true fire from heaven, laying down the doctrine of John, being the baptism
of water, which came from thence, desiring the people to lay down in their
thoughts the sprinkling of infants at a distance; and I called to God for fire,
and it came from heaven, and kindled the doctrine of John in the sight of all
the people, and many wondered when they saw the light shining so clear. Then I
desired the Prophets to call aloud for fire in the presence of the people. And
I confess I further said, that the god of that opinion, viz. the sprinkling of
infants, was gone some far journey, or fallen asleep, and indeed I think the
Author of it is dead long since: And at other times men having preached that
God blinded the eyes of some men, and hardened the hearts of others that never
was in a capacity of seeing or having soft hearts.

I said that no act of power or wisdom of God could be seen in such a
doctrine, viz. to make a man blind that never was in a possibility to see, and
harden hearts that never were soft. These and such like expressions usually
might fall from me, which happily might have been spared, say you; and
therefore you call it jeering. When I am minded to please you I Will forbear, but
in the mean time know I cannot serve two masters.

2. You say that I gloried much that I have gathered many Churches of my own
opinions. I have desired all that know me to forbear to call the truth of God
my opinion, because the Lord thereby is dishonored; which (you say) if my eyes
were opened, would be my sorrow and shame, which intimates that you judge that
I sin not against known light, and would I could judge so of you.

3. You say, I am a notorious vain boaster, boldly bidding defiance to all the
Priests in England to dispute with me.

Ans. I did not bid defiance to dispute with any Priest, but instead thereof
offered so to do for the edification of the people, that so by a loving
conference differences might be ended in love, which was both the practice and
privilege of the Saints in all ages.

4. You say I want skill to frame an argument: If I am so, I am like to be so
still; for I could get none of you to confer with me: So then Reader observe
who is the proud vain boaster.

5. You say I offered to dispute in Latin, Greek and Hebrew; and when I was
put to it could not read one word.

Answ. That when I heard they denied dispute, because they judged me ignorant,
I offered to confer or dispute upon four several tongues, viz. English,
Latin, Greek and Hebrew, but it was with these cautions: 1. That the dispute
might be in English in the publikest place convenient in the country or town
for the edifying of the people in love. 2. That for the other tongues, it
should be private, because very few understand them, amongst themselves, and
little conducing to the edification of the people in piety.

Again you say, when I was put upon it I could not read one word of Greek or
Hebrew.

Answ. All the ground you have to say I cannot read the foresaid tongues, is
because I refused once to answer to Mr. Durants digression as from the point in
hand: And when I saw he would not be satisfied, being extreme passionate, I
spoke in Greek as follows, (...); being 1 Cor. 14. chap. 8. verse. and Mr.
Durant desired me to speak the words over again, which accordingly I did; he
answered I did not keep right stops, but I was not so much beholden to him as
to show wherein I failed, as Major Merytan and Captain Rogers and others can
and will evidence. That Bearward has ill Bears that will not come to the stake
for his profit, sooner then you to a dispute to edification.

Again you say I have spoken against all the Ministers in England without the
least exception, calling them false Priests.

Answ. That is an untruth; for there be many Ministers in England that I love
and judge faithful.

Again you say I call all the Ministers in Newcastle 300. l. Toys.

Answ. That is as true as the former; I can safely say I never heard the phrase
until I saw it under your own hands.

Again, You say I call those men your barking dogs that came to dispute with
me, set on by you.

Answ. The Devil was a liar from the beginning, whose works you do when you
devise these things, as I told Mr. Durant to his face: and you will all appear
so to the world, unless you make these Articles good by proof.

Again, You say, some of my followers (as you call them) called Dr. Ienison a
Minister of the Devil, and also Mr. Wells, with the rest of the Ministers of
Newcastle, they were so ignorant that they could not answer a man any question.

Answ. Who you call my followers I know not; and if any of them that heard me
called them Devils, they learned no such doctrine from me: if I knew who they
were, I would advise them to forbear.

Again, as for their saying you are not able to answer to any question, I think
they do you wrong, for I am sure when the question was propounded to forsake
small livings for greater, you have answered them.

Again, You say my followers report you are good for nothing but to baptize
babes, and teach men to sing Hopkins Jiggs, and that you preach only for lucre,
and will turn any way, and preach the Devil for money.

Answ. I say you are not good for that but evil for so doing: what have I to
do to make answer for other men, being as ignorant of the truth of your
allegations against them, as I am certain of the falsity of your accusations
against me. Surely should I incense authority against you for what your hearers
have said and done in things that I could prove, you would not be willing to
have articles exhibited against you: if so, then you do not as you would be
done unto, but that is no news.

Again you say I interrupted Mr. Sidenham betwixt the administrations of the
Ordinances.

Answ. Then it appears you will be my witnesses, that I interrupted him not
during the time of the administration of Ordinances.

Again you say I interrupted him.

An. He desired to see the face of that man, and hear him speak, that would or
could deny infants baptism: thereupon I offered him to tender the ground of my
dissent, he promising me to dispute the point before all the people: and I
waited his time, and for all this was disappointed, and you say it occasioned a
tumult in the congregation.

Answ. If such a behavior of mine caused a tumult, the people were not so well
taught as the Disciples of Christ were. If they had, they would not have laid
violent hands upon me, by bringing of my life in danger. Again, if I was guilty
of making a tumult, why then did not the Mayor and Aldermen put just authority
in execution upon me, I desiring them so to do at the very same time, saying to
them, if I have disturbed the peace of the Commonwealth this day, wherein you
are all eyewitnesses of my behavior, make me sensible of it, by executing
justice upon me, that J may for time to come learn not to offend: But if they
would not, J should look upon it as no offense: and yet for all this, you would
incense Authority, that at that time J stank of drink, that many suspected J
had taken too much. And such was the zeal of Lieutenant-Colonell Mason (with
some Officers) to the glory of God and the peace of the Nation, and punishing
of vice, that they went to the civil Magistrate next morning, to desire that
condign punishment might be inflicted impartially upon evil doers, saying, if
any that did belong to the Regiment that had offended, he would make them
exemplary. And the Mayor said, if Capt. Robert Everard would apply himself to
him, he would do him all the right he could. At the same time ('it is well known)
J was plucked down and abused by some rude people, together with Capt. Pym,
laying violent hands upon him, calling of him rascal, etc. all which was
patiently born on our parts.

Again you say, that J preached against any original sin in man.

Answ. J did preach that Adam was the first of mankind that did transgress,
and by Gods appointment death seized upon all mankind for his offense, and that
his death was unavoidable, and further say, that J hold all the original sin
that the Scripture makes mention of: and J heard Mr. Hamon preach the
insufficiency of natures seize unto spiritual things, crying out against
those that set up nature instead of grace, saying, that no man could receive
the things of God, unless they were given him from above. Then J went to him
and gave him thanks for that, telling him that I judged he was misinformed,
for I knew none that held out power in nature as in in it self to attain to
spiritual enjoyments; and I desired him to tell me, if ever he read of any
that held forth the same; he said not much to that, and to satisfy him that I
held not the point so falsely fathered upon me; and that I would in the
afternoon preach of natures inability to spiritual things; He replied, he was
glad of that, and so we parted, and accordingly J did. And whereas you say J
preached against Mr. Hamon, you do me much injury, as you have done in all your
false allegations. And whereas you say J say J told Mr. Hamon that I never
preached against original sin,

Answ. He and I had never a word about it, and you further assert that I Will say
and unsay any thing.

Answ. You must unsay many of those things which you have accused me of,
otherwise your conscience will bear testimony against you both here and
hereafter as a just judgment of God.

Again you say I stepped into the pulpit in the afternoon, and took the same text
the Minister did in the morning, abusing text and Minister.

Ans. I confess I preached in the afternoon in the same place, and upon the
same text, and whatsoever truth they delivered, as much as in me lay, showed my
approbation to it: and where I judged they were mistaken, I showed the people
the reasons of my dissenting; but I did not say the Minister had deluded them,
though it is probable he did; for I cannot conclude that every one which hears
false doctrine is deluded, which if I should, I must have been deluded my self
by hearing you, for I heard you, although you judge me by hearsay. O most
unrighteous judgment!

Again, you say such is my hatred against orthodox Preachers, that in public I
preached, that I had rather side with Papists, then with the Ministers of
Newcastle.

Answ. You appropriate the title of orthodox Preachers to your selves: That you
have such a propriety I deny: I might rather have said your actions deny it;
witness your covetousness, ambition, envy and false accusations; all which is
inconsistent with the pure doctrine of love and self-denial, which were the
injunctions and ractice of our blessed Savior.

Again you say I declared that I had rather side with Papists then the Priests
of Newcastle.

An. What is good in them or you I Will embrace, and that which is evil in both
I will abandon. And as for the article which you call your conclusion, wherein
you reflect against the honor and reputation of L. Col. Mason, is answered
sufficiently in the Epistle, to discover unworthiness.

Again, you say I hold that Election from eternity has no ground from
Scriptures.

Ans. I never asserted that, nor no point equivalent to it; and whereas you say
my judgment is contrary to Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. Romans 8. 29, 30. you ought to unsay
it, for I own it as the true manifestation of God.

Again, you declare that J should say, those that hold the most part of the
world goes to ruin, make the justice of God a great monster, which is another
gross mistake in you: and whereas you say J hold points contrary to Mat. 7. 13,
14. Mat. 22. 14. is like the rest of your abuses toward me.

Again, you say, I hold that Adams posterity are not guilty of Adams sin, I
say, they were not so guilty as that they did commit the same sin, for the
children before they are borne did neither good nor evil, but none was born
when that sin was committed, and the Apostle says, Romans 5. 14. that death
reigned over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, but if they had committed the same sin, then had it been like
his, but it was not; ergo, so I do not hold any thing contrary, Romans 5. 12.
though you are pleased to say so.

Again, you say, I hold that Adam had no spiritual light.

Answ. If by spiritual light you mean the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
he had no such light before the fall, and you in Genesis 1. 7. Col. 8. 10. would
make people believe that I contradict those Texts in holding the foresaid
point; but there is not a word there, nor any place else, that Adam had at that
time any such light.

Again, you say, I hold that neither sin in Adam, nor any other creature, does
procure death.

Answ. I hold that sin in any man does not procure death as the efficient
cause, for that is God, who was the only contriver of it, both for quality,
quantity, time, and place.

Neither was it the material cause, formal nor final, as I have made evident
in my book called, the first Adam reviewed wherein I have answered many
objections, and have not contradicted, Romans 5. 12. 21. Romans 6. 23.

Again, you say, no man sins, except it be against his light.

Answ. I hold no man's sins, but against the Lord, which is light; you say this
is contrary to Lev. 5. 15.

Again, you say, I hold that such as teach men to sing Psalms, teach men to
tell lies.

Answ. I deny that ever any man in the world heard me speak those words, or
any words like unto them, but instead thereof, said, that those which set the
people a singing such things as they call Psalms, being not taught, having no
qualification suitable, did provoke them to sing lies, as for instance, O Lord
I am not puffed in mind, etc. and I have behaved my self as the child that
weaned is, etc. and we have not ceased to preach thy Laws day and night, etc.

I was so far from denying teaching of people to sing Psalms, that I pleaded
for a necessity of teaching, preceding singing of Psalms, in order thereunto,
took as much pains to teach the people singing of Psalms, as I did in any
other point I delivered in Newcastle: So it seems you care not what you speak
against me, as if you intended not to give an account in this world, nor in the
world to come.

Again, you say, I hold that Christ died for all.

Answ. I hold that the Scripture says, he died for all men, and for every man,
and not for Saints only, but for the sins of the whole world, and for all that
live therein, and the dead also, as 1 Timothy ^. 6. Heb. 2. 9. first Epistle John
2. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Romans 14. 9. and I hold it forth by these arguments.

1. If the Gospel is to be preached to all, then there is a death of Christ
for all: But there is a Gospel to be preached to all, therefore a death of
Christ for all.

2. If Christ died for false Teachers, which fell to destruction, which were,
and are the worst of all men, then Christ died for all men: But Christ died for
false Teachers which fell to destruction, which were, and are the worst of men,
therefore Christ died for all men. So I have not excluded his death for you.

Again, you say, I hold that infants have no need of Conversion, Repentance, or
Regeneration, until they actually sin.

Answ. I hold so, and these were my Arguments; 1. If Infants have neither sins
of Omission, nor Commission; then they have no need of conversion, repentance,
or regeneration. But Infants have neither sins of Omission or Commission;
Therefore,

2. That our Lord Jesus Christ never commanded his Disciples to come into such
a condition that had need of conversion, repentance, or regeneration; But our
Lord Jesus Christ commanded his Disciples to come into the condition of
Infants; Therefore they have no need of conversion, repentance, nor
regeneration.

Again, you say, I hold that no man shall be condemned, but for sinning against
the New Covenant.

Answ. That is another of your mistakes, for I do hold, that by the offense of
one condemnation came upon all men, according to Romans 5. 18. and that in Adam
all die, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and that from there Scriptures this condemnation shall
universally be taken off at the resurrection of the just and unjust; and after
that, the Judge of the world shall not condemn any, but for sins committed
against the Gospel, which I call the New Covenant.

FINIS.

