An Exact and Perfect RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Army under the Command
OF Sir Thomas Fairfax.

From the sixth of this instant July, to the eleventh of the same.

Wherein is expressed the particulars of the VICTORY obtained by by the
PARLIAMENTS Forces, over Goring, near Langport in Sommersetshire.

Dated at Sir Thomas Fairfax Quarters at Middlesey, 4 Miles from Bridgewater,
July 11.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Samuel G^llibrand, July 14. 1645.

JVLY 7.
AFter the relief of Taunton, and our marching to Crookhorn, where we rested
the Lord's Day, July 6. Although our long march, and the wants of our Soldiers
challenged some refreshment, yet the General, and the rest of the Officers,
could not with patience endure an Enemy so near us; and therefore the party
from Taunton were sent for, who came to Podderton that night, Colonel Massey
about Ilmister: The General seeing it very hazardous to free a passage at
Longlode or Ilchester, marched to Evil, thinking to pass the River there, or
at Mudford-Bridge. A little before our coming to Evil, Sherbone men had broken
the Bridge, which was presently made up; but as it fell out, we had no use of
it, for the Enemy quitted Ilchester, a Garrison of theirs, and left us free
entrance on Tuesday, where we quartered on Tuesday night. Little of moment fell
out these two days, Goring dancing from one side of the River, to the other;
so that our Officers that came from Taunton, had the more free liberty to
congratulate our happy successes; ours at Naseby, which was a complete victory,
their's at Taunton, which was more then a deliverance; for they continually
affronted the enemy, took from him 400 Horse at several times, and ordinarily
made bold with their Guards. The poor Soldiers were much afraid, in regard of
our delay of relief, that they should have had another Cornish Hugg, as they
called it, but it pleased God to prevent their fears, by this seasonable Mercy.
They lost a Gallant man, Colonel Floyd, a Religious experienced Soldier, and
Lieutenant Colonel Richbell, a stout honest man, and some few Officers
besides; some that were hurt, are recovered, as Major Marshall, Major Read.

This day Colonel Butlers Regiment, commanded by Major Fincher, Quartermaster
General of our Horse, came near us, and in its march from Barkley Castle to
us, did very good service. First at Dursley, they entertained Sir Charles Lucas
coming to beat up their Quarters, killed the Captain of the Forlorn-Hope, after
that, charged the Party with two Troops, killed ten, whereof two Captains, took
39 prisoners, hurt Sir Charles Lucas.

From thence they came to Highworth, where the Enemy from Farington had entered
the Town, whom he beat out, and delivered to the Governor, the quiet
possession of his Garrison. From thence to the Devises, where they took some
Horse, and so to Dorchester, where they over took some of Sherborne Horse; and
so came to us very seasonably, being through Gods providence, nearer an
engagement then we expected.

Wednesday, July 9. We divided our Force, and overlooked the danger through our
earnestness to discover and dislodge Goring; but the danger of division was
the less, in regard that Colonel Massey had many Dragoons, at least 2000, and
an enclosed Country: Whereupon Col. Massey's party, with the addition of Col.
Pyes, and Col. Sheffeilds Regiments, and all our Dragoons, but one Troop, were
sent on the other side the Water, betwixt Taunton and Langport, to amuse the
Enemy, and take advantages, if he might; which he very diligently did, and came
upon a strong Quarter of the Enemies about North-Curry, took them before they
were well ready: charged, took 9 or 10 Colors, 4 Captains, some Lievtenants
and Cornets, and about 200 men, and more Horses; with very little loss, only
Col. Cook shot in the face, and Col. Buller hurt in the arm. We were not idle
on the other side, but skirmished at a Pass a mile from Langport, took one
Colors, which led the way to many more the next day.

On Wednesday night, we quartered at Long-Sutton, and on Thursday morning, the
tenth, a Council of War was called, whether to draw up before Langport, and
do further as opportunity might be, or withdraw toward Sherborne and Evil, to
refresh our men, and receive our supplies of Arms, Money, and Ammunition,
coming to us by Sea; but it pleased God to end the business by an Alarm given
us, that the Enemy had possessed the Pass we formerly skirmished at in
Pessebury-Bottom, and some of their Foot appeared on the Hill: whereupon, the
Forces we had on this side the River, were drawn forth: Of Foot, Weldens,
Herbarts, Inglesbies, Fortescues, Maj. Generals, Russels, Hammands, and
Rainsbroughes Regiments, with Sir Hardre Wallers, and the Pikes of the
Generals, Mountagues and Pickerings Regiments. The Musketeers of those three
Regiments together, with Col. Iretons Regiment of Horse, being sent on
Wednesday night to the assistance of Massey. All our Horse, but the three
Regiments of Sir Robert Pie, Col. Sheffeild, and Col. Ireton, and Okeys
Dragoons, who were all with Col. Massey, but one Troop. With these, we drew
into the Field, about 10 of the Clock on Thursday, and about 12 or near one, we
began to dispute the Pass with them; the Enemy had a Hill, and the Wind, we
another Hill, they had the Pass and the Hedges lined before we came; we drew
up our Canon, which did us very good service, and made the other side of the
Hill so hot, that they could not come down to relieve their men; presently, the
Forlorn-Hope were commanded down to clear the Hedges, which they did, seconded
with Weldens Regiment, which was next them.

I need not say any thing of the General and Lieutenant General, who carried
themselves according to their wonted diligence and gallantry.

The enemy had but two Pieces of Ordnance, small ones, having sent the rest,
with most of their Carriages, to Bridgewater. The Pass being gained, the Horse
went on. Major Bethel had the honor of the first Charge of Horse, who did it
very gallantly, charging a Body of the enemy with a Troop, disordered them; and
being overborn with a fresh Body, retreated slowly a little way, to Major
Disbrough, who commands the Generals Regiment of Horse, where he rallyed, and
charged again, and they with him, and put the enemy to a foul Retreat, which
they never recovered. Part of their Foot, with some Horse, and their two Pieces
of Ordnance, retreated into Langport, of which you shall have a further Account
presently. The rest Horse and Foot, as fast as they could, ran toward
Bridgewater, except some who scattered themselves into Corn and Woods for their
shelter. Those that went toward Bridgewater, were earnestly pursued by our
Horse, so that none of their Foot recovered Bridgewater; and very many of their
Horse, and diverse Colors. The General and Lieutenant General staying with the
Foot near Langport, perceived the enemy drawing over at Langport, and going
toward Bridgewater on the other side of the River. Whereupon, we found the
enemy had quitted it, because, as they say, the Governor refused to hold it
without 800 men, which they could not spare: and for a farewell, they fired the
Town to run away by the light. Hereupon, we marched into the Town with Horse,
and some Foot, who through fire and water, pursued on that side the River. With
those Horse went Lieutenant General Cromwell and Colonel Greaves, who overtook
their Foot-Colours, and Ordnance, and three loads of Ammunition, which they
brought back to Langport. The Horse, some of them, got to Bridgewater, some to
a little Garrison call'ed Burrow-Church, in the way betwixt Langport and
Bridgewater. The General in the mean time marched on with the rest of the Foot
toward Bridgewater, for the advantage of Quarters, not being willing to stay in
that wasted place, and came that night to Middlesey, four miles from
Bridgewater.

In this Fight, the whole Foot of the enemy were dispersed, killed, and taken;
but few killed, thanks to hedges and heels. What Ordnance they had, were lost,
and many of their Colors taken. I cannot give a more perfect account of
Prisoners: Two Colonels of Horse, Slingsby and Heveningh^^, are taken, with
Bertridge Lieutenant General of their Ordnance, besides some
Lieutenant-colonels and Majors; and, as I hear, about 1200 Prisoners: and this
a very cheap Victory, we having lost no Officer, and not 20 common Soldiers,
for ought I can learn: Some of Major B^th^ls Troop are sore hurt, himself shot
in the right hand.

Thus has the God of our Salvation protected and prospered us, besotting the
enemies old Soldiers, that they should suffer themselves to be engaged
contrary to their intentions, and in the midst of their expectation of Supplies
to make up a formidable Army, directing us by his good providence, in the midst
of our irresolutions: His Wisdom was our counsel, his Strength was our
Victory; let the praise be his. Our Word was, God with us; and he made it good:
Theirs was Bristoll, which they will make good, its like, and run from
Bridgewater thither. Many of their men came running over to us, being such as
Gerard had taken prisoners in Wales, and entertained; which should make us more
careful in taking in the enemies prisoners: and if it be not carefully heeded,
it may be justly believed, that, notwithstanding the Covenant (the frequency of
oaths having brought them to a formality, and Perjury being now grown familiar;
which it were to be wished were better thought on) Many of the prisoners taken
at Naseby we shall be constrained to fight with once again.

A little before this Engagement, Master Hollis, the Ambassador ordinary of
the Clubs, came to us with a second Petition in the behalf of those whom
Colonel Ceely had taken prisoners at Lyme; That reparation might be given for
the lives of some who were killed, and the liberties of others who were taken;
otherwise very fairly they must betake themselves to the adverse party for
justice. The General being going to the Field, ordered him to stay at the
Quarter, and he should have answer at his return; which, God be thanked, we can
give him, with Honor and Justice. The enemies remainders are at and about
Bridgewater; our Head-Quarter at Middlesey, where our Officers are consulting
what is next to be done; for that is all the Question with us. I pray God
resolve it, and direct us.

FINIS.

