A DIRECTION FOR ADVENTVRERS With small stock to get two for one, and good
land freely: And for Gentlemen, and all Servants, Laborers, and Artificers to
live plentifully.

And the true Description of the healthiest, pleasantest, and richest
plantation of new Albion, in North Virginia, proved by thirteen witnesses.

TOGETHER WITH, A Letter from Master Robert Evelin, that lived there many
years, showing the particularities, and excellency thereof.

With a brief of the charge of victual, and necessaries, to transport and buy
stock for each Planter, or Labourer, there to get his Master 50 l. per Annum,
or more in twelvetrades, and at 10. l. charges only a man.

Printed in the year, 1641.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



The true description of the healthiest, pleasantest, and richest plantation of
new Albion in North Virginia, proved by 13 Witnesses.
WHereas that part of America, or North Virginia, lying about 39 degrees at
Delaware Bay called the Province of new Albion, is situate in the best, and
same temper, and as Italy, between too cold Germany, and too hot Barbary, so
this lying just midway between new England 200 miles North, and Virginia 150
miles South, where now are settled 100000 English and 140 ships in trade, is
freed from the extreme cold and barrenness of the one, and heat and aguish
Marshes of the other, and is like Lumbardy, and a rich fat soil plain, and
having 18 Rivers on the maine land, 17 great Isles, and partaketh of the
healthiest air and most excellent commodities of Europe, and replenished with
the goodliest woods of Oaks and all Timber for ships and Masts, Mulberries for
silk, sweet Cypres, Cedars, Pines and Perres, 4 sorts of Grapes for wine, and
Raisins and with the greatest variety of choice fruits, Fish and Foul, stored
with all sorts of Corn yielding 5. 7. and 10. quarters an Acre: Silkegras,
salt, good Mines and ^iers ware, 5 sorts of Dear, Buffes and huge Elkes to
plow and work, all bringing 3 young at once: The Vplands covered many months
with berries, roots Chestnuts, Walnuts, Beach and Oak Mast to feed them Hogs
and Turkeys, 500 in a Flock, and having near the Colony of Manteses 400000
Acres of plain mead land and mere level to be flowed and fludded by that
river for Corn, Rice, Rapes, flax, and hemp. After 11 years trading and
discovery there and trial made, is begun to be planted and stored by the
Governor and Company of new Albion consisting of 25 Lords, Barronets, Knights
and Merchants, who for the true informing of themselves, their friends,
Adventurers, and Partners by Residents and Traders there four several years
out of their Iournall books, namely by Captain Brown a ship Master, and
Master Stafford his Mate, and by Captain Clayborn 14 years there trading, and
Constantine his Indian there born and bred, and by Master Robert Evelin 4
years there; yet by eight of their hands subscribed and enrolled do testify
this to be the true state of the Country, of the Land, and Delaware Bay or
Charles River, which is further witnessed by Captain Smith and other books of
Virginia and by new Englands Prospect, New Canaan, Captain Powells map, and
other description of new England.

Captain Brown. Captain Clayborne. Robert Evelin. Stafford. Constantine.
Stratton. Thomas White. Richard Buckham. Christof: Thomas. Edward Monmouth.
Tenis Palee. Edward Rhodes. Peter Rixford.


Master Evelins letter.
Good Madam:
SIr Edmund persisting still in his noble purpose to go on with his plantation
in Delaware or Charles River* just midway between New England and Virginia,
wherewith my Uncle Young, and I several years resided, has often informed
himself, both of me, and Master Stratton, as I perceive by the hands
subscribed of Eward Monmouth, Tenis Pale and as Master Buckham, Master White,
and other Ship masters, and Saylors, whose hands I know and it to be true that
there lived and traded with me, is sufficiently instructed of the state of the
Country, and people there, and I should very gladly according to his desire
have waited on you into Hampshire to have informed your Ladyship in person, had
not I next week been passing to Virginia, But nevertheless to satisfy you
of the truth, I thought good to write unto you my knowledge, and first to
describe you from the North side of Delaware unto Hudsons River, in Sir Edmunds
Patent, called new Albion, which lies just between New England and Maryland,
and that Ocean Sea I take it to be about 160 miles, I find some broken land,
Isles and Inlets, and many small Isles at Egbay: But going to Delaware Bay by
Cape May which is 24 miles at most, and is as I understand very well set out,
and printed in Captain Powels Map of new England, done as is told me by a
draught I gave to M. Daniell the plotmaker, which Sir Edmund says you have at
home on that North side about five miles within a Port, or Rode for any Ships
called the Nook, and within it lies the King of Kechemeches, having as I
suppose, about 50 men: and 12 leagues higher a little above the Bay and Bar is
the River of Manteses which has 20 miles on Charles River and 30 miles running
up a fair navigable deep River all a flat level of rich fresh and fat Black
Marsh mould, which I think to be 300000 acres, In this Sir Edmund intends
as he says to settle, and there the King of Manteses has about 100 Bow men,
next above about 6 leagues higher is a fair deep river 12 miles navigable,
where is Freestone, and there over against is the King of Sikonesses, and next
is a Asomocches river and King with 100 men, and next is Eriwoneck a King of 40
men where we sat down, and 5 miles above is the King of Ramcocke with a 100
men, and 4 miles higher the King of Axion with 200 men, and next to him 1^.
leagues overland an Inland King of Calcefar with 150. men, and then there is in
the middle of Charles-river two fair woody Isles, very pleasant, and fit for
Parks* the one of a thousand acres, the other of fowerteen hundred, or
thereabout. And six leagues higher, near a Creek called Mosilian, the King
having two hundred men. And then we come to the False, made by a Rock of
Limestone, as I suppose it is about sixty and five leagues from the Sea, near
to which is an Isle fit for a City, all materials there to build: and above,
the River fair and navigable, as the Indians inform me, for I went but ten
miles higher. I do account all the Indians to be eight hundred, and are in
several factions, and war against the Sasque Hanocks, and are all extreme
fearful of a Gun, naked and unarmed against our shot, swords, and pikes I had
some bickering with some of hem, and they are of so little esteem, as I durst
with fifteen men sit down, or trade in despite of them, and since my return
18 Swedes are settled there, and so sometime six Dutch do in a boat trade
without fear of them.

I saw there an infinite quantity of Bustards, Swans, Geese; and Foul
covering the shoares, as within the like multitude of Pigeons, and store of
Turkies, of which I tried one to weigh forty and six pounds. There is much
variety and plenty of delicate fresh and seafish and shellfish, and Whales or
Grampus: Elkes, Dear that bring three young at a time, and the Woods bestrewed
many months with Chest-nuts, Wall-nuts, and Mast of several sorts to feed
them and Hoggs, that would increase exceedingly. There the barren grounds have
four kinds of Grapes, and many Mulberries, with Ash, Elms, and the tallest
and greatest Pines and Pitch-trees that I have seen. There are Cedars,
Cypress, and Sassafras, with wild fruits, Pears, wild Cheries, Pine-apples,
and the dainty Parsemenas. And there is no question but Almonds, and other
fruits of Spain will prosper, as in Virginia. And (which is a good comfort) in
four and twenty hours you may send or go by sea to New England or Virginia,
with a fair wind, you may have Cattle, and from the Indians 2000. barrels of
Corn, at twelve-pence a bushel in truck, so as Victuals are there cheaper and
better, then to be transported: Neither do I conceive any great need of a Fort
or Charge, where there is no enemy.

If Sir Edmund will bring with him three hundred men or more, there is no doubt
but he may do very well and grow rich, for it is most pure healthful air,
and such pure wholesome Springs, Rivers, and Waters, as are delightful, of a
Desert, as can be seen, with so many varieties of several flowers, trees,
and Forests for Swine. So many fair risings and prospects, all green and
verdant: and Maryland a good friend and neighbor, in four and twenty hours
ready to comfort and supply.

And truly I believe, my Lord of Baltamore will be glad of Sir Edmunds
Plantation and assistance against any enemy or bad neighbor. And if Sir Edmund
employ some men to sow Flax, Hemp and Rapes in those rich Marshes, or build
ships, and make Pipe-staves, and load some ships with these wares, or Fish from
the Northward, he may have any money, ware, or Company brought him by his own
ships, or the ships of Virginia or New England all the year.

And because you are of the Noble House of the Pawlets, and as I am informed,
desire to lead many of your friends and kindred thither, whom as I honor, I
desire to serve, I shall entreat you to believe me as a Gentleman and
Christian, I write you nothing but the truth, and hope there to take
opportunity in due season, to visit you and do all the good offices in
Virginia, my place or friends can serve you in.

And thus tendering my service, I rest

Madam Your Ladyships most humble faithful Servant Rob: Evelm

Provisions for each man and the charge from London.
1. Canvas, or linen Clothes, Shoes, Hats, etc. costing here four pound for
two men to buy Cowes, Goats, and hogs in Virginia, Tersera Islands, or Ireland,
which there yields six pound, and will buy one Cow, two Goats, two Sowes, which
for each man comes to 2. l. 0. 0. 2. Freight for a Passenger, and his half
Tonne of provisions and Tools. 1. l. 10. 0. 3. Victuals till his own stock
and Croppe, maintain him for seven months. 3. l. 10. 0. That is, Pease,
Oatemeale, and Aquavite, 7. s. five bushells of meal, of which two to be baked
into Biskets, and five bushells of Malt, some must be ground and brewed for
the voyage both 1. l. 10. s. a hundred of beese, and Pork, 1. l. 2. s. two
bushels of roots 2. s. salt fish, 2. s Cask to carry provision 5. s. five pound
of Butter. 2. s. 4. One hogshead of ears of Corn, Garden seeds, Hemp and
linseed with Caske. 0. 16. 0. 5. Arms (viz.) a sword, Calliver or long
Pistol, Pike head: six pound of powder, ten pound of shot, half an old slight
armor, that is, two to one Armor. 0. 19. s. 0. 6. Tools, a spade, Axe, and
shovell 5. s. Iron, and steel to make and mend more, and two hundred of
nails. 5. s. 0. 10. s. 0. 7. Guns and Powder for the Fort, that is to every,
50. four Murderers 8. l. a barrel of powder, 4. l. 10. s. That is to each
man, 5. s. Bed and sheets of canvas to be filled with huls each man, 10. s.
Sum total. 10. l. 0. 0.
Each Adventurer of twenty or fifty men must provide household necessaris, as
Irons, and chains for a drawbridge, two Mares or horses to breed or ride on,
which with hay* oats, and water, will for four pound a piece, be transported;
Pots, Pans, dishes, Iron for a Cart and Plow, Chains, Sithes, and Sickels,
Nets, lines, and hooks. A Sail for a fishing Shallop of three tonne, and hemp
to employ his people in making them, as with hair and Canvas for quilts,
as well on shipboard, as demurring at the Sea port, as with locks, keys, bolts,
and glass Casements for his house. And generally, fit Implements for the work
or trade he intends.

1. Here by bringing good laborers, and tradsemen, the provident planters may
do well by giving shares or double wages when each man may earne his 6, nay
10, and 12 shillings a day.

2. For here the Ship-carpenters ten men a day will build a tun of shipping as
in England, which with masts, and yeardes there taken is here, and there wort
3. l. a tun and yet here, and there is built at 1 l. a tun wages, which is 6 s.
a days work, having the timber without money.

3. Here in 24. days they make a thousand of Pipe-staves, worth here seven
pound, and at the Canaries twenty pound a thousand, and so get seven shillings
a days work.

4. Here in making Iron they save 5 l. a tun in the price of wood, and 3 l.
more in digging the Iron mine, and saving land carriage of it, and of the
Charcole, for mine is taken on the Sea beach, and wood floated down the
Rivers, and so each man earnes 5 s. 10 d. a day, Iron valued at ^2 l. per tun.

5. Here the constant trade of 350. ships, and 7000. men a fishing begin to
leave cold Newfoundland small fish, and late taken, when this is before theirs
two months at the market, 100. fish here yields 4 quintales, there scarce one
and here is fish all the year, there but only in the 4 warm months, so as for 9
weeks work each man above his diet, passage, and return, gets 20 l. and 22
l. a man, and herein dried Base, in Sturgeon, in pressed Mackrell. Herings, and
Pilchers, is got, as well as in Cod-fish 6 s. and 8 s. a day. And this returns
ready French and Spanish coin.

6. Here the glorious ripening Sun as warm as Italy or Spain brings rare
fruits, wines, and such store of Anniseed, and Licoras as well as Bay Salt made
without boiling only in pannes with the Sun, that each labourer makes 6
bushels a day worth in these three 12 s. a day, and this maiden soil, so
comforted with the Suns glittering beams, and being dug, and set with the
Indian Wheat, and their Beans, and Pease; with 40 s. charge in 40 days work
with seed, yields 10 quarters an acre, the same Wheat being 10 times as big,
and as weighty as ours; beside Potatoes, woad, Madder and Tobacco will yield
half a tun of Flax, and a tun of Hemp; worth 12 l. an acre: and 6 s. a days
work.

7. Here as in Province in France Walnut-Milke, or Oil ground and pressed will
yield the gatherer ten gallons, and 10 s. a days work.

8. Here the land lies covered 7 months with Beech, and Oak Mast, Walnuts, and
Chestnuts and 3 months with Groundnuts; and wild Pease: and Fetches yearly so
as sixty Hogs for one; and a hundred Turkeyes; Partriges, Hethpoults; and tame
Poultry eating their fill, for one is an ordinary increase.

9. Here the Soap, and Potashes, men paying in England 12 d. a bushel; and 4
d. carriage for ashes; and 20 l. a tun for Potashes make them for a quarter and
less; and get 8 s. a days work, by cutting, reeking, and burning whole
plains of Fern; Brambles, and wild Vines being thrice as strong as Woodashes.

Here a ship may go; and return in four months laded and comfortably see
their friends; making three voyages a year, in a healthy air freed from
enemies, and Turks, and get two for on each voyage: that is six for one of that
stock and proceed in a year.

11. Here the kind Gentleman that in England does not live without debts,
mortgages, suretiship, Lawsuits, and troubles, may here settle, and avoid bad
company and tempting occasions, and live in plenty, and variety of all sports,
hunting Deer, hauking Foul, fishing, and many more sports, and sorts of game
as with dainty fruits; and lay up his spare rents.

12. Here the soldier, and Gentlemen wanting employment, and not bred to
labor without going to wars to kill Christians, for 5 s. a week in the mouth
of the roaring Canon or in a seige threatened with famine, and pestilence: but
with a quilt suit arrow proof, and a light Albion gunspear: and but ten
together against a few naked salvages may like a devout Apostolic soldier
with sword, and the word to civilize, and convert them to be his Majesty's
lieges, and by trading with them, for Furs get his ten shillings a day and at
home intermixing sport, and pleasure, with profit, store his Parkes with Elkes,
and fallow Dear, and are fit to ride, milk or draw, the first as big as Oxen,
and bringing three a yeete, and with hares a yard long, and with five hundred
Turkeys in a flock got by nets, in stalking, and get his five shillings a day
at least.

All Adventurers of 500 l. to bring 50 men, shall have 5000 Acres and a Manor
with Royalties at 5. s. Rent, and whosoever is willing so to transport himself
or servant at 10. l. a man, shall for each man have 100 Acres freely granted
for ever and at (...) may be instructed how in 3. weeks to pass, and in 20
days to get fit Servants and Artificers for wages, Diet, and clothes, and
Apprentices according to the 3. Statutes: 5 Eliz. All which after 5 years
service, are to have 31, Acres of free land and some stock and be freeholders.

FINIS.

