An EXACT and TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Blowing up of the French Magazine OF DUNKIRK;
And the particulars of the taking of Five French Flutes, Laden with AMMUNITION,
By the DUTCH, Sailing from the said Port For BREAST, designed for IRELAND.
THE French Letters say, and the Dutch Letters confirm, that on the 12th
Instant, there happened a terrible and surprising Disaster in the French Garrison
of Dunkirk; for the same being looked upon the Metropolitan over all the French
Garrisons in the New Conquest in Flanders, whereby mighty Stores of all Sorts of
Munitions of War were Reposited, for the carrying on the grand Designs of Louis
XIV. was by one Fatal Blow and Disaster, through the Negligence of a Drunken
Workman, or Soldier, with a lighted Pipe of Tobacco, entirely Blown up and
Destroyed.

The Certainty of the Occasion cannot be authentickly known, because the Powder
gave no minutes for Enquiry, but precipitately carried all before it into the
Region of the Air, which as it was more Inclusive, had greater Extensive
Efficacy on the Garrison, it having destroyed and wholly ruined one Third of the
Interior Fortifications, with one Bastion, and made a large Breach in the Wall
of the Side toward the Sea, there being computed 2000 Barrels of Powder to be
lost, which is an extreme Injury to France, the same being valued at 8 l 10 s.
each Barrel besides the Store of Arms and Ammunition adjoining, are either
broke to pieces, or burned in the Ruins, there not being one part of the said
Garrison but what received its dreadful Effects either by the destruction of the
Houses, or killing some People therein, the tops of all the Buildings being
either carried away, or broke down afterward with the Stones, or other
ponderous weight which fell thereon. And the Damage is almost Irreparable, One
hundred thousand Pounds being not sufficient to put it into its pristine
Condition, for the terrible Shock which it made, has created a great many
Cracks, and dismal Casma's in the very Wall of the Fortifications, which must
be wholly taken down to the ground to be repaired, otherwise Untenable; and,
upon a strict Examination, about 530 People, as well Soldiers as Inhabitants,
have perished in this Catastrophe, among them 43 Officers, and above 300 others
are miserably shattered or wounded with the Stones: And there are some which
conclude that it was occasioned by the Treachery of several new Convert
Soldiers, but considering that the person which perpretated it, was a Companion
in the misery which ensued, we believe that it was more Misfortune than Design;
and the rather, for that it was known, that a considerable Quantity of Powder
brought from Foreign Parts, had, by the Saline and Vaporous Quality of the Sea
received some Detriment, whereby it was drying, and making again serviceable.
However it was (as all Advantages with Enemies are best) it betokens a lucky
progress of Affairs to all the Confederates in the ensuing Campaign, especially
in the Kingdom of Ireland, to which place the said Powder was principally
designed, and where we do not doubt the French Rhodomantado's as soon as
appear, will vanish in Smoke.

And this direful Misfortune (as the English Proverb denotes, Comes seldom
Alone) is ushered in with another; which though it may not be attended with those
dreadful Circumstances of the loss of much People, yet it carries with it, and
bespeak as fatal a Consequence to the French King's Affairs; for as he was
lately come to the Zenith of his Glory, it will be a means to bring him to the
declension of his Usurpation and Tyranny, which the sage Prognostics conclude
it near accomplished, as is the good Tidings which we have verified and
confirmed by the last Dutch Post: That Five French Flutes laden in the Port of
Dunkirk with all Sorts of Munitions of War, and going under Convoy of two of
their Privateers for Breast, designed for Ireland, were intercepted and taken by
three Dutch Men of War; their Convoys, after receiving the first Broadside,
sheering off, escaped; and they are now actually brought into Rotterdam, where
being examined into, are found to be Freighted with these following
Particulars, viz.

In one of them are 16 Demi-Culverins upon Carriages, with Sponges, Ladles, and
all other Materials thereto, as Traces, and Harness for the Draught Horses. 236
Barrels of Gunpowder. 6000 Iron Bullets. 120 Quintals of Match. 500 Barrels of
Musket, Carbine, and Pistol shot. 1500 Chevaux de Frize. 400 Tunespiks. 800
Gabions, and other Baskets. 7000 Mattocks, as many Shovels. 300 Wheel-Barrows.
2 Mortars. 600 Bombs, from 60 to 100 l. weight each. 6000 Horse-shoes. 2000
Saddles, as many Bridles, with Holsters for Pistols, and Cruppers. 4000 New
Tents. 3000 Firelock Muskets. 2000 Matchlocks. 1000 Fusees. 6000 Swords,
Bandaliers, Belts, etc. with much other materials, too long to incert, all
which are condemned as Prize, and are to be brought to Amsterdam, and the
greatest part ordered to Maestricht and Breda for the use of the States Army.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Langley Curtiss. 1690.


