An Exact and True RELATION Of the Birth, and Life of SIMON MORIN, Who
professed himself to be JESUS CHRIST: For which, and other detestable Heresies,
together with his Book entitled Pensees du MORIN, he was Condemned and Burnt
at Paris in the end of February last, 1662/3.

With an Essay against Toleration of Schism and Heresy.

By Wm. Griffith, M. A of Christ's College, Cambr'

Lege Historiam, ne fias Historia. Licensed according to order.

London, Printed 1663.

An Exact and true Relation of the Birth and Life of Simon Morin, who professed
himself to be Jesus Christ: for which, and other detestable Heresies, together
with his Book entitled Pensees du MORIN, he was Condemned and Burnt at Paris
in the end of February last, 1662/3.
IN the Primitive Christians Times Africa was held not to be more fertile in
her production of Monsters, then of Heresies: which uphappy fruitfulness if,
with Astrologers, we may, with any appearance of Truth, ascribe to the
prevailing Influence of its ruling Planet; of later years we may as justly
suspect, that the Heavens have looked upon Europe also with as malign an
Aspect. For, if we consider either those Heretical Opinions, that first swarmed
in the Low Countries, through that Toleration and Indulgence they found there,
after they had been banished and drove from their Native Hives; or those, that
afterward transplanted themselves hither amidst our late Distractions, which
if they did not actually begin, they unhappily fomented and continued at least:
we have very little reason to account these Parts of Christendom less tainted
at present, then that Quarter of the World was of old, with that Infection.
Heresy is of it self impudent: and those croaking Religions, that like
Pharoah's Frogs creep into the Ovens and Kneading-Troughs at first for Bread
only, will, if permitted once by the Civil Magistrate, go up in time into His
Bedchamber, and, though they be Haeresin expellas surca licet, usque recurret.
flang out with Shovels and Tongs over and over, yet with Importunity plead if
not for a Settlement, at least for a Toleration. Which Schisms like that
Egyptian Plague the Divine Providence never sends of courtesy; but inflicts
rather as a punishment. One would admire how specious Pretenses the primary
Br^achers and Founders of Novel Opinions frame at first, and how different and
unequal their Super-structure is at last from their Foundation: which I shall
not dispute whether it be, because those, who succeed them, improve their
Principles higher, then they were originally intended; or whether it be
naturally incident to such Spirits to pretend Liberty of Conscience, and
Religious Affairs, when their chiefest Aim is Innovation both in Church and
State. It is therefore the best Prudence and Policy of a Prince, or State, to
eradicate and root-up those Weeds out of the Gardens of their Government, while
young and tender; or, as we deal with Wolves, when got at liberty, unkennel
all the Mastiffs in a Country to worry them, e're they come to litter, and fill
the soil with so pestilent a Vermin: and not to hazard the future Peace of
their Kingdoms by any seeming Political, or at-present-necessary Toleration.
This Experience through continued Ages has made good, and a late Example in
the French State under the most Christian King confirms. Which Church, as She
retains Her ancient and pristine Privileges on one side free from the Papal
Usurpation; as appears by the late Censures and Decree of the Court of
Parliament at Paris there past on the twenty second of January last against
those Conclusions, that were intended to have been asserted in the Sorbon, in
defense of several Theses, and Positions, assertive of the Popes Authority over
the Church, and making Him equally infallible with Jesus Christ: So does She on
the other hand keep back from Indulging and upstart Opinions, or novel Factions
in Religion; which, though at first they may seem foolish and contemptible, yet
having spread once, and gotten head, become oftentimes of dangerous Consequence
to a State, and not seldom venture to give Check-mate to the Prince Himself.
To avoid which Evil there (in France I mean) since the Decree aforementioned
against those Positions of the Sorbon, there past a Sentence of In their
Sess^ons-House at Paris, like our Old-Beley Judgments.
Chastelet, confirmed by an Arrest of Parliament, by power whereof in the end
of February last one called Simon Morin was burnt alive at Paris. He was born
at Aumale, his Parentage but ordinary, his Education not greatly Learned, his
Parts quick enough, but either by deferbescency or design brought into such a
subserviency to a Religious and reserved Temper, that he seemed to be so far
Master of himselself and his Endowments, that by that very Means he might be
able to manage any Practice or Design for his own Repute: which (as it is
thought) put him upon a Project of raising a new Sect by ways seemingly wild
enough; as if, because the Turks account their Santons, or Fools, in the
Catalogue of their Saints or Happy men, because they pass this Life without
care for the things of this World, it were the nearest Cut to the acquiring of
a Sanctified Repute to purchase it by Projects absolutely mad, or purely
ridiculous. Such certainly his Attempt of boasting and professing himself to be
Jesus Christ will seem at first: but when we consider how that King's Army was
then intended; and withal how commonly when Princes are upon foreign Designs
Rebellions are fomented at home, and those commonly begin either with the
Ringleader of a new Sect, or an Innovation in Religion (as it is manifest from
our own Home Histories both in the Time of King John, and other Kings) we may
not improbably suspect, that his Design was rather to arrive at Canonization
the way that John Clemens and Ravilliack had done before him. To back his
Project, his Visage Hair, and Beard (which, it is said, he wore bi-partite, or
two- forked, according to the common Pictures of Jesus Christ) were suited and
formed as near as he could, to the imitation of our Savior; and a negligence
in Apparel studiously affected, and all other Things suitable to the stirring
up a Belief in the minds of his Disciples, that he was the same indeed he would
be taken for. His Life is for the greatest part unknown to us, it having been
obscure and unsettled, while he traveled far and near to gain Proselytes; of
whom within the space of twenty years a very considerable number, and too great
to be trusted by the Magistrate, was infected with his Errors: which (as we are
informed from France) were found at his Conviction to be many more, and his
Practices very dangerous, both to the Church, and to the State; he having (as
we said) engaged so great a number of Persons within so small a space of time,
that it was more then seasonable for the Prince to look after him in that
Conjuncture of Affairs, and purge his Country of such a Monster, that might in
time produce such deadly effects. He was therefore seized, and committed to the
The public Gaol at Paris, like our Newgate.
Conciergery, where little sign of amendment or repentance appearing, but
greater danger rather of the spreading his Errors by the concourse of his
Disciples thither, he was after Trial condemned, and publicly burnt; his
Errors at the same time suffering the same Condemnation, and forbidden to be
propagated, or published; a Book, wrote by him, entitled Pensees du MORIN,
(or, The Opinions of MONRIN) containing, as it should seem, the substance of
his Erroneous Doctrine being burnt together with him: for which reason it is
impossible to give you an exact Catalogue of his other Errors; but it may be
sufficient to know, that they were so monstrous, that the Civil Magistrate
thought them not fit to come to the knowledge of any else, lest they might be
liable to the same Infection. To put a final end to such an Imposture, and the
farther spreading of his Errors, his Disciples, which we have said were
numerous, were every where imprisoned, and enjoined to recant, or be banished,
and sent to the Galleys; and among the others those two Priests, whom he had
seduced, and who (we are informed) attended him, besides those appointed by the
Magistrate, to his Execution. This was His Beginning, Progress, and End; who
might probably, if he had not been stopped here, have in time produced Troubles,
which would not quickly have found an end: So pestilent a Thing is Heresy and
Error, when it once gets Head, for to be rebated; and is much easilier
prevented in the growth, then cut off when grown-up. For, as we had in our
memories the same Game played here in England by James Naylor; so, had not the
timely severity of the then temporary Powers curbed him, I do not doubt, but
had he continued, and been still on foot, he would have put in, as well as his
Party do, for a Toleration. But (thanks be to God) it is not France only,
which in this late Example, or those former ones of Caesar Vaninus and others
at Tholouze; nor the State of Geneva in that of Servetus, burnt there on
October 27, 1553. for denying the Divinity of our Savior, and other Errors;
that can make show of their opposing all such erroneous and novel Opinions, as
might disturb the Peace of the Church, and serenity of their Government: But
England may as justly boast of Her constant extirpation of Heresy and Schism,
as of Her purging out Superstition; and may She continue in that Mean, neither
inclining to the right Hand nor to the left, but keep inviolate that
mediocrity, whereon, as on Her true Basis, Her Interest is so certainly
grounded and established.

-- Medio tutissimus ibis.
FINIS.

