

This is the Shadow of that House of Clay
Where dwelt a Soul that richly did Display
Such Light of Truth abroad, as did Viseal
The Book of God and Hidden Things Reveal;
But having left That House now dwells Above;
In those Blessed Mansions of pure Light and Love.
T. Cross Sculpsit.

M: B:

THE Gospel-Treasury Opened: OR The Holiest of all unvailing:

Discovering yet more The RICHES of Grace and Glory,

TO THE VESSELS of MERCY:

Unto whom only it is given to know the Mysteries of that Kingdom, and the
excellency Of SPIRIT above LETTER. POWER above FORMS. TRUTH above SHADOWS.


In several Sermons preached at Kensington and elsewhere, By JOHN EVERARD D. D.
deceased.

Whereunto is added, the Mystical Divinity of Dionysius the Areopagite, spoken
of Acts 17. 34. with Collections out of other Divine Authors, translated by Dr.
Everard, never before printed in English.

2 Cor. 3. 6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life.

Verse 10. For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect,
by reason of the glory that excels.

1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect, even the
hidden wisdom of God in a mystery.

London, Printed by John Owsley, for Rapha Harford, at the Bible and
States-Arms in Little Britain. 1657.

To all those who (through the power of Christ in them) have attained to esteem
it their Wisdom and long to be despised and accounted Fools by the World (...)
his sake and the Gospels: whose knowledge, ^isdome and Gifts has made them
not Great and (...) (according to the custom of the World) but Little, yea
Nothing in their own esteem; who notwithstanding are the True Offspring of God,
the Only Right-Wise and Honorable with Him, and the Excellent upon Earth.
TO such only are these Sermons dedicated, (they knowing what these things
mean) but not to the Great and wise men of this world; For says our (...), All
men cannot receive these sayings, Mat. (...). 11. A rich man can hardly enter
into the King^^me of heaven, nor he (especialy) who is Rich, or (...) in his
own esteem; Nay, It is easier for a (...) (or Cable) to go through the Eye of a
(...) Needle, then for a Rich man to enter into (...) Kingdom of God; And,
says our Lord, (...) I say unto you, Except ye be converted (...) little
Children ye cannot enter therein; But whosoever shall humble himself as a
litt^^ child, The same says he, (mark the word) (...) no other, shall be
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

These only are they that can Deny the^ selves in all things, and take up
their Cross, da^ ly following their Lord and Master in the sam^ path he has
trod out before them, being (...) with his own Baptism; they wait upon (...)
as his ser^ants, and covet to be like him.

In all his afflictions, reproaches, and death, (...) meek? how lovely? how
courteous? how (...); how amiable? how gracious was he (...) all his behavior?
How ready to pardon and pray for his enemies? There was no guile foun^ in his
mouth, He never reproached the vildest sinner; how patient, meek and loving was
he (...) them? how did he pity and tender them? an^ weep over them, because
they were so fast boun^^ in Satan's chains? Only he fell very foul on the (...)
and dissembling Outside Religion of the Pharisees, their gilded seemingly Holy
outsides He could never endure; Because, though ther^ was an unreproveable and
glorious outside, y^ within, nothing but Stenches, rottenness and (...) bones;
like unto gilded and stately Sepu^^chers without, but within all manner of
rotten^ness and loathsome Stenches. And he chose ra^ther to keep company with
the grossest sinner (the Publicans) rather then with these; Because themselves
and others had so high an esteem of them, and thought them righteous, by reason
of their grave and demure outsides, to make others believe it was so, or rather
better within, when it was quite otherwise. He sought not Himself nor his own
glory, but the glory of his Father, He endured the Cross, despised the shame;
His life was, to go about doing good, even to his enemies; He would gladly have
done good to the proud Pharisees, but they could not endure him, because he did
not reverence and admire them, (as others did) but dishonor them and discover
their nakedness and loathsome insides. Those that are his servants, they in
their measure, strive to follow their Master in all good things; They have the
same spirit, Full of meekness and tenderhartedness to all; Free and ready to do
good, they love all creatures for his sake, they can see no creature in want,
but their bowels Yearn to help them, being much troubled, if they have not
wherewith to supply their wants.

These indeed (like their Master) can Welcome the Cross, yea kiss the Cross
every day, and expect, bearing of the Cross in every thing they do; whether
they be Actions Civil or Spiritual, in their Alms or Charities to men, or
their religious Worship and duties to God; They in all, bear the Cross always
about them.

Therefore that of the Papists (to me) is a pretty Emblem of these men's lives,
in this regard (though they abuse it in an external, outward, foolish, and
Superstitious way,) but the Morral and signification to this purpose, is (by
some) very aptly applied: Viz. Every thing they have to do with, or what ever
they begin or go about, The Cross, The Crusifix (as they call it) must be made
upon it, when they rise or when they go to bed, or whatever they do they will
not forget that; so is it very truly and really applied to these men, And the
more they esteem themselves Blessed; for the Papists think themselves Blessed
by doing it externally, and the fewer Crosses they use, the more (they think)
are their curses.

But in this sense, I am sure it is a real truth, That these Self-denied
Little-Ones know by experience, (then whom for any to offend, it were far
better for him, That a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and sunk headlong
to the bottom of the Sea) That the more of the Cross they bare, they reckon,
they are the more Rich, the more Happy: This taking up the Cross and Denial of
themselves, they account it their Life, their Portion, their Inheritance, their
Blessing, their Crown, yea indeed their Heaven upon Earth: As for all the
things of this world, they sit as loose to them as Elija^'s Mantle, which as he
Ascended fell from him to the Earth, to which it belonged. These Souls, they
willingly and freely have departed from the love of this World, and expect no
love from it, but rather Hatred, but they having found the Pearl of great price
(of invalluable price) they slight all, Sell All, for this Pearl; For they have
resolved and concluded in their souls, in good earnest, as it is Prove. 4.
Wisdom, is the principal thing, therefore say they, I must (what ever I do)
get Wisdom; for all my other Gettings, I must get understanding; For the
Merchandise of it is better then the Merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof then ^ine Gold, This is that Wisdom which is more precious then Rubies
and all the things thou can desire is not to be compared to her.

Thou once having this High Esteem of this Super-Excellent, Super-Eminent
Life, thou will search for it as men search for silver, and dig for it, as for
Hidd Treasures; For (believe it) These are of infinite more value; These are
Everlasting, Eternal, Durable Riches, The other are not so: But the men of the
world they esteem silver and Gold and such like, to be their Highest Riches;
and therefore all their Loves Mights and endeavors are to digg for them, but
these souls are quite contrary, and put worth upon things of Worth indeed, The
violent take this Kingdom by force, (says our Savior) Nor can it be gotten
other ways; This life cannot be obtained without strong Affections to it, Not
with sitting still, nor in a general and formal road of profession, it will
not fall into our laps, nor is it gotten by pattering over a few cold prayers;
but it must be Esteemed, Prized, Loved above all things, else it will never be
laid hold on, none else shall ever come near it; if any other thing take off
your Eye, or your Love from the persuit thereof, you immediately lose the very
sight of it. He that finds this life, he indeed finds life. Wisdom loves
them that love her, and those that seek her early, shall find her, Riches and
honor are with her, yea durable Riches and righteousness. But he that sins
against her, (or neglects her) hates his own soul. And this is the final
conclusion he makes; Proverbs 8. 36. All that hate me love death; yet know, it
is the Lord that works all our works in us, ^sai. 26. 12. And it is He that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 3. 13. etc.

These laborious Sermons do sweetly discover this Life This Pearl, but till you
come to experience them, you will find them full of P^rables and hard Sayings,
not only to such as are void of understanding, and to the men of this world;
but to all such (though filled with knowledge) who are without the true
knowledge of God, even to all out of Christ: for as the Apostle Paul says, The
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 13. The worldly wise, or men only literally learned, are
incapable of such Doctrines; for St. Paul says of such, that God will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to ^ought the understanding of the
prudent; and as it were, looks about him, and cries out, Where is the wise?
Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.

And it is certain, that the profound Rabbis and Philosophers require a sign,
and seek after wisdom; that is, such as is but humane or sensual, carnal and
devilish, Iam. 3. 15. and therefore if Christ crucified be preached, he is to
the Jews (and most learned men) a stumbling block, and unto the Gentiles
foolishness. And St. John says of those great and learned men of the Jews,
that they plainly expressed so much; Do any of our rulers believe on him? no,
no; they did not, nor could not; they wanted the seeing eye, and hearing ear
to know and receive him; for had they known, they would not have crucified the
Lord of Life.

T^ese labors then are fit indeed, and only fit for such as are weak in
themselves, poor and despised of the world, yet called of God, and precious,
because they hold out Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.
24. and of a truth, the great, and the wise men, nor the learned, are not
called (or very few of them) to the knowledge of God by the Gospel, and
thereupon unfit for such spiritual doctrine: nay is it not true, as the Apostle
says? You see your calling brethren; how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak
things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of
the world, and things that are despised God has chosen; yea, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.

And therefore to you, even to all you whose life is hid with Christ in God,
The seed of Abraham, children of faith, and of the promises, begotten and
descended of the blood and seed Royal, is this piece of Heavenly directions
presented, who are experienced and builded upon the Rock Jesus Christ, and who
know what that Annihilation, Mortification and Self-denial is, which is taught
in these Sermons; and by Christ was also wrought in the Author himself, and
other^; and tends to the confusion of the Mystical Babel in men's spirits, so
strongly erected in men's ^earts, so that very few yet scarce know truly, what
the confounding of that language means in themselves.

Oh how rare, how precious, how excellent and sweet is this spiritual,
practical, experimental life? but where to be found? where are the living
Monuments of it, and where are the Books of it? where are those Choice ones
that know it and do it? How few in these days (though Christians in profession)
do press toward the mark for the price of the high calling, and who act true
Mortification? How few enjoy those true and sure treasures, pleasures,
raptures, riches and possessions which are in Christ? How few do discern the
true way to that High, Rich, Supereminent life? But indeed few are the
Preachers of it, and few be the Laborers in this harvest: Oh! Therefore seeing
the harvest is great, and the laborers few, how should we incessantly pray,
that the Lord would send ^orth such Spiritual and Mortified laborers into his
harvest?

But what may be the cause of this paucity or scarceness? certainly it is because
the practical part and the contemplative also, are clean contrary to flesh and
blood, unpleasant to the carnal man: few men desire to take up, much less to
bear the cross of Christ, which is the only way thereunto: and if men travel
not in the right way, how can they come to their journeys end themselves? or
how can they direct or encourage others to enter into it?

Oh! this great Idol, corrupted self, is too much served and worshipped: Men
are lovers of themselves more then of God: very few practice now answerable to
the Primitive Christians, who delighted in self-denial, and spiritual love:
very few prize the cross of Christ in themselves, but rather despise it: we
ascend not, nor set our feet aright on those six steps ascending up to the
Throne of Grace, Peace and Rest, truly and lively explained in this book (to
wit) 1. Condemnation. 2. Annihilation. 3. Abdication. 4. Indifferency. 5.
Conformity. 6. Union or Deiformity, the very Throne it self; and compared by
the Author (as you shall find in this book) to the six steps leading up to
Solomon's Glorious Throne.

Where are the men now, who desire to climb these steps? but generally all men
account them mighty difficult and painful, and therefore decline them: men
rather descend them then seek to ascend: how low, and how poorly do most men
(yea most Professors) live? how bound up to the world? they live altogether
unto pleasures or profits, and to themselves, not unto the Lord: and yet it is
certain, He that will be my disciple, must deny himself, and take up his Cross:
Actions not forced or compulsotory, but free and voluntary: few now seek the
glory of God, or the good of others; but mind themselves, love themselves,
provide for themselves, so that they are rivetted into, and fastened unto the
earth: Is this to live by faith? to live to Christ? Can such men say, I dye
daily? with the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. or, I am crucified to the world, and the
world unto me? or can they justify that they live not, but Christ lives in
them? or can they plead that they have crucified the old man; with the
affections and lusts thereof? have these men abstained (though it may be from
outward fleshly lusts, yet not) from those spiritual wickednesses in high
places, which also war against the soul? O for shame! is this to live as Christ
lived? and to do as ^e did? Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him who judges
righteously: And even hereunto are ye called, because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an ensample, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23.

Those Primitive Christians, those precious jewels of God, whose souls are
bound up in the bundle of life, they counted all but as loss and dross, and
dung, to gain the knowledge of Christ and him crucified: they in the first
place sought the Kingdom of heaven, and its righteousness: they took the
Kingdom of heaven by violence, and these violent ones took it by force: Oh
admirably active and passive men? of whom the world was not worthy; they were
afflicted, persecuted, tormented, who counted it their joy to suffer for
Christ: they went to their Rest, through the Cross, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his name: Those were they that counted not
anything, no not their lives too dear for Christ, and yet in all their
sufferings, went off Conquerours: these found that pearl, slighted all, and
parted with all to get this pearl: Behold, here is the faith and patience of
the Saints, Rev. 13. 9.

And of this Author we may say, he was one that sought after wisdom, and found
it, for he knew the merchandise of it to be better then the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold, Prove. 1. 4. and 8. And he would
often say, that he desired to be acquainted with men who had experience of
Christ, rather then men of notions or speculations, that desired to act more
then to talk; and he did in his public preaching averr it, that though they
were never so mean, poor, and despised by the world, yet if they were but
acquainted with such experimental truths as these, they were more welcome to
him then so many Princes and Potentates; and we hope his labors of the like
stamp, will find the like welcome with such as are experienced and practiced in
these spiritual truths: And to such Auditors he desired to preach to, and be
acquainted with, that he might confirm them in the grace of God. We may say
here of him, and of such high-raised truths, as the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 28. 9,
10. Whom shall we teach knowledge, and whom shall we make to understand
doctrine? those that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts; for
precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little and there a little.

And such was the counsel of the Author, when any came to him, either ignorant,
or full of literal knowledge, who usually are full of questions: yet are also
very ignorant (says he) as to Self-denial, Annihilation and Resignation, which
his discerning spirit soon perceived in reasoning with them: sometimes
alleging to them that of Pythagoras, that when any Scholar came to enter
himself under him, he would enjoin them to ask no question in three years, so
that he might teach them as he found them able to receive; and at three years
end, they might then ask him any question, but then they had none to ask, for
he had satisfied all their doubts.

Or suppose (said he) there were before you as much meat as you could eat in a
month, if I should enjoin you to eat it all at a meal or two, instead of
nourishing, it would destroy you: whereas if I gave you a month to eat it,
taking your meals orderly and digesting them, it would do you much good,
nourish, refresh and strengthen.

And a narrow-mouthed vessel, which holds much in the continent, you may fill
it with precious liquor, and so preserve it, if you pour it in as it can
receive: but if ye pour in too fast, ye spil and spoil that which hereafter may
support your life: Nor do we put young Scholars to learn Latin or Greek at the
first entrance, but we instill learning by degrees, as they are able to suck in
and receive: with these and such like expressions would he persuade them to
wait with patience, till God were pleased to reveal: and the same counsel do we
give to all who cannot be satisfied presently with these things, but let them
read, ponder and wait; and those that hunger and thirst shall be filled.

And truly, they are but (as St. John and Jeremy say) One of a City, and two of
a Tribe, that shall come to Zion, who can attain this salvation; few there be
that enter into this strait gate: For wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads unto destruction, and many there be that go in thereat: but strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it.

And in reading these Sermons, you may observe the Author cuts his way clear
between; First, the mere Rationalist, who will square out God according to his
own reason, or else he is no God: and herein also including the Formalist: and
Secondly, the Familist, who says he lives above Ordinances, and so has quite
left all Religion, and by degrees has turned licencious Ranter: which are the
main points now in agitation, and the two great rocks against which so many
(either against the one, or the other) have split their vessels in these days:
But the Author so clearly distinguishes, that he misseth both Rocks, and
carries on the truth Amain with Top-sail against all battery and opposition.

Here ye shall find the vail rent, and the last shadows vanishing, and some
Rays of the glory of the holiest of all appearing, being hid from ages and
generations, but in these last times, upon the bringing in the fullness of the
Gentiles, and for the calling of the Jews, more brightly breaking forth;
revealing the mystery of the Scriptures, or the marrow of the true word of God,
which endures forever: wherein the Life and Spirit of the Holy Word is clearly
distinguished from the outward and killing letter, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual; that all those errors, differences, revilings and bitter
censurings, so much broken forth of late, occasioned by resting in the letter,
may now vanish and make haste before the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his coming, whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor,
and gather the wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire: And will baptize his own people with his own Spirit, with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire.

Howbeit, we speak wisdom only among them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom
of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, which comes to naught: But we
speak the wisdom of God in a MYSTERY, even the hidden wisdom, which God has
ordained before the world unto our glory, which none of the princes of this
world knew, 1 Cor. 2.

It is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for those that love him,
having revealed them unto us by his spirit. And if in this life only we had
hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. We are fools
for Christ's sake, but ye are wise: we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are
honorable, but we are despised, 1 Cor. 4. 10. Let no man deceive himself; if
any man among you seems to be wise in this world (or to himself) let him
become a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of the
CROSS is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved, it is
the power of God, verse 18. But the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and
the weakness of God is stronger then men, verse 25. He that is spiritual
judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, verse 15.

The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

And the anointing which you have received of him, abides in you, and ye need
not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you all things,
and is truth and is no lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him, 1 John 2. 27.

If any man have an ear to hear, let him hear, Verse 10.

Now unto him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, Jude 24. and to
do exceeding abundantly for you above all that we can ask or think, according
to the mighty power which works in you: unto him be glory and majesty,
dominion and power in the Church by Jesus Christ, thoughout all ages, world
without end, Ephesians. 3. 20.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Spirit, be with you all. Amen.

Rapha Harford.

An Approbation.
THe publisher of this Book is desirous, that it might pass with some
testimonial into the world; but it needs not testimony from man; for I find it
impressed with such a Divine Image, and bearing such clear lineaments of
Heaven-born truths, as testify it to be of God: and therefore strongly
bespeaks us to receive it, as into our houses, so chiefly into our hea^ts.

I dare assure thee, Reader, if thou have received a spiritual relish, thou
shall taste much sweetness in it; And if thou can rejoice to be laid low, and
made nothing, that God may be exalted and made all in all, then shall thou find
here that which will help thy joy: and let me entreat thee, That as thou
read the Book, to read also thine own heart; and by this thou may come to
find thine heart in the Book, and the Book in thine heart, and will make thee
fall upon thy face with that Idiot and worship God, and report; God is in this
word of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

Some are casting off the letter of the Scripture, others resting in it; some
are despising Ordinances, others overvaluing them. I find the Author walking
warily betwixt both, giving due honor to the letter and the form, while he is
exalting the Power and the Spirit incomparably above both: And thou shall find
him laying the Ax of truth, and the Edge of his Spirit, to that cursed Root of
Self-Approbation in man, which is daily bringing forth such bitter fruits in
his heart, in his life, and in the world; and yet remains unseen and untouched
in the hearts of many that would be thought to be arrived at the brink of
perfection, while they scarce understand wherein the great imperfection of the
natural man does lie.

Some expressions, in thy reading, may seem harsh or obscure to thee, as they
did to me; but if thou comparest one place with another, thou will clearly see
what the Author means, and shall find his whole discourse to have a Sacred
tendency to lay man low: and so to put him into a Rich capacity of coming in to
the near^st fellowship with God: so that while some seek to build up themselves
upon the deceitful foundation of corrupted nature, and struggle (though in
vain) in the light and power of it, to advance toward perfection; He is
planting his spiritual Artillery against it, to throw it into the dust* that
man may come to be surely bottomed upon the Righteousness, Power and Wisdom of
Jesus Christ, which is the only foundation that God has laid, and the Gospel
revealed:

And in some things you must give him a latitude to his judgment, as thou
desire to thine own in other: If thou find some truths delivered and
enforced with reiterated expressions, consider they were delivered for the most
part in several Congregations; so that in some particulars, the same things may
be reinforced, but yet with more lustr^ to make Truth more clear: And that
thou have them as they were Preached and Pressed in Sermons, to the Capacity
and Conscience of his Auditors, and taken from his mouth by a Notary; yet
afterward owned and approved by himself, and compared with his own notes: Read,
Consider and Try, and hold fast that which is good.

March 26. 1653. Tho. Brooks. M. Barker.


Imprimatur,

Joseph Caril.
December. 6. 1652.
In remembrance of the Author, and upon view of his Essigies and SERMONS.
HIS ICON curiously engraved, sets forth
His outward feature, not his inward worth:
His body was his souls dark vail and skreen,
So that his excellent substance lies unseen:
The hearing-ear, and seeing-eye, are blessings rare;
He furnished was with both, for ^was his care
To preach and practice true Self-denial,
Whereof these labors give sufficient trial.
In's la^er days, while here he had abode,
His life was joined and hid with Christ in God:
How others might this spiritual method know,
His Life and Doctrine in this book do show.
True godliness is a MYSTERY long concealed,
But truly in these Sermons it is revealed:
What good thou find, let not man be praised,
But to the Lord, let all your hearts be raised.
L. D.

The Titles, Contents, and Texts of both parts of this Book.
Christ the true Salt of the Earth. IN one Sermon Preached at Islington
Publike-meeting place, on Mark 9. 50. Have salt in your selves. The Star in the
East, leading to the true Messiah. The Mystery of Christ crucified. The
spiritual crucifying the true Messiah. In two Sermons at a private Meeting at
Kensington near London, on 1 Cor. 2. 2. But I determined to know nothing among
you save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Of suffering and reigning with Christ.
In eight Sermons at Kensington Public meeting place, on Romans 8. 17. If so be
that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified together. The dead and
killing letter, the Spirit and the Life. Shadows vanishing, some rays of glory
appearing. In four Sermons at a private meeting at Kensington, on Josh. 16. 15,
16. And Caleb said, he that smites Kiriathsepher, and takes it, to him will I
give Achsah my daughter to wife, etc.
The second part.
Militia Coelestis, or the heavenly Host. In two Sermons on Psalm. 68. 17 At
Giles Cripplegate, London. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands of
angels; the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place. Where Christ
feeds, and where his flock rests. In two Sermons on Cant. 1. 7. at Highgate
Publick-meeting place. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest,
where thou make thy ^^ocks to rest at noon? for why, etc. Of eating Hidden
Manna. The substance of a Sermon preached at a Lecture in the Old Jury London,
on Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Hidden Manna.
Covetousness Anatomized, or the generality of Covetousness. The substance of
several Sermons, preached at Putney near London, on Ier. 6. 13. From the least
of them even unto the greatest, every one is given to Covetousness, and from
the Prophet, even to the Priest, every one deals falsely. The PLUS ULTRA of
the Creatures. A brief Exposition on Psalm. 148. spoken privately in Old Street
London. Milk for babes, meat for strong men. The substance of several Sermons
at Kensington Public meeting place, on Luke 2. 40. And the child grew, and
waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
The Mystery, or the Life and Marrow of the Scriptures. An Exposition in two
Sermons on Exodus 3. the 6. first verses, at a private meeting at Kensington;
Moses kept the flock of Iethro his father in Law, Priest of Midian, and he led
the flock to the backside of the desert: -- And the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto him in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush, etc. True and divine
Exorcism, or the Devil conjured by Jesus Christ. The substance of several
Sermons preached at Kensington Public meeting place on Mark 1. 25, 26. And
Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him: and when the
unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.
All power given to Jesus Christ, in heaven and earth. In one Sermon preached at
a Private meeting in Old-street London, on Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to
me in heaven and in earth.
Whereunto is added, some Collections by Dr. Everard out of some Divine
Authors, as being things suitable to his preaching, and giving further light
each to other: viz. To him who is in the light.
1. Dionysius the Areopagite his mystical Divinity. 2. Certain grave and
notable sayings in Latin and English. 3. Sayings of a certain Divine of great
note and name. 4. A lovely glass or example of our Lord Jesus Christ, taken out
of Taulerus his works. 5. Another short instruction out of the same Author. 6.
A short Dialogue between a learned Divine and a Beggar.
TO THE READER OF Dr. Everards SERMONS.
Christian Reader,
AS there were many causes of delay in publishing these Sermons, so there are
also in bringing them to light now: The time when they were preached was in the
days of the last Bishops, who endeavored the strangling of many Truths in the
birth, as Pharaoh the children of Israel, lest they should increase and
multiply, to discover and suppress their deeds of darkness; to that end
High-Commissioning many precious and bright-shining lights, whereof this Author
was in the number, laying (as their manner was) many foul things to their
charge, which they never knew (as David said of himself, by his enemies)
thereby making a great noise to amuze the people, in meddling with such men, and
to color their wicked designs (for the suppression of light, and men of
light) as if they were guilty of foul Doctrine, or foul life, or both; and
though they could prove nothing against them, yet keeping them in their Courts,
if possible, to aw and vex them, if they could not suppress them.

The Author hereof being spotless in either, especially since God in a special
and extraordinary manner appeared to him, in him, in his latter days; for he
conf^ssed, with the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.
that in the days of his former ignorance and vanity, he walked as other
Gentiles, and as men living without God in the world, in the vanity of his
mind, having his understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
because of the blindness of his heart; which no doubt our merciful and
ready-pardoning God had forgiven, though men could not, or would not forget,
which he regarded not much, God speaking peace and par^on to his soul.

But afterward he desired nothing more then to bring in others, to see what he
saw, and to enjoy what he enjoyed, and to clear truth to them in either
respect; he oftentimes averring, as to others, so to the Publisher hereof, that
his trouble was not for self-sufferings, but that truth should be any way
obstructed or defamed through him.

And he having once obtained of their Court, to refer the accusations in either
kind, but especially for Doctrine, and for Conventicles (as they called them)
kept by him: to reason out his judgment, and what he had delivered, with four
Bishops, members thereof, or any three of them: In this he rejoiced so, as in
nothing more, so he expressed (and we judge, and not without good ground) he
taking abundance of pains and travel to obtain this meeting; and several times
procured two, but never could get three of them together to confer with, and to
give an account of whatever had been delivered by him, which That he might
vindicate Truth much hungered and thirsted for; what the cause may be of such
backwardness in them, we leave to others to judge of.

But it may be if they would have met, they might have learned that which they
never knew: For as truth is strongest, so God had wonderfully come into him,
and declared himself by him, in his late years, and made him (as it were) a
Sampson, against the numerous Philistims, and a David against the huge and
mighty Goliahs of those times: for even then, in his days, some of his
acquaintance and followers, who indeed were very knowing men, and pretended
High things, as indeed they were, but abused by them to great lie^nciousness,
making even those precious (...), an occasion to the flesh; insomuch that he
(...) to threaten prosecution of them to (...), for their vile words and
actions, if they so persisted, after so often Admonition: and he forb^d their
following or hearing of him, except they came with affection to truth, and with
desire to be built up in the most holy faith: yet as he was a man of presence
and Princely behavior and deportment, and fit to accompany such: so he was
also familiar even with the meanest, and if willing to be taught, he was as
willing to instruct and teach them; and they were (upon this account) more
welcome to him then Lords or Princes, imitating the humble carriage of his Lord
and Master; he not thinking it any disparagement to accompany with the worst
and lowest of men, so he might do them good; for (he knew) he was not sent to
call the righteous, but the sinners: nor to heal the whole, but the sick: not
the Iustic^^ries, and those, who though they may be large in confession of sin,
yet really see but little in themselves, and less to repent of.

Insomuch, that those who were about him, either in sickness or health, would
often say, they gat more good instruction from him in discourse, then by many
Sermons of other men's, he being still forward, if they were backward, to take
occasions to communicate some Divine truths, so that he won their attention to
hearken to him; as Christ did Mary's, who chose that better part, Luke 10. 42.
which should never be taken from her: And when they were backward to enquire
of him, he would move them to ask him questions, if they had any doubts or
questions to propound then; for (says he) when I am gone, many will miss me;
therefore I desire you would make use of me, and get what you can by me while I
am here; and the more you so do, the more welcome; but Christ, I know, will be
a Teacher to those that are his. He was also a man of a choice, courageous and
discerning spirit, endowed with skill and depth of learniag, judgment and
experience to manage what God had (though but of late) revealed to him, (as he
often would say) affirming, he was now ashamed of his former knowledge,
expressions and preachings, even since he commenced Dr. in Divinity; although
he was known to be a very great Scholar, and as good a Philosopher, few or none
exceeding him: yet when he came to know himself, and his own heart; and also to
know Jesus Christ, and the Scriptures, more then Grammatically, literally or
Academically, viz. experimentally; he then counted all those things (even all
his acquired parts and humane abilities) loss and dung, for the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8.
and him c^ucified, not only externally, but particularly, buried and risen
again in himself; and for that blessed sight, to see how the Scriptures were
daily ful^illing in himself and others; they concerning as much all times, all
men, and all ages, as those of whom they were the history, wherein lies (as in
these Sermons he shows) the chief excellency, fatness and marrow of the
Scriptures, and without which the word is of so little use to us, that to us it
is not the word of God; which the Apostle says, Heb. 4. Heb. 4. 12.
is quick and powerful, and mighty in operation, sharper then a two edged
sword, and peircing between even the joints and marrow: as he also largely in
several parts of this Book shewe^h; Gal. 6. 14.
And this was the alone knowledge, whereby he was crucified to the world and to
himself.

And thereby his depth in learning and Philosophy being sanctified, they so
much the more confirmed and centred his spirit, they brought him to his heaven,
home and rest, even into that ever blessed union and communion with God, which
before was but skin-deep learning and Philosophy (as he termed it;) And the
couragiousness of his Spirit was such, when he was but a bare, literal,
University Preacher (as he afterward still called himself) that he was the
only man that opposed, preached against, and held it out to the utmost,
against the late Kings matching with the Infanta of Spain, when others durst
but whisper their consciences and thoughts: he chose Texts on purpose, to show
the unlawfulness, and the great sin of matching with Idolaters, being often
committed to prison for it, when he was Preacher at Martins in the Fields; and
then by the next Sabbath day one Lord or other would beg his liberty of the
King, and presently, no sooner out, but he would go on and manage the same
thing more fully, notwithstanding all the power of the Bishops, being committed
again and again; being, as I heard him say, six or seven times in Prison;
insomuch, they coming so often t^ King James about him, he began to take more
notice of him, asking, What is this Dr. Ever-out? his name (says he) shall be
Dr. Never-out.

Then began the Bishops for this, to be his (...) adversaries, fetching him up
into their High Commission, and never left prosecu^ing him, until they had took
from him his Benefice, being four hundred pounds a year: And at his second
convening thither, spoken of before, (...) threatened him, he would bring him to
a morsel of ^read, and all because he could not have his will of him, to make
him stoop and bow to him: And where is the man that has adventured (for all
their forward and great professions) so far as he has done, in discharge of
duty and conscienc^, because he thought he was bound thereto by command from
God! And yet for all this (as he said of himself) ^his he did by a mere power
of self, from natural abilities, and from the power of the old man, suggesting
and working in him, and carrying it out with much boldness, m^gnanimity and
true zeal (as to man's judgment) Oh! what great things may men do this way,
externally, and have no principle of grace, or true fear of God! yea not only
to the loss of Means and Liberty, but to the loss of their heads and lives, and
merely out of Vainglory, or some such Self-interest; 1 Pet. 4. 15.
and herein truly is little or no difference at all between them and Sufferers
as evil doers.

And in reading these Sermons, we shall find those things made good, and we
^re sure the experienced Christian would not censure us, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
though we thus judge: but herein judge even as the Author, and as we have
found in our own knowledge and experience; for he that has a true sight of his
own heart, by a reflection of the sight of the brightshining face of Jesus
Christ upon his soul, will set to his seal, that man's heart is the most cunning
and deceitfullest jugler in the world, and seal to that Scripture, Ier. 17.
Jer. 17. 9.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? and that none
but I the Lord can search the hear, and can try the reins.

Concerning the discerning spirit of this present Author, if we shall relate
but one passage, spoken confidently by him (after God had Opened his eyes) thou
may suppose there was (...) discerning spirit in him (as it were) to
prophecy; My friends (says he) remember and m^rk well my words; you now see
the Bishops high, great and swelling, (...) all the power both of Church and
State into their (...); but if ever you live to see a (...) Parliament in
E^gland, expl^i^ing his meaning thus, I mean a Parliament having power in
themselves, so that the King may not ((...) has) at his pleasure break them
off, which will be ^re long, you shall see the utter down^^l of (...): This
being spoken near two years before ever it came, when there was ^o sign of any
such thing; O Sir^ replied his friend (then present) how can such a thing be?
they have now (...) so much power, and are (...) by Law, that such a thing will
^hake the very roo^s and (...) of the Nation; perhaps they may have their wings
(...), and their power weakened and their great Lordl^ness taken away; but they
themselves to be (...) taken away, seems to be impossible: Well (says he) yet
for all (...), take special notice, what I say, and we both may live to (...)
it; That the very race and function of Bishops will be (...) overthrown.

Not long after, he was himself fetched up again by them into their
High Commission, and kept there depending, till the preparations hereunto began
to work, viz. The rising of the Scots, etc. so that he would then say, The work
was begun; and I do observe (says he) by their coun^enances, their hearts
fail; for I see very Lead in their eyes; But there his cause was depending even
till he fell sick, and he lived to see Strafford and Canterbury put under the
black Rod, and then he was gathered to his Fathers.

Besides this, take knowledge of one thing more; when by some religious Lords,
and men of worth and ability, ^illiam Laud, the Archbishop, was much solicited
to give way for Dr. Everard to preach to clear himself, as to others, so
chiefly to the Ministers of England, which was offered to be done by a Latin
sermon, once a week in London; wherei^ he would have unfolded his whole
judgment, and what God had taught him, wherein he was never sparing,
especially when he met with Auditors, who were not too wise to learn, as (he
would say) usually your bare litteral-knowing men are: they esteeming it a very
great disparagement to be ignorant of any thing: when indeed they are (for all
their pretended great knowledge) really ignorant of all saving truth, Ephesians. 4.
21.
as it is in Jesus.

These great men also promised (if this request might be g^anted) they would
have undertaken to pay a ^00 l. a year, to whatsoever (...) he would appoint;
but it could not be obtained, whereby was prevented (we suppose) as useful a
pi^ce of work, as this Age (...), or is like as yet. Take one passage or two
more; he giving his attendance several Terms at the High Commission, expecting
Articles against him, which were long preparing; and he growing impatient under
such extreme delays, waited an opportunity, and before the Court addressed his
speech to the Archbishop, saying to this purpose, My Lord, I am forced to
complain, I suffering more then is (...) for any Subject to bear; I have given
attendance from Court to Court, and from Term to Term, above this half year,
expecting Articles against me: If you have any, or can make any, let me see
them, and let me not be kept waiting here for nothing; and if you have nothing
against me, let me be discharged; or else if you will not, let me save my
attendance until they be ready, and upon the least notice from your meanest
Officer, I will be ready to appear. And I conceive this is but a reasonable
motion; for this unnecessary charge and attendance is burthensom to me: To
which motion replied the Archbishop; Dr. Everard you need not be so hasti^; do
you suppose we make you wait here for nothing? your Articles are almost ready,
and (...) warrant you, you shall have enough of them: Replied the Doctor,
Enough of them, my Lord; what mean you? Do you know John Everard, better then
John Everard knows himself? Enough of them, my Lord! do you censure me, before
ye hear my cause? I had thought you had sat here to do justice, and is it
justice to prejudge me? whatever tales or informations you may have against me,
do you know how I may clear my self? I wonder at your censure; and being
som^what moved, said again, shall I have Enough of them, my Lord? I tell you, I
have several things that I know will bear me out; That is well, said the
bishop: what are they? I Will tell you one or two of them; the first is my
Innocence, and another is my Poverty. My Innoc^ncy, in that I know what I have
either s^id or done, I know what I have taught and by the help of God, I shall
be able to make it good; however, you may misunderstand me: for I have well
advised and considered, what I have d^livered publicly, before I durst
deliver it as my Masters e^rand and embassy. Secondly, for my Poverty, I know
poverty is A^mor of proof against the (...) of this Court. I want that which is
the support of your Count, (Money) for I must be my own Advo^^te, my own
Doctor, my own Proctor, my own Spokesman; all you (...) (looking toward the
Doctors and P^octors) I have no money for you: but some expense I must be at,
coming by water: but for other disbursements, I can part with none, do what ye
will with me: and I know you care not for such Customers: Well Doctor, well,
replied the Bishop, do you know where you are? I do, and have well considered
before I spoke: Have you? Well Messenger, take him aside, we have other
business; Pray withdraw: He there waiting till the Court was rising, the
Messenger urging him to go away with him; he said, what to do? Sir; you are
committed; You are mistaken, replied the Do^tor, I will first speak to the
Bishop; My Lord, said he, The Messenger would have me to Prison: is it your
pleasure I should be committed? yea Doctor, you are committed for your bold
carriage, and for af^ronting the Court in your language, most grossly, and not
to be born: So the Court being rising, the Messenger jogging him to come away
he said* but do you hear, my Lord, are you in good earnest? must I go to prison
indeed? I think you are but in jest: Well Doctor, replied the Bishop, you were
too too ^awcy, but we will pass it by for this time, expecting better carriage
from you hereafter.

And coming another day in the morning to the Bishops house, privately to speak
with him, many waiting in the Hall, before he was ready, he made known his
desire to the Secretary; but it seemed the Bishop had no mind to speak with
him, and there he waited; s^veral (...) being called in and disp^tchd, he
thought himself Slighted; and spoke again to the Secretary to mind the Bishop
of him; at last he told him, h^ had told him twice, and he thought the Bishop
would not speak with him, for he seemed displeased with him for naming him;
thereupon the Doctor still waiting and seeing the last man called in, went
after him without order; the Bishop staring him in the face, said, How now Dr.
Everard, what do you mean by this? who sent for you? no, my Lord, replied the
Doctor, I might (I see) have waited long enough, before I should be sent for;
but it is my d^ty to wait upon you without sending for: And then further urged
his expectation of his Articl^s, and his trouble in attending, and plainly told
him, he looked for no favor at h^s hands: let him have but Iustic^ (which he
had little hope of, he had so little already) and he desired no more; and
withal, told the Bishop of his (...) him, and that if he would boast of his
standing in his (...), he was not behind him; but if he would have s^attered
and complied as some did, he might have been a Bishop as well as he, and that
he knew well enough; whereat the Bishop stormed, and flung away in a rage. But
to go on.

But such was his exp^rience of truth and error, and also in distinguishing
the spirit and the life from the dead and killing letter, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
having always had the same searching spirit, as in other things, so in
divi^ity chiefly; so that he had run through most men's judgments that differ,
to discover and divide between truth and error: and had it so pleased God he
had lived till now, he would have been of singular use, as a means and
instrument in the hand of the Lord, Exodus 26. 33. 2 Cor. 3. 14.
to have drawn aside the curtain from before the glory of the Holy of holies,
and to remove the dark vail still upon the heart, and the scales of ignorance
from the eyes; for therein was his affection, his excellency, and the delight
of his heart above all things, he giving l^rge testimony to the truth of the
Letter, and yet making it but the Letter, thereby giving the lie to any who did
or shall ignorantly charge him with Familism; but firmly est^blishing that, he
then labored to draw men higher, that they might (...), as he clearly saw most
men did, and so do still: So also, he would have had marv^llous faculty in
reconciling differences between honest and well meaning Christians, and would
have clearly told them, what they both mean^, and how they might agree and
reconcile; whereas since through misunderstanding, they have quarrelled
extremely, though but about shadows, for the most part, both meaning well, but
through ill managing, have abused and reproched each other most unchristianly,
and making the difference more and wider then i^ was or is: So that a man may
ask, as the Apostle does in another case, 1 Cor. 6. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 5.
Is there not a wise man among you? but brother goes to Law, and cont^ndeth
with Brother; nay, what censuring, and bitter (...) have they searched for, and
invented to repro^h each other, even before the ungodly, to make one another
(...) to all men? witness those (...) of mischief by Mr. ^dwards and others,
who intended and promised such fruit every month; a most wicked, bold and
presumptuous allusion to the tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God,
spoken of Rev. 22. Rev. 22. 2
but it is far better that the Lord has cu^bed and prevented such intentions.

These Sermons we had much ado to keep out of the Bishops fingers; the
Pursevant upon search for any thing of his, missed them very narrowly: But God
preserves and brings to light in his due time, all things, (designed for
use) according to his own purpose: And these had been communicated sooner, but
that we waited for a fit time, we conceiving time now more ripe, and more fit
to propagate such spiritual and more raised truths; Professors of Religion
formerly living more in externals; having not so deep a sight of such things as
these, Ephesians. 6. 12.
and of the greatness of heart-sins, and of those de^ilements within, and of
those secret wickedensses in high places, which the Auther setting himself
against, (...) laboring with all his might, to unb^ttom (...) and litteral
Professors from their false foundations, whom he observed and discovered to
build the main stress of their Religion upon Form, (...), and generals, and
very few of them seldom ever came to see the disorder of the inward frame of
their spirits, and of the defilements of the inner man: yet he finding most men
approving and commending (though b^t such) yea most Ministers and Preachers,
sowing pillows under the Elbows, even of such Professors, Eze^. 13. 18.
especially (...) withal they lived inoffensively to men in their lives, an^
withal retaining and expressing a (...) esteem of them, they thought them
goodly converts, and they passed for (...) Christians; for those that put not
into their mouth^r, they prepare war against them. Mich. 3. 5.


Therefore seldom or never never of late did our Author go their way and tread
their baths, but purposely avoided them; which paths (the saw) led men to be at
best but novices in Christianity, and to be fed always with milk, being not
able to (...) stomachs would so turn at (...): which state also they might
come, and yet be nothing at all; therefore his labor and endeavor was, to lay
the foundation, and to root them sure and steadfast, and then to build them up,
and to cause them to grow up, and come on to perfection, which they cannot but
do, if truly ^ounded upon the true cornerstone Jesus Christ; he labored to
sit them for strong meat, as the Ap^stle says, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Heb. 6. 1, 2.
Leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfect^on, not laying again the foundation of Repentance, Faith, Baptism, and
laying on of hands, of the Resurrection, and of the eternal judgment: but as
the Angel commanded John To come up hither, and to look for those (...), those
(...) and full things, that w^ may come to be in the spirit upon the Lords day,
as John was; which things are held forth to all those that hunger and thirst
for them, Rev. 1. 10.
and who cannot be satisfied without them, and to none else.

Besides all this, the importunity and solicitations of many Scholars, and
other Christians, from time to time^ who having experience of these practical
things in themselves, who (though they want much of the Doctors schollership
and parts) yet deemed them worthy the publishing, and have now prevailed to
communicate them publicly; assuring themselves, that those who have the
things themselves in them, will not be captious to spy out faults, but receive
in good part what is well intended.

Moreover, another main reason of deferring them no longer, is the abuse of
many truths, more broken forth of late them fo^merly: many of those Diamonds of
truth, being therein cleared and polished, which have been so much abused and
abased; either by those filthy dream^rs, who have (as to men) woefully mistaken,
corrupted, and defiled many glorious truths, and by their false and devilish
conclusions, have not only given occasion, but a justification to defile the
^lesh, falsely pretending that truth allows it: though truth (in it self) cannot
be corrupted or defiled: or else by those blind Seers of (...) times, who yet
calling themselves Prophets, but are not, do as Isaiah says, Isa. 5. 20. Isa.
5. 20.
call truth error, and error truth; call darkness light, and light darknes^;
evil good, and good evil, etc. here also thou shall find many of those Diamonds
and pr^cious T^uths taken up from under their feet, having been by them so
trodden in the dirt (as to men I say still, they not knowing the worth of them)
by their vi^ifyings, and by their foul names of Error, Heresy, Familsm, etc.
because they knew not a true and right Diamond; or if some, yet not all, and
them they knew not, they presently vilify as cheating and counterfeit; indeed
few can know them from such, or from dirt, they have so daubed and trampled
them in the mi^e; yet here thou shall find them made orient, spa^kling, and
refulgent, as ^it to be numbered among those foundation precious stones, whereof
the New Ierusal^m is built, Rev. 20. And those blind Seers pourtraitured to the
life, and their seemingly-holy disguises pulled off.

And yet in all this we have said commendatory of the Author, Christian
friends, do not think that we have gone about to praise or li^t up (Man) or
that we would have you fasten your eyes on any creature whatever; No, no, God
forbid; far, far be any such thing from our thoughts; for what is man? Isa. 2.
22.
or wherein is he to be accounted of? neither was it the Authors practice at
all, to lift up (Man) neither do we here present him as a perfect man; but with
Eliah, as the Apostle says of him, James 5. 17. James 5. 17.
He was a man subject to like passions as we ar^: and with Lot, Abraham, David,
P^ul and Peter, Romans 7. 18.
he had his infi^mities; but he could say also with Paul, (...), me, that is in
my flesh, dwells no good thing, But I d^lig^t in the Law of God aft^r the
inward man; now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but s^^
that dwells in me; neither did he ascribe any good, either graces or gifts to
himself, but all to God; he would not set that crown upon his own head, or upon
the head of any creature, but with Paul confessed, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified
with Christ; Gal. 2. 20.
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me: And when God had
wrapped up his spirit in p^eaching, even, as it were, to behold himself in the
third heaven; yet he had that prick in the ^l^sh, which would cause him often
to say, even in public; Beloved, if at any time you find any good by me, or
see any truth more then you did before, or find your souls raised from death to
life; or the Cripple from his mothers womb healed and cured within you; or if
you see any grace, any gift in me, Acts 3. 12.
as Peter to the Jews, Ye men of Israel, why look ye on us so earnestly, as
though by our own power or holiness we had made this man walk: if you see in me
any good, know, that is none of mine, I dare not claim it, neither can any
creature claim it: But if you see in me or your selves any s^^, Romans 7. 20.
any evil that is most properly mine and yours; and yet it is not I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me: but all good is Gods; whatever it be that comes
under the notion of Good, under what name soever, it is Gods, and his only. So
that we have only hereby labored to set and six your eye on him, from whom
all excellencies slow, to see and behold the excellencies and virtues (not of
man) but of him who calls from darkness to light, Acts 26. 18.
from the power of Satan to God; and that you should wonder and be amazed that
the Almighty should stoop so low, as to work in men, and to communicate of his
own nature, and put ^orth his mighty workings in and through such poor nothings
as men are: And in this respect let no man ^ear to speak to the utmost freely
and fully of the Virtues, Excellencies and workings of the Lord in the hearts
of his people; for in them he displayes his glo^ies, they are his Sanctuary,
his Temple, in them he rests, as in his holy hill, where every one speaks of
his glory: Psalm. 26. 9.
and although these motions and mighty miracles be wrought in man, yet they are
not of man, or by man: Therefore let men (or whoever shall have occasion to
speak either of the dead, or of the living) but keep to this rule, and fix
their eye on him to whom all glory and praise is due, and then let them set
forth freely and fully whatever virtues, or what ever is praiseworthy in any
of the sons of men, thus far, made the sons of God; then they need never fear
to be charged with flattery or hope of rewards from men.

Let not (so far as lies in man) the graces of God, and his glorious working in
his Saints dye; no, not when they dye: (...) this is far from over- praising
the dead, or the (...), as the mistake has been; though man may, and must
return to his mother the Earth, and to his principle of dust, yet let the Lord
alone be exalted; and in this sense, spare not to speak out freely the virtues
and endowments of God in any man; although for the best of man or men, we must
say of them, with Daniel and other Saints; To us belongs nothing but shame
and confusion of face for ever; Dan. 9. 7.
but to the Lord honor and glory, mercy and forgiveness for over and ^ver. Let
no man appropriate to himself, or put upon others any good; for all good is
from God, and whatever is evil is man's; although naturally and generally men's
practices are quite otherwise, appropriating all good to themselves, and
nothing of evil; whereby the poor blind creature (Man) deludes his poor soul,
while he lives, or when he comes to dye; if the Lord do but speak to him as he
did to Job, then he finds quite contrary, that all evil is his, and no good at
all, and then he is amazed at himself and confounded.

And although it is heartily w^shed (if it had so pleased God) that the Author
had lived to see these Sermons in print, and some other pieces of his, as he
intended, but prevented by death: yet (as the proverb is) Seeing we cannot do
as we would, (...) us do we may: It Is pity these things should dye, and be
altogether obs^ured: there may be in them such an ap^^ door to some men, whom
the Lord has this way enlightened, and such hints given, as may lead them to
(...) things then these: yet thus much we assure you, (...) were in the Authors
hands a Considerable, and were perased over by himself, (...) who gave this
approbation of them, There is nothing in them but I own: he saying withal, That
writing of Sermons was a very great advantage; not only giving men account of
what was delivered many years after, when both the matter, the subject and
expressions were forgoten; But also (said he) it is a kind of immortalizing men's
labors (and the workings of God upon their spirits) to generations to come:
though they themselves dye, and are forgotten, yet their works may live and
remain: And if Writing be so, much more Printing, which makes them so common,
public and cheap, so that so many thousands do enjoy them; and many thousands
more might and would, were there not a common fault (especially of late) in
those that should disperse, sell or communicate them, and do not, or will no^,
either because of their particular dislikes, every one affecting, and will not
prefer any thing, but what su^s to their apprehensions: or else being tainted
with envy at others accep^ation and prosperity; whereby ab^ndance of precious
Books dye in obscurity; either lying by the walls, and rot, or turned to Wast
paper, being a just judgment of God upon persons and Traders, tainted with
envy, or affecting singularity; the fruits whereof this generation has deeply
tasted the bitterness of, and those that succeed are like to do much more,
except we repent and resolve amendment, beginning again to love and receive
each other in the truth, and bearing with what our selves at present see not;
Mat. 7. 2.
for you have found, that with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you again: but let us now learn that safe and sure rule, so much in these days
neglected, As ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them;
Mat. 7. 11.
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

It Is true, we know one main cause is fullness and over-abundance, whereby many
stomachs are cloyed; and indeed our full stomachs have loathed and turned
against abundance of precious hony-combs: but though this be one reason, yet
the two form^r may lead the van, as being chief ringleaders to this mischief.

But to conclude; for this Authors Sermons, thou must accept of these or none;
for here is all can be hoped for, or expected, we rather choosing to present
thee with all at once, then divided, in regard this Authors manner of teaching
was not in an ordinary way, whereby some things asserted may seem harsh or dark
to some, that so one part thereof may express and give light to another, he
insisting more fully in some Sermons then other; therefore judge not all,
until thou have read the work through, and pondered well with waiting on God
by prayer; for here are things worthy to be seriously weighed and waited for
till God reveal.

So we commit thee and them to him who is not tied to man's teachings, but is
able to teach without him; (and it is only be that teaches by him) according
to his most gracious promise in the new Covenant, I will be their God, and they
shall be my sons and daughters; Jer. 31. 33, 34.
and they shall not teach every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for
they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest.

Farewell. Yours, desiring if by any means he might serve you in the Gospel, and
help you on to perfection. R. H.

TESTIMONIES Freely given By Mr. John Webster, and by Mr. John Cardell, in
their public Preaching at A^hallowes Lombard Street, LONDON.
By Mr. JOHN WEBSTER.
AND therefore I cannot but take notice, and I much wonder at; That precious
Book lately printed, which it may be, many of you have not taken notice of,
being Sermons preached by Dr. Everard, called Gospel-Treasures opened; wherein,
he among other Divine things expresses this point in several of his Sermons,
most Divinely and Elegantly; and I could not but recommend it to you, having my
self found so much sweetness in it; and I wonder much at the Heavenliness and
sweetness of his spirit; for to me it is as clear a piece as any I know extant;
Setting forth (as to this particular) the infinite and deep condescension of
the Son of God, being God equal with his Father, yet to stoop lower and beneath
the unexpressible misery of man, to bring him up again. He there showing, that
herein lay the great and unconceivable sufferings of Christ, far beyond his
external sufferings of whipping, reviling, spitting upon, crowning with Thorns
or his crucifying upon the Cross, and the like; all being far below and not
worth the naming the same day with these sufferings. And showing also how these
things are to be also in every Christian. And that this Liberty purchased by
Christ, is not to encourage the flesh, or to purchase liberty for it; but it is
for the inward man, and the spirit; And how, he once having such a principle of
life, he cannot give way to sin, but sin is his bondage; and how the power of
Christ in him slayes all fleshly actings in the love of them; And that all
things of man shall be slain and crucified in him by the death of the Son of
God; And that these are the things which shall be burnt up for ever and ever
with unquenchable fire. And although many self-wise Professors in the world are
offended at the Book, and stick not to asperse and belie it with their common
slanders of Error and Heterodoxal opinions and the like: Yet we know the World
can do no other, but will belie the Truth, as it always has done: And the
more Divine any truth is, the more they oppose it; Why? Because the Light
thereof Condemns their Darkness, Sin, and Ignorance, and their Practices: And
they are not able to stand in, or bear the Light thereof: For either they must
Condemn the Truth to justify themselves, or else Condem themselves by the
Truth, which they can never do, till they are overcome and Captivated by the
Truth.

By Mr. JOHN CARDELL.
AND therefore I cannot but recommend to you those precious Sermons Preached by
Dr. Everard, which I know many of you have both in your houses and hearts;
whose Name is very sweet and precious to many that knew him in the ^lesh, (in
his latter days) for those savoury and experimental Truths wrought in you, by
the power of Christ, which he was an instrument to bear so clear witness unto;
And I, for my part, if I had the most precious Balm, or the most Odoriferous
ODOR in the whole Earth, I could freely pour it forth upon the NAME and Memory
of that man, as upon any English man I ever read or heard, or ever were
acquainted with; But, I have it not, and he needs it not, for he is far above
all things of that nature, or the most precious things the whole Earth can
afford; For, He Rests with Christ. But that which makes me now remember Him,
is, That Mystical and Divine Exposition he gives of those 2 or 3 verses in the
15 Josh. 15, 16, 17. being very suitable to the MYSTERY we are now unfolding; I
will read you the words, and then I will give you the Interpretation in His own
Words, for I cannot give you a better* And although the Men of the Letter, or
the Masters of the Letter, will not, cannot endure an Interpretation, but what
the bare Letter bears, but presently they cry out, ERROR and HERESY, according
to their wonted manner, In vilifying that which they do not apprehend; but we
leave them to themselves. I pray give ear, The words are these; The Holy Spirit
speaking concerning Caleb; And he went up to the Inhabitants of DEBIR, And the
Name of DEBIR before was Kiriathsepher. And Caleb said, He that smites
Kiriathsepher and takes it; to him will I give ACHSAH my Daughter to Wife: And
Othniel the Son of Kenaz the Brother of Caleb took it, And he gave him Achsah
his Daughter to Wife. Says he, Kiriathsepher signifies The City of the Book,
or The City of the Letter. And Debir signifies THE WORD: And Caleb, A good
heart; OTHNIEL, The Lords Opportunity; and Achsah, The Rending of the Vail. So
that the Dr. reads the verses in English thus. And, A good Heart said* He that
smites the City of the Book, or the City of the Letter, He only shall marry
Achsah, and have the Rending of the Vail, And Othniel, The Lords fit
Opportunity, he only smites This City of the Letter, and takes it, and to him
alone are the Scriptures made DEBIR, The Word; from whence he draws most
Heavenly and Divine Conclusions, etc. But I refer you, for your better
satisfaction to the Book it self. And return to our business in hand.

To all Those Blessed and Precious Souls Wheresoever Scattered Throughout the
World, Yet, united in One Spirit, Which Rejoice in the Revelation Of the
Mystery of Christ, Being also reconciled unto God In One Body, By the Cross;
He, Having slain the Enmity thereby And do, or may Comprehend This LANGUAGE.

To Them Is the Word of This Salvation Sent In all Humility Greeting.

A light to lighten the Gentiles, And To be the Glory of the People of Isra^^.

To make known among the Gentiles The Manifold Wisdom of God And The
Unsearchable Riches of Christ.

THE RENDING OF THE VAIL, OR Some Rays of Glory from The HOLY of HOLIES.
MARK 9. 50. Have Salt in your selves.
In one Sermon, Preached at Islington, at the Public Meeting Place.
MY beloved, now you are here gathered together in this place, I beseech you
hearken diligently to what shall be now ^poken.

I will use no other Preface, then a word or two from that saying of our
Savior in the Pa^allel place to this, Luke 14. Luke 14. 35.
35. from which he makes this conclusion, He that has ears to hear let him
hear: Let him now hear the word of him by whom he shall be judged at that great
day: Let him now hearken to that word which shall certainly one day, either
sooner or later, rise up in judgment against him: Let him hearken to the word
of him who spoke as never man spoke; Luke 2. 12.
for his words are like the wine he made at Cana; no wine like that wine, nor
no words like his words: fot the best words that ever man spoke, had somewhat
of Self and Carnal ends in them, but in his words there is no tincture, no
concourse or taste at all of the Creature, no Allayes of humane weakness, but
they are all words of grace and peace, Luke 4. 22.
the words of spirit and life; insomuch that all that heard him, wondered at
the gracious words that proceeded frrom his lips; who in all his words never
sought himself, nor his own glory (as men do) but the glory of him that sent
him.

Nay hearken, I pray you, to his word that could have spoken far beyond all
that ever he has spoken had he but had Auditors fit to have heard and
understood him: I beseech you therefore silence yourselves a while, I mean your
own Wit and Rea^^^ and your own blind understandings; Rev. 8. 1.
And let there be silence in Heaven for half an hour, that you may learn to
know what it is to have salt in your selve^, that you may have salt in you,
that you be not spewed out of Gods mouth as unsavory, Rev. 3. 16.
and loathsome to his stomach: It were far better you had never heard, then
that these words should prove unprofitable to you.

But as you are here in this your so great zeal to hear, and in such thronging
and ^locking together this day, to whom should we address, that our zeal and
meeting may not be in vain? for as the woman of Samaria said to our Savior,
John 4. 11. John 4. 11.
so may we say, The Well is deep, and we have nothing to draw with; man's reason
and understanding cannot reach Truth; ad quem ibimus? then, whether shall we
go? says Peter, John 6. 60. John 6. 60.
and he answers it there himself, truly O Lord, Tu habes verba vitae aeternae,
Thou have the words of eternal life; Therefore let us pray with the Disciples,
Mat. 13. 36. Mat. 13. 36.
O Lord, declare thou to us this Parable. And I humbly pray and beseech that
God who opened the mouth of Balaams dumb Ass, Number. 22. 28.
that he would be pleased to open my lips, Ps. 51. 15.
and then my mouth shall show forth his praise, for the instruction of those
that are his servants here: And I pray God you may rouse up your attention,
maugre fullness, drowsiness, wandering thoughts, custom in sleeping, and the like.

The things that I intend (through Gods assistance) to open to you, and answer,
are these three Questions: O Lord, In lumine tuo lumen, Psalm. 36. 9. In thy
light we shall see light. And by no other light. Then, Let us see 1. What salt
is? 2. What it is to have salt? 3. What it is to have it in our selves?


1. What salt is? Mat. 9. 49.
Christ says in the Verse before my Text, That every one shall be salted with
fire, and every sacrifi^e shall be salted with salt. We must first find what
fire is, and then we shall know what salt is. This fire is Christ, and that
very properly, as you may see he is so called, Isa. 10. 17. The light of Israel
shall be for a fire, Isa. 10. 17.
and his holy one for a flame; and it shall burn and devour his thorns in one
day,

And he is FIRE in three regards:

In regard of Burning. Heat. Light.


First, The nature of Fire is to burn: Fire cannot burn it self; take notice of
that, fire cannot burn fire, but all things else it will burn and consume: So
does Christ* he is that fire that burns up all our works, and whatsoever is not
himself, and his own work INUS, he consumes and annihila^es. The Light of
Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame, it shall burn and
devour his thorns and his br^ers in one day. Know this, the more sin, the more
fire, the greater burning, Mal. 3. 2. Mal. 3. 2.
Who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears?
for he is like refiners fire, and like fullers soap? Christ is this fire; and
let me tell you this burning and consuming is for your good; it is that out of
the old ashes of the old man you may have a new life, Mat. 5. 29. 30.
a new resurrection. Examine thy self, has this fire cut off thy hands and
feet, and pulled out thy right eye? has it. consumed thy young men? (...),
has it burnt up thy OLD heaven and thy OLD earth? that so ye may, enjoy a new
heaven and a new earth? 2 Pet. 3. 7. 2 Pet. 3. 7.
Nay further, let me ask thee, has it thrown all thy gods in the fire? has
it burnt up all thy idols? yet I tell ye, this burning is not unto death, but
unto life, as Christ said of Lazarus, This sickness is not unto death; but be
sure that as the Lord Jesus Christ burns up, Joh. 11.
and wounds, so he heals and makes alive again: I would and I heal.

Secondly, the work of fire is to heat; so Christ after he has destroyed and
burnt up all our actions, then he breathes into us a gentle warmth and heat of
his own Spirit to cherish and revive us again, that so we may no longer live
our own lives, but the life of Christ.

Thirdly, The nature of fire is to give light: when That day dawns to us that
Christ comes into the soul, we shall find, He brings light with him, and this
is called Christ's day. Isaiah. 20. 3. and Joel 2. 10.
Our first day is our own day, that is, a day of darkness, a day of gloominess,
and thick clouds; but the day of the Lord is a terrible day* our flesh
trembles for fear of thee, for who shall abide the day of thy coming, and who
shall stand when thou appearest? for thou art like refiners fire and like
fullers soap. When Christ comes into the soul, he comes not only with light to
discover, but like fire to burn up all that building that we have made to our
selves, and that we have raised by our own power, and breathes warmly and
gently, by his Spirit, his own life, until by degrees he brings a glorious
light into the soul; Acts 26. 18.
He then turns us from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.

And all this is done by one and the same act in God, although those acts be
diverse and distinct in the creature; that is, the same act in God, which comes
to the obstinate and perverse, and hardens them; which comes to the humble and
meek and softens them; the same act in him, Hardens, and Softens, as the Sun
does wax and clay.

That same God which was darkness at the bottom of Mount Sinai, was light in
the top of the Mount: Exodus 19. 16.
He is the same God in himself to all, but he works diversely in regard of the
creatures; He is the same God in a frozen and hard heart, as he is in a
repenting and bleeding soul; but to the one he appears not, but in wrath and
vengeance, ready to take revenge on them for their sins; but to the other he
appears in mercy and love, and marries himself to them, Hos. 2. 19.
he communicates to them his sweet loves, and their wills are swallowed up in
his; and these only are they that can say in truth, Not my will, but thine be
done; but the other, they cannot forsake themselves, Mat. 26. 39.
their own will, their own ends: but this is but by the way.

And this you see in brief, what the fire is; Our God is a consuming fire. But
now what is the salt? Heb. 12. 29.
I know it is diverse ways taken and expounded: Some take it to be wisdom and
discretion in speech; and for proof they cite that place of the Apostle, Let
your speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt; for so Solomon says, A
wise man may hold up his head before Princes; and they give this reason, Col.
4. 6.
As salt keeps things from stinking, so does wisdom so salt and season a man's
words, Prove. 16. 21.
that his words may not be unsavory to wise men, Eccl. 8. 1.
so that he is not laughed to scorn. Others take it for holiness and sincerity
in life and conversation; as our Savior says, Ye are the salt of the earth,
Mat. 5. 13. that is (say they) when by their living well, speaking the Truth in
their words, and expressing holiness in all their actions, this seasons their
lives, and makes them savoury before God and men: So also they interpret that
of our Savior, Mat. 5. 13. Mat. 5. 13.
Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost his sav^^r, wherewith
shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and
trodden under the feet of men; when men live not as they profess they are
unsavory, and men tread such men's profession under their feet; and therefore
say they, He admonishes them to strive for integrity of life, and so^ndness in
doctrine, and constancy in suffering; for these things honor their profession,
and seasons them with salt, and makes them savoury to God and to men.

But to be short, and without any more circumstances (that we may come to the
matter intended) The fire and the salt are both one, and that is Christ himself
as I have told you; He is the fire: so, He is the salt; as the Apostle says,
Heb. 2. 11. Both he that sanctifyeth, Heb. 2. 11.
and they who are sanctified are all one: So Jesus Christ he is the fire that
salteth, and the salt wherewith it salteth, as is expressed in the verse before
the Text.

Indeed I confess, the Apostles also were called Salt, Mat. 5. 13. Mat. 5. 13.
Ye are the Salt of the earth (says Christ himself) not that they were the
Salt themselves, or the salt indeed, but they were those which uttered the
salt; they taught salt, (as I may say) and where rath^r (as we may call them)
Salters; those which sold and uttered the true salt, (which is CHRIST) to the
world: But I say of them, as the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 3.
4. 5.
While one says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo: who is Paul, or
who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom you believed? neither is he that planteth
any thing, nor he that waters, but God, etc. and in another place (says he)
Was Paul crucified for you? 1 Cor. 1. 13.
or were you baptized in the name of Paul? So say I, were the Apostles
crucified for you? are they those that suffered for you, and redeemed you? are
they those that are the Salt, Life, Strength and Support to you? no, no, for
themselves had need of salting; therefore they were not The Salt, but they were
the Instruments or Ministers which Christ used to convey to us the true Salt,
and in no other regard were they called The salt of the earth.

And again, Christ says (in the same sense) Mat. 5. 14. Ye are the light of
the world; and again S. John says, Mat. 5. 14.
and more properly, John 1. 9. Joh. 1. 9.
He is the true light, which lightneth every man which comes into the world;
and himself says, John 8. 12. I am the light of the world. He it was also that
was typisied in all the Oblations under the Law, Joh. 8. 12.
and throughout the old Testament; He was the True Paschal Lamb, He was the
true Sacrifice, he was that Fire that must always burn upon the Altar, Levit.
6. 13. Lev. 6. 13.
He also was that salt commanded, for the salt was never wanting; and in the
verse before my Text, Christ himself cites that place, Every sacrifice (says
he) shall be salted with salt, he was that salt which must never be wanting; he
seasons every Oblation, Lev. 2. 13. Lev. 2. 13.
he is the Salt of the everlasting covenant unto thee and thy seed for ever:
Number. 18. 19.
he was that Salt that Elisha threw into the waters, 2 Kings 2. 21.
and healed them; and those many waters are many people, as it is exp^essed in
the Revelation; in sum, he is the Substance, the MIND of the whole Scriptures.

As he is the fire, by reason of burning, and because of heat and light; so he
is the salt that sweetens and savours ev^^y thing. As he is the light that
enlightneth, so he is the salt that sal^e^h ^very man: He it was th^^ was
wanting in that people which God upbraideth, Ezekiel. 16. Ezekiel. 16. 4.
That were cast forth to the world in their blood and fil^hiness, and their
navel was not cut, and they were not salted at all; that is, they had not
Christ that true salt applied to them, that should have made then savoury to
God; That which is unsavory, shall it be eaten without salt? Job 16. 4. Job.
16. 4.


It is this salt that must season the venison that must be savoury meat for old
Isaac; Genesis 27.
it is not your salt, no, nor your VENISON, not the daintiest meat you can
provide, not the best duties you can perform, will please him, except they be
salted and seasoned by his own Son; let them be the best actions that ever man
performed, never so well purposed, never so good and excelling, (both for the
matter and manner of them) away with them, without This Salt; it is only in
his son that he is well pleased: Mat. 3. 17.
Never think that all your prayers, your tears, your alms, etc. please him, but
only that which is his Sons own action and work in you; else they stink and
are abominable in his eyes; he will not, he cannot regard them: The sacrifices
of the wicked are an abomination to him. The Devil made as true, and as large a
Confession of Christ, as any man can do; look upon the words, and not upon him
that spoke them, and you would think they were the words of a Saint; O thou
Jesus of Nazareth, Son of the most high God, I know thee who thou art, Mat. 1.
24.
even the holy one of God: (indeed it was extorted, and came from them against
their wills) but Christ accepted it not, because this glorious confession was
without salt; it was not from a sweet feeling experience of him in them, but
from some self ends. Therefore I have observed, that the Devil (where he is
worshipped) to imitate God, has brought in, in all his Sacrifices, the use of
salt: nay, so eminently true is this, that as the Devils cry out and attest
unto him, though against their wills: so by their practice we may note, that
under salt, was hidden that great mystery and secret of all Religion, by their
great care to use salt, thereby to imitate the worship of God, as Josephus
notes against Appion, and Jerome against Vigilantius, Pliny, Plato, and others.

Christ spoke altogether in Parables; Mat. 13. 34.
for says the Text, without a parable spoke he nothing unto them; yet know, he
always spoke in such parables, as were not absurd ones, but they had a most
fit correspondency and resemblance to the things themselves, and those speeches
of his which to us seem not congruous, had we but eyes to see (even every one
of them) they would be like apples of gold, with pictures of silver; Prove. 15.
23.
so aptly and fitly are they spoken, as no man can speak like him; As there is
not a word nor a syllable in all this blessed book of God, but is really true;
so all the words therein they are spoken with infinite wisdom; there are
Wonders in all Christ's words, but our eyes are shut that we cannot see the
wonders of Gods Law; and as Christ spoke much in Parables, so does God much in
Allego^ies; Psalm. 119.
the truth is hid under shadows, and Mysteries in the Letter.

But the reasons (as I con^eive) why Christ is compared to salt, are these:

First, There is a healing power in salt: Rea.
Little do you know the virtue that is in salt to cure all manner of diseases;
for Antidotes against poisons, to heal all manner of wounds, as some have
written thereof at large: I do not say, salt rudely taken, as it is in our
common use, but salt duly prepared and made ^it to every use, nothing more
useful, nothing more excellent.

In this regard (salt having such an healing virtue for all wounds, poisons,
diseases) Christ is more truly salt to the soul, then salt is to the body; he
is precious salt, and duly prepared and ^itted for all our diseases; no
infirmity, or malignant disease in us, though never so desperate, but This Salt
will cure it: If you have gotten such a wound, that you are as a man fallen
from an high place upon a heap of stones, so that you are bruised all over; if
you be covered with the leprosy of (...) from the crown of the head, to the
sole of the feet, so that no part, no member, no faculty is free, His
everlasting mercy, and His never failing goodness, and his Almighty power, is a
never failing Medicine, that can fit and compound such ingredients, that shall
answer the disease of every part: If there be an utter enmity between God and
you, in your apprehension, so that you have no hope of ever coming into his
favor, and nothing you can do can prevail with him; set but Christ between God
and you, and he will heal this enmity. When he was here upon earth in the
flesh, no disease could withstand him in the body; so I am sure none can in the
soul: Hos. 13. 9.
But if you have not Him, there is no way but you must dye in your sins, and
your destruction is of your selves because you believe not, and lay not hold on
him who would save you from destruction.

Alas do not you once think, In your own names, or in your own strengths to
turn your selves to God: No alas, this is the way to destroy your selves; for
do you what you can, fast and pray, and weep and lament, and confess your sins,
etc. these do but destroy you the more, if he be not the bottom you stand upon,
if he be not your rock you build upon: But coming in his name, and confessing
from your souls your own vileness, seeing really your own nothingness, and
utterly disclaiming whatever flesh and blood can do; Then, thou shall find God
gracious to thee, not only in accepting what thou do on this ground, but
also healing thy nature, Luke 10. 34.
and subduing thy lusts, then shall thou find this good Samaritan pouring in
oil to heal thee, and to bind up thy wounds; and then thy meanest duties in
him, are better accepted then the most glorious and splendent to men; for then
the c^se is altered with thee, Because now Thou bottomest upon him.

Se^ondly, Reas. 2.
he is compared unto salt, because as sal^ preserves things from putrefaction
and corruption, so does he preserve our souls; for they would stink before God,
Psalm. 38. 5.
if his merits were not applied to them; as David says, My wounds stink and
are corrupt: We are in our selves, without him, As unclean, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
as a swine that walloweth in the mire, and as dogs that return to their vomit;
but of this we h^ve spoken sufficiently already, and therefore we p^ss it by,
and come to the third Reason.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
salt has a power and virtue in it to preserve it self; if it be able to
preserve other things, much more it self. Salt is the most durable of all
things; therefore says Abi^ah, 2 Chro. 1^. 5. 2 Chro. 13. 5.
Ought you not to know, that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a Covenant of Salt?
Why? Numb. 18. 19.
Because it was most durable: therefore says the Lord, I will make with you an
everlasting Covenan^ of salt, A perpetual covenant is there called A covenant
of Salt; because salt is durable it self, and makes every thing else durable,
therefore the Lord compares his Covenant to salt, because it is and shall be
immutable, unchangeable; And it is his praise, and his goodness, that in
himself he is not mutable; and it much commends his mercy to us, that he
changes not, why? Because Therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3.
6. Mal. 3. 6.
and James 1. 17. In him is no variableness, nor shadow of change or turning.
He only is Unchangeable; but look on all the creatures, and ye may see them
[changeable] If we grant they do not change (as you think) yet they are in a
possibility of changing.

But if we think Him [changeable] this is our ignorance, our childishness; When
we think, by our prayers, or fastings, and reformings, that we can turn God, or
change his mind; that one while he is angry, and another while he is pleased:
Beloved, this be far from our God, He cannot change: You think weakly and
childishly of him, that when you feel or fear a judgment, or desire any
blessing, that you can meet him and stay his hand, or you can prevail to turn
his mind, or constrain him; no, no, far be such thoughts from us: The change is
not in your God, but you may and are changed; The change is in your selves, and
in your selves only: As when men are at Sea and cast anchor on a rock they draw
and pull as though they would pull the rock to them, but they pull themselves
to the rock,

We think when we repent he is pleased, and when we are obstinate he is angry,
as if ^e were so changeable* that he is angry to day, and pleased to morrow:
There can be no such thing in God; And by such thoughts, we make God no God; we
make the ever blessed and unchangeable God an Idol: Indeed, the creature is
changed, and the act of God upon the creature, may and does change; as the
Psalmist says, They all shall wax old as does a garment; Psalm. 102. 26.
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
changest not, they years are the same. We err, not knowing the Scriptures, if
we think that we can Change and Alter God, or that we can direct him what is
best to be done, as I Fear too many of you do. Yea, (I fear) even some that
have been long professors, nay those that have been long Teachers in the
Church, and sit at the stern, and should guide the ship aright, yet ordinarily
let it dash upon this rock, they themselves teach so, and others believe so and
so both, The people with Aaron, have made themselves A golden Calf, and then
have fallen down and worshipped it: No, no, my brethren, it is our happiness,
our security, that God changes not.

And so also God is said to come nearer to us, and to go further from us; but
know, God cannot remove, God is as near us always as he can be* yea, he is
nearer us then any thing we can call [i] he is nearer us then our selves, Ps.
139. 4.
he knows all our thoughts a far off; that is, even before we think them our
selves.

But Beloved, to me all these Reasons are b^t external, common Reasons; But I
conceive, the only and true reason, and that which I conceive is chiefly
intended, is this:

That as salt is (for so it is) the Central existence of every thing; that is,
salt is the Substance, the Strength, Supporter, and Compacter of every visible
and mixed body: So is Christ to every creature. Rev 3. 14. the beginning of the
creation of God, and the BEARER bearing up all things by his mighty word and
power, Rev. 3. 14.
Heb. 1. 3. and Col. 1. 17. He was before all things, and by him all things
consist; and Heb. 3. 14. For we are made partakers of Christ, Heb. 1. 3.
if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. Col. 1. 17.
Take this as a maxim, there is no one thing in the world, Heb. 3. 14.
but salt is the strength, the Knitter, the Supporter, the Sustainer, the
Compacture of it; there is nothing in the earth that you can give me, but I can
give you the Salt of it; as take a Leaf, wherein you may think that there can
be no salt; but there is in it Salt, and so in all other things; And indeed
that is the life of every thing; The greenness is not the salt, and yet salt is
in it, though you see it not; even so is Christ that salt of every thing; it is
He who FILLS all things, He who Knits and Upholds all things, is the essence,
being, and life of all things.

Behold I tell you a mystery (as the Apostle says) you think Christ is in
heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 51.
and so indeed he is, for heaven is where he is, and he is every where. But
shall I tell you how yo^ may come to handle him with your hands, and see him
with your eyes? Thus; Can you but take off all accidents from every thing, and
then that which remains is [Christ;] Mat. 18. 1^.
Their Angels always behold the face of their father which is in heaven. As if
you take from me all height and depth, all greatness and littleness, all
weight and measure, all heat and cold, and all kind of matter and form; for
these are all Accidents: and then that which is left, is He which BEARS ^p all,
even Jesus Christ, blessed for ever; even He, that dwells in Heaven, and in the
bosom of his Father, in his Pavilion, and in his Secret place. He clothes
himself with light (says the Psalmist) as with a garment. Psalm. 104. 3.
[Light] is the next thing to God himself, the purest Accident: For all that
may be smelt, felt, tasted, seen, heard, o^ understood, all these are
Accidents: and therefore says the Apostle, the fashion of this world passes
away, for the fashion of this world are but Accidents: for take away all kind
of fashion visible, and every thing that can be imagined under any form
whatsoever, and then you shall find Jesus Christ the Son of the father, Col. 1.
15, 17.
the first-begotten of all creatures, the Beginning and Foundation of all the
works of God, The IMMANUEL, God with us.

All accidents must pass away, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
all the fashion of the World; and whatsoever must passaway, let it pass away;
and that which perishes or is to perish, let it perish; but still Christ
remains, he changes not, he is not subject to Accidents, or any change, Heb.
13. 8.
but he remains always the same; He is yesterday and to day, and the same for
ever. Therefore lay not hold on these transitory things, but lay hold on the
Anchor of your souls, which is Both sure and steadfast, and that enters into
that which is within the vail, Heb. 6. 19. Heb. 6. 19.
Highness and lowness pass away; greatness and littleness pass away, youth and
age pass away, weight and lightness pass away, and all the beauty and glory of
the Creature; but still Christ who is the salt and the substance, that still
remains. For, there was something of me before I was either high or low, great
or little, heavy or light, old or young, etc. and that was Christ, The
beginning of all things.

And Christ being thus, as we have showed you, you then see, what ground Christ
had to call himself The salt of the earth; for all these things being taken
away, ye shall find him to be as the salt of every thing: that is, Christ he is
the Strength, the Holder, the Knitter, the Composure, and Compacture of all
things: Joh. 1.
His name is The word of God, Rev. 19. 13, Rev. 19. 13.
He is The word by whom all things were made; in him was life, and the life was
the light of men: this light shines in darkness, But the darkness
comprehends it not. All Accidents are darkness, and hide God from us; He is
the image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15.
the firstborn of every Creature; for by him were all things created, that are
in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all were created by him and
for him, and he is the beginning of all things, and by him all things consist.

Object. Object.
But it may be you will say to me, How can that be true of Christ? Salt is
good, but if the salt (says he) has lost its ^avour, Luke 14. 34, 35.
wherewith shall it be salted? It is neither meet for the land, nor yet for the
Dunghill, Man. 9. ult.
but men cast it out. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. What shall he be
seasoned withal? can he be infa^^ated or unsavory?

Answ. Answ.
The decision of which doubt falls prope^ly under the second general question
of my (...). My second question answers this, viz. What i^ is to have salt?

He in regard of himself seasons all alike; He in himself does not season some
more and some less; or some have him, and some have him not; but as it was in
the gathering of Mann^, Exodus 16. 18.
they all gathered enough, thoughsome gathered more, some less; they lacked
not, nor they had none left: so Christ is in every one in regard of himself
alike; that is, in regard of their real and essential perception and
participation of Christ. He is the form of forms, the soul of the soul: and he
cannot be more in one place then in another. But here, to have salt, is, to
see, to know, to feel, and believe, and assure our selves that we have this
salt, and that Christ is in us. Christ is in regard of himself every where, and
in every one alike, but every one believes it not alike.

If we should attempt to speak of God as he is in himself, in his essence, as
abstracted from all creatures, so he is unknowable; neither Creating, nor in
possibility of being Created, as it is said in Prove. 30. 4. Prove. 30. 4.
Who can declare his generation, his name, Job 12. 7.
or his sons name, if thou can tell? he is unknowable, unnameable; Can thou
by searching find out God? We cannot conceive of his manner of being in the
creature; but ac^ording to his manner of working in the creature. As Jacob when
he awaked, then he saw that God was in that place; Genesis 28. 17.
then he cries out, Oh how terrible, how dreadful is this place! this is none
other but the House of God. God was there before as much as he was then; but
Jacob was not aware of God.

The whole creation is Gods house, Gods Temple, but we see it not so; we see
not God in all places, nor in all creatures, (as Jacob did then) till our eyes
be opened. God is always in every creature, and he is there alike, in his
Heaven, and in his Holy place, and he cannot be more in one then another; but
till we be awaked, till our eyes be opened, till the scales of ignorance, and
the thick darkness be removed, we cannot acknowledge it: But as soon as ever
they are open, then we see God was and is in us, and we were not aware; and we
shall then cry out of every place, and of every creature, O how dreadful is
this place! I see now, this is Gods house, Psalm. 18. 11, etc.
and Gods Temple, and I knew it not. Till then God had made (as David says)
darkness his secret place, and his Pavilion round about him were dark waters
and thick clouds of the skies; but when he pleases to discover himself, then
it follows in the next verse, At the brightness that was before him, his thick
clouds passed, hailstones and coals of fire: then the Lord was seen and heard,
for he thundered in the heaven, and the Highest gave out his voice: they saw
then that it was He alone that wrought in and through all the Creatures; that
it was he alone that gathered and scattered, and discovered the foundations of
the world; Psalm. 18.
He it is that turns the Nations of the world upside down; it was at his
rebuke, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils that the earth shook, and
trembled, and coals were kindled by it. So also he saw that it was God who sent
from above out of heaven, his holy place, and took him out of his troubles, out
of many waters, and delivered him from his strong enemy, and he brought him out
into a large place, and so goes on in that 18. Psalm.

When the soul comes to be awaked, and to see God thus, filling all in all, to
be motion and Agent in all things: then he falls down before God, and is
ashamed; and throws down all his own pride and arrogancy, all his high
conceits of his acting and doing any thing; for he sees now it was not he, but
that it was God in him that did all: Ephesians. 6. 12.
now, down falls all conceit of power and gifts, with all strong holds, all
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places, Psalm. 15.
and he gives All glory to God who dwells so near him, Psalm. 24.
In his holy hill of Sion.

Then he no longer looks without himself; but now he hearkens to know what the
Lord says in him; Hab. 1. 2.
his eye and his ear are now to himwards; he will now no longer rule and guide
himself* nor take his own advice; but he sees how he has gone astray from God,
and desires now that God only would guide him; for he finds that he is the
surest and the nearest Counselor; his eye is altogether now upon God, so that
he trembles in his presence: He sees now we need not say, Who shall ascend up
to Heaven to bring Christ thence, Romans 10. 7.
or who shall descend into the grave to bring Christ from the dead? for behold,
the word is nigh thee, it is even in thy mouth. Christ is in thee, in the midst
of thee, as the Prophets often, Great is thy God in the midst of thee, O
Israel. And again, The holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. And again, Ioh.
1. 26.
John Baptist, There is one in the midst of you whom ye know not; he shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire.

When our eyes are opened by Christ, to come to see this, even those eyes which
were blind from their Mothers womb: And when the strings of our tongue shall be
loosed then we shall fall down before his presence, and confess our own
vileness, our own nothingness; and that we in our selves without him are mere
dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27.
poor drops, poor warms. And this is not out of formality, or custom, but
unfainedly and really, seeing our selves to be so and no otherwise. But till
this time we go on in our pride and arrogancy; we exalt our selves and go on
to please our own wills, and say who shall bring us down? our tongues are our
own, we will prevail; who is Lord over us? we say, Psalm. 12. 4.
Tush: God sees not, he is above: can he see through the thick clouds? and so
we go on in our own ways, Job. 12.
and follow our own wills, and regard not God who is in us, and acts all our
acts, and works all our works for us; Isa. 20.
till then we exalt our selves, even into Gods throne, and dethrone him, as
much as lies in us: for we say, I will, and I am, Power is mine, and Revenge is
mine: many say so, and multitudes more do so, they will be Revenged, that they
will: and so appropriate and arrogate to our selves, James 4. 13.
the very att^ibutes of God: Vengeance is mine says the Lord. And, as James,
Woe to them that say, To morrow we will go to such a City and remain a year,
and there buy and fell and get gain. and Isa. 9. 9. Isa. 9. 9.
Woe to them that say in the pride and stoutness of their heart, The bricks are
fallen down, but we will build with ^^wn stones.

Beloved, conclude this, all power is his; and all praise is his; and if all be
His, then what has any creature to do to take to himself any at all? but this
great sin of arrogancy is that which runs through the whole world, great and
small; and who sees it? and who checks himself for it, saying, what have I
done? This is that which rules in the very Devils themselves: Nay this is the
Devil in us. For they think they have a power, and so walk according to their
own wills, and see not that they act by the power of God; for God is all power,
all act, and no creature stirs or moves but by him; he is their act and their
being, though not of evil: for though God be The orderer of evil, yet he is not
the Author: but men would hence lay the fault on God, and excuse themselves:
And very strange conclusions men have made through mistake, that because there
is in God an active, positive, consulted, and deliberate repr^obation of
certain men, before their sins were committed, yea, before the Creation: and
because also it is said we can do nothing without him (for in him we live, move,
and have our being) therefore they con^lude that the evil of action as well as
the Action belongs to Him* not understanding to distinguish between the Act and
the Evil of the Act: no, no, you are deceived; you conclude thus, because you
cannot comprehend his ways, and so you would bound, limit and circumscribe the
Almighty by your narrow Reason. But you must distinguish between the Act and
the evil of the Act: all Act is Gods, but he is free from the evil of any Act.
All evil is thine, and all good is Gods. And therefore Hos. 13. 9. Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel, thy perdition is of thy self, but in me is thy help: but this I
cannot now enter upon; we therefore return to our point in hand.

Till Christ be pleased to discover himself to be there, to be in us, we are
stark blind, until He say to our eyes, Ephatha, be ye opened: Else how do we
walk and ^et up and down in our pride and arrogancy both to wards God and men,
and begin to beat and oppress, and lord it over our fellow servants? what an
^nseemly thing is it, that such worms and nothings as men are, should walk so
bolt-upright, in insolency and arrogancy, boasting o^t themselves to be
something when they are nothing! They will revenge themselves, and begin to
(...) their fellow servants, Romans 12.
and reproach even those who desire to do their masters business as well and
better then themselves; Mat. 24. 49.
affecting nothing so much as to rule and to be great. Is this the carriage of
those who have their eyes upon God, who (they know) sees all their pride,
insolency, and arrogancy? or rather is it not clear that this is the carriage
of blind men, ignorant men, that say, We see? and therefore their sin
remains. Ioh. 9. 41.
And the Lord of such servants will come in an hour when they look not for him,
and will cut them asunder, Mat. 24. ^0.
and appoint their portion with Hypocrites; there shall be weeping and grashing
of teeth: The hainousness of his sin is seen in his Lords wrath and punishment.

In Isa. 2. 18. Isa. 2. 18.
See there how the Lord threatens to bring down this Spirit, that is generally
in all the sons of men, Verse 10. Enter into the rocks, and hide thee in the
dust for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty; the lofty loo^s of
man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down and the
Lord alone s^all be exalted in that day: For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall
be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted
up, and he shall be brought low: and so he goes on, And upon all the Cedars of
Lebunon that are lifted up: upon all the Oaks of Bashan, upon all the high
mountains, upon every tower, and upon every fenced wall: upon all the ships of
Tarshish, and upon all their pleasant pictures: And the loftiness of man shall
be bowed down, and haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day: And their Idols he shall utterly abolish, and
they shall go into the holes and caves of the earth for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth; and
a man shall cast his Idols of silver and gold to the Moles, and to the Bats, to
go into the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks for the fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the
earth: Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to
be accounted of? I have a little digrest, but it was for your good, therefore
you may bear with me.

Let us now then henceforward learn to beware of this God, that is so Near us,
and so much in us: and not to be like Lot in his drunkenness, when his two
daughters came and la^ with him, and yet he knew not when they lay down, or
when they arose, Genesis 19. 35. Genesis 19. 35.
But learn we to awake (...) of our spiritual darkness, and not to be so
ignorant, so sott^sh, to let him be so near you as to live in you, and to dwell
with you: to be with you in your going out, and coming in: in your down-lying
and uprising, and you never yet acquainted with him, Who knows all your
thoughts afar off, even before you think them your selves. 2 Cor. 13. 15.
Says the Apo^^le, KNOW YOU NOT that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? nay, though ye be reprobates: It is the case of Reprobates, of
Devils, not to know this: but the meaning is, if ye be not in the condition of
reprobates, then ye know and feel experimentally, in some measure and degree,
that Jesus Christ is in you of a Tr^th.

O happy, yea, thrice happy is that soul, who is thus aware of God, to see his
workings and actings through all the creatures* then will that soul cry out
against himself, and instead of arrogancy^ and applanding himself, he cries out
of himself, of his own former and present ignorance and blindness; he will not
say, we see; and they what they ignorant of any thing! they would not any one
should have such a thought of them: alas poor souls^ their great knowledge
undoeth them; Isa. 46. 10.
thy wisdom has made thee rebel, or perverted thee, Isa. 46. 10. because by
all their parts and knowledge, they themselves are swelled and p^ffed up, and
are not lessened, and made nothing; if they were, they would cry out, Oh what a
beast was I, I have not the knowledge of a man! Oh what a wretch was I! was God
himself so near me all this while, nay within me, and I not know it? has it
been he that has altered and changed me, Jer. 48. 11.
in the whole course of my life, and turned me from vessel t^ vessel, from one
condition to another? It was he that has made all the changes in my life, and
ordered my actions as he pleased; and also would and has, made them serve to
his praise, though I saw it not; but now I see and feel it was He that made me
pass through the fire, and through the water, and tumbled me, and tumbleth
Nations up and down; Psalm. 62. 11. and 46. 2.
That makes the waters roar and the mountains quake.

But now I hear and see, Job 42. 5.
as David says, The Lord spoke it once, and I heard it twice, that God alone
does all; that is, I heard it thoroughly, experimentally; I saw it ratified to
my experience, to me, within me; I he^rd it first by the hearing of the ear, I
heard it in my understanding; but my second hearing was my experience, and
seeing by the eye, believing it^ and knowing it in my self, that it was so,
that God alone does All. Till we come to see this, What ever our boasts are,
whatever our parts are, whatever our knowledge is, we are dead, we are in the
state of reprobates, we are frozen, we can take no salt: and I pray God we are
not so self-wise, Jude 1^.
and so hardened in our own con^eits, that we be not, as the Apostle says,
twice dead and pulled up by the roots, and so never shall bearany fruit, being
past hope, and without God in the world.

I know this is harsh doctrine to the general sort of Professors: What, they
ignorant! what, they to be accounted by others, or to account themselves fools!
then, who are the wise men Think they! You know Salt when it is in a frozen
body, does no good; you know by experience, that frozen meat will take no salt,
and then it may be said to be infatuated or good for nothing. So though Christ
the true salt be in us, as he is in himself, yet we may be reprobates, our
hearts, our souls Frozen, and we cannot take in this salt: And then, though
Christ be there, yet he does us no good; and he may be then said to be
infatuated, useless; not but that he can tha^ our hearts, and work upon us, and
overcome in us, and prevail over all the powers of (...) and darkness within
us, if he pleases: for He in himself is always alike strong; but we do not
always find him so, neither is he so to us: As you know he came to one place,
and he could do no miracles there because of their unbelief, Mat. 13. 58.
Mat. 13. 58. Christ he works still, and does all his miracles in the world
daily, but it may be not to thy sight: he shows not his miracles to thee, or in
thee; but to those whose eyes he has opened, he is daily in their sight,
working his miracles: You are deceived, Miracles are not ceased as you
conclude, but your eyes are closed and blinded by the god of this world, 2 Co^.
4. 4.
2 Cor. 4. 4. as the Apostle Paul says concerning the Cross of Christ, Can the
Cross of Christ be made of no effect? yet the Apostle there propounds a case,
wherein it is made of no effect; that is, not that it can be so in its own
nature, but to thee it may be of no effect: Christ may be to thee infatuate,
unsavory, good for nothing, as he is in reprobates.

Now I hope, Mark 9. 50.
is answered that Question, What if the salt has lost his savor, wherewith
shall it be salted? Christ who is the true salt in himself, he cannot be
unsavory, and good for nothing: but he may lose his favor in thee, and to
thee; may be as a thing good for nothing; because he dyed in vain to thee, his
cross is of no effect; and so may be (as he says himself) good for nothing but
to be cast out, and trodden under the feet of men. Alas, brethren, Christ
blessed for ever, he in himself cannot be said to be good for nothing; no^ he
cannot be trodden under the feet of men; but till their eyes be opened to see
him, and acknowledge him as he is, that they be aware of Christ, and o^ his
presence, and greatness. and filling all things; they, as it were, tread him
under foot: And as it is said, Heb. 10. 29. Heb. 10. 29.
How much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy of, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the convenant
an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and has done despite unto the
spirit of Grace? But beloved, none of all these things can any creature do to
Christ in himself; for to him all Angels cry aloud, Rev. 4. 8. Rev. 4. 8.
The heavens and all the powers therein cry continually, Isa. 6. 3.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabboths; heaven and earth are full of the
majesty of thy glory: No creature can dishonor him in himself: but in
themselves, and to themselves they tread him under foot, because he lives not
in them; and so they see not, neither acknowledge him, or his workings in them.

Then, Use.
my beloved, let us make this use of this; If this salt be in us, and that we
see it is he that is our life, and our motion, then let us not only give ear
to him, but let us love, reverence and obey him, and hearken to what he wo^ld
teach us, and work in us; let him be sole Lord and Savior to us, to deliver
and save us from our lusts, and from Satan: nay, if this salt be in us, these
will be the fruits and effects that will follow, To love, reverence and obey
him. God himself proclaims him to be his well beloved Son, in whom only he is
pleased, Mat. 3.
hear him: Silence then your selves, deny your own life, hear no longer your
selves, nor your own lusts, what honor says, what profit says, what self,
and your own by-ends says: But hearken now to what he commands; Deuteronomy. 32. 47.
This shall be your wisdom before all people, this shall be your life; and he
that finds his life shall lose it: John 1^. 25.
but he that loses his life thus shall find it.

Beloved, Christ being once dead dies no more, says the Apostle: and yet he
says again, That we crucify to our selves the Son of God afresh: He in
himself cannot dye, cannot be crucified no more: but to our selves, and in our
own souls, he man be, and is cruc^fied daily; that is, when your lusts and
your sins live, Acts 7. 25.
then Christ he is dead, and you have crucified him, of whom you have been the
betrayers and mu^therers (as Steph^n said to the Jews, Acts 7. 52.) so that he
has then los^ his savor and his taste in and to thy soul; for thou tastest
him not, see him not, nor feel him* though he be in thee.

Further, know this, that Christ himself is that salt himself here ^ommandeth:
To have salt in our selves, is to have Christ himself in us: as if he should
say, Though I be in you, as I am in all things, in all creatures, yet my being
there does you no good, except you feel and see me there, except your faith
believe me there, and your life express me.

The third and last point is,

What is it to have salt in our selves?

We must have salt in us, 1. Exclusively; and 2. Inclusively: not only to see
Christ in our selves, and in ^ll creatures, as we have showed you: but to have
it in our selves, is to be sure we look to our own (...), whether we have this
salt or no: and this is a necessary Exhortation now in these times, when men
are so ready to neglect themselves, and are so much in questioning the estates
of others: We are too ready to judge and condemn othe^s* that they have not
this salt; but he^e we are admonished (...) others alone, and first be sure to
look circumspectly that we have it in our selves. Another man's grace will do
thee no good, if thou ha^^ none in thy self Warm thy self at thine own fire,
Prove. 5. 15.
and drink the waters of thine own Cistern, as Solomon counsels, Prove. 5. 15.
And who made thee Judge over others? what have thou to do to take Christ's
office from him? Acts 10. 42.
he is appointed to be Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10. 42. Yet thou will take
upon thee to be Judge, and to sit in Christ's throne; thou will be judging and
censuring of thy Brethren, before thou have censured thy self: Christ is not in
such and such men; thou can spy motes in thy brothers eye, and perceivest not
the beam in thine own, Mat. 7. 5.
Mat. 7. 5. whereby thy sight is quite put out, as to thy self.

You know Christ himself, when he was here in the slesh, when they brought to
him the woman taken in Adultery, says he, Has no man condemned thee? John. 8.
11.
neither d^ I. John 8. 11. Beloved, did he disclaim this I^dicature, and shall
we presume to take it up? shall we overlook our selves, and judge, reproach and
condemn other men? This man has no grace, and that man has no grace; away,
away with all these things: such a man, O he is a wre^ched sinner, and thou
would have God destroy him and plague him; thou wonderest God does not strike
him down dead; and see not thy self how vile thou art: Lord, shall we call
for fire from heaven? said some of the Disciples; away, away, says Christ, Ye
know not of what spirit ye are of: Leave off then ^udging of others, and leave
all judgment to God; Vengeance is mine, says the Lord: Christ could have writ
every man's sins in his forehead, as his are whom thou despisest, to be read and
seen of all men: 1 Cor. 32.
But thy sins are more secret and hidden, and yet as odious to God as his, and
this thine own conscience knows* what would become of thee (I pray thee)^ if
all thy secret sins were written visibly in thy forehead? But know, that this
gift of having salt in our selves, is not in any man's power to take, but God
only must give it; where and when he pleases to bestow it, they shall have it,
and none else. And in his time, and not sooner nor later.

But this command to have Salt in our selves is as much as to say, before you
go about to search other men's cellars, that you see your cellars be well
provided: But (by the way) be not deceived, to think God comes or goes; for he
cannot remove from place to place; he cannot fill you more then he has filled
you already; neither can he be nearer you then he is; for he is ONE entire ACT
of Being, filling all things with his infinity; he cannot come, nor go, nor
remove, nor be more in one place, nor in one man more then in another: And yet
David bids us, Psalm. 24. 7. 9.
Open our gates that the King of glory may come in; stand open ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may come in; yet this is a certain truth, he
cannot come in more then he is already come in; but the meaning must needs be^
set open the eyes and doors of your knowledge and understanding. Beloved, take
knowledge of this, that the King of glory is within you already.

As when Elisha and his servant were environed round about with enemies, 2
Kings 7. 13.
the mountains round the City full of Chariots and armed men, his servant was
afraid; but Elisha comforts him, and tells him, there was no cause of fear; for
they had more with them to preserve and defend them, then there was to offend
and destroy them; for says he, There is round about us Chariots and Horsemen
for our defense: Elisha his eyes were open, and he saw them present; but his
servants were shut, and he could not see them, although as near to him: then
Elisha prayed, that his eyes might be opened, and immediately it was so, and
then he also saw the Chariots and Horsemen, and fire round about them to defend
them; they were there before he saw them, and his not seeing them did not make
them not there: So Christ does not then come into thy soul, when thou first
see him there, when he works in thee, and to thy sight and feeling, when he
lives in thee; but then you come to know him, and see him there; and then you
come to know ye are no reprobates, because he dwells in you workingly, to your
sight and feeling: for if you were reprobates, yea, Devils, and the blackest
Devils in Hell, Romans 8. 27.
yet he is in you: no place, no creature, can exclude him: the earth and
heavens, yea the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8. 22.
no, nor exclude him: nor is he any more in the highest, gloriousest Heaven,
then he is in the lowest Hell, then he is in the very Prince of Devils: but
this they know not, they cannot see him in them, they are not able to see that
he acts in them, and by them; but they think they act, and live, and work by
their own power, and think that they fulfill only their own wills, their own
malice, and do what they please.

And this also indeed is the very Devil in man, this Disposition, when he
arrogates to himself the wisdom, power or glory of God; for all wisdom, power,
glory, and all good, is all and alone his: And (as I said) if all be his, the
creature is deceived to think it self has any; but they in whom God lives,
they see themselves nothings: they see God is all in them; they see him do all,
speak all, work all, think all in them; they acknowledge freely they have no
wills, no affections, either Natural or Divine, but what are his: they execute
not their own wills, their own lusts, but they fulfill the will of him who works
in them: And to him, and not to themselves they ascribe the glory and power of
doing all.

O Beloved, If we knew the gift that is in us, our eyes, our desires, would
always be upon it: Oh how precious is that gift in us, could we but see it,
and know it! as our Savior said to the woman of Samaria, O woman, if thou
knew the gift of God, Joh. 4. 10.
and who it is that speaks to thee, he would have given thee living water,
whereof if a man drink he shall never thirst, and it should be in his belly a
spring of water, springing up to eternal life: Such a Gift, such a Power, such
a Treasure is in every man: (mark well what I say) that were he but acquainted
with it, he would presently deny, renounce himself, his own wisdom, power,
parts, and solely live upon this gift, this wisdom, this treasure: I tell you,
you would desire to drink no more of your own waters, of your own pleasures, of
your own wills; but you would say, as the woman there said to Christ, Oh sir,
evermore give me of that water, that I thirst no more, and that I come no more
hither to draw: Then you will desire never to draw your comforts from honors,
pleasures, lands, etc. or from your own wills: then you will acknowledge
feelingly and knowingly, and not in words only, that you are nothing, that you
can do nothing, but that he is all, and in all.

Beloved, look but inwardly, and there you shall see the gloriousest things that
ever ^e saw; 1 Cor. 2. 9.
there is the City of God, Rev. 21.
the Temple of God, the new Jerusalem, Psalm. 87. 3.
such things as never eye saw, nor ear heard, or ever entered into the heart of
man (as man) but as he is a new creature, in some deg^ee: Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of God, Selah, says David: There is within thee
such a glorious Temple, (...) bedecked, and beset with precious stones and rich
pearls of Faith, Repentance, Love, Joy, Hope, etc. all graces, which did thou
en^oy, would make thee rich to Eternity, thou woulst never desire any more to
taste thine own waters, to follow thine own will; but wo^ldst say with David,
One day in this house of God^ is better then a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84. 10.
Psalm. 84. 10. Its better (with David) to be but a Doorkeeper in this Temple,
then to dwell in the places of [self-wil] and wickedness: Here are ^he Beauties
of God himself displayed: One thing I have desired, and that I will seek (says
David) that I may dwell in thy house all the days of my life; Psalm. 27. 4.
there to behold thy beauty, and to visit thy Temple: Here dwells wisdom; whose
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

Never look nor never expect outwardly to find God, Prove. 3. 17.
for God dwells within, nor expect not outwardly to hear God, for God dwells in
his Temple within, there he preaches and there he teaches: for outwardly are
nothing but obscurities, darkeness, thick darkness, outward darkness, as the
right translation renders it; where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of
teeth: Mat. 8. 12.
Outwardly are nothing but accidents and vails, and thick clouds, which hide
the everlasting beauties of our God from our beholdings: within dwells the King
of glories, the everlasting Son of the Father* who is from everlasting to
everlasting; even the Alpha and Omega of all the works of God.

Beloved, Psalm. 4. 4.
when you a^e still and quiet upon your beds, Rev. 3. 21.
then examine your hearts and then ye shall find your beloved, when lust, and
self, and flesh are all quieted and asleep, so that there is no disturbance,
nor hurly-burly in the soul; then, and not before, expect to hear and see God:
God is never seen or heard, but when all things in us as of us, are at rest:
Those that come and acknowledge him, and deny themselves* and all they are,
even all their parts both of Nature and Grace; these are come to en^oy their
rest, these only keep Subbaths, Rev. 3. 21.
these are they that have overcome, and are set down with him in his throne,
even as he has overcome, and is set down in his Fathers Throne.

In the evening, it is said, God came into the Garden, and called to Adam in
the cool of the day, Genesis 3. 8. Genesis 3. 8.
that is, when the heat of Adams lust and self-will was over: till then lust
made such a noise in Adams soul, God could not be heard: Then the Lord God puts
Adam upon the examination of his soul: Adam where art thou? wh^t have thou
done? have thou tasted (...) eaten of thine own will, that forbidden fr^it?
which (...) shall find the very eating or tasting will be death to thee, which
every soul that God has really spoken to, finds true in his own feeling and
experience.

Thus have we run through this hour allotted, it may be God may open your eyes,
that you may see into these things; and I pray God you may, even far beyond
what I am able to express: that you your selves may say and feel that this
knowledge is that one thing necessary: For this is that word, Luke 10. 42.
which if you believe not, will be the savor of death unto death; 2 Cor. 2. 16.
but if believed and received, will be the savor of life unto life.

THE STAR IN THE EAST, Leading unto the true MESSIAH.
1 COR. 2. 2. But I determined to know nothing among you save Jesus Christ and
him crucified.
In two Sermons Preached at a Private meeting at KENSINGTON.

BEloved, there are such things In-wrapt and folded up in the sacred Sriptures
of God Almighty, which being once known, he that knows them in a right way, he
need not with the Apostle here, being taught by the holy Spirit, deire to know
any thing more.

And because the treasure that is in these words, and also in all the words of
God, is so fast locked up so that no natural man can come at them; he knows
nothing of them, for he perceives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
neither indeed can he, for they are spiritually discerned. Therefore let us
implore and besee^h his help who has the keys to open the seven seals, as it
is in the Revelation of S. John, He who only was counted worthy to open the
book, Rev. 5. 9.
that He may unlo^k and reveal to us these precious mysteries.

I determined to know nothing among you, etc. What does the Apostle mean by
these words? was he a man that knew nothing, or was he an ignorant in all those
other things, and therefore slighted them: That because he had no learning
therefore slighted learning? No, (...) me leave to tell you, He was no Fool,
he was (...), he was no Bab^^ no not in all that great and ^hiefest learning,
which was in his time accounted so highly of: for he was as great a proficient
Therein as most of them all. Act. 22. 2.
He was brought up (as he ^aith of himself) at the feet of Gamaliel: and he wa^
a great man in the learning of the Pharisees, who were at that time the only
learned men of the Church, yea of the whole world: Insomuch that they were had
in reverence of all, because they thought these Rabbis had all knowledge, and
that these were the only men to whom God himself opened and revealed himself:
So that, he was counted a madman or a fool, one led with the spirit of error
and schism that should dare to oppose or speak a word against them.

Yet our Apostle here, being inferior to none of them all, and could have gone
their paths, to have gotten their estimation in the world, if he had then seen
any excellency in them, as before he did, he could have gloried after the slesh
as well as they. But now having to do with these Corinthians, and seeing the
vanity of all humane learning without this knowledge, he lays all aside, and
undervalues all as dross and dung, and comes to them in wonderful plainness of
speech, that he might preach to them Jesus Christ and not himself (as they did)
to gain honor and profit in the world, 2 Cor. 2. 12.
and to make themselves great in the esteem of others; it was death to them to
fail of these ends. These, they put so (...) confidence* both Preachers and
People, in this kind of way, and in this learning, being only literally
learned, and knowing in the Scriptures only Externally; so that all the world
was undervalued to them; for so it was at that time, All this great fabric of
the world was divided into two parts only, viz, Jews and Barbarians; if they
were not Jews, they were Barbarians and Heathens.

And this kind of learning was then, and so always is accompanied with all
manner of riches and honor, with all the glory and splendor of the world,
every man bowed to their parts and worth: they were presented with gifts, and
it was accounted a great honor to have them accepted by them: they were
repaired to at all times, As to resolve doubts, and give counsel, etc. they
were as Oracles in the peoples esteem generally. And he that went not this way,
was like to lead an obscure, beggarly life, no body taking notice of him,
scarce having a hole to put his head in, nay He should be sure to be trampled
down and cast under foot by these great men, by their great blustering, and by
their great parrs, and by their great learning. Luke 9. 58.
The foxes have holes, and the birds of this world have nests, but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head.

Well, notwithstanding all this, our Apostle sticks not at it, but lays all
aside, learning, credit, honor and dishonor, riches, poverty; he tramples all
under foot, and is content to expose himself to whatever their malice could
bring about: he reposes no confidence in whatever Parts he had equal with them:
and says that he expected, and was content to be accounted a Fool, and to hide
himself, and be as one that had nothing in him. He will never go about to
dispute it out with these great Rabbis, that is not the way, he knew that
would do no good: for he had experience, that of disputations there was no end:
for every one stuck so fast and unmovable to his opinion, one to show his wit
and eloquence; another to gain honor and riches; another because he had
declared what he held, and being once past the bars of his lips, he must not
recant and be a flincher, and discover his ignorance, wherein he had declared
so much confidence, but must then stand it out to the death: so one for one
end, and another for another, men's Ends being infinite and unspeakable, so that
therein he had no hope.

Well beloved, our Apostle sleights all, away with all these things, Phil. 3. 8.
I count them nothing, they are dross and dung: I desire to know nothing, I
seek for no knowledge you can name: as if he should say, you (it may be)
account me ignorant in regard of some among you: well, all is one, esteem of me
as you will, seek to undervalue and to crush me what you please, I determined,
I resolved before I came I would know nothing, hearken to no knowledge, but the
knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified: that is, whether you knew this in
experience or no, whether you had that knowledge that would crucify and bring
to nothing all your great learning, and your great parts.

Now that I may come to unfold and unlock those precious truths that are hid
and folded up in these words, by the gracious assistance of that Meek Lamb that
was slain for us: I shall endeavor to open these three principal things, Rev.
13. 8.
that ly plain in the words.

1 What manner of knowledge this is, that the Apostle so Highly sets it up even
above all knowledge, so that he himself was contented to be accounted nothing,
so he could but gain more of that among them, or bring them to the knowledge of
it?

2 What is the subject of this knowledge? that is, Jesus Christ.

3 What it is to know Jesus Christ crucified? (as it is here meant.)

He knew it was not enough to know Jesus Christ Externally, nor to know him so
Crucified: No, though they had been eyewitnesses of it, yet this knowledge was
nothing: for (says the Apostle) Henceforth know we no man any more after the
flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
no, though we had known the LORD CHRIST himself: Yet I know, if I should ask
any of you; or take you one by one and ask you, If you knew Jesus Christ? You
would presently answer me to this, and tell me a large story, that this was
your faith, and that you did confidently believe, Math. 1.
That in the fullness of time God sent an Angel to the virgin Mary to tell her
that of her body Christ should be born, Luke 1. 35.
and he was conceived in her by the power of the Holy Ghost, the most High came
upon her and overshadowed her, she conceived without the aid or help of man,
and she brought forth her firstborn son, which was the Messiah, and that he
grew up in age and stature, and in favor with God and man; as the Scriptures
express of him. And also* that wise men came from the East to see and worship
him, and at twelve years old he came up to Jerusalem with his parents, and
went into the Temple and disputed among the Doctors: Luke 2. 42.
and then ye heard no more of him till he was 30 years old: and then he was
baptized of John at Jordan, then he began to preach, and then he was questioned
for his doctrine, despised, derided: (...) that he wrought many miracles, and
taught such doctrine that many wondered at the gracious words that proceeded
out of his mouth. And at last, he was apprehended, examined, scourged,
buffeted, spit upon, crowned with thorns, and was crucified, and dyed upon the
cross, and the third day rose again, and shall come again at the end of the
world to judge the quick and the dead. This is your faith, this is he in whom
you believe, and this is your Savior.

Well, but give me leave to tell you, you may know all this and a thousand
times more, and yet not know Jesus Christ, nor know him crucified: It is
another manner of knowledge that our Apostle here determined to know, all this
faith will do you no good, for this is no more then the Devils know: Although
it be all truth, undeniably true; this History of him is most certainly true,
and in defense whereof we ought to spend our lives and blood. And I say also,
they do well that teach this, and who have learned it themselves, and teach
their children and servants to know it: But if you learn this and no more, ye^
know not half so much as the Devils know,

This you may know also, that God is a great and a mighty God, Jam. 2. 19.
the Devils know him to be so: that he is a wise and omniscient God: the Devils
know as much and more: The Devils believe all this, I, and tremble at the
knowledge thereof, as the Apostle says. They believe and tremble, Iam. 2. 19.

And because it is said in the Gospel, Joh. 17. 3.
This is eter^^l life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. Do thou think this is that knowledge St. John means?

And because thou know that he is a merciful God, the Devils externally and
in general know as much; That he is long-suffering and abundant in goodness and
truth to those that fear him, and what else thou can say of him: they know as
much, and far more. This is not therefore most certainly that knowledge that is
there called Eternal li^e, for such an Eternal life the Devils have, and a
better.

But many are so far from Eternal life, that they know not so much as the
history, the bare letter of the Scriptures. Although they that do know the
history never so exactly, in that they have every letter and word thereof
without book, and have gathered it into never so short an Epitome by their
labor and industry, yet these may be far from the Mystery, the life and marrow
of the word. But what shall they do then, how far are they from the mystery,
who have not attained the bare shell, the bare history and outside? Those
indeed must be known (though in themselves they do us no good^) for they are
but the way to the Mystery, and without the History we cannot have the Mystery:
for we cannot come to Believing without Hearing: Romans 10. 15.
for how can they believe him, of whom they have not heard?

We must not therefore cast away the letter, because that is the Book which
brings us the Word: though they (those letters) be not the living word, and in
themselves do us no good, if we go farther; yet we cannot have the kernel
without the shell. These outward letters to the eye and to the ear are a means
to convey the True word to the heart. And therefore if you think you have Gods
Word, when you have gotten the knowledge of the letter, or of whatsoever the
outside, or the letter bears, without the mind and meaning, you are deceived.
This knowledge will deceive you; it will be but as a broken reed, that
whosoever he be that relyes thereon, it will run into his hand, Isa. 39. 10.
deceive and destroy him. This is Truth (if ye will believe it from our
Saviors own mouth) The flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6. 63.
it is the Spirit (the mystery) the marrow that gives life. It is the mystery,
the Spirit that is eternal life; The letter and the shell cannot nourish, it
must be the mystery and the marrow, That which cannot possibly be known in the
superficies, in the outside, in the flesh, in the shell of the Letter, except
we go further; Mar. 10. 11.
and Jesus Christ opens the seals and shows us the life, the marrow, That,
which except it be given to us, we cannot understand.

And therefore the Apostle flatly denies all other knowledge, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15,
16.
2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 16. for (says he) the love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and he
dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him that dyed for them. Wherefore (says he in the 16. verse)
henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known Christ after
the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more. What may be the meaning of this
blessed Apostle thus seemingly to slight the very body of Jesus Christ? In all
probability he never saw the body of Jesus Christ upon earth in that 33 years
he lived here: except he had a vision of him, as he marched to Damascus, when
he was smitten from his horse; His meaning therefore must needs be, Act. 9.
If we know Christ after the Letter never so exactly, the whole history of him;
what avails it? Our knowledge of Jesus Christ must be internal, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
spiritual, experimental, to live unto him that dyed for them: if a man be not
(as the Apostle says in the succeeding verses) made a new creature, altered
and changed according to Christ in the inward man: 2 Cor. 5. 17.
so that he lives no longer to himself, but to him that dyed for him; so that
all old things are past away, and all things are become new: so that there is
(by the mighty power of Jesus Christ) a new man begotten in us, Gal. 4. 19.
as the Apostle says: My beloved of whom I travel in birth, till Christ be
formed in yo^. This is indeed that Christ that died for us, else Christ dyed
not for us, 2 Cor. 1. 17.
his cross is of no effect, he dyed in vain to us. It Is not all the knowledge
and believing that ever thou can attain to of an external Christ will do thee
any good, without a Christ begotten within thee, a Christ in experience.

Has any man gotten or attained (though by much pains and industry) any taste,
any knowledge of Christ otherwise, it is but old things, old knowledge, old
learning, attained by the power of the old man, fot self ends. And all old
things must pass away (says the Apostle.) That knowledge that was conveyed to
us by our parents, or by our Schoolmasters; let it be what it will, or by whom
it will; (by all the Catechisms and Books that can be made, and that we are
able to apply them to our lives according to the Letter) it is all but old
things, old knowledge; as the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 20.
he knew the law, and had kept all those things from his youth: but he failed
in point of self-denial, he obeyed from old powers, and to old ends. And
although we had all knowledge, and all power, and all conformity in this
regard, before Christ be created in the heart, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
it must all pass away: This is that knowledge that we cannot depend on, This
is that knowledge that the Apostle regards not, he esteems it Nothing: let it
be never so glorious and splendent, and though all the world has received it,
and in their words, own it (though in practice they renounce it) he counts it
all dross and dung. Phil. 3. 8.


Why St. Paul, what manner of knowledge then is it, that thou will know nothing
besides it? And that is the second thing: he answers it himself in this
chapter, Lo, if ye are able to understand (says he) so that the god of this
world has not blinded your eyes: 1 Cor. 2. 2, 6, etc.
we do speak wisdom, even the hidden wisdom of God, yet in a mystery, not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, which comes to naught:
indeed this wisdom it tends not to outward pomp, not to riches, nor honor, nor
the setting up of men and parts, but we speak wisdom to those that are perfect,
to those whom Jesus Christ has pulled off the scales from their eyes. What
mystery is it to know Jesus Christ his death and resurrection outwardly, and
all the circumstances? Will this faith save you? No, but to those that know no
more, V. 14.
we are very fools; and they can see no wisdom in our words. The carnal man
knows not the Profound, the Deep things of God; neither indeed can he,
because they are spiritually discerned.

But he that can divide these waters, shall have dry and firm ground to walk
on, and over Jordan safely: He that can crack the shell, those can relish and
digest these precious mysteries: And to those, they are the preciousest
dainties in heaven and earth: they are the sweetest excellencies wherein their
souls can live and die: these are the souls which delight themselves in
Fatness, undervaluing the world and all things therein, as seeing them lean and
empty things. But to the carnal man, and he that will go no farther then the
Letter, these truths we now speak of, are the unrelishablest, the tasteless
est, the sapless est meat you can give them: we pour but water in their shoes,
ye cannot please them worse then when you talk of these things, or preach of
these things, because ye are out of their element, it is as unwelcome and as
Nauseous as a c^p of cold water, they are sick of such doctrine.

To tell them that they must be killed and slain, their own knowledge, their
own lives must be crucified, they must no longer have their own desires, their
own wills, their own affections; but must be content to cross themselves in
every thing, Luke 9. 23.
and to take up their cross daily and follow Christ, else they cannot be his
Disciples: oh here is vinegar and gall, ye are the unwelcomest men to them in
the world: they cry with the Jews, Numb. 11. 6.
Our soul is weary of this light meat, give us somewhat that we can feel: give
us some ponderous thing, some comfortable thing, somewhat that our senses may
see and feel good. Alas, this is not the Heaven we look for; Can we think it a
happiness to be destroyed, to be killed and crucified? Give us such a Christ,
and such a Heaven as is good to our outward man: who will let us have credit,
and honor, and riches: such a Christ that we may believe in, who died so many
years ago, that will save us outwardly: such a Christ that will be good to my
eyes, to my hands, and to my feet, to my back, and to my belly: such a Christ
as will save us, if we do but externally and literally believe in him, and
will let us have our own wills, Isa. 58. 13.
and speak our own words, and please our affections, and save our souls at last.

I marry Sir, Here is a Christ indeed, this is such a Christ as all the world
would have. But give me leave to tell you: This is a Christ of thine own
making; this Christ which thou speak of, was never of the Fathers sending,
he comes unsent, the true Christ is hid from thee.

But (as the Apostle says) if our doctrine be hid, it is hid to those that
perish: but to us who believe, it is the Savor of life unto life: but to all
others the Savor of death unto death: Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
He is to us sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb; more dear to us, then
thousands of gold and silver: This Christ is more precious (whom we are now
unfolding) to you that truly believe, then all the riches and glory, yea then
all the lives in the world.

And, That we may come to open this Jesus Christ to you, if so be your eyes are
open, or else we shall speak but parables and paradoxes to you, as Christ did
to the Jews: and they will but make you more mad as he did them, more enrage
them against himself.

That ye may understand what we speak of, and intend, we must first wave the
knowledge of the History of Christ externally; and then we shall come to the
knowledge of the Mystery, of the true Christ, of that Jesus Christ which is
able to save your souls, and to make you wise unto salvation. The other
knowledge cannot do so; for if it could, the Devils themselves should be saved.
Therefore it must needs be another kind of knowledge then they have; it must be
more then the knowledge of the Letter, and outward face, even of the whole
Scriptures. It must be a hidden knowledge, and that is the knowledge of The
Mystery: namely, a real, l^vely, and experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ
wrought in thy heart, by the power of himself. Even like unto Flowers or Herbs,
or any other thing that grows on the ground by the heat and power of the Sun:
if there be not something communicated to them from the Sun, that is of the
Suns own nature, they grow not at all, but they wither and dye; if the Sun warm
them not and comfort them, they grow not, but dye. So if there be not in every
one of us something of Jesus Christ that is of his own nature, the same mind,
the same quickening Spirit, Phil. 2. 15.
the same disposition, and the same new nature, something of his own
offspring, we are but in a dead and perishing condition; all that ever we know
otherwise, is mere folly in this regard; be their knowledge never so excellent
and glorious to those who have not Jesus Christ in them.

As that wicked Pope said when he had showed such a vast treasure of riches,
See (says he) how that Fable of Jesus Christ has enriched me: So to these
men, what ever they talk of Jesus Christ and of the knowledge of him, to them
the true Christ is a mere fable, a mere tale: as he thought outwardly to enrich
him, so they think this Fable of a deceitful Christ has and will enrich their
souls. But except we know Christ feelingly, experimentally, so that he lives
within us spiritually, his own natural life, insomuch that whatever any man
has known in the Letter and History of him, that he know the same within him,
as truly done actually in his own soul, as ever Christ did any thing without
him in the days of his flesh, else it profit nothing; And to find all that ever
you read of him to be verified in you experimentally: It is not Jesus Christ
without us can do us any good; he is no Christ, to us, all his actions are in
vain, to us, they are all as a mere tale, a mere song, to us. As one of the
Fathers said, It was not that Christ that the Virgin Mary carried in her womb,
that did save her, but that Christ that she carried in her heart.

And our Saviors own words express as much, Not blessed is the womb that bare
thee, Luke 23. 29.
and the paps that thou have sucked; but blessed are they that hear the word of
God and kept it. They that would have any benefit by Jesus Christ, they must
have him in their hearts, Born within them: not only to know that Christ was
born at Bethlehem, but born in them, and not to know only that Christ dyed at
such a time, so many years ago; this will do you no good, except you
experimentally find and feel, how he is crucified, dead, and buried within you.

Let no man (what ever he be) delude you, and make you believe that any other
Christ will save you. Let no man upon pain of the salvation and damnation of
his soul, once dare to think that any other Christ will do him any good; and
that he experimentally feel Jesus Christ risen again within him; and all other
actions that ever he did, that still he finds him doing the same in him: as
Saint Paul says, My beloved, of whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed
in you: Gal. 4. 19.
not Christ divided and by halves, but whole Christ formed in you.

When you begin to find and know, not only that he was conceived in the womb
of a Virgin, but that thou art that virgin, and that he is more truly and
spiritually, and yet as really conceived in thy heart; so that thou feel the
Babe beginning to be conceived in thee, by the power of the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.
35.
and the most High overshadowing thee; when thou feel Jesus Christ stirring
to be born, and brought forth within thee; when thou beginnest to see and feel
all those Mighty, powerful, and wonderful actions done in thee, which thou
read he did in the flesh: For Christ is not divided (says the Apostle) but
yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and the same for ever: There is not one Christ without us, and
Another within us, but that same Christ that was then upon earth, must be
spiritually in us, growing and increasing, and doing the same actions still.

Now, Beloved, here is a Christ indeed, that will save you; here is a Christ, A
real Christ, that will do you some good; this is The Christ, which indeed,
Alone, and Only will bring you to heaven.

If your faith has wrought and formed such a Christ in you, Ephesians. 3. 12.
then you may have boldness through him: Of this Christ you may boast and
triumph against all the powers of darkness, with St Paul, Romans 8. so that
neither heights, nor depths, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
Angels, nor any creature, shall be ^ver able to separate you and this Jesus
Christ our Lord, blessed for ever, Romans 8. 38, 39. Romans 8. 38, 39.


What ever other faith you have, believe as strongly, and as confidently as you
will or can do, be sure it is but Head-knowledge of Christ, it is but a bold
unwarranted presumption, and no faith: For External Jesus Christ is a shadow,
a symbol, a figure of the Internal: viz. of him that is to be born within us,
In our souls.

Beloved, you know it is said of Abraham, He saw Christ's day, and rejoiced; so
all the Saints that ever were, are, or shall be, must See the day of Jesus
Christ as well as Abraham did; if we look for any comfort by Jesus Christ, we
must see his day also. The Jews saw the day of Christ in the flesh only; but
thou must see Christ's day as Abraham did: Thou must as really, yea, more really
and more truly See Christ's day, then the Jews; John 8. 56.
for says Christ, Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced; and in the same manner
shall all that ever shall taste of heaven, See, The same day of Christ. Did the
Jews see the day of Christ in the flesh? did they see him work miracles?
opening the eyes of the blind, yea, of those born blind, and curing the deaf,
and the lame, and the dumb: why (as if our Savior should have said) you think
you see my day? but if you see me but externally, doing this action, you see
not my day: Abraham that lived so many hundred years ago, he saw my day truly,
and rejoiced: He saw me do all these works in himself; he did truly and really
see me cast out devils, raise the dead, open blind eyes, heal and cure all the
diseases of his soul; he saw me to be the Messiah and Savior to himself and in
himself; he saw my day better then you, and rejoiced to see me do all these
mighty works in him: and the self-same day must we see, if ever we come to be
partakers of Jesus, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
and of the Divine nature.

Abraham saw not his day (as some think) so much by way of prophecy, as it is
commonly taken and expounded, that he was the Messiah that should come into the
world: but he (besides this) saw done in himself, that which he did when he
came in the flesh: And so Abraham saw my day, He saw me conceived, born,
brought up; yea he saw me apprehended, scourged, crucified; He saw me dead, and
buried, and risen again, and all in himself: This was a true, a real, a saving
seeing of Christ's day. To see it by way of prophecy, was far below this
seeing; that was a seeing did Abraham (nor will do you) little good: If it were
meant of that kind of seeing, the Jews saw Christ better then Abraham; for they
saw him actually, personally, but that was a fruitless seeing.

Therefore if you will see Christ gloriously, as the Great and Mighty Savior,
we must see him such a Savior, Isa. 9. 6, 7.
as we may say of him, Unto us a Son is born, unto us a child is given: ye
shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
father, and the Prince of Peace, and the Government shall be upon his
shoulders: And all this I find and feel in my own soul; and in me, and to me is
all this done.

But Beloved, give me leave, that you may understand me, if it shall please God
to open your eyes, and to let you see these hidden secrets* which are kept
close from ages, and from generations: I will in the plainest manner that I
can, show you how Jesus Christ is said to be in you: that is, when he so begins
to arise in you, Mark 1. 18.
that his fame spreads far and near, when he shows his own actions in you: for
know this, Christ is always in you^ he is at no time absent; as soon as ever
ye began to have a being, he was in you in regard of himself, though you saw
him not, because he is Infinite; For, That which is infinite, is in all places,
it is excluded out of no place: for if any place, if any creature were without
him, he were not infinite: And because he is infinite, he is equally present in
all places at once, and in all places alike: he cannot be more in one place
then another; for if he should, he could not be infinite: and because he is
infinite, he is all-present in all places at once.

These things are out of all question, and known by every one that understands
any thing: I think none will deny them. He is as well in a dead withered
branch, as in a green flourishing tree; but in the living branch we see him
grow and put forth his life: And so likewise he is in the deadest, rottenest
member that is, as well as in the fruitfullest Christian: But here is the
difference; in the one we see him not, we see not his life and fruit, but he is
in such a member as dead; dead to him, and dead (in appearance) to others, yea,
that member is, Jude 12.
as it were, twice dead and pulled up by the roots, as the Apostle says, and
fit for nothing but to be condemned to the fire: For Jesus Christ, although he
be in them, as much as in the living bought, yet to them he is dead and buried,
and lives not in them, and to them.

And give me leave, and I will show you in some particular actions that Christ
did and does, when He begins to live in a man; for till He begin to show the
actions of life, He is, as if he were not there. I will only touch upon some
of his actions, which may be as a key to open and interpret the meaning of all
the rest: for it is impossible to speak of all the actions that he did and
does; for the whole world were not able to contain that which might be written
of him, John ult. and ult.
says St. John: Mat. 9. 35.
that is, of those actions and mighty miracles that he goes up and down working
daily, and doing good internally and spiritually in the souls of men.

But the first motive that induces, shows and persuades us that Christ is
alive in us, is his Nativity, which you know in the days of his flesh was
first proclaimed by one Angel, and afterward by a whole quire of Angels.

When God has sent this One Angel (or Messenger) into the soul, to show us,
and to proclaim the reality and being of Christ in every creature, then
thousands of Angels sing the same to us, then every creature proclaims HIM with
a loud voice (to him who has this light sent into his soul) that there is now
to us a Son born, Isa. 9. 6. Luke 2. 14.
and to us a child is given: glory only be to God in the highest, on earth
peace, good will toward men: then all the Angels, that is, all the creatures,
they all harmoniously sing the same tune to us. When he brings the
first-begotten into the world, He says, Let ALL The Angels of God worship him.

And then Christ being once born, the next thing that appears is his Star; Mat.
2. 2.
his star appears in the East, and wisemen come to see him; then he increases
and grows up in us; then he shows himself to men, then he manifests himself to
be The Christ, in that he does the deeds of Christ; in that we show the virtues
of him that has called us from darkness to light, Acts 26. 18.
from the power of Satan to God* then he waxes taller and taller, Luke 2. 52.
and grows up in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and man (i. e.)
with all wise men: They now act and live the life of Christ, denying their own
lives they lived before; Mat. 5. 16
that so men seeing their good works, may glorify their father which is in
heaven. Til this time Jesus Christ was crucified, dead and buried: but when
once this Lion of the Tribe of Judah begins to rouse up himself, Rev. 5. 5.
then it shall appear that there is now a King born, that will bear rule, that
shall be such a Messiah spiritually, as the Jews expected temporally, Isa. 9. 7.
a Potent and Mighty Prince, whose Government shall be upon his shoulders. His
Name being WONDERFUL, Counselor, and Prince of Peace.

And now all those Accursed Jews which ^rucified him, and made him to serve,
shall now be made to serve him: Isa. ^3. 24
as the Prophet says, You have made me to serve with your iniquites: Psalm. 2.
3. and 9.
Now all those headstrong lusts, those Kings and Rulers of the Earth which
cried Let us break his bonds in sunder, and cast away these cords from us: He
shall now rule them with a rod of iron, and crush them in pieces like a potters
vessel: So that we shall live no longer the life of natural, carnal men, in the
vanity of their mind, Ephesians. 4. 17.
to fulfill the lusts of men, and the will of flesh, Gal. 5. 16.
and of the world; but they live the life of spiritual men; we shall then show
that we are the Offspring of Christ: Till you become to this, whatever you
think of your selves, there can be nothing well done; Act. 17. 29.
for before this we altogether think our own thoughts, Genesis 6. 5.
do our own actions, go our own ways: For all the imaginations of man's heart
are only evil continually.

But before this great and not able day of the Lord come, Mat. 24. 3, etc.
the Lord will set signs in the heavens, and in the earth, and there shall be
great stirs and wars, and rumors of wars; and the Inhabitants of the earth
shall be troubled; amazement and terror shall seize upon them, because of
these things: Luke 21. 28, etc.
And when thou see these things come to pass (I say, within thee) then look
up for know your redemption draws nigh: When you see the red Dragon watch
against the woman shall be delivered of her man-child spoken of in the
Revelation, that he sends forth whole floods of water out of his mouth, to
drown her, then know the child is born.

But before this time, when you see the woman in travel, and has great pain,
and cries out extremely, and has bitter pains, I say Bitter pangs, then you
may know the child is near delivery: that is, when this beloved old man, our
own will, as the Scripture terms him, who was never by us denied anything
himself desired, but all was carried smoothly, according to his own desire; and
now to be crossed and contradicted, Oh ^his is great pain to him! Oh he cries out
like a travailing woman! Oh he would by no means forsake himself, his own will*
his own pleasure, his own profit, Take up his cross and follow Christ! What,
forsake all that is dear to him! this is death to him: Oh! when you hear your
flesh cry out, Oh! would to God I had never been born, then I had never seen
this day: Oh! let me dye, let me dye, I am weary of my life when ye hear him
like Job bitterlycurse the day of his birth: Oh Beloved! this day is a terrible
day to flesh and blood: it never saw such a day: Oh its a bloody day, it comes
with a terrible confused noise of the warriors, and garments tumbled in blood,
Isa. 9. 5.
as the Prophet speaks; it was never so haled and pulled, this way the flesh,
the other way the spirit it was never so torn in pieces: But know Beloved, when
these pains are upon you, that the child is at the birth, near to be delivered.

Beloved, these things will be, if ever Christ be born in the soul: And when it
is so, that the flesh hales one way and the Spirit another, Oh then it behooves
you to pray, That so your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath, nor
in the harvest: Oh Beloved, pray that these things, this Seed do not dye
without fruit, that in the midst of this biting bitter winter, you do not fly,
but bide by it, and endure and wait the fruit, that in the midst of winter you
may enjoy your Sabbaths, a day of rest and peace, lest that when other men
enjoy their Sabbaths, their harvest, you have nothing but winter, bitterness,
trouble and want, and no fruit to refresh you.

Brethren, Mat. 24. 20.
I beseech the Lord that you may prove, try and examine your selves by these
things; see if this day has overpast ye; has your woman had pains, and bitter
agonies? have you suffered such contradiction between the flesh and the spirit,
that these wars and terrors and rumors, have struck through the very soul of
you? that you have felt it as bitter as gall, as bitter as bitterness it self,
for says our Lo^d, Luk 21. 22. Then be the days of VENGEANCE, that all things
which are written may be fulfilled; insomuch as you may say of your selves,
Ruth. 1. 20, 21.
Call me not now Naomi, pleasant; but call me Marah, bitterness: for the
Almighty has dealt bitterly with me. Esa. 9. 6.
This work being gone through, you may be sure the child is born to you, and to
you a Son is given, else not. Tell me of what you will, of education and good
nature, and the still work of Gods Spirit; except this work be done in you, so
that you can speak of the work thereof experimentally, you do but befool and
delude your own souls.

And this work being gone through, Luke 2. 42.
and the child born, then (as I said before) he grows and increases in age and
perfection every day. He is not grown to a man in a moment, but by steps and by
degrees. He that has this work brought about in his soul, he need fear
nothing, he is in a free and safe condition; all the men upon earth, nay the
powers of darkness cannot hurt him; although the Dragon, the Devil, Sin, Lusts,
the old man, Self, Lucifer, Adam, the Serpent, etc. these with all their fiery
darts (for when I name one, I name all) (as I opened them to you upon another
occasion) for I opened near 20 of his names severally: for these names and many
such the Scripture gives him, to set out that evil one within us, which the
most part of men are little acquainted with (although they hug them in their
bosoms, Rev. 12. 15.
eat, drink, sleep, work, play with them) and all these I say, although they
send forth whole floods of water after the woman, yet they cannot drown her,
(...) this work delivers and frees men from the powers of darkness: this work
brings down the strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
disarms the strong man, and sets the soul free, Saves it, delivers it, carries
it above all waves.

The next remarkable action Christ did, he was circumcised, Mat. 12. 29.
That is, He submitted himself to all outward Ordinances, because he knew that
all powers were ordained of God; and so far forth as they tend to God, and tend
to love and peace, we ought to submit: So then, we are then circumcised with
Christ, and Christ is circumcised in us, when we for his sake submit to all
humane Ordinances, both temporal and spiritual, they not being against the Word
and command of God. For Christ himself, though he was not bound to them, yet he
would do it, because (says he) on another occasion, Mat. 3. 15.
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.

And our Savior puts this very question to Peter (says he) Peter, of whom do
the Kings of the earth take tribute? of the children, or of Strangers? Pe^er
answers, of Strangers. Then (says our Savior) the children are free. Though
our Lord knew his liberty, yet he did submit himself; and did not as many do
now adays, upon pretense of liberty deny submission to good orders in Church
and State: But he commanded Peter (notwithstanding he was the Son of God) and
knew infinitely his own liberty, and the liberty of his Saints and Disciples,
more then we or they; It Is true Peter, Mat. 22. 21.
says he, the children are free: yet notwithstanding, go to the Sea, and cast
word Angle, and open the mouth of the first fish that comes up, Mat. 22. 21.
and there he should find a piece of silver; go and give that for me and thee;
so then are we circumcised with Christ, when we do the same action for his
sake, although we be free, that we may give them no offense, as Christ there
says.

The next action that we read Christ did, Luke 2. 46.
He came up with his Parents at the feast to Jerusalem, and went into the
Temple and disputed among the Doctors. The same thing does Christ in the soul;
for there is within every one of us A many Learned Doctors, brought up in
Satan's University; who are very subtle, very acute Disputants: even the rankest
fool amongst us has a whole University of Doctors within him: how subtle how
learned then are they in wise men? Truly the more wisdom, the more dangerous
to dispute a man to hell; and in this regard the more wise the more remote from
the Kingdom of heaven, more unfit to be made a fool for Christ: how hard is it
for such a man to be brought to unknow, Esa. 47. 10.
unlearn, and deny his own wisdom, parts, goodness? etc, Thy wisdom has made
thee rebel, says Jeremiah and Isaiah: We are so full of wisdom to defend our
selves in our evil ways; and by custom and practice we have wonderfully
profited in this University: we have made a large progress in these Schools,
and have out-stript many of our standing. Insomuch that we have not only
approved and cleaved fast and close to our iniquities, but we are grown learned
Doctors at it, to defend th^^, to hold out arguments against the very World of
God, and the everlasting blessed truths of Jesus Christ: which did we but
receive, and suffer our selves to be overcome by them, they would make us for
ever happy and Able to make the man of God wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15.


Beloved, examine your selves; find you not these things so? What mighty,
learned, unwearied Disputes are there held in our souls? what strange and
strong reasonings? insomuch that the Old man carries all before Him, and these
Lusts, these great Doctors bear away the day of it: down with the Word, down
with Law, Gospel, Christ, Salvation, Truth, all kept under and imprisoned, and
made to serve with our iniquities, Isa. 43. 24
as the Prophet speaks. And this you know is, and has been of old, and still
will be, My brethren, until Jesus Christ be pleased with his Almighty power to
come into the soul and command a silence; and that he will now manifest
himself, and comes in with Regal, Conquering power. Else our lusts make such a
hurly burly, such a noise, such loud clamouring in the soul, that Christ cannot
be heard: therefore he in the first place, is fain to put them all to silence,
answering and convicting every lust: and then are we mighty through God to the
casting down of strong holds and every imagination that exalts it self against
the knowledge, kingdom, and power of Jesus Christ^: otherwise, 2 Cor. 10. 15.
if Christ come not in thus, there is no silencing these Doctors: He must put
the Minstrels out of doors before he will raise the dead soul. Do you what you
can, pray, fast, strive against them, yet they know you not, they are furious
and raging. Act. 19. 16
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? Self will not be crossed,
will through all, knows no banks, no bounds, no bottom; will seek it self, set
up and exalt it self in every thing; there is no overcoming, no silencing these
Doctors.

For there is Doctor Pleasure; and he pleads, take thy pleasure in the life
time, fill and satisfy thy self with recreations, and take thy fill of the
good blessings of God: Were they not made for man's use, and art not thou Lord
over the Creatures, to use and enjoy them as thou please?

And then there is Doctor Profit: says he, Friend, the best way for thee is to
get riches for thy self, it is no matter how, though others pinch for it, so
thou can but bring in profit: this will do thee good when all thy friends
will forsake thee: thou may then take thine ease; come times what will, thou
have goods laid up for many years, Luke 12. 19
thou shall be rich, and be a man in esteem in the parish: hereby thou shall be
a great man, thou shall be heard before another, and thou shall be looked upon
and advanced, whereas the Poor they are despised and trampled on, scarce
suffered to speak for themselves.

And then comes Doctor Honor; and says he, what need all this stir about
Religion? can not thou be content to go the old way thy forefathers went?
can not thou be content to go that way the State goes, that way that Kings
and Princes, and Great men go? then shall thou walk safely, and enjoy thine
own, and be honored for a wise man, a prudent man, do not the most go this
way? and though thou art not so forward in Religion, thou shall do as well as
they: There is none but a a company of poor beggarly fellows, Tinkers and
Cobblers, and schismatical and conceited fellows that are so hot, and they are
every where despised; as it was said in derision the last day, that there was
none came running out of the City to hear me, but a company of Cobblers and
slight fellows.

Although I would not encourage any to slight their own Pastors who teach them
truth, and labor to build them up in their holy faith, and I know there be
many able men in the City near them, and therefore I marvail what they came out
into the Wilderness to see? a poor sinful man, subject to like passions and
infirmities with others? a Reed shaken with the wind? who has nothing to give,
if God enlighten not, and if he open not my mouth, Psalm. 51. 15.
I cannot set forth his praise, whose praise is far above the earth and
heavens: for if Praise, or Profit, or Self open my mouth, Psalm. 8. 1.
I cannot set forth His praise: but if this people come after me with a
hungring and thirsting after truth, and without slighting other worthy
Teachers, I here profess, be they what they will be, rich or poor, if they have
a feeling of these things in their own souls, I profess they are more welcome
to me then so many Princes or Potentates: and for ought I know, one of them may
enjoy more of God then most Kings or Princes, or Noblemen, and shall enter into
their Masters joy, when they themselves shall be shut out, for the poor are
always despised in the world. You know the Prophet Esaias says, chapter 43. 8.
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. Isa.
43. 8.
And says our Savior, Go tell John, the poor receive the Gospel. This is a
digression by the way, we return to our matter.

And although the storm and the lightning be now very terrible, A terrible
storm of Thunder and lightning filling the place with fire and flame.
be not afraid, change not your countenances, nor be not so amazed, stand fast,
our God is able to defend us. Attend, mind the business in hand, and fear not;
we are about the Lords business, our fathers business; we are now discovering
the powers of Darkness; if we should now be snarcht away doing this work, we
should have comfort in it: though the earth be removed (says David) and the
Mountains be hurled here and there, we will not fear; though the heavens should
kiss the earth, and all things be reduced to their first Chaos, yet stand still,
fear not, but attend and we shall go on.

Says Doctor Honor, Be wise for thy self, art thou willing to be counted such
a Fool, to be so hot in religion? do any of the learned, any of the great and
wise men go this way? can not thou go on in a fine, smooth, moderate way, and
so shall thou please all the World? And thus these Doctors will dispute against
those ways which are of absolute necessity, if ever a man come to Heaven. If
thou will go this way we go, and seek for honor, riches, etc. thou shall be a
man of some account, all the world shall bow to thee, thou shall be accounted
some body, people shall flock to thee for counsel. else, if thou will not
hearken and obey our counsel, thou art like to lead an obscure And beggarly
life.

Again, there is Doctor Arrogance; and he says, Be thou some body in thine own
esteem, exalt thy self, seek thine own praise; thou have wisdom, and power, and
parts, they are thine; arrogate and appropriate these to thy self, and walk
confidently and boldly on in thin^ own worth; and so he looks on himself as a
Peacock, and says, Am not I some body? have not I done this, and this, and
that? Is not this great Babel (says Nebuchadnezzar) that I have built, Dan. 4.
30.
for mine honor, and greatness? Oh Beloved! this little word [1] little do you
think what a comprehensive, vast word it is; it is a little one, Jam. 3. 5, 6.
as the Apostle James says concerning the tongue, but full of evil: have not I
brought about this? and have not I effected that? and so prides himself
therein, as if he had brought things to pass, and sees not God acting and doing
all in him and by him, and in and by all the creatures.

This Doctor is none of the lowest, but is every where in request, he runs
through the whole world, but unobserved [Arrogance] you may observe almost in
every man, in setting up himself, praising and admiring himself what great Acts
he has done, being tickled and delighted with the praises of others, but
cannot endure to hear any other praised but Himself: and though all men say not
thus with their tongues, because of their subtilty, The Devil will not suffer
them, for they would no^ be observed to do so, yet it is the end of their
discourse, and in their hearts they say no less: And men are ignorant how
dangerously The Devil in them disputes, and whereto it tends, in taking from
God that which belongs to him, and arroga^ing it to himself, no less sin then
pulling God from his throne, as much as lies in them, and advancing themselves
into his seat: Oh! poor crawling worms, nothings, worse then nothings! to
attempt this high Treason, to the King of kings, and Lord of lords; for all
power, wisdom, goodness and praise, All is Gods; and if all be his, what right
has any creature to say or think any part thereof is his?

This is no less then the sin of Lucifer, which threw him down from heaven:
This is Lucifer within us, being not content to be as he was created, but would
be some^hing of himself, Isa. 14. 13.
he would aim at Gods seat; Thou have said in thine Heart, I will ascend into
Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will be like the most
High, etc. And this does all the world by appropriating any good to themselves,
or any power to act without God: for the creature is but a mere instrument in
the hand of the Almighty, and has nothing of his own but sin: and therefore
they should in themselves be vile and nothing, little in their own eyes; else
we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; as our Savior says, Except ye be
converted, Mar. 18. 3.
and become as little children, ye cannot enter; that so all praise and
goodness, and all power to act, be ascribed to God alone.

And then comes up Doctor Reason: Oh! He is a great man, he is a learned Doctor
indeed, he is Doctor of the Chair at least: when all the rest are ^^^enced, yet
he must be heard; and he will believe nothing that you cannot bring within his
bounds, within his element: whatever ye show him, if you show him a reason for
it, then he is on your side: If you tell him its reason he should regard his
body, he will believe you; and that he should regard his soul above his body,
as the more precious, and look out for the good of that, that it may be saved
hereafter, he will believe you also, because ye speak but reason to him; but if
you go beyond reason, tell him any thing you cannot make him understand by
reason, he will, if he can, have you hist out of the Schools: Tell him he must
deny himself, 1 Cor. 3. 18. 1
he must deny his own wisdom, parts, goodness, he must become a fool, that he
may be made wise, Cor. 1. 19.
Tell him It is written I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
naught The understanding of the prudent, Oh! This is Harsh Doctrine, then he
cannot hear, he cannot understand.

But when Jesus Christ comes into the soul, he puts all these Doctors to
sielnce, he opposes and answers all; Mat. 7. 29.
he comes and preaches with authority, and not as the Scribes: he disputes with
such power and authority, with such a plain demonstration of truth in all his
questions and answers, that he makes the standers by amazed and astonished at
his understanding and answers, Luke 2. 47.
and brings all things into such a peace and tranquillity in the soul, that
there is no more jars and dissentions, but the soul yields to Christ, he having
cast out those unclean and unruly spirits; and they now with Ma^^ sit quietly
at Christ's feet and hear his Heaven^^ Doctrine, and there is a confessing and
subscribing, that he has done all things well: Mar. 3. 20.
they will no more contend with him, nor direct him; but confess, that what
ever he does is the best.

Well, then we hear no more of Christ after this, till he was thirty years old:
I beseech you go along with me, and look altogether within your selves, and it
may be, the Lord may show you all these things, and a thousand times more then
I can speak: I beseech him to open your eyes, and to give you understanding;
for this day (through Gods blessing) I shall put such a key into your hands,
that unlocks all the Scriptures; even as a fine curious contrived Cabinet,
which we know not which way to open, yet having found the secret Lock of all
the Drawers, then they all fall to pieces, and every one comes to your hand: So
shall I do this day (if God say Amen) give you such a secret key, that takes
all the Scripture to pieces, and you may come to see what use every several
part thereof is for: Those Scriptures that before were hard and dark, and you
could not tell what they should mean; now they all fall off as easy, and come
to hand as you desire: but it is not I, nor any thing I can do, though I should
preach and beat these things into you till midnight, till Christ himself be
pleased to come into the soul, Acts 20. 7.
and work these things in you by his own power: the hearing by the ear will not
do it, it must be the experimental touch of these things upon your hearts that
must teach you these things.

Well, after Christ was thirty years old, he began to fall to working of
miracles: and it is said, the first miracle that we read that Jesus did, Luke
2. 1.
was in Cana of Galilee, where at a feast he turned the water into wine: Those
things which before to you were but dead, flat waters; these precious truths
that heretofore were so untasteful, so unrelis^able, that you had as live dye
as drink thereof, the ways of Christ are so harsh and thwart to flesh and
blood; Christ must come and make those waters (that before were deadly, they
were so bitter you could not endure to taste them: Oh! it was Gall, Vinegar and
Wormwood, if you tipped but your tongue in them, you would have no more of them,
away with them) now he comes and makes these waters first drinkable, that you
begin to endure to take a draught of them; and afterward he turns them into
wine, delightful and pleasant drink: nay, he made such wine that it was
wondered at, Luke 1. 10.
Thou have kept the good wine until now.

Oh! the ways of Christ to that soul that has experience of them, are more
pleasant then the purest wine; Psalm. 19. 10.
they, as David says, Are as sweet as honey, and the honey comb; are more
desirable then gold, yea then much fine gold: And now those wines that we so
much prized before, now are turned into water; they are now harsh and
distasteful; its death to them now to drink of those waters; but he that is
overcome and governed by Christ, he turn^ all into wine: then all Christ's ways
are pleasant, though he walk contrary to them, yet still he gives these souls
wine to drink, and such wine, as they never tasted the like before: Do you now
tell them of drinking of their old waters? no, they can despise them all; he
despises his sinful pleasures, he despises the world; he can despise honor,
pleasure, ease, profit, all; though they were his life before, now he can
despise them all.

If Christ before had commanded to for sake our pleasure, our profit, our
friends, our houses our lands, our lives: Oh! this had been harsh wine, we
should have dyed to have heard of it: but as soon as Christ comes, he convinces
and overcomes our inward darkness and mistakes; our judgment of these things
is quite turned; our eyes begin to be opened, we have new eyes, new tastes; we
can now see and relish the wonderful things of Gods Law: Now Christ does
nothing but go up and down in us, preaching and teaching in our Temples, and
working miracles from place to place in our souls; Mat. 9. 35.
in one place he makes clay and anoints their eyes, and opens them; in another
he cries to the ears, Ephatha, be ye opened, and then all things shine
gloriously to these eyes, and all things sound melodiously to these ears.

What thunder is not a well tuned cymbal? and what voice so hoarse and harsh,
that is not a clear Organ, when God sets his voice to the instrument, and the
instrument to his voice? when our spirits are set right, there is a sweet
harmony between us and all the ways of God, seem they never so harsh to flesh
and blood: all Gods dealings they esteem them to be right: though God afflict
them, Psalm. 119.
yet they see it is in faithfulness; as David says, I know, O Lord, that all
thy judgments are right, and thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: and again
(says he) I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, Psalm.
119. 75. 128.
and I hate every false way: Before they could endure to hear of nothing but
ease, pleasure, honor, profit, credit, and external freedom from crosses: I,
I, ye cannot bring news so fast of these things, as they have eyes, ears,
hearts, hands, and all ready to receive them: ye are the welcomest Guests that
can be to them; but if you tell them they must deny all these things, they must
part with these things, they must sell all and follow Christ, Mark 10. 21.
as he told the young man; That they must enjoy them as if they enjoyed them
not, 1 Cor. 7. 30.
as Paul says: Oh bitter! they have now neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear
you, nor hands to receive: all this Doctrine shall fall to the ground for them;
they cannot endure any thing which brings not good news to themselves, to their
carnal self.

As when the Sun shines, you know it shows all things below it self, and
darkens every thing above it self: for in the day ye can see nothing above the
Sun; all the Stars, which are above the Sun, are obscured, and all things else:
So while a man is in the state of unregeneration, he can see nothing above
himself: but if it be any thing that leads him to the love of himself, that he
can see: Heaven is welcome to him out of a self-love, and so far as he
apprehends it will make him happy; but if ye show him any thing above himself,
he cannot see nor hear any thing; he is therein stark blind and deaf: this is
not the generation that he is wise in; but the children of this world are wiser
in their generation, then the children of light. Luke 16. 8.


I said, Christ being once come into the soul (conceive, I pray you, what I
mean) not that Christ in regard of dwelling can come in, or go out, but in
regard of his workings in us, and to us: Psalm. 8. 1.
Christ in himself cannot grow greater or less, or more exalted; for his praise
is far above the earth and heavens; but to us he is more manifested and to us
and in us he grows and increases, and so his life comes to us by degrees: And
so far forth as we lay down our selves, and all that is in us, or whatsoever is
acted by us, at the foot of Christ, and that we are ruled and guided by him,
then we shall see, how he speaks all in us, does all in us, hears all in us,
sees all in us; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father
which dwells in you: Mat. 10. 20.
This is to have Christ come into the soul; because before we are really
sensible of this, he is as it were not there: But he being (I say) once come
into the soul, for we must make use of such expressions for our understanding,
then he opens those eyes that before were shut; he now makes those feet that
were cripple from the mothers womb, so that they could not set one foot forward
in his ways, now he makes their feet like hindes feet; he makes them run his
ways with delight, and he shows his miracles in all their members; he turns all
into a new creature, and in this sense he grows more and more in them, Ephesians.
4. 13.
till they come to a perfect stature, even the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ: Before they could not endure this life, it was the old life
they were taken up withal, how they might please the flesh, Ephe. 2. 3.
and fulfill the desires of the flesh, and were by nature children of wrath even
as others: Those were the thoughts they were taken up withal at bed and at
board; all their thoughts, words, actions, eyes, ears, tongues, feet, were all
employed in this service, else they were unquiet, and never contented.

To see Christ to be all in all in us, this is to know him experimentally: and
if ye know him thus, then you know him as you ought to know him, else he is but
a fable to you: for so to know him, is to have all the Scriptures fulfilled in
you, as our Savior said, Luke 4. 21
This Scripture is this day fulfilled in your ears.

Beloved, such a light, such a key ye have gotten, who see these things, that
whatever place of Scripture you read or hear, that you shall be able to say and
feel it in your own souls, That this day is this Scripture (though writ so long
ago) fulfilled in your ears, in your souls.

When you read the Story of the Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection of
Christ; of his Whipping, Crowning with Thorns, Buffeting, Spitting upon, you
shall be able experimentally to say, and cry out, Alas! this day is this
Scripture fulfilled in me.

And Beloved, this is a daily doing all the Scriptures over again; this is the
enduring of the word for ever; as David speaks, (says the soul) Alas, my soul
was like a Leopard, Psalm. 119.
spotted from head to foot with the lepros^e of sin, and he has commanded,
Mat. 8. 3.
I will^ be thou clean; he has washed away with his blood all my spots. I found
that I was grown crooked and bowed together with my strong sinews of lusts,
Mat. 9. 20.
and he has made me straight. I found I had a continual running issue, that
continually ran, to the polluting of my soul, and to the dishonor of God; and
the touching of his garments has healed me. Oh happy soul, to whom God has
been pleased to give this key! this is saving knowledge of the Scripture; all
other knowledge of the Letter, is but the flesh of the Scriptures, that which
the carnal man may comprehend: and although it be never so great, never so
exact, it is mere dirt and dung^ its not worth one rush: for thus to know the
Scriptures as I have said, is to have the whole Scriptures fulfilled in us, as
David says, I will hearken to what the Lord says in me.

Now we come to the third thing: What it is to know Jesus Christ crucified: I
determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And
again, says the Apo^^le, God forbid that I should rejoice in anything, Gal. 6.
14.
save in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world is crucified un^o me, and I
unto the world. And again, Phil. 3. 8.
I count all things loss and dung* that I may win Jesus Christ, and know him
crucified. Before we can live the life of Jesus Christ, we must of necessity
know his death, and find that he is crucified in us. In a natural life a man
must first be born and live, before he can be crucified and put to death; but
in the spiritual life in us its contrary; a man must first see that Christ is
crucified before he is born.

Beloved, I tell you, if you take but this key to unlo^k this p^ecious Cabinet
of God, you will find precious Jewels will come tumbling down to your hand.
Christ Jesus, as he was crucified upon the cross, so by way of equivalency, he
is still and daily crucified in us: Rev. 13. 8.
for he is the lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the
end of the world. You are deceived if you think the passion of Christ is past
when he had suffered under Pontius Pilate.

Every man before he comes to be a spiritual man, he was a carnal man, a
natural man. And this natural man possessed the house, Mat. 12. 19.
and he is the strong man; and not only strong, but armed: and when ever I
speak of the strong man, or the old man, or sin, or the Devil, or Satan, or
Lucifer, or Antichrist, etc. I mean and intend one and the samething, and so
does the Scripture, as I conceive, and I would have you well to consider this
thing; for they are those enemies the Scripture most minds us of, and gives us
warning to beware of, and watch against; they be our bosom enemies that betray
us: as for outward enemies, we meddle not now with them; but the Scripture has
given these Enemies, or rather this Enemy of ours several names, that thereby
we may come to know him, or by some of them at least: that we may see in our
selves the several effects of all those names, and the several workings,
according to the nature of those names.

So long as this strong man keeps the house, that is, so long as our own
wisdom, strength, gifts, abilities of nature, reason, understanding, will,
affections, Heb. 6. 6.
so long as these keep the house, Jesus Christ is crucified; Isa. 43. 24.
these are those Jews who have Crucified the Lord of life; Amos 2. 13.
these have kept him under, and made him to serve your iniquities; these have
laden him as a cart is pressed with sheaves, Ps. 105. 18.
these have kept him down; these have put his feet in the Stocks with Joseph,
and the irons have entered into his very soul. This is the true, the real
crucifying of Christ: all other crucifyings are but the representment of this.
This is that crucifying, that all the external crucifyings and deaths in the
world are not sufficient to figure it out to us, and make us sensible thereof,
unless we our selves partake thereof; for herein chiefly consisted the
sufferings of Christ, even as the Apostle lays them down in Philip. 2. Phil.
2. 6, 7, 8.
he emptied himself, and he humbled himself: he emptied himself of all his
riches, glory and greatness which he had with the Father, and came down here
among us, and was content to be as a servant; he that was Lord of all, to be
content to be trampled upon and crucified both literally and mystically, by his
own creatures; herein were sufferings indeed, far beyond his bodily whipping,
or nailing to the Cross; far beyond his buffeting, crowning with thorns and the
like: and if we herein suffer with Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
this is the true Cross of Christ, and this is to be made partakers of his
sufferings. S. Paul largely expresses how he came to know these true
sufferings: 2 Cor. 5. 16.
and so shall all that ever shall taste of heaven; says he, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more: you know that
as soon as the body comes, the shadow goes away, when we enjoy the body, the
substance, there is little use of the shadovv. Joh. 6. 63.
And Christ himself beats us off from these things when he says, The flesh
does us no good, prositeth nothing, but its the Spirit that gives life, that
only profits. If once we have the body, let the shadow go; if once we have
teh Sprit, le^ the flesh go; if you suffer with Christ (as we said before)
then you have the life, the Spirit of the Scriptures in that particular, and so
likewise in the rest, To arise and triumph with him, etc.

But by the way, because I would have you understand me, let me remember you,
except you know the mystery of the Trinity, you will never understand what I
mean when I speak of Christ; for it is the knowledge of HIM, The ONE in Trinity
and the Trinity in ONE, Being rightly grounded in that, Act. 16. 14.
it makes all these things easy, viz. to him whose eyes and whose heart God
has opened. This is that I say. Ye must first come to the knowledge of the
Three in One, and the One in Three, or you will never rightly come to know what
Christ is.

Mind this, when we speak of God the Father, then we speak of him that is
Unknowable, Unspeakable, Unnameable; and then you must consider him as
abstractedly from all manner of creatures; neither in possibility of Creating
or being Created; Exodus 3. 14.
He is That he is; I am that I am; that is, he is [God] Unknown, Unspoken,
Unpronounced, either by men or Angels, or any Creature; as having nothing to do
with Creatures, or Creatures with him: And so the Father, Son, and Spirit are
All one; Here is the Trinity in Unity. But if ye come to speak of any THING,
any manner of conception, or of Things created, then we divide the Godhead into
persons; then there is immediately Father, Son and Spirit, There is Jesus Crist
the Son of the Father, the first begotten of all Creatures. Heb. 1. 2.
The Heir of ALL THINGS.

And so, we behold Jesus Christ as the second person in Trinity, Although the
persons in the Godhead are not before or after other; and so, He has to do
with creatures, and is In the creatures; is the Being, Action and Life of the
creatures: And so, Jesus Christ is called The WORD Spoken, for so he is called
in that first of the Hebrews: as He was in the bosom of his Father, he was
Unspoken, Unpronounced, or in possibility of being pronounced; so He was and is
God equal with his Father: but being once spoken or pronounced, so he is less
then his Father, he is after his Father: but before, he was neither before nor
after.

As for example, (for I would illustrate these unknown things to you as well as
I can) I have a word in my mind, while it is in my mind it is my own; what have
you or any one to do with it? but being once past the door, the bars of my
lips, then it is yours.

Brethren, Rev. 2. 7. Mat. 16. 17.
I beseech you mind these things; He that has ears to hear, let him hear: but
it must be given to you to understand these things; Flesh and blood cannot
reveal these things: But I will open them unto you as familiarly as I can. As
suppose the word in my mind be [A House, A Tree] or any other thing; while they
were in my mind you knew them not; but being once spoken, Then you know them,
and apprehend them: the figure and representation of that Word or Thing is
immediately also in your mind; So long as Jesus Christ was or is in the bosom
of his Father, he is unknown to the creature; he is God Equal with his Father,
neither One before or after other: But if God please to speak THIS WORD, if he
please to put forth himself in the Creating of any Creature; Here now, The word
is Spoken, I say Here now is Jesus Christ come OUT from the Father, John 14. 6
here is now, The MEDIATOR That is between God and man, without whom we cannot
come to the Father.

He Only complyes with his Father, and complyes with The creatures: If God
should speak to us as he is in himself, Heb. 12. 29.
we dye; Our God is a consuming fire: if he should speak to us as he is in
himself, all the Creation would be undone, consumed to nothing. But here is our
comfort, Only Jesus Christ HIS SON is Our Mediator; otherwise, Tell me his
name, or his Sons name if thou can Tell, as it is said in the Proverbs: P^ov.
30. 4.
No man comes to the Father, or knows the Father, but by the Son, Mat. 11.
27.
and him to whom the Son will reveal him.

Christ is called also The Eternal purpose of God, and so, Ephesians. 3. 11.
All things in him had their IDEAL form; but who knevv what that IDEA was,
or what was in his mind? But he put forth his Son, that so he might reveal to
us what his Eternal purpose was. And know this, that what ever was In God,
was God hi^^elf; Christ was and is in him, therefore is Himself; His purposes
were in him, and they are HIM: And so, Christ was Equal with his Father
Unknown, Unspoken: But as soon as ever ye think of any word, or of any manner
of Form; then fasten presently on God the Son, as Col. 2. 15, 16. Col. 2. 15,
16.
Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature, by
him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible,
and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or
powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he is before all
things, and by him all things consist. The same also is expressed Heb. 1. 2. 3.
Heb. 1. 2. 3


And then The third Person in Trinity, the Holy Ghost, He is The Motion, or
Reciprocation between the Father and the Son* The Act of Love, as I may so say,
or that Bond of Love between the Father and the Son; 1 ^oh. 4. 16.
for God is Love, says the Apostle;

Then, God the Holy Ghost is nothing else but that constant love and amity that
the Father bears to his Son, To. 8. 29 and 15. 6.
and that love that the Son bears and returns to his Father again; and so
Proceeds from the Father and the Son; and this is that Holy Spirit of love,
whereby we are sanctified and conformed to our head Christ: and so is The third
person in Trinity, and after both, though in themselves One and the same. But
know this, God cannot communi^ate himself to us, but by One in Three, and Three
in One, it is impossible: but in himself he is but One, and cannot be more,
there is not three things in him: for he cannot be multiplied nor divided.

But BY Jesus Christ God made all things that he has made, as in Ioh. 1. ^oh.
1.
The world was made by him, and without him made he nothing that was made. In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
There was God In Himself: But if God make any creature, it follows, The world
was made by him, and without him made he nothing that was made: There is God IN
the Creatures, Mat. 3. 17.
Christ Jesus: And in This Son is all the Fathers complacencie and delight, in
him he is only well-pleased: he loves Him, and Him only, Him and nothing
else, That is, His own image in every creature: for it is certain, God cannot
love any thing but Himself; It is impossible His love should go out of himself
if it should, let me tell you He could not be God Almighty.

So that in conclusion, The sum of All we have said, is thus much, You can
conceive no otherwise but thus, if you conceive of it rightly: God is in
himself Unspeakable, Unknowable, and Incomprehensible, having no relation to
Cre^^ures, nor to a Creator; neither in possibility of Creating or being
created. But Thus it is, God the Father has been pleased to put fo^th his Son,
and to send him into the world, who is the express image of himself. Heb. 1. 3.
And This image of himself he loves Inf^nitely, and indeed nothing else he can
love, viz. The image of himself in every creature, This is His Son and nothing
else he can love: And it is one and the self same thing in God, though to us
they be d^verse; Himself loves Himself, and only Himself: now you see here is
three things named, the Loving, the Loved, and The Love: yet all is but One and
the same thing,

Beloved, these are High, Mighty, Sublime, Unexpressible things we have now in
hand; but if God be pleased to give us this KE^, I spe^k of, then these things
will be easy to us.

Now having a little disgressed (for your sakes) that you may the better
understand These things, we come nearer to our matter in hand: mind me I pray
you, As long as any thing whatsoever lives in us besides Christ, As long as
those things we brought into the world with us, Any thing that is [US or [I]
lives, Christ is whipped, his mouth is stopped, he is crucified, dead and buried:
As long as Reason lives, Christ is dead: As long as our own Wills live, Christ
is crucified: As long as our own knowledge lives, he is dead. He may knock and
knock long enough at the door of our hearts, but we will not hear, we will not
open to him, and he is as one dead to us, and we dead to him. Our ears are
only open, to hear the voice of Nature and the voice of flesh and self. Oh!
here is a way how thou shall be made rich; Here is away how thou shall come to
be Honorable; we are deaf, except it be to these things: Oh! here is a way how
thou shall come to be esteemed a wise man, a Famous Professor; How thou shall
be set up, and esteemed, and every one shall speak Well of thee, People shall
flock to thee for Counsel, and thou shall he The only man in the City.

Oh beloved, Let me tell you while we hearken and are Taken with such things as
these, Now is Jesus Christ, whipped, blind-folded, crowned with thorns, and smote
on the mouth, made to carry his Cross, crucified, dead, and buried, and a heavy
stone rolled upon him, that he may never rise again. Now is Jesus Christ Taken,
Apprehended with a strong guard, carried from one judgment seat to another;
And every lust cries, Crucify him, Crucify him; they are all willing, and
give sentence that he shall be condemned, that so THEY may still live and rule;
for They know, His life is their death: Therefore he is now taken for the Grand
Transgressour; and why? Because He has broken the Laws of flesh and blood,
therefore Crucify him, Away with him, It is pity he should live. The Innocent
is hereby taken and led Captive, and he that was Righteous in all he did, is
now taken for a Wicked man and a Sinner.

My beloved, Herein Lies The life of the Scriptures; Yet do not think that I go
about to deny the Letter: I hope I shall stand in justification thereof to the
death, that those things were Externally and Literally acted. But this I say
still, Let us not be content with the Letter Only; Friends, Bear me Record, I
say, They were All, Actually and Really done in the flesh; but yet I also say,
They were To Teach us, That the same things are Always In doing: I am so far
from having such a thought (as some ignorantly charge me) as if I would make
all the Scripture a Fable, and merely Allegorical, and no such things done:
that I wish from my soul, Cursed be those lips, and for ever be the sealed up,
even with the wrath of Eternal fire, that shall deny in the least, the truth of
the Letter.

The truth is, Christ was conceived in us as soon as ever we were born, as I
said before, Nay as soon as ever we had A Being; Nay it was He that created us,
and gave us Our Being: But now, This we must know and believe, Christ was born
in us at our first Being; But that is not enough (as to us) But He must be
manifested IN US, and that is, To be Born again. We condemn those Cursed Jews,
that apprehended our Lord and Savior, and put him to death; And we condemn
Judas for betraying him; And we condemn the Soldiers that nailed him to the
Cross, and that pierced his blessed Side with a spear: Oh! we count Them Bloody
Villains, and we would have them p^t to a Thousand death: But Let me ask thee,
What do thou do, when thou followest thine own will, and thine own pleasure,
against his pure command^? 2 Samuel 12. 7.
I tell thee, Thou art the man, as Nathan told David; thou art that very Judas,
The very Traitor that have betrayed him: For, when he would live in thee, and
rule in thee, and be KING in thy soul, and Tread all his enemies under his
feet, thou have betrayed him into his enemies hands; Thou have delivered him up
to be crucified: As long as thy sins live, and thou pretendest to be a servant
to him, Thou have made A MOCK of the Son of God, Heb. 10. 29.
And counted the blood of the Covenant an Unholy thing, wherewith he would have
sanctified thee: Rev. 2. 11. and 20. 6.
therefore ye must seek to have your part in the first Resurrection, if you
hope the second death shall have no power on you,

But Let me remember my self, Perhaps friends, I speak Riddles to you; for you
may say in your hearts, Far be it from me to crucify my Savior: I find no
Christ crucified in me, nor I would not do it, no, not for a Thousand worlds:
What? to have my hands imbrewed in the Death and BLOOD of the Son of God? God
forbid: No poor soul, I believe thou feel it not so, Because the strong man
keeps the house, Mat. 12. 29.
and He keeps all at peace: But if once Jesus Christ come into thy soul, Even
He that was dead, and now begins to live, That he begins to rouse up himself
like a Lion, He will then, Make all the beasts of the Forest to TREMBLE: And
know this, if he once Will Lift up himself, it is not in our power, nor in the
power of all the lusts and corruptions in the world, nor in all the powers of
darkness to keep him Down: But Till this time; He is content, Isa. 43. 24.
To serve your iniquities.

But, When He does Arise, He will then show you and make you sensible, How you
have scourged and crucified him All this while: He will make you Amazed to see,
How all this while, you have had him Live in you, and been so near you, and you
have Crucified him: What? I Crucified my Savior all this while; and I not
aware of it? Oh wretch that I am! Oh! now now he cries out, Oh! let these Jews
dye, let them live no longer, these lusts,' these Sins of mine, that have
crucified and put to death The LORD of Life: When I read the story of his life
and death, how he was used, de^ided, buffered, etc. little did I think that I
was He that was in doing all those things to Christ my self; Then, thou shall
clearly see, that when Christ commanded thee, These and these things to be
done, Psalm. 50. 17.
Thou have cast his Commands behind thy back, and thou would not have him
rule in thee: but thou chosest rather to follow thine own will, and what self
and flesh commanded: Oh! here now thou have Newly pierced Jesus Christ to the
heart with a sharp spear: Thou confessest, truth it is, God commands me to do
these things, to cross my self, to forsake my own will, and follow him: Tush,
but it is all one, I will, and I must have my own will, I will not stand bent
to these Laws; thou s^^ppest in sunder these bands and casts these cords from
thee: Oh Friend! thou art now The very man, Psalm. 2. 3.
that has newly wounded the Son of God, and brought from his s^de, water and
blood: John 19. 44.
Oh Beloved, these are The Spears, These are the Mocks, these are the
Scourgings, these are Vinegar and Gall, to Christ: And that man that has,
Thus, Crucified him, He has more truly crucified him then ever the Jews did.

But after a man is brought to see and feel This, How do you think? Can that
man that sees how he has crucified Christ In him, and put him to death, Can he
go on and crucify him still? Can he wound and put him to death still? Can he
be so Cruel to take these Spears, these sins and lusts, and wound him to the
very heart again! Oh! no, no, He cannot, He cannot; he will rather choose to dye
Ten thousand deaths: Whatever he does, he will not wound again So Meek and
Merciful A Savior.

But it may be there is this Q^estion which may run in your thoughts, Quest.
and it may be it is Hard for you to conceive, How Christ should suffer, and
not God to suffer, seeing he is God and man: Ans.
It is certain, God cannot suffer: and therefore ye must understand, That
Christ in Himself cannot suffer, but he suffers in his body, in his members:
Those types and shadows of his sufferings are but to show how He still suffers
in his Members Internally, and spiritually! He suffers In regard of Us, and to
Us, and for Us, because we live, and our sins and lusts live, and our Self
lives, and therefore He suffers, He is Crucified and dead: For, whatever we see
done by Christ in the letter, is An Emblem of that He does for Ever; For He is
the Lamb slain from the beginning: Rev. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: Heb. 13. 8.
Did you see him yesterday nailed to the Cross? he is the same to day, and for
ever, etc. yet He HIMSELF suffers not, but his body: For Example, my body can
never suffer, unless my soul be in it; neither can my soul suffer without my
body; and yet my body cannot suffer without my soul: Then wonder not, if it may
be thus in a creature, if Jesus Christ in himself suffers not, but only
Himself in his members, neither can his members suffer unless he be in them. 2
Cor. 4. 10.
I my self (says Paul) fill up in my body The measure of the sufferings of
Christ.

Beloved, These are Divine, sublime things, if your eyes be but open to see
them: And, you having This KEY put into your hand by God himself (for God
himself must interpret his own meaning) then you will have Such a light, such a
Demonstration of Truth, so that, Those Scriptures which you knew not before,
what to make of them, nor what they concerned, they were So dark and Obscure,
and Contradictory; Now, all the whole Scriptures open of themselves, and show
you all their Hidden Jewels, and Unspeakable Treasures.

And now my Brethren, God forbid, that after an hours, or more patient hearing,
that I or you should fall under the reproof of Jobs friends, In ventum verba
protulisse; or to have entertained you here so long with Wind or lies; as
Ephraim is said to have dieted himself with, Hos. 12. 1. Hos. 12. 1.
He feeds on wind, and follows after the east wind, He daily increases
lies: God forbid, That all we have said should be but as Lies or wind or
Nothing to you.

But if you see these things in experience; Psa. 118. 12.
Then Beloved, you shall see wonderful things, How all David's Psalms come in,
How the Fat Bulls of Basan came about him like Bees; and How his feet were fast
in the stocks; and how he was overwhelmed in the mire: and so throughout the
whole Psalms, and the rest of the Scriptures (still seeing and taking them as
done spiritually and invisibly) And so, you shall come to see, The Scriptures to
be A Bottomless SEA where in the Elephant may swim and the Leviathan may sport
himself. Psalm. 104. 26.


Neither would many men so much trouble themselves about a personal Reign of
Christ here upon earth, if they saw that the Chief and Real fulfilling of
Scriptures were within them; And that whatever is externally done in the world,
and expressed in the Scriptures, is but Typical and Representative and points
out, A more spiritual and saving salvation, and a more Divine fulfilling of
them: For this is no more, Then to ask, as the Sons of Zebedee did, to sit one
at his Right hand and the other at his Left, in his Kingdom; And with the
Disciples, to expect a Temporal Restoring the Kingdom to Israel: but Christ
takes them off from all those things; John 18. 36.
and says, My Kingdom is not of this world, for them would my servants fight
to obtain this their Kingdom; but the Kingdom of heaven is within you; for
men may have their part in these external Powers, Scepters, Crowns and
Kingdoms, and have no part in Christ's Kingdom; Therefore all those thoughts are
but Literal and low, and poor, and childish: but let us mind such a Kingdom,
wherein if we have but the least part, the least share, that if we be but
Door-keepers, then we are Happy for ever, and shall never perish, neither in
this world, nor in that to come.

And let us look upon all those Scriptures they allege, as fulfilled to the
Church spiritually in all ages: Verily there be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death till these things be fulfilled: ^ohn 8. 51.
And then whether that come about they speak of or no, it matters not; or if it
do or should be fulfilled literally, either for the pulling down of Antichrist
the Pope externally, or for the thousand years of Christ's Personal Reign, yet
we are not Here to Rest, in the external fulfilling of them, but plus ultra,
let us look beyond all these things: These things may be, and yet Christ not
exalted in thee, nor Antichrist pulled down in thee: And if they be not done in
thee, and in me; what is all to us?

But I will hold my self at this time rather to the point in hand, concerning
Christ being crucified IN man; for to look upon those actions and prophecies
only as to be fulfilled externally, is but a knowing Christ after the flesh, 2
Cor. 5. 16.
and to please the outward man; of which the Apostle says, Hence forth I will
know no man after the flesh; no though I had know Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth will I knew him no more: Of our hope and belief in this kind of
fulfilling the Scriptures spiritually, we are sure we need not, nay we shall
not be ashamed, because we are sure we shall not be disappointed: This is the
body, The Substance: the other is but the Figure, the Shadow.

And those actions being done Spiritually, they are more truly done then those
that are done Temporally and corporally: for if he did suffer then in the time
that he lived upon earth, in the days of his flesh (as he did) He suffers now
herein, more truly and really; for that suffering was but the shadow of these
sufferings. These are The Sufferings indeed, His other sufferings, are not
worthy The Name of sufferings to these. Yet be sure, The Godhead cannot suffer,
by no means: And therefore if God in you have brought the knowledge of Christ
to this, to see all these things to be within you, And to suffer with him
Internally, then is your knowledge right; Sufferings with Christ in the outward
man are nothing to these sufferings, namely thus: for a man to lay down his own
will, to cross himself, to forsake and Empty Himself (as Christ did) herein lie
the Great and unconceivable sufferings of Christ, as the Apostle sets them down
in Phil. 2. 4. Phil. 2. 4.
He that was Lord of all became least of all, He Emptied Himself, Poured out
all his glory. (as the original renders it,) and became as a servant; was
content to be abased and trampled on by his own creatures; Herein was
Sufferings indeed: Herein lies The MYSTERY of the Gospel of Christ; His other
sufferings, or any External sufferings in the Saints are not worthy to be named
the same day with THESE Sufferings.

For, If once you come to these sufferings, then, down with parts, down with
our own excellencies and endowments both of nature and grace: (Babel within us
must bethrown down) then shall we come to be nothings in our own esteem: Behold
Herein is the sufferings and patience of the Saints, and whatever else we
suffer, Rev. 18.
if we suffer not thus, we suffer not with Christ, we are not acquainted with
Christ Crucified. For if we know never so much of an External Christ, of an
Outward Christ, and of Outward sufferings without this, it will do us no good.

But I beseech God, That you may observe All within you; How Christ is
conceived within you, and when he offers himself to the birth; Observe when
those Commotions and Hurly-burlies are within you: then look up, and know that
the birth is at hand, The kingdom of God is at hand; Your Redemption draws
nigh; That you may see, how you are the men that have killed and crucified Him:
and that he will be exalted and lifted up in you.

And then, being once come to this: That light which has discovered Thus much,
of the work of Christ within you, will not leave you, but bring you further and
further: so that you shall go on, From strength to strength, and dig up
fountains of wonder and comfort till you come, Psalm. 84.
and appear before God in Sion. Then shall ye be brought by His power and
strength, And by his Mighty workings in you, to stand in awe of him: And now,
To look Altogether to his counsel and direction, ceasing any longer to Guide
your selves: so that, This man's will is quite altered and turned up^^de down.

As for example: Suppose, Two men alike Vile coming into a room where the King
is Behind the Hangings: The one, He is aware of the King, because he knows he
is there: but the other, knowing nothing, he lashes out into his own idle,
foolish, frothy talk: he talks any thing, he speaks Trenchmole (as the Proverb
is,) That is, He observes no rules but his own will and fancy; He behaves
himself Rudely and Unmannerly: but the other, he observes himself and his
carriage, because he knows, The king hears him and observes him. Now, The king
He is as near to the one as to the other: but here is the difference, The One
sees him, and Trembles before him: but the other sees him not; and so thinks he
may do what he list. But if so be, That the King please to discover himself to
this man, and to let him know, That he was an eye and an earwitness to all his
behavior; Then he falls down with trembling and fear, and judges himself and
his own loose actions, and submits himself to the will and pleasure of the King.

So my brethren, Christ Jesus in regard of his Essence, he is as near one
creature as another, as near the wickedest man alive, as the highest and
gloriousest Saint: But, the One, he is sen^ble how Jesus Christ is near him;
and He knows how he has been overtopt in him, and overmast^^ed by him, and
therefore he is ashamed and will do so no more: But the Other, not knowing of
this^ he goes on according to his own laws, and his own will, and kills him
Again and Again, and runs his own ways, and thinks his own Thoughts, and
pleases himself: Rushes upon any thing that tends to satisfy his own will; He
rushes upon any sin as a horse rushes into the battle (as the Prophet speaks)
without fear: Jer. 8. 6.
He pleases himself and Tickles himself in his own delights, and cries Ha, Ha,
and he feels nothing, sees no danger* what ever men talk of Hell and Death, and
Bitterness, Destruction, and Damnation, yet he believes none of these things:
and therefore he goes to the same course again and again. But having on^e
espied the King, Him, who stands Behind the Hangings, Him, whom he has so
often kicked at and crucified; then he is amazed at his Horrid Oaths and
Blasphe^i^s, of his Pride and Arrogance against Him, of his Envies and
Reproaches against his Brethren, being on^e come to a true sight of this, He is
amazed and confounded in Himself.

Says he, Have I been the man that h^th put the Son of God to death? H^b. 10.
29.
have I trampled his Blood under my feet? I will not any more add to hi^
torments, no, not to gain the world.

Has he dw^lt so near, been my guest, and lodged within me? been my life and
my stay? and have I been he that has starved and famished him? have I so often
mo^kt, whipped, derided, crucified him, and knew it not? Rather then I will do it
again, I will dye ten thousand deaths. All the world shall never make me commit
thos^ Horrid Facts again, I will now be ruled by him, I will now do his Will
not mine own: I will now (by his assistance) live as he will have me live; now
I am content to deny mine own wisdom, gifts, parts, strength, For now I see, I
am Nothing. And so by this means Christ shall be fed, nourished and brought up;
and he shall grow in wisdom, and stature, Luke 2. 52.
and favor with God and man. By this means Ye shall bring Christ to the
Temple; Luke 2. 46.
who shall put all the Doctors within you to silence, and so nonplus them,
that not one shall be able to gainsay or answer him. By this means you shall
find him do all his miracles (more truly) over again (the substance of his
miracles) as I showed you before: you, even you your self us shall see him work
all his miracles in thy sight, within thee: and this shall make thee, more run
after Christ, to see these Divine mira^les, far more affectionately, and with
more wondering, and with more true love, then ever they did in the days of his
flesh, to see^ his external mighty works and miracles.

This was that S. Paul determined and desired Only to know: for he knew this
knowledge would never leave him till it had discovered such things, (such
Miracles) as neither eye had seen, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
nor ^are heard, no nor ever entered into the heart or thoughts of any man;
things unutterable, unspeakable. Let others seek after what they will, to get
glory and splendor in the world, and to get those things that the world
accounts great matters, or any external literal knowledge of Christ, though
never so glorious, though never so received: yet says he, I lay all in the
dust for the Excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, Gal. 6. 14.
by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World; for all those
things shall vanish with them, and perish in the using, and come to nothing.

But these comforts will stand a man instead; this is such knowledge, that it
will set one foot in Heaven while the other is upon earth: when as other men
who rest in the Flesh and in the Letter, who know none of these things, God
knows (when they come to dye) how many weary, winter, Cold and comfortless
steps they have to fetch, that they shall be forced to Fly upon the Sabbath,
and in the Harvest, Mat. 24. 20. and 25. 3.
and have their Oil to buy, when all things are at rest with others, and they
enjoy a fullness and a harvest, and have Oil in their Lamps at the Bridegrooms
Coming: for they have given up their wills and their lives to Christ, So that
Christ and they have such sweet Embraces, as if they were in heaven already:
Insomuch that they are gotten above the world, ^and all things below; go they
Even or Odd with other men, they always go Even with them: they have gotten
above Themselves and their own wills; Now, Christ's will is their will; And
Christ's ^eace is their peace; And They have begun ^^eir Eternal SABBATH, and
are at Rest in the bosom of Jesus Christ their Blessed Savior.

OF SVFFERING AND REIGNING WITH CHRIST.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
In eight Sermons, P^eached at Kensington Public Meeting Place.
It Is true, the Coherence of the Text imports An exception, after some vast and
immense Privileges asserted; and those privileges, Such whereof a Christian
may boast of, and triumph in; as first, of his Sonship, Ver. 14. As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, have received the Spirit of
Adoption: Verse 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear; but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.
2. Such is a Christians Privilege and Sonship, that he is delivered and set
free from the Spirit of bondage, he need never fear more: And 3. He has also
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby he can own God, and cry to him, and
call him Abba; for he is his Father. 4. The testimony of the Spirit of our
Father, with our Spirit, Verse 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our
Spirit, that we are the children of God. And lastly, Of our being made the
Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ, As in the former part of the Text, And
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.

Our Text, being much like the Exceptions in the Kings general Pardon, wont to
be given in the end of a Parliament, where at the first beginning you would
think he had forgiven all and every One; but by that you have read it to the
end, you will find so many exceptions and limitations, he has scarce forgiven
any: So this out Text is such a restriction or limitation, narrowing and
bounding all those large Privileges, Immunities, and indulgences, and tells us
in plain terms, Except we suffer with him, we shall not regin with him (for
every one is ready to catch at the Privileges and assume them to themselves)
but stay, (as if he should say,) Although these be very large privileges, yet
let me tell you to whom they belong: If so be we suffer with him, that we may
be glorified together: These words I say, are a limitation and concentring
these precious privileges; And terminating them upon, One out of a city and
Two out of a Tribe, No more: yea, though the number of the children of Israel
be as the sand of the sea, A remnant only of them shall be saved, Isa. 10. 22.
Isa. 10. 22.
Being like those words of our Savior, Wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, Mat. 7. 13.
and many go in thereat: but strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

Yet, (...)
for this present we will consider the Text As a Melchizedek, (...) without
father, without mother; viz, without any dependence or succession from the
words going before, or any reference to them that follow: As a substantive
standing by himself, and so we shall find this Text, an Everlasting Almanac,
an Erra Pater, setting before your eyes the state of a Christian, from the very
first day [of his Regeneration] to his last day even [of Glorification] ^ay,
beyond all time, according to the Angels Oath, Rev. 10. 6. Rev. 10. 6.
Till time shall be no more.

This Text is that sword, without which, you will never cut asunder that
Gordian knot, As to tell us why St. Paul says, Col. 1. 24. Col. 1. 24.
That he did Gaudere in passionibus, 2 Cor. 11. 30.
Rejoice in his sufferings: and says he, 2 Cor. 11. 30. If I must needs glory,
I have nothing more to bast on, then of the things that concern my infirmities:
That which to you, and to all the world Seems my infirmity, my loss and my
cross, this is my gain, and my Crown; 2 Cor. 11. 30.
In labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons, in deaths, in
perils, in painfulness, in watchings, in hunger and thirst, in fastings, in
cold and nakedness, etc. and herein (says He) I glory: And he asserts it with
the greatest asseveration that can be, Verse. 31.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for evermore,
knows that I lie not: What a strange paradox is here? what a Gordian knot is
here to be untyed? or who can with the sword of man's reason cut it insunder?
Therefore have I chosen this Text, that by it and by Divine Light, the Spirit
of God, we may clear this p^radox, and untie this knot.

Neither was this Paul's case alone, but the other Apostles also when they were
beaten, Acts 5. 41. Acts 5. 41.
they departed from the Council, re^oycing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for his name. I pray Beloved, if you had known no more of the
Apostles then the Jews did, would not you have said as they did? (...).
that they were (...) Act. 2. 13. Acts 2. 13.
These men are full of new wine; for its ordinary with you, when you are not
able to comprehend the Mystical Depths of the Spirits working in the hearts of
those regenerated, to ^ay, They are Mad, Distracted, Drunk, Filled with new
wine; And if you had known no more of the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, then
their Persecutors, would you not have said with them? Wisd. 5. 4. Wis. 5. 4.
We fools thought their life madness, and their end without Honor.

It is said, Nemo carnem suam odio habuit, etc. Ephesians. 5. 29. Ephesians. 5. 29.
No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it: What
did They then? and what case were They in, Isa. 50. 6. Isa. 50. 6.
that gave their backs to the smiters, and their cheeks to the nippers, and hid
not their faces from shame and spitting; And were content to be killed all the
day long; And to be as sheep for the slaughter? that preferred Mountains and
Dens, and Caves of the earth, before Palaces of Princes? wildernesses before
Society? Heb. 11. Heb. 11.
8. Mat. 11. 8. Mat. 11. 8.
sheepskins and goats-skins, before the softraiment of them that are in Kings
Courts? mockings and scourgings, before sleeping in a whole skin? Rackings,
before down-beds? Stoning, Hewing asunder, and slaying with the sword, before
Deliverance, safety, health and long life? Heb. 11.

And generally all who are not sufferers with them, have that opinion of them
rooted in them, which Festus had of Paul, Acts 26. 24. Acts 26. 24.
that they conclude they can be no less then Mad men: and the very tr^th is,
these true sufferers are counted every where, In All Ages no other;

Then God Almighties FOOLS.

But, Judge. 14. 18.
there is no finding out Sampsons Riddle, without ploughing with Sampsons
Heifer; could we but do so, then we may say, as Philip said to Nathaniel, We
have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jo. 1. 45.
Jo. 1. 45.
So here, In opening these words now read, we hope (by the gracious assistance
of the holy Spirit) we shall unfold, As this Text, so those Riddles mentioned
in the SCRIPTURES: As,

1. What is meant by Moses bitter waters at Marah, Exodus 15. 25. Exodus 5. 25.
whereof the people could not drink, but murmured; and Moses cried unto the
Lord, and he showed him a Tree, which being cast into the waters, they were
made sweet; even so, shall these sufferings with CHRIST be made very sweet to
us, And come to know How, they come so to be, in our own experience.

2. We shall see what is meant by Elishas naughty waters of Jericho, 2 Kings 2.
19, etc. 2 Kin. 2. 19, etc.
The men of the City said to Elisha, the situation of the City is pleasant, but
the water is naught, and the ground barren: Then he took salt, and cast
therein, and said, I have healed these waters, there shall not be from hence
any more death or barren Land: and the waters were healed, according to the
saying of Elisha which he spak: Even so shall be these sufferings with Christ.
All bitterness and unsavouryness shall be taken from them.

3. You shall see what is meant by Jobs unsavory meat, and the salt to season
it, Job. 16. 6. Job. 16. 6.
Ca^ that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in
the white of an egg? These Sufferings with Christ being once seasoned by
Christ, they will be savoury to your Taste, Self-Denial will be no hard task,
but Meat and Drink to you.

4. You shall come to see what is meant by Having salt in your selves, Mark 9.
50. Mark 9. 50.
Salt is good, says our Savior, but if the salt have lost his saltness,
wherewith will you season it? Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another.

5. You shall see what is meant by David's sowing in tears, and reaping in joy,
Psalm. 126. 5. Psalm. 126. 5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: he that goes forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him: And then the Lord shall turn again your captivity, as the
streams in the South: all these things you shall come to see and feel
experimentally fulfilled in you, and upon you.

6 You shall come to see what is meant by Isaia's Mourners and Rejoycers, Isa.
66. 10. Isa. 66. 10.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, all ye that love her: Rejoice for joy with her,
even all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck and be satisfied with the
breasts of her consolations: that ye may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory. You shall come to know what Heaven is, which is so much
talked of, and so little known.

7. You shall see what our Savior represented and intended, when he said, John
16. 21. John. 16. 21.
A woman when she is in travail, has great sorrow, because her hour is come;
but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man-child is born into the world.

And lastly, we shall also see, what it is St. Paul means, 2 Cor. 1. 15. 2 Cor.
1. 5.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so also our consolation
Abounds by Christ: So that you see, both the Law and the Prophets, And Christ
and his Apostles, do plentifully bear witness to the Text, and to both parts of
it; both for our suffering with Christ, and our reigning with him: for as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 19. 2 Cor. 15. 19.
If in this present life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most
miserable. But our Life is Hid with Christ in God.

As then* There is a Season to every thing, and an appointed time for every
purpose, Eccles. 3. 1, Eccles. 3. 1, etc.
etc, A time to be born, and a time to dye; a time to weep, and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance; a time to lose, and a time to get,
etc. So will I enstyle this Text A CHRISTIANS TIME, His whole time, from the
very beginning to the end; so that besides or beyond which, he has not no^
cannot look to have, a minute, a moment; Nay he is not at all, when he is not,
either suffering or being crucified with his Savior, or else in being
glorified or reigning with him. In both which states he is very safe, although
he cannot always see it so.

Or you may call i^ (if you will) his Nonage and Full age, Gal. 4. 1. Gal. 4.
1.
when he is under age, and differs nothing from a Servant, though he be
coheir with Christ, who is heir of all things: or else his Full-age, Heb. 1. 2.
or partaking with Christ in his Inheritance and glory: Or else* if that be too
long ye may call it A CHRISTIANS YEAR, that is, his winter and his summer; his
winter of affliction and suffering; Genesis 8. 22.
and his summer of joy, refreshing and consolation.

Or if that be too long, then call it HIS DAY, as Genesis 1. The evening and the
morning were the first day; and so the f^rst day; and every day after consisted
of an evening and a morning: first the evening then the mo^ning: And Luke 19.
42. Luke 19. 42.
If thou had known in this Thy day the things that belong to thy peace; You
must observe this order; or else a Day is improperly applied to him, because he
has first his Night and evening of darkness and sorrow; and then his Morning
of joy and refreshing after that NIGHT of sorrow; as Psalm. 30. 5. Psalm. 30. 5.
Heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy comes in the morning: Call it all
these, or any of these, so you pervert not the order, that we must be first
servants and suffer with Christ, before we come to be heirs in p^ssession with
Christ; we must first have our winter: first sow our seed, etc. Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
before we have our Summer and time of reaping.

From hence take notice of the perpetual and constant method God taken with all
his children; first he gives them their Evening, their Nonage, their Winter,
etc. First, lets them have their time of suffering, their winter of affliction,
their evening of sorrow: Their serving-time first, and then afterward comes
their Morning, their Summer, their Full age; Their Morning of joy and
consolation, and their time of Reigning: first Servants, then Heirs: as you may
obse^ve in those Types of Jesus Christ: which Types set out not only his
Person, but his Body: Joseph was first sold for a slave, Genesis 37.
and was cast into prison, before he was advanced to a kingdom. And Mordecai,
he had his sorrowing and fasting time, before he was advanced; a tristibus
semper sed necessariis incho at Deus, as Origin says.

And as our Savior says, Mat. 11. 28. Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
But it is quite contrary in the Devils method toward his servants, He gives,
first their Summer, first their morning, first their good wine: but Christ he
keeps the good wine last; God first plucks up, and then plants; first pulls
down, and then builds: first kills, and then makes alive, 1 Samuel 2. 6. 1 Samuel 2.
6.
And as it is Romans 5. 15, 16. Romans 5. 15, 16.
For if through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the Grace of God,,
and the gift by grace by Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many: For if by one
man's offense death Reigned: much more the abundance of grace, and the gift of
righteousness shall Reign in life by One, Jesus Christ.

But wicked men, They may rejoice here, but they have their portion, but their
suffering succeeds, Luke 19. 25.
and is coming apace, as Abraham said to Dives: Son, remember that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy Good things; but now he is comforted, but thou art
tormented.

Friends, you may rejoice, sing, and dance, and be merry, but you have small
cause if you consider all: you may sup well, but you are like to have au hard
breakfast. You prefer your life, and your lovial time, before the life and time
of the people of God; you think, they are a melancholy people: but judge your
selves, whose condition is best, Luke 9. 23.
theirs or yours: He that will be my Disciple, let him here take up his cross,
and then his Crown follows: whatever He loses, parts with, denies himself in,
it is that he may have an hundredfold with Christ, in his Kingdom; He now sows,
that he may then Reap: but it is quite contrary in thy condition; nothing will
content thee but to reap now, rejoice now, and to be frolic here; and then
follows everlasting darkness; instead of leaping and dancing, Jer. 13. 16.
your feet will for ever stumble on the dark Mountains.

Beloved, these things are worth your consideration; which if you seriously do,
it may be, that your spirit may be saved in that day of the Lord: do not
overprize your contents here, but rather use them soberly; use them, but use
them so as if ye used them not: 2 Cor. 6. 10.
there will come a time will abundantly recompense all your suffering, Bearing
and forbearing.

But I fear, to some this is harsh doctrine, as Christ his doctrine was to the
young man, when he bid him Sell all, Mar. 10.
and he should have treasure in Heaven: he went away sorrowful, for he was very
rich; worldly riches glistered more in his eye then heavenly riches, and that
drove him quite away: And our Savior preaching such unsavory doctrine as
this, Ioh. 6. 66. Joh. 6. 66.
it is there said, Many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with him.
And so also, it may be some of your cases here present, To turn away and turn
back from the Holy Commandment, when it is set before you without fraud or
flattery.

But I must tell you, this Trial he has Appointed; ye must all that look for
this crown, this Throne of Rest, pass through the Fiery Trial in one kind or
other: For enough would willingly eat of Christ's Bread, and drink of his wine,
see his miracles, and be healed by him externally; but to eat the ^lesh of
Christ, and to drink his blood, to be content to bear his Cross, and to be
baptized with his Baptism, to suffer with him, how few are they? How many are
content to hear his doctrine, and to be ruled by it very much, John 6. 20.
as Herod was by John: its an easy and a pleasing request, to ask to sit on
his right hand, and on his left; Mat. 20. 21.
but hard to be baptized with his baptism: To see and read of his Miracles done
upon others, but to be content to have his Miracles done in our souls, how few
are there? nay, you are so far from that, that you cannot so much as yield or
acknowledge that you are lame or diseased, or blind, or deaf, or dumb
spiritually; it were much if you would confess this, then there were some hope
you would be content, I, and be glad to be healed by him. O my Brethren, I
would say to you as once Paul to His Corinthians; O ye Corinthians, Our mouth
is open to you, our Heart is enlarged; ye are not straightened in us, but I fear
ye are straightened in your own bowels. Now for a recompense in the same, I
speak unto you as unto my Children, Be ye also enlarged. For I would not Keep
Back from You any part of Gods Counsel revealed to me.

But to many, 2 Cor. 6. 11.
how harsh is this doctrine? are you not ready many of you to repent you ever
followed Christ, and to turn back and leave all pro^ession? I know that these
thoughts will creep in even while I set these things before you. When Christ
shall tell us, That for his sake ye must be content to be despised, mocked,
excommunicated, cast out of the Synagogues of the greatest Professors, and that
by the greatest Rabbis and learned Teachers, and by those that profess Christ:
And, by them ye shall be persecuted, scourged, killed, and by them his name
s^all be blasphemed: Oh! then you are ready to cry out, What strange new
Doctrine is this? what hard sayings are these? And many times Christ's own
people are amazed at this doctrine, and are not willing to submit to it, Mat.
19. 25. Mat. 19. 25.
When his Disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, who then
can be saved? How many are willing to flatter themselves, saying, Master,
favor thy self, none of these things shall happen to thee, Luke 4. 8. Luke 4.
8.


But beloved, you know Tops must be kept up with whipping, and Nets Kept open
with cork and lead; Else there is no fish caught: But be not afraid of the
Cross of Christ, it is the pathway to his Crown, to his Throne.

If the Son himself learned obedience by the things He suffered, Heb. 5. 8.
Heb. 5. 8.
much more may you. And it is said v. 9. He being so consecrated, He was the
Author of salvation to all that obey him: and not only an Author but a
pattern: we must imitate, obey, and follow him our pattern. And, Luke 24. 26.
Luke 24. 26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his
glory? Else if it were not so, The Disciple would be Above his Lord, and the
Scholar Above his Master. As David said, Shall I dwell in an house of Cedar,
and the Ark of God dwell between the Curtains? 2 Samuel 7. 2. 2 Samuel 7. 2.
So shall our Lord, wade through a Sea of blood to his Crown, and woulde^t thou
be carried in a bed of Roses and Spices? and as Uriah said to David, refusing
at his command to go to his house, The Ark, Israel and Judah abide in tents,
and my Lord Ioab is encamped in the open fields: and shall I the^ go into my
house to eat and to drink, and to lie my wife? 2 Samuel 11. 11. 2 Samuel 11. 11.
so how uns^itable is it, for our Lord and Master Jesus Christ to suffer so
much, to be so humbled, and so emptied, and we to be so full, and so lifted up?
He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Mark 10. 45. Mar. 10. 45.
and shall we expect to be served, and not to serve? But the wisdom of our God
in this case, has appointed it otherwise.

But as there are some are amazed and discouraged at these things, and turn
back, so some also though they go forward, and seem to walk with Christ, yet
suffer not with him. If this be all (say they) then we have to plead for our
selves, we have suffered for him, and with him: These are ready to bless
themselves, and will not be found without an answer; like those in the 7. of
Mat. v. 22. Mat. 7. 22.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many great works?
when Christ had there, a little before, been telling them what they must do,
and what they must suffer; he there takes them off as well as the former
Sufferers. So many now will come and say, Have not we suffered in thy name?
have not we been mocked and presecuted for thee? have not we suffered with
thee, and for thee? have not we been poor as thou were? have not we been
despised as thou were? contemned as thou were? have not we been whipped as thou
were? Luke 6. 40. Luke 6. 40.
but Christ shall answer them as he did the other there, Mat. 7. 23. Then will
I profess unto them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
Have not we had compassion on thee, when we have either heard or read of thy
Bitter Sufferings? we never thought upon thy Bloody sufferings, but it grieved
us for thee: we never read in the Gospel of thy s^ff^rings, or of the Jews
malice toward thee, but it pierced us to the very heart; we never heard of thy
sweet name [Iesus] but we bowed our knees, put off our hats; and yet for all
this, will thou say, nunquam novi vos, thou will not know us? No, I will not
know you.

For although they have done and suffered all these things, yet they have not
suffered for Christ, nor with him. Therefore Christ will profess unto them, I
never knew you. I know you not, you poor ones, you contemned ones: I know you
not, you compassionate ones: Depart from me, ye are All workers of iniquity.
Though you were sufferers, you mistake your selves, you suffered not with me
nor for me.

Oh beloved! how Christ met with and amazed his Hearers, he searched their very
hearts, he cut off all their pretenses, he could not be beguiled with a
profession of him only: those who are so eager for forms and outward
profession, they cannot befool and deceive him, though they may ^he world: He
sees through all their great shows and glorious pretenses: he so ransackt the
^eart in all his preachings, which was the reason that so many went back and
walked no more with him; (...)
All those who could not endure to be laid open, hated his Doctrine: and so I
expect will mine be, by such; but such who are willing to know and be
acquainted with their own hearts, will draw near to hear, and fit quietly,
while we are opening these truths, as Mary sat at Christ's feet, and heard him
gladly.

But to clear the point to you.

There be then three kinds of Sufferers, As Moses professed to Pharaoh, that he
would go three days journey into the wilderness, Exodus 5. 3. Exodus 5. 3.


And Solomon's Temple had Atrium Populi. 2 King. 6.
Sacerdotum. Heb. 9.
Sanctum Sanctorum.


It had three Courts o^ three Rooms: the Out-Court, where all the people came:
the Middle Court, whereinto went the Priests only: and the Sanctum Sanctorum,
whereinto went only the High Priest once a year: much like unto these, are
th^re three kinds of sufferers for Christ, and of two of them Christ says, non
novi vos, I know you not.

1 Such, As out of tenderness of nature suffer with him; they are of a natural
tenderness, and can weep to see any creature suffer, much more Him whom they
conceive to be their Savior: to look upon him as whipped, wounded, mocked,
crowned with thorns, nailed to the cross, suffer, cry out so lamentably, and
then to yield up the Ghos^. And all this by the Cruelty of his own Creature.

1 They can compassionate his bodily sufferings. 2 Then also, they can
Compassionate the sufferings in his soul, as I said.

There be some kind of Sufferers, and they come but into the peoples Temple:
these go but the first days journey with Moses, and there sit down.

The second sort go farther, they go two days journey with him: these indeed
do enter into the Priests Court, but go no farther. Where are Laws and
Ordinances, and a wordly Sanctuary, and directions for outward worships; where
indeed the generality of Preachers and Professors stick, and there sit down.

And these Sufferers, though to man they seem to go a great way; yet (as the
Lord says Heb. 4 Heb. 4.
) They have not entered into my Rest.

But there is a third sort, who go the third days journey, and these, these are
the Sufferers I aim to set before you: these are those whom God carries on,
(the power of man and self may bring men into the two former conditions of
suffering) but these, God himself never leaves them till he has brought them
into the Holy of Holies. That is, till sufferings has brought them to, and
ended in Rest: Having overcome, and do sit down with Christ in his throne* even
as he has overcome, and is sit down with his Father in his throne, Rev. 3. 21.
Rev. 3. 21.


The first of these sufferers, who suffer with him by way of compassion (as we
call it) Mat. 15. 32. Mat. 15. 32.
Jesus had compassion on the multitude, because they had been with him three
days: and Mar. 8. 2. Mar. 8. 2.
the same word (...) in both places translated Teneritudines. These Sufferers,
though (it may be) they may think they go a great way, and they can go no
fa^ther; Some of these, they only look upon his bodily sufferings, and therein
they can enlarge themselves, and can dilate largely of it: of the shame and
disgrace that he suffered, the spitting in his face, of his being crow^ed with
tho^n^, of s^^ipping him naked out of his clothes, of his cruel whippings and
scourgings, of his nailing to the cross, of giving him ga^l and vinegar, of his
wounding with the spear, and the rest. In all these things they can amplify,
unfold, and enlarge themselves, thereby to a^^ect their hearts in compassion
toward Christ in all these his bitter sufferings and Agonies: Insomuch that
some of the Papists can find in their hearts, for very grief and compunction of
heart, to whip and tear their own flesh, that so they may have the deeper
compassion, and be more fellow-feelers with him; insomuch (They would make you
believe they so much prize his sufferings) that they make much of any part of
the wooden Cross whereon he suffered; and out of love to him, keep it for a
precious Relic and remembran^e of him. Likewise they can tell how many
stripes his blessed body had: and they keep the number of the nails that
pierced his members, and happy is he that can handle them, and kiss them; and
afflict themselves, and go many sore and far pilgrimages for their s^n^ against
him committed.

Nay, so particular some of them have been in these things, as the Rabbin in
the Letter of the Pentateuch relates of one that has summed up and collected
all his stripes, how many he had, and says he had 5400. Another says they
were 5370. Another that they were 4000. And one has been so p^nctual, and
says, that the crown of Thorns bored his head with seventy two wounds.

Nay, not only so, do they suffer with him, in compassionating his bodily
sufferings, but they carry it farther, to the pangs and torments of his soul,
and suffer with him in that. How do they weep for, and lament his sufferings in
that he should bear the heavy weight of his Fathers wrath? Compassionating
those sorrows, fears, frights, amazements, which he had before his suffering,
when he prayed in the garden, his Sweat being like Drops of Blood, Mar. 14. 35.
Mar. 14. 35.
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

And how do they take to heart those his sufferings upon the Cross, when he
cried out, Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani? so that they may say of him, and call to
others to lament and weep with them, as Lament. 1. 12. Lam. 1. 12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. And all this they take to be
pious, devout, and religious, and they may have a good meaning in it; yet all
this they may do, and yet Christ may profess unto them. I know you not. They
may do all this, and not suffe^ with Christ.

All this is b^t Atrium populi, the Peoples Court, whereunto Every one may
come. This is but as the Pharisees Tything Mint, and Cumin, etc. Mat. 23. 23.
Mat. 23. 23.
And neglect the weightier matters of the Law: to whom our Savior pronounces
many woes. All this is but as the Grass that withers, and the Flower that
fades, and all flesh shall see it together, when the glory of the Lord shall
be revealed in us, Esaias 40. 5, 6, 7. Isa. 40. 5, 6, 7.
And the voice said, Cry; what shall I cry? Cry, that all flesh is grass, and
all the goodness thereof but as the flower of the field; the grass withers,
and the flower fades because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it, but the
Word of the Lord abides for ever: Therefore arise, depart hence, this is not
your rest. Mic. 2. 10. Mic. 2. 10.


Of all these, and to all such, we may say as our Savior, Luke 23. 27. Luke
23. 27.
when they wept for him, Weep not (says he) for me, O daughters of Jerusalem,
when he was going to suffer, but weep for your selves and for your children: as
if he should say, away with all this tenderness of heart, away with all this
seeming suffering with and for me, away with all your thousands of tears, were
they never so many, I regard them not; all this is nothing worth to me as you
do it.

Beloved, These are not those sufferings the Apostle Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 4.
13. 1 Pet. 4. 13.
Where he bids us rejoice in as much as ye are made partakers of the sufferings
of Christ: to suffer with and for Christ, are other kind of sufferings then
these, which I shall hereafter come to unfold to you. But says he, weep for
your selves, and for your children: that is, for those bitter calamities that
are coming upon you, the cause whereof is bred in you, and you see it not; weep
for that, lament for that.

But secondly, some (as I said) go farther then this; they suffer as Christ did
actually with and for him, and as he commands (as they think) in shame, in
reproach, in imprisonment, in loss of goods, houses, lands, wife, children; yea
in loss of liberty and life it self.

But though they think it is for him, and they pretend and seem to suffer for
and with him; yet it is not for him, but for themselves: nay not only so, but
many are come so far, that they do not only suffer these things, suffer
poverty, and forsaking of houses, lands, wives, children, good name, liberty,
life: but they may and also do take pleasure in suffering with him and for him:
This indeed they may do, but how do they do it? they suffer indeed willingly
and cheerfully, and yet unwillingly: Willingly, as it may accomplish ends to
themselves, and ends of their own; but they suffer not for his will sake.

They may thus suffer, because this is a way (as they think) to bring about
their own happiness: so that though they suffer willingly, and may rejoice in
it, yet it is but as of necessity, that seeing there is no other way to heaven
but by sufferings, and by undergoing the cross: but yet withal, they grudge,
and think hardly of God, they accuse him of severity and cruelty, and think he
is a Hard Master: and they accuse the Law also of severity and difficulty; they
could wish the way had been easier and smoother, without such crosses, and such
hard self-denial; they would that God would have more pleased them, and are
ready to direct him a better way, as they think: There is indeed in them a
willingness to suffer and act, things being as they are, but they do not suffer
freely, they do not choose to have them so as they are; their wills and Gods
jarr; They like not in themselves the Cross of Christ, they wish God had done
otherwise, then to make their way to heaven so Rough; They do his Commands, but
they do them as a hard and sore Task: These do indeed (as one says) carry the
cross, but they do not follow Christ: and of both these sufferers Christ says,
Non novi vos, I know you not: And though all these be good Herbs in regard of
the matter of them, yet a little Colaquintida among them spoils all, self ends
poison all, 2 Kings 4. 39. 2 Kings 4. 39.
and we may say of them, Mors in olla, there is death in the pot.

Therefore I had need to say to you, as Christ did, Mat. 16. 6. Mat. 16. 6.
Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces; Take heed of
the poison of self ends in all you do, for you may run far, and act much, and
soar high; but if Self be your end, you lose all the things you have wrought:
though it be but a small thing as you would think, yet it corrupts your best
duties: as you know, a dead slye is but a small thing, yet it corrupts the
oin^ment, and makes it stink: so does this all your duties, all your actions;
therefore I say to you, as the Apostle to the Galatians, Gal. 3. 3, 4. Gal. 3.
3, 4.
Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, ye will be made perfect by the
flesh? have ye suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? and
indeed it is so in vain, that there is no hope, except you see and amend this
evil: therefore this is to be mainly looked to, that this selfseeking in your
actions and duties, do not poison and bring all you do to naught; for all of
this Kind is but from ^lesh and self: but when the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and the Spirit of the Lord blow upon it, we shall see all this is as
grass, and all the goodness thereof but as the flower of the field: therefore
arise, depart hence also, This is not your rest.

But there is a third sort; and These are They which suffer with Christ indeed:
and we may truly say of them, with St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 1 Pet 4. 13.
They are made Partakers of the sufferings of Christ: these are they which have
cast Anchor, and are entered with Jesus Within the vail, into the Holiest of
All: These go the third days journey: these, not only See, but enter and
possess the Land of Canaan: these are the Little slock that shall inherit the
kingdom: these are the Poor Remnant the Scripture speaks of, That though the
number of the children of Israel were as the sands of the sea, a Remnant only
shall be saved, Romans 9. 27. To. 9. 27.
And though all the world we^e Christians in profession, and were Sufferers in
the two former respects, It is this Remnant, this Poor Remnant only that shall
be saved, as the 9. of the Romans testifies; and as in the 29. Romans 8. 29.
Verse of this 8. of the Romans, where it is said, These are they whom he makes
conformable to the Image of his Son: These are they that enter in at the strait
gate; for our Savior says, Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many find and go that way: but strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it,
Mat. 7. 13. Mat. 7. 13.
There is in the way to Heaven so many Snares, set by the Devil; and so many
By-pathes, and False ways, which others have beaten and trodden before us, that
a man may easily be led out of the way: many false ways but only one true way:
But very few find, or come ever to know, The True Sufferings of Christ; and do
we not see, how many the Dragons tail does daily Sweep down? yea such Stars, as
we thought ve^ily had been fixed stars, and yet are proved but Comets: and what
numbers of these glittering Comets, even in these days are come to nothing? As
you know the Dragons Tail drew down the third part of the stars of Heaven,
even Those which shined and Glistered, like stars in a forward Profession of
Christ.

There are some miss this way, because they never intend it, and for them it is
no marvel: because they never once set their faces toward Sion. But there are
some (for my intent is to speak of those) that intend the voyage for heaven,
who miscarry at their first setting out: they miss their way at the very first
entrance into Christianity; and some after they are entered in, and gone a
little way, they will not venture too far; if they can catch fish near the
shore, well and good, but they are resolved they will not venture much, they
will not Sell All, part with all, they will not lose their hold, ye cannot
persuade them to weigh anchor, and Hoise up sails to la^ch out into the deep,
But only content themselves with what they can catch on the shore, and what
lies near hand, for they will not adventure themselves: And these men are so
much taken up about the shell of Religion, and about outsides, they are so
taken up about the letter of the word, that they can catch nothing, though they
fish all night, take great pains about it, and toil themselves exceedingly; and
yet all in vain: No wonder then that St. Paul talks of working out our own
salvation with fear and trembling: and no wonder our Savior bids us, Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. Luke 13. 24.
for says he, many shall seek to enter iu, and shall not be able.

Some again miss their way, after they are lanched out into the deep: they have
lost their sea-mark and their Compass, and then wander they know not whither;
they mind not perfection and Religion for it self, but Religion for some
self ends; and so by seeking themselves, have quite lost themselves: Yet
Beloved, I would not be He that should discourage or discomfort any manin the
way to Heaven, by no means: and yet also I would have you set sure footing, so
that ye may not labor in vain, and lose the things you have wrought: The truth
is, I aim not (as you may think, and as some have affirmed of me) to bring your
Hell into your consciences, no otherwise then to save you from Hell; and as the
Apo^le says, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged; and
though I made you sorrowful with a letter, I do not repent, 1 Cor. 7. 8. So if
the Lord by me did so kindle Hellfire in you here for a time, to keep you from
the Everlasting Hell, this were a great mercy to you, and a fruit of true love.

But, I am sure, you are all of David's mind concerning Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel 18. 27.
2 Samuel 18. 27.
O he is a good man, and he brings good tidings: And you are good at saying, as
in Isa. 52. 7. Esa. 52. 7.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation: Oh! those are the good men, that will preach of nothing
but peace, and prophecy good to you: the^e are the only men with you; but I
(for dealing plainly with you, and for searching your wounds to the bottom, to
make a sound cure) shall even gain that opinion from you, that Micaiah the
Prophet had from Ahab, 2 Kings 22. 8. 2 King. 22. 8.
That when king Ahab and King Iehoshaphat were met together to join battle
against Ramoth-Gilead^ and they had enquired of 400 false Prophets, and they
all cried Peace, peace: Is there not one more, said Iehoshaphat, of whem we may
enquire? Yea, says Ahab, there is one Micaiah, but I cannot abide him, I hate
him, for he never prophesies good to me but evil: And those that were sent for
him, tell him by the way, That all the Prophets prophesied good unto the King
with one mouth, therefore they counsel him, so let thy words be also: And as
the prophet answers there, Verse 14. so do I, As the Lord lives, whatsoever
the Lord says unto me, that will I speak: I shall not, I cannot, nor dare not
(though you entreat me never so) ever speak well of that the Lord speaks evil
of: though men may cry you up and admire parts, and duties, and forms, as if
they were the substance, yet if they come but from the power of self, and tend
to advance self, though others may make such as Kings and Princes and Leaders
in Religion: yet these, without the substance, I must tell you plainly, My God,
my Master abhors: Israel is an empty vine and brings forth fruit to himself:
therefore I for my part cannot prophecy peace to you, in your highest and
gloriousest duties on that ground: Truly Brethren, I dare not in this place
speak the visions of mine own heart, Mat. 7. 13.
but the faithful Embassy of my Lord and Master.

That Scripture named before, Seek, (says our Savior) strive to enter in at
the strait gate; for many shall seek, and shall not be able: And say I, if many
shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, what shall become of them that
never seek? And know, it is such a striving, which made the Apostle compare it
to a Race, So run (says he) that ye may obtain: Likewise he compares it to a
fight, Put on the whole armor of God, and stand fast, Ephesians. 6. 13. Ephesians. 6. 13.
he compares it likewise to A wrestling: How intent are men in these cases of
striving? they mind that thing only: We wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high
places, Verse 12. Ephesians. 6. 12.
Now you know, Wrestlers are very intent, and mind the things only they are
about, they are very watchful lest they should be foiled: Therefore examine
you^ hearts; Do you Thus strive? do you Thus wrestle for heaven, with all your
might? or is it not the least thing that troubles you? Do you not rather mind
All other things of less consequence? or do you not mind it, and other things
too with it? do you not seem to offer violence to the Kingdom of heaven, and
yet your eye and desires are another way, after other things; money, and
health, and superiority, favor at Court, and with great ones, preservation of
youth, handsomness, decking the body, opinion of goodness from others, and the
like? These you account real things, and worth your labor and pains; but as
for the Heaven I speak of, the way whereto consisting so much in self-denial,
you have some faint wishes toward it, but the other way runs your strong
desires: And if you thus wrestle, no marvel you get the foil; for, let you have
but riches and honors, health and prosperity; let you have but beauty and
handsomeness, long life and deliverances, and the esteem and praise of men, and
you are well enough.

As M^phibosheth said to David, 2 Samuel 19. 30.
when he bid him and Ziba Divide the land between them: Mephibosheth answers,
Nay, says he, now my Lord the King is come home in peac^, let who will divide
the Land: So, let that which is Lord and King in thy esteem, come home to thee,
let who will take heaven: for health, and riches, and honor, and praise, and
credit in the world, these things you account real and present: for you know
and feel the use and benefit of them; but as for these things to come, they are
a great way off, we see them not now what they are and therefore (say you) give
us these things: and as for our souls, we will trust God with them, for God is
merciful; we know it, and he that would make us afraid knows it also, for all
he frames and presents us with such Bugbears.

Says the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 18.
If the righteous can scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear? I know the general vote of interpreters expounds this place of temporal
deliverances: but you must pardon me, I take it not so (my eyes are too dim to
read your Iunius notes upon this text) I take it as it is spoken* If the
righteous shall scarcely be saved, etc. that is, if the righteousest, with all
his righteousness: if the just with all his justness: if Peter with all his
tears, if Job with all his patience, if Abraham with all his Faith, if Joseph
with all his chastness, if Moses with all his meekness, if all these shall
scarcely be saved, where will thou appear? what will become of thee that have
nothing of all these?

And to this purpose I told you the last sabbath, as there were six steps that
went up to Solomon's throne, so there be six steps or degrees which we must
Ascend, before we can sit down with Christ upon his throne of Rest and peace.

The first is, Condemnation of our selves,

Confessing and acknowledging our own sinfulness and wickedness, condemning and
abhorring our selves really in the sight of God, upon a true sight of our own
vileness.

Secondly, Annihilation of our selves, accounting our selves Nothing, worse
then nothing, and as it were, beating our selves to dust in our own esteem.

Thirdly, Abdication or forsaking all things in the world, of what nature or
condition soever. Using the world as if we used it not. 2 Cor. 6. 10.


Fourthly, Indifferency to all things, to all conditions, whether to riches or
poverty, to honor or dishonor, to health, or sickness, to ill report and good
report, to liberty and imprisonment, to praise or dispraise, to peace or to
war, to fair weather or foul. When all conditions are Alike to us, whether God
makes us sad or merry.

Fifthly, Conformity to Christ our head, folfowing him as our pattern, that in
what condition soever we are in, whatever in such a condition Christ himself
would do, were he in our case and condition, the same do we.

Sixthly, Deiformity, when indeed we are no longer men but gods: mistake me
not, that is, when we act no longer our selves, but God acts in us; that if we
do any thing, yet we see and feel, and confess it is God that does it* that if
we speak, it is Christ that speaks; if we think, it is Christ that thinks; if
we go, it is Christ that goes: that it is no longer I that act any thing, it
is Christ that dwells in you: and you and the members of your body are given
up to him a living sacrifice, and as instruments of righteousness, Romans 6. 13.
Romans 6. 13.
These are things the Old man cannot endure to hear of, They are terrible to
flesh and blood, the flesh cannot endure to hear of Whippings, and Rackings,
fire and faggot. But let me tell you, that these things are far short of these
spiritual sufferings, These are a thousand-fold more hard to undergo; as those
can witness, who have experience in them: nay, yet let me tell you, a man were
better endure any, nay all those sufferings, Nay that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and He dragged to the bottom of the sea, then not to have his
part in these sufferings, for they are happy sufferings.

Beloved, lest these things, and the difficulty of these Names and of this work
should make you amazed, and make you cry out, quis potest salvari? who then can
be saved? Luke 18. 26
if all must ascend those six steps you have named, how few then have gotten,
or will get to heaven?

Therefore before I proceed any further, Let me for your comfort and
encouragement represent unto you two things: two Qualifications of these truths.

Qualification 1.
The first is this, That God is in you, although you know it not; as you know
there are in us all those parts, those organs and instruments of life by which
we breath and live, as Nerves, Arteries, Sinews, Bones; etc. whereof though
most of us do not know their particular names and uses, and how knit together,
and whereof we have daily and minutely use of: And if any of you be Ar^ists in
the body of Man, you can discourse thereof, and delineate plainly the use and
exercise of them.

And as John said concerning Christ, There is one in the midst of you whom you
know not, Ioh. 1. 26. John 1. 26.
I say so of you, there is one among you, and yet alas, you see him not, you
know him not: and as God said to Moses, Exodus 6. 3. Exodus 6. 3.
By my name Almighty, was I known unto your fathers: but by my name Jehovah was
I not known unto them. I was the same then, but by that name they knew me not.
So God is the same in himself, but he is not manifested to thee, nor in thee;
that is, he lives not in thee (as to thee), to thy sight and knowledge.

So likewise the Patriarchs and Prophets before Christ, they knew him but not
as we do now; they knew him by the name MESSIAH to come, and by the promised
seed, and to be He in whom all Nations should be blessed; by these names they
knew him then; but not by the Messiah come, The Messiah born, the Messiah
crucified, the Messiah risen again, the Messiah ascended. Abraham, says
Christ, desired to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. Ioh. 8. John 8.
He saw it fifteen hundred years before, but not as we see it.

But these things are somewhat too high, and you cannot conceive (it may be)
what I mean by these expressions. But I shall come lower to your capacities,
and shall make you acquainted with these hidden things, and make them familiar
to you.

Says our Savior to Nicodemus, John 3. 6.
(he was one that wanted teaching, for all he himself was a Teacher in Israel;
Christ began to reason with him of High and Hidden and Mysterious things)
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; Christ was now
too high for him: See (for all he was such a great and learned man among the
Jews) what an ignorant and a fleshly answer he makes Christ, Can a man enter
into his mothers womb and be born again? Christ falls lower to his
understanding; (says he) That which is born of flesh is ^lesh, and that which
is born of the Spirit is Spirit: He falls lower still, to familiar comparisons
to make him understand; Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born
again. The wind (now I am in thy element wherein thou understandest, even among
the creatures) It blows whither it lists, and thou hear the sound, but
know not whence it comes or whither it goes; so is every one that is born
of the Spirit.

So, would you know of me how far these high truths may be dispensed with, and
what is the lowest degree in grace you must come to, if ye would be saved?
Thus; though God call you not to that degree of suffering, as he does some
others; yet there ought to be a propension and an Affection to it, to aim at
it, though you reach it not. As a child is a reasonable creature as well as the
lustiest man, and the fullest grown man; and we do not exclude it from the name
of a man, or from the nature of a man: for he will be a man in time, he has
all the parts and lineaments of a man, and he is growing and intends toward a
man. So neither do we exclude those Christians that are w^aklings and Babes in
Christ, neither from the name, nor from the hope of Christians, though they be
but Babes, and have not that strength as perfect and strong men in Christ have:
You know men can reason and discourse of things to our understandings, and can
tell you the reason of their strength and growth; we do not expect this in
children.

Our Savior calls the woman of Canaan no better then a Dog, a whelp; truth
(said she) though I am so, yet Lord the whelps eat of the crumbs under their
Masters table: Mat. 15. 27.
know this, the best Christians are but Whelps, mere puppies and weaklings in
comparison of their Master and of that they should be, and eat but the crumbs,
the scraps that fall from their Masters table in that regard: Alas what poor,
ungrown, unshapen creatures are they, in comparison of their head, the Lord
Jesus Christ? and what fragments do we live upon, to those dainties he would
find us and feed us with, if we were but capable or fit for them? So, though we
find not in our selves that strength and growth that should be, yet be not
discouraged, so you find but a propension and disposition toward these things,
and to grow as much as you can, then be sure, Christ will perfect that
disposition in his due time.

2 Qualification.
Secondly, God accepts the will for the deed: for (as the Apostle says) 2 Cor.
8. 12. 2 Cor. 8. 12.
A man is accepted according to that he has, and not according to that he has
not: so it be a real and a true will, a will in good earnest, then there is no
question, He accepts the will for the deed; but be sure it be so; for you must
know (as the Apostle says, Gal. 6. 7. Gal. 6. 7.
) Be not deceived, do not ^latter your selves, God is not mocked, you cannot
deceive him with pretenses; but if it be so, then he accepts the will for the
deed.

As David, 2 Samuel* 30. 21. 2 Samuel 30. 21.
when Ziglag was fired, and their wives and children carried away captives
while he was absent, David goes and inquires of the Ephod whether he should
pursue after the enemy or no; he was bid go, and he followed them, and overtook
them, and overcame them; but as he followed and pursued, some of his men were
weary, and could not go to their journeys end, therefore they tarried behind
and looked to the stuff; but in the end, when the spoil came to be divided,
those that held out, and performed the work, would not let them that tarried
behind have any part with them; yea, says David, these that tarried behind
shall have as good a part as those that fought; for their will was good, they
as really intended it, as those that performed it: 1 Samuel 30. 25.
and this was made a statute and a law in Israel ever after.

Beloved, just so is it with our infinite wise God, He sets by All his
Soldiers alike, though he set some in the Front, and some in the Rear, and
some in other offices; some in more dangerous places, and some in less; yet he
esteems them all his true soldiers, as well He that is weak (so he be
faithful) as he that performs the greatest service.

So in the 20 of Matthew, Mat. 20. 11.
and the 11 Verse, the Master there hired servants, some sooner, and some
later, some at the sixth, ninth, tenth, eleventh hour but none at the twelfth;
(observe that) none at the twelfth hour; and when he came to pay, he gave all
alike; those that came first, and had done more service murmured: says the
good Master of the house, Take that is thine; is thine eye evil because mine is
good? even so is it with us: so we have a right and real disposition to
suffering, Ver. 14.
a readiness thereunto, and as great a willingness to do much work, and to work
all the day, if God call us to it, as to do a little when God calls us not to
it; Then my brethren know, God in such a case accepts the will for the deed:
perhaps we are not actually called to poverty, nor actually to disgrace, to
whipping, to pulling a pie^es with wild horses, to racks, to breaking of
bones, to crucifying, as you know some have been: Though we are not called to
do what others are, so we do what we can, and are faithful in our talent, and
ready to employ a greater talent to more advantage, if it be Gods will to call
you to it: But know, all must suffer, less or more; for so much is included in
the Parable; the last that was called was at the eleventh hour; there was none
called at the twelfth; he that was called last, wrought one hour in Christ's
vineyard: Christ will have one hours work done before night; take notice of
this: and to return to our former Simile.

A Captain that has Soldiers, all stand not in the front; he dies a Soldier,
that dies in the battle (let it be where it will) as well as he that dies in
the forefront: The Lord is called in Scripture The Lord of Hosts: we are part
of his Soldiers: he has heavenly Soldiers, as well as earthly; It is said of
the Angels, that they are Ready to do his will, Psalm. 103. 20. Psalm. 103. 20.
they are all ready* yet we read but of a few of their names that he sent of
errands; yet those that he never sent, are as truly part of his heavenly hosts,
as those that he does send; they are as ready and willing as those that were
sent. So those Christians that suffer not so much, which he takes away in
youth, and in the infancy of their Christianity, these have the title of
Soldiers, as well as those that live to their full age, and to be fathers in
Christ, and have suffered never so much; All is one, so we be in a willingness
and readiness: only deceive not your selves: I know if I should ask any of you
of your willingness and readiness, you will say, you are willing, and he is not
a true Christian that desires not to be ready to do Gods will and to grow in
grace: yes, yes, we are taught that (say you) in the Lords prayer, to pray, Thy
Kingdom come, and thy will be done.

I, I, I know well enough, you have words enough, very good words, you have
Religion at your fingers, and your tongues end: it is true, we all of us cry
daily, Thy will be done, thy Kingdom come, and it may be we have said these
words a thousand times over: and yet it may be, we are of the number of them
that say, We will not that thou shall rule over us; let us break their bonds*
and cast away these cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. Psalm. 2. 3.
I, and it may be we fast and pray, and tie our selves to a constant rule,
which we will by no means omit: and yet be like those in the 1. of Isaiah, give
God very good words, draw near with our mouths, and honor him with their
lips, but yet our hearts are far from him, and we will have our own will; God
nor his ways neither shall cross us of that: And if so be God will but let us
have our wills, we will then give him service enough in this kind, bodily
service, and bodily exercise more then he would have weary him with sacrifices,
I and our selves too.

Brethren, what shall we think of those men that daily pray for the life and
health of the King, and the extension of his power and government, and yet do
nothing but plot treason? are these loyal subjects?

So it may be you will say with Paul, To will is present with me, but to do I
know not how to perform, Romans 7. 18. Romans 7. 18.
I require you therefore, as you will answer before God Almighty, and his elect
angels, that your willingness be true and real, and not pretended, that there
be as true and as great willingness, as there is in a man that is hungry to
eat: and to be as willing as a thirs^y man would drink; and then if it be so, I
say as you say, and as the Apostle says, he will accept the will for the deed;
and moreover he will work the deed: It is with God, as it is with a man looking
in a glass, if you go to it, it will go to you; if you go from it, it will go
from you; if you look proudly, it will do so too; if you smile on it, it will
smile on you; if you kiss it, it will kiss you: just so it is with our God;
with the just man thou will show thy self just; and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward; with the pure thou will show thy self pure, Psalm. 18.
25, 26. Psalm. 18. 25, 26.
if we do but so much as incline to God, God will incline to us: As soon as the
Prodigal inclined, and had but a thought to turn again to his father, his
father was ready to turn toward him: for says the Text, Luke 15. 18, 19, 20.
Luke 15. 18, 19, 20.
While he was yet afar off, he saw his son and ran to meet him.

Having premised these two qualifications, like a nail in the sanctuary to
Rivet you to your hope, we come now to set our feet upon the first step that
leads us up to this Throne of Perfection and Rest: But, here stands [A Lion] in
the way (the sluggard said so in the Proverbs, to excuse his idleness) when
there was none: but here stands a a Lion indeed; 2 These. 2. 7.
A Roaring Lion, that does hinder, and will hinder, till he be taken away; He
stands continually at the foot of these steps, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom he may devour, and will suffer no man to come near: And he stands
completely Armed, and bids men adventure if they dare, they come upon their
perils.

All the imitable actions of our Savior we are to follow, though not his
miracles, as to cure the blind, and heal the lame, and raise the dead, and the
like: but he has set us a pattern wherein we should all imitate him; for He
being Lord of all, yet he became least of all; although he was God equal with
his Father, Phil. ^. 6.
yet he Emptied himself, and poured out all his glory, and became as a servant,
submitting himself to death, yea, to the death of the cross: then which
description I cannot give you a more plain shorter, or more infallible
compendium of his sufferings, which will assuredly draw after it, Being
glorified with him: Herein ye must imitate him, herein ye must suffer with him,
and Herein ye shall be Glorified together: understand I pray you, I do not say
ye must be poor as Christ was poor; I do not say ye must be whipped as Christ was
whipped; that ye must be crowned with thorns as Christ was: this is more then I
know: I know not what God may do with you in that regard, whether he will call
you to this or not; nay, if I should tell you so, this were To begin at the
wrong end; for if you should do All this, and undergo never so much, the utmost
misery that ever man endured upon earth, name what death and torture you will,
it does not necessarily follow That ye shall be glorified with him: As a man in
a fever, if you apply never so many medicines outwardly to the skin, it will
do him no good; you must alter somewhat within before ye can cure him: so if a
man suffer never so much outwardly in his body, if you alter not the heart
within (for all evil is in the heart) till that be made clean, Mat. 15. 11.
till there be a suffering there, there is no good done; till then, we suffer
not with Christ, viz. to be emptied of our selves, to be made Nothing, to
forsake our own will, etc. these are sufferings indeed; all other outward and
bodily sufferings are but the shadow; these are the substance, and the True
Sufferings: This is, to suffer with Christ, that so we may reign with him.

I say herein we must imitate Christ in these two things spoken of, Phil. 2. 6,
7, 8. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.
Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: we must be Empty and
Humble; empty thy self of all thy gifts, yea of all thy graces: down with, not
only your infirmities and weaknesses, but throw down your Crowns, before the
Lamb that sits on the Throne, Rev. 4. 12. Rev. 4. 12.
and proclaim, All glory, all honor, and all power be unto him for ever: I
say, down with all your graces, your excellencies, that wherein you really do
excel, throw all down before him, your real excellencies, all must be thrown at
the feet of the Lamb: he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich
he has sent empty away, Luke 1. 53. Luke 1. 53.
But here steps in, and here stands in our way the old Adam, the old Serpent,
Lucifer, Flesh, Selfness, etc. he has diverse names, for our better kowledge of
him; and (...) he hears of these sufferings, he cries, Oh Master, favor thy
self, Mat. 16. 23. Mat. 16. 23.
none of these things shall happen to thee: what need thou go this ^ay? here
is a killing way indeed; live still, fill thy self with riches, and fill thy
self with pleasures, and fill thy self with wisdom, etc. you will find the
benefit of it: but you know Christ's answer, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art
an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men.

Object. Object.
But it may be you will say to me, What do you tell us of the old red Dragon,
and Lucifer, and of the Devil, etc. we have nothing to do with any of these
things; tell those of them that it concerns: I hope there is none of us
possessed; some are ready with Peter to curse bitterly, swearing, I know not the
man: Mark 14. 71.
I never saw any of these things; What strange things will this babbler make us
believe? what will he bring us to at last?

Beloved, I answer; Answ.
Have patience with me, Did any of you ever see his own eyes, His own face,
except in a glass? though you think you never saw the Devil; yet had you looked
into Gods book, there you might have seen him in you: There you are bidden to
fight with your own selves, with your own desires, with your own affections,
with your own reason, with your own will; and therefore if you will find your
enemies, never look without; if you will find out the Devil, and what He is,
and what his nature is, look within you; you will never find him without; there
you may see him in his colors, in his nature, in his power, in his effects and
workings: but my fear is, that hearing you hear and understand not, and seeing
you see not, Mat. 13. 14. Mat. 13. 14.


Again, You never saw your own souls, did you, but only in the effects? it may
be you never saw this Fiery red Dragon: but in his effects you may see him
daily: From whence come lies (says the Apostle James) and wantonness, and
pride, envy, hatred, debate? come they not from hence, even from your lusts?
James 4. 1. Jam. 4. 1.


In the time of the Law there was much a do about the leprosy, the Priest must
come and look on it again and again; much ado there was, and all was to this
end, that they might know it, that so they might avoid it: So we shall never
avoid this Old Serpent, this bloody Dragon, if we do not learn to know him, to
know him in his effects in us: and as I said before, we cannot come to set our
foot so much as on this first step, leading up to Solomon's Throne, but we shall
find HIM, this Giant, this Goliath Armed, being full of ire, terror, and
dreadfulness, standing in our way: and there is (...) coming near, without he
be overcome, subdued, conquered, and taken away.

And now I have This dreaful Dragon to fight withal, For I have desired it
Through the power of God, to give him such a blow, that he may be mortally
wounded in you and me: I desire that it may be with me, as it was with the
sword of Saul, and the bow of Jonathan, which never returned empty or in vain,
from the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty, 2 Samuel 1. 22.
This Mighty NIMROD.

And when I have gone over his several names, and opened them, I hope to
discover him so to you, that you may say experimentally, as Abigal said of
Nabal, Nabal is his name, and so is he, 1 Samuel 25. 25. 1 Samuel 25. 25.
Nabal is his name, and so is his nature: if he be called, Satan, that you
shall say I have found him Satan to me, which signifies Seducing, and so is his
nature: if he be called the Old man, the Old man we have ^ound him in our
practice: if called the Red Dragon or the Strong man, or what else he is called
so we have found him in his effects to our poor souls: And I have desired to
discover him; and now I have fallen upon it, God grant I may do it effectually,
even to the assaulting and rasing his strongest and most spiritual wickednesses
and strong holds in you and me, that I may now have a deadly blow at the Head
of this SERPENT, that has so long and so often bitten my Heel, and wounded you
and me when we felt it not.

But my Endeavors and my Wisdom, nor my strength will do no good, he is too
MIGHTY for me to encounter with, neither go I against Him with Sword or Spear,
but in the name of THE LORD OF HOSTS. FOR THE BATTLE IS THE LORDS. 1 Samuel 17.
45.


The feeling of these things in your selves will be far beyound my describing
them.

Neither will I bring any Railing accusation against him, (but only such as
the Scripture has given him) and only say, as the Archangel M^chael said
when he and his Angels fought with the Devil and his Angels, Jude 9.

THE LORD REBUKE THEE.

SERMON II.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
I Brought and Reduced the last Sabbath, all the imitable sufferings of Christ
(for some of them are not imitable in manner, nor always in the matter, none
of them in the measure) to the expression of two words: 1. (...) (...)
2. (...) Phil. 2. 7, 8. Phil. 2. 7, 8.

First, He humbled himself. Secondly, He emptied himself.


And in these two things consists our suffering with Christ: it may be to be
whipped with Christ, to be poor with Christ, to be reproched with Christ, to
suffer death with Christ, etc. it may be we are not called to these, neither
matters it whether we do or no suffer in that kind, except God calls us to
those conditions: But in these two we must of necessity suffer with Christ, if
we would be glorified with him: He was found (says that Text) in the form of a
servant, he was Humble as a servant, He that was Lord of all glory, emptied
himself of all that glory which he had with the Father, being God equal with
him, in full power and glory; yet he emptied himself, pouring out all his
glory, and made himself of no reputation and indeed he became a Servant of
Servants, as you know, who calls himself so.

And (as you may remember) the last day, when we intended to discover those six
steps that led up to Solomon's Throne, to this Throne of Humility, we found
there a HUGE Porter; viz. the strong man Armed, standing at the foot of these
steps: whom we intend to describe to you by opening those names that the
Scripture gives him: I reckoned them twenty in number.

1. The Old Man. 2 Adam. 3. The Serpent. 4. Lucifer. 5. The Red Dragon. 6. The
Roaring Lion. 7. The Devil. 8. Antichrist. 9. Sin. 10. Rebellion. 11. False
light. 12. Darkness. 13. The Flesh. 14. Selfness. 15. Propriety. 16. Self-love.
17. Our own will. 18. Error. 19. Satan. 20. The evil one.

And except He be taken away and removed which till then will Let, 2 These. 2. 7.
there is no ascending any one of these steps.

The first of which was Condemning ourselves.

The second Annihilation of our selves.

The third was Abdication, or forsaking all things.

The fourth, Indifferency to all conditions, to health and to sickness, to
plenty and to want, to good report and to evil report, to fair weather and to
foul: so that ye might stand indifferently affected to these estates, or to any
other: so that they know not which to choose, as willing to have one as the
other, if God please.

The fifth was conformity in all things to Christ; imitating him in all
imitable actions.

The sixth was deiformity, as I may so call it, when we are so given upto God,
that we no longer act, but when we act, it is God that acts, when we see,
think, speak, go, it is not we, but God: and (as I said) when I had thought to
come to those 6 steps, These. ^. 7.
we found that He that will withhold will withhold until he be taken away: That
Great Goliath and Armed; If we do but offer to set a foot on any of these steps,
we must look for striving; expect to fight a great battle, we must look for
much resistance; therefore before we come to draw near, we must labor that
this Armed Man be removed and taken away; or else we shall neither confess our
own sinfulness, nor our own nothingness and vileness, nor be content to forsake
all, nor to be indifferent to all things, nor any of the rest,

For thus he objects to thee, viz. this great red Dragon, this GOLIATH, SATAN,
LUCIFER, etc. What needs all this stir, condemning thyself, and annihilating
thy self, and forsaking all that thy heart could delight in? etc. What needs
all this adoo? had all (do thou ^hink) that went before thee, such a
difficult way ^o heaven? no, no, favor thy self: Master, Master* Be good unto
thy self; none of these things shall happen to thee, as Peter said to Christ,
Mat. 16. 23. Mat. 16. 23.
This is new doctrine indeed: had you ever such counsel given you as this,
before this odd fellow came? yet I beseech you examine your selves (I beseech
you bear with me) Have ye not these thoughts within you? Then If you will but
confess, this. This is the man, the old man, the Lucifer, the Devil that we go
about to describe: Are you not ready to say when you hear these things, Act.
17. 19.
what new doctrine is this? What do you tell me of the red Dragon, and the
Serpent, Antichrist, and the Roaring Lion, etc. We know none of these things*
we are Christians; And no such things appear now adays: indeed in our
forefathers days, we have heard that there appeared SPIRITS and HOBGOBLINGS,
and such kind of things; but that was in the days of Popery and blindness: but
now the light has vanished all these things, and you are ready with Peter,
Mar. 14. 71. Man. 14. 71.
to Curse and swear we know not the man ye speak of: we have heard of Dragons
spoken of by some of the Prophets, that have been in the wilderness; and of
Adam our first father, but he is dead long ago: and we have heard of the Owls
in the deserts, Jsa. 13. 21.
and of the Scritchowls, and the Ims and Oyms of the Desert, spoken of in
Isaiah: but alas to day, these things are old, and concern not us, and are
forgotten long ago: You have: say you so? and concern not you? Alas, Alas, but
for all this, I say unto you, Joh. 1. 26.
There is o^e in the midst of you, whom you whom you know not; See I pray you
if this Dragon, these Serpents, these Owls, Ims and Oyms, be not in you and
among you, and you know them not, And truly I believe you will tell me you
never heard of such a doctrine as this before; you have been Professors this
20, 30 or 40 years, and you never heard that these things were in you before:
you have indeed heard and read of such things, but you thank God you can wash
your hands in innocence, and you were never taught so, nor ever believed so:
And I believe as in 1 King. 22. 12. 1 King. 22. 12.
all the Prophets prophecy so and so, and prophecy good, and say you, shall
we believe this odd fellow? He has already made us believe that we are
Devils, and now he is at it again; and he would persuade us that we are
Serpents, nay Antichrist, and Dragons, and we know not what.

Well, Notwithstanding all this (as the Apostle says) Heb. 13. 22. Heb. 13. 22.
I beseech you suffer the words of exhortation: Truly Friends we must suffer
this proud ^lesh of ours to be pulled out by the roots, it will else destroy
the whole body: Let me pray you to Judge your selves that ye may not be judged,
1 Cor. 11. 31. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
Nay judge your selves, and ye shall escape the judgment of God; God will
certainly judge you to be so, as we have showed; Now, if you would escape his
judgment, then be content to judge so of your selves to prevent his judgment.

And as Peter the Apostle says in another case, Acts 2. 29, Acts 2. 29.
so would I to you, Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the
Patriarch David, etc, So more boldly and freely let me confess before you; As
all these things are in you, so verily I find them daily in my self, and from
mine own experience, and I desire to communicate the knowledge thereof unto
you: And I would not that you should think This Deadly Enemy A friend, and this
Domestic, A stranger.

And in preaching to you, Beloved, I assure you I desire to preach to myself; I
judge you no more then I judge my self; I am peccatorum primus, of whom As
says the Apostle, I am Chief; As bad as any of you all: Therefore I accuse
you not more then my self. If I look for devils, the old Man, Sin, Antichrist,
and Dragons, or Ostriches, or the Ims and Oyms of the Desert, or Lucifer, or
the Hissing Serpent, etc. alas, alas, I find I need not look far, they are nigh
me, they are all in me: And indeed there were far more hope of you to see and
confess it, then to deny and despise what is represented unto you.

Well then, that I may come to open HIM to you, that by His names you may know
him; for I would fain bring you acquainted with this great stranger to you,
though he be your daily guest: as S. John Baptist said of our Savior, Ioh. 1.
26. Joh. 1. ^6.
so say I, There is one in the midst of you, whom you know not: namely,
Antichrist, this Devil, this Darkness and Blindness, with all other his names
whatever He may be called; and this I wo^ld have you know so as your selves may
see and feel that he is in you, In the midst of you: so that you may both Hear
him and See him. I beseech you arraign and examine your selves: for I would
fain make you all Justices, and Judges of your selves, And I shall shortly show
you your Commission; and I pray, when you hear your selves Arraigned by any of
those several names, answer to your names, and cry, Here, Here; and say to your
selves, 2 Samuel 7. 12*
as Nathan to David, and clap your hand on every ones breast, and say, Thou art
the man: and also I would have you to answer as David to Nathan, I have sinned:
and this is the way for me to pronounce to you that Absolution, The Lord has
put away thy sin.

The first Name then, I say, which opposes it self against this our True and
BLESSED Conformity with Christ in those sufferings, formerly mentioned.

He is called the OLD man, Romans 6. 6. Romans 6. 6.
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified, etc. And he is so called, not
because he is Old and Ancient of days, but because, He is The Old Man in our
practice: Psalm. 51.
we are begotten with him, As David confesses Psalm. 51. In sin I was begotten
and brought forth; and it were better for us we had never been born, then to be
but so born: we are by nature (says the Apostle) Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.
Ephesians. 2. 3.
Thus God and his Word accounts of us: what Lands soever we have, and what
HEIRS soever we be, what Honors and Titles soever we have, Our father is an
Amorite, and our mother an Hittite, Ezekiel. 16. 3. Ezekiel. 16. 3.
we are without God, Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, etc. thus we are
in Gods esteem, what ever glory and splendor we have to the world; let Lords
and great ones mind this, as our Savior tells Nicodemus, A man cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God but he must be born again, Ioh. 3. 3* Joh. 3. 3.
these were his words that spoke ^* Diverse Earls and Lords being there present.
E Holland E. Mulgrave, etc. and other his intimate acquaintance.
So true as never man spoke: He whose words could admit of no untruth: Paul
indeed says, now I speak, and now the Lord, and this the Lord, and now I: but
here is one that always spoke the words of God; he never spoke of himself: But
says he, verily, verily a man must be born again; wha^ever it be that tends
not to Regeneration, must be cut off, it must be brought down.

Thus, I say, this STRONG MAN stands in our way, under the name and term of the
OLD Man; but he is not only a Strong man, but he stands also Armed: Therefore
the more strong, the more Terrible, The more Hard to Resist, And he wishes us,
to keep back and not to adventure upon our own ruin.

And his Armor is Custom in sin and Prescription: How hardly is a custom
broke? a man can as soon die as leave an old custom, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23. Ephesians. 4.
22, 23.
That is, That ye cast off, concerning the conversation in times past, that OLD
MAN, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and be renewed in the
spirit of your mind: and says Jeremy, Can the Leopard change his spots, or the
Blackamore his skin? Ier. 13. 23. Jer. 13. 23.
Can custom in sin be broken? if it can, then may you learn to do well, which
are accustomed to evil; if it be broken, I am sure, it was never by your will
or power, you may thank God for it: He it is that has overcome this Man Armed;
You your selves could never have overcome him: It may be here is in this
Congregation a good number of Christians, real Christians, and you have
overcome this Old man, but how? you may thank God for it; you had never been
so, nor had ever overcome, had not He been; and had not he fought for you, you
had never overcome him: Custom in sin is a great matter, as Augustine speaking
of his conversion, Says, That when he was resolved to forsake his sins, then
Custom in sin came and set upon him, and says he, All my sins and all my Old
delights came before me, Crying unto me, What, will ye leave us now? what, We
that have been such Old Companions, loved so dearly, will you now forsake us?
Have we not often given you much delight and content, and must we now part, and
part for ever? And so part, as never to see one another again? So that Custom
in sin may well be called the Armor of this Old man, for it is A Strong Armor.

A second name is Adam, and yet not excluding Eve: good women, do not think so,
But I may say as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 11.
Neither is the MAN without the Woman in the Lord, nor the WOMAN without the
Man: So may I, Too truly say, neither is the Man without the Woman in the
Devil, not the Woman without the Man in the Devil; and so both are in the
transgression: nay, the woman was first in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. 1 Timothy 2. 14.
the whole man is defiled, Soul and Body. And we call it [Adam] because, It
hides it self from God, and because by it as by Adam, Sin entered into the
world: as in our form of baptism we pray That the Old Adam may be so buried in
us, and that the new man may live and grow in us. But, What did Adam? He hid
himself: This is one property in this Old Adam: when Adam had sinned He Hid
himself (as he thought) from God: And God asks him, Adam, where art thou? but
what a vain thought was this in him to think to hide himself from God; From His
all-seeing Creator and Maker? But, This Adam had some LEAVES to hide himself
among: that is, some Excuses, for He is not Unarmed: for in what shape soever
he is represented, he has Armor Fitted to him.

And his armor in this is Amolition of the crime, putting it off himself. And
even thus Do not we do as Adam did? Has not he taught us the Trick of it, to
Hide our selves from God? though we no not do as Adam did, to run among the
trees, yet we do something equivalent, something like it: Genesis 3. 7.
so that we are not only Adam (naked) but we, (even as Adam did) sow figleaves
together for Aprons: Rather then Adam would accuse himself, he would accuse the
woman, and then the woman the Serpent: nay, rather then he will be guilty, or
confess his sin, he will accuse God himself; Thou gave me the woman, says
he: So, do not we do the same? Rather then we will accuse our selves, we will
accuse God; If we be charged, why have thou done this? Oh, I could not help it;
it is this flesh that thou gave me; is not this our case? why have thou done
this thing? we have our answer ready, The spirit is willing but the flesh is
weak, Mat. 26. 41. Mat. 26. 41.
the fault is not in us, but in this weak and frail flesh, that thou have given
us: but God answers this Old Adam peremptorily, Hos. 13. 5.
thou belyest me, I gave thee not Thy flesh to destroy thee, Thy destruction is
of thyself, O Israel, I am free; I gave thee flesh to a good end, but Thou have
abused it: Therefore Accuse thy self, for all evil is from thy self; Blame not
me in saying, The flesh that I gave thee; and that I have not done well in
giving thee such a frail and weak flesh, which thou art not able to bridle and
govern: Says God, all I created, behold it was very good: But lay the blame on
your selves, All that is given you, is given for your good, if you abuse it
not, and turn it to evil, to your selves: This was a good argument, as David
used it, but not as we, and as this Old Adam uses it; for David often
complains of the weakness of his Flesh, and that he could do nothing, and he
had no strength, and that his bones were broken, and he was all to pieces:
David did it by way of Argument, Psalm. 18.
that God would have pity upon him, and strengthen him; but we do it that we
may be excused for all we do, without desire of amendment: therefore away with
these shifts, And give glory to God: Confess, confess, 2 Samuel 12. 7.
that it is thy sin, and thy transgression; and confess Thou art The man.

A Third name, he is called The SERPENT; and in Isa. 1. 27. Isa. 1. 27.
he is called Leviathan, that crooked Serpent.

Now he is called The Serpent from that curse, Genesis 3. 14. Genesis 3. 14.
because he Goes upon his belly, and eats The dust of the earth.

Object. Obj.
But what Are we serpents then? and do we eat of the dust of the earth?

Answ. Ans.
Yes: This Serpent is the flesh, which first came to the woman, and tempted
her; for Eve I take to be meant of the sensitive, and fleshly and inferior
part; and Adam to be meant, the rational and the higher part of man, viz. The
Reasonable Soul: Now this Serpent, the flesh, or this carnal part, does not
first and immediately set upon Adam; for Adam might have reasoned it out with
him: but he first sets upon weak Eve; He Arrests first, The sensitive part,
because that it is next unto the Flesh, and very little differing from the
flesh: And then at last, by degrees, he comes to Adam, and that By Eve; And so,
by that means the Sensitive prevailed over the Rational, Eve over Adam, and the
Woman over the Man.

Object. Obj.
I, but Sir, by your Favor we do not lick the dust as Serpents?

Answ. But we do, and that according to the Letter; Ans.
All that ever we see, smell, touch, taste, ^ear, all is but the dust of the
earth, for this Serpent Licks Dust, and Lives by Dust, and all our Senses are
Fed with Dust: for if we see Beauty, (...) see but beautiful dust; if we touch
gold, it is but thick clay, thick dust: if we smell any thing, they are but
vapors from the earth; if we taste any thing, it comes from the earth, and to
the earth it returns: If we hear any thing that pleases the ears, Its but Air
contracted into a Sound; All that we account of, and esteem, All that we Relish
and delight in, All, is but the dust of the Earth; Beloved, methinks these
things should make a man abhor himself; we see how naturally men abhor
Serpents, because they are made of so contrary a nature and disposition to men:
And if This ONE Serpent be so loathsome and terrible, And Unarmed, what is He,
when he is Armed?

And his Armor is, His Subtilty, that is, his Wisdom: and that you will think
strange; Our Savior says, Be wise as Serpents: But wherein consists His
Wisdom? It consists in this, That whenever this Serpent Sees himself
Assaulted, and like to be Overcome, That he will do all he can to defend his
Head, to keep that safe; For life is in the Head; It Is certain, ye may wound him
in the Tail, and he will recover that well enough: For let a man come into a
garden overrun with weeds; And, to destroy these, shall go and cut off all the
tops of them; we know, that This has not killed the weeds; for the roots are
there still, and will spring again: So, for a man to cut off This particular
sin, And That particular sin, and not to pull up sin by the roots, it is never
the near; after a while they grow the ranker, and the stronger: if we would
destroy it, we must strike at the Root of sin, at the life, at the Head; for
that is it that was promised in the 3 of Genesis, Genesis 3. 15.
Thou shall bruise his Heel, but he shall break thine Head: If at any time, we
Ministers go about to reprove you of your sins, you can endure us well enough,
so long as we cut off but the laps of your garments: 1 Samuel 24. 11.
And you can be well contented to hear us; I, and to reform and obey our
Doctrine; but if once we come to meddle with the root, with the life of sin,
Then you will strive, then you will wrestle and fight to save that, and you
will never fight in earnest till then, and then you will Fight: Oh save The
HEAD; Save the LIFE of your Sins and lusts.

A fourth name is Lucifer; you know the place, Isa. 14. 12. Isa. 14. 12.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the morning? how art thou
cut down to the ground which did weaken the Nations? for thou have said in
thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars
of God, I will be like the most High: yet thou shall be brought down to hell,
to the sides of the pit, etc.

Now it may be you will say unto me; Nay sir, you have made us bad enough
already, do not make us Lucifers, the Prince of Devils: Hest. 7. 5.
who are they, or where are they that will offer such high presumption, To Aim
at Gods Seat, or to Exalt themselves above the Stars of God, or to be like unto
God?

I Answer, This Lucifer Is spiritual pride when the heart prid^s it self in its
own excellencies; viz. Such thoughts as these: See, see, what an excellent
creature man is made, Ps. 8. 2.
But little lower then the Angels? O what a Regard God has unto man? He has
crowned him with glory and honor: he has given him dominion over all the
works of his hands; and has put all things under his feet: Has not he made
the Earth to bear me, and the Sun to shine upon me, The moon and stars to do
homage and service to me, Genesis 37. 9.
and all creatures to feed and clothe me? Oh! what Excellent graces have I? How
have I excelled other men? I have made a fair and long progress in Religion: Oh
Brethren, Brethren, what shall I say? I never wonder that Cain was seduced by
hatred and envy, and Lamech overcome by lust, and Absalom to fall by Ambition,
and Abiram by murmuring, Judas by covetousness, the Richman by gluttony, and
that Simon Magus was overcome by covetousness, and the like. But, here is the
misery of all miseries, and the height of all aggravations: For a man to go to
hell by his Religion, and profession of truth: for a man to go to hell by
hearing of Sermons, By receiving the Communion, by praying, by preaching, by
abstinence, By overcoming of Vice, by Resisting of sin, by giving of alms, etc.
to bless themselves and say, I thank God I am not thus and thus, as the
Pharisee said, I am not as other men, Luke 18. 11.
nor as this Publican; I do not as other men do, I do not swear as such a man,
I do not blaspheme and lie, and be drunk, as such and such; I go to Church
twice a Sabbath, I attend diligently, I read and repeat the word in my family,
I pray twice a day: nay not only so, but I keep a strict watch over my heart
and tongue: I have overcome swearing and filthy speaking, and lying, and
covetousness: all these have I killed, my life is unspotted, No man can say
Black is my eye. But may it not be said of thee, as it was once concerning
Alexander? that when he came to besiege and take a City, and the enemy stood
upon a high steep mountain or bulwark, upon which stood Elephants, so that they
were in such a strait, they knew not what to do; for if they killed, they
should kill more of their own Army, then of their Enemies; For, if they killed
the Elephants that stood in the front, their heavy bodies would tumble down
upon them and kill them: So say I, I fear that in killing of sin, sin has
killed thee: Are not all thy good deeds fallen upon thine own head? and has
not all thy labor and pains that thou have taken, Killed thine own soul?

And, for all this Potent strength that this Lucifer (you see) has, yet he
has gotten Armor on, besides; And his armor is Innocence: And, the more of
this he has, the more strong, and the better Armed is He: I say the more
innocence and unsportedness This Lucifer has, so much the more strong is he
against God; but as David says, Psalm. 119. 71. Psa. 119. 71.
It was good for me that I was afflicted; for before I was afflicted I went
astray, but now I have respect to all thy Commandments; So may I boldly say, It
were good for thee to Fall, Nay it were better, that God would let thee fall,
then stand, that thou may come to see thine own pride and glory laid in the
dust, and that thou be made to see, Not what a strong excellent creature thou
art, but what a vile and sinful, and what a weak creature thou art; that so
thou may say, it was good for me, and I find it by experience; Oh it is good
for me that I sinned, and that I fell: for before I sinned I went astray; I had
like to have gone to hell by all my good actions, by my pride in them; I was
even at the very pits brink, had this never been disclosed to me.

Oh Beloved! Humility is the Top of all graces; all is nothing* if we have not
That, with them. Beloved, examine your selves, Try and see whether these things
be in you or not; and if they be, if you find them so, I tell you, you will
never look so much to find any of them without your selves as within: One Name
more, and then we conclude for this time.

The ^^th name that is given him, is, The Red Dragon, Rev. 12. 3. Rev. 12. 3.
so called, because of his color, And there appeared another wonder in heaven,
and behold a great red Dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven
crowns upon his heads: Friends, I would fain bring you acquainted with. This
enemy also, that you may once come to know him, that you may beware of him: for
I open all these several names, that so I might fully describe and set him out
to you, that you may know him, that if you find him not in you by one name, yet
you may by another; and if not by one or two, yet by all his names compared
together: Exodus 4. 6.
That as Moses put his hand into his bosom, and pulled it out leprous: so I
would fain have you find that these things are in your own bosoms, you are all
Lepers, but know it not. And though I take some time in opening these names,
yet I hope it will be profitable to you; for as yet I am not half gone through
them: This Red Dragon makes his Fiery assaults upon the Soul daily and hourly,
and there does he make Wreck and spoil: he there cruelly Rends and Tears your
poor souls, and you for all that see it not, nor are sensible thereof: There He
Seises upon his Prey, Which but with a very strong hand will he forsake; And,
by those his fiery darts (which the Apostle speaks of) he wounds the soul to
death and destruction, and there is no delivering the soul from the jaws of
this fiery Dragon, but by the Almighty power and hand of God; for he goes about
like a Roaring Lion, seeking his prey, and whom he may swallow up and devour, 1
Pet. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 8.


And his Armor is blo^d* it is no less then your blood, your life that feeds
him; And he Thirsts for blood, which is your life, and that is his life, his
meat and drink: And there is no overcoming this Dragon, but by destroying That
which is the very life of your lives, viz. Of your carnal and fleshly lives;
the life of pride* and the life of covetousness, the life of arrogance and
self-boasting, etc.

All Humane and worldly wisdom must be brought down: The natural man, as born
of the old Adam, must be crucified and slain* and be utterly stripped of all his
wisdom and power: ye must take up arms, and go to war within your selves, and
fight with your selves, fight with your own wills, with your own affections:
You mus resist and cast away that which is sweet and dear to flesh and blood:
you must cut off your right hands, and pull out your right eyes: Mat. 5. 20.
else this Devouring Dragon will never be overcome: Every man loves his blood
dearly; the natural man's sin is as dear to him as his blood; it is so
interwoven, and runs into the very nature of man, even as the blood through
every part and memb^r; so that take away the blood, and you take away the life:
And nothing will satisfy this bloody red Dragon but blood: this he lives upon:
and therefore whenever ye look and behold in your selves, or any other, A
dearness in sin, A love to sin, you shall find how loath they are to part with
it: Can a Blackamoor change his skin, or a Leopard his spots? Neither can ye
which are accustomed to do evil, learn to do well, says Isaiah, Therefore He
is, A Sore Enemy.

SERMON III.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.

THis Text, as I have told you, represents a Christians whole time, that is,
His Nonage, and his Full-age; if that be too long, his Winter and his Summer;
if that also be, then call it His Day, His Evening, and His Morni^g, as Genesis 1.
The Evening and the Morning were a day: Observe, The Evening always before the
Morning. Now every one I know will be ready to say as Balaam said, Oh that I
might dye the death of the righteous, and that my last end might be like his,
Numb. 23. 10. Numb. 23. 10.
Oh let my Full Age be like his; let my Summer and my Morning be like his; The
truth is, every one would Reign with Christ, but none would Suffer with him.

When the time shall come that we must surrender up these precious souls of
ours, and that we feel and see we have but our three last groaning sighs to
fetch, and that we must be dissolved, depart out of this Tabernacle, and return
to our first principles from whence we were taken, and that our spi^its must
return to God that gave them: Heb. 8.
I say when we shall come to see this (if so be, we believe so far as this) Oh
then we would willingly dye the death of the righteous, and that our days
might end like his; but by no means would we take part with him in his Nonage,
in his Winter, in his Evening, in his Suffering with Christ: Oh no; therein he
cries out, Master, favor thy self from these things, Luke 4. 7.
let none of these things happen to thee: but this Text I have now read unto
you, withstands all these wishes and desires; In plain words, If ye suffer with
Christ, then shall ye be glorified with him; if ye suffer not with him, there
is no hope of glory, no hope of reigning, no hope of the crown. Therefore it
behooves us to look for sufferings; we must make account of being sufferers, and
of being such kind of sufferers as may claim a part in Christ's sufferings: for
there be many sufferers in the world, yet have no part with Christ.

Moreover it may be, We never were whipped with Christ, never poor with Christ,
never crucified with Christ, never imprisoned with Christ; we were never called
as the Apostle says, to resist unto blood, how then can we claim a part of
suffering with Christ? therefore we must labor to find out such a condition
wherein we may claim a part in Christ's sufferings, and then we may also in his
Throne and Glory.

We must therefore suffer, as the Apostle defines Christ's sufferings, Phil. 2.
Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.
we must first empty our selves as Christ did; and,

Secondly, We must humble our selves as he did; fot he being God equal with his
Father, yet he emptied himself of all his glory, that is, poured it all out,
and made himself of no reputation, being so humble, that he was found in the
form of a servant.

Now when a Christian begins but to set his face toward Jerusalem, if he do but
begin to look toward this Emptying and suffering life, he shall be sure to
find enemies enough, this old man Adam, Lucifer, Antichrist, the red Dragon,
Sin, etc. All standing like so many Golia^s or strong men armed, standing at
the very gate; that if ye do but look toward the door, they prepare to
encounter; they stand at the very foot of the six steps which I named unto you,
1 Condemnation 2 Ann^hilation of our selves. 3 Forsaking of all things. 4
Indifferency to all things. 5 Conformity in all things. 6 Deiformity or
Transformity.
Wherein con^^sts Our suffering with Christ; which Enemies do labor might and
main, to hinder us from suffering with Christ: so that before we can set one
foot on this first step, there stands, I say, Goliath, That mighty Giant,
Standing for the whole army of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 17
being six cubits and a span high, with an helmet of brass upon his head, armed
with a coat of Male, and greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders, and the staff of his spear being like a Weavers beam,
and his spear head weighing 600 shekels of iron: This Goliath thus armed stands,
and if any man attempt or have a thought to look toward these six steps, he
cries and proclaims, Choose you a man, and if he be able to come and fight with
me, 1 Samuel 17. 9.
if he prevail over me, then will we be your servants and serve you: but if I
prevail over him, then shall ye be our servants for ever.

But it may be some will say to me, I know not the man, I never saw any such
thing as you speak of, I have none of these things in me, you touch not me, I
am free, I have nothing to do with this strong man armed, This Goliath, nor
Lucifer, nor the Serpent, nor the red dragon, nor Antichrist.

Therefore I intended and began last day to open unto you those names, that
thereby you might see whether you knew any of these or no; for the Scripture
has given this Enemy diverse names, and set him out diverse ways to us, because
these things are in themselves far above our capacity; therefore he has
diverse names, that if you know him not by one, yet you may by another; for he
has diverse and various effects, and workings in man, and he works in darkness,
and his works are works of Darkness, so that few ever come to discover him, or
them.

Therefore I hope after we have gone t^rough them all, Mar. 14. 71.
ye will not say Ye know not the man we speak of, or that you have not heard
of any of these things, and that you have no such things within you, Nor that
you have none of these secret whisperings, none of these resistances and
fightings within you; Nor you have none of these wars and rumors of wars
within you, you can repent and confess your sins when you list; And you, for
ought you can see have none of this battle of Warriors as Isaiah speaks of,
which is with confused noise, Isa. 5. 9.
and garments tumbled in blood; you have none of this burning up with the fuel
of fire. But assuredly know, That all These things, will be within you, before
there can be To us a child born, and To us a son given.

And if there be (Through Gods Blessing) such a happy discovery (by that time
we have opened these names, so that you shall be able to say) Sir, as you say
he is, so have we found him: truly Nabal is his name, and Nabal is his nature;
Adam is his name, and so is his nature; the Serpent is his name, and so is his
nature; the red Dragon is his name, and so is his nature. Then this will be a
Happy, ^ Blessed day to you.

As I said, if so be you find him in you by these names, or by his effects;
then assure your selves He must be fought withal, there is no overcoming of him
without fighting: Do not think that he is Scared with words, nor with Big
looks, nor Stately carriage, nor self Arrogance, etc.

Five of his names we have opened. First, he is called the Old man. 2. Adam;
which names we opened. 3. The Serpent, as Esaias 27. 1. Isa. 27. 1.
In that day the Lord with his sore and strong sword shall punish Leviathan the
piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked Serpent; he shall slay the Dragon
that is in the Sea. And I tell you, how much soever we think we abhor Serpents;
yet Th^se Cruel Serpents, we live with them, we eat, we drink, we play with
them, we hug them in our bosoms: And the way to destroy and kill this Serpent
is by cutting off his head: kill him in the head, for therein is his life; for
that is it that is promised in Genesis 3. Genesis 3. 15.
Let the Serpent but save his head, and he will do well enough; cut but off the
tops of weeds and they will grow again ranker then before, they have their life
still; cut off swearing, lying, pride, covetousness, anger, revenge, any
particular sin; yet you have left the root still, you have saved the Serpents
head: and therefore though I have preached to you these three years, yet ye
never knew me, To Hazard a Sermon at the cutting off any one of these
particular sins. I never set my self to preach against any one individual vice,
as swearing and drunkenness, or whoredom, or the like, as many do, inveighing
against some one particular external gross sin, many months together. Perhaps I
might have forced and persuaded you to leave them, and so may they: but what
real good have they done? but I knew if I left the Root behind, they would
grow again, if not the same way, yet another way as bad or worse: but take away
the root and the cause, and then the effects would soon cease, not in one
branch only, but in all.

The fourth name was Lucifer, that is, that through our own virtues and
excellencies he has given us the fall; and that is a dangerous fall, that
which we take by our own endowments: I do not mean only natural endowments, as
ability to pray admirably in words, to repeat Sermons, to converse and reason
excellently: but I mean our looking on our own excellencies, even those that
are excellencies indeed, our graces, and that which to others makes us not
only seem excellent, but we are so in our selves. When we look upon what we
ar^, how far we have gone on in Christianity, how many sins we have overcome,
and we glory like the Peacock in our own plumes and feathers; this is the most
dangerous fall, if not an irrecoverable one.

And he is not unarmed, as I then showed you at large, and his armor is
Innocence, they walk unblameably; and the more of this innocence, the more
danger; and it were better in this case for men to have fallen then to have
been innocent; for their innocence has been their destruction; for this is
the very sin of Lucifer, which threw him down from Heaven.

Fifthly, He is called the red Dragon, in the Revelation 12. 3. Rev. 12. 3.
we read in this place of a woman that was with child, clothed with the Sun,
ready to be delivered of a male child, and the red Dragon stood before her to
devou^ the child as soon as it was born; Because it was a Man-child, therefore
he watched so narrowly; if it had been of the female sex, he had not cared, but
being a Man-child, one that would be the destruction of him and his kingdom, it
was time for him to look about him.

And when you read that Chapter of the woman in heaven clothed with the Sun, I
hope you are not so weak as to imagine that there is any such thing in heaven;
that there is a woman with child in heaven; I hope you are not so babish; but
it is meant of the soul of man, which is to be esteemed far above the Sun and
the fabric of the massy world; And when this soul is to be brought to bed of
a male child, in the New birth, this Dragon watches to destroy it: Exodus 1. 16.
this Pharaoh commands, strangle them in the birth: but be they females, of the
weaker sex, let them live: these help to advance Satan's Kingdom; by all means
let them live, nourish, cherish, foster them: but for the other, destroy,
stifle them, they destroy his Kingdom.

And the Armor of this red Dragon is Blood, therefore he is called the Red
Dragon, Rev. 12. 3.
Red, like blood. God commands the Jews, not to eat the blood of any thing, for
that is the life thereof; but it is blood this Dragon seeks; it is the life, it is
blood that nourishes him; and this is a sore Armor, and we cannot destroy him,
but we must destroy our selves: Ye must destroy your life, ye must destroy the
blood, the life of your lusts, the life of your sins, the life of your desires,
the life of your affections, the life of your hopes, the life of your fears; Is
not this also a Sore Enemy?

The sixth name, he is called the Roaring Lion; so called because of his
implacable fury, nothing will satisfy him, nothing will stop him in his course
of sin; no benefits, no terrors, no threats, no entreaties; neither mercies nor
judgments, neither rewards nor terrors move him; he mocks at all, he rusheth
through all, as the horse rusheth into the battle, as Job says of the horse,
chapter 39. v. 22. Job 39. 22.
He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turns he back from the
sword.

And he is not unarmed, and his armor is Resolution; he will through all,
nothing shall stop him, he is desperate, he is without all bounds, restraints
and limits: when God commands any thing, he is without command, he will be King
and Lord himself, as Ier. 2. 25. Jer. 2. 25.
Withhold from following after thy Lovers, withhold thy foot, withhold thy
throat from thirst: but thou said, There is no hope, I will go after my
Lovers: Strangers I have loved, and strangers I will love; that is, ye cannot
dam up his way, he is like an overflowing Sea: no banks, no bottom, no
commands, no laws will hold him. Says he, seeing that God commands and I
command, one is strong, and the other is strong, I care not, right or wrong,
stand or fall, let him that is strongest take all.

Beloved, I know these things you will not own, you loath these words: Oh far
be any of these thoughts from you; but let me tell you, though you say not so
with your mouths, yet this is the practice of your lives.

The seventh name is [the Devil:] In Scripture: we find very little said, of
what God is in himself, in his essence, because that is too high for us, those
words we are not able to hear, nor to comprehend, but very much what He is
toward us, what God is to us, and what he is in his effects and workings in
us: for he is in his essence incomprehensible to us; so is the Essence of the
Devil; and we find very little, yea much less said of him then of God; But let
us see what is he to us and in us; for it is the Devil within us, that does us
all the hurt: for if he were not in us, all the Devi^s without us could do us
no hurt, till gotten within us, and so entertained by us; were he not in us, he
were no Devil to us: and therefore I say little or nothing of the essence of
the Devil; But as he is in his workings and effects; and therein we daily find
him too much, and too rife amongst us, and his work and nature is to be a liar
from the beginning: A Seducer.

His nature is 1 To accuse Man unto God. 2 God unto Man. 3 Man unto Man.


1 God unto Man, as Genesis 3. Genesis 3. 1.
Has God said, Ye shall not eat of the tree, etc. but in the day thou eatest
thou shall die? Tush Ye shall not die, for God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and
evil. What a most horrible lie was that! He may well be called the father of
lies, Ioh. 8. 44. Joh. 8. 44.
that he should be so impudent, to accuse the infinite good, and Almighty God,
Of strait-handedness or Envy toward them: and that he was not so good toward
them as he might be; and that he had created them blind, and in simple
condition; and had tied them from eating of that tree, lest they should better
their condition; l^st they poor miserable crawling worms, should come to be
like the Eternal, Omnipotent, Wise God; and that God did forbid them that tree
out of envy, for fear they should be as wise as he, because he only will be
the wisest. Oh hor^ible impudence!

Again, Secondly he accuses Man unto God, as Job 1. God asked him if he had
taken notice of his servant Job? Job 1. 8, 9.
Satan answered, Does Job serve God for naught? thou blessest him, and
therefore he serves thee: but do but put forth thy hand and touch him in his
estate, and he will blaspheme thee to thy face; That is, do but take away his
estate, and he will curse thee as fast as he now blesses thee and serves thee.

Again, Thirdly, he accuses Man unto man. From whence comes all strife, and
debates, and contention? is not he the cause? as the Apostle says, from whence
come wars and dissension? come they not hence, Jam* 4. 1.
even from your lusts which war in your members? Rather then the Devil will
accuse himself, he will accuse Man, yea the Scripture, Nay God himself: if any
thing go against him, then all is lies, the Man lies, the Book lies, the
Scripture lies, God lies, and all lies: All this he will not stick to say, that
they all shall be liars before he will accuse himself.

The eighth name is Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 4. 3. 1 John 4. 3.
And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is not of God; but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how
that he should come, and now already he is in the world.

You will say, Nay now, we are sure we are all free of this, he is far enough
off us, he is at Rome: if there should be an Antichrist among us, he should
soon be discovered and had up into the High Commission Court, and there be
censured: but we are no Antich^ists, for the Apostle says, That whosoever he
be that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, the same is
Antichrist: now we all confess this, he came into the world 1600 years ago, and
he was begotten by the Holy Ghos^, (this is part of our Creed) born of the
virgin M^ry, suffered under Po^tius Pilate, etc. but think thou that this
confession with the mouth is enough? But I would ask thee, Is Jesus Christ come
in the flesh with thee? is he come into thy flesh? that Christ is Born in thee,
risen in thee, that he is glorified in thy members? Then, thou art no
Antichrist: but if he be not, thou need not go far to find Antichrist.

I know well the general Vote is, that the Pope is Antichrist* well, let it be
so, that he is externally and chiefly at Rome: and that the Pope shall be
destroyed, and then Antichrist is fallen; I will not for my p^rt contend, let
most voices carry it: but take heed you do not so long look for Antichrist
abroad and at Rome, so that thou neglect one at home: And it may be, when
Antichrist is destroyed, we look for a thousand years of peace, and then the
Church shall be without spot or wrinkle, and Christ shall rule in his Kingdom
in peace, and there shall no enemy oppose: But all this you think will be when
you are dead and gone; you wish you could see those days: And so likewise,
when you p^ay daily, His Kingdom come, and his will be done, you think that
will be in those days of peace: or else, when you are dying and can have your
wills no longer: when you have striven so long, and God will have his will then
you (it may be) will say thy will be done, and thy kingdom come: but then is
Gods Kingdom come, and Gods Will done, when Christ is come into thy flesh, that
he lives in thee, and rules thee; That all thy actions are in imitation of thy
Savior, Doing the same things as our Savior would do in thy case, were he
upon earth: and let ^e tell you, till then, all your prayers and all your
external duties are in vain* they all turn into s^n.

But if you shall ask, What armor w^ars this Antichrist? I answer, The armor
of Antich^ist is Multitude; there are many Antichrists, 1 Ioh. 2. 18. 1 John 2.
18.
Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even n^w are there many Antichrists: whereby we know that it is the
last time. Nothing so common as Antichrist; if a man do but put his hand into
his bosom, he shall find enough of Antichrist there: and there are so many
Antichrists in the world, that a man can very hardly find a true Christian,
every man has an Antichrist within him: insomuch that we had need do as the
Prophet Zachary says, Search Jerusalem with lights; for Antichrist is in every
place, the houses are full of Antichrist, the Pulpits are full of Antichrist*
the Communion Table is full of Antichrist, all places are full of Antichrist.
Oh beloved, There are many thro^g about Jesus Ch^i^t: Yet but very few touch
him, as the woman with a bloody issue, to get virtue from him.

If there were but one Antichrist, as we think the Pope is the Antichrist, he
were eas^ly found: but the armor of this Antichrst is Multitude; nothing
almost through the whole world but Antichrist: we are all born and live
Antichrists: therefore destroy Antichrist and you must destroy all the world:
if we are saved, it is by Gods infinite power and mercy: Mar. 6. 46.
for we are (as the Apostle says, Jude 23. Jude 23.
) firebrands snatched out of the fire, we are pulled out of the multitude; we
are all born Antichrists, and I pray God we do not dye so: for for I am sure we
are all born Antichrists: So that He that will oppose Antichrist, must oppose
all the world, he must oppose a multitude: for say we, shall I not do as the
most do? shall not I go that way that Kings and Princes go? and if I go that
way they go, what need I to fear?

The ninth name is Rebellion, Job 24. 13.
that is, when men rebel even against the light, as Job says, They know not
the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths of it: This n^me is taken from the
Giants of old time, who presumed on their great strength, so that they rebelled
against the Gods: we do also the same thing, for we war against God; we rebel
in our minds and in Spirit. Those that are grieved at any thing God does* and
will not be ruled by his will, this is to war against him; To think any thing
(let it be what it will) not well done that he does, though he walk contrary to
us: as when God takes away such a man, that was a good member of the Church,
and lets another live to waste and devour the Churh; they think this not
wi^ely done, they could have directed God to do better: This, this is High
rebellion, High Treason: For in plain terms They would be Gods, they would
Govern God: and those that do not dislike, and be sorry with them, for these
doings of God, they are not liked by them, neither are they for their company;
they cannot be content to be thrown to Hell themselves, but after they are
fallen, they would, Devil-like, have others in the same transgression. They
would have all side with them in this Rebellion.

But what may be the armor of this sin of Rebellion? And what are his weapons?
Answ. It Is no other but [His Wisdom] that is, wisdom to get for themselves, To
get riches, and honor, wisdom to exalt themselves in the world; what ever it
be that crosses them in this is foolishness; if the stream run not this way, it
is no wisdom with them, though God himself do it: as Isa. 47. 10. I^a. 47. 10.
Thy wisdom has perverted thee, and made thee Rebel: and again, Ezekiel. 28. 2,
3. Ezekiel. 28. 2, 3.
Because thy heart is liftted up* and thou have said, thou art a God, and thou will sit in the seat of God, ^n the midst of the Seas, though thou set thine
heart as the heart of God; Behold art thou ^iser then Daniel? that is, with thy
wisdom tho^ have gotten thee riches: and thou will undertake to be God of the
Seas, that is, thou will rule those turbulent and troublesome waves, and the
exorbitant passages of the world: and thou would rule them so, that every
thing may bring peace and riches and esteem in the world: Art thou wiser then
Daniel? poor Daniel (says God there) he was wise, though he got no ^iches and
wealth: Thou say, There is no wisdom where there is no riches (you must
pardon me) though your tongues say not thus, yet the whole tenure of your lives
speaks this: if things run not smoothly in the world, or according to your
wisdom, this is foolishness.

Oh beloved, think of these things, lay them to your lives, and see if these
things be not in you; I know you would fain shift off your own guil^iness, but
it were more safe to acknowledge it.

B^^ as I told you, This Strong man Armed, which I have endeavored in part to
unfold by these names, will not suffer you to set a foot on the very first
step, viz. To condemnation of our selves: And I would have you be assured, if
you never come to this first step, you will never come near any of the rest;
And, if by opening all these names, which I am not yet half through, I can
bring about but the acknowledgement of your own guiltiness, I shall think my
labor well bestowed; for certainly we have no greater Enemy then our selves,
as it is a common Proverb, yet but little believed, (as most of your common
Proverbs are very true sayings) If our enemies within us did not betray us, our
enemies without us could not surus Nothing can hurt us but our selves: and yet
every one takes himself to be his own greatest and truest friend; but you see,
that to a man's Self the^e is no enemy comparable to undo and destroy him as
Himself.

SERMON IV.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
I Reduced all the sufferings with Christ, into these two comprehensive words:
He emptied himself, And he humbled himself.


As I then told you, God does not require at every man's hand to be poor, to be
despised, and to suffer calumny, to forsake houses and lands, and wife and
children: but whosoever suffers with Christ in these two things; In being
Emptied and Humbled as Christ was, he shall find sufferings enough; He will
say, he has suffered heavy burdens, heavy afflictions, rending and tearing
crosses: for a man is to empty himself of all his moral endowments, of all his
good education, of all his wisdom, of all his Religion and Graces, so that he
must become a fool to be made wise as God would have him: 1 Cor. 1. 27.
To renounce all his own affections, to overcome his own desires, to resist his
own will: these must be all thrown down, and we to behave our selves, even in
our hearts, and from our very souls as truly humble as a little child, Mat. 20.
27. and Mar. 9. 36.
or as the basest ser^ant, to become all to all: Your humble servant, is a base
complement in all men, save in this Emptied man; but he can truly say so.

Then we came to those six steps which did show us, wherein this suffering with
CHRIST consisted.

First, In Condemnation of our selves.

Secondly, Annihilation.

Thirdly, Abdication, or forsaking all things whatsoever that may seem good,
and to be de^ired for our own selves.

Fourthly, Indifferency to all things, Psalm. 39. 9. Psalm. 39. 9.
I held my tongue, and spoke nothing (says David) because thou did it: If
God send foul weather, I held my tongue, for thou did it: if God send fair
weather, I held my tongue; if he send sickness, if he send health, I held my
tongue, and said nothing, because thou did it, Says this Man: I am
contented, whether he make me merry, or make me sad, all please me, because
thou do it.

Fifthly, Conformity to CHRIST in all things, Taking Him as Our Pattern.

Sixthly, Deiformity, that is, when God does all in us, He speaks in us, He
hears in us: so that we no longer think, speak, nor hear, nor do any thing, but
He altogether.

In these six things consists our suffering with Christ: and these are such
sufferings, as there is none like them: you may conceive of terrible
sufferings, of Rackings, of Breakings of bones, of Tearing apieces with wild
horses, of being flayed alive: but yet these sufferings are a thousandfold more
hard and difficult to overcome, as those that have the knowledge and experience
thereof can witness; and as our Savior says in another case, ^uke 17. 11.
Rather then a man should offend one of these little ones, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the depth
of the sea: And I say, these are such kind of sufferings, that it were better
for a man that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in
the midst of the sea, then not to have his part in these sufferings; for these
are happy sufferings, Romans 8. 18.
blessed and glorious, Rich and weighty sufferings, but not to flesh and blood.
But to the Spirit and inward Man will bring An Eternal weight of Glory.

But as I have told you, when we should come to ascend these six steps, and we
thought to have gone on in a quiet calm way, and to have shown you David's feet
to have gone up to this throne, or rather David's wings, that we might fly up
thither, and be at rest: Oh that I had the wings of a Dove! But we found it was
very difficult, and not to be attained by natural power; for it is a
supernatural work, nature opposes it: for there we found the Great, And not
Naked, but Armed Porter, standing in the very gate, at the very foot of them:
Mark 3. 27.
viz. The strong man, Armed, there was one who stands in the way; and we shall
find that true of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
That he that now lets, will let until he be taken out of the way; nay, we
shall find there the Mystery of Iniquity working, that will hinder us, till it
be re^oved: and that Eccles. 2. 1. Eccles. 2. 1.
I said in mine heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth; therefore enjoy
pleasure: and behold this also is vanity. And as Peter said to Christ, Master,
favor thy self, none of these things shall happen to thee: therefore whoever
means to ascend any one of these steps, must get this Giant removed, and that
wicked one revealed, that he may be consumed; He that will be a warrior must
not mind pleasure, nor fear death. You know, David complained that he was
compassed about with enemies on every side: So that The fat bulls of Bashan
environed him, Psalm. 22. 12. Psalm. 22. 12.
and that his feet stuck fast in the mire, Psalm. 69. 2. Psalm. 69. 2.
but let me tell you, all here present at this time, have as great reason to
complain of those things, as ever David had.

And because you might know this enemy that hinders us, I showed unto you, what
this Strong man was called, and opened diverse names by which he is set out to
us, and pourtraied before us:

As Adam. The Old man. Lucifer. Red Dragon. The roaring Lion. Antichrist. The
Devil. Rebellion.


So far we are gone. We are now to proceed to the ninth, and so to the rest.
This enemy is such an one, that if you do not continually watch, and stand in
fear of him, you shall be sure to feel him: and though he has many names, (yea
as many names as a Jesuit, that has one name for one shire, and another for
another, for every County one) But that is, for our capacity that he is set out
by several names: God could have given him one name that might have set out
fully his nature: but who could have understood him? for we are not able to
hear God in his own language, it is too Mighty, too terrible; it would confound
us; we are not able to see him, or hear him, and live.

As the children of Israel on Mount Sinai, they were not able to hear God
speak: Exodus 19. 16.
but say they, Let Moses speak to us, and let God speak no more unto us lest we
dye: for we being created rational creatures, and being led by sense, God deals
so with us; because we believe nothing, but what we see; therefore God gives
These unseen Enemies such names as are agreeable to things we see, hear, feel,
and know, that by them we may know Their Natures and qualities.

The tenth name is Sin: as God told Cain, Genesis 4. 7. Genesis 4. 7.
If thou do evil, sin lies at the door: So I tell you, if ye go about to
enter into the Kingdom of God, you ^^all find, Sin lies at the door, and ye
shall find him as cruel and as hard a Master to serve, as the Israelites found
of Pharaoh: you shall find Him always laying cruel taxations upon you: and if
you seek to go out of his Territories, he will pursue you; you shall find him
an enemy that will serve you to wrestle with all your life time: and the
further and longer you go on in his service and in this way, the harder to
return: The way of God is a strait way: now if a man err never so little at
first, from a strait way a very small little, but a hairs breadths aberration
at first amounts in the end to a great matter.

And the Armor of this Sin sticks as close to us as our skins; 2 Cor. 10. 4.
for his Armor is, Our Selves, our own Members are the weapons of
unrighteousness: And, if we will destroy this Great Enemy, there is no way to
do it, but by cutting off our hands and our feet, and by pulling out our right
eyes: And though our Savior does not actually mean to cut off these visible
hands and feet: but as in all the Scriptures, he speaks to our capacity, he
shadows out by these things, Mat. 5. 29.
that we should do somewhat answerable and equivalent to this cutting off hands
and feet, and pulling out our right eyes: we must do somewhat like it, somewhat
that is more Terrible and Harsh to us. As all our Saviors actions, while he
was here upon earth, were not ended in the actions, but by those actions he
would resemble to us what he did in the soul: for he came not to heal the sick,
and cure the lame, and cast out Devils, and the like, simply, as they are
external actions: but that by these things which we see and feel, he might make
us know, that he cures the sick, and raises the dead, and heals the blind
in the souls of men: and that he alone could cast out Devils in the souls of
men: Likewise so are the actions of Devils outwardly, to show how he possesses
the so^ls of men, as he does their bodies: and therefore by Gods will it so
fell out, that at that time that our Savior lived upon the earth, there were
more actually and really possessed with Devils, then ever there was before or
since, that we read of: that thereby it might be made manifest to us in both
respects; Both in his possessing men, and our Saviors curing and casting forth.

The eleventh name is False light: I am the true light that lights every man
that comes into the world, John 1. 8. John 1. 8.
Christ is the true light, which implies that there is a false light: Till he
be lighted up in the soul (and as David says, In thy light we shall see light,
Psalm. 36. 9. Psalm. 36. 9.
) all other light is but darkness; till we come to see things by this light, we
see them all by a False light: every thing is of quite contrary color in the
light, that we thought it to be in the dark. The light discovers every thing as
it is; but till this light be come into the soul, we believe not that we are in
Darkness, we think we have as true a light as can be: will you make us believe
we are blind? Says the Pharisee to Christ; but (say they quite contrary) In my
light we shall see light: however, some may be in darkness, we are in the
light: Joh. 9. 40.
neither can they be persuaded there is any better light then their own light:
As for example, there be several things that live in the two Elements, as those
on the earth, and those in the water; those that be in the water cannot see
things on land as they are: it is true, they have a light, but it is a false
light: things are not represented to them as they are, because there is [water]
between the sight and the thing: but those that live on the land, they see
things as they are, there is no obstacle between them and the things they look
on; neither can those on the land see things in the water on the same reason:
So it is in our spiritual estate; there be those that live in two Elements, in
the light of Nature, and in the light of Grace: those that live in the first,
they think there is no better light, nor there can be no better; for think
they, Are not we the only men? do not we live obedient to the Laws, and seek
to do justice and equity toward all, and pay every man his own? do not we live
uprightly? do not we govern justly and uprightly, and according to Gods Laws?
do not we bridle sin and sinners, that they run not into that excess of riot
that some do? do not we also submit our selves to authority over us, and walk
honestly in our places, and live peaceably with all men? These men, these are
the men (I say) they live in the water: they have but a duskish, glimmering
light, though they thus boast themselves; nothing appears truly to them: they
think themselves in a very good case; there is no better light then theirs; and
those that think there is, they are deceived: They know that they are in the
good way: those that will seek for any better light, they think their
forwardness will quite put out their light; And those that are below them, they
think those are in as bad case: They know not what will become of Swearers, and
Cheaters, and Drunkards, and Whore^ongers, etc. If it were possible it should
go ill with us, what should become of the multitude? say they: O Beloved, all
this is False light.

For, If once you go about to measure your selves by others, let them be who
they will be, you will be found too scanty; Psalm. 73. 17.
When God shall come to weigh you in the balance of the sanctuary, you will be
found too light: God will not weigh us by the holiest men, but by his own
weights: he will not judge thee by thy light, but by his own light: And if once
this bright light be lighted up in the soul, The light of the candle shall
never need to shine in that soul more: there needs neither the light of the
Sun, nor the Moon: for the glory of God shines in it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof; Rev. 22. 5. Rev. 22. 5.


But the Armor of this False light is Reason: whatever seems good to reason,
that is good: and if you cannot show them a reason, it cannot be good: for say
they, as Nabal said to David, who was so wicked, a man could not speak to him:
says the Text, is it reason that I should take my victuals that I have
prepared for my Sheep-shearers, and give unto strangers? 1 Samuel 25. 11. 1 Samuel
25. 11.
Is it not reason I should take notice of my gifts and graces that God has
bestowed upon me? of my wisdom, of my understanding, of my memory which God
has given me, of my labors and seize above another? take heed, take
heed I pray thee; this may cost thee thy life, (...) to cost Nabal his, had not
wise Abigail come and met David; if Gods wisdom does not come and prevent thy
reason, and thy wisdom, they will destroy thee.

Object. Why, is that any hurt, to make a difference where God has made a
difference? Obj.
I see I have these gifts above another, and I praise God for them: what, shall
I deny the good things that God has given me? no, no, by no means.

Answ. But glorying herein will undo thee; and besides, is this giving honor
one to another as the Apostle commands? Romans 12. 10. Romans 12. 10.
In honor preferring one another, and accounting thy self the least: Read that
Rev. 18. 23. Rev. 18. 23.
Thy Merchants were the great men of the earth, for by thy Sorceries were all
Nations deceived. The Apostle commands, Not to mind High things, but to
condescend to men of low estate, Nor be not wise in your own conceits.

The twelfth name is Darkness; Why, are we in darkness? we have the light, and
have had it these seventy years and (...): if any Nation in the world are free
from this name, we are: we have the light as well as you; You may indeed go
teach this to the Indians, and the Salvages, and to those that know not God; to
those that live in the Antipodes, that go feet to feet with us, they may
perhaps believe this Doctrine, and oonfess themselves guilty: but you shall
never make us believe it concerns us.

Beloved, whatever you think, That you have the light, know it, you are in
darkness: as in Ephesians. 4. 18. Ephesians. 4. 18.
Having their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart:
And as our Savior says; if the light that is in you be darkness, how great is
that darkness? That is, when men boast of light, and yet are in darkness; Joh.
12. 35.
when they are proud of darkness, how great is that darkness? they call good
evil, and evil good; they call sweet sour, and sour sweet; That which men and
flesh calls good, that they call good; Isa. 28. 10.
what nature and reason says is good, that is good, and only good; but God
calls that evil which they call good, and contrary, that good which they call
evil: Therefore says the Apostle, Fashion not your selves according to the
world: 1 Cor. 7. 31.
call not that good which the world calls good, which this corrupt flesh says
is good: says it, wealth is good, and health is good, and fair weather is
good, and pleasure is good; do not men say the same? do not Heathens say the
same? therefore this is darkness, yea, Egyptian darkness, that may be FELT, If
you were not overcome with Darkness.

And the Armor of this Darkness is love of darkness; and this love of darkness
is a strong Armor: Eccles. 4. 12.
Love is a strong cord, As a threefold cord, not easily broken: because men
love darkness, they not only conceit they are in light, when they are in
darkness, but they love it, they will not be removed from it: If ye break this
cord of love, ye break their life, you undo them: What not love themselves?
what, not love that which all the world, good and bad, says is good? what not
Honors good, nor Riches good? Oh how sweet are these things to flesh and
blood! they are joined together with inseparable love, And except God himself
with his Mighty Arm break in sunder this Cord, it will never be broken.

The thirteenth name is Flesh, ^al. 5. 1^. (...) 5. 17.
For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh;
and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would: so called, because it is executed, exercised in the flesh: and
John 3. 6. John 3. 6.
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit. If we speak, it is by the flesh; if we do any thing, hear
any thing, see any thing, it is of the flesh: it is true, we think, speak, do,
but it is through flesh, and therefore is flesh; and you know what the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
When we are present in the flesh, we are strangers to God: whatever action we
do, If we do it by the flesh, and from the flesh; Sure it is Flesh and blood
shall never inherit the Kingdom of God.

But what may be the Armor of this flesh? His Armor is Provision: how do men
make provision for the flesh? Romans 13. 14. Romans 13. 14.
and in the mean time neglect their souls? all their thoughts, words, actions,
all their walking, sitting, lying, running, (...) is, To make provision for the
flesh; and when they think they have made sufficient provision for (...), then
they are at rest; till then, never (...), heart, hands, feet, eyes, all are set
a work to mak^ provision for this flesh: but where, where is the man, that
takes such care, and endeavors to make such provision for his soul? where is
the man that can say, or does say of his soul, as that rich fool in the Gospel
said of his bodily goods? Soul, soul, now take thy ease, eat and drink, and be
merry, Luke (...). 19.
thou have goods laid up for many years: Where, I say, is the soul that can say
triumphingly, Soul, soul, now take thy rest, take thy Ease, be Merry in thy
God, let him be thy joy, thy game and thy gain; though thou have not One penny,
no matter, thou have treasure enough laid up for ever: henceforth never more
take thought, care for no more, God is mine, he is Enough and Enough.

The fourteenth name is Selfness, Whoever will be my Desciple, let him deny
himself, Luke 9. 23. Luke 9. 23.
not only deny thy self all those things that are evil: it is not meant only
so: but deny thy self in every thing, even in that is good, whatever it be that
is well done, and is indeed a good action, that is good really in it self, and
thou would, Nay and think thou ought to think well of it: Oh, this is
well done, here I have done a good action: Away with these thoughts, they are
dangerous; Run away from these thoughts, as Christ did when the Jews would have
made him King: Mar. 11. 16.
Own not these thoughts; the good actions thou do are none of thine: thou
have nothing, thou art nothing; nothing is thine but sin: thou never did a
good action, never thoughtest a good thought: Shall I ascribe to my self the
glory of doing any thing? (all action is Gods; sin, evil, wickedness is thine)
away with it; down, down, proud worm, down dust, down ashes; Rev. 4. 10.
cast down your crowns before the Lamb, and him that sits upon the throne,
and confess all honor, all praise, all power, all might, all dominion is his,
and his alone, for ever and ever: cast down, not only your weaknesses and
infirmities, but cast down your Crowns, your excellencies, your graces; that
wherein your selves and others, think you excel; and confess, That all the
glory, and all the strength is none of yours, it is all his; acknowledge I say
(as the truth is) that you are nothing, D^n. 9. 7.
that you can do nothing; and say, there is nothing due to me but shame and
confusion of face for ever; but to God only be all the Honor, Glory, Power,
Praise, Majesty, and Might.

And the Armor of this Selfness, is love of our selves: Job. 1. 4.
as the Devil told God concerning Job, Skin for skin, and all that a man has
will he give for his life: This love of our selves we cannot part from: M^r.
10. 3^.
He that will save his life shall ^ose it; but he that will destroy himself,
destroy his life, shall save his life: A very strange paradox to flesh and
blood.

The fifteenth name is Propriety: but herein I know, I touch your coppy-hold;
and as our Savior says, John 8. 45.
John 8. 45. Though I tell you the truth, I know you will not believe me: Oh
this Propriety is that that is dear to us; that is, when we ascribe this or
that thing to our selves, I have Propriety in this thing, it is mine, and mine
only, and we look upon it as a thing, we may do what we please with it: you
think it is your own; but know, you have nothing but what is given you: And it
may be you confess that; but you think it is given you for your selves, and you
think you may keep it for your selves. No, God has made thee but a (...); it
is his, whatever it be, and thou art to ^mploy it for him: another has as much
right ^n it as thou, if God call for it; Therefore thou (...) deceived, It is
none of thine, It is Gods: But if you will claim it All, and you will have All
the right in it; then, I say, you must disclaim your ^igh^ in Christ; and I say
to you, as Peter said to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 20.
Your money and you perish together. Thou have neither part nor portion in the
kingdom of Heaven.

I, but here Propriety has his Armor; and he is armed with the Word of God: 1 Timothy 5. 8.
He that cares not for his family, is worse then an Infidel: I must ^ake care
of my self, of my wife, of my children; Truly Friends, through the depravation
of reason, we have so corrupted the Scripture, and so mis^pplyed it to our own
destruction, wresting Scripture and picking out some places merely to serve our
own turns, and no otherwise. But, I would to God you had so much care of your
wives and children as you should; in the name of God go on: I do not forbid you
to care, but walk on in your care, and in your callings: but consider, ^ill you
therefore count these things your own, and not another as well as yours, if
his necessity call for it?

Let me tell thee, God is not tied to provide for thee That way; Mat. 6. 29.
for as our Savior says, Look upon the Lilies, and see how they are clothed.
Solomon in all his royalty is not like them, yet they neither sow nor spin; but
if you will be caring for your selves, care you shall: b^t it is God that both
clothes us and feeds us. And it is He alone that gives power to get wealth.

The sixteenth name is Self-love; say you, can this be an evil root, from
whence comes so much good fruit? from hence we do many good things; how can
this be evil? if we had not this self-love, how could we save and defend, and
preserve our selves? we should run violently upon our own destruction; Hence it
is, we serve men, and do good offices to them; and hence it is we serve God,
and he will serve us and be good to us; Hence also comes care for our souls,
diligence therein, and desire to be saved, and endeavors also; how can this be
evil? But you know what Christ says, Mat. 6. 5, and 16.
Do not hypocrites the same? what thank have you? Verily I say unto you, you
have your reward; God, Never promised to reward that man, that loves only
himself, or that loves those that love Him; as he brews, so let him bake; he
served himself in all he did, and let him reward himself: 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Him that honors me, I will honor: Do I regard him that only regards
himself? God requires not, that thy love should be set upon His happiness for
thy self, and for thy own ends; Prove. 23. 16. and Lu^. 10. 17.
for herein thou have not given God Thy whole heart, which he requires: but
thou have given Thy Self thy heart: Nay further it may be, thou have so set thy
whole mind upon heaven, that thou art not a man of this world (as thou
think) as most are; thou art gotten above these things, and thy eye is
altogether heavenward; yet if this be but merely for happiness to thy self,
thou have yet but given Thy whole heart to thy self, and not to God; thou art
not yet gotten a step beyond this Evil of Self-love.

But if thou were come to this, to love and (...) for Himself, and to give thy
Whole (...) him; if thy love were set upon Him, thou (...) not lose by it, but
should receive thy love again, thy heart again, thy self again, All would
return again; if we had but given^pour selves to him, All should turn to our
good: if we were poor if we were in reproaches, in prison, in death, all should
turn to our good; we should then both enjoy our selves, and enjoy God in the
want of all.

The Armor of this, is, Necessity to love our selves: for say they, if we
should not love our selves, who will love us? A necessity to love your selves,
such a necessity did I never read of in all the Scriptures: Mat. 22. 37.
I read of a necessity to love God, and of a necessity to preach the Gospel,
and this is a Necessity indeed: 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Serve this Necessity and then ye need take no care for loving your selves, but
all to love God, And to Honor Him; and then ye shall do well enough, yea best
of all.

The seventeenth name is. Our own will, and this goes far with us: we think we
do great acts, when we come to Church to hear, when we come to the Communion,
when we tie our selves to constancy in fasting, and set duties of prayer, and
the like, Isa. 58. 3.
as Isa. 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not?
wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? behold in
the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors: but in
doing these, it may be we do but our own will: all the while we do not Gods
will in it; we do them, because they are agreeable to our selves, to our own
mind, And according to our education and company we sort with: and we are
affected that way; we love praise with men of that rank: here is no
self-denial, here is no denying our own will; Our own will spoils all.

And his Armor is, Opinion of our Own Sufficiency, And a strong conceit of
doing good: And say they, if our own Will will bring about the doing so many
good actions, in such an holy manner, how can this be evil? I must be brief,
the time cuts me off: you may conceive of them more at large, when you are gone
hence, as I hope ye will.

The eighteenth name is Error: There is no man Evil, by his own will; no man
would be evil, no man chooses evil; but he chooses it by the error of his will,
his will being misguided: it comes to him under the notion of a good, before he
chooses it: for no man does evil purposely as evil, but he to himself makes it
A good, before he does it, in his apprehension, and that he ought to do it:
yea, even mad men, whom we would think did evil purposely, yet they do
apprehend a good in the evil they do: even such mad men are we all; And, if we
should do otherwise, we must strip our selves out of this Armor which Error
has on, which is An opinion of our own Goodness, and to love the praise of the
world: we seek not to please God, but to please the world; we mind not what God
commands, but what men say is good and commendable: we are not of David's mind,
to make Gods word A light unto our feet, Ps. 119. 105.
and a lanthorn to our paths, to lead us in the way of truth: but having our
eye upon the wo^ld, this leads us any whither, into any error, and then from
error to error.

And hence arises pleasure to do evil, which is a further degree of this evil:
we please the world, and the world pleases and tickles us with its delights,
and we run after it with great pleasure and delight, so that it may lead us any
whither: And this is also (I hope you perceive him) A difficult and dangerous
enemy to resist and overcome, especially being so Armed; for we in all these
things must resist our selves, our own wills, our own pleasure, our own
sweetest delights, even those that are as dear as our right hands, Mat. 5. 29,
30.
and as our right eyes, yea, as our very lives. And who among us ever returned
from following after these dear Lovers, by his own will, by his own power? do
we not see, and have not all of you felt (who are reclaimed and brought back)
that it is the only Almighty power of Heaven, and that it is the Lord (as
David says) that sent from heaven from his high and holy place to save me from
the reproach of him that would swallow me up, Ps. 57. 3.
and set my feet at liberty, and plucked them out of the deep mire and clay,
wherein we were held so fast? It was He alone that has smote in sunder those
iron bands and fetters; he has been a Sampson in us, to snap a sunder The new
cords wherewith we were bound, Judge. 16. 7.
and he has brok open, The Gates of Gaza, and carried them away on his
shoulders; and all this you have as really found, done in you as if you had
been with Sampson himself, and seen him do what is related of him, for it is all
done in you.

There be two names more, but the time is past, and I can but name them.

The nineteenth name is Satan, for he opposes himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped.

And his armor is Infidelity.

The twentieth is the Evil one, and his armor is pleasure to do evil. So much
for this time.

SERMON V.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
IF we would know what these sufferings are we are to endure, if we would be
glorified with Christ; said I, to endure? nay that we should be glad to
entertain, yea and rejoice in; it is not meant of scorn, or scandal, or
poverty, or imprisonment, or whipping, or death it self; for then what shall
become of them that never suffer any of these things and yet do suffer with
Christ? therefore I told you wherein every one must suffer with Christ, if they
will be glorified with him: and that is in two things, 1 In Emptying of
himself. 2 In humbling himself.
If we imitate him in these, though we are not called to the former, it is no
matter, so we be ready in affection, and are in preparation to suffer them, if
we be called to them: for those two are the Original of Christ's sufferings, the
foundation, the root, The Fountain: all His other (outward and external
sufferings) are but the effects, the leaves, and the fruit. From these two do
all the rest stream and flow, as from the Spring, their Fountain, and Wellhead.

Well then, This Groundwork and Cornerstone being laid, Let me tell you it
will bear All, it will bear any building God shall rear upon it: and wanting
this foundation, though we suffer all poverty, all disgrace, all tortures that
can be named, yet we suffer not with Christ: and therefore they will not, nor
cannot bring you to glory with him; And Again let me tell you, The least mite
of sufferings, though it be never so small, yea as small as the two mites (being
but half a farthing the poor widow offered) coming from this foundation and
fountain, Mar. 12. 42.
it is great and precious in Gods sight, for it is from God and of God: when as
all tortures, name what you can, are not regarded by him without they come from
this foundation and Principle.

And as I told you, there be six degrees in these sufferings, or six steps,
Typified by the six steps that led unto Solomon's Throne. These six steps we
must ascend before we can sit down in the Throne of rest, peace and perfection;
having overcome all our enemies, and having brought all into subjection, and
that all things are put under Christ's feet, and that he rules in the midst of
his enemies: Ps. 110. 1.
And made his Enemies his Footstool.

The first Blessed step is; 1. Condemnation of our selves as worthy to be
destroyed. 2. Annihilation of our selves, reducing ourselves to just nothing:
Genesis 11. 4.
That whereas sin has made us something (in our own esteem) and it has built
up a tower in us to reach up to heaven, Grace may scatter it, And confound our
language, and bring it again to nothing. 3. Abdication, or for saking all,
resigning up all to God, all that ever we are or have. 4. Indifferency, to be
equally disposed to every thing; to want, and riches, to cold weather and hot,
to peace and war, etc. knowing that nothing can be better ordered then it is,
All being done according to his will. 5. Conformity, to Christ in all things,
that what ever Christ would do were he on earth, in my case, in my calling and
condition the same do we. 6. Deiformity, that is, That though you see us move,
wish, affect, will, rejoice, etc. yet it is not we, but it is God does all; it
is God that moves, it is God that wishes, it is God that wills, it is God that
rejoices.


And we are now come, after much striving, to set out foot upon the first step,
namely Condemnation of our selves, confessing our own vileness and
wre^chedness: for so far as we justify and approve o^r selves, so far are we
from ascending this first step of condemning our selves.

Friends, I would not have you think my labor lost in opening those several
names, That kept us from ascending ^hese steps: for if ever you ascend these
yo^ mu^^ see those things all in your selves; and they (...) be removed before
ever you can look toward these steps, with so much as a purpose to ascend
them; If you have not looked all this while within your selves, and looked to
find there, The Devil, Sin, the red Dragon the Serpent, Lucifer, the roaring
Lion, Antichrist, etc. my labor is lost, I have but be at the air, and spilt
water on the ground: And it is but a folly to proceed to open these steps; for
as ye understand not the One, so neither can you the Other; they are both to
you As a fountain walled about, and a spring shut up, and as a book Sealed. And
he that after all this is not able apparently to see and confess that all these
are in himself, he is blind and sees nothing.

The subject of our Coudemnation, Being, The strong Man, The Old man, This
Goliah^ of Gath, etc. as you may remember, we have arraigned and indicted him
by several Names; because he may not escape and shift off the indictment: so
that he may be accused, arraigned, and condemned in every heart here present,
that if you find him not by one name, yet you may by some other; either by the
name of Adam, or the old Man, or the Serpent, or Lucifer, or the red Dragon, or
the Roaring Lion, or the Devil, or Antichrist, or Sin, or by the name of
Rebellion, or False Light, or Darkness, or the Flesh, or Selfness, or
Propriety, or Self-Love, or our Own will, or lastly, by the name of Error: For
we showed you that in Scripture he had all these names, with many more: if he
be not known by any One of these, yet by them all you may know him. But lest
you should think you have no Commission to ride this, Circuit and sit as Judge,
and say, Quis me constituit judicem? Luke 12. 14. Luke 12. 14.
Who made me a judge?

I answer: We have not only a Commission, but a Promise annexed to it, to
encourage us to this judging, 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor, 11. 31.
where the Apostle commands Judge your selves, and you shall escape the
judgment of God: and Christ himself gives out this Commission annexed with a
Promise, Judge your selves and ye shall not be judged. Mat. 7. 1.
But know this also, though this work be done in thee, it is not thou that
do it, Ps. 50. 6.
but God is judge himself; yet God himself judges no man, but all judgment is
committed to the Son, Ioh. 5. 22. Joh. 5. 22.
and not only the sentence, but power and authority to execute that Office
belongs to Christ, as Act. 10. 42. Acts 10. 42.
it is Christ that was ordained of God to be judge of quick and dead: he is not
only Judge at that great and last day, but he also is Judge in this life, as
our Savior says, Ioh. 12. 31. Joh. 12. 31.
Behold now is the Prince of this World judged, or cast out: there is no man,
nor nothing of man that is judged or condemned, but it is Christ that is The
Judge in that soul: for if we tarry till Satan condemn Satan, if we tarry till
Beelzebub condemn Beelzebub, till the strong man bind himself, Mat. 12. 26.
we may tarry a day too long, as the Proverb is: for never while the world
stands can we expect that flesh will judge flesh, that our own will will
condemn our own will, that Lucifer will judge Lucifer: this can never be; if
you expect that, you may wait till it be too late, the door will be shut, and
there is no more hope.

The Scripture then makes mention of three sorts of men that are Judges: the
first are, Carnal men, Romans 7. 14. Romans 7. 14.
1 Cor. 3. 3. For we know the law is spiritual: but I am Carnal, sold under
sin. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envyings and
strifes, and divisions, are not ye carnal, and walk as men? that are led merely
by carnal and fleshly sense, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
given up only to please their appetites and fleshly desires, they see no
farther, and their aim is no higher.

The second sort are Animales, reasonable men, and they are such as are more
refined, of a higher and more sublime nature; even those that mind the
intellectual part, their souls; And these reasonable, or rational men, as we
call them, being guided by reason; there they rest, and there they are
satisfied: for let a man but show a reason for what he does, and who will
condemn him? But neither of these have the wisdom that is from above; for all
this wisdom is but earthly, fleshly, and devilish, Iam. 3. 15. James 3. 15.
Can it be expected that either of these two will judge themselves? will carnal
fleshliness judge carnality? no, it approves it, it justifies it: or will
reason condemn reason? how can it overthrow it self? it is impossible; a
Kingdom divided against it self, it cannot stand: but yet, the rational man
does judge and condemn, Mat. 12. 23.
and sits as Judge oftentimes over the actions of the carnal man.

But there is a third sort of men, Gal. 6. 1.
and they are Spiritual men, Gal. 6. 1. and 1 Cor. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, left thou also be
tempted. But he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged
of no man. And This MAN judges both these; the Spiritual man, Omnia judicat,
judges all things: we esteem little of the carnal man, every one condemns him:
but we highly esteem of the rational man, because he is guided by reason, and
does all things that reason guides him to: he minds not his body only; it is
reason he should regard that; but he regards his soul too, and That above his
body: he knows he has an Eternal soul, and therefore it behooves him, and he
has reason to look for an estate and well-being for it; and who can now judge,
who is able to blame this man? can any man do better?

But now comes the spiritual man, and he judges all things when he comes: 1
Cor. 2. 15.
he judges and condemns the very best and highest actions of this reasonable
man, and tells him that his very thoughts are abominable to God; his hearing,
reading, praying, Prove. 10. 17.
his sacrifices are an abomination.

In the two former men, we could not find such a judge; but here comes ONE who
indeed is no man, nor any part of man, but the Son of God himself, he comes now
into the soul: the spirit of God he is the judge; this spiritual man, this
Christ being formed in the soul, Gal. 5. 17.
this word being spoken in the soul: for Christ is the Word spoken; It comes
and says, Reason, for all thou art so set up, and esteemed amongst men; yet
thou art a fool: and Reason says again, that God is a fool. But let me tell
you, God is capable to understand Reasons ways, but Reason cannot understand
Gods ways.

And beloved, God and Man have been a long time at this: God says, Reason,
thou art a fool: and again Reason says, God, thou art a fool: But now Reason
must be condemned; Reason must be cast; the inward man must judge the outward,
the New man the old, the second Adam the first. This is that voice in the soul:
Mat. 3. 17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him: Do you think that
is meant only of his words that he then spoke, when he was on earth? No, but
Hear him: that is, Hear Him in your selves, Hear Him in your souls: the one is
but a fleshly hearing; this is a spiritual, a soul-like hearing; His Word
silences all. Man. 3. 35.
Of this word we may say, Blessed is he that hears my words; and does them. Ps.
82. 8.
And as David says, Arise Lord, and judge the people: but by the way Do you
think that God arises or removes from place to place? No no; Rise Lord in our
souls, be Judge there among the Gods, amongst those that have been our Gods,
and have ruled over us, those strange Lords, bring them down, and do thou Lord
exalt thy self; the wicked flourish in thy House, and Courts, And break down
the carved work etc. In that place that should be thy House: witness those
effects, Psalm. 74. 6.
those murders, and thefts, and cruelties that express themselves daily; many
in action, and many more lie lurking in the soul to betray the innocent and
guiltless man. Oh then, says this soul, let God arise, and his enemies shall
be scattered; and again Psalm. 35. 24. Ps. 68. 1.
Judge me O God, according to thy righteousness, and let not mine enemies rule
over me. Judge me according to thy righteousness, Ps. 35. 24.
not according to flesh, not according to reason; but according to thy
righteousness. And if that condemn me, this condemnation is not unto death, as
Christ said concerning Lazarus, John 11. 4.
This sickness is not unto death; So likewise This delivering unto Satan is
for the crucifying of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord; Oh Lord, says this soul,
judge thou me; my flesh has judged me, and my soul has judged me, the carnal
and the rational man has judged me, but they can find no fault with me; but up
Lord and exalt thy self, that so this man of sin may show himself no more in me.

Now, He that has been judged and condemned by the world, must now condemn the
world: Now He sits down with Christ in his Throne, To judge even the twelve
Tribes of Israel; all Outward and formal profession. The wisdom of the world,
which has long condemned the wisdom of God to be folly, must now by the wisdom
of God, be condemned of folly, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man receives not the things of God, for they are foolishness to
him. And again, 1 Cor. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 3. 19.
The wisdom of the world is foolishness with God; for it is written, he takes
the wise in their own craftiness; and the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise
are but vain. And now that which has labored to quench the spirit, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19. 1 These. 5. 19.
must now be quenched by the spirit: that which the darkness could not
comprehend nor love, shall now be both comprehended and loved. And that which
was crucified, dead, and buried, must now rise again and be exalted, and sit in
judgment.

Oh! where is he that does or dare say and pray with David! Psalm. 35. 24. Psalm
35. 24.
Judge me O Lord my God, Search me and try my Reins; Though I be found guilty,
and so liable to all punishments both here and hereafter, yet judge thou me:
But He, in whom this Spiritual man is risen, he can say so: for he knows this
judging is but to escape judgment; it is not unto death, but to escape both
Death and Hell. It Is for the destruction of the slesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: 1 Cor. 5. 5.
This is the day of Jesus Christ; the former day was Our day; this is that
Great Day of Jesus Christ, wherein he will judge all things.

Suffer then I beseech you the words of exhortation. For until this work ^f
condemnation be wrought in us, we have no need of a pardon, we have no need of
a Phisician, for we are whole: And he that thinks this work needless, he has
as yet no Savior, Mat. 19. 1^.
Intercessor, or Mediator, Mat. 19. 12. Heb. 12* 24.
The whole need no Physician, but those that are sick: Christ never dyed for
him: the precious blood of Christ, let it speak better things to whom it will,
to thee it speaks no better then the blood of Abel: till this great act of
condemning our selves be in thee, Christ dyed in vain to thee.

If then by all that has been said of Adam, the Old man, the Serpent, and
Lucifer, and the rest, if still thou want Water to thy Mill, if still thou
want Argument or Evidence against thy self, if yet thou want water in the
midst of the Ocean, or light in the brightest sunshine, v^z. Cause to set thee
upon this work: what shall I say? I will say as Isaiah says, to the Law and to
the testimony, either contractedly or at large, Isa. 8. 20.
which says, Thou shall love God, above all, with all thy strength, with all
thy mind, and with all thy might: and the second is like it, Mat. 22. 28.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: See and examine thy self by this
Law, and see whether there be no cause of condemning thy self: It is a Law made
for thee to walk by and ^bey, by him that made thee, who has power to command
thee: A Law so full, so holy and pure, that Moses himself trembled and was
amazed at the delivering of it by God; being delive^ed with such terror and
dread, the people were not able to look toward the Mount; nay, they had much a
do to hear Moses deliver it to them: And if it were so terrible in the
Proclamation of it, what will it be in the execution of it, upon Rebels in the
breach of it? Examine thy self by it, and see how short thou come of that
which is enjoined thee. Nay, it is a Law given thee by him that gave himself for
thee; he laid down his life for thee: besides, how agreeable is it to thy
well-being, and to the well-being of thy neighbor? how agreeable to the
principles of nature and reason? how has it been justified in all ages? and
lastly, in observing whereof consists thy life and breath, or else thy eternal
death: as Moses reasons the case in the 28. Deuteronomy. 28
of Deuteronomy.

And because you shall not hereafter complain of your not being Catechized, I
will in this point teach every of you to chatechize himself; and do it I charge
you, till you find matter enough to condemn your selves: and before you go
about it, you had need to pray, Psalm. 7. 8.
O Lord, open thou mine eyes, etc. that I may receive my sight. Psalm. 82. 1


Take then the first Commandment: Thou shall have no other gods but me.

I know now, when flesh and blood hears this Commandment, it thinks it has
shelter enough, it can answer this Commandment well enough: Have I any other
but one true God? I worship no other God; we are no Papists, Turks nor
Heathens: we are free from worshipping Angels and Saints, and Stocks and
Stones, or any false God: I worship only one God in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity: but withal know you are bound to love him with all your whole mind and
strength: and alas, if you did but see your selves, and examine your ways, you
would find, even every man before me, (for I implead my self, and all that hear
me this day) that according as the Prophet says, Ie. 2. 28. Jer. 2. 28.
According to the number of your Cities, so many are your gods: See if thou
have not bent thy heart rather to the satisfying of some lust, rather then to
the obeying of Gods Commandment; wh^ever sin and lust it is, that thou had^
but ^des^re (...) commit, when Gods Law has told thee, (...) said I charge
thee commit it not; yet thou have (...) chosen to obey it, and have not
regarded Gods Commandment; I appeal to thy self, That thou have pleased thy
self, but Gods Commandments thou have cast them behind thy back, Psalm 50. 17.
etc.
and trodden them under foot: Let it be what sin it will, whether Pride,
Gluttony, Covetousness, Deceit, Malice, Revenge; whoever they are that dare
displease God, for the satisfying of any lust or sin whatsover, thou have hated
righteousness, and loved wickedness, Psalm. 45. 7. Psalm. 45. 7.
thou have made that very lust thy God: What Lord, what God, what lust has
power to command you, and you to obey, and to break Gods Law? as the Prophet
complains, Other Lords have ruled over us: what does the Prophet mean there?
does he mean when Israel was carried Captive? No, not only so; those were all
but types of the Captivity of the soul; although we have not fallen down on our
knees, and worshipped these sins; yet in thy practice thou say daily to
them; as to instance, if it be pleasure, thou followest it against Gods
Commandment; if it be profit thou love; if it be money thou esteemest: though
I say, thou have not fallen down and worshipped it; yet thou have done worse:
for thou have given thy heart to them; And I tell thee that therein As the
Israelites did, thou have worshipped them, and said when they had made a GOLDEN
CALF, Exodus 22. 4.
These be thy gods O Israel, these are they that will help thee, and deliver
thee; it matters not whether thou do it with thy body, and in words; but thy
heart has fallen down and said, Pleasure, thou art My God, I admire, adore,
and worship thee, and thee I will serve; says another, Profit, thou art my
God, thee I will please and obey.

Thus if you will examine your selves punctually and particularly, you cannot
deny, but must confess, that you have worshipped and served other Gods; And
thou may truly complain and say, O Lord, Other Lords besides thee have ruled
over me. Though Reason will excuse and defend it self; yet hear God speak in
thee, hear what His well-beloved Son says in thee, and confess that thou art,
as the truth is, Guilty of the breach of this Commandment; and that the reward
of sin is death, hell, and eternal damnation; and this confession from the
heart, and from a true sight, is a sure means and way that thy spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5. 5.
This sight of thy spiritual thraldom, and being delivered over to Satan, is
that thy Spirit may be saved, and that thy flesh may be crucified.

And so you might go over all the Commandments, and try your selves by them, as
hereafter I may have time; and if you do but thus examine your selves, you will
never complain of want of Catechizing.

But for this time, the time has cut me off.

SERMON VI.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
THis is the sixth hour I have spoken to you out of these words.

Many men may think themselves exempted from suffering with Christ, because
they do not suffer as Christ did; viz. In Disgrace. Buffeting. Spitting upon.
Poverty. Whipping. Crucifying, etc.
For, As a Lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened He not his mouth.

Therefore I defined a condition to you wherein every one may claim a part in
his sufferings; and that was in Phil. 2. 6, 7. Phil. 2. 6, 7.
He Emptied himself. And he Humbled himself. Phil. 2. 6, 7. And I told you, If
we suffer never so much, if we suffer not on This foundation, we do not suffer
with Christ: And, if we do suffer from these two, then if we suffer never so
little, we do suffer with him: Nay, if these two foundations be laid; It
matters not whether we be called to suffer in the former cases or no, so we
have but a readiness and a fit disposition and willingness to suffer therein
also if God please: but suffering in these two respects, In Emptying our
selves, and humbling our selves as Christ did, we do suffer with Christ, and
shall Reign with him. For all other sufferings, let them be what they will, are
nothing to these, or without these; yea, the external and bodily torments of
hell are below these sufferings. It may be we are far from the sufferings of
our neighbors in Germany in the other sufferings; yet if we have suffered in
these Two, we have suffered beyond them, if they have not suffered in these
kinds. All the Tyrants in the world cannot invent Tortures comparable to these
sufferings.

The last day we came to handle one of those six steps that lead up to this
Throne of Solomon.

The first was, Condemnation of our selves.

The second, Annihilation.

The third, For saking all.

The fourth, Indifferency to all conditions, That is, to be as willing to have
pain as ease, as willing to have want as plenty, foul weather as fair, bad
report as good report* that we can as well bless God for evil as for good,
Enough can say, blessed be his name for good things: God has given me health;
Oh! blessed be his name: God has given me wealth, God has given me a good
year of increase, God has sent fair weather to get in my crop; Oh! blessed be
his name: God has given me the life of my wife, or the life of my children,
Oh! blessed be his name: God has given me many goodly and happy children, that
are a comfort to me in my old age; Oh! blessed be his name: Every one can bless
God for these things. And what great things do ye? Do not Heathens and
Hypocrites the same? Mat. 5. 46. and Luke 6. 32.
says our Lord. But where is the man that when God has taken away any of
these things, can say as heartily, Blessed be his name? that when God has
taken away his dear wife, that when God has taken away his hopeful child, he
can say, Blessed be the name of the Lord? God has taken away my credit, God
has taken away my wealth, taken away my health; yea all: yet blessed be his
name; Thou may say so in words, but what says thy heart? does that say so?

The fifth was Conformity to Christ.

And the last Deiformity, when we are captivated and have given up our selves,
and delivered up into the will of God, and all our members presented unto God,
A living Sacrifice, Holy and Acceptable unto God; that we no longer do any
thing, but it is God that does all in us, while we do it.

All Attain not to the same measure in these, as I told you before, but all
must attain to the same desire and affection to come to these.

The first is, Condemning our selves.

Judge your selves. 1 Cor. 21. 31.
and ye shall not be judged: Beloved, consider what it is that makes us afraid,
when we come to dye, and to leave all our dear friends behind us; when that
hour comes that we have bur three Deep Groans, or sighs to fetch to cool our
languishing heart, And then to give up the Ghost: I say, What makes you afraid
then to go out of this body, and to leave the world behind you? Is it not,
because you and the world have made a league together, and you esteem it so
dear a friend as you can have no better? Answer me seriously, Is it not because
you are afraid the Comforts hereafter are not comparable to the Comforts here?
but would you escape this fear? would you escape this judgment? then you must
ascend these six steps.

The first whereof is, To condemn our selves.

Let your selves pass first under this judgment; Judge your selves, and ye
shall not be judged: But you will say, This Office belongs to Christ To judge;
as in Acts 10. 42. Acts 10. 42.
He is Appointed to be judge of quick and dead: What have I do to enter upon
the office of Christ? All judgment is committed to the Son, John 5. 22. Joh.
5. 22.
To which we Answer, It is true, that whosoever is truly judged, it is Christ
that judges him; for no man will condemn himself; will reason judge Reason? or
will (think you) Lucifer cast out Lucifer? will Beelzebub cast out Beelzebub?
will devilish practices condemn devilish practices? You are not so senseless,
to think so.

It is true you say in our ordinary speech, and you have it at your fingers
end, we must judge our selves, and we m^st condemn our selves: but as I said,
it can never be expected that Beelzebub, and Lucifer, Mat. 12. 25.
and Antichrist, will condemn themselves: he can ^ver suffer his Kingdom to be
divided; he knows then he cannot stand. There be, as I told you, three sorts of
men; The Carnal. The Reasonable. And The Spiritual Man.


I am carnal and sold under sin, Romans 7. 14.
and ye are yet carnal, says the Apostle. Carnality never judges carnality! 1
Cor. 3. 3.
never look that flesh should find fault with its own actions; neither does the
Reasonable man find fault with his reasonable actions; but s^ith the Apostle, 1
Cor. 2. 15.
The Spiritual man judges all things; that is, the Spirit of God; as David
says, Exalt thy self, O God, above the heavens, and show thy self, thy glory
and thy majesty; Come thou unto us, O Lord, and judge the heathen; be thou
judge among the judges, Psalm. 82. 1.
among the gods, among those that are and still would be gods and judges: Do
thou, O Lord, put all thine enemies to silence, and Rule THOU in the midst of
thine Enemies: But to silence our own reason, all our own affections, our own
will, our own joys, our own fears, our own hopes; Hab. 2. 1.
and then hear what God shall say; There is no hearing of God, till all these
be put to silence: Genesis 3. 8.
as it is said Genesis 3. God came into the Garden in the COOL of the day: what do
you think was meant by that? that God came at evening, when the sun was going
down? do you think that the day was too hot for God to walk in? no, no, that
cannot be; but it is meant, he came into the soul in the cool of the day; that
is, when lust was cool, when the heat of Adams desire was over, when his own
will was silent, and there was a calm; Genesis 3.
then God spoke and said, Adam where art thou? Till then there was such Noise
and such a Hurly-burly in his soul: This lust would be satisfied, and the other
lust would be satisfied; such crying and calling, and making such clamor and
noise; there was then no hearing God speak: but these being All put to silence,
God comes in, with a still, soft voice (not while the thunder and mighty
rushing was) and speaks in the soul: 1 Kings 19. 12.
Hear now what God says, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
Hear him judge you, hear him condemn you: and if ye do this. This delivering
over to Satan, is not unto death, but that your spirits may be saved in the day
of the Lord: Psalm. 86. 13.
This casting of our souls into the lower hell, Luke 12. 49.
as David complains, is that we may be saved from the condemnation
irrecoverable: I came to send fire on the earth (says our Savior) and what if
I will that it be already kindled? The kindling of this fire is a happy
kindling, it is that you may escape the Unquenchable fire: suffer therefore this
condemnation to be wrought in your souls; it is a blessed, a happy
condemnation: The day that this work comes into thy soul, is the blessedst day
that ever thou saw, the happiest hour that ever passed over thy head, the
brightest and gloriousest day that ever dawned to thee: Indeed it is The day of
the Lord, A day of darkness and gloominess, Joel 2. 2.
of clouds and thick darkness, but it dawns to everlasting light and glory.

I told you wherein, and how you might examine your selves; And that you might
have a glass large enough to see your whole body; open your eyes to see the
glass of the Law, and view your selves round by it, and then I will warrant
you, you shall see cause enough of condemnation: then you will see so much in
your selves, that you will have no wisdom nor leisure left to judge other men:
if you did but see the true resemblance of your selves; you could do nothing
else but be always judging and condemning your selves; you could do nothing
but lay all the Bitter curses you could devise, upon this Meroz, Even upon your
Corrupt Self; you would so Hate and loathe your selves in your own sight, Ezekiel.
6. 9.
you would not others praises, which formerly you have so much sought for.

It may be we have read and heard the Ten Commandments over and over a thousand
times; but that is not enough: But as the Scripture requires an ear in an ear;
so we must have an eye in an eye: Rev. 2. ult.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear; and, He that has eyes to see, let
him see. I opened to you the sins of the first Commandment; from which I know
you will free your selves most in; you think That of all the rest, you are most
free from having other Gods: you were taught That from your Cradle, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me: But (as I then showed you) you that do worship any
other god (as all of us do) some make their belly their god, some pleaure their
god, some profit their god, some credit and praise their god, and these we
obey, and worship, and fear, and love: Whatever it was that drew you from
obeying Gods Commandments; was it for pleasure, was it for honor, or whatever
else: consider what you have done; you have made them your gods, and done more
then bowed your knee to them; so that as often as thou have said the Ten
Commandments, so often have thou dissembled with God, and rebelled against that
which thine own mouth has acknowledged: And I doubt I may say of you, as the
Prophet said of Israel, Jer. 2. 28.
So many Cities, so many Gods: Shall I say, so many men so many Gods? Nay, so
many LUSTS so many Gods: And those that have many Gods, have no God: This is
generally acknowledged, for even among the Heathen there was not one learned
and wise man but did confess there was a God, and that there could not be any
more then one God: although they gave several names to the divine power in
several creatures, for the Apprehension of the ignorant, and called them Gods,
yet they knew that God was but one.

Take therefore that sacred spotless Law, open it, and look upon it, view thy
self well, and it will show thee clearly all thy Gods. Do but look upon the
actions of this very day, nay since you came into this place, and see if there
has not been matter enough to cause this work of Condemation: Besides,
consider this seriously, you are not represented to God as doing of one action,
but according to the Tenor of your lives: thou art not presented to God as thou
art dying, when thy mouth is full of holy words, nor as thou art doing any good
action: not as thou art sitting in the Church at thy prayers, not as thou art
hearing a Sermon, not as thou art relieving the Poor, etc. but all thy whole
life, every minute being always as present with him, as if every particular
action were now in doing; there is no passing of time, no succession of time
with him: so that from hence con^lude, and resolve it to thy thoughts, if ever
thou swearest an Oath, thou art with him always swearing; if ever thou
blasphemest, thou art ever blaspheming: if ever thou toldst a lie, thou art
with Him always lying: if ever thou committedst adultery, thou art always
doing that act, as to him: if ever thou brokest Covenant and Promise, thou art
with him always doing so: if ever thou trampledst the blood of the Conant
under thy feet, thou art always doing so: and if there was at any time any
good in thee, know, that is none of thine; that is his own work, and no praise
belongs to thee at all.

Now what say thou? 2 Samuel 24. 12.
David's heart smote him when he had numbered the people; so should ours in
numbering our sins.

Nay, farther consider, that not only all thy own sins are laid upon thee, but
all the sins of all the men in the world that ever were, are, or ever shall be;
Because thou art of that Body, of that Race, A member of that sinful body and
race, proceeding from our first Parents, which stained the Race and House in
the very root by rebellion and Treason. And that all this has been in doing by
thee almost this 6000 years, so that when thou were but six days old, thou
were a 6000 years sinner; when thou were little above a span long, thou were an
Everlasting Transgressor.

As in the body of Christ All the Members have right and interest in all the
excellencies and graces of the whole body, the Faith of Abraham, the Zeal of
Josiah, the Patience of Ioh, the Meekness of Moses, and add to that whatever
virtue is in the head Christ, which is in Heaven; They are all thine, Thou
sharest in all; so that we may then say, Thou art all fair my Love, there is no
spot in thee.

So thou being of that sinful race and body, thou have right, and thereby art
entitled to all the vilest sins that ever were committed in the world. As it
was said concerning those that crucified Christ, Mat. 23. 35.
that God might bring on them all the sins that ever were committed from the
blood of the righteous Abel.

What can thou now say for thy self (O wretched Offspring of the race of
flesh and blood) but that Nebuchadnezzars Oven should be heat seven times
hotter? Dan. 3. 19.
will it not be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment
then for thee? What can thou say? is not Tophet prepared of old, and prepared
for thee, O thou foul and leprous creature? The pile and fuel thereof is fire
and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone shall
kindle it, Esaias 30. 33. Esa. 30. 33.


Have not thou by thy so often sinning, Even trod the blood of the Covenant
under thy feet, Romans 10. 29.
and done despite unto the spirit of grace? have not thou chosen thy sins and
lusts before thy Savior, and have therein cried out for a Barabbas to escape,
and concerning Christ, have cried crucify him, crucify him? What, will ye
crucify your King: I (say you) crucify Him, cruci^ie Him, His Blood be on us
and on our children, etc.

Yet thou condemnest Judas when thou read how Villanously he betrayed and
sold his dear Meek and precious Master; I ask thee, Who now has sold his
Master? what for 30 pieces? nay for the pleasure of one darling sin, which will
for ever destroy thee.

And thou condemnest the Devil, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
who sinned but once, and was thrown down from his place: and thou condemnest
Adam, who eat but once of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. 6.
and was immediately cast out of Paradise: and will not that weight of sin,
that as a TALENT of Lead lies upon thee, make thee once groan or complain? many
aggravations by circumstances might be presented before thee; for circumstances
always aggravate, nay sometimes create the sin.

Friend, What say thou to this charge? if thou can say nothing to me, then
what shall I say to thee?

Then thus, 2 John 1. 7.
Only the blood of Jesus Christ purges from all sin; if thou have not right
and part in that, all thy sins lie upon thee. And what ever he performs in
thee, that God accepts, and nothing else; for be assured, what ever prayers,
what ever sighs, what ever groans thou put up to him; he loathes all but
what his Son makes: but all His requests are heard and granted. I know you can
in words have present recourse to that saying, That though we are sinners
indeed, and grievous sinners, yet the blood of Christ purges us from all sin;
I know that this very word, were it spoken by Christ himself, is enough indeed
to silence Death and Hell, and all the powers of darkness, and is armor of
proof against all Satan's fiery darts; and it is a most undoubted truth: b^t
then say I, it is Christ himself must pronounce this saying to thee, The blood
of Jesus Christ purges thee from all sin, If Christ pronounce these words,
then art thou indeed for ever acquitted: but if thou say this of thy self,
to thy self, and by thy self, thou art not acquitted: I know if Christ speak
these words, it is present death to all sin and unbelief; they are the utter
destruction to Sin and Satan: but if spoken only by thy self, they do but
harden thee in sin, they do but give new life to sin.

Thus much have I spoken to thee, that thou may come to this first work of
Humiliation, namely, Condemnation of our selves.

But O my Dear Brethren, what are my words if Christ speak not by me? he must
preach his own truth to thee. And this I say, except thou first come to this
work of Condemnation, thou will never come to the second, which is
Annihilation, not to any of the rest. For every step is one above another.

These steps are ascending: for as Solomon prayed that God would hear the
prayers of all those that came and prayed in that house of the Lord, and did
see the plague of their own heart, 2 Chronicles. 6. 2 Chro. 6.
for except they saw that, their prayer was in vain: so say I, not that it is
in vain to pray, but it is vain to trust to faith, in vain to trust to Christ,
it will do no good, except you see the plague of your own heart: for thou
may pray long enough, and believe in Christ long enough, if thou do not
see thy just worthiness of being destroyed; if thou do not see just cause of
censuring and condemning thy self to the lowest Hell, 1 Kings 8. 30.
and that thou seriously confess, That hell was not made in vain, but that it
was justly made, And for thee: and that it were just and righteous that God
should cast thee thither; nay not only so, but that you feel your souls in the
Bitter agonies of Hell already, and that the Torments thereof are seized upon
you; then there were hope, That thy spirit would be saved and delivered; Till
thou art come to this, never tell me of the blood of Christ, That it purges
from all sin; but thou art none of them to whom it belongs, for thou have
neither part nor portion in this matter: If ye suffer with Christ, Acts 8. 21.
then also shall ye be saved by him, and reign with him.

SERMON VII.
ROMANS 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
BEloved, I will trust your memories for that which I have delivered before out
of these words, and come immediately to the second of these six steps, which I
have laid down: the first being Condemnation of our selves; the second is
Annihilation, bringing or reducing our selves to just nothing.

Mistake not (for your own sakes) I do not mean to be really nothing at all, of
no substance, that is more then any earthly power can do, more then Potentates
or Kings can do; they may attempt such a thing, but their arm can only reach
to division or separation of soul and body, Mat. 10. 28.
and dividing of the Elements one from another; they may grind us to powder,
they may burn us to ashes; and when they have so done, cast the ashes into the
river, as in some case they may justly do: but they cannot make us nothing* for
the same power that Creates, can only Annihilate; for every thing retires to
its own proper place: every thing to its element; the water to his, the fire to
his, the air to his, the earth to his; so that when I tell you of making your
selves nothing, I do not mean you should destroy your selves, but I speak of
such a making nothing and destroying, as that you keep all your members; such a
making nothing as Job complains of himself, chapter 16. 12. Job 16. 12.
I was at ease and he has broken me asunder; he has taken me by the neck and
has shaken me to pieces, and has set me up for his mark; he cleaves my reins
asunder, and pours my gall upon the ground. Job there complains that he was
broken to pieces, and yet Job had all his joints and all his members: therefore
that which I mean is the turning of a man's self into dust and powder before
God, to be empty in our selves, to be Nothing, less then nothing in our own
esteem; that all those huge bulwarks that we have raised in our souls of our
somethingness, and of our own esteem, may be all laid flat to the ground, and
brought to nothing; as Abraham Genesis 18. 27. Genesis 18. 27.
when God had appeared to him, said, Now I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which am but dust and ashes: he seeing the infinite vast difference
between God and him, he cries out, O Lord I am but dust and ashes. And I tell
thee O man, pulvis es, and in pulverem revert^ris, Genesis 3. 19. Genesis 3. 19.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou must return. But give me leave and I will yet
be more plain to you.

For my beloved, 1 Cor. 6. 11, 12.
My mouth is open unto you, my bowels are not straightned to you-ward, my heart
is enlarged; Act 4. 17.
though the Jews should forbid me to speak any more in this name, as they did
the Apostles, Mat. 15. 26.
yet I will not keep back any part of Gods Counsel from you. And I pray God you
do not take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs; and I shall express my
meaning briefly.

All that thou call [I,] All that selfness, All that arrogance, propriety
that thou have taken to thy self, all this must be brought to nothing;
whatsoever creates in us Iness or Selfness, this is pulvis and cinis Dust, and
Ashes, and Vanity; for take away these, and we are glorious creatures, the
workmanship of God himself: but these things, Iness and Selfness, being let in,
These, these things make us deformed; this is that makes us like the Devil
himself; for take from him this (I) I am something, and take away [Selfness] I
will have mine own will, and I will be Lord and King, and take away [Propriety]
I will have, and I will enjoy something to my self and for my self: and then
the Devil himself is a glorious Angel; there is nothing then left, but what is
good; all things were at first very good.

It is true, That Man at the best, is but created of the dust of the earth: but
what is he, and what a case is he in, when sin enters into him? I do believe
there are thousands at this instant in Hell, that do wish from their souls,
that they were or could be reduced to nothing at all. But that man that is
reduced in this sense to nothing, and has truly considered himself, he cries
out and complains, See O Lord how I am become Vile, Lam. 1. 11. La. 1. 11.
and he acknowledges as David 2 Samuel 6. 21. 2 Samuel 6. 21.
that if I be Vile, I will yet be more Vile: Does Gods book require that he
should be Vile and abominable, and low in his own sight? his heart Echoes and
answers, I will yet be more vile, I will be more nothing, as the Prophet Esaias
says, chapter 40. 17. Esa. 40. 17.
We are nothing, we are less then nothing; all Nations are but as the drop of
the Bucket, they are nothing, they are vanity it self: we are but as a bubble,
as David confesses, we are but as a broken pitcher that can hold no water,
Psalm. 31. 12. Psalm. 31. 12.
we are but as dead men, cast out of sight, and clean out of mind: David was
then in a most miserable condition in the eyes of flesh and blood*

But Oh happy, thrice happy are those men that are once come thus to be Dead
men (whatever men think): You know dead men they cannot so much as say this is
[I] they esteem not of themselves: let men do what they will with them, they
are all one; strike him, he feels it not, they claim no interest nor propriety
in any thing: let them be merry (while he lies by) or let them be sad, all is
one to him: let them be sharers of his goods; One will have one part; Another,
another; let them spend lavishly, and make merry with his goods, he he is not
moved: why? because he has lost his sense, he has lost his taste: so he that
is dead to himself, he has lost his sense, he has lost his taste in this
world: let others rejoice in heaping up riches, and adding land to land, and
making themselves and their posterity great in the world; these things concern
not him: and likewise, pour any thing into a broken Pitcher, it can hold
nothing; it can hold no honor, no praise, no price; so likewise into this man,
pour what ye will into him, pour wealth into him, pour health, pour honor into
him, pour praise, pour credit, or the contrary, he can hold nothing; whatever
ye do to him, Mat. 5. 39.
or take from him, he is all one: if ye take his cloak from him, he will give
you his coat: if ye strike him on the one side, he will turn the other: curse
him, and he will pray for you: and this he learns of his sweet and dear Savior
Jesus Christ, who has set him a pattern for him to follow, and commands him to
learn of him, and thereby ye shall find Rest to your souls: for says he with
Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. Genesis 32. 10.
I am less then the least of thy mercies.

These things, Selfness and Propriety being taken away, Then there is a Fair
Table for Gods Spirit to write what he pleases; for if a sheet of paper be
blacked all over, can a man write any thing thereon? but if ye can take away
that which blacks the paper and defiles the soul of man, take away Iness, as I
may call it, and selfness, and propriety, and then there is a fair paper for
God to write what Commands he pleases: then no Command crosses them. You know
our Savior Christ says, Matt. 10. 39. Mat. 10. 39.
He that will deny himself, shall save himself; and again, There is no man that
has forsaken houses, or lands, or wife, or children, or good name for his sake
and the Gospels, but he shall have a hundredfold, even in this world, houses,
and lands, and wife, etc.

Brethren, if you did but believe this, could you be so over diligent, so
eager, so covetous for the getting, holding, and saving of them? or would ye
not rather, if Christ should command you, even Run out of Church, and burn you
houses presently, if you knew you should have a hundredfold for them? but
whether you believe it or no, his word is true: and all men shall be ^ound
liars: Heaven and earth shall pass away, before one tittle of his word shall
fail: Mat. 5. 18.
his words were the words of truth it self, they could not admit of the least
shadow of untruth: and those that Christ has brought to this condition we now
speak of, know them to be unspeakably true: viz. That one hours joy, one hours
enjoyment of sure, secure peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, which they have
instead of those things, is more worth a thousand fold, then a thousand years
enjoyment of all the wealth and riches in the world: nay, they find it better
to have One minutes enjoyment of this ravishing contentment, then to have all
the honor, all the riches, all the attendants, or whatever the world could
afford them, though for ever: And if the scales of ignorance which now blind
and darken your understanding, were but fallen from your eyes, you should
undoubtedly find it so; and till then you will never believe me: nay, though
one should rise from the dead, and affirm these things, Luke 16. ult.
you can look on them but as empty words, wind and shadows.

Yet let me tell you, O Beloved! were your eyes but opened, you would be so in
love with this condition, nothing could keep you from it: you would not say, as
the sluggard in the Proverbs, There is a Lion in the way: no, no, your souls
would be restless till you attain thereto: I beseech you exaamine your souls,
and try them whether you are in this condition or you are not: let not things
hang wavering, 1 Kings 18. 21.
and weigh down neither side: If God be God follow him; if Baal be God follow
him: you will be hankering toward heaven, and fain you would be saved; but
till you be brought to a resolved Resolution, to take it by violence, there is
no obtaining.

Consider this man in two things:

1 Consider, what ever God gives, he arrogates nothing to himself, and counts
himself not worthy of any thing; neither can he rejoice in it, as his own, but
as given from God.

2 What ever Lesson God sets this man to perform, he ascribes the whole power
and strength of it to God only, attributing no power to himself, while he does
it; yet he does it not, but God in him: Or if he avoid any sin, he confesses
it was by no power, no watchfulness, no wariness of his own whereby he did it:
for herein is the misery of all, that man will not acknowledge but some power
he has of his own, he can do something of himself: And herein was the sin of
Adam, not so much in eating an Apple, but that Adam would have and appropriate
a power to himself: he would be something without God; for if Adam had taken
seven Apples, it had been nothing, setting self-will aside, and aiming at self
pleasing, against the Command of God: But Adam would have power in himself, he
would have his own will, he would have an essence of his own; this was that
which ruined him, and so also all his posterity to this day and for ever.

Thirdly Consider, This man, he takes all well that God does; whether he give
to him, or take from him, all is one to him; he is never troubled, he suffers
no rending in his soul in leaving them: neither rejoices in the getting of
them; for he knows they are Gods, and they are due to him, whenever he shall
call for them: As an honest man that knows a sum of money is due, he having it
ready, he had as live the owner had it as himself; for he cannot account it his
own, he cannot boast and pride himself in that which is none of his own: This
is that we call Reducing our selves to nothing, To just nothing; so that here
we have set before you A lively Statue and Portraiure of a sequestered man
which has lost all that ever he has in this world.

1 He receives all as from God, and looks on them as none of his own, and he
not worthy of the least mercy, being less then the least, as Jacob confesses,
Genesis 32. 10. Genesis 32. 10.
not in word only, but really he is so in his own esteem. Not worth the ground
he goes upon, as we say.

And then secondly, he uses them all to the glory of God, and not to the
satisfaction of the flesh, and his own will and lusts, but distributes them as
God commands: And if he have Wife, Children, Honors, Riches, etc. he sets not
his heart on them.

And thirdly, I should have showed you, but I forgot, he is as glad and
rejoices as much in the good of others, as in his own good: he is not contented
to enjoy plenty himself, or any good temporal or spiritual, but he would have
others enjoy the like, and is willing to communicate to them.

Fourthly, he is ready to part with them willingly when ever God calls for them.

And lastly, Because, as Eliphaz says to Job, Job 15. 11.
because the consolations of God seem no small thing to him, therefore he is
indifferent in all these things; so God take not his holy Spirit from him, and
those inward joys and refreshings from his own presence, he cares not; let him
take from him else what he will: Now what is it (think you) that this man
fears, that has thus overcome, and is set down with Christ in his throne? he
cannot so much as fear death, for he dies daily: And what do you think now can
separate this man from the love of Jesus Christ? what can ^inder him from
boasting and triumphing? though not of or in himself; but as the Apostle does,
To. 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Romans 8. 35, etc.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (as it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter:) nay in all these things we are more then conquerors, through him
that loved us: for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life* nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

So much concerning that; we come to the third, that is Forsaking all things:

Of what degree and condition soever, though not actually, it may be we are not
called to that, but yet to forsake them always in affection, to be always in
readiness to forsake All, if God call to it: Many think they have done this, and
they are ready to say with Peter, Mat. 19. 27.
Mat. 19. 27. Lo master, we have forsaken al: but Peter was deceived, he had
forsaken very little; and I doubt by that time we are tried, we shall be found
very tardy in this very thing.

But before I go any further I will answer one objection, which it may be lies
in some of your minds.

You tell us of these high duties of Condemnation and Annihilation, and
forsaking all things in the world, and indifferency; but what is all this
without faith? they are but splendida peccata, golden sins; Romans 14. 23.
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and we never heard you name faith in
all this.

I answer, Though I never expressed it in words, yet it is necessarily employed;
for that is the weight of all; faith is the ground of all; faith in it self is
a secret thing, it is The Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Heb. 11. 1.
that being the ground and foundation, you know The foundation that holds all:
for wheresoever you see a glorious building, ye will not imagine but that it
has a foundation, though it be hid from your eyes; but as it is said Rev. 13.
10. Rev. 13. 10.
Behold here is the faith and patience of the Saints: so say I; Behold, they
can forsake father and mother, and wife and children, and all, yea and their
own lives too, or else he is not worthy to be my Disciple, Luke 14. 33. Luke
14. 33.
Behold, Here is a glorious Building, Built by God himself: as when the
Disciples wondered at the building of the Temple, Christ takes them off
wondering, as having no such gloriousness in it, because the time should come
there should not be a stone upon a stone which should not be thrown down, Mar.
13. 1. Man. 13. 1.
His wondering was taken up about things of another nature.

But our Savior Christ says there, Luke 14. 33.
wonder not that I said unto you, he that forsakes not father and mother, etc.
he is not worthy of me; but I say unto you, that he that hates not father and
mother, and wife and children, yea and his own life too, cannot be my Disciple,
v. 26. Ver. 26.
But Oh, this Scripture comes so tart, and so thwart to flesh and blood, they
cannot endure it, they cry out durus sermo, as the Papists say concerning the
second Commandment, it comes so directly contrary to making of Images, that
there is no way but it must be blotted out of the Decalogue.

So is it with this Scripture, flesh and blood cries out, down with this
Scripture, away with it, out upon it, it is impossible for any man to perform
it: or else they cry out, Oh give it some allay, some moderation, some
interpretation, some mitigation, else we cannot bear it: I, if it come in
competition with that and other things too, that either we must forsake Christ,
or forsake them, here now flesh and blood can bear with it; But say I, away,
away with all these things, These fleshly interpretations; Do you think Christ
knew not what he said? Bring thy self to the Word, and not the Word to thee:
All these things are offense unto me.

Behold (as S. Paul says) I tell you A mystery; Mat. 16. 23.
He that loves any thing in the whole world that is visible; any thing that is
visible in thy wife, or visible in thy children, or visible in thy father or
mother, etc. I say if thou love any thing visible in the whole world, let it
be what it will be, This love it arises from flesh and blood, and it is guided
by flesh and blood, and is terminated and ends in flesh and blood. For, the
body is but the brutish part; flesh and blood is the worser part of man or
woman; for, think but from whence this comes: look back and see the pit whence
you were dug, Jer. 51. 1.
see the womb in which you were nourished, and with what; The womb was but made
of the dust of the earth, and of the same art thou made; and thou were there
nourished by by the flesh of beasts, Fowl, or fish, such as thy mother Eat;
and when thou art brought forth, by the same is thy life continued; and all is
but fleshly and beastlike actions; for the brute beasts do as much; they eat
and drink, and seek to maintain life, and propagate their kind, and delight
therein: and if thou do no more, thy love is but Earthly, sensual, and
devilish, Iam. 3. 15. Jam. 3. 15.
but if thou would have thy love to be Pure; Then learn to separate; separate
the precious from the vile, Jer. 15. 19. Jer. 15. 19.
if thou separate, then shall thou be as my m^uth, etc. Thou must love that
which is divine in them; thou must love their internal part, Their Souls; Thou
must love the image of God in them: and if thou do not separate herein the
precious from the vile, Christ when he comes, he will do it then; and if thy
love be set upon the vile, thou and it go together; for as it began, had its
original, continuance, and end in flesh and blood; so in flesh and blood it
shall have its reward: thou lovedst it, and it loved thee: And I may say as
Christ said in another case, Mat. 6. 16.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, you have your reward. Himself did make a
separation of the precious from the vile when he was on earth, and so he will
do when he comes to judgment: as when some came and told him when he was in
the Temple, Mar. 3. 31.
thy Mother and Brethren stand without desiring to speak with thee: he answers,
who are my Mother, and Sisters, and Brethren? they that hear the Word of God
and keep it, the same are my Mother, Brethren, and Sisters. He there separated
the precious from the vile, as if he should say, Do you think that I look as
men look, and that I esteem as men esteem? No, as Mat. 23. 8. Mat. 23. 8.
I look upon you all as Brethren; for ye are all the children of you heavenly
father: I look upon that which makes you all Brethren, and as you are a
complete body, having one Master and one Father: I look not upon you as
divided, but as one; for a Kingdom divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot
stand: Luke 11. 17.
Belzebubs Kingdom is not divided; and shall Gods House, shall Gods Kingdom be?
Therefore he that loves any visible thing, his love is but fleshly, and you can
expect no better then a fleshly reward.

I, Object.
but some will say to me, it is true; we know we ought not to love them, as them,
but we only love them so far forth as they are helps to better things, and as
they fit us for the service of God.

A fair pretense! Answ.
but delude not your own souls: many have been hindered by these things, few or
none ever furthered: and yet forsooth, all the world of Professors, uses them
but as furtherances, as they say: But we know, that thousands have been hindered
by wives, and hindered by children, and hindered by houses and lands, and hindered
by honors and pleasures, and they are most commonly, if I may not say Always,
snares and hindrances: for who ever found his heart as willing to part with
them, as if he never had them? Therefore they are hindrances, and pul-backs,
and no furtherers: ye are deluded, ye are blinded by them, when ye say so; and
your souls are so much the more dangerously snared in them: for God commands in
Deuteronomy. 13. 6. Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
That if the wife that is in thy bosom entice thee to Idolatry secretly, thou
shall not hearken, neither have pity; thy hand shall be first upon her, etc.
and I say, take heed thou make not an Idol of that thou pretendest to love
but to further thee.

And that of our Savior, Mat. 18. 8. Mat. 18. 8.
They are both such places, and aim at such high things, and such deep
self-denial as flesh and blood cannot endure to think on: If thy hand or thy
eye, or thy foot off end thee, cut it off, pluck it out, etc. showing that
these outward things that thou love so dearly, may do thee the greatest
mischief; as Wolsey said to Cromwell when he was to dye, Oh if I had but loved
God as well as I have loved honor or riches, or health, and^. he would not
have forsaken me as these will do very shortly: so that you see these outward
things, for the most part, hinder us from Heaven, and minding the honor of
God, and the good of our souls: The prosperity of wicked men, is but a ripening
of them, fatning and fitting them for destruction.

Object. I but Sir, this is strange; would you not have us love our wives?
would you not have me love my children? would you not have us love our money?
Love money, and it will love me, as the Proverb is; make much of it, and it
will make much of thee: These are the good blessings of God, that he has
bestowed upon me, says every one: and will you have me so unthankful as not to
love them?

Answ. Yes, yes, by all means; I dissuade you not from loving your wives, or
from loving your children: far be it from me to think, much less Teach, That
children should not obey their parents: w^ have not so learned Christ: far be
it from me to teach you so; for Christ commands that you should love your
neighbors: Ephe. 4. 20.
and to love them as our selves, and our wives as our selves, as S. Paul says,
Ephesians. 5. 25. Ephe. 5. 25.
And shall I diswade you from loving your wives and your children, or father or
mother? God forbid: But know what our Savior says, Mat. 5. 46. Mat. 5. 46.
If ye love them that love you, what thank have ye? If ye love Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Goods, Honor, Credit what great acts have ye done? what have
you done more then Heathens do? But as ye are Christians, I enjoin you A Love
above all these: You are to love, That Noble, that Divine, that Internal part
that is in them: do but separate the precious from the vile, Jer. 15. 19.
and then I will say ye cannot love too much: But take heed these outward
things do not privily and secretly withdraw your hearts from God; For They
st^al away the heart insensibly: you must love them in the Lord, and the Lord
in them, it is all one: Therefore, those that are true Christians, as they love
All in the Lord, so they love the Lord above all, and love the Lord in all: for
he that loves not God in all, cannot love God above all, and he that loves not
God in them cannot but be snared by them.

Thus loving all things in God, you will be ready to part with all things for
God: This is the Abdication I speak of, which is done by faith, and by faith
only.

And further thou ought to have thy affections to stand so indifferently to
them, as still and always Listening, when God shall bid thee Depart from them:
that when God shall say, Depart from this thing, or let it depart from thee,
whatever it be; that if he call for thy eye, or thy ear, or thy hand, or thy
foot to cut it off, or things as dear and precious, That then, this shall be no
sad message to thy soul; and then, I will say with thee, That thou love them
for God, and in God, and as blessings from God, as All are ready to pretend:
But if it be otherwise, ye are befooled, and gulled by them. Look upon Abraham;
did God bid him forsake his own Land, and leave all behind him? Genesis 12. 1.
Genesis 12. 1.
yes, and in such a manner as I think you can hardly show me his pattern; he
must leave all; Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
Fathers House; and whither must he go? to a Land that I will show thee; He knew
not whither: So likewise did Abraham offer his son, his only son, and the son
in whom all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: yea, he did; That is,
It was done in purpose and affection, and had been done in action, had not the
Angel stayed his hand; here now was Abraham's faith, that stood so indifferently
to all things, that he as readily parted from them as enjoyed them: Beloved,
what think ye, were not these sore Trialls? And so Moses did, he forsakes
Egypt, and all the pleasures and preferments there, and chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God: and those in the 11 of the Hebrews, Heb. 11.
37.
that forsook all, kindred and friends, and wandered up and down in sheepskins
and goat skins, in dens and caves of the earth, whom the world was not worthy
of; and all this was through faith: Faith must be the ground of all this
Blessed Abdication; they were weaned to all these things through says: Psa.
131. 2
as David says, surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is
weaned of his mother: My soul was even as a weaned child: You know a child when
it is weaned, it is froward and pettish, nothing will still it; it would have
the milk, the breast still, and will not endure strong meat, David complains,
that he was even so; Nothing would content him, but That he should not have*
give him what ye would, if he might not have (...) will, he would throw all
away as children do: nothing was so bitter to him as This Weaning; yet for all
this, The child must be Weaned; Though it wrangle, and though it cry, and is
never so froward, yet all is one, The child must be weaned. It Is for its Health,
for its Good, and for its strengthening, That it may grow to be A Man, And
endure STRONG MEAT, and not to be always Fed with PAPPE.

SERMON VIII.
Romans 8. 17. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.
THose which have no part in Christ's sufferings, they have none in his glory:
And those are expressed in Phil. 2. 4. Phil. 2. 4.
in two words, 1. (...) 2. (...) Phil. 2. 7, 8. (...).

1 In Emptying of himself. 2 In Humbling himself.


And these are sufferings indeed, Far beyond his scourgings, far beyond his
nailing to the cross, far beyond his crowning with tho^ns, far beyond his
whipping, his mockings, etc. All those sufferings are not worthy to be named
the same day with these: for though he was God equal with his Father; yet he
came down from Heaven* And dwelt among Us, among men, in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and took upon him the form of a servant, And made Himself of no
reputation; and he had not so much as a hole to hide his head in: Luke 9. 58.
and also, he became Obedient unto death.

Now if these sufferings of Christ be in us, If we Empty our selves, viz. Of
all that gall of sin and bitterness that is in us, and also of all our
Excellencies and Endowments, both of Nature and Grace, and lay it all down At
the feet of Christ, giving him all the power and glory for ever: Then be
assured, whatever we do on this foundation, God accepts it, be it never so
little: And though we do never so much without this, it is to God no more Then
the cutting off a dogs neck, and as odious as the offering up of swines blood,
under the Law: On whom (says God) Isa. 66. 2. Isa. 66. 2.
and to whom will I look? even to the humble, to him that is of an humble and
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words: This foundation being laid, Then
come what will come: Then neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor heights
nor depths, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 8. 38. Romans 8. 38
They instead of separating us from Christ, shall make us nearer to him, and
shall make us more conformable to our head, Col. 1. 24.
To fill up that which is behind of the measure of Christ's suffering IN US,
which is his body.

And you may remember we compared these sufferings with Christ to those six
steps, which are the six steps that led up to Solomon's Throne (to wit)

1. Was To abhor in our selves all those sins and defilements that we are
guilty of: which we called Condemnation.

The second was, To beat our selves to dust, to just Nothing, which we called
Annihilation, yea, to less then Nothing and vanity.

The third was, Willingness to forsake all, to Sell All for Christ; which we
called Resignation: That is, To be always in affection and readiness, till GOD
call us to action.

The fourth was, Indifferency; which we are now to come to* to stand equally
affected to all conditions: Faith being the ground, as I told you the last day,
Believing undoubtedly, that nothing can be better done then what is done, God
doing All. We have a pattern set us of this, by the Apostle Paul, He was come
to this, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Ephe. 4. 11, 12.
I have learned, says he, Implying, That he was long about the work, before he
could attain it; but now I am grown to be a good Scholar in it, That is, in
what estate soever I am, to be content: and now I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me; I know Now, but not till now, Both how to be
abased, and I know how to abound; Every where and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, to abound and suffer need, Phil.
4. 11, 12. Phil. 4. 11, 12.
I have learned, and I am instructed (says he) which implies, that there is a
secret in Gods school, which cannot be attained at the first entrance, and by
Beginners: but when we are well entered and exercised therein, we may know how
too look with a smooth face upon all changes: for they do as Christ their
pattern in that of John 4. 34. John 4. 34.
which is a copy set St. Paul by Christ, My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work; they account it not their meat and drink to do
their own will, As all the world does, but to do whatever He wills, And to
suffer whatever He Wills, this is Their meat and Their drink: and as the
Apostle says, I count it not in any case expedient to consult with flesh and
blood; surely in this case it is not only not expedient, 1 Col. 6. 12.
but altogether unlawful; for how tart is this to flesh and blood, To tell a
man when he is to go a journey he must be alike patient, and alike thankful,
and he must neither desire fair weather, nor foul? To tell a man that is at
Sea, He must neither desire a wind with him, nor against him? To tell a man
that expects a harvest, he must neither desire a good harvest nor a bad;
Sunshine nor Rain? To tell a man that is Naked, that clothes and no clothes
must be all one to him? To tell a poor man, That money or no money must be all
one? To tell a man that is sick, that pain and ease, health and sickness, must
be all one to him; Labor and pleasure, Ease and suffering, Liberty and
Imprisonment, Glory and Infamy, All this must be alike to him? How can flesh
and blood endure this Doctrine, if we consult with it? And therefore, He that
Means to practice this, must not at all consult with flesh and blood: As the
Apostle says, I ^onsulted not with flesh and blood,

And the reason is, Gal. 1. 16.
because, Thou may not desire any thing that may cross Gods will or his
providence; for that weather that is for thee, may be hurt to another; and that
wind that is against thee, may be for the good of another, etc.

You will say, Object.
it may be, Here is a doctrine indeed: What will this Babbler bring us to at
last? Acts. 7. 10. Act. 17. 10
Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and of the Stoics encountered him:
and some said, What will this Babbler say? other some, He seems to be a setter
forth of strange Gods, be^^use he preached unto them Jesus and the
resurrection; What new doctrine is this? I have been an Auditor and a Professor
this 20, 30 or 40 years, and I never heard such a doctrine as this; And I have
heard above a 100 Preachers, and none like this man, I never heard my own ways
so much thwarted; He clean contradicts our byas, and we have been always
taught otherwise, and therefore this cannot be true doctrine: these are some
new tricks and some new crochets and devices, some new querks and quillets, for
novelty. This Doctrine is as strange to you, 1 Kings 22. 14.
as if I were A Setter forth of strange Gods.

Answ. No, no; God forbid that I should Entice you to Idolatry, or to serve
strange Gods. Nor are these things beloved, neither querks or quillets or new
devices: for do not think I durst bring you here any thing, but what my God
has Bid me speak, and what he puts in my mouth to speak: They are no devices
of my own, but I assure you they are rich Jewels taken out of the precious
cabinet of God, They are Crystal streams from God the fountain of them, Rev.
22. 1.
clear as crystal proceeding from the Throne of God and of the Lamb. They are
things that I have not brought here presently upon the fancy of my own brain;
but things that I have seen and known by some experience thereof in my self;
Things that I have long, long, debated in my own soul, and in serious
consideration, before ever I durst deliver it to you as a message from my
Master.

But Beloved, if you for all this do count these things Foolishness, Gods
Spirit will, And does, call you Fools; Do not do by me as the Gergesens did by
Christ; because he did but only separate them from their swine, they went out
to meet him, Mat. 8. 34.
and besought him to depart from their coasts, Notwithstanding all the good he
might have done them, in his miracles, And in curing them and their diseases:
they slight all this, because they had lost their swine: So, Because I desire
to separate you and your swinishness asunder, you and your beastliness asunder,
you and your earthliness asunder, you care not for it, what ever good and
benefit this may be to the healing and curing of your souls; And if I do cast
pearls before swine, And they turn again and all to rent me, I cannot help it;
The Lord has opened my mouth wide toward you. And I beseech him to open All
our Hearts, As he did Lydia's. But to the Old man this Doctrine is very Harsh,
and flesh and Blood will not endure it. But to the New man this Yoke is easy,
and this burden is Light. And no wonder though a body made and bred of, and
with these carnal things, as it is, I say no wonder though nothing please it,
and relish with it, but what tends to These things; No marvel though we shut
our ears against this spiritual Divine Doctrine; for as it is said, Heb. 10.
36. Heb. 10. 36.
Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may
receive the promise: so indeed may I say herein, We have need of patience That
we may be Thus molded to Gods will, That we may be as pliable to his will, As
wax is to the seal; and then, we shall be sure always either to please God, or
God shall please us, or both; Then All shall be at peace; Then shall there be
no more war between God and us; Then we shall have Endless peace: As in the
Revelation a 1000 years there is put for Eternity; for, from whence came wars?
says the Apostle James; Jam. 4. 1.
come they not hence, even from your lusts? And again, we lust and have not, we
desire and are not satisfied, because we ask it to bestow it on our lusts.

Now he that has attained the practice of this LIFE I speak of, He is always
satisfied: but so far as we come short, when we desire any thing, and God gives
it not, Then we fall at wars with God, And censure his proceedings, Having
Harsh thoughts of Him.

The Apostle Jude among all the grievous sins that he speaks of, He reckons up
Murmurers, complainers, That is, Mistakers of Gods doings; and he brings the
example of Corah, whom the earth swallowed up quick for that very sin; But we,
Jude 1. 16.
Because the earth has swallowed us up quick already; therefore we murmur and
complain.

And as Christ said to Peter, Why doubtest thou* O thou of little faith? so say
I, Why murmur you, Oh you of little faith? Why do you murmur against your
infinite Good God and most gracious Father, who has promised you, ye shall
want for nothing? why dare you not trust him? And why do you accuse your God of
Untruth and strait-handedness? what displeases you, Oh ye of little faith? let
me but reconcile you together. As he thinks well of you, and intends well to
you, So do yo^ esteem always well of him, and of his doings: Do you not
believe That God He is your Father? and if you account your selves His
children, he will give you All good things, Mat. 7. 11. Mat. 7. 11.
Then he content To let him be wiser then you.

O but! I know you will say to me, God forbid but we should do so: he knows
what is best for us, better then we; This we have been taught long ago: this is
a Received Truth; This is plain in the Word, And in our Catechisms which we
learned when we were Children; And what do we do with the word if we believe
not All this? let us throw away our Bibles, let us burn our Bibles, if we do
not believe and sent to our seal that this is true.

And if I should ask you, Do you not believe that God is your Physician? Yes:
And will you direct your Physician what order he shall take with you, And will
you tell him what is fittest for you? Surely then, if you mistake any thing
that God does to you, or direct him what he shall do, (whatever your
confessions be with your mouths) you proclaim your selves Wiser then God.

Does not he know, when to give you health; and when sickness? when to give you
wealth, and when to give you want? when to give you honor, and when to give
you dishonor? does he not know when to give you peace, and when to give you
war? Psalm. 145. 15.
Does not this Great Master of the whole World know, how to give to al his
household their meat in due season? I know you acknowledge all this. And that
God, if he saw it good, can give you your desire; for he can do as he pleases,
And he has the disposing of all these things; And that it is in vain to rise
early, and go to bed late, Psa. 127. 1
and eat the bread of carefulness; for he alone gives his beloved sleep. And
our Savior says, Mat. 6. 31. Mat. 6. 31.
Take no thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; for your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things; for sufficient for the
day is the labor thereof: and care not for the morrow; the morrow shall care
for it self, But if you confess, Also Believe These things, then might I save
my labor; But your practice shows you do not. For if God do not give that
which thy flesh desires, yet thou ought to be content.

Obj. I but Sir, shall I not labor and be industrious in my calling?

Answ. Yes, by all means, or else the Apostle says, you must not eat: and it
is commanded, Eccl. 11. 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let
not thy hand rest: But, This thou art to do without Perturbation of Spirit, and
with indifferency, with a weaned affection, here is the very Hinge of the
business, That when thou have done all and found it true, That except the Lord
build the City, they build in vain: And that except the Lord watch the City,
the watchmen watch in vain, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
and so consequently, That when the Lord has denied that success thou seek;
yet to be content and quiet, As seeing him Ordering all in his greatest wisdom.
Thou art to aim at This, viz. To bring thy self to this point, to be alike
thankful in health and sickness; For crosses and disappointments, as for
successes and blessings (as thou esteemest them) for all dispensations, even
crossest, may be successes and blessings with God, though thou esteemest them
not so; for he may bless thee most, when he crosses thee most; and contrary, he
may most curse thee when he most blesses thee, as thou think.

I but Sir, by this rule you would not have me pray, Oject.
neither for the one nor the other, neither for plenty nor want, neither for
liberty nor imprisonment, or the like.

Yes, by all means, I would have you Pray, that God would give you that which
is best for you, Ans.
and that he would Turn all To the best, but not to direct and appoint him what
to do. Be sure that your prayers be such as become Gods ears to hear; for all
the prayers of all flesh through the whole world, is displeasing to God; He
hears not, if it be for the satisfying of the flesh and lusts. Na, yas I said,
God may give a blessing, and yet not grant the thing thou desire, but the
contrary; and yet he gives the blessing; and he may and does both hear and
grant thy prayers: I know i^ is your ordinary common speech, when you are in
some distress and affliction, to say such a thing has befallen you, you praise
God for it: But At that time what does your heart say? does not it desire
liberty from it? if it do, you do but dissemble with God; For, could you praise
God for it in good earnest, you would do it as for a thing which you rejoice in
and are glad of; At least, to be as equally content to have that condition as
the contrary: Job 1. 21.
There is enough can say blessed be his name for good things, and such things
as please them; but if God take away those things, then they cannot as well
say, Blessed be his name, as holy Job did. And as Hezekiah, when he had showed
the treasures of the house of the Lord to the Ambassadors; the Prophet comes
and denounces Gods judgment against him, Esaias 39. 8. and told him that the
King of Babylon should come and carry away all those things: he answers, the
word of the Lord is good which thou have spoken: Isa. 39. 8.
so where is the man that when God causes any to carry away those things which
we esteem, can say, The word of the Lord is good? This is that we should labor
for: for if once we could attain to this, that nothing that God did should
displease us, Then nothing that we do, should displease God.

But alas, Job 11. 12.
alas, Vain Man would be wise, and will needs contend with his Maker; for this
is that we should do, to subscribe and set to our faith and belief, that what
ever happens and comes to pass, Is the best, yea better, then if it should
happen otherwise; Until we come to this, or so far as we come short of it, We
are mere Lucifers, mere Devils: for we are not content with Gods government,
and we mislike what he does; and we would fain establish, if we had power, we
would have a government not according to Gods will, but according to our own:
But until we come to this, to esteem Gods government to be best, we can never
quietly submit to it, or choose it: for so long as we apprehend a thing to be
Evil, we cannot choose but hate it; for it is natural to us, To hate and abhor
that which hurts us, and to love that which does us good.

Hence it is that the husbandman when he has bad weather, that destroys his
hopes of his crop, if he apprehend this to be evil, he cannot love him that is
the cause of it: and so the Mariner if he apprehends that a contrary wind is
evil for him, how can he love God who is the cause thereof? So likewise, if a
man thinks it an evil to lose his father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
goods, or lands, Job 2. 9.
he cannot choose but hate him that is the cause of all this. As Jobs wife says
to her husband, Do thou still remain in thine integrity? Curse God and dye:
as if she should say, do thou still bless God that curses thee? This is a
maxim too commonly received among us, that where profit is there is piety;
where God does not bless a man (as we count blessing) there we think is no
piety; and where he does, there God is well pleased.

Oh fools, and slow of heart to believe! Know this, That every man must either
be a god, or else subject and submitting to a God; there must needs be One
Rule, One Standard-measure, that must be the rule of all justice: so it is in
every thing, in corn-measures, and the like in weights, etc. In every thing
there is a rule, a standard to repair to, That rules, governs and measures all
the rest, to which all measures must be brought to be regulated and fitted by:
it must not be this or that man's saying so, but come to the rule: So in
Divinity, will you be your own judges? or shall it be this man's opinion, that
man's opinion? or rather shall we not say as David? Arise O Lord and judge the
earth: I will not tell thee any more, what thou should do, or tell thee what
is best; for thou a^t Lord and judge, Thou art Justice it self, and who shall
contradict thee? I account better of what thou do, then what I do; for my
wisdom is foolishness: in case of honor, in case of dishonor; in case of good
report, in case of evil report; in case of riches, in case of poverty; in case
of giving children, in case of taking away children: In giving fair weather or
foul and^. whatever thou do, that is best.

Every thing in the world (as one says) has two hands; by the ^ne ye may
carry it, by the other you cannot: As to say, My brother has done me an
injury, by the hand of injury we cannot carry it, but we swell and take it in
ill part: but take it by the hand of Brother, my brother has done me an
injury, and then you may bear it: for though he has done me an injury, yet
because He is my brother, I ought to bear with him. So again, My enemy has
done me an injury, by the hand of injury, you cannot bear it, but by the hand
of your Enemy you may; for from your Enemy you expected no other: and so these
daily complaints are in the world: Oh! What shall I do? I have lost my estate;
or I have lost my good name, or I have lost my dear wife, or I have lost my
hopeful children: Oh! take heed of that, of saying so, They are taken away: And
he has taken them that gave them to thee, whose own they are, He takes but
what is his own; and why then do (...) repine, but that thou claimest a
propriety and right in them, when thou have None? For did God ever Covenant
with thee, How long thou should have thy wife or thy children, or thy lands,
o^ thy health, or thy credit, or thy honor? He never did; why may not He then
take any of them when he pleases? But here now, is that faith that overcomes
all, Psalm. 62. 11.
To look upon God, As doing all, and therefore to conclude, all is well done:
for in his government there can be no error, not the least Error that can be
imagined: who dare blaspheme so as to imaginne that God can err? and yet in
our practice we daily Accuse him.

You know David how he behaved himself toward Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 7. 2 Samuel 16.
7.
when he railed on him, Come forth thou man of blood, come out thou man of
Belial: when some would have fallen upon him, no says David, let him alone,
for God has bid him curse: as if he should say, I will not run at the stone
that is thrown, but look through him, to him that stands behind this creature:
Oh what a height in Christianity is that soul come to, that not only can
endure, but endure joyfully? as the Apostles, Act. 5. 41. Acts 5. 41.
they went away Rejoicing from the council, when they had been imprisoned,
misused and whipped, That they were counted worthy To suffer such things for the
name of Christ: So when a man simply out of an Awful respect and Reverence of
His Almighty God and Father, can look upon the carrying away of his goods, the
burning of his house, the ravishing of his wife, with dry eyes, and with a
smooth face: I say, Out of an Aweful respect to God, not out of a senseless
stupidity: mistake me not, but because he dares not find fault with what Gods
will is: when he so behaves himself in whatever befalls him, for the Name and
sake of Christ, That he rejoices at it, That he so carries himself in Gods
sight, in these things, as if he willed them, and takes them thankfully as the
Apostles did, hating murmuring, This is something; What thou poor worm, dust
and clay, to lift up a thought of murmuring against thy infinite wise Creator?
Oh tremble before him, all ye Nations, and let him rule in his own house in
peace.

We daily pray, Man. 6. 10.
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done. Beloved, Gods will is never out of tune,
but it is thine that is; for although thou have said that Petition a thousand
times over, yet thou have never yet learned that Petition till thou have
learned to render up thy will to Gods will: 2 Samuel 12.
as David, 2 Samuel 12. 16. 2 Samuel 12. 16.
when his child was sick He fasted and lay upon the earth: but when his child
was dead, he raised up himself, and washed and called for meat; Some of his
servants wondered at him; he answers, Ver. 22. When the child was sick, I knew
not what Gods will was; but now God has declared his will, in taking him away,
why should I grieve any longer? I shall go to it, it shall not return to me:
his carriage in it was wonderful, That he should grieve for the child when it
was alive, and comfort himself when it was dead.

Now we having been so long in the Doctrinal part, it is time for us now to
look, What effects this Doctrine brings about in us: Let me tell you, He that
practices this Doctrine, As he has two eyes in his head, so he has two eyes
in his mind: and as he has two feet, two hands, two ears to his body, so to
his mind; the one is like the compass that stands fixed, pitched in the center:
and the other moves and goes about, and does the work: the one is pitched upon
God, his will, and his decree; the other acts and works, and goes up and down,
and does what he has to do in the world: so that whatsoever fall out, still he
has recourse to Gods will and decree: There is his place of Refuge and
security. He does the works of his calling* and actions among men with
cheerfulness, as employment from God; and however things fall out, they move
not him, to lift him up, or cast him down.

2. This man's eye is not divided between God and Mammon; Mat. 6. 22.
he looks not asquint; his eye is always single; he brings not God down to
these things, but he brings all things up to God, he consecrates all to God.

3. This man he has resigned up his judgment To God only, He is content to
let God rule his judgment: he resignes his judgment wholly to him. If God
condemn him* He accounts himself condemned: but if men condemn him he can puff
at it; He Regards not that: So likewise, This Man He resign^ his judgment of
others to God; He dares judge no man: says he, shall I dare to judge? no no,
Psalm. 85. 8. Psalm. 85. 8.
I will hear what God will say, I will hear his judgment, whatever his
judgment be, that is well, that is best: and as David says, Psalm. 31. 5.
Psalm. 31. 5.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit: So says this Man, into thy hands, O Lord,
I commend my judgment; into thy hands I commend my taste; into thy hands I
commend my sight; I am ignorant, and know nothing, but thou know what is
best for me: and to thy judgment will I submit, whatever it be.

4. This Man's is gotten Above all Heights and depths, above all principalities
and powers, above life and death: for he has tamed and brought under all fears
and all hopes: that which has undone and conquered thousands, He has
vanquished all his Enemies, and does lay him down and sleep: for says he with
David, Thou only make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 8. Psalm. 4. 8.
If mountains be tumbled up and down and hurled into the midst of the sea,
Though the Sea Roar and make a Noise; yea, though the whole frame and fabric
of heaven and earth crack, and heaven and earth should meet together, yet He
can lay him down and sleep: they may kill him, but he knows They cannot hurt
him: If all things be in peace, He is a quiet man: If all things be in
confusion, and coming to nothing, He is a quiet man too: For, believe it, Till
a man be come to This, He is never quiet; for he that has any propension to
any one thing more then to another, can never be quiet: therefore this man is
equally A stranger to all creatures; and he that is disturbed by harkening to
the call of his lusts cannot be quiet.

He that Hearkens after covetousness, If he be a servant to this sin, he is
always in ways that lead to it, and he can never be a servant to God: For, If
it does bid thee cozen and deceive? does it bid thee trudge here, and truge
there, to fulfill the lusts thereof? does it bid thee compass sea and land with
an over-Eager intention for thy profit? thou art still found in these ways. So
of Honor, if thou hearken to the commands of it, then art thou found in its
service: Thou will flatter, thou will bribe, thou will do any thing that it
commands; Thou art as true a servant to it, as the Centurion said of his
servant: Mat. 8. 9.
I say unto one go, and he goes; and to another come, and he comes; and so of
any other sin: and while thou hearkenest to the commands of these, thou can
never hearken to the commands of God: But This Man, He is ready for whatsoever
God commands either in doing or suffering; He is never ^narmed for any thing
God shall send: if God call him to sickness, to imprisonment, to death, to
judgment, he is ready, he is always ready horsed for his Journey; he waits
for the word of Command and is ready to depart: He is ready with the children
of Israel To depart out of Egypt, He has His bag and his baggage, and his
staff in his hand, Ready to depart: All News is alike to him; yea, All
creatures are alike base to him, and alike excellent: God is only Excellent to
him, but all creatures are alike.

Beloved, If all creatures were but Alike to us, and we indifferent to all,
then God would be All in all: for in very truth, the reason why we do not
account God most excellent, is because we prefer One thing before another; we
prefer one creature before another: But whatever happens to This man, he can
make no difference; does riches happen? does credit happen? does poverty
happen? does disgrace happen? does friends happen? does foes happen? all is one
to him; He concludes, Mat. 11. 26.
Blessed be Thy will; And says with our Savior, For so Father it seems good
in thy sight: does health happen? even so father it seems good in thy sight:
does sickness happen? even so father it seems good in thy sight: does
adversity happen? he is not cast down^ does prosperity happen? he is not lifted
up: as the Spouse in that of Cant. 4. 16. Cant. 4. 16.
Awake, O North wind, and come thou south, and blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out: let my be loved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits; That is, arise what will, Come from the four winds, and blow
upon my garden, and it shall cause it to Flourish and increase: Come any kind
of condition, it makes his garden grow: come the East wind, he grows; or come
the West wind, a wind full contrary to that, it brings forth the same effects:
come the South or come the North, which is full opposite to that, all is one.
Oh happy, thrice happy man, who is come to this!

Lastly, This man is such a man as I would ye were all such; That is, He is an
Anabaptist, as I may say, he is New Christened: for so the word signifies;
Anabaptist, That is, to be Again Baptized, or Rebaptized: according to that
promise of God, Isa. 62. 2. Thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth
of the Lord shall name. His first name was, Quod vult homo, what Man would,
what Self would, what flesh would: If ye ask how he lived? how he willed? how
he desired? The answer must be, After the will of man, after the will of the
flesh; but now his name is Quod vult Deus, What God would; He lives no more
that old life, now he lives, wills, desires, affects after the will of God: Ask
him now, how he wills? he will tell you, He desires no more his own will should
be done, but that Gods will may be done in all things; Now, he no longer
retires to his own wisdom, to his own directions in any case; but says with
Iehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 20. 12. 2 chronicles. 20. 12.
We know not what to do, but O our God, our eyes are toward thee: we know not
what thou would have us to do, we know not what thou will have us to suffer,
we know not what we shall have, we know not what we shall lose, we know not how
long we shall live; but O our God, our eyes are toward thee; even
whithersoever thou shall bid us go, we are ready to go.

Just as a man that is traveling in a strange way, and he comes to a way where
there is three or four ways before him; now he not knowing which is the right
way he would be glad to have any one to tell him which is the right way; and he
willingly takes that way, thorgh it be the worst, the ruggedest, he is
indifferent to any way, so he go the right way. Especially the business being
Important As Heaven is.

So my Brethren, Be assured many are the bywayes that a man may turn aside in;
but This man looks up to Almighty God, and enquires of him, which way he will
give him to go: and if in his providence he reveal to him, That Poverty is the
way he would have him go, This man goes it cheerfully: If it be the way of
Reproach he would have you go, that you go it cheerfully: or whatsoever way it
be, that you go it willingly. I know, I need not bid you go the way of ri^hes
willingly, the way of honor, the way of pleasure, to go these willingly; every
one desires these ways; but when God shall cross their own wills, and their
own desires, that they go these ways also willingly, and with cheerfulness. We
will conclude with our Saviors words; He does all this cheerfully, because
Even so father it seems good in thy sight; and because it is my meat and
drink to do thy will.

THe Author being taken off his public preaching at Kensington, he came not to
speak of the two last steps to peace and rest: viz. Conformity, and Deiformity.

THE DEAD and KILLING LETTER.; THE SPIRIT, and the LIFE.
JOSH. 15. v. 16, 17. And Caleb said, he that smites Kiriathsepher, and takes
it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife. And Othniel the son of Kenaz
the brother of Caleb took it, and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
In four Sermons, Preached at a private meeting at KENSINGTON.
BEloved, that I may now bring you down As by the Hand, to the meaning of Gods
Spirit, in this portion of Scriptu^e, To unfold and set forth those Sacred,
Hidden, and divine Mysteries contained in them: Take knowledge how that when
Moses, as you may read in chapter 13. 14. Numb. 13, 14.
of Numbers, when he had brought the people to the borders of that long desired
land, Exodus 3. 8.
which flowed with milk and honey: Moses according to Gods command, chooses 12
men, One out of every Tribe, to go and discover this land, what it was, and how
it might be obtained: among these 12 men, were these two sent, Ioshu^ the
Author of this Book, and Caleb here mentioned in the Text: These two and the
other Ten went, dispersing themselves by two: they pass through the Land from
Zion to Rehob, Numb. 13. 21.
and took special notice of what they could get knowledge of, as conducing to
their ends, searching and piercing into the very bowels of the Land, Ver. 18.
what they could discover of its Richness and Fertility, Of its commodiousness
and pleasantness, of the strength and weakness of the people; and of all things
which might conduce to the victory, and for the encouragement of those who sent
them: For they had heard various reports, some to encourage, some to
discourage, therefore they resolve to send these 12 picked men, One out of every
Tribe, as spies, to bring them a True report. And in their journey, Two of them
(to show the richness of the land) they meeting with grapes very fruitful,
Ver. 23.
large and wonderful, at the Brook Escol; There they cut down a cluster to
bring their brethren an Example of what they had seen, to convince them by
sight as well as report: and it was so big and weighty, that they were fain to
carry it between two of them. And All these twelve coming back to their
brethren, They all give reports of the Land: All the twelve agree in one, for
the Excellency and goodness of the land: but ten of the Spies, Ver. 27.
All except these two, Joshua and Caleb, They bring up in ill report, To
discourage the people; saying, it was very true, that it was a land ^lowing
with milk and honey, and abundance of all things, Ver. 2^.
and therefore, To be desired: But, There was no way to get to it, for their
walls were strong and high, reaching to heaven; and the men were mighty men,
the sons of Anack, The land was full of Giants, And say they, we were in our
own eyes but as Grasshoppers to them. And therefore whatever others may talk of
this and that; the plain truth is, Ver. 32.
That it had been far better That we had dyed in Egypt, or the wilderness: for
let the Lord promise what he would, and Moses and that Faction believe what
they would; there was No hope of ever prevailing: Numb. 14. 1.
But this Rumor running and increasing among the people, insomuch that the
people Cried out, and wept sore: Joshua and Caleb hearing thereof, at last they
stood forth to stop this slander, and to encourage the people; and exhorted
them not to give any heed to those reports; For, The people were so discouraged
at these reports, And the Mutiny grew so high, That they resolved to forsake
their Governors, Ver. 4.
and make themselves Captains and return into Egypt. But Caleb and Joshua
labored mightily to persuade their brethren; for the Lord was wroth and would
have destroyed them, But These persuade them to forbear their murmuring, and
not rebel against the Lord: for If the Lord delight in them, Ver. 8.
he could and would give them the Land, and bring them into it; And, If they
could but Believe, They need not fear the people of the Land; For; Their
defense was departed from them, and the Lord would be with Israel, And he would
make their enemies to be bread to them, and they should be as Grasshoppers
before them: and the Lord would make them As Giants and Conquerors over them;
and they should not be able to resist: And, for all they were so great and
mighty, Ver. 9.
The power of God should make them serve for food; And, all those oppositions
and discouragements should so turn to their advantage, that they should Serve
them, and be all, as helps to them in the victory and conquest. Yet for all
this the people were so mad and enraged through unbelief, that all the
congregation bad, Ver. 10.
Stone them with stones.

They thus persevering, These two, To clear the slander, And the other to
murmur and discourage the people, that hereupon began such a mutiny; Some few,
taking Calebs and Ioshuahs side, and some, yea most of them the murmurers side,
Insomuch, Chr. 14. 3.
That they fell at variance whether they should attempt the land, or dye as
they were; so that Moses was fain to stand up and intercede for them; or else
the Lord would have destroyed them utterly as One man, at one instant; but yet,
He would, for all this, in the very heat of all his anger and wrath, Preserve
those that believed, And made of Moses, Ver. 13.
A great people: yet Moses Stands up for them, and prays and urges the Lord,
That he is long-suffering and great in mercy, and therefore that he would, as
he had often done, bear with them and pardon their unbelief; And the Lord
answered his prayer and said, I have pardoned according to thy word: Ver. ^.
but as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the
Lord; Only, This generation, who have seen All my Miracles and my wonders from
Egypt to this day, and have tempted me now Ten times, they shall not see this
good land I promised them; save only my servants Joshua and Caleb, they shall
live and Enter and Possess, and also the posterity of those that believe in me.

But before I go any further, I would not let all this go without this One
observation from hence, by the way, That of all the souls that murmured, though
they were at the edge of the land, yet (being 600000 in number) not One of them
All, Entered the land of Canaan, but only these two.

Beloved Friends, you have heard here a large description of what was then
done: Of an Exceeding good land, and desirable, and how they murmured, and how
full they were of Unbelief, and how few entered: Shall we only look upon All
this, as an history, and never reflect into our own souls? What is This good
Land to us? what are we the better for all these good things, A land so
fruitful, so good, so replenished with milk and honey, so fruitful every way, so
delightful, so commodious, so desirable, If there be not the same land for us,
as well as for them? Can all these things do us any good, unless we may enjoy
them? you know the p^overb, when ye hear of such and such Rare things, every
one will say, what is all this to me? We had rather have it, then hear of it:
for, it is a trouble to hear of it and yet want All these things. So I say
Beloved, Because, in all you read or hear in the Scriptures, I would have you
still look into your selves, That the Scriptures may Be your Own; That you may,
as David says, Psalm. 119.
make the Word your Portion and your Inheritance: That, that which was to
others sweet, as it was to him; so it may to you, be as sweet as honey to your
taste, Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
yea sweeter then the honey comb; and more to be desired then gold, yea then
much fine gold. I say, what is all this long History to us? But that, in this
history, and so in all other Promises, we may see, They are made to us: Let me
tell you, In this very history, There is a good land promised to us, as well as
to these Israelites: and it is by Gods promise confirmed and Ratified to us;
And though we often doubt and despair, murmur and mutiny, yet the Lord often
and many a time passes by, and pardons our murmurings, and unbelief, and
still renews his promise; Though we often (so far as lies in us) Cancel the
bonds and the engagements; yet, He is a God Rich in mercy, Slow to anger, and
he pardons our Unbelief; and his Charter to us and with us is A New granted and
renewed every day, and Revealed more and more unto us.

You that are Believers, Do ye not find all these things true, both to and in
your selves? Nay, are there not Mutiners among us, within our souls? do you not
find These very things accomplished within your own hearts? have you not These
Whisperers, These depravers of the power of God within your selves? do not you
harbor these Mutiners, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
that say, It Is true, Heaven is a good Country and full of plenty that can be
desired; there is indeed, as the Scripture says, Things, Psalm. 16. ul^.
such as eye never saw, nor as ear never heard, nor ever entered into the heart
of man: And At his right hand there are pleasures for evermore: but These
Mutiners within us, they say withal, that This place, this land, this Paradise,
is walled about with high and thick walls, such as we shall never climb; and
the Inhabitants are Giants, mighty men, such as we shall never overcome: There
is, before we come there, The strong man to overcome, and he is not only
strong, but Armed; And there is Lucifer the Prince of the powers of darkness:
and There is the blood Red Dragon, spoken of in the Revelation, And all these
are Giants, sons of Anack, whom we dare not disturb nor en^ounter: there is the
Old Adam, and Self-will, and that which is nearest and dearest of all, There is
[I] my Self, to be overcome (as I opened to you upon another Text, under
several heads) All these are as so many Golia's, making challenges and
pro^lamations in behalf of the whole army of those numerous Philistims within
us; And, to fight really with these, we had rather die in the wilderness, or
return into Egypt, 1 Samuel 17. 9.
into our old captivity, then once adventure against them: For, says the heart
within, (for the present) we are quiet, and let us not further adventure, we
feel now no evil, we can take our own wills, and we can follow our own
pleasures, and we are Lords, and none dare control us in our own ways, if we
can be content: Though we are told, our own ways and wills are destruction: We
find not, nor we feel no such thing; Jer. 44. 17.
while we served and worshipped the Queen of Heaven, we had plenty of all
things; but since we attempted To forsake our selves, and deny our selves, and
to crucify our selves, we have found nothing but troubles, fightings and
discouragements, Therefore It Is but a folly to try any further and labor
ourselves in vain; let the Country be as good as it will, we shall never get
thither; we will rather venture our souls though we dye in this wilderness; God
is merciful, and we find most ease and pleasure in following our own wi^ls and
o^r own ways.

Oh my beloved, Find you not all these things within you, and ten thousand
thousands more of this nature? But let me tell you, None of all these doubtful
distrustful spirits can ever enter this promised land, Never did Nor never
shall Enter this desired Land; for, Those enemies (as I then showed) which I
named in part before, they must not only be fought withal, 1 Samuel 18. 7.
but they must be overcome: These Goliahs must be slain, and be beheaded before
ever ye can triumph in the Dance, with the Minstrels and the Damsels: Nay let
me tell you, God has solemnly sworn in his wrath, in Psalm. 95. Psalm. 95. 11.
These shall never enter into His Rest: but To him that overcomes, will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down in
my Fathers Throne, Rev. 3. 21. Rev. 3. 21.


But, Oh ye of little faith, why doubt ye? How is it that ye have no faith? if
ye look upon your selves indeed, ye are but as Grashopers to these Mighty
Giants, Heb. 10. 23.
and Terrible ^nemies within you: but if ye fix your eyes on him that has
promised, you have no cause at all to (...); they shall be but as meat for us,
And their ^efence shall depart from them, and the Lord of hosts is on our side:
this spiritual Canaan, this Heavenly Rest, is freely promised by God, not for
anything in you: Say not in your hearts, as the Lord says to the Israelites,
Because we are better, or because we are stronger then the Nations about us,
Deuteronomy. 7. 8.
we have done, or shall do All these things: but because the Lord loved you,
and he would do it for his own Name sake: Therefore, Only Believe, and none of
all these things shall stand in your way: These discouragements shall be as
meat, and Strength to you: This inheritance is not gotten or obtained by our
strength, or our righteousness: but it is purchased by his Sons Own blood, and
the work is carried on by his Own strength; Only believe: If ye can but trust
to this, if ye can but Rely and Roll your selves on Him, be sure you shall
enter This Rest, and possess This Good Land: And the way to it, is only by
being sensible of our own unworthiness and weakness, and likewise of his Love
and power Relying thereupon: These souls shall enter, and these only.

My Brethren, Then of all things take heed, or rather, The Lord give you
watchfulness against this great sin of Unbelief. Infidelity and unbelief is the
first and main thing to be overcome in the way of Christianity. Unbelief
excludes us from this Rest: Therefore it is That He who is an unbeliever cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God; All other s^ns are but fruits of unbelief. ^nbelief
disables utterly, and Cuts off from the Kingdom of God: for so long as we
conceive a thing impossible to be done, we can never go about it with courage
o^ confidence. But He that relies on Gods promise, distrusting his own ability,
yet believing that there is nothing so high but he shall attain it; nor nothing
so strong, but he shall overcome it; and only because God has promised it,
Then shall we go on courageously and victoriously: Our own strength or our own
weakness shall not much encourage or discourage us: But If we doubt and believe
not, Then shall it fare with us, as it did here with these Murmurers, We can
never enter into His Rest.

But now let us go on; These things I could not but touch at, lying so in our
way. After that these Israelites had entered, and had partly overcome and
conquered this Land, and had got it into their own possession, They began to
divide the Land, to every Tribe His lot of inheritance: To Caleb (Joshua being
made Governor) he gave Hebron, which he took upon him to subdue and to finish
the conquest; for Here and there The Enemy had some strong holds: Josh. 14. 9.
So that Cal^b he took Hebron for his inheritance, And he undertook, He and his
friends to assist him, that if he could overcome it, he should have it to him
and his for ever; if he could not, he should lose it: And passing along, he
came to this City, Kiriathsepher; and It being a City very strong, and yet of
great importance for him, he much desired it: Caleb makes a stand, and
proclaims, That whosoever smites this Kiriathsepher, Josh. 15. 16.
and takes it, he promises to give him his daughter Achsah to wife: it seems
Beloved, She was One very Amiable, and to be desired for her Comeliness and
Beauty, One worth having; and therefore he propounds Her as a Great and full
Reward to whosoever takes it: as it is in the verses read: And Caleb said,
Whoever smites Kiriathsepher, and takes it, to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife.

We come now to divide the words: There is in these two verses, two things:

1. Onus, the work, the burden, whosoever smites Kiriathsepher and takes it.

And secondly, Here is Honos, the gift, or the Reward, or the honor, To him
will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

But now let us consider, what is all this to us? what is Caleb to us? or what
have we to do with the smiting or taking Kiriathsepher? or what shall we be the
better for Achsah, Calebs daughter?

I have here, you know, even now, read the first and second Lesson part of this
15. Josh. 15.
of Joshua, and the other out of 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.
I may boldly say, One answers to the other, like the two Cherubims, This looks
forward to that Chapter in the Corinthians; and that looks back to this; The
one is the interpretation of the other. But it may be you will say to me, That
is very strange, we see no such thing: what is this Chapter to that, or that to
this? for S. Paul tells us there, That the letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life; and that They are Ministers not of the letter, but of the Spirit: And
likewise, he speaks there of the two Tables of the Law, and compares it with
the Glorious dispensations of the Gospel, as being far more glo^ious: If there
was so much glory at the Promulgation of the Law, which was written but in
Tables of Stone, and to be abrogated, and was also but the ministration of
death: much more glorious is the ministration of the Spirit, written by the
finger of God himself in the Tables of our hearts for even that which was made
glorious, had no glory by reason of that which excels in glory: And Moses,
He put on a vail, 2 Cor. 3. 13.
else the people could not behold Him nor Hear him; Which vail is still upon
the heart, and our m^nds are still blinded by reason of that vail, which is
still upon the heart, while we are under the law: for to this day remains
still the same vail, untaken away, In the reading the old Testament, which vail
is done away in Christ. But to all this I redudce only This part of this
Chapter now read, to unfold and interpret all this: And for the present I have
made choice of these two Verses, to give light to that whole Chapter; and that
Chapter is the Exposition of this, as I before said: O how like is my text, and
every part thereof, to those New washed sheep! Cant. 4. 2. Cant. 4. 2.
Every word bears twins, and there is none barren among them.

Of which two Verses, I shall say as Abigal said of Nabal, when David came to
destroy him, Regard not this son of Belial, and let not my Lord be angry, Nabal
is his name, and so is he: So I may say of this Text, as their Names are, so
are They.

Here is Kiriathsepher, and Caleb, and Othniel, and Achsah: We will see what
Secrets and Mysteries The holy Spirit has Couched under these vails: For as
they are in Hebrew, they express nothing to us: but Read them in English and
take off their vail, and you may see what honey will come out of the mouth of
the eater, Judge. 14. 24.
and out of the strong Sweetness.

What then is Kiriathsepher? In Hebrew it signifies The City of the Book, or
the City of the Letter.

We will first interpret them to you into English, and then we shall come to
show you what they are, To every one of us: for it is the office of the
Ministers of the new Testament, To strive To take off the Vail, that every one
may come to see His own face in the Scriptures, as a man sees His natural face
in a glass.

In the next place, What is Achsah? In Hebrew it signifies. The Rending of the
vail.

And then, what signifies Caleb? In the Hebrew it is as much as to say, My
heart, or a perfect heart, or a good heart.

And what then is Othniel? In Hebrew it is, Gods good time, or The Lords fit
Opportunity.

I have Beloved, as yet Read the Text to you but in ^ebrew: And then it runs as
it is written, And Caleb said, Whosoever smites the City Kir^athsepher and
takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife: And Othniel the son
of Kenaz the brother of Caleb took it, and he gave unto him Achsah his daughter
to wife; and so on: But in English it is to be read thus, And my heart said, or
a good heart said, That whosoever smites and takes the City of the Letter, to
him will I give the Tearing or Rending of the vail: And Othniel took it, as
being Gods fit time or opportunity, and he married Achsah; that is, enjoyed the
Rending of the vail, and thereby had the blessing possessed by Achsah; viz. by
this Vail being Rent, and possessed both the upper springs and the nether
springs. To him that obtains This rending of the vail, to him shall be given
the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; He possesses full content, heaven and all
happiness, and whatever his heart can wish for, as we shall show hereafter, if
God permit.

But in the interim, Object.
it may be you will say to me, Sir, but methinks this seems to be a very bold
allegory.

But have patience; Answ.
for I must tell you that not only in this Scripture, but throughout the old
Testament, from the first of Genesis, to the last of the Prophets there runs an
Allegory, a Mystery, a Secret Woof in the Web of the Letter, as I may so call
it, which if you have not the skill and Art to know it, that so you may eye it
and see it through the letter, (for it is hid and covered with the letter) I
will be bold to say it you have not the Marrow, the life of the Scriptures; in
the justification of which I dare live and die: I deny not the history of the
word, It is really true, undeniably, most certainly true: bear me record: for
certain, it is true both of this particular Scripture and so of the rest; I
say, Caleb did say so, and Kiriathsepher was taken by Othniel, and he did marry
Achsah: these things were really, and literally and externally acted. And so
the History of Abraham, and all the rest: but I cannot stand now to instance as
I would, though I could show you clearly How the Mystery is hid, and couched
and interwoven in the letter. But to touch upon the History of Abraham; He had
two sons, The One the son of the bondwoman; The Other the son of the free
woman: And there was A mount Sinai, and A mount Sion, as the Apostle Paul
alludes to it: and shows us Thy mystery of those things: and tells us plainly,
Those things are an Allegory, Gal. 4. 24. Gal. 4. 24, etc.
Which things are an Allegory, says he; for these are the two Covenants, the
one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage which is Hagar, and answers
to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children: but Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of us all; and as he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is
now: and so he goes on, showing what the Holy Ghost Pointed out in that
History, because he would not have them, Rest in the Letter, but search for the
Spirit, The life, and the mystery: So neither do I deny, nor diminish the least
title from the letter: but the Apostle, and so I, would bring the history home
to our selves, to our own particulars: For what are these histories to us? what
good is it to us, that there was Amount Sinai, and A mount Sion? and that
Abraham had two sons, the One by the bondwoman, the Other by the freewoman?
but He would show and teach us, That the son of the bondwoman in us, which is
the Son of fear, should be cast out; and the son of the freewoman, that is,
the Son of love, should inherit: so always reserving the Truth of the Letter,
yet not losing the sense and the meaning. But if we rest and dwell on the
Letter, or on the history, and so only take it as an history, John 6. 63.
and not see our own selves in it and by it: then that History, that Letter
kills: but it is the Spirit only that gives life, viz. the Mind and the
meaning; for there is no Scripture but is as a glass to behold our own faces,
our own Hearts.

So, he that shall read the second and third chapters of Genesis: where we read
of the Serpents speaking to, Genesis chapter 2. 3.
and beguiling our mother Eve; and of Eves tempting her Husband, and so both
came into the transgression: But now let us not only read this speculatievly,
and so let it pass; but let us consider how this Scripture is fulfilled in us,
see how our own condition is there related, as well as our first parents; let
us come to the woof; this is but the outside, the Letter; what is the hidden
truth in them? for there is no part of holy Writ but is fulfilled always in
all times, in every part thereof, and in every member of the Church; or In the
enemies of the Church at one time or other: always the same things are in
doing throughout all ages.

As I take it, the meaning is, The Serpents there speaking to Eve; His first
setting upon her, soliciting and seducing her: It shows that Satan's method in
the soul of every man, is first to set upon the inferior part of man, the
affections, which are soonest overcome: as S. Paul says of Eve, the woman was
first in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
thereby understanding (as I conceive) the affections, unto which and by which
The Serpent is every day whispering Treason, and suggesting Treachery into the
soul against God. The lower parts of the soul first hearken, and they being
overcome, then they as Eve, set upon Adam, that is, the Will and Understanding,
and the higher powers of the soul, whereby both the Woman and the Man came into
the transgression. Understanding the Scriptures thus, As fulfilled within us,
we make them our own; hereby the word is made a Living word and Endures for
ever, as David says. Those that see and feel the Scriptures Thus fulfilled In
them, They have found The Pearl of the Scriptures, for we ought to sell All:
and the Hidden Manna which shall feed and nourish them to Eternal life. Rev. 2.
17.
Nay, let me tell you, These have the Spirit and the life of the Word, though
they never heard nor read the Scripture before. If thou have but found and felt
the Hissing Serpent cursed in thee, and overcome in thee; Genesis 3.
if thou have seen Lucifer fallen from his Heaven in thy soul, like lightning;
I say to thee, This day is the Scripture fulfilled in thee. For if thou know
the Letter of the Scriptures never so exactly; if thou have not this work
brought about in thee Thou art a mere stranger to the Scriptures: thou never
yet understoodst what the Word of God was: but finding these things in thee,
thou will say as those Samaritans said to the woman of Samaria, who told them
she had met with Christ the Messiah: but when they themselves had conferred
with him, Joh. 4. 42.
say they, now we believe him to be so, not because thou said so, but because
we have seen him and found him so to our selves: so may thou say, now I
believe, not only because it is written in Genesis but because I have felt it, and
seen it written and fulfilled in mine own soul: for Thus God is pleased, for
our capacities and comprehensions, to convey to us the knowledge of this inward
work within us, by external representations to our understanding; that so we
may comprehend Those things, that are so far above us; for men naturally
altogether live by sense and reason, which reveal not these things but as they
are rubbed and whetted upon us, Isa. 28. 10.
instilled by degrees, Line upon line, and precept upon precept, here a little
and there a little. And when thou can say, I have felt all these things done
in my self, this whispering and this soliciting; I find I have that Adam and
Eve in me; I have eaten of that forbidden tree; I find it was I that aspired to
be equal with God, and I would sit in his seat; and this is Lucifer in me, and
the Devil in me, and the old Adam in me; but if thou can say withal, I have
also found him overcome and cursed in me: o^ Beloved, you then are in a happy
condition.

It is said concerning our Savior, Mat. 13. 34.
that he spoke to them in parables, and without a parable spoke l. e nothing
unto them: so God seldom or never speaks to us, but it is in parables, under
resemblances and figures: So here this City Kiriathsepher here spoken of, Of
its Smiting and Taking, its a parable rather then a history; something else
represented of more high concernment. The wisdom of God in the Scriptures is
such, that it minds higher things then to tell Stories, and relate Histories:
but he would thereby set out to us The picture of our selves, and of his own
workings in us, And this is divine, the other is but Humane; it is but bare and
empty, base and carnal in comparison of the spiritual and living sense. But
herein lies the very wisdom and power, and footsteps of God, The very finger of
God.

This we have spoken by way of prologue; that so we might bring you to
converse, and to have your eyes within and upon your own hearts while we are
opening unto you the Scriptures; Luke 24. ^2.
then will your hearts burn within you. And I pray God that he would be pleased
to show you These things in your selves, so that he may thereby so warm your
hearts, that they may make them burn within you, even while He himself opens
these Scriptures to you and in you.

The smiting of this Kiriathsepher, is the smiting of the Letter; we must
st^ike this Letter, this Scripture, and take it, and then we shall have Honos,
the gift, or reward: there is no getting of Achsah to wife without the Smiting
this Kiriathsepher, and Taking it: you your selves must be the Othniels; But it
must be a Caleb, a good heart that must make a proclamation in you, encourage
and put you on to this work; You must know this, Self can never smite this
Letter. If you smite it for your own ends, for your own carnal advantages, or
for your own liberty, there is enough would so smite the Letter, as S. Paul
says, to abuse their liberty by Jesus Christ, to the satisfying of the flesh;
this is nothing but the Devils and Satan's smiting and taking the Letter: for
flesh and the old man wishes there were no Law to rule and bridle it: this is
not an Othniels nor a Calebs smiting and taking; but this is our selves; this
is not to strike it in Christ's Name, but in our Own names, and then we shall
never marry Aschsah.

He that rightly strikes the City of the Letter, Shall have Achsah to wife:
observe hence,

That we may have the Scriptures and yet not marry Achsah: we may be very
conversant with, and daily use the Scriptures, and yet never marry Achsah,
never possess the Rending of the Vail. Oh Brethren! know this for certain, we
may be bred and born with the Scriptures, live and dye with the Scriptures,
rise and go to bed with the Scriptures, Eat and drink with the Scriptures; they
may be always in our hands, and always in use; insomuch that we may be able
to give account of the whole Bible by heart, and yet not marry Achsah, and yet
this rock yield no water to quench our thirst: and all because we read them as
a History, as things done long ago without us, and not at present doing in us.

Moses might have stood long enough looking at the Rock, Exodus 17. 6.
Till he had fainted for thirst, if he had not smote the Rock: So, the reason
why we get no milk from the breasts of consolation, Isa. 66. 11.
as the Prophet Esaias says, it is because we force them not, we milk it not
forth: but he that strikes the Letter of the Word, shall have the
interpretation thereof given to him.

Obj. Object.
But it may be you may say to me: But has not God given us this Letter of the
Word for our rule; the which he has been pleased to keep and preserve in all
Ages, and has brought them to our hands, and so to our Posterities? and have
not many Authors spent their labors, and written whole volumes upon This very
Word, on the Letter of it? and will you say there is nothing in it? or will you
say the Letter kills? What, has God given us poison in the Scriptures to
destroy us? then it were far better to neglect them and never use them.

Answ. No Beloved, far be it from me to say so; yet I would have you rightly
understand me, for your own sakes. The Letter, the Scriptures are all True, as
I said before: but let me tell you withal, they are true only as God means
them. We must give him leave To interpret his own meaning: He that w^ote the
Scriptures, certainly knows best His own mind in them: but I say, if you have
Only the Letter, Nay, though ye have the external signification of them, that
kills, that destroys.

But you will say, Is the Letter, is the Book written in black Letters, is it
then Evil? If so, then let us Throw away the Letter; if God has given us
therein poison to kill us, then what do we with it? let us throw away our
Bibles, nay, let us burn our Bibles.

No, in no case; let us labor to preserve the Lette^ of the Word whole,
entire, and untouched: But, The Letter is said to kill, not that it does so in
its own nature, but per accidens; it is so to him who looks no farther then the
Letter, we make it so to our selves A killing Letter.

As if suppose I should give you a Cockle, or an Oyster, and I should tell you,
Take this, for therein is precious meat to sustain and nourish you. Now if you
take this and keep it by you and never crack the shell, that so you may come at
the meat and the virtue which is in it; I may say now, the s^ell kills you:
for, if you only look on the shells, and lie Licking the outside only, will
this nourish, will this give life? certainly no; but if you crack it, and open
it, and eat the meat, this will nourish^ yet I may justly and truly say, This
Cogal, or These Oysters kill you; because you depend upon That which will
starve and undo you: But, The meat, that gives life: So in the same sense is it
spoken concerning the Word: The Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life: 2 Cor.
3. 6.
If you be always handling the Letter of the Word, always licking the Letter,
always chewing upon that, what great things do you? no marvel you are such
starvelings; no marvel you thrive not: no marvel you are such Monsters, always
children, and never come to any grow^th: no marvel you go not on To perfection:
what do you in this more then every carnal man may do? what do you more then
Hypocrities? Mat. 5. 46.
Do not Hypocrities the same? nay, do not the Devils the same? For he knows the
Letter exactly, and he can discourse excellently thereof, far beyond the
learned Rabby in the World: but I say then, if you rest only in the Letter,
That kills: except this Letter be crakt, except this City Kiriathsepher be
smitten and taken, ye cannot come at the kernel, ye cannot have Achsah, Calebs
daughter.

Though the Letter contain in it Life and nourishment, as the Oyster-shell does
the Oyster, and as the shell of the Cocal does the meat; and ye cannot have the
Oyster without the shell; Yet you see, you cannot have the meat neither,
without you crack and break the shell.

As for instance, If you give me [Beef or Mutton;] there is in them both meat
for nourishment, and also excrements: buu who can say (when he looks on either)
This is the meat, and This is the Nutriment, and this Other is the excrements,
and this is that which goes into the draught, and is good for nothing. Yet you
know, The stomach will sever these, and divide to either their proper way and
places, and to their proper uses; and a skilful Physician which knows the body,
the arteries, and the veins, and all the parts how they lie, he knows how
nature disposes of all these things, and knows both the things and the causes.

And so likewise in Physic, ye can have no Physic without excrements: though
ye cannot see the virtue, and the Life, and the Spirits; yet ye may see the
effects: and though in meat you cannot see the nourishment; yet you may see the
thing nourished by it. So we cannot have the true word of God without the
letter: God could not (as I may so say) considering our state as we are, he
could not give us meat or Physic by the word, but by the Letter: And although
it be not the Physicians intent to give excrements, but only Physic; and we
do not eat meat for the excrements sake but for the meats sake, and for the
nourishment:

So my Brethren, we being of so low a nature and quality, so earthly, so
fleshly, so sensual, so far from a spiritual nature, That I say, God cannot
give us His Mind and the soul of the Scriptures, which is so Divine, Heavenly
and Spiritual, without the Letter, without the shell, without those excrements^
Yet, His meaning is not, to give us the shell or the excrements, but the
nourishment: his meaning is to give us Living water, springing up to eternal
life, John 4. 14
and to feed us with Hidden Manna, Rev. 2.
and to give us the white stone, wherein there is a new name, that no man
knows but he that rece^veth it.

But we must not therefore Throw away the Letter, because there is excrements
with it: as we do not throw away meat or Physic, because excrements are in it:
because, if you throw away the meat, you throw away the nourishment, as well as
the excrements: But, if you take the Carnal letter as carnally spoken; The
literal letter as literally spoken; Then, you have not taken the City of the
letter. If you look for no more in the Scriptures, Mat. 7. 6.
we do but cast pearls before swine; you go no further then the Pharisees.

The Jews and the Pharisees, before Christ came, they were so literal, sensual
and carnal, they thought that whosoever did not break the letter of the Ten
Commandments; If they did nothing against the Outward, Literal letter, they
thought themselves blameless. As in the seventh Commandment, They thought If
they had not actually layen with a woman, then they had perfectly kept that
Law; but Christ goes further, and tells them, Mat. 5. 28.
He that looks on a woman, and lusts after her, has committed adultery already
in his heart: And so for murder, they thought if they did not lay hands on
their brother to murder him, they thought they had gone a great way in keeping
that Command; but our Savior goes further then every eye can see, and says,
He that is angry with his brother without cause, is guilty of murder: Mat. 5.
22.
So they rested on the Letter, and the Letter perished: They had not married
Achsah, they had still The vail before their eyes; and those that are come no
further, they are still Jews; as the Apostle says, They have still the vail
before their eyes, even while Moses is read: and Christ is a mystery Hid, to
such, even from the beginning of the world.

Beloved, we have many Chatechisms now adays, 2 Cor. 3. 15.
and They say, they are for children; and I believe so to, Only for children
to get by roat, and be never the better for them: and I am afraid, there are
Too, too many such children, who think themselves Tall men, who have most of
the Scripture at their fingers ends; And because they can answer any
Catechistical point in Divinity, they must be accounted, The greatest
Proficients, and tallest Ch^istians: But you see by this we have said, how far
men may go herein, and yet know nothing to salvation.

As we said, The children of Israel, how expert were they in the Scriptures, so
as they thought themselves the strictest observers of the Commandments: yet you
see how our Savior undervalues all their knowledge and strictness: And now
seeing it is fallen in our way, we will touch upon each Commandment briefly.

The Israelites they thought, if they observed the litteral Ten Commandments,
there was no more required. As in the first Commandment, if he worshipped
either Sun, Moon, or Stars, or any creature, then he thought he should dye the
death; but if they never bowed to any creature in a way of worship, then they
were innocent: But, This they might do, and be never the better; for says the
Apostle, The end of the Commandment is love, out of a pure heart, and faith
unfeigned. To have any thing in the world for thy God, Either to love or fear,
so that it draws away the love and fear of thy Creator, that thing is to thee a
God, and thou give it that worship, fear and love that is due only to God.
So far as any creature has caused thee to offend thy Creator, thou have broken
this Commandment. If either riches, or beauty, or honor, or promotion has
weighed down thy love from obeying God Almighty, thou have set it in the room
of God, and cast Him behind thy back, psalm. 50. ^7.
And that thou have worshipped and served; thou sacrificedst to it thy heart:
thy fear, thy love, thy trust, which is only due to God. They never came to
this, To observe what they set up in their hearts for God; and herein lay The
marrow, The nourishment, the meat of the Commandment, and all because they had
not smitten Kiriathsepher, they had not cracked the Letter.

And so the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image. Exodus ^0. 4.
Here let me tell you thus much, In making of Images, God loves Carvers better
then Painters; It may be, The strangeness of the expression will cause you to
take the more notice of what I am to say: Be not offended a^ the expression;
for I shall open my intentions in so saying.

Quest. Why sir, what do you mean?

Answ. I Will tell you; Carvers you know in their work, they lessen, cut, pare,
and take away; but Painters they do not so; but they add in their work, they
put color here and there; So this is that I mean; God loves those that seek
him in poverty, in a way of emptiness and self-nothingness: And as for those
that seek him in riches and greatness, and in high things, in men's esteem, they
go farther and farther from him. The Virgin Mary found it so in experience,
Luke 1. 48, etc.
when she said, The hungry he fills with good things, and the rich he sends
empty away: he has regarded the nothingness of his handmaid, he has brought
down the mighty, and exalted them of low degree, and scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts: If you would find God, It must be, by lessening
your selves, and taking the creature quite out of your way. And, if you would
think of God, to find Him you must not imagine Him under any form, but cast
away from you, all that ever you can say, or think; for God is nothing that we
can say, name or imagine.

And therefore if you speak of any thing, or think of any thing, either in the
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, Exo. 2. 4.
or in the water under the earth, and think him like it, though it be never so
glorious; yea, ten thousand times brighter then the Sun: yet in this you commit
Idolatry, and make to your self, A graven, or a formed image: All is one; for
God infinitely transcends all our thoughts and imaginations: yea all the
thoughts of all the Angels in heaven; for none can comprehend God, but God
himself; Therefore herein you belie God, for he is none of all those things,
nor like any of those things we imagine. For you know He speaks falsely as
well He that says less then the truth, as he that says more then the truth:
As in your public oaths, they are given in this form, Thou shall speak the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth: So that, he that speaks less
then the truth, or more then the truth, speaks not the truth; and he that
speaks not the truth, speaks a lie: So he that thinks or speaks that which
comes short of God, and says such an one is the Almighty, He belyes him, and
has broken the second Commandment.

But he that shall Take away whatsoever is competible to any creature
whatsoever, He comes nearest to God; For, whatever is competible or agreeable
to any creature, Is All but Accidents: and so The creature blindes us, and
hides God from us: though God be in every creature, and as much in one creature
as in another, yet These Accidents in the creatures hide God from us: And those
to whom Christ has manifested the Father, They in whom Christ dwells, they
know that Christ is in them, and in every creature; but Reprobates know it not,
2 Cor. 13. 5.
as the Apostle says, Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Those that be reprobates, do not know that Christ is in them: but
if they be No Reprobates, they know it, and are sensible of it: Christ has
manifested himself to be in them, by Revealing to them That God fills all
things.

They See him, Ephesians. 1. 23.
Believe him, and Feel him to be That Ever Blessed BEING That fills all in
all, Who Alone can make them Happy; They have seen His Goings out, and His
comings in, His glorious Outgoings in every creature, which has so Endeared
and won over their hearts to him, so that they esteem him Dearer, and more
lovely and Amiable, then ten thousand worlds, and their hearts Can never depart
from him; or rather, He has so united them to himself by His love shed abroad
in their hearts, that they can never be Reprobated from him: as David says in
Psalm. 68. 24. Psalm. 68. 24.
They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my King and my God, even
in the Sanctuary: They see God in every creature, Deck^d as on his Throne, In
his Glory and Majesty, in his Heaven, and in his Holy Temple.

But as we were saying, whatever creature thou look upon, be it never so
glorious, That creature by reason of its Clothing, by Accidents i^ blindes and
hood-winks us from God; for I cannot show you God, nor represent God to you by
showing or setting forth to you any creature: but if you take from the creature
All that can be felt, heard, thought or understood, then you come Nearest Him:
As Dionysius in his book of Mystical Divinity, who was St. Paul's Scholar,
mentioned in the Acts, Acts 17. ult.
He very Elegantly expresses This very thing we have so often spoke of, and I
willingly speak of it, And the oftener, as it comes in my way, because I know
These things we are very ignorant of generally, even among those that think
they know All things, and yet are ignorant in this Great and Comprehensive
truth, which is even the very beginning and foundation, and Rock, of all other
truths.

If you could take from the creature all Heat, and Cold, all heaviness and
lightnes^, all weight and measure, all beauty and ill-favouredness, all youth
and age, all greatness and littleness, and all Accidents, All manner of fashion
and form, or Whatever has a Name, or can be imagined, then you shall find, the
High and Holy One, in his tabernacle, Psalm. 91. 1.
and in his Secret place, Romans 8. 5.
Even He who is God blessed for ever, that is, Even God, in Christ Jesus. Those
that go about to find God this way, in the way of poverty, and taking away,
they shall find God in Christ Jesus: But those that go about to find him in the
way of adding or enlarging, or setting any creature before them to resemble
God, God hides himself the more, and goes farther off from them: And therefore
it was I said, that God loves Carvers better then Painters.

So then, we have showed you how Moses delivered only the Letter of the
Commandments; and he that made Not an Idol to behold and fall down to it with
his body, he had not broke this Commandment: But the Spirit of this Commandment
goes farther then every eye can see, and there is more contained in it then we
can at first see in the superficies of the Letter.

For he not only breaks this Commandment that makes an Image, and falls down
and worships it; for this is but the least breach of it, this is but outward
and bodily; he indeed transgresses against the Letter: but there is an inward
and more dangerous breach; viz. To transgress against the Spirit of it; That
is, He that thinks or believes, Exodus 20. 4.
or affirms, That God is like any thing in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, or in the water under the earth, and of this makes himself a God, and
adores and worships it in his mind; This man the Lord will not hold him
guiltless, for he is a jealous God.

He that thinks God to be like any thing, either glorious or base, to be like
any thing he has seen or not seen, to be like any thing he has felt or not
felt, to be like any thing he has heard or not heard, to be like any thing
great or little, to be like any thing either present or absent, or any thing he
can imagine, that man has made him A graven Image, and has fallen down and
worshipped it. Nay, Isa. 2. 8.
I tell you, though he has neither eyes no^ hands to make an Image, Isa. 40.
18.
yet he has both made A graven Image, and has worshipped it: Whereto (says
God) will you liken me? Exodus 20. 7.
saw you any thing in that day? etc. and to what will you compare me? therefore
he that compares God to any thing, he has not smitten The City of
Kiriathsepher, and taken it; he has not married Achsah.

So likewise, the Third Commandment: The letter of it commands not to take Gods
name in vain, or blaspheme his name: Now if a man has ^ot in words blasphemed,
nor swore an oath but when he has been called to it, he has done what Moses
required; and No man else was externally punished, but he that externally broke
the Letter of the Commandments: But Gods name you know signifies his
attributes, his Power, his Wisdom, his Justice, his Mercy, etc, so that the
Spirit of this Commandment is; He that takes or appropriates this Power, or
Wisdom, or Mercy, or any other Attribute, and says They are His, That he has
either power, or goodness^ or wisdom, or justice, or mercy; or that any
creature has any of these, or whatsoever is Gods Name; or That he shall apply
These to any sinister, by, or self-end, and does not at all times use them
only ^o glorify, serve, and honor God with them: I say this man has
fearfully and desperately broke this Commandment: this man has not only
Buried his talent in a napkin, and been An unpro^itable servant, for which the
Lord Commands from him to be taken away That which he has; Mat. 25. 28, etc.
that is, That which he seems to have, To himself, and to other men like
himself; for which ^nprofitableness he is to be cast into Outer Dark^ess, where
is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But then, what shall become of him that has Arrogated, purloined and
appropriated those things which were but lent him to employ for his Lords
(...), to his own self ends and advantage? Nay moreover, This man has
subjected God himself to ^erve his turn, and his own carnal ends: as the Lord
himself complains by the Prophet, Isa. 43. 24.
You have made me to serve your iniquities; that is, you have served your
selves with my power, and strength, and wisdom, and goodness, and not me, nor
my ends.

O Beloved, that we could but see all these things in o^r selves, to shame us,
and to bring us to nothing, that we may put our mouths in the very dust for
these high indignities against the Throne and Scepter of Jesus Christ in our
souls! Beloved, know, This is the substance of the Commandment; the other part
is but the shadow; this is the Commandment it self; the other is but the
Sacrament, the symbol, the Image.

And so likewise in the fourth Commandment: he that refrained his hands and
feet from servile labor, Exo. 20. 8. Numb. 16. 32.
and rested, did no work, nor gathered (...) sticks, Moses found no fault with
them: but the Spirit of this Commandment goes farther; for he that goes but
thus far, keeps but the Sabbath of the Ox and the Ass: but the Sabbath is to be
sanctified: what is that? only to go to Church and hear or read, and make a
prayer, or to do the like at home? Isa. 56. 2.
No, no, But blessed is the man, who keeps the Sabbtah from polluting it.
Many think because they are constant in such things as Those, that they have
sanctified the Sabbath. But as I said, He that truly keeps the Sabbath Holy, he
must keep Gods Sabbath.

Object. Object.
You will say, What is that?

Answ. Answ.
He is called The God of Sabbaths, not because (as many ignorantly think) that
he is the God of the Sunday, more then of the Monday or Tuesday, o^ of the
seventh day more then of any other day; But because He is the God of Rest: for
[Sabbath] is as much as to say, [Rest] Because the creatures are all in motion,
in vegetation, and action, and no creature can be at Rest, till they return to
Tim; He Only is at Rest. All creatures were created by him; and are (as it
were) gone out from him, as Noah's Dove sent out of the Ark, and they rest not
One minute till they return into this Blessed Noah again, And till He be
pleased to put forth his hand, and take it in again.

Beloved know this, The most stable and most durable creature that is, is in
Motion, is still and always inchanging; It remains not the same, not one tittle
of time: The iron, the gold, the silver, the stones, none are at rest, no not
One minute: For could you but show me any one creature that is at Rest, but for
one minute, I would be so bold as to say It were God: and that creature were
immortal and everlasting: but it is God only that is at Rest, it is He only
that is immortal, and therefore no creature can be. Exod^s 20. 11.
God Almighty, He is the True Sabbath, and those that return to be One with
Him, they only keep a True Sabbath: for God Rested on the seventh day and
sanctified it: six days He was in creating and working; while we are absent
from the Lord, we are in continual travel and labor, and so in continual
changing till the seventh day come: while we are in the world and in the body,
we must work and be in changing and removing from place to place, and doing the
actions of creatures as creatures. But know, as the Prophet says, Arise,
depart hence, for this is not your rest; Mich. 2. 10.
Remember your Sabbath To keep it Holy, without turmoils, and hurryings after
the creatures, and learn to live above while you are here below: I say Above in
the quiet and still Regions, Above All the creatures and things below: for here
in these things you can never Rest; But Return to God; Return to thy rest O my
soul, says David, (...). 6. 7.
where only you shall find Rest and there keep your Sabbaths: All other
keeping Sabbaths, is but External and bodily labor, and bodily labor
profits nothing, says the Apostle: yet most men, (...). 4. 8.
those that not only profess religion, but also most Teachers, they are gotten
into such a Form of religion and External holiness, of Outward and Bodily
labor in keeping Sabbaths and other things in religion, so that true and real
godliness is almost lost; and which is most dangerous of all, Herein they rest,
and bless themselves and their disciples: Therefore I would gladly disturb
them, and Rouse them from their Lees, whereon they are settled. Therefore I say,
look not among the creatures, nor in your External duties, nor in Outward
keeping of Sabbaths, to find your true Rest; but only in your God, who is the
God of your Sabbaths.

Then for the fifth Commandment, God by the Letter commands us, Exodus 20. 12.
to honor Father and Mother; that is to be done: To honor and obey those that
are our Fathers and Mothers of the body, and according to the flesh; and those
that are termed Fathers and Mothers in regard of their office. For my aim is
not in this, nor in any other Commandment ^o dehort you from doing the
External part thereof: But when you have done that, there you Rest, and think
you have done some great Act: but this is that I say, this is not that God
chiefly intends; but God would by them commend unto us Himself.

1 In regard, He is the Father of all Fathers, the only and true Father of
all. And

2 Because Fathers and Mothers are dear to us, and tender toward us: but He is
more tender over us; therefore He ought to be (...) to us then any other: and
Him we ought (...) honor and obey before them and above (...) he that honors,
obeys and loves them one^^ has obeyed the Letter: but he has not smitten this
City, he has not married Achsah.

Then come to the sixth Commandment; Many think if they can but wash their
hands from blood, so that they have killed no man, they think they have kept
this Commandment: but if withal they have not murdered their brother in their
heart, Mat. 5. ^.
nor bore no malice to no man, nor wished an^ hurt to No man: and yet in this,
who can say, Hi^ heart is free? and if any have gone th^s far, the^ think
themselves upright in obedience to thi^ Commandment.

But this I must tell you is but the Letter: i^ you go no further, you have not
smitten Kiriathsepher and taken it. But true and Real murder i^ that, which is
fatal to the soul: and that is the murder of God: How? what say you Sir?
Murder God? We murder God? God forbid. Yes, I Will tell you what I mean, and you
shall confess it.

God complains (as I told you before) that we have laden him as a cart is
laden with sheaves: Amos 2 13.
ye have so pressed him down under your sins, that he cannot rise: and again
the Apostle says, Ye have crucified to your selves the Son of God afresh: and
this you do when you Hate God: Heb. 6. 6.
And that is, whensover ye apprehend not God Merciful and good to you, in
whatever he does to you; I must tell you, you then Hate God. If at any time You
apprehend God hurts you, you cannot love him for it, but you Hate him: and this
is true and Real murder with God, as well as when you hate your brother you
are Man-slayers, 1 Ioh. 3. 15 1 John 3. 15.
and that you will not deny; neither can you deny this, as much as lies in you
You Murder God.

For this is a certain rule; No man can love Evil, as it is Evil to him, and
every man loves good as he finds it good to him. So long as we apprehend any
thing to be an evil to us, and for our hurt, we cannot love it, but do so long
Hate it: As David in all his Psalms praises God For His Mercy, for his
Goodness, and for His loving kindness: whatever it be that comes under any
other apprehension, we hate it, resist it, fight against it: But David He
praised God for his afflictions, for corrections, even when God made him to
smart; but that was never till he found kindness and mercy in it, and that he
saw it was good for him: if any thing come upon us, that we cannot account a
mercy to have it so, we cannot praise God for it. If we think when God has
taken away any thing we enjoy, be it wife, children, friends, health, liberty,
houses, lands, or any thing else that we prize and love, if we think this evil
to us, So long we can never praise God for it: if we do not Account What ever
falls to us a mercy, and be glad of it, yea a greater mercy to want what we
desire then to have it, this man so far hates God.

He that murmurs and thinks, That God at any time does not well nay does not
always the best, this man hates God. This was that sin that God so Hated and
punished in the Israelites, That they would be wiser then God, and they would
teach him the path of wisdom, and show him the way of understanding: Psalm 78.
still they were a murmuring and finding fault with what God did, as if he were
not so wise as they; When the Poor POTSHERDS of the earth will contend with the
Almighty, Isalah 40. 13.
And for the Pot to stand up against the Potter, Romans 9. 20, 21.
and say, why have thou made me thus?

When we, Poor Creatures, Poor Crawling Worms, Isaiah 45. 9.
(the best of us compared with God) shall take upon us to control the wisdom
of him, who is wisdom it self? Jer. 18. 6.
Oh! says one, There is such a Heavy thing fallen out: Oh! says another, God
has not done well in this: Oh! if he would have heard my prayers in that, I
could have told Him How he might have done better then he has done; and I wish
it had fallen out otherwise: Oh friends! Oh friends! this is no other then to
do what lies in us to throw the Almighty out of his throne. How ordinary is
this every where? Even among those that profess religion, The greatest and
chiefest End and Aim of their prayers, is to counsel and direct God. Nay,
though ye will not own these things, yet if these things be examined to the
bottom, this is the plain English, he has done this contrary to my will, and
thou do not govern well in this, thou do not rule well in that; thou
might have taken My counsel, at such time, and in such a thing: this is the
language and the plain English of many, yea of most of your prayers, Even of
great Professors.

Oh poor Nothings! poor Grasshoppers! Thus to lift up your selves against Him,
who is so transcendently Wise, Holy and good! Thou think much If thy servant
that is (as it were) thy Equal, in some regards, the same flesh and blood with
thee, That he should contend and censure thy Actions: And Seems this A small
thing in your eyes, to control, and Direct, and Censure, the Wisdom of the
Almighty? Oh Beloved! All things of this nature express Hatred of God.

Let me tell you one thing, there is no man that when he looks upon All
providence round about him, within him, and without him, Above him and below
him, Mar 7. 7. 37.
that cannot say from his heart He has done all things well I say if he cannot
in every thing set this down for a Maxim and a firm undeniable truth, that he
has done all things well, very well, Else he cannot from his heart always and
in Every thing give thanks, Ephesians. 5. 20.
as the Apostle commands, A true resigned man can say freely and heartily, He
has done All thing well; In taking away my friends from me, In removing my
dear wife: He has done All things well, In taking away my health, In taking
away my good name. And if so, If he have done A^^ things well, nay all things
so much for the best, as the very wisdom of a God could do; then why art thou
displeased with him? why do thou once dare to lift up One murmuring thought
against Him? thou prayest daily, thy will be done, or at least should do so:
why then do thou Repine when his will is done, either toward thee O thine,
or in the world, or to his own people, or to the Church of God, or to the
Enemies of God?

But beloved, I well know what your manner is, to excuse All, under dainty,
fine, mincing terms, and call it the infirmity of the flesh, and your weakness,
when indeed it is no less then Rebellion, 1 Samuel 15. 23.
and as the sin of witchcraft (as Samuel told Sau^) when you take little notice
of this High Crime, and High treason against the Most High: yet you pass it by,
and make light of it, as Saul did; when as in plainterms, it is no less then
the renouncing o^ God, Ver. 26.
Rejecting him and his Government. And i^ you were in His place, you think you
would do otherwise in this thing and in that.

Oh poor Drop! why contendest thou with thy Maker? Who shall set him A Rule?
will thou Sit above him, and Rule him according to thy mind? will thou give
Laws to the Almighty? Oh tremble before him Ye Earthen Pitchers, ye poor Dust
of the balance; tremble before him, the whole earth: and let them not dare
thus presumptuously to strive with thtir Maker, who is able for One of these
thoughts to undo thee, and it is his infinite mercy he pasheth thee not to
nothing.

Oh! Isa. 40. 15.
learn, learn, Poor Dust of the balance, and poor Drop of a Bucket, to be
pleased with whatever he does; whether he pleases thee or pleases thee not, be
tho^ ple^sed with him. If he drives down The Banks before him, like a mighty
Ocean; if he Rend the Rocks, and overwhelm the Mountains: if he make the Sea
Roar, Psalm 46. 2, 3.
and the whole earth to Shoot for fear: learn we To tremble before him, and be
Afraid to withstand him, lest he ^onsume thee, and bring thee to nothing. Learn
to be ruled and guided by His wisdom; Learn of faithful Abraham to obey God,
Learn to deny thine own will, and to take up his Cross Readily, and follow him.

As Abraham, when God had made him Rich, and he was settled in U^ of the
Chaldees; God, Of A sudden Bids him Leave All and follow him: he presently
obeyed and went: Genesis 12. 1.
But whither must he go? Whither I shall show thee: He told him not whither,
no: he inquires not what conveniences and accommodation the country had
whirher he was to go: Heb. 11. 8. 9.
but this was all, Follow me; Even Any where, where God shall show thee, thou
should willingly go; if he bid thee leave Health, that thou leave it
willingly; and if he will have thee go with him into sickness, that thou go
with him willingly; if he lead thee into any condition, yea, even into the vale
of tears, as David says, Psalm 23. 4.
and into the shadow of death, that thou go with him readily and cheerfully:
And so likewise consider Abraham in the sacrificing his only son, Genesis 22. 2,
3. etc.
How readily he did it, and consulted not with flesh and blood.

For consider, if it be Gods will that thou shall go this way, Thou must go it:
Why will thou do that unwillingly, which thou must do?

Again, in the seventh Commandment, with Moses, he that did not commit Actual
adultery with a woman, was not guilty of the b^each of this Commandment: And
our Savior goes further, In inte^p^eting the very letter, Mat. 5. 28.
He that lusts after a woman in his heart, has committed adultery already: But
the spirituality of this Commandment is, Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
Take heed of spiritual Adultery: Take heed of turning Aside from the Creator,
and going a Whoring after the creatures, to set thy affections on any creature
above the Lord God Almighty, and not to love Him withal thy mind, with all thy
might, and with all thy heart: To set them upon any thing below God, Thou have
therein played the Adulterer in the highest degree.

And this is that Adultery set out in the 7. of the Proverbs, Prove. 7.
of the strumpet and the simple young man, Void of understanding: She had
Attired her self like an Harlot, and she was subtle in heart, and she caught
him and kissed him, with an impudent face; And tells him, How she had decked her
bed with tapestry, and perfumed her bed: Come let us take our fill of love
until the morning: And with much fair speeches she caused him to yield, and her
flattering lips forced him: But says the Holy Ghost, He goes after her: but
it is as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks; till a dart
strike through his liver, And he hastes as a bird to the snare, and knows
not that it is for his life: This is the lette^, But yet All this is chiefly,
To set out to us, that all the sons of men are, This simple Young man; and that
the beauty of the creatures woes us to go a whoring after them: they Court us,
as she did the young man, and tell us, What pleasure and delights we shall
have, if we will follow them; and by this means, the spirit of man is defiled,
and goes a whoring from the Lord.

All those excellencies and beauties in the creatures, should be, As so many
Beams from the sun, to draw up and fix our eyes upon the Sun it Self; but we
Are like PENELOPES Suitors; Many hearing of Her admirable and incomparable
Beauty and Comeliness, Attempted to come to her, but few or none ever came at
Her; For, She had many Fair Damsels attending Her, to Conduct Her lovers to
her, which were so fair and Amiable, that they thought none so fair as they,
and so fell in love with them, and never came at The Mistress of All Beauty, of
whom the Handmaids were but shadows: All which is a lively emblem of God and
man; God is compassed about with various and Beautiful Creatures, which should
only serve to lead us, and to bid us look higher then them. And though we all
pretend, To aim at God, at perfect bliss and happiness, yet How Few Attain to
him? How many fall short, And by the way they are wholly taken up with the
creatures, His Handmaids, and thereby their souls are caught As a bird in a
snare, And they know not That it is for their lives? But yet know the creature
may be loved and used, so we could but use it rightly, and love it r^ghtly; but
that is very hard to do: 1 Cor. 7. 29, etc.
if we could use it, and love it, as if we used it not, or loved it not, As not
appropriating it to our selves, And always being ready to leave it, willingly,
and freely; so that thou suffer No Rending, No Tearing in thy soul, to part
with it; and using it so, thou usest it for God, and in God, and to Ends
appointed by God.

Then for the eighth Commandment: Every one will be ready to justify
themselves from theft; That is a poor, base, beggarly sin: But as I said, I say
still, the outward part of this Commandment, and so of the rest, you may keep
exactly: It is the easiest part of all; The Outward man may keep it without any
Divine or spiritual assistance: Every natural man may attain The keeping of
them According to the letter; and yet, They are deeply guilty of the spiritual
breach thereof: For there is a spiritual Theft; and besides, you know the
external part of this Commandment, and so of others, God can, and has
dispensed withal: but Never did nor Never will dispense with the Spiritual
part: He gave Abraham a Command to kill his son; Genesis 22. 2.
and had not he Really intended it h^ had sinned: And God commanded the
Israelite to rob the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 35.
to borrow their Jewels of silver, and gold, and raiment, and to spoil the
Egyptians; but never did he dispense with any man, Nor never will, To rob His
God, to rob God of his honor and his praise; Will Any man Rob His God? Mal. 3.
8. Mal. 3. 8.
And therefore in all the Commandments, Content not thy self with the letter of
the Command; Because for all that, thou may go to hell: But if God shall
bring thee to ob^erve the marrow, the inside of the Commandment, This is done
by the power of God himself in thee: And he that can keep that, I dare assure
him, Psalm. 15. ult.
He shall never perish, neither in this world, nor in the world to come: For
the Spirit, is All in All,

And I may in brief touch at the spirituality of the ninth Commandment: For the
time is so far spent, and my own ability to speak, that I must leave the tenth
to some other time; And, But that I made haste, I would have spoken more
largely to some of the former; but according to that impulse of the spirit,
within at this present, you have had my thoughts: Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor: The letter of it, is against thy neighbor;
which I say still, must not be neglected, yet not rested in: The spirit of it
is, That we should not bear false witness of God: Thou professest thy self to
be a Christian, and a servant, A child to God, and that he is Thy Lord, Thy
master, Thy father, Thy God, Thou being one of his household, thou should
labor To Credit and Honor Him to whom thou belongest; To report to the world
in our lives and conversation, the Holiness and Purity of our God and our
father: Joshua 24. 19.
Because He is Holy and Pure, And loves righteousness and Hates iniquity. And
so all his servants ought to do, Thereby to bear True witness to the world of
our God; for else they will say, as the proverb is, Like servant, like Master,
like Child, like Father. If you live otherwise you break this Ninth Command,
And bear false witness to the world of thy Holy and Pure God.

In all these I have taken the more pains, that so you may see, that when you
have learned a Catechism, or the Bible by Heart, or that you are able to
answer, or speak to any point in Divinity, acording to the Letter, and the
Grammatical Sense, and have got The letter of it without Book, Nay, have gotten
the external part in your practice and conversation, yet you have not gotten
The Substance, The Life and the Marrow: you have but attained only The Shell
and the Husk, and not the Meat nor the Kernel.

So then, by this time I hope you are come to see, How this letter must be
struck, How this City Kiriathsepher must be smitten and taken, if we mean to
marry Achsah: and then, that is the way to make it unto us Debir, that is, The
Word; for it is never The word unto Us before: As you may see in the Verse
before my Text.

This City before it was smitten, it was called Kiriathsepher, The City of the
Letter: but when it was smitten and taken, then it was no longer Kiriathsepher,
The City of the Letter: but i^ was called Debir, The Word; for then it was the
word, and never before.

For this Book of the Bible, As it consists of Words Syllables, and Letters, Is
not the Word of God: It is not, nor cannot be, the Word of God, without the
Mind and Meaning, till it be smitten, till the shell be cracked: For, the Word
is A Spring shut up, Cant. 4. 12
a Fountain sealed: for as it is in my reading it, that reading it makes it not
the Word of God; only the reading makes them words: and they are not words as
they are written o^ p^inted, till one read them and make them words and
syllables: for in no Book whatsoever is there One word or syllable till they be
read, and that makes them words: And if a Book be written or printed in
English, Hebrew, or French, etc. It is the knowledge of him that reads makes
them words: For if an ignorant man look on them they are nothing: So the
Scriptures when they are read they are made words, yet still the mind and the
mystery lies hid, though the external sense be understood; And The Acquired,
Natural parts, will Reach This sense; but the true and Hidden Sense the Natural
man cannot come at, As the Apostle says: 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are foolishness
unto him: neither indeed can he, because they are spiritually discerned.

And besides, if the natural man should perceive the things of God, they are
riddles, they are foolishness to him; they are wisdom only to those that are
perfect; to those only that are immediately taught of God: so then it is
clear, this book of the Letter must not only be read, but Smitten by Othniel,
before you can find Gods Word. For Gods Word as it is his Word, is not for
every eye to read, but only for those to whom it is Given, as our Savior
says in another case, Mat. 13. 10, etc.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but to them it
is not given, because in seeing they see not, and in hearing hear not, neither
do they understand. They have not received power from on high to smite it, as
Moses the rock, to get out the pure water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding from the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22. 1. Rev. 22. 1.
It Is not that Water, or that sense that proceeds from the Universities, or any
the acquired parts or powers of Man, but it must be freely given out by God
himself, and seldom to the learned Scribes and Pharisees, or to the great
Princes of the World; but to the despised, to the Off-scourings to poor
Fishermen and the like; that the Creature might be convinced, that the power is
of God, and not in the wisdom of Men, as the Apostle expresses, 1 Cor. 2. 1
Cor. 2. 4.


For this book of the Bible is, But the Letter to the eye, and to the ear; But
Gods Word, that lies hid: There must be a word to the heart, And, the Heart of
stone must be removed, Rev. 3. 18.
and a Heart of flesh given. We must buy of him eye salve that we may see,
before we can be acquainted with Gods Word. Gods Word is not Ink and Paper
written or printed; but Gods Word is, as the Apostle says, Heb. 4. 12. Heb. 4.
12.
Quick and powerful, sharper then a two-edged sword. It is not the dull and
dead letter That gives Life, which we see by experience in most, even those
that think themselves Doctors and Teachers, and think they know all things: And
so indeed, to them, instead of being life and a quickening spirit, they are dead
and sluggish: And men may be full of Notions, and Literal knowledge, and yet
have no power. The Letter, it suffers men to be dead, idle, sluggish, as to the
Life of Regeneration and the power of godliness.

The Letter never binds The strong man, it never conquers the will, and a man's
Own Self; it never makes a man to deny the World, To rejoice in the Cross, To
sell all, and follow Christ. If the letters or the Grammatical sense were the
word of God, Christ would never have so often condemned, and expressed so many
woes against the Scribes and Pharisees: for, who took more pains in them then
they? who had them, or observed them outwardly, more exactly? and for That, The
people had them in High Honor and great Esteem: yet Christ He condemns all
their knowledge, 1 Cor. 2. 16.
learning, holiness, parts, etc. for they sought not after the mind of Christ
in them: if they had known the Word of God, they would have known him who was
The Word.

If the Literal Scriptures were the Word of God, why does the holy Ghost so
often say, He that has ears to hear let him hear? And why does the Prophet
Esaias say, Isa. 6. 9, 10
That hearing they may hear and not understand: and seeing they might see and
not perceive? make the heart of this people fat, their ears dull, and their
eyes heavy, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them: This is
spoken, not in regard of those that are ignorant, but of those that are very
knowing, and very much conceited of their much knowing; and yet their
knowledge, and gifts, and Precise Holiness according to the Letter, is but a
stumbling block and an occasion of their falling, death, and destruction; and
Thus to know all things, is but to be ignorant of all things: And God accounts
these knowing men among the number of those the world accounts The only
Profane; and he esteems them farther off the Kingdom of God, Then Thieves and
Harlots; and says, Mat^ 21. 31.
That these shall go into the Kingdom of Heaven before them: and therefore
Christ himself sooner conversed with Publicans and Harlots, and preferred them
still before them, as knowing there was more hope to work upon them, then upon
these Great, Conceited, puffed up Professors.

And therefore I have the more, and the larger insisted upon this that if it
were possible These men might come to know the Truth, and so themselves, that
they might be saved. Thus to understand the Scriptures, Luke 10. 42.
is that which the Scriptures call Eternal li^e; and That good part which Mary
has chosen; this is to ^at Christ, to believe, to put on the new Man, to be
regenerate, to be born again, to live to the Spirit, to be baptized, to receive
the Word, to be ingrafted into Christ, and the like. The other Carnal Knowers,
they reach none of these things, though they think they are possessed of them,
and enjoy them; but Even from this very knowledge and holiness they eat death;
and this is that forbidden tree of good and evil; From whence they Enquire much
after knowledge, and Aim to be Like God, and so live for ever: and this is
nothing but the Seed of the Serpent in our hearts, whereby these men much
admire themselves, Genesis 3.
and kiss their own hands; that is, they much set up their own wills, their own
wisdom, and their own carnal reason, and cover themselves with fig leaves, as
Adam did; whereby also they are come to that pass (that as I said before) they
are ready to teach God knowledge, and To bring God to School to them, and to
prescribe and direct him what he shall do in the world, and how he shall govern
according to their wills and their prayers.

The word of God is Pure, High, Holy, Heavenly, Powerful, Reviving, Quickening,
Spirituallizing, But the Letter is not only dead in all these regards: But
killing and destructive in that sense formerly expressed, If you live and dye
with this word; I mean, the letter of the word, and the Grammatical External
sense, which These men call the word of God: All is nothing, If you have it
exactly by heart, that you have it as ready at your fingers ends, to apply it
to all occasions, as the Devil himself: yet this can be no service of God, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
this is but bodily labor, and bodily exercise, as the Apostle calls it, which
profits nothing: this is but the flesh, this is but man's teaching; the Spirit
of it, The WORD of God [Debir] you never yet found: But yet as I said, let us
not say; If the Spirit be all, then what do we with the Letter? Let us then
cast it away: No, no, by no means; the letter is of use, to regulate the flesh,
and the outward man in bodily exercises: But I say, it reaches not the inward
man, and the heart. That must be, That bread which the Father gives; which
comes down from Heaven: Neither Moses, nor the knowledge of the whole Law, and
of all the Scriptures can give us That bread; as Christ says John 6. 32, 33.
John. 6. 32, 33.
Verily, verily, Moses gave them not that bread from heaven: but my Father
gives you the bread from heaven; for the bread of God is he which comes down
from heaven, and gives life to the world.

And besides, (as I said) As the spirit of a man you cannot have without the
body; Nor you cannot have the Oyster without the shell: so neither can you have
these mysteries, these Allegories, without the flesh, without the shell,
without Excrements; that is, without the letter of the word: for we being of a
dull, low, corpore^^ substance, must have these high, divine, sublime things
brought to us in such vessels, and represented by such things as we understand,
feel, hear and see, and so come to know them: We are not able to conceive of
the spiritual meaning, and Gods mind, without something represented and
p^oposed, suitable to our Element to our language, to our sphere, to our
condition: something bodily must be presented, that we may conceive of that
which is in the same proportion, done in us spiritually.

And therefore this is that I advise still, Be sure still, To maintain the
letter of the word Undefiled, Untouched, Uncorrupted: And let his tongue cleave
to, and for ever Rot in his mouth, That goes about to abrogate the Letter; for
without the letter you cannot have the Spirit: even as we cannot have Meat and
Nutriment, but you must have necessarily dung and excrements: and if you cast
away the Excrements, you cast away The Meat with it: Not that the Letter is
dung and excrement as of it self, or killing, or dead; but occasionally made
so, to us, and to all those, who crack it not, smite it not, and so suck not
life, but death from it.

Therefore it is said, My heart, or a Good heart, a Caleb must set us a work,
and an Othniel must smi^e it: for you see what fruits follow any other smiting:
The heart that seeks liberty to it self, it abuses the Scriptures, It comes in
privily, to spy out our liberty, that it may be an occasion to the flesh: I
say a Caleb must smite this City, and not a heart that seeks for liberty to
satisfy its own will and its own desires: for such Smiters there be too many,
that would cast away the Letter of the Word: They would have no Law to rule or
curb them: but this is not a good Hearts, A Calebs, or an Othniels smiting: But
to it, I say, viz. to this Good Heart, Let it smite the Letter and spare not:
nay, I counsel, ye, Take it, and Tear it, And Rend it all to pieces, as we do
meat; else ye get no nourishment; for in the Letter lies the nourishment hid:
there is no getting out the Nourishment and virtue, without we do, as it were,
Tear it with our teeth and Chew upon it, to get out all the virtue: As clean
Beasts Chew The Cud, and that by a power given from above: and the more we can
tear it and chew it in that sense, the more and the better nourishment it gives.

Nor do I bid you, do it as of your selves, by your own power, but by the
wisdom and power of God, who will enable you to find the Treasure, if you dig
for wisdom as for gold, Prove. 2. 4.
And search for it as for Hid Treasures. With a resolved heart, To dig for
truth, for truths sake, and not for self, and for sinister ends and advantages,
but out of love to truth; thus, I say, let a good heart use the Letter of the
word and spare not, Take it, Strike it, Smite it, Tear it all to pieces: not
because he hates the Letter; but as men do by meat, they tear it, champ, it,
chew it between their teeth, not because they hate meat, but because they would
get all the nourishment out they possibly can.

Beloved, in this manner Strike Kiriathsepher, In the Name of God, and the
Almighty prosper ye; Go on, and the Lord of heaven give you good success, that
he may enable you to get out Those pure waters of life, proceeding from the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb; That Hidden Manna that may nourish you to
Everlasting life; that ye may have that Treasure, that Pearl hid in the field,
that white stone, and that New Name, that ye may be enriched with gold, Psalm.
12. 6.
purified seven times, as David in that 12. Psalm says the Wo^d of God is: Do
you think, he means the Letter? No, no, but That thou may have That white
raiment, to cover they nakedness, and that eye salve to anoint thine eyes that
thou may see: then also art thou, Him that overcomes, to whom it shall be
given to sit with him in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21.
even as he also overcame and is set down in his Fathers Throne: Then shall ye
come to be married to Achsah, Calebs daughter; Then, shall Othniel, Gods fit
time or opportunity, give you possession of this City Kiriathsepher, that it
may be unto you, The Word of God: That the Vail being Rent, you may look within
and see the glory of the Holy of Holies; and that you may behold The Beauty of
the Lord, and may visit His Temple, and there fall down and worship, and desire
there to be for ever and for ever, AMEN.

Shadows vanishing, SOME Rays of Glory appearing.
The two last SERMONS on JOSH. 15. v. 16, 17.
And Cale^ said, he that smites Kiriathsepher, and takes it, to him will I
give Achsah my daughter to wife. And Othniel the son of Kenaz the brother of
Caleb took it, and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
THE last Sabbath I told you that part of this Chapter was as the One Cher^b
and that in 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.
was as the other Cherub: which, as the two Cherubims looked directly face to
face to each other, so does this Chapter look forward to that, and that turns
it self and looks face to face upon this; that is, the One is the
interpretation of the Other* and you may remember, as a Prolog^e to our Text,
we gave you a brief Epitome of the History of Moses his sending the twelve
Spies to discover and view the Land of Canaan, whereof Joshua and Caleb were
two of the twelve: and they bring news of the goodness of the Land with the
other Ten, which Ten, All but Caleb and Joshua, they brought up an Evil report,
though they All confessed the Land was Excellent and good, and abounded in
plenty of all things, Numb. 13. 27.
flowing with milk and honey: yet they said it was impossible to get it, or
conquer it: for the men were mighty, sons of Anack, Giants, and the walls Thick
and high: The people hearing this, began to murmur: Then Caleb and Joshua
standing up, they clear the slander, and encourage the people; and for this
confidence and says of theirs, they two only entered the Land; all the rest,
being about Six hundred thousand that murmured, died in the Wilderness, and not
one entered the Land.

And as we related the History, we raised some observations, and endeavored to
bring the History home to our selves, and showed how these things were daily in
fulfilling spiritually and really within us. Then we came to our Text, where I
also told you, that this Text as I have now read it, It is Hebrew; and reading
it but as it is printed, is still Hebrew.

But (as I then told you) we may not, nor will not deny the Truth of the
History and of the Letter; but we must take heed we rest not in the Story and
go no further: for the Word of God Endures for ever; 1 Pet. 1. 25
There is a secret in the whole Letter of the Word which lasts to Eternity;
which is accomplished not only in that time, and of that man of whom it is
written; but fulfilled as well and as Really, in all times, in all ages, in all
men ever after and before: As Ambrose said of Ahab and Nabal, 1 Kings 21.
These Histories are old in time, but new in practice; for there are many such
persecuting Ahabs, and many such churlish Nabals. So may I say of this History
and the rest of the Scriptures: Old in time, but ordinary in use: To this very
day, Caleb proclaims, Whosoever shall smite Kiriathsepher and take it, he shall
have Achsah his daughter to wife. This was done Once in the Letter, but Ever
doing in the Spirit; for the world of God lasts for ever, Ps. 117. 2.
as David says, Thy Word O Lord endures for ever; Often in the 119. Psalm and
elsewhere. They are such things as not only instruct one age, one season, but
every age and every season that follow it: The meaning and the mind of God we
must look at, 1 Timothy 4. 1 John 6. 63.
and not to the bare History: hear what the Apostle Paul says, Bodily exercise
profits nothing; or rather hear it from our Saviors own mouth: The flesh
profits nothing, but the Spirit gives life.

Caleb here signifies A good (...) or the City of the (...), which is to be
smitten; and he that does So shall marry Achsah, which signifies The Rending or
the Tearing of the Vail, and so by that means Kiriathsepher, the City of the
Letter, s^all be made unto us Debir, the Word. So that if you put them
together, you must read it thus in English

And A good Heart said, Psalm. 91, 1.
He That smites the City of the Letter, and takes it, to him will I give the
rending of the vail asunder: Psalm. 91. 1.
and he shall pass into my holy place, Psalm 31. 20.
and enter into my secret Pavilion, or into my Tabernacle (he shall behold and
enjoy the glory of the Holy of Holies) as it is promised in that 15. Psalm.
This is that S. John wept sore for, when the Angel (...) proclamation in Rev.
5. Rev. 5.
with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to loose the seven
seals thereof? and no man in heaven or earth was able to open the book or look
therein: but at length it was revealed, that the lion of the Tribe of Judah,
the root of David, had prevailed to open the book and loose the seals.

The Letter is not this sealed book; for every one reads that: humane abilities
will reach the Letter and the Grammatical sense. The Letter is not the Tree of
Life, nor the Waters of Life which god promises to give unto us. The Letter is
not the Secret Place of the Most High. Every unclean Beast may hear, and read
therein, and drink of these waters: But He that has the word of God shall live
for over. How many are and have been exercised constantly in That, viz. in the
Letter, and yet not live, but perish for ever? Many thousands have taken great
pains, and writ many Volumes, and preached many Sermons, and yet never reached
This Living for ever: many have read it, heard it, preached it, and therein have
thought they have done God good service, and expect to enter, and shall say,
Lord open to us; and yet Christ shall say to them, Depart ye workers of
iniquity: For by them the City of the Letter was never smitten and taken: but
he that shall be admitted to come into this Sanctuary, and to eat of this
Manna, he shall find and say, from a true and feeling sense thereof, This is
heavenly Manna indeed; I find these are waters of life indeed; for I find they
give life: to read, hear, and pray, and the like, they give no life; they are
no service to God, without the life and power, but kill and slay those souls
that rest therein, as most men do.

The words, as I told you, divide themselves into two parts, Onus and honos;
The burden, he that strikes or smites Kiriathsepher, and takes it. And the
honor or reward, to him that so does, He shall have Achsah to wife: but see
here, it must be a Good heart must do it, not a heart that seeks liberty to the
flesh, To make the knowledge of Christ as a more easy way to sinning, to
facilitate and encourage them to please the flesh. No, no, my Text says it
must be a Caleb, a good Heart, such a Heart as seeks not rest in sinning: but
such a heart as seeks its Rest only in God; such a heart as hungers and
thirsts after God, Such a one as labors with all his soul night and day, and
never can be at Rest in any thing below God. And then as it follows here,
Othniel the Lords fit opportunity, or, in his good time^ he struck it, and took
it.

Concerning Onus, the burden, I intimated, that it is not sufficient To Read
the Scriptures; No though we could say all the Bible without Book, and
understand it according to the Letter, It were nothing to salvation: If they
would read the whole Old and New Testament over every year, as I have known
some have made it their task, yea, and made it their boast; nay, I say more, If
it were possible they could read it All over every day in the year, yet this
were nothing, for the Devil can do as much; what man can come near him in
bringing out Scripture upon all occasions?

As the flesh of Christ, Till it was broken and his precious side Pierced, and
His Blood shed, there was no profit could redound to us, as he himself said,
Mat. 26. 26.
This is my body which is broken for you: this Letter of the Scriptures is As
the body of Christ; till this side of his be Pierced, till this Letter be
broken, till this Rock be smitten, there is no water for us, Till the Lord give
it down from Heaven there is no Manna, no bread for us; else we may live and
dye with the Scriptures, and yet hunger, and starve and dye: but this body
being once broken, and this Rock smitten, and this Side pierced, then we shall
find a fountain of living waters springing up to eternal life, and precious
blood gush out, and hidden Manna to nourish us, so as we can never dye nor
perish, Psalm. 15.
neither in this world nor in the world to come. As you know, bread is not food
till it be broken; whole bread and whole meat goes into the body, and through
the body into the draught, and yields no nutriment to the body; The
Nourishment, and the life, and the spirit of it remains untoucht: but if it be
broken and chewed, then the stomach separates the One and the Other, The Virtue
and the Excrement, which divides and conveys to each way its part. Truth it is
many toss and tumble the Letter, and have it much in their mouths, and roll it
up and down; but never crack it, never break it, though they seem so to do, and
make you believe they expound it, and give you the sense and the virtue: yet
how shallow, how literal, how humane, how low, how sensual and carnal do they
make the Word to be? even your Rabbis, your Doctors, your great Scholars;
Which shows, If that God himself, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, If the
Root of David do not open the Seals, it is not all the learning, or all the
Universities in the world can help us to the Mystery And the Mind of Christ, 1
Cor. 2. 16.
as the Apostle calls it. Truth is, The worst of men, wicked men, they feed but
upon husks, upon Excrements, upon the Letter, and keep a great stir and a great
noise about that; they indeed champ that in their mouths, but they let the
nourishment, the virtue, and the marrow escape; Luke 15.
They eat not of the childrens bread, that is not for dogs, as our Lord says
to the woman of Canaan. Mat. 15. 26.
As in Luke 15. in the History of the Prodigal, there wicked men, the worst of
men, Carnal men, they are there compared unto Swine, because that any trash,
any Excrement or the refuse of any thing will serve their turn; they feed upon
Husks, and it agrees well enough to their stomachs; that satisfies, and they
neither desire nor know any better food: and as their meat is, so are they,
carnal and fleshly, and earthly: Nay they cannot relish any thing Higher; That
which is spiritual, heavenly, and divine, and like God, That they turn at, and
quarrel at, because it is out of their Element. And all because The word of
God, the Bread of God they cannot come at, The book is still sealed; Heb. 5. 14.
they have not their senses exercised to discern between good and evil, between
the precious and the vile: The word is not in them Aningrafted word, turning
the stock into its own nature, they are not converted, molded into the word,
that so it may be able to save their souls, James 1. 21.
as the Apostle says: they get no good by the meat they eat, they feed upon
Husks, and not upon the FATTED Calf, Luke 15. 23. Luke 15. 13.
Nor on thefeast of fat thingsful of marrow, nor of The wine on the lees well
refined, Esaias 25. 6. Isa. 25. 6.
Therefore it is no strange thing that they profit not to salvation: because
they champ only The Letter of the Word, and feed upon Husks, and can get no
nourishment from it: and no marvel, for it can give none. I marvel much how
such men can hope for Heaven, or hope for the Gift, and the Reward here spoken
of that never eat any thing but the Letter of the word: That only do as the
Jews did, only desire but to touch Christ's outward Garments, and to see His
Body, or to see his external miracles on others, but they touch not HIM, not
his person: His miracles are not wrought in themselves; they touch him not as
the woman did with the bloody-issue; Mat. 9. 20.
she touched not only his garments, but touched him inwardly, she got virtue
from him: for Christ as soon as she had touched him, asked when all the people
pressed him, Who touched me,? Peter wonders and asks him, Luke 8. 45.
Do thou ask who touched thee, when there have so many hundreds touched thee?
the whole multitude presses thee.

By this you may see what I mean; Christ knew he was not only Outwardly
touched, as multitudes do; all that make any profession of Christ do that: but
he was touched inwardly, which fetched Virtue and nourishment from him. For all
your great professions and running after Christ in much hearing, reading, and
praying, etc. Let me tell you, He is sen^ble when ye touch him; you may do all
these things constantly, all your life, and yet never touch him; He can feel
when virtue goes out of him: For we all in the flesh and in the letter, and
acco^ding to carnal men, may be wise in carnal things; According to men, and
the rudiments of the wo^ld and for external government, and the like. And
herein we touch Christ but as the Jews did, only see and touch His body, but
none gets Strength and Marrow and Life from him.

Indeed they handled Christ when they crucified him; and they handled him Hard:
but who once I say handles him as the woman, to get virtue from him? for a man
may read the letter diligently, gather his family together duly every day,
morning, noon, and night; read it and converse of it, and teach it to them: but
may not Christ ask for all this pressing about him, who has touched me? To
what end is all this ye do? what good do ye? what meat, what marrow get ye?
unless withal ye touch Christ inwardly, what does all Touching do you good?
this is but to touch Christ's body, this is but to touch the Letter, this is but
the Shel.

As the Disciples going to Ema^s, Luke 14. 15.
They read and conferred, but they could not understand till Christ came: for
all they had been brought up in the Family, and in the House of Christ, in the
School of Christ, always hearing and receiving at the feet of Christ, yet they
were ignorant of the Mystery and the Spirit.

The Letter of the Scripture is but the Outward Court of the Tabernacle, where
all the people may be admitted: Where Beasts, clean and unclean, come and are
sacrificed. Heb. 9. 7, etc.
And there was also the inward Court, whither came the Priests; and there were
only Outward Ordinances, and Laws for Discipline, and Outward worship. But
there was also the Sanctum Sanctorum, where only entered the High priest, and
that but once a year. The Letter is but this outward Court, or the Priests
Court at most, where were nothing but Outward duties of preaching and
sacrificing, of reading, hearing, and praying, and the like: but within, in the
Sanctum Sanctorum, There is the hidden Manna: there is that which all the Other
things Without did but represent: for they were not the things themselves:
there only is to be found Debir, the word; There is that which is quick and
powerful, mighty in operation, Heb. 4. 12.
Sharper then any two-edged sword, dividing between the bones and the marrow,
and is the discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

All the former things were but cold, low, dead things; Here is the Life, here
is the Quickening, the Spirit it self: Ioh. 6. 63.
There you shall find That word, that sword of Jonathan which never Returns in
vain. In this regard the Letter always returns in vain. Thou say thou
Read it in the Church, and in thy family twice a day, and thou delightest to
be exercised therein, and to see that others do so; Thou do well, it is good
in its place: but what good does it convey to thy soul? what refreshment and
nourishment do thou find by this thou so delightest in, and so boastest of?
where is the Power that the word has abroad among these kind of men that seem
so much to throng after Jesus Christ? what manner of people are these, that so
champ the Letter between their teeth and Troul it on their tongues? what are
they in their lives? have they got any virtue from Christ by being so
conversant with him? are they transformed and made new Ceratures? do they live
the inward and spiritual life of the Word? are they dead to the world, and the
world to them? does Christ's life shine in them and by them, so that they live
not any longer in themselves? are they fetched off their own bottoms, and
ingrafted into Christ? or rather do not They altogether live, and Christ is
dead in them? do they feed upon any thing but Husks, upon the Letter of the
word, and upon the world, and upon creatures? And there they have their chief
Life, hope and dependence; for had they new diet, they would become new men: by
the men you may guess at their meat.

As, Take a man that has been hard kept, with ill fare, ill diet, and want of
clothes, his very countenance will show it: but let him come to better keeping,
good nourishing diet, and warm clothes, and you shall see his Complexion and
his flesh come again, and his whole body and countenance will be more white,
smooth and sightly; So, He that feeds upon the Life and Marrow of this Word,
Oh! He is cle^n another man then he was before: the time was that he lived like
a swine, eat, and fed, and fared like a swine walked like a swine, spoke like a
swine, conversed like a swine; and all this, because he fed and fared like a
swine: he lived upon Husks, the Letter of the Word, without the Spirit and the
MARROW, And that would suffer them to follow the World, To wallow in the
pleasures, the profits, the honors thereof: these and the like, these he fed
upon and these relished with him, and nothing else but such like Husks and
Excrements, and Altogether carnal things, was his meat and his delight.

Will not new food alter all, even the whole man? Judge therefore Brethren,
whether we may not call The Letter of this blessed, wholesome and Heavenly Book,
(which within it contains the Heavenly Manna and Angels food) any other but the
Husks, To such men; Whether it be any thing else to these men but the City of
the Letter, Joh. 6. 63.
the Book sealed, The Fleshly and bodily exercise, which profits them
nothing; It is not yet Debir to them: its true, they call it the Word of God,
Jer. 7. 4.
as the Jews did, Oh! the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: so they
call it the Word, the word: I by all means it is The Word of God, but you see, it
is not the Word to them, for where is the Nourishment they get from it? If they
fed upon the Life and Marrow, Alas to day, How would it Alter their Lives and
their Looks and reform their ways, and make them Look like Christians, doing
the works of Christians. But, they smooth themselves up with Crying The Temple
of the Lord, and The Temple of the Lord, with a mere outside profession of
godliness, But the Prophet Tells them there, They were deceived, For, says he,
The Temple of the Lord Are these. If ye Thoroughly amend your ways and your
doings, If ye thoroughly exercise Judgment between man and man, etc. But, will
you steal, and murder, and lie, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
Incense to Baal, and serve other gods, and oppress the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, etc. and then come and stand before me, in my House
which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered, what for? To do All
these Abominations; Is This House which is Called by my Name, become A House of
Thieves and a Den of Robbers?

Therefore I charge you in the name of God, and as ever ye hope for heaven, or
think to see Gods face, learn, yet I know it is not in your power to learn; but
this I say, To show what you should be, and what you must be if ever you enter
into the Kingdom of God: learn henceforward I say, Not to keep this Book in
your houses only, and in your heads; But to BREAK the body of Christ, that you
may eat of the True bread; says our Lord, This is my body which is BROKEN for
you. Learn to smite the rock, that you may get the pure water of life, running
from under the Throne of God and the Lamb, In the new Jerusalem; and not
outwardly to touch it only; for that will do thee no more good then if thou
had Touched the body of Christ when he was upon earth: yet many desired to
see him, and rejoiced to see him, and To converse with him, and Touch him; and
so it is now, and always has been in all ages with most Professors in regard
of the Letter and Externals of the Word: Christ's body does us no good, except
his body be broken, and his blood shed for us. Neither will the water you draw
out of the Letter do you any more good, for your souls, then that water the
woman of Samaria drew out of Jacobs well, And He that drinks of that, shall
Thirst again: But He that drinks of the Water that Christ gives, He shall
never Thirst, and It shall be IN HIM An Everlasting Well of water, Springing up
to Everlasting Life.

Let us Ministers and All others learn Rightly to divide the word of truth, and
not take the Outside alone, but Outside and Inside together: and then you shall
find what it is, To marry Achsah, and to have The Rending of the Vail. What it
is to have The Upper Springs And the Nether Springs given you, as your JOINTURE.

Let no man for Any thing that I have said, think to undervalue the Letter, and
to trample it underfoot as Excrements and Profane: For though this be The
Shell, The Outside, yet it is the Shell and it is the Outside: but this is that
I still say, There is something within of more price, of greater value; Thus
far prize it, In that God has (by this means) given us the Kernel: In the
Shell is the kernel to be found, and without the shell ye cannot have the
kernel: As we can never see LIFE, but we must see it in a mortal thing That
lives; so, The Ever blessed Sweet and eternal Truth, is in the Letter Hid, as
life is in Accidents, and as fire in a thing fired; for True Fire, The Element
of Fire ye can never see: And Truth is as an Oyster in the shell, fast shut up,
which shell must be forced open, before you can have the meat: And he that does
thus by the letter, shall have the meat, the vail Rent for him; he shall have
the priveledge to pry into the secrets of my God, and he shall enter into his
High and Holy place.

Now, I humbly beseech God Almighty, that your eyes may be opened, to behold
Those M^steries that are Within. Paul, that blessed High-Flowen, self-denied
Apostle, He being brought to this, 1 Cor. 12. 4.
he not only confessed he saw things unutterable, unspeakable, so that he was so
ravished therewith: he knew not whether He was in the body or no: but also,
this was another effect in him of the sight of these things; Then says he, I
will henceforth know no man after the flesh: Why? because that was nothing;
many glory in the flesh, in the letter, in that they have seen the body of
Christ, That they have the Bible in daily use. As if he should say, away now
with all these poor empty things; 2 Cor. 5. 16.
Henceforth I will know no man after the flesh, no, though I had seen the Lord
Christ after the flesh: he would (now he was come to this condition) know
nothing after the flesh no more: no, he went so far, as to say, that in that
case he valued not the very body of Jesus Christ; which was a very High and A
strange word: Men after the flesh And after the Letter judge it no better then
blasphemy, and would say so, but that its written in the Bible; and had many
that profess themselves Teachers, and knowing men, heard Paul say so, not
knowing him to be as he was, they would not have been able To comprehend Paul's
reach, but All their voices would have gone clear. To have burnt him for an
Heretic, (And Christ himself also) For, many of whose actions were such they
would have cried, Away with him, Cruc^^ie ^im, Crucify Him, its not fit he
should live; And, With those men, which Live upon the shadow and content
themselves with Shells and Husks, There is no peace to be had with them, except
ye make the Substance Vail to their Shadows, And the True God to stoop to
their Idol Baal; Otherwise, They are like Saul, Before He was converted, Acts
9. 1. Act. 9. 1.
Exceedingly Mad against them, like Enraged Mad Bulls, and Breathing out
Threatening and Slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, And are still
seeking to the High Priests and the powers of the Earth, to assist them with
Commissions To make Havoc of the Church. But Oh! that the Lord would
graciously Shine Round about them, And smite them to the earth, Causing them to
hear That voice, Why, Why persecutest Thou Me? It is Hard for thee to Kick
against the Pricks.

But St. Paul, ^e was now come to those things. of which he knew and found;
(...) 16. 17.
Christ His bod was but A shadow; He now possessed the (...) let the shadow go:
And if men wo^ld never sleigh the Shadow, or the Letter, or the Shell, Till the
did it on the same ground the Apos^le did (...) instead of blaming them, I
should Highly commend them: But this is that which is too common in these
days, they throw away the shadow and the shell too soon; they throw away the
Letter and Ordinances upon a mere supposition (...) they are in S. Paul's
condition: and this is the very ground of the Error of Many in these days and
therefore I caution hence (...) much, and charge you Not to throw away the
Letter, no^ slight the body of Christ, in the least ex^ep^ inrelation to the
Spirit, the Life, and the Substance Only comparatively, And you as come Really
(...) enjoy these things, not to cast them quite (...) as I said before, but
not to rest in them; (...) the Handmaid before the Mistress, or the (...)
before the Marrow, or the Casket before the JEWEL, or the ^ield before the
PEARL. Le no man (says the Apostle) Judge you in Meats (...) Drinks, or in
respect of an Holy day, New (...) of The Sabbath days, which are shadows of
Thing To come, But, the Body is Christ.

For beloved, Christ's body was Symbolical (...) well as his actions; they all
held (...) that we might not rest in them: b^t this is (...) flesh in us is
ready to abuse to our own (...) and condemnation: The cunning politic Devil in
us, when he cannot hold us in profaneness, by the Chains of ignorance, then he
labors to do it by the Chains of knowledge: Says he in us, if the letter be a
shadow, and nothing, then we will neglect it, we will throw it away, there is
nothing now to be done, we will live as we list, we Owe No duties to God or
man, we will please our selves, and deny our selves nothing; for we are gotten
above Word, Ordinances, Sacraments, Worships, and all.

Oh Beloved, these are the Devils strongest Chains of all: These Chains of
Knowledge, to abuse the highest liberty, and glory of a Christian, to the
Idleness and Luxuriousness of the flesh: He that is taken in These Chains, a
thousand to one if he ever get out; as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 26.
There is after this no more Sacrifice for sins; such will hardly ever recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil; and as he expresses it in Heb. 6.
Heb. 6. 4, etc.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away, it
is impossible to renew them again to repentance: and he so goes on, and
explains it by a similitude; For the earth which drinks in the rain which
comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them for whom it is
dressed, receives blessing from God; else it bears thorns and briars, and is
rejected, and is ^igh unto cursing, and in the end to be burned: This caution I
thought good to mind you of, that in taking you off from Resting on these
things, that you do not quite slight them, nor think your selves. come to the
Spirit, when ye have scarce Attained The letter and Outside.

But as I was saying, Christ's body and his actions were symbolical; for though
he healed the lame, and cured the deaf, and raised the dead, and the like, yet
this was not the Substance, nor the End of his coming; for he by them shadowed
out to us what he does internally in our souls: Heb. 13. 8.
For Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: He did then
Those actions, of curing the blind, cleansing the lepers, casting out devils,
and the rest: So, he does the same still; as David says, Psalm. 103. Psalm. 103.
2, 3, 4.
Praise the Lord, O my soul, which cures all thy diseases, and heals al thy
infirmities; which redeemeth our lives from destruction, and crowns us daily
with loving kindnesses and tender mercies: These are the diseases Christ cures
daily; and so cures, that they never mortally fall sick again: Those he cured
then, they might fall to the same diseases again, or worse it may be; and
besides, that curing them saved them not from death, as this curing does. The
young man that was raised from death, dyed again; and Lazarus dyed again; but
those he cures in soul, they are cured for ever, them he quickens for ever,
them he so raises from death, that they die no more.

As old Simeon said of him, Luke 2. 34. Luke 2. 34.
That he was for the fall and rising again of many in Israel: and he was for a
sign which shall be spoken against: He is for a sign in the flesh, and in his
Humane nature, of what he did from the beginning, and of what he is still in
doing: He himself, in the body, in his humanity, and All his actions, were
typical. These things I often represent to you, because we are Backward to
re^eive them, we are loath to turn our eyes inward, in hearing and reading the
Scriptures, To see all those things fulfilled in our selves; Nay, we do not yet
feel and believe, That we are those that Christ came to cure; that we are the
dumb, and the deaf, the halt, and the blind: Little do we think that Devils are
to be cast out of us: but those whom Christ has cured, they are able to see
really that they are The men that Christ then by them represented: They see,
when they read of the Jews crucifying of the Lord of life, of their cruel
whipping, mocking, etc. crowning him with thorn^, and the like, they can say to
themselves, as Nathan said to David, when by a parable he had represented his
sin; 2 Samuel 12. 7.
says he, (and so can this man say to himself,) Thou art the man: And so
likewise in all his other actions.

Far be it from any one to think, that to heal those External diseases, was the
End of his coming. But thus think; Did he arise from death to life? he does the
same daily in our souls: Did he heal the lame, and cast out Devils then? He
does the same in our souls; And wherever he does them, he does them so as they
shall never be Blind more, never Dumb more, never Deaf more, the devil shall
never possess thee more: The whole letter of the word is but Christ's Body and
therefore we must not be content with that and rest in that: When once we have
the Substance of Christ's actions, there is no more use o^ the signs: we must
labor to find out the Truth that is hid in this shell, and to find the
treasure, the pearl that is hid in this field, seek for THE WORD, Joh. 17. 17
as our Savior prays, Father sanctify them with thy truth, Thy WORD is
Truth. Mos^ men hen^e think, when they read the letter of the word, they think
they read Gods word: No no, this is not the truth, that Christ calls truth; for
he himself is the Word, the Truth, and the Life* He is the meat and the marrow,
of which that is but the Bone and the shell: Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think to have eternal life, for they testify of me: I am the substance, I
am the SOUL of them; And, they do but testify of Me; they are not the life the
soul: Yet I prize the letter as high as any man, but I must not prefer the
Handmaid before the Mistress.

Yet much ado there has been among many men about this Letter of the word, who
pretend to know much in Gods word, as if they knew whatever were to be known:
They are gone so far, and are come to such perfection (as they think) that they
can resolve any point in Divinity, give the interpretation of any place of
Scripture; and many large voluminous works have been published to the world,
and filled it full of their Expositions; but God knows how many of them have
kept a deal ado, and much blustering, to little purpose* And in our days, and
in our Nation, what talk is there everywhere of Gods word, when indeed and in
truth most men are ignorant of Gods word? and all is, because they take these
Literal, black letters to be The word of God: you are deceived; Is it The Word
of God, because it is English, or Latin, or Greek, or Hebrew? can we tell
whether ever God spoke in any of these languages? or if he did, These Letters
cannot be The word of God: If any way, The word be taken in vain, it is this
way, when men think God speaks to them, And they hear him when they read the
letter: You are deceived in this, The letter does but bear Witness to the
truth; Christ is the Truth, and the letter gives Testimony to him: See what the
Evangelist says The Word is, Joh. 1. Joh. 1. 1.
In the beginning was the word (Bibleswere not then) and the word was God; This
is That Word, so magnified both in the old and new Testament, To which, all
their Sacrifices and Prophesies pointed to, in shadows; but the Substance of
them is Christ; as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. Heb. 10.
The Law is but a Shadow of good things to come: But Christ he is The Word, He
is The Truth, He is those good things promised throughout All the Scriptures.
The letter is but the Shadow, the Signs; the BODY and Substance is Jesus
Christ.

And if it be so, then let me say thus much more to you, Never any man ever yet
Saw the Truth, nor ever any man Heard the truth, nor ever read the truth: Those
that only read the Letter, they are ignorant of the word; for the truth is the
word, and the word is the Spirit: It is the Spirit That discerns the word
through the letter, and it is the Spirit that applies it, where ever it works;
it is the Spirit only that knows the truth, And it is the Spirit only, that
fructifies and thrives by it and lives in it. The word heard or read, is but
the Bark, the Outside, the Sheath, the Lanthorn: but the Sap, the Life, the
Sword, the Light, that is within: And this is, Only Christ Co-Essential with
the Father: This is that word which the Scripture speaks of, which is able to
make the man of God perfect; for as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3. ult.
The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; for do
you what you can; Heb. 7. 19.
yea, keep the whole Law, according to the letter, yet this cannot make us
perfect: But this word, this truth we now unfold, is the Sure, the real, the
true, the eternal word, against which The gates of hell shall never be able to
prevail: Mat. 16. 18.
Have ye what ye can of the letter, except ye have also Christ, the substance
thereof, the letter will but deceive you; for you have but the shadow, and
therefore you must needs be deceived, for you to think you have the substance,
when you have but the shadow: It is not any outward thing we can do, will do us
any good; it is the Spirit, the word it self that does the deed.

Yet I must tell you more, That this word and Christ and the Spirit All dwell
Among us, dwell In us, and we know them not: as John 1. 10. Joh. 1. 10.
He was in the world, and the world was made by him; He dwells among us, and yet
the world knows him not; nay, He came among his Own, and his Own received him
not: These are strange expressions; what may be the meaning of this Divine
high-flowen Eagle? (for that is his Emblem:) I conceive it was, to show that
he soared and flew higher in Divine contemplations of truth, and in the
knowledge of the Mystery, then all the rest of the Evangelists; This was he of
whom it is said, The Disciple whom Jesus loved, John 21. 20.
and this is he tha^ Leaned on his breast at supper: This was he that had all
those divine visions and Secret mysteries revealed to him in the Isle of
Pathmos, who writ the Revelation, and was therefore called JOHN the Divine.

I conceive his meaning is (when he says, He came and dwelt among us, and yet
the world knew him not, although it was made by him) was this, that God in
Jesus Christ dwells in every creature, but the creature comprehends it not,
Because the light shines in darkness, and the Darkness cannot comprehend the
light: It is in him, (as the Apostle says) that we live, Act. 17. 18
move, and have our being, and yet we know it not, because we are compassed
about with darkness: nay we are Darkness it self: Is it not a strange thing,
that He should be in Us, be so near us, and be our light, and our life, Psalm.
84. 11.
our sun and our shield, and yet we not know him, we not be acquainted with
him? But He Shines in Darkness; what is that? that is, All creatures are darkness
to him. God in himself is light of lights, infinitely far above and beyond all
creatures: and if he put forth himself in the making of any creature, that
creature is infinitely below him; the highest of creatures is da^kness to him:
He is darkened in the Sun, and he is darkened in the Moon and Stars; He is
darkened in Angels and Archangels, in Cherubims and Seraphims, and more darkened
in men and other creatures: But he is (in Jesus Christ) The SOUL, and life of
all things.

There have been great disputes in all ages, what the soul of man is, which I
shall not now enter upon; but whatever it be, be sure of this, It is infinitely
below God: For God is the life of lives, the soul of souls; He is that Sun and
glory, that Excellency and Beauty that shines in All creatures; He not only
gives to all things life and being, but He is Their life and being; He fills all
things with His Being: So as all things are nothing, Compared with God; and yet
for all this, For all He is so GREAT And so much ALL; yet, they see him not*
comprehend him not: John who was the fo^erunner of Christ confesses, that he
knew him not: For all he was of such Excellency, Mat. 3. 11.
that he was He whose shoe-latchet he was not worthy to stoop down to unloose;
and yet he knew him not, He saw not this Glory and Majesty that was in him: For
all he was The Messiah, The Savior of the world, Lived with him, and converst
with him in all probability; for he was his Cousin German according to the
flesh; And if their mothers visited one another while the children were but in
the womb, and for the childrens sake, much more after their birth did they come
together visit and salute one another; besides, many other reasons which might
be given* yet he knew him not all that thirty years, till he came to be
baptized of John, And he saw the Spirit descend upon him like a Dove. And it
was so with John Baptist, who was a Prophet, and the immediate Harbinger
appointed to bring tidings, that the Messiah followed him: I say, Seeing it was
so then, do not wonder that men who read the word, and teach the Letter of the
word, all their life long, yet never know Christ, never be acquainted with his
Spirit, and His meaning in the literal word: Therefore take it not ill, if I
tell you; If any man were able to speak the whole word, the letter in every
tittle, That he could or were able, or if it were possible, To speak the whole
Scriptures in one word, or at once, yet he may go to the Devil for all that:
for no man can do so much as He in this regard: But I Will tell ye, if ye had once
known Jesus Christ after the Spirit, ye would not make such a stir about Forms,
Disciplines, and Externals, as if that were the great and only reformation;
for, all those things men may do, and be not One hair better before God; For
all that the Devil is the Devil still, and flesh is alive still, and the heart
may be set upon the creature still, and to this man this word is amiable still;
I pass not what men say and prattle to the contrary: Let us see their humility
and self-denial, and becoming all to all; lets see their self-judging, and
judging other men less, and themselves most of all; let the life of Christ
appear in the fruits, humility and lowliness of mind, not seeking themselves,
and their own profit and advantage, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved: were it so as they pretend, what means so much knowing men after the
flesh, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage? what means their
seeking greetings in the markets, Jude 16.
and uppermost rooms at feasts? what means Their long prayers, Mat. 23. 14.
under a pretense, but it is To devour widows houses and to ingratiate themselves
so as to get the praise of men, being exceedingly desirous of vain glory, and
the wealth of the wo^ld. And if they have not these they are dead on the nest,
heartless, and little or no fruit of love comes from them, but the contrary,
Censoriousness, and bitterness, and hatred and Envyings.

Were you but once come to the true Vision of God, and the Life of Christ, you
would be Above and slight all these base and carnal things; and they would
here with the Apostle, never more know Men, nor the world, nor any creature
after the flesh; that is, in their choicest and highest love and esteem: but
all these things show, that these men are yet below and in the world, and not
above with God, whatever They in Show express to the contrary.

Object. Object.
But it may be you will say to me, Sir, you so undervalue the letter and the
Scripture, that we know not what to do; we took this to be Gods word: what
would you have us cast away our Bibles? would you not have us worship God
according to the letter? shall not God be worshipped with our bodies?

I answer, God forbid: But I know men of the letter, or the Devil in man,
presently runs into this extreme; Either through ignorance, and so is, through
the infirmity of the flesh, and weakness of the inward man: or else it is out
of wilfulness, and so of the Devil, and one of his great designs to destroy the
soul: God forbid that I should so condemn the Letter, as to bid men neglect
good Orders and worshipping God in their bodies, and in external worship; far
be it from me: But this is that I say, I would not have ye only do this; And I
fear ye strive and cont^nd so much for the letter, and the external part of
Gods worship, that ye neglect the inward and internal altogether; for where is
the man that is so zealous and so hot for the Internal, as he is for the
External? whereas the One is to be preferred far before the other, but we find
it quite contrary: If we press men to the Inward before the Outward, or do but
as I desire to do, Lift up that; Either how cold and heartless are they, or
else how quarrelsome and malicious are they? but this is that I say, Strive
chiefly for the Spirit and the Hidden sense; get this but on^e into your
hearts; and then I will be bold to say, Turn this man loose, he has that
within will g^ide him: Then I say let him neglect the outward if he can:
otherwise you do but hold men to it as a Bear to the Stake, by cords of Humane
inventions, by Self-Love and self-interest, by Fears, Hopes and Rewards, and
these poor things, without the overruling and commanding Natural power and
principle of love. And when you have done this, what great act have you done?
Do not the Hypocrites the same? Mat. 5. 46.
do not sinners the same? do not Heathens the same? Luke 6. 33.
what great and goodly Converts have you made, that you so glory in them?

Beloved, if a man love his wife, this love will produce all care and
tenderness, and all offices of love toward her that may be; if he love her,
let him kill her if he can; let him beat her or hurt her if he can: if a man
love his friend, let him wrong him if he can: but here is matter, If ye have
but the External Worship, As most men content themselves with that, and never
care for the Internal; but if once ye have the Spirit and the True sense of the
Letter, through the Letter, then I say, let him throw away the Letter if he
can: no no, he cannot abuse but love that in its place and degree, which has
been the Shel and instrument to bring him all that sweetness, meat, and
nourishment.

I say Beloved, once again, things being thus, and men being generally thus
taken with the Letter and go no farther; Wonder not, To see All the world in A
Deluge, All drowned in their own ways, Phil. 2. 21.
all seeking themselves and their Own things; and not the things of Jesus
Christ, All being taken with, and Idolizing their own Conceits: Wonder not To
see them All in a mist, Groping in darkness, and every one feeding himself with
his own devices: I say, Wonder not; for John the Baptist, He that leapt and
sprang for joy in his Mothers Womb at the salutation of the Virgin Mary; For
all He (as it were) lived with him was his acquaintance, Luke 41. 1.
and conversed with him for 30. years, yet knew him not: Wonder not to see An
Universal Darkness over the whole world, and scarce a man knows Him that lives
in them, dwells in them. 2 Timothy 3. 7.
I am afraid it is with most men as it was with those women the Apostle Paul
speaks of, Always learning, and never came to the knowledge of the truth. Yet
it is well known, ye have always been Thro^gers of Christ with the Jews, but I
fear Never yet drew any virtue from him: and that ye have not yet Taken the
City of the Letter, Never yet had The rending of the Vail, never yet took
Achsah to wife, For if ye had, you would be so far forth Altogether spiritual,
and much taken up with these things, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
knowing no man any more after the flesh, but altogether in a spiritual manner;
knowing God to be in you, and to dwell with you: wherefore to stand in awe of
his goodness and greatness, majesty and incomprehensibleness, etc.

But Beloved, I press these things the more and the oft^er, because I know
these things had need be taught you, Isa. 28. 10.
as the Prophet Esaias says, Line upon line, and precept upon precept; here a
little and there a little. For these things ye receive but slowly and by
degrees, 1 Cor. 3. 1. etc.
like narrow-mouthed vessels, as ye are able to receive; otherwise these things
run over, run at was^e, and run besides, And are spoiled, and ye trample these
Pearls under your feet; And besides, I know you have enough that press the
Letter, but these things very rarely, and therefore I take the more liberty.

This is such a truth that I would have it foun^ded and well rooted in you,
viz. That God is He that Fills All in All; I would not have you ignorant of
this one thing, viz. that God He is All Act, a pure Act; and nothing acts, nor
grows, or increases, or moves, but in Him. Know that not one creature stirs in
any act toward you, but by Commission: there is no such thing as chance or
fortune. This is such a foundation^ Truth that every Branch of Godliness
arises from this root.

Jacob He saw this: Genesis 28. 16, 17.
for it is said, when he Awaked then he saw God was in this place. God there
appeared to him, On purpose to convince Jacob of this very Truth: not but that
God was in that place before, but Jacob saw him not there before* God was in
this place before, but I knew it not, says he: but his eyes being opened, then
he cries out, Oh! How dreadful is this place, this is no^e other but the house
of God! God dwells with us and in us, and we are not aware of it All this
while. To this very day.

As suppose two men should come into a large room, in which the King should be
in one corner behind the hangings privately: (I suppose I have used the Simile
before, but the fitness makes me use it the oftener, therefore take it and apply
it) and the One of these two men, Espieth the King, the Other knowing nothing
of him: He that knows the King is there, he behaves himself with all Reverence
and fear, as before the King; because he knows the King hears and sees all: but
the other lashes out in idle and frothy talk, and behaves himself rudely as
among his companions; The reaon is because He sees not the King: but if once he
chance to espy the King, or the King discover himself to him, Then He humbles
himself for all his idle carriage, falls down Amazed intrembling and fear, and
carries himself so much the more Humbly and Awfully, and the more submissively:
His carriage is quite changed, he is no such man as he was before: so Howsoever
a man carry himself before he sees God, and before he knew of him, that he was
so near and he knew it not: yet when God once shows and discovers himself to
such a man, In the midst of all his pride and lofty carriage, Dan. 5. 5, 6.
in the midst of his high and Towering imaginations, and self-conceits, As he
did to Belshazzar, when the handwriting appeared to him on the wall, His hair
stood upright, and his knees smote together, and his joints were loosed: Even
so is this man astonished at the sight of God in him, he falls down and cries
out with Jacob, Oh! how dreadful is this place? this is none other but the
house of God, and I never knew so much: Was my God, my Creator, the Almighty,
and maker of Heaven and Earth, 2 Chro. 6. 18.
He that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; Is he here by me and in me all
this while, heard all my words, and observed all my actions, and I not know it,
I not aware of it? Oh vile wretch that I am!

Beloved, the case was thus with Jacob; He over night being weary, Traveling a
whole days journey from his fathers house, had no Inn to lodge at, but in the
open field, having gotten some stones together for his pillow, and the Heavens
for his Curtains; He lies down in sorrow and thoughtfulness what he should do,
what would become of him, what course he should take: He was a yo^ng man, and
apt to run hi^ own ways, and follow his own will: little he had, and knew not
how he should be provided for: Genesis 28.
He was fain to run from home, leave his fathers house as a banished man: and
it seems in these thoughts and the like, he fell asleep; And in a dream God
appears and speaks to him and comforts him; And in his dream he saw a vision; A
Ladder reaching up to Heaven, Ver. 12.
and the Angels of God ascending and descending, etc. and when he awaked, he
finding God to be so near him an^ present with him whithersoever he went, his
spirit was comforted and refreshed: Then He was a changed man, Then he had New
thoughts, and all his former thoughts were banished. Even so does this man
behave himself when once God has spoken to him and discovered himself to be so
near, He does as David says he did, Set the Lord always before his eyes: Ps.
16. 8.
then he minds God, and observ^s his workings, his outgoings, and incomings;
he always then puts God forward in him, He must do all: Before He was the
forward man, and who but he? All Gods acts in him he arrogated to himself: and
(as he thought) the actions were His, done by His power, wisdom, and parts, so
he took home The glory and praise of all to himself: But now Upon Gods
appearing to him, this man is Undon^, slain, crucified: Then he can with all
his heart let God Be all, and Do All, Speak in him, Move in him, Live in him,
Work all his works in him and for him; He now minds God in whatsoever any
creature says or does to him: Isa. 26. 12.
He no longe^ lives his own life, but the life of God: it is true, He lives as
the Apostle says, Yet not He, but Christ in him: He now As a New man, Has no
words but the words of Christ, no thoughts but the thoughts of Christ, made One
spirit and life with Him, and so he becomes throughout A changed Man, A New
man. But the other, he that is not aware of God, He that is a Reprobate, who
knows not, That Christ is in Him, He takes no knowledge of all this, but does
what he list, (and as he thinks) He speaks his own words, and thinks his own
thoughts: and All their thoughts, words, and actions, All their aims and
endeavors tend to the fulfilling the desires of the flesh, Either more gross
and open, or else more subtle and refined, and more hid from the eye of the
world; Their desires and aims are, How they shall procure such a benefit to
themselves, such an estate: or how he shall be delivered from the danger of the
times, and he is full of carking and caring how his flesh shall be provided
for, and the like: And truly beloved, it cannot be otherwise; for whatsoever is
born of the flesh is flesh, and whatsoever is born of the Spirit is Spirit: for
it can never act without its own sphere and compass; Ioh. 3. ^6.
were we born of the Spirit, we could not but dye to the flesh, and seek the
things of the Spirit: then all his thoughts for the advantage of the flesh
Cease, and he is altogether fot Increasing and Perfecting This life of God
begun in him: let God live more and more, Col. 3. 1.
and himself less and less; As John Baptist says, he must increase but I must
decrease: Joh. 13.
This is his life now, which before was his death: and contrary his death is
his life.

God is now A welcome Guest, Yet, Not that God is more or less there, you being
always Gods Temple, as well before you see him, as when you see him: for
Christ cannot Alter his lodging in the reality of it; This is a certain truth;
Nothing can make Christ depart in regard of his Essence and Being; but to you
he may depart, and so you are to understand all such expressions: for if you
think (and as some preach) that God comes and goes from place to place, from
earth to heaven, o^ from heaven to earth, departs and returns; and that you can
stay Him and change Him, or make him return; These are all childish fopperies;
in this ye do as it were Create another God to your selves, and make the true
God an Idol; but it is spoken in ref^rence to the Creature, in regard of our
sight and apprehensions; As To you, He is departed and dwells above far remote;
And indeed and really he is as having no being, and is as no God to thee;
However thou may flatter and deceive thy self, Until thou have smitten and
taken Kiriathsepher, and married Achsah Calebs daughter, Till there be power
given To rend the vail: But then you shall see Him who is the truth of all
things, The substance of all things, and not before: for whatever you can see,
are but Shaddows and not the Truth; As in this my body you cannot see the
Internality and the Truth of it: for the truth and Substance of it does not
consist either in the coldness or in the hotness; for it has been hotter, and
it has been colder: neither in the Oldness nor Youngness: for it has been
younger, and may be older: neither in the heaviness nor lightness; for it has
been lighter, and may be heavier; nor in no accidents you can name; Then if so,
none has ever heard, or seen, or spoke that which is the Truth of me; for my
Substance cannot be seen, but only Accidents; the truth consists in things
internal; and it is the like for any other thing you behold besides.

And so likewise, such is the Word of God, it consists not in any thing you can
hear or see, or can perceive or comprehend; for Gods Word is as himself,
Mighty, Incomprehensible, Omnipotent, etc. not included in any place; His Word
is the Being and life of all things; the Letter cannot possibly contain the
Eternal Majesty of the Word: it is not the Word of God till it be expounded to
the heart, and made a word of power and quickening in the hearts of his people.
The Word is Eternal, and was before any Letters or Scriptures were, and shall
be for ever when all those things Cease.

Gods speaking is His creating, Let it be done: there can be no resisting;
says David, whatever he commanded it was wrought: Ps. 148. 5.
God Has spoken As many Words, as he has made Creatures: But He has spoken
One Great and mighty word, and that One WORD includes All those Words: and that
One Word is Jesus Christ the Only begotten of his Father, and the first born
of every creature: all the rest of the creatures are but as so many Letters of
this GREAT Word: for he is called the Word* He being in the bosom of his
Father, He was Unspoken, Unuttered, Unpronounced^ there was not then any one
creature in heaven or earth: but God was ALL; there was then Neither Father,
Son, nor Spirit, as divided; But He being Once pronounced, He is the Word
Spoken; then immediately there is Father, Son, and Spirit; For these are
expressed Several or TRINE only in relation to the creatures: which to me is
clear; for there is not diversity in God, but God is one, and in Himself cannot
be more; and I hope it is clear to you.

If any should think or say unto me, the words of Pilate, Oh Sir, What thing is
truth? I must answer thus, truth is not possible to be either spoken or heard:
for God only is truth, and nothing else can be: now, it is impossible to see
or hear God; Joh. 1. 18.
says our Savior, No man has seen God at any time: for we cannot see him and
live; we must depart Out of the nature of man, and return into God, and be one
with God, Else we can never know God, it is only his well-beloved in us, and who
also is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared and revealed him.
Whatever it be that a man sees or comprehends, that cannot be God, that cannot
be truth; It can be at most, but the Emblem, the shadow of truth: as in a man
we cannot see his life, but we may see him live; even so, truth cannot be seen,
but you may see the Effects and Fruits of truth. But he that marries Achsah, To
him will I give The Rending of the Vail; that is, He shall see as much As a
creature Can See and live, as God said to Moses. [Achsah] She will give you A
glimpse, A sight through the cleft of the rock, as was to Moses; The Back-parts
of JEHOVAH. But Truth cannot be seen In the True glory and splendour thereof;
only the back parts of her: She will admit you into the Sanctum Sanctorum, she
will beg of her Father to give you a blessing, that seeing he has given you
the south-land, Josh. 15. 11.
as it is here in this Chapter, that he will give you Springs of water: That
you shall not only have the Nether Springs, The Letter of the Word, External
Ordinances, and outward Duties, Bodily Worships and the like; but you shall
have The Upper Springs, Ver. 19.
The life of the Letter, the power, the quickening Spirit, to see not only
Christ's body, and touch it; but you shall have the virtue of The breaking of
His Body, and the benefit of the sheding of his blood.

And When the Vail is Rent take but a short view of those privileges and
precious things you shall then have: Though I have hinted at them in general,
as I went along; yet let us view a little the particular things contained
within the Holy of Holies, as time at present will give leave.

When ye came to the Tabernacle, there was first, Heb. 9. 1.
as I told you, A worldly sanctuary, as the Apostle sets them down, Heb. 9. 1.
And therein was Ordinances and Divine service; for so the Apostle calls it in
the first verse. And therein was the Candlesticks, and the table, and the
Shewbread, and thither came the Priests, and did their office; there was
sacrifices and offerings for themselves, and all the people; And All they could
learn there, was but worldly and external Ordinances, bodily worships, which
concerned not the heart and the inward man; But, if they offered such and such
External things as was required, this was all: But into the second Vail within
the Holy of Holies, thither the High Priest must come but once a year, (for we
shall only at present touch at those particulars mentioned there by the
Apostle) And first, There was the golden Censer, which typified Christ's
offering the prayers of the Saints, as it is expressed Rev. 8. there is an Angel
which had the Golden Censer, Rev. 8. 3.
and there was given him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of the Saints upon the golden Altar; which Angel is Jesus Christ, the Angel of
the Covenant: showing unto us thus much, that he is the Mediator between God
and man, for whose sake all our services are accepted: nothing is accepted from
us with the Father, But what his Son does in us: Be they never such glorious
actions, and done with never so specious religious pretenses; yet if they be
Our actions, they stink, they are abominable; In him only he is well pleased:
They are his actions only that can be savour^ meat to him; Although as they be
our actions, they may seem beautiful and glorious to us, yet to him they stink.
A dead man has the shape of a man, but he stinketh; So thy duties, though they
have the shape of Right and Holy duties to us, yet they are to him but dead
works, Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 9. 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God, who through the eternal spirit offered himself?
When your services are not from an Internal prin^iple, from the work of the
Eternal Spirit, but are like the Motion of Clocks and Watches, which is from
Art and External weights, not from nature, all such services are dead works.

Within the Vail we come really to see, All our works nothing, they are
abominable; yet we think highly of them, While we remain in the worldly
Sanctuary, and are gotten no farther: But here within the Vail, God speaks to
us, as he did to Job, and we are convinced of our Vileness: Job 42. 5, 6.
Behold, says Job; then I am vile; I will lay my hand upon my mouth; I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, I abhor
my self in dust and ashes; Job had often made confession of sin before in words,
and in the notion: And practiced daily External worship, but yet we may see all
along for all tha^, what an high Opinion Job had of himself of his strictness
and righteousness: Job sacrificed often and constantly, and observed the letter
very strictly; and thereby Job maintained a high opinion of himself: But now
the vail must be rent, and God must appear himself, to darken and confound all
Jobs righteousness, before Job could say I am vile; Job was strict in
Externals, but Job could not Really loath and Abhor himself: though in words he
might, as many can easily and frequently do that daily, but to be really VILE
in themselves, this work is from above, from Heaven, from God: And so we come
to see what it is, and for what we or our actions are accepted; it must be his
sons work in us, else he loathes all, even the best of your Sacrifices, if it be
not Jesus Christ in us that does All; viz. that loves God, and Fears God, and
obeyes God, and believes in God, etc. his Father regards it not; that may seem
a Paradox, but yet it is a truth; for indeed and in truth, there is nothing
fears God, but God; nor Nothing obeys God^ but God; nor Nothing loves God, but
God; He a^cepts his own work in us, and nothing else: God cannot accept any
thing any creature does out of himself, but what himself does; what his Son
does, that pleases him; that he cannon but accept. This is that Achsah that so
pleases her Father that he can deny her nothing: This is the first thing we
shall have after the Vail is rent; and none can attain this Really, and in good
earnest, But He, to whom the vail is Rent.

The next thing there Expressed, Heb. 10. 4.
is, The Ark overlaid with Gold; the Ark of the Covenant overlaid with gold,
overlaid round about with pure gold. Having married Achsah, we shall also have
power to break open this Mystery: Christ is He in whom all the promises are Yea
and Amen, they are all fulfilled in him: As all our actions must be derived
from him as from the fountain; that is, if they be not quickened and animated
with the power, purity, holiness, excellency of Jesus Christ, that they are of
himself, and of his own Divine Nature, he cannot accept or regard them; So
also, if this be so, then is there not only holiness within, flowing from A
Natural principle of a new Nature, but there will be All External glory; there
is the Ark of the Covenant overlaid all over round about with pure gold; to
show, that from this spring and fountain cannot but proceed all purity and
holiness in our external actions: then they cannot but must show forth the
virtues of him who has called them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God: Acts 26. 18.
Then there is such a power, and such a burning desire in the soul, they must
show forth their good works, Mat. 5. 16.
that they may glorify their father which is in heaven: neither can this be
attained really, till we be admitted within the vail.

True it is, while we are in this worldly Sanctuary, we may do many External
good actions, as to our selves and other men; And also Good in themselves; but
they are not done for this End, to show forth the virtues of him that has
called them, nor to glorify their father which is in heaven, but it is to
glorify themselves, and to set up themselves, Either for praise, or esteem, or
for fear, or for hope of advantage, Job. 1. 9.
etc. they serve not God, (as the Devil said of Job) for naught, not for love
of Holiness, not for that Excellency that is in its self, but to get something
by it; they use it as men do a bridge, to carry them over to some desired
place, to some self-happiness or advantage; and were it not for these, the man
were dead; and you should find, if the heart were searched thoroughly, and the^e
ends, hopes and fears removed, the man would stand stone-still: But the other
man, he who is ascended, and gotten within the Vail, He works freely and
naturally; He cannot do otherwise; though there were neither fear of hell or
punishment, or hope of the reward, yet he must work: And he will work; this is
that I still say, Let but the heart be set to rights, let the man be
regenerate, 2 Pet. 1. 2.
and partaker of the Divine nature, and then with such a man you need not keep
such a stir with Laws and Precepts, and Rules and Disciplines; He has that
within which will not only inform and teach, but reform and compel by the
power of Love, For (says the Apostle) the Righteous are a law to themselves.

Beloved, this is the service God loves; He loves A cheerful giver; 2 Cor. 9. 7.
He cannot abide that which comes forced, and grudgingly, and as a forced
imposed task, that by sinister respects they must be held to it: but I say this
man needs no such thing, but turn him loose at all turns, he has an Informer,
and a Reformer in him; Those that are led by the Spirit, Gal. 5. 18.
are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. but under Grace and under the power of
love, and of a free mind; 1 Timothy 1. 9.
for the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, This man is no longer under the law, but is Dead to the Law, that
he may live to God, and not unto himself; for self is in him conquered and
dead, and Christ now is alive, and exalted, and set in his throne to reign for
ever and ever.

In the third place there was the Pot of Manna; which Manna God gave the
Israelites in the wilderness; Heb. 9.
some of which by the providence of God was preserved many hundreds of years
together, until the time (as it is thought and affirmed by some) of their last
destruction by Titus and Vespatian: He that has gotten within the vail he has
gotten food sufficient to nourish him for ever; He shall Never hunger more, nor
never thirst more; as in that of Rev. 21. Rev. 21.
He that lives according to this new li^e he is ^ed with Hidden Manna, He eats
of the tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God; His comforts are
pure, and ravishing, and full of Everlasting delights; his waters Ever ^low,
and never cease; there is in his belly a spring, Ever springing up, to
everlasting life.

In the next place there was Aarons Rod that budded, that was laid up by the
pot of Manna: Those that are accepted to look into the Holy of Holies, Their
fruit is always flourishing and green; their good works never dye, but they
ever after bring forth fruit like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that
brings forth fruit in his season; Psalm. 1. 3, 4.
his lease shall not wither, and whatever he does it shall prosper: and not
only shall they bring forth fruit but Ripe fruit in their age, Psalm 92. 12.
Psalm. 92. 12.
The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon; those that are planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the
Courts of our God; they shall bring forth fruit in their old age, they shall be
fat and flourishing: These men, They are never satisfied with God, They are
never weary, they shall run and not be weary, nor faint; they never have enough
of Him; his comforts are always fresh to them, flourishing and green; They are
never satisfied with the knowledge of God; This is such Manna, such Meat, The
more they eat the more they may; The more God communicates himself to them,
they are the more Hungry, the more thirsty, the more Unsatisfied; They have
overcome, and are still Overcoming, they go on Conquering and to Conquer; they
are still conquering and subduing all their Enemies, and getting their sins and
lusts under their feet; And so long as there is Any To overcom and conquer,
they can never Rest till they have brought All under, 1 Cor. 10. 5.
Every high thought and Every strong hold, and Every imagination That exalts
it self against the Power, Kingdom, and Sovereignty of Jesus Christ.

Within the Holies of Holies, Heb. 9. 5.
There was also The Cherubims of glory, Overshadowing the Mercy-seat; and we
may say as the Apostle there, Of which things we cannot now speak particularly:
Those glorious Cherubims, they looked face to face beholding one another,
Overshadowing the Mercy-seat, Beloved were you but once come to this sight, you
should behold God Glorious and Amiable, Full of love and mercy, and tender
Bowels: All wrath And All frowns blown clean away; We then shall behold in Him
Not so much as any shadow of Anger, but there will be a most sweet and amorous
beholding of one another: He will love and delight in us, and we shall love and
delight in him: we cannot look so delightfully upon him, as he will upon us;
there will be Nothing but Amorous embraces; and we shall then see How Sure All
his mercies are to them that love him, and that they are The Sure Mercies of
David: Isa. 55. 3.
we shall find in Our Hearts, All his promises made good, and we shall then
call him Our God, and Our Jehovah, making good and giving Being as to all
things, So to all his promises; that we shall say feelingly, Not One has
failed of all the good things he has promised: we shall say by experience, Now
we know, that heaven and earth shall pass away, Mat. 5. 18.
but not one tittle of his word has failed; We shall then see, All Solomon's
Love-songs fulfilled, and never till then; And yet Beloved, all these things
are but dark shadows to the Truth, and The Things themselves.

But to conclude, We run over these things, for time hastens: Those that are
brought to this condition, To have the vail Rent before their faces, They shall
see Such things as I am not able to express; For eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither ever entered into the heart of man those glorious things which
God has prepared to entertain, To Feast such self-denying souls, which are
both Full Satisfying and Ravishing contentments: Beloved, these are such things
as cannot be enjoyed, Seeing them, by feeling till the vail be Rent.

But yet know this, it is Othniel that takes this City, it is The Lords good time,
or fit opportunity: We cannot take this City, nor marry Achsah Calebs daughter
when we would, but we must wait Gods opportunity, when he pleases to give it,
no^ in our time, but in his time; nay we cannot so much as hasten that time,
When we shall have power to smite Kiriathsepher, and marry Achsah, no more then
a woman in travail, by all the means and industry she can use, can hasten the
time of her delivery: We must wait the time Till God reveal; for we must take
it When he will give it, And As He will give it by degrees, time after time,
line upon line, and precept upon precept: And so We w^iting in Gods way, He
will Reveal, and we shall come to understand The Good Will of the Lord, Isa.
28. 10.
One time after another, Now A little and then A little line upon line; that so
you may come To glorify God your heavenly Father: Not that you may bring
Honor or Profit to your selves (though This be our greatest Honor and profit)
or take the praise to your selves, as though by Your power, you had smitten the
City, or married Achsah, And so possessed the Upper and Nether springs, Josn.
15. 19.
the letter and the Spirit: Thus to do, is not to smite the City; You as yet
have not smitten it: this is not The power of God; this is but Your selves;
this is but by the power of flesh; this is but by the power of Satan in us* but
here is the misery of the Sons of men, they are ready to think and believe that
they have smitten the City, when it is Nothing less: they think they know as much
as can be known, and Glory in this, and so look for and give praise and Honor
to themselves; And if Any go beyond them, if they cannot fathom what you say,
presently they cry out upon it as an Error, and no body must know more then
they, and they must have the honor and praise of all: they must and will be
sure to keep men within their compass and knowledge, always holding them in the
letter, in the Rudiments, and in the Pedagogies, and in the shadows of
Religion, and cannot endure nor bear that men should be brought up to
perfection, to possess those Plerophorias those Full Enjoyments prepared for
them, that so they may be delivered and set at liberty from under the Law, and
from the killing Letter; From Bondage and thraldom, that they may come to
receive The inheritance of Sons and Freemen; h^t so the glory and praise of All
may be to God Almighty (none to them) who has given power to smite
Kiriathsepher, the City of the Letter, that it may be unto us DEBIR, The Word
of God, and so reveal unto us things Unutterable, and unspeakably glorious,
Even The hidden Manna, and the Living Waters, to nourish us to Everlasting
life, Where the Glory of God is the light of that Temple whose brightness you
shall see so far as you are able to Receive, Rev. 21. 23.
where you shall have Safety from all your Foes, and you shall see and behold
their Ruin; where you shall have the company and comfort of all the Saints, And
God himself shall strive to Fill and if it were possible, and Glutt you with
happiness; Where the City Gates are built with Pearls, The streets paved with
gold, the walls of Precious stones: the Temple in this City, Is Almighty God
Himself; and Kings and Princes shall be but Vassals, and cast out and nor
regarded as such: Where the River springs from under the Throne and Hill of
God: Rev. 15. 3.
the Water clear as Crystal, Chap. 19. v. 1. 3, 4, 6.
The Banks set with Trees of Life, Chap. 21. 4.
Where your Cheer is Joy, your Exercise Singing the song of Moses and the Lamb;
your Duties praising, the Subject, God; the Quire consisting of Angels and
Saints, the Songs Hallelujahs, Rev. 19. 3, 4, 6. Where there is no more need to
fear, that your Eyes shall be dimmed with Tears or your Ears Affrighted with
Cries, or your Senses disturbed with Pain; or the Heart Damped with Sorrow, or
the Soul Ever Surprised by death: Where there is All God, and No Evil; there
is No Persecutors; None to Claim your Possessions from you; None To Envy your
Happiness: the Rich cannot be Robbed, Nor Kings shall not be Flattered: Where
there is Possessions without Impeachments, Seigniories without Cares; Length of
years without decay of Strength: Love of All, without Ie^lousie of any;
Greatness of STATE, without Conscience of Corruption; Where we shall be
Ravished with Seeing; Satisfied with Enjoying; And Secured for Retaining.

Beloved, All these things are Very true, True In the Letter, But far more
true, Taking it All as meant Spiritually; There are Such Things as These, Bu^
infinitely more Spiritual, Divine, and Transcending: Such things As These, and
whatever else The Heart of man can Imagine Are but Poor Things to what we shall
there Have and Live with, and Live in, viz. In Heaven; The Beginnings whereof,
are given you Here as an Earnest and First Fruits; For Heaven is Nothing else
But Grace perfected, It Is of the same Nature with that you Enjoy Here; For He
that is United and made ONE with Jesus Christ by Faith, Has A True and REAL,
Glimpse of those Ravishing Glories And Delights, which he shall for ever Enjoy:
But you must Wave All Carnal, Sensual, and Worldly Enjoyments; And look upon
the Highest, Chiefest and Rarest here, To be But Shadows and Dark Resemblances
of those Blessed Good things, which we shall then Enjoy For Ever and Ever.

THE TWO MIGHTY AND Wonderful TREES OF EDEN In the Garden of (...) ELOHIM.

Incognita Unknown.

Ever since Man was driven out of Paradise, until Admitted to Return in Again.
viz.

THE TREE of KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD and EVIL, AND The TREE of LIFE.

Taken out of A Book Called The LETTER And The LIFE, Or The FLESH And The
SPIRIT.

Translated by Dr. EVERARD.

THE TREE of KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD and EVIL What it is.
I Will not much contend with them that will have The Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, as it is Recorded in Sacred Scripture, to be A Natural Tree, Planted
by God in Paradise, And of such A Nature, That whosoever did Eat of it, should
have their Eyes opened against themselves, and so to be made As Gods, To know
Good and Evil; It may be, God would Admonish Adam both Inwardly and Outwardly,
of what He did Inwardly, and in His Heart, either Forbid or Teach him; That He
would likewise for the greater Evidence, Set before His Outward eyes; But I
desire withal, that they will grant This, that What was Outwardly done, The
Same also happened Inwardly, in the heart of Adam; That he was there Tempted by
the SEED of the Serpent; To make some Account and Reckoning of his own Wisdom
Will and Nature, and not to Submit Himself unto God, As Void of all Name,
Knowledge, or Work; But to be SOMETHING of himself, And There are Two Causes
that move me to think so. The First is this, Because the Promise is, That the
seed of the Woman should Bruise the Head of the Serpent; Now, We read of no
Natural or Living Serpent whose head was so Bruised, by that Seed; Therefore
say I, As the Spiritual Seed of the Woman, was in Adams Heart, So likewise was
the Serpents Seed; For Man indeed was made Good, Not of the Substance of God,
But out f Nothing: And therefore, He Always Turns Himself from God and
Inclines to His own NOTHING and Vanity; For, I call, The Devil, Sin, Death and
Hell, NOTHING: As many of the Ancient Fathers have done, and especially
Taulerus For, God Never Created Them, But they are A NONENTITY, A NOT-BEING,
which is Contrary, And Perfectly oposite to ENTITY and BEING. And Peradventure,
this was the Devil that dwelt in Adam, and Seduced Him, As well as in Lucifer.

The other Cause is this, That the Scriptures likewise Witness That, The City
of God, And The Heavenly Jerusalem, and The Kingdom of God, is a Paradise
Within Us; And further; that God and His Almighty Word, Is Our Paradise, The
Tree of Life, The Temple. Where we Dwell, Walk, Sacrifice and Pray; As we
likewise are His Temple and Paradise: And, That The BEAST Spoken of in the
Revelation, Which the Whole World, Great and Small, Do At This Day Worship in
their Hearts As likewise, The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, is Within Us.
For, All the Whole Exterior World, or Whatsoever either is, Or is done
Outwardly, are but Only An Accident, and A Figure, Signifying The Truth of the
thing And, The Internal Nature. And therefore There is Nothing True, of
whatsoever is Seen with our Eyes; For the Figure and Fashion of this world must
pass away and Perish, As being Nothing else but a certain Imaginary world, And
The Figure of the World That is True, Right, Eternal, and subsisting of it Self.

Consequently, all things, which in the Bible were done Externally and
Signifyingly, must again be done and again, brought to pass After their Manner;
And, All the History of the Bible, All Moses and the Prophets, and in Sum,
the Whole Scriptures Do, To This Day, Stand in Force, And are Continually
Accomplished and Fulfilled, Internally, and Spiritually. All things are By
Christ Translated, into the Truth, And it must needs be, That All the
Prophesies which God spoke, From the beginning of the world, by the Mouth of
his Holy Ones must still be Called back, Reiterated, or Done over again;
therefore that Shadow or that Tree, Was and is Nothing else in the Truth, But
the Nature, Will, Knowledge, and Life of Adam; Of This He should not Have
Eaten, This He should not have Ascribed or Arrogated To Himself; But Rather, To
be Free, and Freely Subject To God, and not to have Known anything, But What
God Knew In Him, Nor to have Done any thing, But What God Did in Him; Nor, to
have spoken any thing, But What God Spoke in Him, and so forth in the rest.

To the End That God, Without any Impediment, Might have Exercised His Almighty
Kingdom, Will, Nature and Power, In Him: But Himself should have been utterly
Void of all Knowledge, Will, or Nature, And not have Arrogated any of These, As
Proper to Himself: This Pleased God, This was That Which He Commanded, And what
He would have had Done.

To this Interpretation agrees GERMANE DIVINITY, which Resolves That this Tree
in the substance thereof is Nothing else, But our Own Will, and Knowledge, of
which Alone In all the Earthy Paradise of this Wide World of our Hearts, We
Ought not to Eat; But to Account it as Forbidden, Except we will also Eat of
Death and Destruction.

Now then, As soon as Adam Fell, and did Eat of This Tree, The TREE, was
Immediately Planted, in His Mind, And afterward Derived, into All the Branches
and Fruits thereof, So that As, the Same Word, Precept, and Forbidding was
Common to all, So is The same Fall. All We which are In Adam Have now, Eaten of
Death, and have Received from the Serpent, This Undigested Poison: Of an ill
Bird, an ill Egg.

Hence, it may easily be perceived, How, Every Man is His Own Greatest Enemy;
And what he ought to think of Himself, Of his Own Will, Understanding, Wisdom
and Knowledge, Seeing it is the Counsel, Seed, Wisdom, Knowledge and Head of
the Serpent, Which must By Christ, be Bruised In us; I say, it must needs be,
That (As in the Old Testament was Signified by Circumcision, and in the New One
by Baptism) All things which we have By Nature and Inheritance from Adam Must
Dye, That we may Unlearn and Put off All Things, Even as we would do, The
Devil, And Death it self, viz. Our own Will, Prudence, Wisdom and
Righteousness, Wherewith as with Figleaves Our Adam, does Vainly seek to Hide
Himself; For that is SIN, and the Sting of Death; Namely, To Eat of This Tree,
And to Arrogate to a Man's Self, His own Wisdom, Providence, Will, Nature, or
Himself.

But Alas for Woe, Who knows This, Who thinks of it? Who is it That is
Displeased with his Own Will, Understanding or Wisdom, Oh when shall we forsake
them? Every Man Delights Himself, In His Own Will, and Recreates His Mind,
Sweetly, and Contentedly therein, Reposing upon His Own Knowledge,
Understanding, and the like. The Tree is Fair to be looked upon, and Sweet to
be Tasted; and therefore All Mortal Men, do Greedily Swallow and Devour Death,
as Adam did; But This is the Misery No Man knows it, No Man thinks of it,
But, Judges it to be Good; And All flesh thinks Assuredly That, This, Is The
Tree of Life; Even, To follow their Own Wills, And their Own Conceit and
opinion of Good (which indeed is false) As to Know Much, to Learn Much, to
discern Many Sciences; And in sum, To become Gods: And in the mean time, They
are not Aware, That This is, Adams Fall, His Biting of the Apple; Yea, His
Bitter Death It Self.

Continually, do we speak of This Miserable Adam and of His Fall, and never
Take notice, that the Same is done In us. We Talk of His Eating and detest it,
and Him for it; And yet WE Continually Eat, as well as He. O MAN Who art Thou,
That do so Prepare A Rod for thine O^n Back, and give Sentence against
thine Own Life; In Condemning Thy first Father Adam, and Pereeivest not, That
thou art First in the Same Trap? Here then Consider Diligently, What OUR Will,
Knowledge and Understanding is, Whereof we Boast so much; And wherewith we
Think we may Come into the Presence of God; Whereas Indeed, It is Nothing But
The Bitterness of Death, And The Fruit of the Forbidden Tree. Who is there,
Among ALL Living Men, That Perceives This, Or will Learn To put Off, Deny,
Fear and Mortify, or Kill His Own Will, and Wisdom? Nay rather, We Hold it
Fast, Extol and Value it, as Pure Gold, When as Indeed, It is Eternal Death,
And, In This Misery The Whole World ^yeth sick. But Where are Those Blessed
Redeemed Ones?

THE TREE OF LIFE WHAT IT IS, And why Adam was Shut out, Forbidden, and
withholden from it, and not suffered to EAT thereof.
I Can also be Content there should likewise Outwardly have been in Paradise,
The Tree of Life, as you read in the Scripture, Whose Fruit might have been so
Seasoned, and Endowed by God, And How it had that Nature, that He who should
Eat of it, should Live for ever and Never Dye; And when Adam had first Eaten of
the Forbidden Tree, and had Fallen (as God foretold) into Death, it might not
Now be That He should be permitted to Eat of the Tree of Life; Otherwise, he
must have Lived for ever, And the Word of God, If thou eat thereof, thou shall
dye the death, had been false. Moreover, God who is mere Love, and cannot for
ever* be angry with His own workmanship, did well provide That Man in this
Misery, Hated of God and an Enemy to Him, might not for ever Leada Wretched and
Calamitous Life; And for that cause he drove him out of Paradise, from the Tree
of Life, into this House of Penance (as it were) The World; And showed him a
Way whereby he might again come out of Death into Paradise, To this Tree of
Eternal Life.

But, In the mean time, He fenced The Tree of Life, with a Flying Cherub, and a
Glittering Sword, Lest Adam in this Banishment should Eat Life; For it seemed
better, to the Good God, That Man should Dye, and so by Death put off this
miserable Life, and Changing It, To be Translated to a better: For, He knew,
That Life after this Death, Cold, Calamity, Banishment, would be so much more
Welcome, and He so much more Dear unto God, after Victory. Therefore God, Who
cannot Hate Us, Ever deals Mercifully with Us, Howsoever he handles Us, If we
would always take it In Good Part, And not Suspect Him to be our Enemy; For,
so is The Nature and Suspicion of Man's Heart.

Now, I do Thus think, That for Agreater Testimony, The Same thing did likewise
Happen In the True Paradise (i. e.) In Adams Heart; As There is, The Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil; Which is the Seed, Speech, Counsel, Knowledge,
Wisdom and Will of the Serpent: So there also is, The Tree of Life, The Seed,
Speech and Counsel of God, or of The Woman. And, As God and the Devil are,
Even so are These Two Trees; So Contrary The One to the Other, That the One
brings Life, The Other Death. And therefore It is Impossible, That whosoever Eats
of the One, should at the same Time Eat of the Other, or come unto it, As being
Separated by a Flying Cherub, and a Glittering SWORD, Thus I Interpret VVinged
Sin, and Obstinate Disobedience; Which is elsewhere called in Scripture A
Separation. For who so Eats of the Tree of Knowledge of Good And Evil, That is,
He that Greedily Swallows down, and Devoureth Humane and Diabolical Wisdom,
He Is already separated from the Tree of Life; That is, from the Wisdom,
speech and Knowledge of God.

Neither of these Wisdoms, Speeches, Wills, Knowledges, Can endure the Other,
Neither can One come from the One to the Other, So great is the Gulf between
them, Being as Far Divided asunder as Heaven and Hell. He that Eats of the Tree
of Life, That is, Of The Word of God, He is Born of God, and cannot Dye, No,
Nor Sin. For Their Fruit, Does Eat The Eater, and Translate Him into His Own
Nature, That is, Into Life; As Elsewhere The Scripture Speaks, Of Eating of
Christ His flesh; For indeed, It is The same Thing, To Eat Christ, To Live in
His Word, To Believe, To Know God, and the like.

As likewise, it is All one, to Be in Adam, To Live in Adam, To Dye, To Eat of
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, To Obey the Seed, and Word of the
Serpent, And to become GODS.

Therefore, He that Eats of the Deadly Tree, And cleaves to the Word, and
Wisdom of the Serpent, And Being Born of Satan, and Affected as men are, Lives
in Flesh and Blood; He cannot Do Well, or Please God; As, Contrariwise, The
Other, Cannot Sin, Do Evil, or Displease God; Therefore He that will have the
One, Must needs part with The other. We must of Necessity Go out of the Wisdom
of Man, and The Serpent, and from The Forbidden Tree; That so, The Wisdom of
the Tree of Life may Enter into Us: Adam, and the Wisdom of the Flesh, must Dye
in Us, That Christ may Live in us, and The Spirit Have the Government. The Life
of the One is Always The Death of the Other, And The Weakness of the One, The
Strength of the Other. No man can serve two Masters; And in vain shall thou
strive To Reconcile, Couple together, and Make Agree, God and Adam, or Christ
and the Serpent, Light and Darkness, The Old man and the New.

That the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil planted in the heart of Adam, Is
the Seed, Speech, and Spirit of the Serpent: And that great Idol ANTICHRIST,
Sin, Death, the Devil, and the BEAST, spoken of in Daniel, and the Revelation,
which is the Greatest and most ordinary Worshipping of Idols.
What do you think is the BEAST, of which Daniel writes, that Resists and
Blasphemeth the Most High, and kills his Saints? What is that Old Serpent
that overthrew Adam and Eve? Genesis 3.
What is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil? What is the Shameless King and
Antichrist, Of which Daniel wrote, and P^ul to the Thessalonians? Dan. 11. 21.
What is That many-Headed Monster and the Seven-Headed Beast which the whole
world Adoreth, These. 1. 2.
Of which is spoken in the Revelation? What is Sin? Rev. 13.
What Death? What the Devil Himself, But every man's own Will, Wisdom, Reason,
Religion, Righteousness, Skill, Delight? For which cause Paul calls it Death
it self, Enmity against God, and Folly before God. And Saint James calls it
Earthly, Humane, Devilish wisdom; Jam. 3. 15
Because these three are one and the same, and that is Devilish which is
merely Humane: And contrariwise; For, Man, the Devil, Adam, and the Serpent,
are the same, and do agree: For the Serpent did so In-stil this Wisdom and
F^igned Goodnese into the Nature of Adam, that the Serpents Seed and W^rd was
in Adam, made a corporal Man, So that now, the same thing may be said of them
both: And as they that are born of God, and in whom the word of God is made
Man, or Flesh, Ephesians. 4. 4.
are called Gods, and One Spirit with God: so all men, being Sprung of flesh
and blood, before they be Born again, Joh. 3.
and before they are Planted into Christ, and Born of the Spirit, are justly
called Devils, and the Devils Children, and offspring: Therefore that which is
Humane only, is evil, and that which is Devilish is Humane. Again, What is
the fall of Adam, but the wisdom of the flesh, and the fruit of the Forbidden
Tree? What is that Old Dragon that came out of Hell, and Drew down from Heaven
with himself, Rev. 12. 4.
with his Tail a great part of the Stars of Heaven, But only the wisdom of
this Tree, Which extols it self against God, and would it self be God, and
place his Seat with the Highest? I pray What else Are the thoughts of the
flesh, What is Sin, What Arrogance, but the Fruits and Wisdom of this Tree?
What are the Decrees of all men, and the bent of their Reason against God;
Their Devises, Light, Books, etc. but the cunning of the Devil, from this Tree,
Eaten? What is all the worship of Idols, The false Religion of all the wicked
Jews, Turks, Gentiles, Mamalukes, and all false Christians? What are all their
Leagues, Conventicles, Ceremonies, But the Apple of this Tree? Which
counterfeiting The Tree of Life, shows to be pleasant fruits; but are such as
are death it self. No man can sufficiently express The general worshipping of
Idols, wherewith All the corners of the World, and the Hearts of men are
stuffed; How common it is to all men? Who is he that Adores not Himself, and
says to his Own Hand, Reason, Knowledge, Honesty, Art, and Wisdom, Thou art My
God, In thee I Hope, In thee I Trust? They do not, I grant, say thus with their
mouth, but their Whole life, and their Idolatrizing mind says as much by their
deeds.

Here, Here it is, that all Mortal men deny God, and testify it by their
works. For if they think there be A God why do they not leave Vengeance to God?
Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
Why are they so Anxiously careful? Why do they so exercise mischief and fraud,
and so deceive one another? Why do they make War, and Strife, right or wrong,
for mine and thine? Why do they so Lie, Deceive, and Flatter one another? Why
do they forget God and His sayings, making no account of his Commandments?
Wherefore do they labor Night and Day to Get and Heap up Riches? Truly all
this is because they believe not That God has any care of them, or will or can
Revenge for them; And therefore it is necessary that they Help and Revenge
themselves; Otherwise they might look long enough unto Gods Hand, but be
overcome and starve before Roasted Geese fly into their mouths (as they say)
and before he will avenge them on their Enemies; And they might be killed ten
times over, and they might all beg their bread if they will have ought to do
with God and truth in good earnest: No, they must not be wanting to themselves,
but make their own Markets, by Lying, Deceiving, Cousening, and Usury. This,
This they are assured will do them good and enrich them. Whereas his
commandments would come too late for to Help them, and fail them at most need,
and the Word of God is an insufficient Help in Adversity; Therefore it pleases
them To kiss their own Hand, Hab. 1. 16.
To speak Big words, And to Admire themselves; for who else is Our God? says
the Whole world, by their Works.

Of that Great Idol of Man's Wisdom and Knowledge; How men kiss their own Hands,
and the whole world does diligently Worship Only it SELF, and the works of
their Own Hands, That is, the Inventions, Arts, Counsels, of their own Reason
and Wisdom.
What Other thing is the Worship of Idols, Superstition, Witchcrast, Evil
Doctrine and the Ordinances of men, Then the Wisdom, Reason, Inventions,
Crafts, Actions, Instincts and Prudence of men? Therefore the worshipping of
Idols, is but to fashion such a form, like unto God, not according to his word
as He Teaches, Figureth and Forms Himself In us, But according to our
opinion and Judgment of God. Moreover, what is sin, Other then Our own Will,
Wisdom and Counsel, Sown in the mind of Adam and in his posterity by the Seed
of the Serpent^ Consider the Purpose, Course, and Life of All mankind, where,
and how thou will, and it is nothing but Humane wisdom. Here Will every man be
his Own God; Lead, Teach, Govern, Actuate, Revenge, Defend, Excuse, Enrich
Himself, and the like; and every man's own Head, Will, and Reason, is instead of
A God unto Him; Though the sin and fall of Adam be nothing but Humane
Affectation, of The Cunning, Reason and Wisdom of the flesh, Which is therefore
worthily called by God, Folly, and Enmity against God, yea Death it self and
Devilish Wisdom.

All men ought with Christ, to bring Man to nothing, and by daily les^ening and
depressing Him, to make him An Ass, A Fool, and a Child: But now it is clean
contrary; All men build up The Man, that he may prove Wise, Glorious and
Famous: Here are so many Cartloads of Arts, to the end, The wretched and
unprofitable Man, may become Great, Eminent, Praised and Excellent; And may
obtain many Places Titles and Names. Here young men are purposely inslamed with
a desire of Glory, that they may not be content to sit in the lower form, but
may Domineer in the Pulpits and Teaching-places: And to the end, there are
Artificers employed to make the Scholars Accute, Witty, Knowing in all kinds of
Crafts, and Exercises, and in all Exercises, Arts and Literal Deceits, Whereby
it appears clearer then the Light, That the world is contrary, An Enemy to
God; Here, Every body Kisseth his own Hands, and Adoreth the Wisdom of his own
Wit: This he accounts instead of God, his Way and Word; and indeed which is
of all things The greatest and Only sin, and that very fall of Adam, And the
fountain whence all other sins do flow, as Job confesses; For this is to be
obedient and addicted to serve Himself, to Admire and Adore Himself, to follow
his Own will; Briefly, to be His Own; Being glad and willing to be somewhat,
and to do, to Omit and to know somewhat, in himself; and not to be utterly void
of all Name, W^ll, Work, and subject only to God, this is the Only and most
deadly Sin; Yea rather, the Sink and Mother of all Sin; For the Delight, Will
and Wisdom of the flesh, is Death it self; and a man is thereby no more
profitable, better, nor religious then a Swine in his death. But so far forth
as he does Nothing, knows Nothing, Wills nothing, but bears and suffers and
sees God, making Holy Day In Him, This man keeps the Sabbath Holy, being void
of skill and Will, is subject only to God; In Him to go Out, Work, Will, know;
Both How, What, When, and Why he pleases.

Now, The Whole World lies in This Death and Sin, for that it does nothing
else, but kiss i^s own hand, That is, Adore the Purpose, Counsel, Invention,
and wisdom of it self. To this purpose are all things Intended, Aimed, Drawn,
and Bent, Even the Holy Scripture and Words of God: Namely, to be consonant to
Our Reason, and not to cross Our Wisdom, Course and Way. But all these things
must be Overthrown and unlearned again, if we will see God. For therefore do
the Scriptures so Vehemently urge us to become Children and Fools; Vomiting up
again all the Art and knowledge of this Forbidden Tree, To be purged by the
strength of the Tree of Life: and consequently let Every man (in this case)
look and observe Himself narrowly what he does, And He shall find all this True
in his Own Breast.

THE Gospel-Treasury Opened: OR, The Holiest of All unvailing. The Second Part.
Containing I. Two Sermons on Psalm. 68. 17. entitled, Militia Coelestis, or the
Heavenly Host. II. Two sermons on Cant. 1. 7. Where Christ feeds, and where
his flock rests. III. A Sermon on Rev. 2. 17. Of eating hidden Manna. IV.
Heads of Sermons on Ier. 6. 13. Covetousness anatomized, or the generality of
Covetousness. V. A short Exposition on Psalm. 148. The Plus Ultra of the
creatures. VI. The substance of several Sermons on Luke 7. 40. Milk for babes,
meat for strong men. VII. Two Sermons on Exodus 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The
mystery, or the life and marrow of the Scriptures. VIII. The substance of
several Sermons on Mark. 1. 25, 26. True and divine Exorcism, or the Devil
conjured by Jesus Christ. IX. A Sermon on Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to
Jesus Christ in heaven and in earth.
Also added, I. Dionysius the Areopagite his mystical Divinity. II. Grave and
notable sayings in Latin and English. III. Sayings of a certain Divine of great
note. IV. Taulerus his holy glass or example of our Lord Jesus Christ. V.
Another short instruction by the same Author. VI. A short Dialogue between a
learned Divine and a beggar.


LONDON, Printed for Rapha Harford, At the Bible and States-Armes in Little
Britain, 1657.

Militia Coelestis: OR, The Heavenly Host: Two Sermons upon Psalm. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands of Angels. The Lord is among
them as in Sinai, in the Holy Place.
Out of which the Bishops pretended matter of high accusation against the
Author in their High Commission Court.

Preached at Giles Cripplegate when those masking Chariots and great shows were
presented and acted at the Court, the Temple, and in the City, after which
there was so much running to be Spectators: He chosing Texts on purpose
constantly (as his manner still was) and being our Saviors practice in the
Gospel, he making use of present things most in use, and most affected, to take
men off from admiring such vanities: or rather to take an advantage by them,
and thereby improving them, to raise up the mind to real Glories, which have so
few Lovers and Followers. Says our Savior, Matthew. 11. 17. Mat. 11. 17.
But we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned, Mat. 7.
17.
and ye have not lamented. And again (says he) Wide is the Gate, and broad is
the way that leads unto destruction, and many there be that go that way: but
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it, Mat. 7. 13.

SERMON. I.
AS this Psalm was undoubtedly David's, so it is more then probable the occasion
of penning it (as you may see at the b^ginning thereof) was upon the removing
of the Ark to Jerusalem, the City of David, from the house of Abinadab, 2 Samuel
6. 2 Samuel 6.
At which time David with the rest of the people of Israel, played on all
manner of Instruments, and danced before the Ark: Whereupon Michal his wife
Saul's daughter despised him for a fool: An ecstasy of joy seizing upon his
spirit, he enjoying so much of God in it, caused him to leap and dance before
it: She hereupon takes upon her to reprove, censure, and revile him, and in her
heart scorned him, says the text, v. 16. V. 16.
But David being lifted up, filled with divine joy, slighted her, and told her,
he would yet be more vile.

And the reason of this conjecture, is, because this Psalm begins with that
very Proverb that was appointed to be said at the rising of the Ark out of its
place, Number. 10. 25. Number. 10. 25.
Arise O Lord and let thine enemies be scattered; let them that hate him, flee
before him.

I dare not offer at any Method in the whole, nor at any connection in the
parts; For I find that all your curious Dichotomizers do but dream and play
with the Scripture, feeding themselves with fancies and not truth. For sure I
am, the only method that holy men of old observed, was to speak as they were
moved by the holy spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2 Pet. 1. 21.


But these words we have now read, they being a clause in this Psal^ I take
them as a Melchizedeck, without Father, without Mother, Heb. 7. 3. Heb. 7. 3.
so having no dependence, We will come to open the words, as having a
sufficient sense lying within themselves. There be many Expositions on this
place, which I will not trouble you withal; for men speak according to men;
but the Scriptures were written by Gods spirit, dictated by his own finger; for
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2
Pet. 1. 21.
We must therefore labor to find out (if it be possible) what is Gods mind in
the Scriptures, whatever men say.

I may call this Text as it is Luke 2. 13. Luke 2. 13.
Militia Coelestis, the Heavenly Host; There was with the Angel a multitude of
the Heavenly Host praising God; or as Jacob did the Angels, Genesis 32. 2. Genesis
32. 2.
when he saw the Angels, he said, This is Gods host; for there is in them both
greatness and terribleness, which is proper to the Angels of God.

But that we may give you the parts of the wo^ds, There are four things
represented in them. 1 Their Nature, they are called Chariots. 2 Their Number,
they are said to be twenty thousand, or thousands of thousands: that is, they
are innumerable or numberless. 3 In regard of their Names, they are here called
Angels. 4 In regard of the Commander of all these numberless number of Chariots
and Angels; and that is God himself.


The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels.

^ Their Nature, they are called Currus, Chariots.

The mention of Chariots is as ancient as any History either sacred or profane:
they being used both for peace and war.

In the first Book of Moses, Genesis 41. 43. Genesis 41. 43.
there is mention made of Pharaohs triumphant Chariot for Joseph, he that
exalted Joseph. And again in Exodus 14. 9. Exodus 14. 9.
of the Chariots of new Pharaoh that arose, which knew not Joseph, who pursued
Israel with Chariots, being drowned in the Sea, He and all his Chariots. And it
is said of Solomon that his Chariots were twelve thousand. But the greatest
number we read of in Scripture, is in 1 Chronicles. 19. 7. 1 Chro^. 19. 7.
were Hanun hired 32000 out of Mesopotamia, Syria and Zobah.

Now I say, Chariots were used in two regards: As the great men and Princes of
the Earth (besides that common use for ease) they had them either for their
state and glory, and those were for triumph; or else for terror and
dreadfulness, and those were for war.

Some Chariots were drawn with two horses, some with 4, some with 6 or else for
the more glory, they were sometimes drawn with men: So also as Chariots were to
several ends, so they were of diverse fashions; some were made of wood, and some
of Iron, and some were made with Hooks, according to their several uses and
Ends for which they were.

So our great God, when he will appear in

Triumph, or Terror,

Has Chariots at command, without borrowing, buying or hiting, etc.

And these Chariots are in one word HIS CREATURES: in which he rides when he
pleases: Either for Glory and Triumph, or else Terror and Battle.


1 Triumphant: As he is said to be fairer then all, Psalm. 45. 2. Psalm. 45. 2.
that is, there is none like him in mercies and compassions to those he loves;
Thou art fairer then the children of men; therefore Grace is poured into thy
lips: So he is terrible above all in fury and dreadfulness to those he hates,
Psa. 66. 5. Psalm. 66. 5.
Come and see the works of the Lord; he is terrible in his doing toward the
children of men.

Those are Gods Chariots of Triumph, when h^ rides upon the Cherubims, and
walks upon the wings of the wind; when he is clothed with Majesty and Honor,
and covers himself with light as with a garment; when he lays the beams of
his Chambers in the waters, and makes his spirits Messengers, Psalm. 104. Psalm.
104.
When he is clothed with Glory and Majesty, and comes forth like a Bridegroom,
and as the Sun is his Tabernacle, Psalm. 19. 5. Psa. 19. 5.
Then we may say, O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth,
Psalm. 8. 1.
who have set thy glory above the Heavens! And as it is here in the 24. Psalm.
68. 24.
verse. of this Psalm, so we may say, They have seen thy goings, O God, even the
goings of my God and my King, which art in the Sanctuary: The Singers go
before, and the players of Instruments followed after; among them were the
d^msels playing with Timbrels.

2 For Terror: Let us see which are Gods Chariots for Terror and War; as he is
fairer then all, so he is terrible above all, as I said before; as he is the
God of peace, Romans 16. 20. Romans 16. 20.
so he is the Lord of Hosts, Psalm. 24. 8. Psalm. 24. 8.
God then rides in his Chariots of Terror, when he makes darkness his secret
place; and at the brightness before him thick clouds passed, hailstones and
coals of fire. The Lord thundered in Heaven, and the Most High gave out his
voice, Hailstones and coals of fire. Psalm. 18. Psalm. 18.
When he rents the Heavens, and comes down, and causes the Mountains to flow
down at his presence, as when the melting fire burns to cause the waters to
boil, to make his name known to his Adversaries, that the Nations may tremble
at his presence, when he does terrible things which they looked not for, Isai.
64. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 64. 1, 2, 3.


And as in that Psalm 18. v. 26. Psalm. 18. 26.
With the pure thou will show thy self pure; so with the froward thou will show
thy self froward. That is, with those that will be at peace with him, he will
be ^t peace with them: and with those that are at war with him, he will be at
war with them. Yet think not that God changes. But so as it is in a Looking
glass, you know it represents unto you such shapes as is set before it; yet all
the change is in your selves, not in the glass; for the glass is always the
same in it self. If you frown upon it, it will frown upon you; if you laugh
upon it, it will laugh upon you; if you hug it, it will hug you; if you strike
it, it will strike you; if you embrace it, it will embrace you; if you turn
your back upon it, it will turn its back upon you.

Just so it is with our righteous God; as a man behaves himself toward him, so
will he show himself toward him: If we forsake him, he will forsake us, Chr.
15. 2. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
If we be stubborn toward him, he will be stubborn toward us. But if we cleave
to him, he will cleave to us; if we embrace him, he will hug and embrace us; if
we run toward him, he will run toward us: As you know what the Prodigals
father did; when he was yet afar off, but a coming and returning to his father,
Luke 15. 20.
His father ran to meet him, and fell on his neck and kissed him: And yet for
all this, God changes not, our God is always the same; there is no shadow of
change in him, but the change is in us: Jam. 1. 17.
And he appears so to us because we are changed: but in himself he is not nor
cannot be changed, Psa. 125. 1.
but is ever the same, like Mount Sion which cannot be moved.

^ But we go onto our Text, The Chariots of God.

Quest. Quest.
What are these Chariots of God?

Answ. Answ.
Look but round about thee, and thou shall see those innumerable Chariots and
Angels here spoken of; for so many Creatures as thou see, so many Angels and
Chariots of God thou see; they are all his Host, they are all his Chariots
wherein he rides; and whether you see it or no, The Lord is among them as in
Sinai, in his holy place. The glory of the Lord fills them all, had we but our
eyes open to see it so: and they are all at his command, and there is no
creature but does his pleasure.

Oh Brethren! how glorious and blessed a thing it is to behold and see, that
look how many Creatures visible and invisible thou see, or conceivest to be;
2 King. 2. 11.
For the soul now to look on them as so many fiery Chariots and Horsemen for its
defense and preservation! and on the other hand, Heb. 1^. 31.
how a fearful a thing it is to fall into the hand of the living God, who has
all these Angels and Chariots at his command, to execute his will and vengeance
on those that hat^ and oppose him! Amos 3. 8. Amos 3. 8.
when this Lion roareth who can but tremble? when God by any Creature roars
against a man, and threatens terror to any one; for when the Creature roars
and threatens, or when it comforts and smiles, it is God in it: I say, who is
he then that dare comfort? And if God speaks peace to a man, what Creature
dares, nay what Creature can terrify? If God be on our side, Romans 8. 31.
who can be against us? (...) likewise if God be against us, Job 20. 14.
who can be for us? If a man fly from a Bear, what help has he if a Lion meet
him? and to fly from an iron weapon, and a bow of steel strike him through?
when God is become thine enemy, who dare be thy friend? when God shall deny a
man comfort, then all comforts and Comforters fly from him: when the God of all
comfort shall deny his creatures power to comfort thee, then like Job, if thou
lay thee down, thou say, when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and thou
art full of tossings too and fro unto the dawning of the day, Job 7. 4.
Job 7. 4. He seeks for comfort, but none dare give: when the day comes he
wishes for the night; and when the night comes, he wishes for the day, and is
full of unquietness.

While a man is in the body, the Almighty has visible Chariots to ride in
toward thee: In this life he shoots visible arrows, Nah. 3. 2. The noise of a
whip, Nah. 3. 2.
and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pra^sing horses, and of
the jumping Chariots. He striks with visible swords; his Chariot-wheels shall
rattle against thee in poverty, disgrace, imprisonments in this life etc. these
are his rods, and whatever else seems bitter to us. Numb. 16. 32.
He has the earth to swallow thee up as it did Dathan and his company: and he
has waters to drown thee, as he did Pharaoh: he has Whips, Racks, Strapadoes,
Halters, and the like. All these he has, and a 100 times more he uses for the
body, in the hands of man.

But add unto these, the invisible torments of thy invisible part; And a
wounded heart, which (as Solomon says, and such who have felt it know full
well) is far above all the rest. The spirit of a man may sustain his infirmity,
Prove. 18. 14.
but a wounded spirit who can bear?

I but now if a man shall say (with David) Psalm. 139. 11. Obj. Psalm. 139. 11.
Peradventure the darkness shall cover me, and I will flee far hence: when I
have put off this body, I shall then be at rest; then dark death shall cover
me, and it shall ease me, and hide me from all these things.

No, Answ.
no; Then has thy God invisible Chariots in which he rides, and invisible
weapons, which shall pierce thy invisible soul: The day and the night are all
one to him, Psalm. 139. 12. V. 12.
When thou have put on death, he has then also fiery Chariots and Horses,
still to affright; amaze, pursue, wound, and kill with a never dying death. And
therefore let us learn to fear him who can cast both bo^^ and soul into hell.
Luke 12. 5.
But let us not fear any (...): Ephesians. 4. 20.
and I hope (especially some among us) we have not so learned Christ, as either
to fear them or trust in them.

Some (says David) Psalm. 20. 7. Psa. 20. 7.
put trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will trust in the name of
the Lord. These are things we should never regard: for all the Creatures are
but Chariots wherein God rides: therefore we should not much heed them, but God
in them: neither men nor things, but God only, who acts in them and by them;
for they can neither do us any good or hurt, (as of themselves) but as they are
acted and commanded by God, and therefore I say, we should neither fear them,
nor trust in them.

First, Not fear them; for so says our Savior, Mat. 10. 28. Mat. 10. 28.
Fear not him that can but kill the body, etc. Not trust in them, for says
David, A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man, Psalm. 33. 17.
Psalm. 33. 17. And again, put not you your trust in Princes, nor in the son of
man, Psalm. 146. 3.
in whom there is no help. For what is it that we trust to, when we trust in
them? Fear them not (says the Psalmist) why? for their breath is in their
nostrils, they are but a puff of breath, Isa. 2. 22.
which is soon past and gone: As soon as ever the Gate of our Life is broken
down by some disease or other, we come to nothing; Psalm. 127. 7.
The snare is broken, and our souls are escaped; and what can such poor
creatures do to us either for good or hurt?

Secondly, Trust not in them, no not in Princes, nor in the son of man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, in whom there is no (...) and wherein is he to be
accounted of? The words are very remarkable and emphatical: for when he had
said, Trust not in Princes; one would think he had gone to the highest pich of
power on earth; for what is greater, and who are of more power then Princes?
yet he adds, nor in the son of man, whose breath is in his Nostrils: that is,
when a man has trusted so long to things without himself, till he has no more
to trust to and all fail him; yet at last of all he will trust to himself, and
indeed the last trust is in a man's self: therefore Christ names this before
all, to deny a man's self, and take up his Cross herein daily.

But let us have our eye only upon God, and say as Elisha of Eli^ah, and
afterward as Ioash to Elisha, 2 King. 13. 14. 2 King. 13. 14.
so let us cry to God alone, O my father, my father, the Chariots of Israel and
the Horsemen thereof! for indeed he is the Horsemen and the Chariots. So when we
look round about us, both on the right hand and on our left, above or below us;
let us take heed we rest not in any Creature whatsoever: but let us look up and
see that God is the strength of Israel his people: and let us call upon him and
say, O my Father, my Father, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel! and to say
with Iehosaphat, in any strait, O our God we know not what to do, but our eyes
are upon thee.

But as I told you, there were chariots of diverse fashions; some that are made
open, and some made close. And of old the Princes and great Ones of the Earth
had Chariots of diverse fashions and for diverse uses: so has God Almighty; As
he has Chariots

Of Triumph, so of War

And those are both Offensive, to pursue. Defensive, to deliver.
So also the Lord Almighty has his Chariots

Both Open and close wherein he Rides.

In some of his Chariots, in some of his Creatures, God rides more close, in
some he rides more open: In some Creatures God is more apparently seen, in
others he is more hid: But yet I will say as Austin says of his Judgments; in
some he is more hidden, in others he is more manifest, yet in all he is always
just. And so say I of his presence in all his Creatures: in some he is more
conspicuous and apparent, in others more secretly, but in all alike truly, and
apparent to the seeing eye.

The Heavens are an open Chariot wherein he appears more visibly and plainly,
Psalm. 19. 1. Psalm. 19. 1.
The Heavens show forth the glory of God, and the Earth shows his handy Work;
d^y unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge. In these
God rides more openly; here ye may behold him with open face, as it is Ier. 23.
24. Ier. 23. 24
Ca^ any hide themselves in secret places from him? do not I fill Heaven and
Earth? says God.

So the Earth is a close Chariot, wherein he rides: God rides and abides in the
close and silent Earth, (though less glorious as to us) as well as in the open
and more glorious Heaven. Psalm. 18. 10, 11. He made darkness his secret place,
and his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds; he bowed
the Heavens and came down, and darkness was under his feet. It Is true, he fills
Heaven and Earth, but in the Earth we cannot see him so open and manifest:
Sometimes he hides himself in darkness, and sometimes he shows himself in
light: As he is light, so he clothes himself with light, Psalm. 104. 2. Psa.
104. 2.
like as he was to the Israelites: he went before them in a pillar of a cloud
by day, and in a pillar of fire by night, Exodus 14. 19, 20. Exodus 14. 19, 20.


He in himself is always invisible; but in his expressions and workings, he is
more secret, and more manifest, Isa. 45. 15.
Isa. 45. 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the
Savior. For God was both the cloud and the fire that went before and behind
the children of Israel, and he it was that filled the Tabernacle; he was in
both, though he expressed himself so diversely: And when we have put off this
Tabernacle of clay that hangs about us, 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
then we, whom he has appointed, shall see him as he is.

Yet let me tell you, no man can see God as he is, not in his Essence; no not
the Angels in heaven; they themselves are not capable of that, nor ever shall
be; but then the scales of Ignorance and blindness shall fall from our eyes,
and then we shall see his Influence into all Creatures, and how this infinite
God Flows into them all, as the river of Thames or the Sea, by its streams it
flows into all the adjoining Creeks and Arms, but into every one according to
their capacity, and not according to their own greatness, but according to the
greatness or littleness of those Creeks: So does our infinite God Flow into all
his Creatures; (yet these expressions are infinitely below him, and too narrow
to set out God to you) but something in a way of resemblance, I say after this
manner does the Almighty Flow into all his Creatures, into Angels, Archangels,
Cherubims and Seraphims, Into men, into beasts, birds, fish, into all
creatures, yet not according to his own infinite greatness, but according as
every one can receive him, and according to their capacity.

For if God should fill his creatures, or communicate himself to them beyond
their capacities, he should destroy his creatures: Exodus 33. 20.
As to Moses, God showed him as much as a creature could see and live: for if
God had showed him more, he had been blinded and undone by it: for things may
be as well invisible by too much light, as by too little; by excess of light,
as by want of light. As the Sun, if it should shine unto us in that excess of
light, that is in it self, and that it were not intercepted and interrupted by
vapors, and by thick and dull air; or, if we were nearer to it then we are,
we should see nothing at all. But whatever we see not of God now, while we are
in the world, it is not for want of light in God, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
but for want of light in us, because the thick scales and the thick Darkness
are still before our eyes, and the dark vail is upon our hearts: For God is
alike apparent in every creature, in regard of himself; yet the accidents and
matter that clothes God in the creature, hides him from our sight.

For if we ask the Sea, or the Winds, or Beasts, or Men of God, these all speak
dully and darkly of him: for thou art now a hidden God from our eyes, though
thou art in every creature; thou art the action, motion and being of every
creature; yet God himself is a hidden and a close God. As Jacob when he fell
asleep, Genesis 28. 17.
and dreamed, and when he awaked, he cries out, Oh how fearful is this place!
this is none other but the house of God: God was there before, but Jacobs eyes
were not opened, for God is in every place alike, and cannot be more in one
place then another, but till our eyes be opened, we can never acknowledge it:
but as soon as they are open, then we can cry, nay then we shall cry out, for
we cannot contain ourselves, with Jacob, with a holy fear and reverence, we
seeing the fullness of his presence every where: Oh how dreadful is this place!
this is none other but the house of God, and the gate of Heaven; doubtless the
Lord was in this place, and I was not aware.

Object. Object.
It Is true, you may say, I see indeed all the creatures are Gods House and his
Temple; but why does he call it The Gate of Heaven?

Ans. Answ.
Because every creature (when our eyes and ears are open) it plainly represents
and speaks out God with a loud voice; it leads us to see God himself, who is
not only the substance and being thereof, but he is the action, life and
motion thereof; it leads us to behold and enjoy the infinite God, who is heaven
it self: Then we shall come to see, and say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Hosts, Isa. 6. 3.
heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory: And then shall we cry
out one to another, as the Seraphims, Isa. 6. 3. And one cried unto another,
and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his
glory: Then we shall see him so fill all places, and all creatures (even as he
filled the tabernacle with his presence and glory) Insomuch that we shall be
overcome by his presence, and the excellency of his divine glory.

Take home this truth with you, and the Lord fix it in your hearts; meditate
and often think on it, till you come to see it and believe it, That God fills
every thing, though you see him not: And although he be hidden, not only from
men but even from the Angels themselves, in regard of his Essence; yet whatever
creature it be, how little so ever it be, it is the house of God, and the gate
of heaven; for this is Heaven upon earth thus to enjoy God; and therefore well
may Jacob call it The gate of heaven.

He fills even the lowest hell, and is as well in the damnedst Lucifer in hell,
as in the gloriousest Saint in heaven, in regard of his Essence; because he is
in that regard in all places alike: But here is the difference; the one sees
him not so, nor yields unto him the praise and glory of his infiniteness, and
of his filling all things, as the Saints and Angels do: to the one he is not
manifested to be in them; to the other he is gloriously; but they think they
have an Essence and Being of their own, even as all we poor ignorant men think,
who live not with and in God; And they think they are governed by their own
powers and wills and look on themselves as living out of God, and at a distance
from him (as indeed they do) because he is not manifested to be in them, as he
was to Jacob; and so far as any of us live at this remoteness, and as
strangers to God, we live in Hell, and in the very condition of Devils and
Reprobates.

But, O Lord, where am I? and to whom do I speak? I pray God I do not cast
pearls before swine: Mat. 7. 6.
Though these be glorious and undeniable truths, yet if you see them not so; I
expect no other then that you should turn again, and all to rent me, as our
Savior speaks: But the truth is also, I have outrun my self, and my own
purpose; for I feared (as the Apostle says) I could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual; for hitherto ye have not been able to bear these things, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
neither yet are ye able, I am afraid: But you must be led to the understanding
of them by low, mean and carnal things, and you must still be dealt with as
with children, because ye are not yet fit for strong meat, Heb. 5. 13, 14. Heb.
5. 13, 14.
For, when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach
you which be the first principles of the oracles of God, and are become come
such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat: for every one that uses
milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe.

But seeing providence has opened my mouth, the Lord open your ears, and your
eyes to see and understand, and that I may declare and show forth his praise
and Glory.

But our God himself describes himself what he is, and what his name is, Exodus
3. 14. Exodus 3. 14.
I am that I am; and yet also that expression comes infinitely short of what
God is, for he is inexpressable, unutterable; therefore I hope you would not
have me to set him forth to you, and give you to see and handle him who is not
to behandled nor to be seen; would you have me to show you him, that is, the
unknown God spoken of, Act. 17. 23. Acts 17. 23.
I confess I have read in some Authors, of the occasion of that Altar that was
erected To the unknown God; for (as they relate) they having been a long time
together afflicted with a great plague, they sacrificed to all their own Gods,
and to all the Gods they ever heard of, and were not delivered; at last (they
knowing and believing there was a God that could help them, but they knew him
not) they then sacrificed to that unknown God, and were delivered; whereupon
they erected that Altar, and ever after sacrificed To the unknown God.

But I would willingly ( so far as humane capacity can reach, and by the
assistance of Almighty God) unfold something of this our great God, who fills
all things; even this Unknown God: but so, as you must then say with Balaam,
Numb. 24. 17. Numb. 24. 17.
I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh: While you live
in the creature, and have your dependence upon the creature, you cannot now see
nor know God.

Beloved, if I go about to describe him to you by the way of Honor, by the way
of Credit, by the way of Health, by the way of Riches, or the like, or by any
creature, or by any worldly glories, happiness or enjoyments, it is impossible
to find him, Luke 1. 53.
or ever to come near him; for the rich he sends empty away: Or to find him out
by the way of addition or multiplication, we shall never find him; for if you
go from one glorious creature to another, and so multiply and add one to
another, higher and higher, till you come to the glorious heavens, and put them
altogether, yet these are infinitely short of God; for Is. 40. 12. Isa. 40. 12.
He has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out the
heavens with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure; he
has weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance: Therefore
none of all these things can fully set forth what God is.

Quest. Quest.
What then? how shall we find him?

Answ. Answ.
It must be by way of substraction, and taking away all that ever you can, and
then you come nearest to God (as Dionysius says in his Book of Mystical
Theology) In the way of poverty ye may find him; for our Savior says
expressly, Mat. 5. 3. Mat. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; And the
Virgin in Mary, He has filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he
has sent empty away, Luke 1. 53. by the way of substracting and taking away,
many have found him: Luke 1. 53.
If you seek after him thus, happily ye may feel after him and find him, though
he be not far from every one of us, Acts 17. 27. Acts. 17. 27.
but by adding or multiplying, you shall never come to see him.

For if you conceive God to be any thing that you can imagine; go as high as
you can, you do no other then make an Idol of him: For if you conceive God to
be [Light] which is the most glorious thing, he is no such thing; for he dwells
in light inaccessable: but take away this, and all sensible Accidents, as
Hardness, Softness, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Heat, Cold, Greatness, Littleness, and all that you can conceive, and this is
the way to know and to find out God: Then shall you come and draw near to Him,
who is the very image of the invisible God, ^ol. 1. 15. Col. 1. 15.
To him, who is the b^ightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of
his person; To him, who upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.
3. Heb. 1. 3.
and to Him who is the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7. 9. Dan. 7. 9.
and to Him that is I am that I am, Exodus 3. 24. Exodus 3. 24.
and to Him that that is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, Rev. 1. 8.
Rev. 1. 18.
This our great Jehovah is not to be measured or compared with any thing
competible to the creatures; for He infinitely transcends all the excellency of
all creatures, yea though all the glory and excellency, yea the quintessence of
all were gathered and summed up in one.

It may be when you have thought of God you would resemble him to some glorious
thing, and then you have thought of [Light,] when you have thought of him to
resemble him by; so, it may be you have sometime thought him to be [Sweet] but
he is not sweet, as we conceive of sweetness; for he is not the sweetness of a
Rose, nor of Honey, nor any such thing: he is not the lightness of the light,
nor the pleasantness of fruit, nor any such thing: But he is that by which all
these have their pleasantness, light and sweetness; and whatever excellency any
creature has, he is not that thing (as some have foolishly conceited) because
God is in them, therefore they are Gods etc. this declares in such much
ignorance and weakness: But he is the cause and being of all such excellencies;
and he himself infinitely transcends whatever can be thought or imagined. For
he that conceives in his God, that there is in him light, or sweetness, or
glory, (as we accont glory, or light, or sweetness) or that he should be Music
to the ear, or some glorious or glittering sight to the eye: he that conceives
God or Heaven to be any such thing whatsoever, he is deceived.

Beloved, I hope (though I have some cause also to fear it) that you are not so
childish as to conceive that there is Music, Viols, or Harps, or Organs, or
any such thing in Heaven; He transgresses against the first Commandment,
whosoever he be, that apprehends any of these things to be in God or in heaven,
according to the letter; Exodus 32. 4.
and he is as great an Idolater as he that makes A Golden Calf, and then falls
down and worships it; nay he is a more dangerous Idolater and Transgressor: for
the other Idolaters were so gross and absurd, that very reason condemns them;
but this is more spiritual, and more close Idolatry, and therefore more
dangerous; For the Kingdom of heaven consists not in meats and drinks, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Romans 14. 17.
that is, it consists not in food or raiment; in riches or honors, or
whatever is accounted precious or amiable to the world: but says our Savior,
The Kingdom of God is within you; and again, My Kingdom is not of this world,
neither comes it with observation.

But I say more then all this, he that would find God, let him be silent, and
sit in darkness, neither to see any thing, nor to hear any thing; for he that
thinks he hears or sees any thing, or thinks of any thing, that has any manner
of form or thing in his imagination when he thinks of God, he is an Idolater:
As for instance, will you see God in a man? as he is in a good man, so he is
also in an evil man: God or Christ dwells in them both, in regard of Essence,
both in good and bad: but here is the difference, Christ lives not, is not
formed in them, (as to them) in the one; but in the other he is, as to them:
the one sees it, and knows it, and prizeth, and rejoices in the seeing,
knowing, and believing of it; the other does not, but is Anathema Maranatha,
and separated from Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. 1 Cor. 16. 22.


Christ lives in every man, in regard of himself, and is as much in the one, as
in the other: But, I say, here is all the difference, to the one Christ is
manifested, to the other he is not; God lives in all, but all know it not: A
good man has God in him, and he sees, knows and believes it; the other do
neither see, know, nor believe it, and so rejoice not in the manifestations of
God in them: but they believe they have a power, Hab. 1. 16.
will, and a Being of their own, and this they glory and rejoice in, presume
on, Acts 17. 28.
and live to themselves, and sacrifice to their own drags, and regard not God,
in whom they live, move, and have their being.

Again, would you see God in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, or in Beasts or Trees,
and in all other creatures? Know, he is the Life, Act, Motion of all creatures:
take away from all or any of these all that may be taken away, all Accidents,
and then that which remains is God. In the Sun, or Moon, or any thing else,
you must first strip it of all visibility, and of all form and representation,
Glorious or Base, and then you shall behold God, not as that form; but as the
Cause, Essence, and Being of whatever is in it: Or, as in a man, take from him
highness and lowness (for those are Accidents) weight and lightness, greatness
and littleness, youth and age, for all these are Accidents; and what remains
then but he that was, and is, Col. 3. 11.
and is to come? the All in all; Rev. 1. 8.
he that is Alpha the first of all; and shall be Omega the last of all: What
remains then but the first begotten of the Father, Jesus Christ? even him that
is the Ancient of days, he that is above all, through all, and in all, Ephesians.
4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 6.


For beloved, there was something of me, before I was either hot or cold;
before I was either dry or moist; before I had either weight or lightness; yea,
before I had any manner of shape; These things, I say, being taken away, what
remains then but he that is I am? He that is Alpha and Omega: For take away
heights and depths, things present, and things to come, and then nothing can
separate Christ and us, as the Apostle in that case reasons, Romans 8. ult. Romans
8. ult.
He was persuaded nothing could separate him from Christ; neither death, nor
life, nor angles, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor heights, nor depths, nor any other creature, should be able
to separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: For
nothing hinders or separates us from Christ in this case but these things:
Although I know many men say and teach in a general way, sin is the cause of
separation, which is a truth, but too general a truth: But this is a cause more
particular, and the cause of abundance of particular sins. Seek therefore to
remove the root and cause; and then particular fruits, effects and branches
will wither and dye of themselves.

For were it not for the vail of Accidents that is between God and us, we
should see God: we might then see God in the Gold, and God in the Light, God in
the Sun, and God in the Water, and God in the Earth, God in the Trees, and God
in the Flowers, and God in every pile of Grass, and God to be All in All: were
but those things, those Accidents removed from our sight; for where any thing
moves, God is the mover; nay, where any thing has a Being, a Substance, he is
the Being of that Being, the Substance of that Substance, (if we may call any
thing Substance or Being but God.) For he is the Motion and being of every
thing, great or little, glorious or mean, they are all, not only his
workmanship, as most men teach and believe, but he is also their Substance and
Being: and the Saints, They see that the Lord is among them as in Sinai: and
that he was not more present and glorious in Mount Sinai, then he is in all
Creatures.

And further let me tell you, this is The Angel of the Covenant spoken of in
the Revelation, whom these types and shadows not only represent, and point to;
but they are also those which hide and blind him from our sight, Isa. 12. 6.
Isa. 12. 6.
Cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Zion, Great is the Holy One of Israel in
the midst of thee; He that is an Inhabitant of Zion, will upon the sight of God
in any Creature, fall down before him, in a holy ecstasy and amazement of
spirit fall down and worship him; The seeing him to be so Infinite and Great,
and filling all things; that they must with the Prophet (in an holy ravishment
and ecstasy, as being made drunk, overcome and swallowed up) cry out and shout,
Great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

The word in the Original signifies, in the inmost inwardest part of thee. When
this Divine Being shall arise, discover and rouse up it self before the poor
soul that never saw him before: Oh! how amazed, ashamed and confounded is it in
it self! This seeing of God is only peculiar to the Saints, God is only
manifested in them, and to them; but not at all in Reprobates: but he is hidden
and removed from their sight and believing, though not at all out of them.

The Chariots of God are (...) thousand, yea, even thousands of Angel^; the
Lord is among them as in Sinai.

You see I hope by this what sweet and glorious truths are couched in these few
words: These words I think many of you have read oftten; but how few have (...)
them? You may see now by this Doctrine, what a glorious privilege the Saints
have, to have Christ dwelling in them by faith; Ephesians. 3. 17.
so that they see not only that their bodies are the Temples of that great and
Holy One, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
but they by faith see him filling and dwelling in all Creatures: And know
this, that God is not revealed or manifested, but only in and to the Saints;
not effectually and operatively, though notionally and in words men may
acknowledge these things; but they are not inwardly thus filled, amazed,
overcome, and swallowed up with the glory of the Lord, even as the glory of the
Lord filled the Tabernacle.

For they can and must say and cry out of all (...), Psalm. 84. 2.
Oh! How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my soul longs, yea,
even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God; when shall I come and appear before God! A day in thy (...) is
better then a thousand elsewhere. I had rath^^ be a Doorkeeper in the house of
my God, (...) dwell in the Tents of wickedness. Those are (...) wickedness where
God is not seen; and (...) in (...), and have their habitatio^ the Tents of
^edar. But that man that enjoyes God thus, his soul is filled with the fullness
(...) ^reatness of his presence: even as the house (...) with the odor of that
ointment, Ioh. 12. 3. Ioh. 12. 3.
How was blessed Mary taken with those sweet drops that fell from her Saviors
lips! Luke 10. 39. Luke 10. 39.
who made it her whole business, content, and happiness: nay, whose All it was,
so she could but sit at his feet, stare in his face, hang upon his lips, and
hearken to his honey-dropping and healing words! Oh! blessed is that man that
thus sees thee, and trusts in thee! and no marvel that these men undervalue
all the afflictions and all the glory of the world, and see that they are not
worthy to be compared with this glory revealed in them; as the Apostle says
concerning afflictions, Romans 8. 18. Romans 8. 18.
All glories are nothing, and all afflictions are light and vain, compared to
this fullness of God, filling all things.

The next thing considerable, is their number, and they are said to be twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels: many Interpreters differ in the explanation
of this number, but I having viewed al or most of their judgments, I conclude
that here a certain number is put for an uncertain, as it is often in
Scripture, as Numb. 10. 36. Numb. 10. 36.
when the Ark was set down and rested, this Proverb was appointed to be said at
its seting down, Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel: there is put
an uncertain number, but in the margin you may see the word signifies a certain
as well as an uncertain number, and an uncertain as well as a certain, either
of both. Which Interpretation gave Hierome and Novatianus the hint to say in
plain words twenty thousand, or thousands of Angels: that is, they are
innumerable, infinite, immense: And I think that interpretation is best and
most agreeable to the manner of the Scriptures expressions, and to the meaning
of the word here used, and elsewhere: For the Hebrew word Ribboth signifies ten
thousand in all numbers, and Ribbaboth is interpreted, 2 Samuel 18. 7. ten
thousand: and Rebaboth the plural number, is rendered Numb. 10. 36. the many
thousands of Israel, which come all from the Verb Rabbah multiplicavit, and
Rabmultus, which gave Hierome and Novatianus that hint before expressed.

Then the Chariots of God are numberless, that is, no man can number them; not
but that God can number them, and call them all by their names, as David says
of the Stars, Psalm. 147. 4. Ps. 147. 4.
for any number that can be numbered, is but like the number of the Beast, Rev.
13. 18. which is according to the number of a man: but God numbereth all
things: for as he made all things in weight and measure, so in number, Wisd,
11. 17. Wisd. 11. 17.
Suppose as great a number as can be numbered, as great as can be called or
named, yet Gods numbering is beyond all thought, and to us it is impossible to
number them. If all the words that ever I spoke, or ever shall speak, were
unmbered: if the minutes that are past since the world began were numbered,
this is beyond the number of a man. But God can number all things, he has made
all things both in number, weight, and measure* but himself is the plot, the
standard, the measure of all; and the measure, scales, and weights, are all his
own: for he numbers not according to the number of a man, nor he weighs not as
man weighs. It suffices therefore that the number of his Chariots are as the
number of his ways, both in difficulty and number; no man can find them out,
they are unsearchable, and past finding out, so that we may well with the
Apostle, Romans 11. 33. Romans 11. 33.
cry out, Oh, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out!

He weighs the World in a balance; but what is all the world to him? it is but
as the drop of a Bucket, and as the dust of the Balance, and as the drop of
the morning dew to the Ocean: yea, infinitely far less and inconsiderable; It Is
true, that in Esaias 40. 12. Esa. 40. 12.
He measures the waters in his fist, and metes out the Heavens with his Span,
and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure; but the Omer and Ephah are
both his own. Ps. 147. 4.
And it is true, he tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by
their names: but as they are his Stars, so they are numbered by his
Arithmetic; for they are not according to the number of a man. As God says to
Abraham, Genesis 15. 5. Genesis 15. 5.
Look toward Heaven, and tell the Stars if thou be able to number them, so
shall thy seeed be.

I hope Beloved by this time you begin to see what a numberless number of
Chariots and Angels God has ready pressed at his command for any errand he
pleases to send them on: and also how easily our Savior, the great Archangel
of the Covenant, and Michael Captain of the Lords hosts, could have commanded
more then 12 Legion of Angels, Mat. 26. 53. Mat. 26. 53.


Beloved, I will propound it very briefly to you in two things, or two
Scriptures, wherein ye may a little have a glimpse of God, and a small scantling
of God, and of God Almighties Arithmetic: and if this small scantling and
little glimpse be so wonderful, what is his perfection? what is himself? what
is his Essence and glorious Being?

One shall be from that which David says, Ps. 90. 4. Ps. 90. 4.
A thousand years with God are but as yesterday, or as one day: there is no
succession of time with him. In a thousand years (you know) are 365000 days,
and all this time is to God but as one day is to us: Then who can number days
with God? so who can number Gods Angels, his Armies and his Chariots? they are
to us infinite, and numberless as to men; we must not nor cannot number them,
no, not according to the number of a man: As we must not measure God by man's
measure, so God numbers not by man's number, nor measures not by man's measure:
for whenever ye read of God expressed under any Name or Attribute, measure
him not as you apprehend of that Attribute; but as infinitely beyond it, as the
Ocean to the Drop, and far, far beyond.

Beloved, when we think of God, we must go backward from our first principles
that were born with us, or instilled into us by our Teachers, or acquired by
our industry, and unlearn what we have been learning so long, or rather
transcend and forget and forsake all that knowledge of him: we must be stripped
from all carnal apprehensions of God, so as to measure him by any thing we can
comprehend. And to teach us this Arithmetic, Isa. 28. 10.
we had need have line upon line, line upon line, and precept upon precept,
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, before ever we can
learn these things: for they are far above us.

As all the ways of God are unknowable, unsearchable, Romans 11. 33. Romans 11. 33.
so all the Armies of God are unsearchable, unknowable: and the Chariots of God
are all the ways of God. And both Chariots and Ways are his Creatures: God
has his ways in all his Creatures: his goings forth and workings in all the
Creatures, are but the goings forth of himself; they are but the displayings of
his own wisdom, power and greatness. Be hmoth is called The Prince of the ways
of God, Job 40. 19. Job 40. 19
And David says Ps. 77. 19. Ps. 77. 19.
Thy ways are in the Sea, and thy paths are in the deep; and the Lord has his
ways in the whirlwinds, and in the Storms, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet, Nah. 1. 3. Nah. 1. 3.
And whatever God is, he is infinitely so as he is: If he be called [good] he
is infinitely good: If Being, he is infinite in Being, and he only has a
Being: for if any thing else has a being, he cannot be infinite; All things
but God, are but shadows, bubbles, soon vanish, soon up and soon down: and if
he be all power, and all wisdom, etc. as most certainly he is; then there is no
power nor wisdom, etc. but only his, either in Heaven or Earth: and if his be
all the glory, Mat. 6. 13.
then no Creature has any glory: if his be all the power, Kingdom, and glory,
as in the conclusion of the Lords Prayer; then no Creature can claim any; and
yet how commonly do men ascribe and appropriate these to themselves, and wipe
their mouths, and say, I have done no evil?

The second thing, wherein I would have you take a scantling of God, or of Gods
Arithmetic, or of his ways, is from that place, Dan. 7. 10. Dan. 7. 10.
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. I
could make a strange inference upon his calculation; but the bed is shorter
then a man can stretch himself upon it, and the covering narrower then he can
wrap himself in it, Isa. 28. 20. Isa. 28. 20.
Therefore well may we (with the Prophet) conclude, v. 23. Verse. 23.
Precept must be upon precept, Isa. 28. 13.
and line upon line, etc. that ye may go backward and be broken, snared and
taken.

Beloved, ye must be undone, and broken, (as to your selves and your own wisdom
and parts:) Verse. 9.
and then begin again, Line upon line, and line upon line, here a little and
there a little: for says he, whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall be
make to understand Doctrine? even them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn
from the breasts. For we have hitherto made lies our refuge, and under falsehood
have we hid our selves, v. 15. Verse. 15.


Then Beloved, if God be so infinitely great as he is, so that he is all
greatness, all wisdom all power, so that he comprehends, commands, acts all
things, fills all things in Heaven and Earth: Oh! All you, the people and
children of God, look about you, and behold your Portion: none has such a God
as you; none has such a Protector as you; none has such a Father, such a
Provider as you have: Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
Oh happy! Oh happy! yea, thrice happy indeed art thou that have but these
everlasting arms under thee, and his right hand to defend thee, and his care to
provide for thee; what need thou to fear? what need thou to care? thou
art safe for ever.

Henceforth let not any proud flesh quarrel at, or any doubtful soul wonder at,
or question our Saviors words, Mat. 10. 30.
saying how can it be that all the hairs of our heads are numbered? and that
not one can fall to the ground without him? for by infinite ways he is
infinitely present with all things in all places.

But let all that hate or slight this great God, tremble at his stupendous
presence greatness and power: For Nahum 1. 3, 4, Nah. 1. 3, 4.
5. Though the Lord be slow to anger, yet he is of great power, and will not at
all acquit the wicked, who has his way in the whirlewind and in the storm; and
the cloud are the dust of his feet: for at his pleasure he rebukes the Sea,
and makes it dry, and dries up the Rivers; Bashan languisheth, and Carmel,
and the flower of Lebanon; The Mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and
the earth is burnt up at his presence, yea the world and all that dwell
therein: who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide the fierceness
of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down
by him, and darkness shall pursue his enemies. Think upon this all you that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.
ult. Psalm. 50. ult.


But (says he) Psalm. 61. 3. Ps. 61. 3.
The Lord is good and is a strong Hold in the day of trouble, and he knows
them that trust in him.

Oh Beloved! Let us all then give glory from our souls to this our great God:
to this infinite and everlasting Being, who fills all things; and let us all
pour out o^r souls before him like Water, and be melted to nothing in his
presence. And to that end.

First, Let us subscribe to the infiniteness of our ^od in all his Attributes,
in all his ways, and in all his Creatures; Let us always believe it, and have
him continually before us, that we may tremble to offend him, even the
wickedest man; And that godly men may both fear and love him, and that they may
with strong confidence be rooted; resting, and depending on him who is the rock
of Ages: And

Secondly, Let us cry out (with Moses) in continual acclamations in that
powerful Orarion, Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
when ever we think of him, or behold him, There is none like the God of
Iesurun, who rides upon the Heavens for thy help, and in his excellency upon
the sky: For the eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the Everlasting
Arm. Thou can be in no trouble but he is by thee, with thee; in the fire, or
in the water, where ever thou art. Ps. 34. 7, 8. Ps 34. 7, 8.
The Angels of the Lord encamp round about them that fear him: O taste and see
that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him: O fear the Lord
ye his Saint, V. 10.
for there is no want to them that fear him: The young Lions may lack and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any thing.

Jacob when he went from his fathers house, was afraid he should have wanted,
Genesis 28. Genesis 28.
but God appeared to him in a dream, and he beheld a Ladder reaching from Earth
to Heaven. The longest Ladder that ever was read of, or ever heard of, and the
greatest builder has made it, and only for his own use: And Jacob by it saw
that the providence of God was every where, and Angels were continually passing
up and down upon it; being sent of the Almighties Errands, not only for
protection, but to be ministering spirits, sent forth not only for the good of
those who shall be heirs of Salvation, but for the good of all his Creatures.
So that we may say of the providence of God as David says of his presence, for
they are both one, Psalm. 139. 7. Ps. 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy presence? if I ascend into Heaven thou art there;
there is the top of the Ladder: if I descend into the deep, thou art there;
there is the bottom of the Ladder.

The builders of Babel aimed to make such a Ladder; Genesis 11.
but that which they could never do, the builder of Heaven and Earth has done:
but were they not very fools to think to build a Tower of ten thousand times
1000000 miles high? But let us labor to see the eternal God at the top of this
Ladder, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
and everlasting arms at the foot of it, and then how can we doubt? Ps. 147. 9.
He that hears the Ravens when they cry unto him, who have neither faith nor
understanding, shall he not hear thee, O thou of little faith? It is against
both the promise and against the practice of your Father, that any of you
should want any good thing; Yet how full of complaints are all the sons of men?
one wants children, another friends, others honor, others riches, others
health, others preferment, some all these: but certainly you are deceived, you
do not want any of them; for if they were good for you, and you had them not,
then indeed you wanted them: but being not good for you, you want them not; for
they in such a case will do you more hurt then good. Therefore I say let the
servant of God that thinks he wants any of these things, pray for what he will,
and he shall have it, if he do really want them: for not only all inanimal or
unreasonable Creatures (which are Gods Angels when he pleases) do owe their
Suit and Service unto those that fear the Lord, but even all the Angels of God
in heaven, they are all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their
sakes which shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. Heb. 1. 14.


Nay let me tell thee, if thou will command the Sun to stand still, and the
Moon in the valley of Ajalon as Ioshuah did, it shall be done: or the Sun to go
backward upon the Dial, Josh. 10. 12.
as Hezekiah did, or the Rocks to gush out water, and the Heavens rain down
Manna, or the waters to be divided, Isa. 38. 8.
and the Sea to stand up as a wall, as Moses did; Numb. 20.
all shall be done, and they shall obey rather then any of Gods people shall
want any good thing. Exodus 10. 25.
Or if he will command Iron to swim, as Elisha did; Ps. 78. 13.
Nay let him command the Covenant of night and day to be broken, and time to be
no more, 2 King. 6. 6.
and it shall be done; Isa. 54. 9.
for Gods word can never fail; nay, heaven and earth shall pass away, Rev. 10.
6.
but not one jot of his word shall fail. Mat. 5. 18.


But for all this, I know, and methinks I hear your murmuring thoughts still;
for all this you are not yet satisfied: And you say with Job, Does the wild
Ass bray when he has grass, or loweth the Ox over his fodder? Job 6. 5.
can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in
the white of an egg? We are sure we do want these things, or else we would not
complain, we are sure we have them not: and is there any sweetness in nothing?
had we fodder, we would not low nor complain.

I answer, Indeed that may be, that you are without them.

1. It may be you are not of the family of your heavenly father; then what
right or interest have you to expect them? but you are servants to sin, and to
his enemies, and yet would have him let you want nothing.

2. There is a great difference between not having and wanting: It may well be
that you have not riches, and honor, and preferment, etc. but if you be the
true servants of God, it cannot be that you should want them. Ps. 119.
David says it was good for him that he wanted, and that he was in trouble.
There is oftentimes more mercy from God and more comfort to us in Gods Rods,
then in these outward things which are only esteemed Blessings; for they are
often no other but rods or else meat to fat us for slaughter: for our happiness
and comfort lies not in that which the tender and delicate, or wanton flesh and
blood says is good, as to eat Calves out of the stall, and Kids out of the
flock, and then rise up and sing to the sound of the Vial, Amos 6. 5.
and the Harp. Can there be any true comforts in these discomforts? which if
attained are but vanity, and if not attained, are vexation of Spirit, Teshavah,
Teshelemoth; nay most commonly better not attained then attained, because they
prove but snares and destructions. But here may be applied that of Sampsons
riddle: Iud. 14. 18.
out of the sour came forth sweet, and out of the eater meat: therefore O that
we could behold the love of God in all conditions.

Indeed there is nothing happens to the wicked, that has any thing of love in
it; but if we belong to him, how he^vy soever the afflictions be, or how evil
or unjust soever the Instrument be, from him it is always just, and is in
love, and intended for our good: and the issue shall be sweet, just and good.
Shall then any servant of God grudge at whatever such a Tender father lays upon
him? we suffer the fathers of our bodies to correct us, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 12. 9. Heb. 12. 9.
and we gave them reverence; and shall we not much rather be in subjection to
the father of spirits and live? so verily they for a few days chastened us for
their pleasure; but he for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
holiness. I might show you in many things wherein our profit by afflictions
arises; but this is not our point in hand: we must return to it, that we may
end at present, and commit you to God.

And let not me think, because there are so many men and creatures in the
world, in Heaven and in Earth, to provide for, defend and protect, that
therefore I shall be neglected; or that he has not Armies and Angels enough to
defend me; or that thou, who ever thou art, that trustest in him, shall be
neglected: no, no. To think, because Kings and Princes and great Ones have
Angels to defend them; therefore to doubt there will be none or not enough to
mind or to assist me. Yea, yea, fear not, he has Chariots enough to assist
all; yea all his Creatures in all places, in all times, through all ages.

Beloved, those sweet Babes, the Kings children that now are; How pleasant are
they? they take their sleep, their food, and their play, and care for nothing;
And yet little do they think how many heads must bleed, and hearts must ache
before their royal persons can be touched: but I say, they take their play and
sleep quietly in their Cradles, and neither fear nor care touches them.

So my beloved, Let the true royal seed of God do so Let all Gods Servants lie
down in peace and take their rest, and say, O Lord thou alone make me dwell in
safety, Psalm. 4. Psalm. 4. 8.
for their Gods Armies lie round about them, and shall make them all dwell
safely; They cannot be touched or hurt, For besides all this, that these
millions of Angels both in Heaven and Earth are their Guard; That great General
himself, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is their Savior and Protector:
and his Everlasting Arms are under them for evermore.

But it may be their infirmities and their ignorance will not let them see it or
confess it; yet little do they know, how many thousand thousands of the Armies
of God must be overthrown before Gods people, or any one of his children can be
touched; before ever any one member of Jesus Christ can be hurt: for this God,
as he is great and dreadful, so he is a God infinite in bowels and compassions,
who fills and commands all Creatures, and all his Armies and Chariots are for
their defense, relief and protection.

And therefore, from henceforth and for ever, let us all cry out in an holy
admiration,

Oh the Height, Depth, Breadth, and Length, of his Power, and Mercy, and
Loving Kindness.

1 HEIGHT.
For says David, Psalm. 36. Psalm. 36. 5.
Thy Mercy O Lord is in the Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds.

Thy righteousness is like the great Mount ains and thy Judgments are a great
deep: V. 6.
O Lord thou ^reservest man and beast.

How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! V. 7.
therefore the children of men put their trust under the ^adow of thy wings.

^hey shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, V. 8.
and thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures.

For with thee is the fountain of life, V. 9.
and in thy light we shall see light.

2 DEPTH.
Psalm. 86. 13. Ps. 86. 13.
Great is thy mercy toward me, thou have delivered my soul from the lowest Hell.

3 BREADTH.
Psalm. 104. 24. Ps. 104. 24.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

4 LENGTH.
Psalm. 98. 3. Psalm. 98. 3.
He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Isaael: all the
ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

And now Brethren, if this OUR great God be Lord and Governor of the House,
what then can be out of order?

If he be our spenditory, our house of Store, what fear of want?

If he be our Treasurer, what fear of poverty?

Surely he has enough and enough, infinitely more then enough: He can make the
Philosophers Stone, he can make gold, he can and will create comforts: and
therefore let all these things stay your hearts, and depend on him, as on that
Rock to whom there is none like him: though all the men, and all the Kings and
Princes on earth should consult and conspire together, and all contribute their
utmost to make thee happy, yet there is none like the God of Iesurun, who
rides upon the Heavens in his help, and in his excellency upon the sky: for
the eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are

THE EVERLASTING ARMS.

And so I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and bring you on to perfection.

Militia Coelestis: OR The Heavenly Host: The second Sermon upon Psalm. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands of Angels. The Lord is among
them as in Sinai, in the Holy Place.
At Giles Criplegate, in the Afternoon, the Repetition omitted.
WE may well call this Verse The heavenly warfare: wherein (as I told you) were
contained four things. 1 Their nature, they are the (hariots of God, because
God was pleased to ride in them. 2 Their number, the Text says, that they are
twenty thousand thousands of Angels; and I told you from the Text, that they
were Infinite. 3 Their name, they are called Angels. 4 Their Commander, and
that is [God] The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels.


We spoke of these two in the forenoon; we come now to the two last. The third
is their name [Angels]

There is much adoo about this name of Angels, what they are, what their nature
is; but we will not now stand much upon that; the most do consent that all the
creatures are Angels.

The word it self signifies especially in this pla^e, an ambassador, or a
messenger: now all the creatures being so, messengers or ambassadors from God,
they must needs all be Angels: But if a man should speak now unto the wisest in
Israel, and tell them, that God sent Angels into every womb, there to frame and
create the Infant, would he not wonder! But what if I should say that the very
forming-power is an Angel? This could not be digested; yet it is true, for
every particular influence in every creature, is an Angel; and observe this,
that never any one Angel was sent on two errands, nor never any two Angels on
one errand; for all the whole creation do jointly together sing the infinite
praise of their most wise Creator; there is not the wickedest man alive but
sings and sounds forth Gods praise as much as the holiest (though it may be
against their wills) for if they sing not the praise of his mercy, yet they
sing as much to his praise, the glory of his Justice. God makes even the very
worst of his creaturs sing a part of his praise.

Ask the craggy Mountains what part they sing, and they will tell you, they
sing the praise of the immutableness, unchangeableness of God: Ask the flowers
of the field, what part they sing? and they will tell you, they sing the wisdom
and liberality of God, who clothes them beyond Solomon in all his glory. Ask
the Sun, Moon and Stars, what part they sing? they will say, the constancy of
Gods promises, that they shall hold their course, and not alter it: Ask the
poor received sinner what part he sings? and he will tell you, he sings the
infinite free mercy of a most gracious Father: And ask the wicked obstinate
sinner, what part he sings? and he will tell you, he sings the praise of his
patience and Justice.

And truly my beloved, not one creature but sings apart, and yet all together;
all that ever were, and that are, and that ever shall be, put all together, yet
they do not sing, no not the thousand thousand part of this infinite, eternal
God: As the Queen of Sheba, when she came and heard Solomon's wisdom, she
confessed that what she heard of him in her own Country, although incredible,
yet it was not the tenth part of that she saw and heard: so though all
creatures sing Gods praise, yet All, and all, if they were a thousand times
more then they are, yet they all do not yield the thousand thousand part of
that honor and praise that is due to him; for he has all perfections in him;
and he also gives and distributes to the several creatures those several parts
and portions they have.

As I have often told you, the perfection of any one species, cannot be known
by any one individual: And so Gods Church is a glorious Church, taken not as
being in any one member, but in the complete body: As the perfections of a man
cannot be known by any one man; for if one man have wisdom, another has
sobriety; if one has patience, another man has temperance; so that the beauty
of the Church cannot be known by any one member, be it never so excellent: If
Abraham has faith, Job has patience; if Joseph has chastness, Moses has
meekness, etc. so that as you must not look for the perfections of a man in one
man; for, if one be as fair as Absalom, another is as proper as Saul: if one
has proportion, another has sobriety, etc. so neither must we look to see the
admirable perfection of the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 4. 7.
that is all fair, and has no spot, by one member; neither by all that are now
living upon the earth, or that were; but look upon all that ever were, are, and
shall be, and add to them their Head [Christ] and then it is a beautiful
Church indeed, and in her no spot at all; So though every creature express God;
One, one attribute: another, another: and they speak his praise wonderfully;
yet they come infinitely shorr of him: and though altogether they say somewhat,
yet not the tenth part of him: not the tenth part of his Justice, not the tenth
part of his patience not the tenth part of his Mercy* etc. One is sent to
deliver a message of his love, another a message of his justice, another a
message of his patience, another a message of his liberality and bounty, all of
several errands; and whatever message he sends any creature on, he is always
just; they all do but his will; Though they sin, and transgress, and therein
think they do their own will, and that makes it sin: but they all do his will,
therefore it is said, Psalm. 103. 20.
Ps. 103. 20. Bless the Lord all ye hosts, ye Angels that do his pleasure; and
although it be more properly spoken of those Angels that are invisible in the
air, and in the heavens: yet it may well be also applied to all creatur^^; for
he has made them very little lower then the Angels; Psalm. 8. 5.
only in the Angels below, matter prevails above the form; but in the Angels
above, form prevails over the matter; for if our forms were not bounded and
fastened to the earth, by their matter, even we should be as the Angels of God:
so that we should no sooner think or desire to be in any place, were it never
so far off, but we should immediately be there; for, how soon can my spirit
convey it self in thought thousands of miles? but my body cannot be there, but
by times and succession of gradation, and by steps.

The reason is, because the form is imprisoned in the matter; earth goes to
earth, and ashes to ashes, and dust to dust, naturally, because it is its
center: but the spirit goes upward naturally; the higher we go from the earth,
the more pure the elements; and the nearer the earth, the more gross, the more
dull, the more sad and lumpish; it is impossible that a heavy body should hang
in the air; for every thing tends and bend to his center; if it be a heavy
body, it will fall downward; the water is purer then the earth, the air then
the water, the light then the air, the fire then the light, and so more and
more spiritual, till you come to him, who is All Spiritual, Spirit it self.

And for those Angels are out of our sight, which are said to be in heaven, you
know there are degrees of them; some are Angels, some Archangels, some
Cherubims, and some Seraphims; (...) therefore if you have observed it, if ever
ye saw Angels pictured, they were drawn with complete bodies, from head to
foot, but yet to show they are above a man, and more spirit, therefore they
have always wings, which show that they are above us in their Nature, and are
carried above our element,; but Archangels they are pictured with half bodies,
cut off at the middle, with wings: showing that they are further off from
matter; but Cherubims they have faces only, with wings, showing that they are
further off then all these: but Seraphims they are pictured as it were, without
any form or matter at all, only with a kind of fiery flame, or yellowishness:
Therefore now of these Angels that are above us, we can say little of them;
because men being in Nature below, and they above our element; Even as if we
should ask a Toad, what man is? it could say nothing, because it is in a sphere
below us: So if we should go about to define what Angels are, we might very
well mistake; for though we may conceive somewhat to our selves, yet we may be
easily deceived in the knowledge of the Nature of Angels. So much at present
concerning Angels.

But some may further Object to me, and it is a strong Objection.

Object. Object.
God being so constant, so unchangeable as he is, and he is in the creatures,
what is the reason ^hen that the creatures are so changeable? the Scripture
tells us God is Immutable.

Ans. Answ.
Beloved, Almighty God is like the Sun, riding in his Chariot (we have no
better expressions to set out these unexpressable things to you) the Sun shines
to us, yet it is much changed to us, according to the several objects it shines
through: The Sun is not the same to us that it is in its self; for it is
exceeding light and exceeding hot, and its shining through the dull air changes
it to us, though nothing changed in itself: so though the creature be changed,
yet God is not changed; but his works are changed according to the several
subjects he works on.

Again, that same beam that shines in at one window, is not the same that
shines in at another; yet we say the Sun shines in at both, and yet it alters
in a very small distance in one quarrel it shines red, in the next green, etc.
now here is a change, but the Sun is the same; So though the creatures be
changed, and turned upside down, and mountains be hurled here and there, yet
God is the same, he is not changed, he cannot be moved: In him is no
variableness nor shadow of changing, Iam. 1. 17. Jam. 1. 17.
although according to the several creatures he works in, he seems to be
changed to us; yet in himself he is not, nor cannot be.

Now we come to the fourth and last part; and that is, who this General and
great Captain is that commands all these Army of Angels? this great Army of
Chariots and Angels, it is said, they are the Chariots of God.

Quest. Quest.
But you will say to me, I pray how is God in the Creature? is he in the
creature, as he was on Mount Sinai? for then God appeared to Moses in great
Majesty and Glory; the mou^^ shook and trembled, and trumpets sounded louder
and louder: and there was thunder and lightnings, insomuch that all the people
were amazed; now if we could see God in the creature thus, we should then
believe he were there; but we see no such thing in the Creature.

Answ. Answ.
We must not imagine that God has either trumpets, or thunders, or any such
things material, but there was something answerable to them, something
equivalent, God then appearing in terror; and we could not better conceive of
God then by such expressions as these: But although God appear not the same to
us in his creatures; Yet without all doubt he is as much in every creature, and
as infinitely present as he was on Mount Sinai, as terribly, as gloriously,
though he does not manifest himself so much: For he is as much in the basest
creature, in a Mouse, in a Frog, and yet no disparagement or abasing to his
infinite Majesty and greatness (as some foolishly think) but it so much the
more exalts him; yea I lay he is as much present in a Fly, in a Flea, in a
Pile of grass, as he was on the Mount; And to some God ^ounds as loud in their
h^arts, Genesis 19. 19.
in the manifestation of himself, as the trumpets then; though in others more
stilly and wisperingly* In all he is alike, but he manifests himself but where
he pleases: Some are (...), and see not God at all.

In Balaa^^ (...) as as much before he spoke; but when God (...) himself in
him, then he spoke; for if God would he could raise unto himself children unto
Abraham out of the very stones, Mat. 3. 9.
as well as from among the wisest men: And therefore O Hierome! it was thy
fault, it was thy weakness, when thou said that it was an abasing of God, to
say he was in a Mouse, in a Toad, in the base creatures; for it is no dispraise
at all to him, to say he is as much in a Fly, or in a pile of grass, as in an
Angel; as much in the damnedst Devil in hell, as in the gloriousest Saint and
Angel in heaven, but much to his praise and glory: for deny this and ye deny
his (...), his filling all places, and all creatures.

But know this, God is not in every (...) as he is in himself, but as every
creature (...) him; as though it be true, that the sea flows into all the
creeks and crannies of the earth, yet not according to the fullness of the sea,
though to every cranny and brook the sea is not spaing. It is true, God is in
heaven, yet not more in heaven then he is in the earth; and I remember I was
taught when I was a child, by my nurse, or by my mother, that God was above in
heaven; but let us now put away childish things: I pray God too too many old
men be not guilty of this childishness; yea, and many of these litteral Divines
teach no otherwise; they never bring their he^rers any farther then to be
Monsters, always children, always feeding them with milk, and never learn
them to eat strong meat: So that if they come amongst strong men to feed with
them, their stomachs are so squemish, they turn with at all. Or else casting
pearls before swine, they trample them under their feet, Mat. 7. 6.
and turn again and all to rent you.

One thing I had almost forgotten, concerning the name of Angels, which I will
deliver to you, before I come to make use of these things: In every creature
there is an Angel, and this Angel is as the beam that comes from the Sun: and
this beam goes directly in a strait line to the Sun: So that let a man, th^^gh
he be in never so dark, stinking a dungeon, and never so deep, yet if any
little beam of the Sun can but come in, though it be but at a pinhole, yet go
and lay your eye full in that beam, and you shall behold the Sun it self;
therefore, and in that regard says our Savior Christ, Their Angels always
behold the face of their Father which is in heaven: Mat. 18. 10.
So though there be never so much darkness in the soul, yet do but lay your eye
(blinding all your sight besides) in this beam or Angel that comes from God,
and you shall behold God.

Now we come to make some use.

The first let it be this, To teach us charity and love toward all the
creatures, be they never so base; for we have all one Father and maker, and God
is in them, though he manifests not himself as he does in thee, wherein he is
most manifested; for how came he to be manifested in thee? was it by thy pains
or industry; or by his good will and pleasure? he might as well have refused to
shine into thee, as into another? and might have made thee in his case whom
thou despisest: Therefore behold and look upon all the creatures as thy
brethren: yea, they are all more truly thy brethren, then if you had been
begotten by one father, and brought forth by one mother, in this regard;
because, Almighty God is the common-Father of all; and therefore when thou
look on any creature, though never so base, account and esteem it as thy
brother; Ephesians. 3. 15.
for it is a son to that Father of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is
(...): And therefore however some of our litteral and ignorant Divines do laugh
at that of St. Francis, that he called every creature his Brother, he called
the Ox his brother, the Ass his brother, and all cre^tures his brothers; if it
came from an humble and lowly mind in him, I think him the better Christian;
for man is apt enough to boast himself, and to look upon his endowments; Luke
1. 53.
but he will fill the hungry and the humble with good things: Psalm. 25.
I tell you, here is such a brotherhood as shall never end; the other shall have
an end; and therefore more cause of love to these then to the other; for we are
all begotten by one Father; the other brotherhood ceases; Mat. 22. 30.
for says our Savior, You are deceived, not knowing the Scripture nor the
power of God for in heaven there is no marrying, nor giving in marriage, but
they are as the Angels of God in heaven.

Use 2. Lets learn to know our selves, and then we shall learn also to pay the
creatures that which is due to them: Let us give them all due respect, show no
cruelty to them, but use them as brothers: those creatures God has appointed
for man's use, and used so, they serve their Creators will and appointment; let
us use them so; though many of them lose their lives for us, yet show as much
compassion to them as we may; let us not exercise cruelty, or our dominion or
authority over them, beyond what we are allowed: Mat. 24. 49.
do not begin to strike thy fellow servants, show no rigor or wrath to them, no,
not to the dumb creatures, no, nor to men: When thou see a wicked man, thy
heart rises against him, thou would have God presently destroy him, not
knowing thy own heart how bad that is; and thou art ready to call for fire from
heaven, as the Disciples did; but what answer makes Christ to their desire, Ye
know not what spirit ye are of; Luke 9. 55
no, no, leave them to God: Thou wonderest that God does not send fire from
heaven presently and destroy them, as he did Sodom, or open the earth to
swallow them up, as it did Corah, etc. O fools, when will ye learn wisdom?
certainly God knows what to do, without thy directions; yet vain man will be so
wise, Isa. 40. 14
as to teach God wisdom, Isa. 40. 14. and censure his actions; But who art thou
that contendest with thy maker? Isa. 45. 9. Isa. 45. 9.


Though it be said in Psalm. 8. 6. Psalm. 8. 6.
He has given him dominion over the works of his hands; yet know, though they
were made for thy use, they were much more for his; they were not made for
thee, to use as you list, nor for thy will and pleasure, but to be used soberly
according to his pleasure, and appointment.

Use 3. And lastly, learn from hence that there is nothing of Fortune, but all
comes and falls out by an infinite wise Providence; That the name of Fortune is
an Idle, a Heathenish, and a wicked word, taking it as the word imports; for
nothing comes by Chance or Fortune, but it is God that guides all; And yet
knowing the right use of that word it may be used; for it is used in the
Scriptures: says Solomon; For Time and chance, or fortune (for it is the same)
happens to all things; Though it first arose from an evil ground and from the
Heathens, who because there were such cross events in the world, that when a
business was brought to the heads and period, yet one thing or other oftentimes
came between the cup and the lip; (as we say,) and quite turned all about: now
hereat they were so amazed and at their wits end, they could not tell how this
should come to pass, except there was a God called [Forune] and therefore they
sacrificed to him; But I say the ground and mis-use being forgotten, it may
come in time to be lawful to use it, at least by such who know how to use it.
But what it imports is wicked, and is condemned by this Doctrine as abominable.

We poor creatures stand and wonder at many events in the world; here now God
calls all the creatures Fools; for instance: When two dear friends, that have
been long apart, not having seen one another in twenty or forty years, he one
falls to come in some great danger, his dear friend chances to come at a very
instant, and saves his life: here now we stand and wonder; it is no wounder at
all, if we eye God; ye are herein but fools and blind: Again, for example if
you see me strike these two hands together, if you saw not my body that guides
these, we may wonder at it; but what wonder is it, if you see me strike these
two togther? so far as you are blind and see not God, so far ye wonder* for it
is as easy with God to do any of these things, as for me to make my hands
meet. I can also by the power and guidance of the soul that is in me, lay my
finger in the darkest night, upon any place about me; why? because my soul
within me guides it: so it is as easy for God in any case, he being (as it
were) the soul of the creatures, can cause the creatures to do whatever is his
Will to have done, both in Heaven and earth and in the Seas, as David says.

Thus I have spoken to you of this our Immense, Unknown, Unexpressible Great
God; But O my Beloved, I have spoken but according to man all this while,
infinitey short of him himself; and therefore never scanty or circumscribe God
by these things I have said; for he is this, and he is infinitely more: for if
men Men and Angels, and Cherubims and Seraphims should all join together, to
set out his praise to the utmost that they could conceive or relate, yet look
further, further still; for when they have said what they can, they have said
nothing in comparison of what he is: As if a man should come from some foreign
parts, and desire to see our Kingdom, and should but only come to the
out-coasts, and see only the Cockle-s^ells that lie upon the shore, or the
Oyster-shells, or the Pibble-stones that lie there; and should immediately go
back and say, he has seen England; do you think that he is able to describe
the Kingdom to any one that shall ask him? Alas poor man, he is deceived! for he
has seen none of the pleasant Hills, and Vales, none of the stately
Structures, Palaces, Buildings; none of the strong Castles and Towers, none of
the Provisions and Ammunitions, none of the Proper and Comely Men, Women and
Children, none of the Healthful and Commodious Springs, none of the
Silver-Gliding and Pleasant Streams; none of the Pleasant and and Fruitful
Orchards, none of the Pleasant Walks and Gardens, nor any thing else, esteemed
the Glory of the Nation: Even so when Men and Angels, and all Creatures have
seen and spoken to the utmost, what they can of God; Alas, alas, they have
neither related nor seen any more then the Out-coasts, the Suburbs of this our
great God, or of his Kingdom, Glory and Majesty; I say when we have written and
spoken to the utmost, even Men and Angels, and all Creatures, put all together,
all that ever they can do or say, They all speak infinitely, infinitely short
of him; they all can show you but the Cockle-Shels, and the Pibble-stones of
his Kingdom Glory and Majesty: they can describe nothing in comparison of what
God is. They have not seen the City with twelve Gates the streets whereof are
pure Gold, the foundations whereof are laid and garnished with twelve manner of
precious stones: and the twelve gates of several pearls, and the streets of the
City Transparent as Crystal. And the Glory of God and of the lamb, are the
light and glory thereof.

O then, let us learn to give him the Glory, the surmounting praises of his
glorious greatness, and incomprehensibleness: Psalm. 62. 8.
And do it heartily, freely: Pour out your very souls before him like water,
Lam. 2. 19.
fully and freely, nothing your selves in his Being: And although herein we may
lose our selves and be annihilated, yet be assured, it is our greatest and
only Salvation and gain.

Learn we henceforth, to know wherein our Riches and happiness lies: O Beloved,
deceive not your selves, and dote not on these outward temporal things, on
Honors, Lands, Livings, Meat and Drink, and those despicable things, compared
with these Riches and Pleasures, which indeed are but poor Cockle-Shels, for
children to play withal, and not for Grown-men in Christ: These are but for
the body, for the back and belly, and the outward and worser part of man: and
as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 14. 1 Cor. 6. 14.
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both it and
them: All these things perish with the using. Learn to distinguish and know
what is true riches, true food; these outward things are but as the
Cockle-shels, and Pibble-stones that lie on the Out-Coasts of the Kingdom:
These are nothing of the State, Riches, Treasure, Magnificence of the Kingdom
of God: You must learn to distinguish between the Riches and Glory of the King,
and the Cockle-shells at the shore: And You that have Plenty of these outward
things, you have no more but shells; and you that have no more, you never
enjoyed nor saw the Riches, the Pleasures, the Glory, the Magnificence of this
Great King, or of his Kingdom, which we have now been unfolding to you.

Beloved, Let us all call to mind what has been set before us, and stand and
wonder! and for ever hereafter, be amazed and astonished, and cry out, Oh the
Glory, the Glory, the Infinite, Unspeakable, and Incomprehensible glory of our
God, of his Kingdom, Majesty and Sovereignty! and therein to be lost and
swallowed up in an everlasting Abyss of Silence and Serenity: And say to our
selves, as that Rich man in the Gospel; and although he deluded his poor soul
with false Joy and Treasure: yet this man may truly sing to his soul a Requiem
as he did, Soul, soul, take thine ease, take thy rest, sing and rejoice, leap
and dance Thou have much goods laid up in thy God, not only for many years, but
for ever and ever, Luke 22. 12. Luke 22. 12.


O now, let us for ever take delight under His shadow, sitting there with great
delight with the Spouse saying as it is, Cant. 2. 3. As the Apple Tree among
the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons: I sat me down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste being
ravished in beholding him, as Guiding all things, as FILLING ALL THINGS; and
seeing him more our selves, then ourselves; she was overcome by his Glory, and
by her union with him, etc. O Beloved, let us curiously survey him in all his
Riches, Attendance and Glory, even the Kingly-nakedness of his Divine Being:
and let thy soul here set up her REST; see him, hear him, and adore him, and
entertain all familiar and amorous parlyes with him, and receive his Rosy
Kisses, close and amorous embracements, and sugared expressions from him: in
which condition thy soul will be (as it were) annihilated and lost, being
swallowed up and drowned in him; I tell thee thou blessed soul, thou will be
inebriated, drunken and overcome with these Divine Pleasures and Glories which
are at his right hand for evermore; looking upon, and despising all things but
him (or as enjoyed in him) as Empty Nothings, as Cockle-shells, and
Pibblestones; but seeing him to be so Rich, so Full, so Ravishing, and more
then transcendently glorious and excellent, that this soul can truly, really
and freely, and with all his soul say, O thou whom my soul loves, Cant. 4. 7.
thee only I Adore, Love, Prize, Admire and take full consolation and
satisfaction in; and I hate all other Comforts, Houses, Lands, Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, as compared with thee; Luke 14. 26.
For he that hates not all these, in comparison of thee, he is not worthy of
thee.

Beloved, now I (for my part) am at my farthest; lost and confounded in the
beholding this vast and stupendiou^ riches and glory of our Great and Almighty
God; which like a deep Sea before me, stops my passage, I can go no farther: So
that I must only now stand upon the Banks, and cry out with St. Paul, Romans 11.
33. Romans 11. 33.
O the depth of the Riches, Wisdom and Excellency of God! how unsearchable are
they, and past finding out! which are as unsearchable as God himself, without
brim, without bottom: And if things we see and behold here in the body, which
are as Cockle-shells, and Pibble-stones, be so excellent, so rich and glorious,
1 Cor. 13. 12.
so full, so sweet, so ravishing; now we see but in part, as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 13. 12. what will the fullness of this glory be to us hereafter, when we
shall see as we are seen, and shall not only possess it, but be possessed and
swallowed up in it? So for present I conclude, and commit you all to the Lord,
and to the word of his Grace. Farewell.

Where Christ FEEDS AND RESTS.
CANT. 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the stocks of thy companions?
In two Sermons preached for Mr. Hodges at the public meeting place at
Highgate in the Forenoon.
THIS Text may well be called the request of a fair Lady to her dearly beloved
Lord; it is clear it is so: for though she complains of her self in the verse
before my Text, that she is black, and the Sun has looked upon her: yet in the
verse following my Text, he says, That to him she is the fairest among women:
and she cannot be so forward in requesting any thing at his hands, as he is
ready to accommodate her: if she desire to have her name written in the palms
of his hands, he will do more, he will set her as a Signet upon his heart; as
you may perceive in reading over this Book, Cant. 8. 6.
this Lord here spoken of is such a Lord, whose judgment, when you know him,
you cannot disallow; for it is Christ Jesus the Lord of life and death: and
this Lady is the Spouse of this Lord, viz. the Congregation, or the body of
this Saints and Servants: and wonder not that I call her a fair Lady; for
though we see it not, yet He, her Lord says, she is all fair, and there is no
spot in her: And I tell you, Ibid. 4. 7.
if we would see the beauty of the Church, we must not look upon any one
particular member, for then we can never say, she is all fair; ye shall see
many spots, many wrinkles in them: but if you look upon the whole Church, then
she is all Fair, that is, the complete body together: As any one species, the
excellency thereof cannot be known by any one Individual; as in a horse, the
best that is, though he may excel in one and many things, yet he may want
something that is excellent in another; if he have strength; yet he may want
comeliness; if one have comeliness, he may want swiftness, etc. but take all
together, and then you may judge of the species of a horse, and so of a man, or
any other kind: it is a vain thing to judge of the perfections of a man by any
one m^n; one is comely of body, another is comely in mind; if one be diligent,
another is wise: so, if you look upon the whole kind of man, and the
excellencies of all men put together I say, look upon him outwardly and
inwardly, and then you must needs say, he is a glorious Creature, a rare
workmanpiece: So, O Lord Christ, wherewilt thou show us, and where shall we
find that beautiful one thou speak of, that is Altogether fair, that is Tota
pulchraces amica mea, if we look upon any one Member? but take the religion of
one, and the charity of another, the zeal of another, the faith of another, the
patience of another, and go through the whole body, and look upon these as a
complete body, and then thou may say truly, Tota pulchraes amica mea, etc.
There is no spot in thee; Thou art all fair my Love. And if any one man or
member shall claim this beauty to himself, Cant. 4. 7.
except it be as he stands in relation to the body, he claims a lie: for if ye
will claim this Perfection, ye must look upon The whole body, both all below
upon Earth and all that are in Heaven, all that ever were, and all that are,
and all that ever shall be, and add to them, Christ the head of all; then we
shall confess that as she requests him not to look upon her as black in any one
member, so he answers her, and acknowledges that she is all Fair.

This Text then is a request of a fair Lady to her dear and espoused Lord, whom
he has was^t and purified with his own blood. I hope be that is the weakest
and the meanest in religion, will not imagine this Sons to be a Dialogue
between two carnal Lovers: or as Solomon and his wife complementing together;
if ye consider them so, they are but the e^crements of flesh and blood, and
they shall perish with them. But whereto then shall I liken these songs of the
Canticles? They are like those three Tabern^cle^ that the Disciples would have
made when Christ was transfigured, one for Moses one for Elias, and one for
Christ.

1 One for Moses and for his Law; that is, for the legal and civil life.

2 The second Tabernacle is like the Book of Ecclesias^es and the Proverbs,
leading a man above this life, when it condemns this civil and legal life;
reprehending whatsoever is in man as man; as wisdom, strength, power, and what
ever power there is in him to act, and to bring any thing to pass.

3 But the third Tabernacle may well be called The Holy of Holies and such is
this, namely this Book of the Canticles: Here Christ answers his Spouse
familiarly face to face, even in the silence of thunder, as it is in Psalm. 81.
7. Psalm. 81. 7.
there he calls it the silence of thunder, and yet what is more ^ud then
thunder? the meaning is, that to that soul to whom God speaks, it is as loud to
him as thunder: but to them that stand by, it is silence, and secret wispering,
because they hear not the voice of Christ.

Beloved, this Book is a Mystical, Divine, Highflown Book; the things herein
contained, are not fit for every ear to hear, lest the dead Fly, as Solomon
says, corrupt this precious ointment; Let the flesh abuse it, and turn it to
fleshly liberty; and for this end the Jews would not suffer their children to
read this Book, lest the wantonness of flesh should make them abuse it: but I
hope well of you, that you are better instructed so that you will not abuse
this Scripture to your own destruction; 2 Pet. 2. 1.
as the Apostle says, Charity bids me judge the best: and I go on and propound
them as to the immaculate Spouse of her dear Lord.

Ye may observe in the words (yet rather for memory then order sake) four
things. 1 The first is her Request, Tell me, she is in a doubt, and cannot be
satisfied, therefore she desires to be taught. 2 The Adjuration, or the Poise
or weight she hangs upon her request; it is not slight, weak, cold, or
perfunctory: but she is violent in her request, Mat. 11. 12.
and follows him with strong arguments, Oh thou whom my soul loves; she offers
violence to the Kingdom of God: to say the truth, she does as it were commit a
Rape upon the Kingdom of God. 3 The Matter of her Request, and that is double,
she would know where he feeds, and where he rests at noon. 4 The Reason of all
this, why she would be taught where he rests, and where he feeds: for why
should I be as those that turn aside by the flocks of thy companions?


1 For her Request, Tell me, teach me; think it not strange that this Spouse
who is so great and familiar with her Husband and Lord, that thy Spouse does
desire to be taught of him: neither look upon her as guilty of curiosity or
impertinencies; Although she wants for no instruction, but is acquainted with
all the counsel of God, and she knows all things, for she has received an
unction from the holy One, 1 John 2. 27.
which abides within her, and she knows all things; yet here she is
complaining that she wants something. In such passionate speeches as these, so
full of raptures of love, ye must not look for method, for they excel and fly
above the regiment of reason, truth it is, Logic is the Art of reason, but
passions are either above reason or beneath it; but here above it.

David was a man taught of God, and though wiser

Then either 1 His Enemies, 2 His Teachers, 3 His Elders.


Yet he cries, teach me notwithstanding, which shows that the teachings of God
are far above Nature and Reason: for they are but like the Sun, which when it
shines, shows all beneath it, but hides all above it. This admirable and
glorious Spouse of the Lamb, she desires to be taught of her Lord: And she does
it not remissely, as if she cared not whether she sped or no; but zealously,
earnesty; tell me, Oh thou whom my soul loves: she so presses her suit, as if
she would not be satisfied with out granting of it: tell me, she would (for all
her knowledge) still know more, that so she might do more: Mat. 5. 16.
she would have her light shine before men, that they may magnify and glorify
her Spouse and Husband. Hence take notice of the nature of the fire of Love;
when Jesus Christ has once kindled it in the heart, it is never satisfied:
still feeding and ever hungry; still she wonders at the glory and beauty of
God, and of her Spouse, and is never satisfied with enjoying of him; she sees
his excellency, sweetness and glory in every thing, and desires more and more
to see it and taste it; still he fills her, and still she wonders at him: Oh how
excellent is thy name in all the earth, Psalm. 8. 1.
who have set thy glory above the Heavens! she never thinks she has enough,
and that she needs no more, as it is too great a fault in these self-wise
days: but like David she cries, O teach me, Oh direct me, Oh lead me, so that
I may draw nearer and nearer to thee! she answers the desire of God, Oh that
there was such a heart in this people to seek after me, Deuteronomy. 10.
and to keep my commandments: and she has good reason, Luke 1. 53.
for the rich and full God sends empty away; but he fills the hungry with good
things: but now adays we are rich and full, with the Church, in Rev. 3. Rev. 3.
17.
and know not that we are poor blind, and naked: no sooner one is entered into
the Church (Christ's School) and they begin to know any thing, but they will be
presently Masters and Teachers; and he is a great Christian now adays that is
a great fault-finder, he that can pick a many holes, and reprove the sins of
other men, and this Forsooth must go for great profession, and a good progress
in Christianity: but for my part, I would ye were all Masters and Teachers;
Numb. 11 29.
I would (as Moses) that all the people of God could prophesy, and that the
Lord would put his spirit upon them: I would they were as sure Masters and
Teachers as I am sure they are ignorant and without all knowledge; Romans 12. 3.
for the Apostle says, He that thinks he knows any thing, he knows nothing as
he ought to know: and our Savior commands, Be not many Masters, for one is
your Master in Heaven; he that will learn, must still account himself a fool:
and I pray God our wisdom be not so great that we scorn to learn even of God
himself: And sure I am as long as ye go on in this conceit of your own
knowledge, you cannot admire God and his wisdom, but you admire your selves and
your own wisdom, your own parts; and you love your selves above God; and the
truth is, the very sum and quintessence of this peoples Religion, is to speak
bitterly and largely against their neighbors sins, against their brethr^ns
infirmities, and forsooth, they conceive they do it out of a zeal to Gods
Glory, and consider not what a hook the Devil has put into their own nostrils,
who draws and pulls them which way he pleases; and is under pretense of serving
and glorifying God; They consider not how they serve nothing but the Devil and
their own lusts; such a man (say they) he is a good man; were it not but that
he has such and such faults, he would be a good member in the Church, but he
lives scandalously; never considering how scandalously they live themselves
toward others, yea far more, but see it not.

Oh Beloved, what do we in all this, but say in practice, though not with our
mouths, with that Pharisee, Luke 18. 11.
I thank God I am not as other men, he is a greater sinner then I, I am better
then he; I am no whoremonger, as such a man; no Adulterer, as such a man; I
live not in those sins as he does. You know the Scripture tells us, that this
poor sinner the Publican whom he despised, went home to his house justified,
and not the other. Therefore I beseech ^ou for your own sakes, and for his sake
that shed his blood for you; Nay I beseech you for his sake that could have
written every man's fault in his forehead if he had pleased; Leave this (office
of accusing, of backbiting, of slandering,) to the Devil, take not his office
from him; it is the nature of (...) files to be always dwelling upon sores of
horses, or other Beasts: so thou, whatever good or excellency he has in him
otherwise, thou art content to run over that, and take no notice thereof;
But if thou meetest with a botch, with a sore, there thou ea^est, and there
thou gallest, and make it worse then thou foundst it, when thou should
rather dwell upon the other, and run over this: and the reason they do so, is,
because they would seem wise* and be able to reprove sin: I do not speak
against this, so that I would not have you reprove sin where you find it: Yes,
yes, do it; but then do it to his face, and not behind his back. I confess that
Christ called Her^d Fox, not to his face; go tell that Fox: but he did it not
blindly, in a censorious way as most do, but upon knowledge, when he knew he
ought to do it: For he knew the hearts of men.

But you see the Spouse here not contented with that she had, Phil. 3. 13*
but she seeks still, and forgets that which is behind, and presses hard toward
the mark* what warrant then have these men, that as soon as ever they are
within the pale of the Church, they will be Teachers, and they would fain be
accounted great Rabbis, and they can expound Scriptures as well as any, and if
need were, or if they durst, they can preach as well as any; and these people,
if people will not hear them, presently, they are ignorant; They are so well
instructed they can go no whither to learn anything; as though al wisdom were
born with them, when God knows they are as full of ignorance, of pride, of
self-conceitedness, as any men in the Town; but the Spouse she cries, yea, and
still will cry, till dooms day, Tell me, teach me; she sees her own
imperfections, and strives after perfection; she knows and is sensible with
Paul, Phil. 3. 1^.
she has not yet attained: And therefore I once again beseech you, in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, and for your own souls sake, leave off this kind of
Religion, although I would have you to hate, Iud. 23.
even the garments spotted by the flesh.

We come to the second thing laid down, and that is the Poise or weight that
she hangs upon her suit, she does in a kind Adjure God. I had thought to have
gone through this Text at this time; indeed I had thought, when I began that
you and I should have waited upon this beautiful Lady, our Mother, our
Mistress, from Engedi to Eneglaim; from the beginning of the Text to the end;
but you see here is a word has bin cast in our way, 2 Samuel 2. 23. and 20, 12.
as the Carkases of Amasa and Asah^^ which made us to make a stand, like the
children of Israel at the Red Sea; Exodus 14. 16.
they could not the pass on, till waters were dried up; and indeed the Red Sea
is before us, a whole Sea of matter, but we must take what we can* and leave
the rest.

Tell me O thou whom my soul loves: Here is a true expression of Prayer; it is
but a folly to pray to God* except we can thus put up our prayers to him, in
this dialect, O thou whom my soul loves^* Many think that if they can pray to
God in setting forth his attributes, styling him Most High, Most Mighty, Most
Gracious; and, it may be, add Hebrew words, as O Most mighty Jehovah; then
they think they have made an admirable Prayer; but be sure of this, except thou
can come to God, and truly say from thy heart, O thou whom my soul love; thy
prayers (be they never so excellent otherwise) they all fall to the ground, he
accepts them not: But when thou come under this title and it is so indeed, he
cannot chus^ but hear for then it is the voice of his Spouse: but if you
express his Attributes never so largely and amply, without this, yet thou have
prayed no better then the Devil; for there is no Attribute but he can enlarge
and amplify above any of you all: herein he is able to outstrip the best of
you.

And the Apostle says, He that loves not the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.
let him be An^thema, Maranatha, accursed from Christ: he prays no better then
the very Devils, and those that are accursed from Christ; as we see still when
the possessed with Devils came and met our Savior, wh^t a large confession and
acknowledgement they make of him, I know thee who thou art, Luke 8. 28.
Jesus the Son of the most High God: but Christ many times stopped their
mouths, and would not accept their confession; All thy prayers, the best that
ever thou made, without this title of love, Mat. 17. 6.
are but as milstones hung about thy neck, and will drag thee to the bottom of
the Sea* But it may be you bless your selves for all this, and think your
prayers are not so bad as we make them; or if they be you hope you shall do
well enough hereafter, after you dye: But know, that as the tree falls, so it
lies, as Solomon says; If thou dye in this condition, so judgment shall find
thee and you hope it may be, that you shall possess the Crown laid up for you
in Heaven (as you conceive) but I fear you are so glued to the earth, you can
relish nothing but the earth; so that, that is it your souls loves.

And (it may be) you think it shall be some ponderous thing you shall have in
heaven, some glorious visible, material, or some tangible thing; You think you
shall have some such things* as you enjoy here: but alas, alas, thou shall
find, that as soon as ever thou art unriveted from the earth, (And happy were
it for thee, if it were done here) That the Kingdom of God consists not in
meat and drinks, in riches, and wealth, and the like: for the Kingdom of heaven
is not a creation, but a multiplication; And when you come to be received into
that Kingdom, it will not be demanded, What riches have ye? what honor have
ye? but Christ will ask, Mat. 15. 34.
How many loaves have ye? if ye are not in possession of some loaves, of some
part of the Kingdom of heaven before in this world* there is none to be given
then: Not what had you in this world? But it will be asked, how many loaves
have ye? that is how many loaves of love? How many loaves of Charity? how many
loaves of faith? how many loaves of patience? what will thou do, if thou have
none? will thou say? Stay Lord, I will go and buy; or I will go and borrow, as
the foolish Virgins: no* no there is no body can lend, they have none to spare,
Mat. 25. 9.
they have but enough for themselves: If thou can not say as here, O thou
whom my soul loves, never look to ent^r; but ye must look for the answer those
foolish Virgins had Depart, Mat. 25. 12.
I know ye not: if this love be not the salt that seasons all your actions, all
your sacrifices, he knows them not, he regards them not: where he sees no love
in the actions, let it be never so glorious a duty, he knows it not, Depart
from me.

But try your love to him: Try this secret seal by the Broad-seal of love to
the creatures, to your brethren: if you be a living Member* you will sympathize
in love and fellow-feeling wit the rest of the members; for the Apostle says
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 23. 10.
the whole Law: for take the Commandments; first the Commandments of the
second Table: if a man love father and mother, let him dishonor them if he
can: And so the next, Thou shall not kill: if he love the creatures, and his
brethren, he is so far from offering violence to any, that he will rather lay
down his own life; And so the seventh, if he love all, he will not take the
members of Jesus Christ, and make them the members of an harlot; And love will
make him in stead of stealing from any, to give plenteously and willingly: and
to be so far from coveting and taking away, that he will rather add what he
can; and love can bear no false witness: nor covet any thing which is his
Neighbors. And so likewise for the first Table, he that loves God, he knows
him to be so full and satisfying, that he never need make him more gods; he
knows that if the world were ten thousand times larger and pleasanter then it
is, he knows that God he is so full, that he is sufficient for all; neither can
he make Images, to worship them, nor to put him in remembrance of him, for he
has an apprehension of him beyond all manner of Images, the whole Creation is
a glass to him, he knows no Image can resemble him; as God said to Moses, Thou
shall make no image; Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
for ye saw no Image, since the day I brought you out of Egypt: And if he love
him, can he swear, and blaspheme, and profane his name? and can he, if he love
him, grudge him one day in seven? yea rather he wishes that God had taken seven
to himself, and given him but one.

Examine your selves by these things: Is the seal of your external love, a
witness of your internal love? Joh. 4. 24.
it is true, God is worshipped in spirit and in truth: and his love must be
shed abroad in our hearts invisibly first, but yet that love never rests there;
but it is like Aarons Rod a budding Rod, or else thou art not fit to be a
Priest to God: Numb. 17 5, etc.
if thy Rod be not a budding Rod, 1 Cor. 9. 9.
be not deceived, God is not mocked; Except this tree put out some fruit, some
leaves, it is dead, and there is no sap or life in it; for God has not left
himself without witness: so that you see, if there be not this love in the
heart, and expressed in the life and conversation, there can be no acceptance
with God; thou must come to him under this title, O thou whom my soul loves,
not as a Mercenary, for gain or reward, or for what advantage thou shall get by
him, but for love to him, not to his; not as a Servant, but as a Son; No^ for
fear neither, but for love to him.

Many (Beloved) can come to God under this title, O thou whom my body loves;
thou give me health, thou give me wealth, thou give me wisdom, thou
give me a good report; this is but O thou whom my body loves; But this, O
thou whom my soul loves, this proceeds forth from him that is invisible:
generally most men fix their eyes upon the visible blessings of God, and they
are much in prayer to God for them; but know, he regards none of these prayers;
but when his Son* in whom he is well pleased, when he prays, he hears him
always; Joh. 11. 42.
but if any other prays, he regards it not.

Ye pray, and it may be daily, Thy will be done; but yet says the Husbandman,
O let me have a good year of increase; and the Merchant he prays Thy will be
done too: but says he, O let the wind blow right for me, to send home my
shipping: and the Tradesman he prays Thy will be done, but says he, I desire
store of customers to day, and good takings; what prayers are these think you?
what submission is here to the will of God? mind thy own duty, leave the
success to him.

From whence (do you think) come these prayers, O give me my health again, O
give me my wealth again, O give my children again; come these from Christ
think thou? are these his prayers in thee? or come they not from the flesh?
O let my flesh be well housed, let my flesh be well clad, let my flesh be well
provided for; away, away, God is deaf, he can hear none of these prayers; these
blessings he gives promiscuously to every man: these do not at all declare Gods
love; for he as often, or oftener, gives them where he hates, as where he loves:
These are goods that a man may do good with; but the other are goods that make
a man good: and if thou do good with them, coming from this ground, from love
to Christ within, they are acceptable even the least of them; but if thou do
never so much good with them, without this, doing them to be seen of men, or
for any other by-end, then verily ye have your reward; ye did them to be seen
of men, and ye are seen of men; ye did them that men might think well of you,
and they do think well of you; verily I say unto you, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
you have your reward: As the Lord said to the rich Glutton, Son, thou had
thy portion in thy life time; now he is comforted, and thou art tormented:
Examine thy self; do thy prayers come from this root, O thou whom my body
loves? O thou whom my flesh loves? or O thou whom my Soul loves for my body,
Luke 16. 25.
for my flesh? then it is all one; search thy soul diligently^ for the day of
the Lord will come, and burn up all our deeds, all our actions, all our dross,
it will try out the gold; the gold will not consume, but be more refined; but
all that is hay, and stubble, and dross, and such like stuff, wrought but by
the power of the creature, and by the power of man, even all men's Religion, and
their religious actions, and whatever is of man, shall be burnt up for ever.

Where Christ FEEDS, And where his Flock RESTS.
CANT. 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy companions?
Preached in the Afternoon for Mr. Hodges in the public meeting place at
High-gate.
I Told you in the morning that we must not imagine this Book of the Canticles
to contain any idle reverence, and foolish wanton complements between a man and
his wife* on whom they either doted; but the expressions of entire vehement
love between the Lord Christ and his dear Spouse. Beloved, this is the Eternal,
Everlasting sense; the other is but the Letter, which is nothing, nor may we
look upon them as the Dialogue between Solomon and his wife: for what are they
to us? they are dead and gone. Though the whole Book of the Canticles be in
appearance but an Epithalamion, or a Love-song between Solomon and Pharaoh^
daughter his wife; and consequently may seem to relish nothing but of sensual
love, and the effects thereof, carnal enjoyments: yet know, this is but the
chaff that covers the corn: And herein (by these expressions) the true Solomon's
face is veiled (as was Moses his face by his vail) because we are not able
otherwise to behold him. 2 Cor. 3. 13.
Therefore still when ever you hear or read the Scriptures, Rev. 5. 5.
seek to have the Book unclapsed, and the seals opened; for as it lies printed
or written in the Letter, Cant. 4. 10.
it is both clapsed, sealed, and walled about; and though it be a fountain, yet
it is walled about by the Letter, and none see the meaning, Mat. 13. 11.
save only they to whom it is given. And wherever you see the Letter speaks,
rest not in that, but look for One greater; for behold a greater then Solomon
is here, Ib. 12. 42.
Mat. 12. 42. when the Letter speaks, that is but Solomon; but the spirit is
Jesus Christ, the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth: Joh. 1.
14.
And when Solomon's wife speaks, observe and mind the wife of Jesus Christ, his
Church and Spouse, the dearly beloved of his soul: being professions of
dearness, and intimateness of love to his wife, and of his wives to him, and do
but set forth the unexpressible and reciprocal dearness between Christ and his
Church.

The Letter is but a dead resemblance, or picture of the life within; as of
good things promised, so evil threatened. It speaks of devouring fire, and
everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. Isa. 30. 33 and 56. 24.
and of the Tophet prepared of old, and of the worm that never dies, Mar. 5. 44
and of weeping and gnashing of teeth; and all these are but resemblances and
shadows of the terrors of the Almighty; the thing it self is infinitely beyond
these expressions. As I have read of some who of old time kept for their
security fierce dogs within the House, and were wont to have without doors upon
the wall, a painted Dog with this Caution, Cave, Cave Canem, Beware, Beware the
Dog.

And I have read of some ignorant people that would place burning Lamps made of
combustible matter mixed with oil in the Sepulchers of their friends, and have
likewise pourtraied fire on the stones on the outside to show there was fire
within. So the outward Letter is but the picture, the resemblance of the truth
within: that is but the Literal, Historical sense: the life, the fire is
another thing: Jesus Christ is the Spirit and Life, he is the fire: as John 5.
35. Joh. 5. 35.
Christ says of John, He was a burning and a shining light: that was, so far
as Christ did shine and give light in him and by him.

As true fire is infinitely unspeakably beyond the shadow, resemblance, and
representation both in heat and splendor, so is the truth beyond the Letter.
And as a living Dog is more then a painted or a dead Dog, for they bite not at
all, but the Dog within is of another nature. Psalm. 110. 1.
Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand till I
make thine enemies thy footstool: that is, The Lord said unto his son, or unto
his word; for so the word in the Original may be as well taken: The Lord said
unto his Word, Sit thou on my right hand, etc. This great Kings word is like
the Kings daughter, Psalm. 45. 13.
Psalm. 45. 13. All glorious within.

And he that has the Bride, Joh. 3. 29.
is the Bridegroom: that is, Mat. 13. 52.
He that has the living sense given to him, he is instructed to the Kingdom of
God: The living sense is the Word, and the Word is Christ himself: the letter
that is but the shell, but this is the kernel, and is of perpetual use: As all
the Scriptures are symbolical, and figurative, so this more especially. These
words then are a request of the Spouse to her Husband, whose love and
instruction she never wanted, and yet here she sues for it: though he was not
wanting to her, yet still she desires to grow in the knowledge and love of him,
that she might abound therein: as he filled her, so still she desires to be
filled.

I gave you four things to consider of, which was rather for memory sake, then
order. 1 Her request, Tell* or Teach her. 2 The weight she hangs upon her
request, Oh thou whom my soul loves. 3 The matter of her Request, what it is
she s^eks; these two things, where thou feedest, and where thou restest at
noon. 4 Lastly, The reason of all; For, why should I be as those that turn
aside to the flocks of thy companions? thereby intimating if he did not
continually teach her and direct her, she should presently turn aside to the
flocks of his companion^: some are so full, their Omers run over, they are
wiser then the Spouse here, as God said to Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28. 3. Art thou wiser
then Daniel? these men they are wiser then Daniel. They, if they had been but
with God at the Creation, they could have directed him to have done many things
wiser then he has done; they would have showed him a better way, and in their
prayers they are still teaching God what to do; but there are none of these
things in Christ's Spouse: this is not her voice, but in all her conditions, and
at all times, yea till the world shall be no more, she cries, Tell me, Teach me.


Let us dread the sentence of the Church of Laodicea, Thou say that thou art
rich, and want nothing, Rev. 3. 17
and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked; There is nothing so pleasing to the ears of God, as this sound, this
voice; Tell me, teach me, direct me; Oh thou whom my soul loves. All other
prayers are but the prayers of the Devil; they can confess God to be, and know
him to be Mighty, Glorious, Omnipotent, Omnipresent; to be the Mighty Lord Iah,
Jehovah: they can herein outstrip any man living: therefore let us examine how
much we love God, and how much more then any thing else; if thou can not
examine it by it self, examine it by the fruits, for by their fruits ye shall
know them. Mat. 7. 16.
How much has thy love increased toward him? or do thou love him as well as
ever thou did? for thou lovedst him ever since thou were born: that is never a
whit. If thou bear no fruit, thou art dead; yea, it may be twice dead, and
pulled up by the roots: for if thou be rooted in him, Jude 12.
thou can not (if thou would) but bring forth fruit. What ever prayers come
from a soul that can truly say it loves God: from this root, I may boldly say,
it never returns in vain: if it can say, Oh thou whom my soul loves, thou art
my God, and I will love thee: I would not commit adultery with any creature;
but my love is taken off all, and is toward thee: then is Gods love shed
abroad in thy heart.

But we will go on to the next, to the Spouses request, Tell me: what? where
thou feedest; it is a strange speech now at this time, that Christ should eat:
yet it is a true speech, and a real question, not imaginative, but real; not a
transitive, but a substantive. It is true he did eat when he was upon earth,
you will say: but he eats not now:

For your answer, and for your better understanding of this, take this short
Theory:

They that conceive Christ according to the short time of 33 years (that he
lived upon earth) or thereabouts, they do limit and circumcise, as I may say,
and cut short the vastness of his greatness.

Yet it is very true he lived 33 years upon earth: and One only merit of his,
One action that he performed at that time, was sufficient to satisfy for the
sins of all the world abundantly, and to perfect the work of Redemption:
considering what person he was, viz. God equal with his Father, and that he
emptied himself of all his glory, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and
made himself of no reputation: and One action from him was sufficient: this you
will not deny:

And therefore in all the Scripture you may observe, that from the very instant
of the Creation, the second person in Trinity took upon him a body: he had a
body from the beginning, from the first man, and shall have a body to the last
man: Psa. 79.
as David says of him, a Body have thou prepared me; consider of this, and
compare it with the Scriptures, and see if this be not more agreeable unto the
vastness of the largness of Christ, then to confine his body only to the short
time of 33 years. He it is that suffers in man, in the first man, and shall
suffer in the last man; from the time of his suffering in the first righteous
Abel, to the last, to the last righteous Abel: 1 Cor. 15. 24.
from the time of taking his Kingdom of his Father, till the time that he shall
render up the Kingdom to his Father, it is he that suffers.

I know when at any time ye hear of Christ's Body, and of his sufferings, you
presently fly to that short time that he lived upon Earth, to those 33 years
that he was visibly seen to walk upon Earth: and I doubt many Divines intend no
less when they speak of his sufferings, they presently have recourse to that
time, and to Pontius Pilate, and Herod, Heb. 13.
and the Jews, and intend no more; but Beloved, Christ is yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever: Christ suffers now as much as he did then, and
before that, as much as he does now, for while any of his members suffers, he
suffers. I appeal to you, examine this truth, whether this be not more
agreeable to truth, and to the Scripture, to acknowledge this Vast Largness of
Christ, then to narrow and scant his body to that short time? for if ye say he
wrought our redemption, and satisfied Gods wrath in those whole thirty three
years, then you contradict your selves; for none can deny, but any one of his
actions alon^ considered, was abundantly sufficient: and the Apostle Paul
says, That he did fill up in his body the measure of the sufferings of Christ:
2 Cor. 4. 10.
and certainly he that thus suffered in him, does still, and shall do so to the
end of the world.

And so I say, concerning this request of the Spouse to Christ, it is a strange
question, if ye consider it according to the three and thirty years he was on
earth, in the days of Herod, for to ask him where he fed? and where he rested?
we know in that regard, where he fed, and where he rested at that time; but she
asks where he feeds now, and where he rests now, to the very very last day, and
from the first day; this is the Spouse her question, where he feeds, and where
he feeds at noon? But by the way God forbid, that we should go about to deny
Christ's coming in the flesh; for he did come in the flesh; and whatever the
Scripture says he did in the flesh, is really undeniably true* and let his
tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth that shall deny it: But yet give me
leave to tell you, that is but the History, there is a mystery in all the
words, there is a symbolical truth hid in them, that is not obvious to every
eye: Mat. 9 20
It Is true he cured the eyes of the blind, and healed the lame, and cured the
deaf: but, that is but the letter, the history, that dyed with them; for they
are dead, their eyes are shut up, and their members are dissolved, and returned
into their first elements: But he by that resembled to us, how he has ever
since, and before, and will for ever cure the eyes of the blind, and heal the
lame, and cast out Devils, and cure the bloody Issue in our souls; for the
other was but the outside, the visible, sensible part of his actions and
miracles; but that which Christ would represent to our understanding by that,
that is the fixed and eternal truth; And so, Christ still has, and shall have
his food, and his resting place. And whoever shall eat of this Food, shall
never hunger again: whosoever shall drink of this water that he shall give
them, shall never thirst again.

Your Fathers have eaten Manna in the Wilderness, Joh. 4. 14*
and are dead (says he) but whosoever shall eat of this manna, Ibid. 6. 49
shall never dye: Those actions Christ did then; but these actions that those
represents, he does always: those were visible representations presentations
of them which he invisibly and mystically does now, yet as really; Not only I
say, as truly, but more truly: The spirituality of those actions never end; for
put all together that ever Christ raised from death, or cast out devils out of,
and healed, etc. they were but few: he could have healed and cured all, if he
pleased; but that was not the end of his coming; but he did so much, and enough
to manifest God come in the flesh, and that he will always do the same things
to the end of the world, Spiritually.

Where thou feedest? what then may be Christ's food? Mat. 23. 18.
for even Christ now has his diet, and food, though not of figs, after which
he hungered, Luke 24. 42.
nor of flesh which he did eat, nor of boiled fish which he seemed to eat, etc.
But Christ himself tells us, Joh. 4. 34.
My meat is to do the will of my Father, and to finish his work; and he tells
us where he rests, Cant. 6. 3.
Cant. 6. 2, 3. Among the beds of spices, Isa. 66. 2.
among broken and contrite hearts: and his delight is to be among his lilies,
and among his roses in his garden, there does he refresh himself: Christ is fed
in his members.

Take heed then ye suffer not Christ to starve within you, lest at the last day
it be laid to your charge, Mat. 25. 42.
I was a hungry, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
naked, and ye clothed me not; in prison, and ye visited me not etc. But do you
think, that Christ is fed with corporal food? I assure you this, for your
comfort, that those that feed Christ shall never perish; but now to feed the
hungry with bread externally, to put clothes upon the naked, to give drink to
them that are A-Thirst, to go to them that are shut up in prison, this every
man may do, by his natural power; ye may do this, and yet give where there is
no need; you may do this, and yet suffer your Savior to starve: This is not a
true feeding on Christ; no, no, it is Another-guess feeding that he requires,
or that he will Reward: The meaning is I had a spiritual hunger, and a
spiritual nakedness; this ye did not relieve, satisfy and supply; when I lay
begging and knocking at your door for relief in this kind, Rev. 3. 20.
ye would not hear me; and now, I will not Hear you: You suffered me to starve,
and do you look I should relieve you? Mat. 25. 44.
Depart, I know you not: Lord (say they) we never saw thee a hungry, but we fed
thee; or naked, but we clothed thee; or in prison, but we visited thee; They
wonder, that Christ should lay that to their charge; for who more careful to
relieve him outwardly? and yet you see Christ will not know them.

Therefore take notice, that it is not enough, that if no man demand, ye need
not to give: or if you do give, you have done all; for ye may be guilty of
neglecting Christ notwithstanding: Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6.
for they shall be satisfied: Let Christ be fed and satisfied in thy soul, give
Him such meat as he can eat: Joh. 4. 14.
His meat is to do the will of his Father, Psalm. 2. 12.
and to f^nish his work; therefore in that regard also, Romans 8. 28.
take heed ye displease not the Son, left he be angry and ye perish in the way:
Take heed ye suffer him not to starve; Thou feedest him in his members, yea,
Outwardly, but that is not enough: I tell you, that is but an emblem of
feeding Christ, that is but the outside: Mat. 23. 23.
thou do but (as it were) perform the small matter^ of the Law, and neglectest
the weighty matters thereof.

Tell me, where thou feedest, and where thou restest at noon? Beloved what need
Christ any rest? he is in heaven, and is there any weariness? where there is no
weariness, there is no need of rest; Isa. 66. 1.
he is far above the malice of men and devils, Isa. 66. 1. Where then is the
place of my rest? For Answer hereunto, we must consider Christ as a Body, not
as any one particular member: for a member cannot suffer without the body: for
if a member be cut off from the body, all actions cease in that member; and
where there is no life or action, there can be no suffering: separate the
action (which is the effect of life) from the body, or the life which is the
cause of action, and the body is not capable of suffering: So in Christ,
consider the body complete, and so Christ suffers still, Col. 1. 15. etc.
and has need of Rest: As he is in every creature, so he is called The
beginning of all the works of God: and he indeed is All Things, and so he is at
rest, and cannot suffer.

Here is a great mystery, Beloved, that Christ should be in the Creature* and
yet be at Rest; that he should be in the Variation and Alteration of things in
the world, and yet He not vary; that He should be the substance of things
changed, and yet He not changed. I will show you it in an example. The light
and heat of the Sun comes through the air: now you know, the wind and the air
is subject to change, nothing more: it is changed and turned every way; and yet
the sun, though it do come through the air, is the same, it is not moved, nor
changed: though they suffer an alteration, yet it suffers none. Wonder not then
(if such a thing may come to be in a Creature, as the Sun is) that he that is
the Lord of all Creatures, should be so, and infinitely more: No marvel though
he can turn them upside down as he pleases, Psalm. 102. 27.
and vary and alter them as the wind; They all shall wax old as does a garment;
they shall perish, but thou shall endure; as a vesture thou shall change them,
and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years never end; that
is, they shall all purify and corrupt, but thou art the same, thou changest
not: Dear friends now we have answered you where He rests. Jesus Christ blessed
for ever, he indeed suffers in his members, But he Rests in himself; Jam. 1. 17.
in him there is no shadow of change: And in our temptations and aff^ictions we
rest in him;

When we can in all troubles have recourse to him, as David did, and find
succor under the shadow of his wings, this is a repose for our hearts in all
conditions: in our selves we can do nothing; there we cannot rest, but in him
we may and can: when as, we are in such an affliction like as our Savior was,
that he saw No comfort, every thing was Sad and dark round about, he was
compassed with sorrows on every side; he was in such a labyrinth of sorrow, as
never man was; he saw no comfort at all, neither in life nor in death, above
him nor below him, from God or men: I say, were our condition as b^d as his,
(if it were possible) that we were in the very midst of the heat and fire of
afflictions, when the flood of tentation arises forty cubits above
ourstrongest hold, yet then we might rest in our Head; even as he rested in
himself, so we may rest in him, seeing that all things work together and shall
turn to the best to them that love God: Romans 8. 28.
It is a strange speech, and as rarely believed, that though God bring us
through never so many, and never so bitter tortures and torments, That yet we
may be at rest, in an assured persuasion, that all shall turn to the best;
which notwithstanding are not punishments and judgments, as they are generally
taken* nor so to be accounted; Ill indeed had it been for us, if it had been
so; for they are not to be looked upon as vengeances, but as fatherly
corrections; not as ministers of his wrath, but as Evidences of his love: and
such love, that neither height, nor depth, Romans 8. 38, 39.
death, nor life, etc. Nay, nothing can separate us from Christ: Here is the
rest of a Christian, and then they may be said to Rest with him at noon, in the
very heat and height of tentations and afflictions: And if the soul shall ask,
O my God, where art thou? Beloved, he is nigh thee he is with thee, he is so
neatly joined to thee that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor things present nor things to come, shall be able to
sep^rate between him and you; And in his due time he will rouse up himself like
a Lion; When the heat of tentation shall have humbled us, and laid us low, and
qualified the proud heart of man, and the Smart of affliction mellowed and
tempered us, he then will appear for our comfort and rest.

The fourth thing is; For why should I be as those that turn aside to the
flocks of thy companions? She would fain know, with an unsatisfiable desire,
what pleases him, and where he rests, and where he feeds; for if he do not
resolve her, and answer her, she shall turn aside to the creatures, to the
flocks of thy companions; as anon we shall show you what it is; There is in the
souls of all men a propension to worship a God; if they find not the true God,
they will worship somewhat, that which their own fancy tells them is a God; It is
the nature of gratitude, to be returning somewhat: The soul is given of God,
and it would of its own nature return a service again; this is placed in every
man naturally, as you may see in the very heathens: Our souls are always
calling, either for a Christ or a Barabbas; They must worship* and therefore ye
shall find God never commands, That thou shall worship, but only rectifies it,
and shows whom they should worship* and how; and therefore the Spouse of
Christ calls upon him to direct her: if thou do not direct, I shall not be able
to do any thing pleasing to thee; I shall presently be as those that turn aside
to the flocks of thy companions: she freely consesseth, I am as apt to turn
aside as they which do: (I cannot now stand to tell you why the creatures are
called the flocks of his companions.)

The soul cannot stand idle, as I was saying; it is a hard task to serve two
masters; Mat. 5. 24.
he shall; either hate the one, and cleave to the other; or else cleave to the
one, and despise the other: If we turn to the creatures, we turn our backs upon
God, he that loves the creatures (as who does not too much?) let him but
examine, whether the love of them has not banished all love to God out of his
heart: for if thou do not love God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might, thou love not him at all: he will not be contented
with a divided heart; Mar. 9. 11.
As you know God is called Power, then God is all power, and there is none that
has any power but he: if any creature have a part, then he has not all; so if
any creature have a part of thy love, God has not all, and he will then have
none at all: No woman can love another and her husband too, with her chiefest
love: So no man can love God and the creature too with his chiefest love; and
no man comes to the Father but by the Son: Joh. 6.
he accepts whatever we do, and only all in his Son, nothing pleases him but
his Sons actions: And he that cleaves to the creature, falls when that falls;
but he that cleaves to the Creator, Ps. 125. 1.
shall stand fast for ever, as Mount Sion.

Beloved, behold, as Joshua says, This d^y I set before you life and death,
Deuteronomy. 30. 15.
blessing and cursing; choose whether ye will cleave to the adulterous love of
the creature, or cleave to the immutable unchangeable Creator.

I have read of an Allegory among the Jews that they had among them, to set
forth the condition and state between God and men, and it is an excellent one,
the best I think that ever was.

Suppose A huge Rock of pure crystal, and round about this rock, at the foot
thereof, a pleasant torrent, or rapid River as pure as Crystal, and round
about the river all manner of pleasant trees, bearing all manner of pleasant
fruit, and One standing on the top of this rock, a proper tall man, without
blemish, as fair as Absalom, and over his head the Sun shining in his full
strength and glory, Attended with the Moon and Stars, making a glorious
firmament;

Now this Sun you may conceive to be God himself, and the fair Absalom to be
Christ Jesus, the image of God the Father; and the rock of Crystal, to be this
word, and in the river is represented all things in motion, all changeable
things, all manner of trees and fruit, and all things below; but in the
crystal is clearly represented [Him] that stands on the top, as if he were in
the very midst of the rock, and above him the Sun in his full brightness, which
is God the Father, of whom he is begotten: Now when a man shall come to the
foot of this rock, and there he beholds choice of objects, to set his heart and
mind upon: I say, when a man shall come and behold choice of beautiful objects,
and suppose he had power to choose which he will to set his heart upon; In the
river he beholds all sublunary thing, All things which are in flux and motion,
and whatever the earth can afford for delight.

Now let him choose whether he will set his heart upon these things which have
their being in their flux and motion, that they are never the same, but they
change as the object changes; and if they did not change, they could not be: As
in the Thames, the river it is continually in motion and running, it is never
the same, there is not the same water to day that was yesterday, for that is
run into the sea, but is still a changing; And if Here we place our affections,
and take up our delight, how unstable and uncertain are our comforts? Oh! we
think it a great matter to be rich, to be strong, to be comely and
well-featured and composed; to be beautiful, to be in honor and credit, to have
great attendance, large reven^es, etc. Alas, Alas, do thou place thy
affections Here, in the very lowest and meanest condition of things, amongst
these transitory and flitting things: Why, all these things are but toys, but
bables, but rattles, to please children: where is, and what is become of the
greatest Monarchs that ever were in the world? where is great Alexander, and
Pompey, and Augustus? and all those Worthies (as the world esteems them) are
they not all turned and tumbled into the dust? are not they, and all their
glory, like a tale that is told and forgotten? are they not like a dream? like
a shadow? like a bubble in the water which arises on a sudden, and is
beautiful, but as suddenly down again.

Beloved, then do you examine your selves, If you do not set your love, your
hope, your delight upon these things that are ever changing? and as I said, so
changing, that if they did not change, Col. 2. 22.
they could not be, which all perish with the using: Do they not all fall away,
as you fall away, or fall before you? as Houses, Lands, Riches, Goodly and
Sumptuous Buildings, Husbands, Wives, Children, Good name, etc. and yet will
you set your affections upon such things as these, though you see them moulder
and fall to dust and nothing before your face?

But some, they come here to the foot of this beautiful Mountain and behold,
and they look higher, and they behold the Sun, moon and stars and the
bespangled glorious firmament, and see how they reflect upon the crystal, and
wonder at their glory, and so they set their affections upon them; truly these
are better then the former, because they set their affections upon Celestial
things, things that represent the glory of God more then these things below,
and he is more glorious in them; but the other, their love is taken up with
Terrestrial things, earthly and low; but both these are short of this true
happiness.

But a third sort come, and take a veiw of these various objects, and they can
rest in none of these things, And they look Higher, till they come to behold
that fair Absalom Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 15.
who is the brightness of his Fathers glory; And they, cannot rest till they
see Him who is in the middle of the creature, Him that is in the midst of the
Crystal, even HE that is all in all, the very bottom and Foundation, and the
SUM of all; and so in and through him, they come to behold the SUN over his
head in its glory and splendour, even God himself Blessed for ever: for
otherwise, God cannot be seen or approached unto, but only through his Son: and
these Spectators can never fail perish, or miscarry, because their love is set
upon him that cannot change, fail, or miscarry; For, they cannot rest till they
are united and joined, and made one with him.

As my eye can never be united to any thing, till my sight see and receive it,
and by that means that thing be united together with my sight; so neither can
we be made one with God, till we see and behold him being united to Him. And if
once we see him, we cannot but love him; and this love brings thee into union
with God: Now love is the knot that must unite us eternally, that must for ever
k^it us together; and this knot being once knit, it is knit for ever: for we
being knit and made one with him, we can never be lost; but so long as God
lives, so long shall you: Mar. 10. 9.
Here are Christ's words verified, That which God has joined together, let no
man put asunder: but if to the creature you join your selves, God never made
that conjunction, God never knit that knot, and therefore that shall be put
asunder: but this knot that God has knit himself, shall never be loosed.

And further know this, that thou being thus joined, to Christ, as a true
member of his body, thou have full right and title to him, and to all his
virtues and excellencies, riches and glory; but otherwise thou have no title at
all: for as thou art a particular man, thou have right to nothing of his; but
as thou art a member of the Church of Christ, his love comes to thee by virtue
thereof; for thou have nothing to do with heaven, or any thing that is Christ's,
but as thou art a member; just as a man has a portion and dowry with his wife,
or a woman any riches or joyn^ure by her husband: she or He has no right to
any part thereof, as a single man, or a single woman, but by virtue of the knot
that unites them together, so as they are made One: even so the dowry, the
jointure of eternal happiness was not made to Paul, nor to Peter, nor to thee,
as ye are single and particular persons, but as you are members of his body,
being united and made one with him as a Branch in the root.

Beloved, it is to the Church that Christ makes all his promises; still to the
Church; still to his Spouse; and it is not to any visible Church neither, or an
Assembly of men and women, as particular and separated from his body; but to
the visible and invisible Congregation of Saints, which are his members, and
make up his body; to these are all the promises made, and upon no other account
can any one promise be claimed; Therefore beloved, let not the Church be an
odious name to you, as it is too too much: nor let not every particular man
think himself the Church; for to thee separated from the Church belongs no good
thing.

Now, if a man be knit to Jesus Christ by this knot of love, I will tell you
what will follow: Love, you know, suffers not a man to be his own, but he has
given up himself to the thing loved, and that rules him, and it he obeys: So
this soul once knit to Christ by this knot of love, then he cannot commit
adultery with any creature; he is no longer his own: and therefore whenever ye
find in the Proverbs, and there read of the adulterous love of that whore that
waits in the twilight to trap the young man: or of the adulterous love of
Potiphars wife to Joseph in Genesi^, or the like: the intention of the holy
Ghost is to set forth unto us the adulterous love of the soul, Prove. 6. 26.
and how our love is carried away from Christ: Genesis 39. 7, etc.
The Creature, is the Adulterous woman which takes our love.

And this love is diversely called in Scripture; sometimes it is called hope,
and sometimes fear, sometimes trust etc. according to the several objects it is
exercised upon; As the Attributes of God are one in themselves, though
differenced to us according to the several ob^ects they work upon; Sometimes he
is called Grace, sometimes Glory, sometimes Majesty, sometimes Patience, sometimes
Mercy, sometimes Anger, sometimes love; not that there are so many several
things in God: but all these are one act in God: As the Sun, it causes one
color in the Rose, another in the Nettle* and it causes the Carrion to stink,
and the Rose to smell sweet; yet one and the same thing in the Sun does all,
but it works to the several objects it meets with: so it is One and the same
act in Religion, which is that, which joins and unites us to our Creator, yet
distinguished by diverse names, as Hope, Faith, Fear, Love, Trust, yet all one
thing in the soul: As, when it looks upon the promises of God, then it is
called Faith: when it apprehends him to be a just revenging God, and that it
apprehends that he is angry, then it is called Fear: and when it beholds the
merciful and loving face of God in Jesus Christ, then it is called Love: again,
when it Beholds the promises, and apprehends God to be faithful, then it is
called Hope etc. and therefore ye are not to apprehend these things, as several
in God, or in your selves, but as One.

Yet I pray, do not mistake me, that because I say Love is the cord that unites
us to God, do not think that I exclude Hope or Fear, or Trust, or Faith, or any
other grace: do not think that I undervalue the rest; far be it from me; but
only this I say, Love does knit the band more sensibly, and more feelingly to
us: And in all this we must not ascribe any good, any power to our selves:
whoever he be, he must acknowledge himself an unprofitable servant: Luke 9. 13.
and that the work is Gods own work, and that you had no hand in it: and be
sure, as ye have set to your seal that God is true, so also, that this is truth.

But if thou have set thy seal to the creatures, and that they have stolen away
thy heart, and thou art in love with them, and knit to them, made one with
them, then when thou come to dye, thou have no refuge to trust to: they will
all fail thee: for they all dye with thee, if not before thee: however, when
thou failest, they fail: and when they fail, besure thou failest: But if thou
art dead to the creatures, and art daily dying to them by degrees, then it will
be no grief for thee to part with any creature: Phil. 3. 7.
but thou will be willing to do as Abraham did by Sarah, Genesis 23. 11.
to buy a field to bury thy dead out of thy sight: for they are dead to thee,
and thou art dead to them: and when death shall come to call thee hence, thou
can look him in the face with great joy and re^oycing: and then shall thou
know what is the benefit of eating The hidden manna: Rev. 2. 17.
then shall thou find and taste both what it is, and how delicious and sweet
it is: then shall thou find that one day in Gods house, Psa. 84. 10
is befter then a thousand elsewhere: then shall thou find that God himself
will be more to thee then all the creatures put together: then shall thou find
that one day of true love to God, one hours enjoyment of the love of God, does
give thy soul more joy and content, then all the creatures could ever afford
thee: then shall thou feelingly say, as the Queen of Sheba by Solomon She said
to the King, 1 King. 10. 6, 7.
It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy
wisdom, howbeit I believed not the words until I came, and mine eyes had seen
it, and behold the half was not told me of thy wisdom and prosperity, exceeding
the fame which I heard. I have heard much of the love of God by his Ministers,
and of the ravishing content that was therein: but now I am come to enjoy it: I
find they did not relate the tenth part thereof, and that it is such love,
which fastens and knits us together for ever and ever, to the unchangeable God,
through Jesus Christ his only beloved Son, who is the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person.

OF EATING HIDDEN MANNA: The Heads or Substance of a Sermon preached for Mr.
Hodges at his Wednesday Lecture in OLD JURY.
REV. 2. 17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and
will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.
IN a little corner of Asia were these Churches seated, unto whom God by the
Evangelist Saint John wrote: The words I have now read, are as David says of
the blessed man, whose tree never withers, Psalm. 1. 5.
but is always fresh, flourishing and green, planted by the Rivers side: such
are these words, and all the words of God: they have not only a dead Letter,
but they have a living sense: this Tree bears fruit in all Ages, in all times,
As our Savior Christ says, what I say to you, I say to all men: the words of
God are so spoken and meant, that they are not only true of that man, that
time, in that place, in that age, in which they were spoken; but they are true
and concern as much all men, all ages, all sexes, all places.

But if ye shall say to me as the Apostle ^aith, Romans 10. 6. Romans 10. 6.
Who shall ascend into Heaven, or who shall descend into the secrets of God, to
bring Christ from the Grave, or to fetch him down from Heaven? behold he is
nigh thee, even in thy heart, etc. Behold, I am he, whom God has appointed at
this time to unfold this word from God now read to you, to open to you these
sweet promises of mercy and grace: but it will be so only to those whose eyes
are open to see them so: the promise here made, is large: I will give him to
eat Hidden Manna: but it is not without a condition: let them be what they will
be, pretend what they will, let your confidence be never so great, ye have no
interest in this promise without the condition: would you eat of the hidden
Manna? then ye must be overcomers: he that overcomes shall eat. But give me
leave a little to wave the condition: the Apostle John says, 1 John 5. 8.
That there are three, that bare record on earth: the Spirit, the water, and
the Blood; and these three agree in one. So say I, here is both a condition and
a promise, and they both agree in one: A man cannot eat except he Overcome:
neither can he Overcome except he Eats: therefore let no man think he can
Overcome except he eat this hidden Manna: and he that eats does Overcome: as
Christ tells the Disciples, Joh. 15. 5.
without me ye can do nothing: so without ye eat this hidden Manna ye can do
nothing, ye can never overcome, for in eating this hidden Manna we get strength
to Overcome: and as we eat, we overcome; and as we overcome, we eat: this was
your vow made in Baptism, to renounce the Devil and all his works, and to
fight manfully under Christ's Banner against sin, the World the Flesh, and the
Devil: thou have there given up thy name to Christ, and have bid defiance to
Satan, as much as in thee lies: and have said, I renounce thee Satan: and I
will be one of thy Soldiers, O Lord Christ.

There is no man that has prepared his heart to seek God, but he shall be sure
to find enemies enough, he shall have temptations to wrestle with, and to
overcome. David says that he found his enemies innumerable, Ps. 118. 12.
Psalm. 118. they compassed him on every side, and came about him all like Bees:
and the Lord himself tells us, that all the imaginations of man's heart are
only evil continually. Do thou think then that thou have no enemies? Then
let no man say, if I found any enemies, I would fight with them: for I may say
to thee, Judges 16. 12.
as Delilah to Sampson, Arise, the Philistines be upon thee, there be enemies
enough, even in the chamber, within thee, lying in wait: and if you do not
arise, and stand upon your guard, you shall be overcome instead of overcoming.

But that you may understand this Text, I will lay down three things which will
be necessary to unfold it.

The first is this: All these seven promises made here to the seven Churches of
Asia, though they be diversely expressed, yet it is all one thing: suppose they be
promises of eating of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God: or
promises that we shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. and 3.
or that we shall have the crown of life, or of the white stone with the new
name in it, or of ruling the Nations with a rod of iron, or the receiving the
bright morning Star: All these promises they are one and the same thing: and
they are pronounced by one and the same Spirit; and let him that has an ear,
Cha. 2* 29.
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches: wheresoever Christ shall be,
there shall his members be also: and every member shall have a full and
plentiful part, there shall be nothing wanting to them, they shall all have a
satisfying part, they shall be all as branches that are nourished with one and
the same root: the same sap goes through the whole body that is in the root:
And, what ever privilege or benefit Christ has, they shall all receive of his
fullness, Joh. 1. 16.
grace for grace, they shall all be made partakers of all the virtues of the
head: but notwithstanding all these promises we are never the better without we
have Christ, they are all blanks without him, all unsavory: it is he that
seasons all: Yea, trust as long as thou can, and believe as much as thou will, without Christ thou can never come unto him: God himself is nothing to
us without Christ: As every Iubar and Beam of light that comes from the Sun,
they are all included in the body of the Sun, but they are not communicated to
us but by those Jubars and beams that come from the Sun: so God is like the
Sun, and whatever good, benefit or blessing we have, it comes from God: but all
these are included in God himself: and there is no creature can partake of any
good from him, but by his Son Christ, in those Iubars of light, that
communicates them to us: This light had never come to us, but for those beams:
so God the Father cannot communicate himself to any creature but by the Son, he
is the first begotten of every Creature: Col. 1. 15.
he came being sent from the father: yet God the Father is not a day, Heb. 1.
not a minute Ancienter then his Son: Christ he is called The word spoken, in
the Hebrews; As he is unspoken, so he is the word with God in the bosom of
his Father, and this word is God, as John 1. 1. Joh. 1. 1.
but being once spoken and utered, he is the first begotten of God in every
creature. The Alpha and Omega in every creature, from whom alone we receive
grace for grace; all the goodness and fullness of God is poured upon the head of
this Aaron, which runs down not only to his beard, Psa. 133. 4
but to all the skirts of his garments, to all his members; God himself in
himself to the creature is nothing without Christ: He cannot possibly be
communicated but by and through Christ.

Secondly, All these promises to the seven Churches they imply that which has
its beginning in this life, and perfected in the life to come; says our
Savior, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you; if ye find not the Kingdom of God
and the Kingdom of Heaven within you, Luke 17. 21
and in this world, be assured ye shall never find it in the world to come; He
that denies me before men, him will I deny before my father which is in Heaven:
he that enjoys me not in this world, he shall never enjoy me hereafter.

The poor dejected and oppressed soul, it longs to taste Christ here: nothing
will satisfy him but to taste and eat Christ here: for if he eat him not here,
he knows he shall not hereafter: as David says, Psa. 42. 2.
My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come before
God? What to do? Psalm. 27. 4. Psa. 27. 4.
To see his beauty, and to taste of his goodness: if you see not God here, ye
shall never see Him hereafter. Christ will ask thee as he did the Discsples,
how many loaves have ye? when ye come to dye, Mat. 15. 34.
what Angels food have ye to feed on? what Hidden Manna? How many loaves of
that? if ye must say, none Lord, what a heavy answer will this be to you? but
if thou have any, if but two loaves, if but a little oil in thy Lamp, he will
then multiply thy loaves and that little oil: the barrel of meal, and that
cruse of oil shall never fail: 2 King. 4.
And he will say, come thou good and faithful servant, Mat. 25. 21
thou have been faithful in a little, I will now multiply thy reward: Come now,
I will feed thee to eternity: If Christ shall say to thee, How much peace have
you? if thou can but say, here is a little Lord: Christ will say come, come,
I will multiply and increase that peace infinitely: what love have thou? if
thou have but any, Luke 3. 19.
though but as much as a grain of mustard seed, come, says our Lord, I will
cause it to grow and increase, and become a mighty tree, so that the fowls of
the air shall build their nests therein. That is, I will enlarge it as my self
infinitely: And which way soever else a man seeks for rest and peace, he shall
never find it: for, as all the Creatures, so all the action and motion of the
Creatures come out from him, and they can never rest till they return into him
again: and therefore he is called the God of Sabbath, which signifies Rest: in
him there is Rest, and no where else. The soul is the breath of God, and it is
impossible that it should have a rest for the sole of her foot till it return,
and this blessed Noah put forth his hand and take her in again. Mat. 6. 11.
Lay up treasure for your selves in heaven: would you have treasure hereafter?
ye must treasure it up while ye are on earth, that ye may have the reward and
the wages hereafter: ye must receive here the pledge, the Hire: The Portion and
the reward comes hereafter. Your fathers (says our Savior) have eaten Manna
and are dead: Joh. 6. 49.
but blessed is he that eats Manna in the Kingdom of Heaven: he that feels Gods
love shed abroad in his heart here, shall find that love increased thirty,
sixty, an hundredfold in the life to come: here ye feed but are not filled,
but then you shall be satisfied.

Thirdly, All these seven promises that are here made to the seven Churches,
there is not one word to be taken according to the Letter: but think not
strange of such sayings: be not startled, I would only quicken up your
attention. I undervalue not the Scriptures, but desire to give them all due
honor: for do you think that you shall be Pillars in Heaven, or that you shall
eat trees, or the fruit of trees there? or that ye shall have rods of iron in
your hand, or that ye shall be burning stars? or as it is in Daniel, Dan. 12. 3
He that converteth a soul shall shine like the Stars? I say there is not one
word true according to the Letter: yet I say, in all the words that ever Christ
spoke, or that is written in this blessed, blessed Book of God, they are all
true; there is not the least tincture, not the least allay of untruth: I say,
every word, every syllable, every letter is true: bear me witness, you are my
record: but they are true as he intended them that spoke them: they are true as
God meant them, not as men will have them.

As when Christ says, Joh. 15. 1.
my Father is an husbandman, do you think, or are you so childish to think that
God is a husbandman? and Christ says again, I am the vine, and ye the
branches: will you have this to be literally spoken? Go to, I will speak a
paradox to you, but I willl unfold it. It is impossible for any man either to
speak a precise truth, or to hear a precise truth; for a precise truth, or to
speak precisely, is to speak at once the truth, that is, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth: as for example, if I tell you this is a Church, this is
not a precise truth: for in saying it is a Church, I neither tell you whether
it be built of wood, or stone, or brick: I neither tell you it is little or
great: I neither tell you whether it be high or low, etc. which I not doing, do
not tell you the whole truth: Or, if I tell you I saw a man, I tell not his age
nor stature, nor complexion, nor kindred, nor riches, nor bigness, etc. which
is not the whole truth. I shall unfold this to you, these similies I use for
your good: God only is able to speak such a truth, A Precise Truth at once, in
one word, as shall include all this: God could have spoken such a word as
should have included the whole truth in one word: but where should he have
found Auditors that were able to have heard him? where had been our ears to
have heard such a word? or our understandings to have understood it? you know a
great noise deafs us, and abundance of light blinds us: if there be too much
light, it may as well blind a man as too little: now you know truth is the
object of the understanding, as light is of sight: so if there be an excessive
truth spoken to us, it destroys, it splits the understanding: as the people of
Israel, Exo. 3. 9.
they were not able to hear God speak, but they must dye for it: and Moses
himself complains that he was afraid and trembled: we are not able to hear God
speak: if he should speak to us (as he would, if we could hear) he should speak
us all to pieces, he should speak us to nothing; Oh let not God speak to us
lest we dye! We should cry out, Exo. 20. 19.
Oh do not speak to us as thou art in thy self, for we are men: but let Moses
speak to us, and we will hear him: O Lord speak to us as men, as we are able to
hear.

Beloved, the not knowing of this truth, and our receiving the word, and
understanding it according to the Letter, has the been the ground of all the
Errors, of all the schisms, of all the rents in this poor Church of ours. But
to go further, and to give you a little further light, I know the Scripture in
the Letter speaks of election, reprobation, and predestination: But if we take
it according to men, we are much deceived. As for example, when I say this man
is like such another man, And though he may be so in some things, yet not in
all: and far be it from us to think, because God speaks according to the manner
of men, that therefore we conclude his ways are like our ways, or his
thoughts like our thoughts: but whatever God says of himself, those are
sentences and expressions spoken but by way of similitude to make us
understand, Isa. 55. 8, etc.
and not that we should think that the almighty, infinite God to be like weak,
man: so when he speaks of any of these things, of election, or reprobation, or
his foreknowledge, there is indeed such a kind of thing in God it is true: but
it is true as God intends it, and not otherwise.

It is said also that God made a Covenant, and the Scripture speaks of Gods
knowledge: but do you think that Gods Covenants are like the Covenants of men,
or his knowledge like means? God forbid: and woe be unto that man that takes it
contrary to Gods intent and meaning: so also we read of Gods hatred and of Gods
love: but his love and hatred is not like men's love and hatred: Are my ways
like your ways, or my thoughts like your thoughts? As if he should say, will
you wrest my word, and take it according to your own ways? will you take me
according to my literal words? away, away, As high as the Heaven is above the
Earth, so high are my thoughts above your thoughts: And when God says he
repented, do thou think that he repents as man repents? He does repent, it
is true: but according to his own sense and meaning, not according to thine.
Alas, alas, we poor, ignorant, low, narrow-spirited creatures, as we are not
able to comprehend God, so neither can we Gods word: we can see but a glympse
and a little glimmering of the Truths of God: As Elias, 1 King. 19. 12.
he could not apprehend God, nor discover him neither in the thunder nor in the
lightning, nor in the mighty rushing, nor in the f^re, though God was in them
all; but when God came in a still, soft voice, then he could apprehend God,
heard him and saw him; and then he came to see that God was also as much in all
the rest, though he saw him not: but he being (as also we) of a low, soft, and
tender nature, and so much children that he could not endure to hear the mighty
God, but in a still, soft and tender voice; the thunder and the fire and the
mighty rushing is too terrible, too destructive to our weak natures. For in God
there all things coincide, even contradictories coincide in him, as the Vision
of God shows at large in some Chapters.

So when God promises here, To him that overcomes, will I give him to eat of
the hidden Manna, we must not take Gods meaning according to the Letter, nor
think it was, or is that Manna that God rained from Heaven, Number. 10. But by
that expression he would win us to consider the heavenlyness, Number. 10.
and excellency, and the rareness, and the welcomness of that Manna that feeds
the soul, and what spiritual food is. How welcome was it to the Israelites at
first, though afterward the commonness made them loath it?

O lack! I am but newly entered into my Text, and now the time cuts me off; I
have opened the Windows, to let in light into the Chamber, into this Subject,
and the time bids me shut them again; and I now must let it alone till another
opportunity, which is contrary to my purpose and full intent, which was to have
discovered what God has revealed to me, concerning these deep points, now so
much controverted, and wherein there have been such errors and general
mistakes, even among them who have thought themselves very knowing in the
Scriptures, Job. 11. 11
For vain man would be wise though he be born as a wild asses colt. And he in
his foolish wisdom and in his humane Reason would fain frame and square out God
like unto himself, that so he might (as he thinks) well near fathom and
comprehend him within, the poor, weak, and narrow bounds of Reasons Line, or
Rule.

So much for the present.

Covetousness Anatomized: AND THE Generality of Covetousness.
JER. 6. 13. For from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every
one is given to Covetousness: and from the Prophet, even to the Priest, every
one deals falsely.
Preached at Putney.
BEloved, this speech as it is bold, so it is a very strange speech, and a home
charge: but wonder not (for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is true
boldness: as Solomon says, Prove. 28. 1. Prove. 28. 1
The Righteous are as bold as a Lion For the Prophet here strikes at head and
tail, root and branch, great and small, Prince and People, Priest and Prophet.

The whole house of Israel are here 1 Accused of Covetousness. 2 Condemned for
Covetousness.


The accusation is like an Indictment well laid, which expresses* 1 The fault,
the charge, which is Covetousness.

2 The extent of the fault, it was Epidemical, from the greatest to the least.

3 The Intention, they gave themselves to it; they did it purposely and
voluntarily: And

4 The Charge being proved, and they found guilty, the sentence or condemnation
follows; which is only employed in the word [For] it being the connection of
this verse with the former: wherein is threatened, that God will pour out his
fury and indignation upon the children and young men, Jer. 6. 12.
upon the husband and wife, the aged with him that is full of days, and their
houses and wive; should be turned to others.

I The matter of the accusation is Covetousness. But this sin how evil soever,
and however threatened here and elsewhere in the Scriptures, is hardly esteemed
any sin at all; ye cannot persuade men of the Evilness thereof; but you are
ready to think and charge us, that we Churchmen are strange fellows; To set up
men of straw, and then fight against them: for our parts we find very few
covetous; some indeed are Swearers, Drunkards, Adulterers, Liars, Prophaners of
the Sabbath; these they can see and acknowledge to be sins, and would have us
preach against them; but to keep such a stir about Covetousness, they think is
a vain thing, and time lost; for either they are but few that are so, or else
it is not so great a sin as you make for; or else you call that Covetousness,
which is not.

Indeed, I confess, other sins wear the Devils Cognizance and Livery openly,
but this always wears a Cloak; ye shall never see Covetousness without its
Cloak; as the Apostle terms it, 1 These. 2. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
For our last Translation renders it very right, Nor a Cloak of Covetousness.

For this sin is generally in credit in the world, and therefore they do not
let it go naked, but clothe it, not with the name of any vice or sin, but under
tolerable and credible names, as Thrift, Providence, Good Husbandry, Honest
care of a man's own, and Care of the main chance: I, and so it should seem, they
esteem it the main chance; a covetous man will part with his soul, before he
will part with his Covetousness: and they have Scripture ready to protect and
defend them, 1 Timothy 5. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 8
He that provideth not for his own, especially for them of his own house, is
worse then an Infidel, and has denied the faith: And so they bring it in as a
duty, that they ought to be scraping and covetous.

We may endeavor to uncase this covetous man by two words; one is in the place
before named, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
Nor a cloak of Covetousness: its never without a cloak, as I said; and the
other is, 1 Timothy 6. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
its hare called The root of all evil: What a world of evils grow up from
covetousness? as if we had time we might show: In brief, it excludes all love
and fear of God, and all love and pity to men, and all care of our neighbors
good, and so breaks the whole Law: it will make him Oppress, Cozen, Deceive,
Lie, sell a good Conscience, for every trifle: In short, it will make a man
turn his back on all Religion, to forsake the faith, and consequently
Salvation; as is there expressed, and in the foregoing Verses, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted
after, have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows: It is such a sin, that if ever God touch the heart about it, it will
pierce through with many sorrows, before ever they can forsake it: for says
he, They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: It is
such a subtle snate, so cunningly contrived, and so full of fair pretenses,
that let a man be once in love with money, he knows not which way to wind out,
but it will fetter him, even to everlasting perdition and destruction. Indeed
friends, it is a very hard thing to uncase this sin, because care and diligence
there may and must be: and this is its Cloak; DILIGENCE is Covetousness his
Cloak, never off his back, whereby its sheltred against all reproof.

I suppose, and sure it is, a man may pray Agurs prayer without Covetousness,
Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food
convenient for me: Prove. 30. 8, 9.
A Competency of food and raiment, this certainly is the limitation and bound
of our desires: But then will arise another Question,

What is a Competency? or what is sufficient?

Therefore some in answer hereunto, have de^ined Covetousness to be an
inordinate desire of more, and using unlawful means and ways to get it: But I
conceive this is somewhat too favorably defined: for one may be covetous, yea
deeply covetous, and yet get his goods without fraud, deceit, or oppression,
etc. Aug. de lib. Arbit. lib. 3. Chap. 17. Avaritia est plus velle quam satis
sit. It is Covetousness to desire more then is sufficient; which is But daily
bread; and but, This day our daily bread, we have no warrant to seek more.

But we having daily bread, according as our Savior teaches us to pray in the
Lords prayer; which includes all things necessary for this life, food and
raiment, and the like: without question this is sufficient and the desire of
more is Covetousness: As our Savior commands, Matthew. 6. Matt. 6.
latter end. Take no thought for the morrow, saying, What shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? for after all these things do
the Gentiles seek: And as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy, 6. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content: When this will not
content, then the desire is inordinate, when a man will hunt and seek after
that which he dare not warrantably pray for, which is but daily bread: and why
should we seek with carking care for any more? Isa. 2. 22.
for any more? for our breath is in our nostrils* we are not sure of life, not
an hour: then to what end is all this taking thought? and then thou fool, whose
shall those things be which thou have provided? within this bound we ought to
keep our selves; Luke 9. 13.
for no sooner are we over this pale and bound SUFFICIENT; but then we are in
the wide wilderness, and boundless CHAMPAIGN of Covetousness: which consists in
two things:

1. To be covetous, is to let our desires run out to seek eagerly after, beyond
what is sufficient to the preservation of nature, in its own kind, and not to
stand indifferently affected in the use of lawful means, whether God will give
more or less.

2. An inordinate love of that a man has, though he have not beyond the limits
of sufficiency, is Covetousness: And in this sense a poor man may be covetous.

Covetousness may be either in -- Scraping or Holding Rapacity or Tenacity A
large paw to grasp, or In a S^runk hand to hold fast.

In Sum, I conceive Covetousness, is an inordinate desire and endeavor after
these outward things, without the bounds of sufficieny, in the preservation of
nature in its own kind, as I said.

Beloved, This sin is like poison, destroys and kills unobservedly, unseen,
infects the blood by degrees, when as some other sins break out more openly and
suddenly, in botches, and boyls, and plague-sores.

But we may observe the footsteps, and show you some symptoms of this covetous
man, whereby he may be discovered and detected, and chiefly to himself, that he
may confess himself guilty; as,

1. In his course of life, and walking, and actting; their time, their lives
and their actings are wholly taken up in buying and selling, in trafficking and
trading and reaching which way to grow rich, and get more; all their thoughts
and words, and all their mights and endeavors run in this channel: Here they
are in their own element, as a fish in the water: here their hearts run out
freely, and never regard their immortal souls: just like them of the old world,
Luke 17. 26, 27. Luke 17, 26, 27.
They eat, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage: and this was
all they minded, they never thought of their end, till the flood came and
destroyed them all: So do they; O how eager, and how full of contrivances to
add house to house, and bag to bag, and land to land, and never think how soon
death may seize, and snatch them away. And then what fruit have ye of all those
things you so pursued? you have only heaped together sorrows, Romans 6. 21.
and snares, and darts to pierce through your very Livers.

And it may be, for all this toil, you could never attain what you sought: but
adventured to lay out your precious and immortal souls to pursue after that
which is (when attained) but vanity; Psa. 62. 9.
And much lighter then vanity, if not sure to attain it.

The second Symptom whereby you may know this man, and so know your selves, is
his company; they still associate with such company as is like themselves: and
they are the only men for wisdom with them, and all others they make them
either their Prey, by circumventing and overreaching them, or else, they make
others their laughing-stocks: he is their fool to make them merry, who neglects
such a Price in their hands (as they conceive) and so much minds things
unseen, and in their opinion but air, emptiness, and vain things.

The third Symptom is his breath; he smells of that he is made of: he is like
a dying man, his breath is strong, and savours earthly, John 3. 31. Joh. 3. 31.
He that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth: The Egyptian
garlic that he has swallowed rises in his stomach, and his breath smells
strong thereof: There is Earth in his heart, and his breath that comes from
thence smells strong of the earth: all his words and discourses savor of the
world.

4. He keeps a Court of Faculties in his conscience; for gain he can dispense
with any sin: he is not so precise, but he will drive a bargain, or take
unnecessary jouneyes on the Sabbath: If his conscience tell him of doing wrong
or injustice, he can quiet it presently; O its but a trifle, a little injury,
what is that, he may live to give satisfaction, I may do him a good turn another
way; and so he thinks he has made up the matter: If he forswear himself, he
hopes he may live to ask God forgiveness, and he knows God is ready to
pardon, and forgive; and thus he dawbs up himself, and quiets his conscience
with these ignorant excuses.

5. He is Homo omnium artium, or Nullius artis: A man of all Arts, or a man of
no Art; that is, He has either a multitude of business of his own, that he
cannot look after nor mind any body else: or else he is a busie-body, and has
his finger in every Pie, every man's business is his: or else he is idle, and
has no business; viz. He is an Usurer, and lives upon other men's labors and
industry.

Oh but Sir, you make us amazed! is it possible that this should be so great a
sin?

I thank God (says he) I am found in Religion, I am free from Adultery,
Fornication, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness, Murder: These indeed are
Heinous sins and I would not be guilty of them for a world: but for a man to be
covetous, this is slighted, its a thing of nothing, rather esteemed a virtue,
then a vice, and every one extenuates and lessens it, with ^incing terms and
excuses: say they, indeed he is a little with the hardest, or he is a little
too much for the world: but in truth a mavelous honest man, a wondrous good
man. But let me ask you, were it not a thing to be laughed at, to say so by a
Thief, he is no Adulterer, no Murderer, but a very honest man? Romans 1. 29
for you see Matthew. 21. 31. Mat. 21. 31.
God ranks him with no other then Thieves, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and yet you say he is A wondrous good, honest man.

But as honest a man as the world makes him to be, yet take a little view from
some particular Scriptures, how God ranks him among them whom you account the
most Heinou^ Transgressors, Mark 7. 21, 22. Mark 7. 21, 22.
For from within, out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries,
Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, etc. all these come from within,
and these de^ile the man: and 1 Corinthians. 6. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effemina^e, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God: And Romans 1. 29. Romans 1. 29.
Being filled with all unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness,
etc. still Covetousness comes in a rank with all other the vil^st and grossest
sins.

A Christian professing the name of Christ, would be ashamed of such gross sins
as are there named; as to instance, he would be ashamed to be an Idolater:
what? to fall down to, and worship stocks and stones for his God? to seek
relief from them? God ranks covetous persons even with such, and with the
grossest sinners in the world, even as gross and hateful as can be named: and
makes even it, a note of a Reprobate mind, and one given up to vile
affections; Romans 1. 26
therefore our Savior gives special and particular warning against this sin,
Luke 12. 14. Take heed and beware of Covetousness: Luke 12. 14
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses.

Besides all this, that it is one of those Ingentia Peccata, Mighty sins, as it
is called in Amos 5. 12. Amos 5. 12
appears:

By The practice of the Saints: The danger of the Sin.


Look over all the Saints: which of them do we read of, that were defiled with
this mire of Covetousness? Genesis 9. 21
Noah once overtaken with the love of wine, 2 Samuel 11. 4.
never with the love of the world: David though once besotted with flesh, yet
never bewitched with the world: Psa. 39. 12
but he ever accounted himself a Pilgrim and a Stanger in it: Luke 19. 2.
then he was far from being in love with it: Zacheus he had been A Pinching
Prowling Publican, and the chief among them, griping and grasping what he could
get by cruelty and extortion, before he knew Christ, which is a sin incident to
all such me^: but as soon as Christ entered into his heart, when he entered into
his house, he threw away this sin with disdain; Verse. 8.
Lo, half my goods* I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any
man by false accusation, I will restore him fourfold.

If Jesus Christ do not whip this Money-Merchant out of the Temple, Joh. 2. 14.
it will bar even Him himself entrance.

Now Beloved, what is the reason these forenamed Saints, though they had other,
both infirmities and gross sins, yet not any of them tainted with this sin of
Covetousness? surely it shows, that Christ and this sin, in the love of it,
cannot cohabit together: if Christ be there, this sin must abandon; if this be
retained, Christ is there a stranger: And the reason is, Grace and Religion may
better stand with a sin once acted, or oftener, so it be not habitual, although
it be gross and foul, as Adultery, Incest, Drunkenness, etc. then with an
habitual Covetousness; for where that sin is, it can scarce be other then
customary and habitual: Therefore Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3. did so abominate this
sin, 1 Samuel 12. 3, etc.
that he challenged all Israel to charge him with it, though he was their
Governor and Ruler, and wanted not for temptations and opportunities; Behold, I
have walked before you from my childehood unto this day, and here I am; bear
witness against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed: whose Ox have I
taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you:
And they all answer and bear witness, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed
us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand.

There was a pattern for Kings and Rulers, and for Saul their new chosen King!
but who follows it? he presently, as soon as he could get the power of
oppressing, fell to it, as God told them he would, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12. 1 Samuel 8.
11, 12.
This will be the manner of the King that will reign over you: he will take
your sons for himself, for his Chariots and his Horsemen, and to run before his
Chariots; and he will appoint them his Captains; and he will set you to ear his
ground, and reap his harvest; and to make him instruments of war, and for his
Chariots; and he will take your daughters to be Confectioners, Cooks and
Bakers; and he will take your fields, and vineyards, and olive-yards, and give
them to his servants, etc. and so goes on, and ye shall cry out in that day,
because of your King which ye have chosen: And Beloved, what more frequent in
all ages then covetous and oppressing Rulers and Governors? They take it
successively from hand to hand: Having once got the power, ye shall soon feel
it.

So Ier. 5. 10. Jer. 5. 10
He complains, that though he was free of this sin, yet every one hated him: Woe
is me, my Mother, thou have born me a man of strife, a man of contention to the
whole earth; I have neither lent on usury, nor men have le^t me on usury, yet
every one does curse me. So Paul, Acts 20. 33. Act. 20. 33
I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel ye your selves know these
hands have ministered to my necessities, and to those that were with me.

But what may be yet further the reason; why that of all sins, the Saints were
freest from this sin of Covetousness?

Surely, These Reasons may be further added:

I. Rea. 1.
Because they knew, that this sin was that which most staineth and blemi^^eth
the good report, and honest reputation of men professing Christ; that men who
pretend for heaven, should live as men of the world whose portion is in this
life: and that they should so far blemish themselves, Psa. 16.
and their master, to set their minds and affections on such poor transitory
trifles, and as if they had not better things to look after; or that they
served a Master, not able to maintain them; rather then thi^ should be fastened
on them or their Master, They would instead of being in love with them, trample
them under their feet.

2. Rea. 2.
To enlarge a little of what I hinted before: It handeth in greatest opposition
to the life and truth of grace; for where this sin gets head, it eats out
the heart of grace; that though it be not quite lost, yet scare Any to be
perceived, the Life being almost quiet extinct: if he have life, yet none to be
perceived by himself or others: and therefore says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
1 Timothy 6. 10.
Love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and peirced themselves through with many
sorrows: Nay, not only has it caused some to err from the faith, and so
wounded their own souls; but some it has caused to fall quite away from the
faith, that is, from the profession of the faith, and turn Apostates, 2 Timothy 4.
13. 2 Timothy 4. 13.
Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present world: and yet now
adays where is there a man, yea especially among Professors, that would be
accounted Christians, that are free from it, but are most deeply guilty of this
defiling and dangerous sin of Covetousness? And I think in no age ever more.

Beloved, though your hearts were as mountains of rich Mines, yet this one sin
loved and delighted in, will consume and eat out all (for ought may be
perceived) and make you as barren as the barrenest Heath.

This sin is like the seven lean ears of corn that Pharaoh dreamed of, which
devoured the seven full ears: And like the seven lean Kine, Genesis 41. 2, etc.
devouring the seven fat, and were themselves as hollow and lean as before: and
in Scripture is often compared to Caterpillars, Grasshoppers, Cankers, and the
Palmer-worm, because it does feed upon the green and flourishing herb of grace,
Joel 1. 4.
till it has ( as it were) quite eaten it out of the heart: therefore David
prays, Psalm. 119. 36. ^s. 119. 36
Incline mine heart unto thy Commandments, and not unto Covetousness;
intimating, that those that love Covetousness, regard none of Gods
Commandments: as, had I time I could show you how Covetousness is the breach of
all the Commandments: But I will a little in brief show

How Covetousness occasioneth the breach of all the Commandments.
I. COMMANDMENT.
The first Commandment is soon answered; for Covetousness is Idolatry; that is
clear, which this Commandment forbids, Col. 3. 5. Col. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupisence, covetousness, which is
idolatry: And the covetous is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man,
who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of God: But if the
Scripture will not satisfy you, and you will not believe without a reason, and
say,

How can that be, that a covetous man is an Idolater, and Covetousness Idolatry?

I answer, thus, Though thou sacrificest not beasts yet thou sacrificest that
which is the chiefest sacrifice, which God still calls for, and without which
all sacrifices are nothing to him; namely, Thy heart, which includes thy mind,
thy soul, thy might thy strength, Luke 10. 27. Luke 10. 27.
then which thou were better sacrifice beasts: for in this thou sacrificest
thine own bowels: Therefore that is a true and remarkable saying, and agreeable
to Scripture, though Apocrypha, Ecclus. 10. Ecclus. 10. 9.
9. There is nothing worse then a Covetous man; why art thou proud, O earth and
ashes? there is not a more wicked thing then to love money; for such a one would
even sell his soul, and for his life every one is compelled to pull out his own
bowels.

The fool indeed, that is, the Atheist, says There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
Psa. 14. 1.
but in some sense the Covetous man exceeds him; for he not only dethrones
God, and will not have him to be his God, but he sets up another in his seat;
for, he says to the Gold, Thou art my hope, and to the wedge of gold, Thou art
my confidence, Job 31. 24. Job 31. 24
What need men love money, but that they dare not trust the providence of God?
but they wickedly say in their hearts, though not with their tongues, according
to the proverb, Its good going a foot with a horse in hand: So say they to
themselves, let Ministers talk and prate against Covetousness* but its good
trusting God with a penny in purse: what desperate Hypocrisy and Idolatry is
this! You know also, obedience is due to God, and it is better then sacrifice, I
Sam. 15. 22. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
How cheerfully do men obey the commands of Covetousness? how ready and free to
run and go when it bids? so that without further dispute, thou make it thy
God; and whatever is due to God, thou sacrificest to Covetousness: So that the
Israelites in the 32 of Exodus, did not more heartily say to the Calf made of
their Rings and Earrings, These be thy Gods, O Israel, Exo. 32. 4
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: then thou say, O Covetousness,
Thou art my strength, my help, my joy, my trust, my Rock, my Tower: thou have
helped, saved and delivered me, And wilt help save, and deliver me: Though thy
mouth confess not this, yet this is the plain English of thy practice: when
thou look upon thy money, and wealth, houses and lands, thou say, These
be thy gods, O my soul.

Beloved, never mince the matter, for so it is; as the Prophet Isaiah says,
Isa. 2. 7, 8. Isa. 2. 7, 8.
Thou have forsaken thy people, because they are replenished from the east, and
they please themselves in the children of strangers: Their land also is full of
silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; and their land is
full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots: And then it follows
in the next verse, Their land is full of Idols, they worship the works of their
own hands, that which their own fingers have made: So that you see, whatever a
man relies on, trusts to, depends upon, or to its service, Dedicates his
wisdom, strength, time, parts, and the like, that he makes His God.

2. COMMANDMENT.
And for the second Commandment, That depends upon the first: The first
Commandment concerns the heart, and This, The purity of Gods outward worship:
Is it not lamentable to see, how men for this Lucre of Covetousness, will
vioate the laws of God, and of their own conscience? and for gain and
preferment sake subscribe and submit to any thing, to any change in Religion;
so they may keep in favor, and keep their livings and Benefices? so that the
Apostle may say of them, and God rather, as he of Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10. 2 Timothy
4. 10.
Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present world; If men could be
content to forsake, as Christ commands, Houses, Lands, Liberties, Lives, for
his sake, and his worship, they would not so Creep and Cring and Issacar-like,
stoop down to take up every burden, and every command that men shall lay upon
them, even against the pure worship of God: And, if any man speak against these
practices, presently Up with him into the High Commission or Star Chamber; then
Demetrius-like. Act. 19. 24. Act. 19. 24
They all lay their heads together, not for fear, That the worship of God
should go down, but for fear of their gain and their Silver-Trade, and with one
unanimous voice, cry up their God, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, pretending
for their Goddess Diana: but it was because by that Craft they had their
wealth: Mat. 21. 13
It is written, my House shall be called the House of prayer, but ye have made
it a den of Thieves; and every man is for his gain from his quarter: Jer. 2. 11.
let men set up, and change Religion as they please, so They, Jer. 2. 11.
can but have their gain from their places, and from their quarter they are
well.

Insomuch that the Keys of the Church, which God has entrusted his Church
withal, are now become and made very Picklocks: and the cause of all this is
Covetousness. The Devil when he tempted Christ to idolatry, he did it by
Covetousness; All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me, Mat. 4. 9. Mat. 4. 9.
An Israelite cannot be familiar with a Midianite, but she will woo him to
Baal-peor: How many are ready to renounce the Almighty, slight him, and turn
their backs upon him, rather then slight or part with their wealth, their
Mammon? if not in action and with their knees, yet how many in Heart and
affection do this daily?

3. COMMANDMENT.
The third Commandment enjoins, Not to take Gods name in vain: Exo. 20. 7.
How ordinary this is, every one knows, taking his name in vain for their
profit; an ordinary thing now a days to make bold with the sacred name of God
for their gain sake to help away with their Commodities, though they swear
falsely, and all this to serve their god Covetousness; nay, this is not the
worst; Religion is taken up by many, and made a stalking-horse, a color, a
cloak for their gain: As you know what a many woes Christ pronounced against
the Pharisees for making Religion a color for their Hyprocrisie and
covetousness, under pretense of long prayers, devouring poor widows and their
houses, Matt. 23. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 23. 14, 15, 16.
where he instances in many other particulars; insomuch that by their evil
example (which was then much looked upon) they shut up the Kingdom of heaven
against men; Verse. 13.
for they neither go in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in:
This was the case of the Shechemites, Genesis 34. Genesis 34.
you see how desperately the two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi played the
hypocrites, pretending Religion to the Shechemites, that if they would be
circumcised, they would marry with them, and give their daughters in marriage
to them again: This was the Cloak, but what was their End and Aim? you shall
see Verse 23. Verse. 23.
say they, when they are circumcised, and not able to stir, shall not their
cattle and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? And so in the
28. Verse, Verse. 28.
They fell upon them, and took their sheep, their oxen, their asses, and that
which was in the field, and all their wealth, etc.

Thus the Devil is transformed into an Angel of light: he will be religious to
serve his own turn, and to accomplish his own ends; when men instead of making
Godliness great gain (which is pretended) 2 Timothy 6. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
they make Gain godliness; And, that is intended.

4. COMMANDMENT.
Fourthly, For the Sabbath, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day; Exo.
20. 8.
six days shall thou labor* but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God; in it thou shall do no manner of work etc.

The covetous man commonly is of Pharoahs Religion, Exodus 5. 17. Exo. 5. 17.
Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the
Lord: They count that day a lost day; One day in seven, is above seven weeks in
a year (say they) and what loss of time is this? And those covetous persons in
Amos, who were weary of one day in seven, Amos 8. 5. Amos 8. 5.
When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn; and the Sabbath, that
we may set forth wheat? Many keep their Sabbaths in their Saddles, riding up
and down for profit and gain about their worldly occasions.

Nehemiah, when he saw how they profaned the Sabbath, how zealous was he? the
course he took you may see, Neh. 13, 15, 16. Neh. 13. 15, 16.
If he were alive now, and should see what is now done, to see how thrust the
Lawyers chambers are on this day, what would he say? But you see all this is
the fruit of Covetousness.

5. COMMANDMENT.
The fifth Commandment is, Exo. 20. 12.
Honor Parents: by which is meant, not only in brief, that we owe them first,
Reverence. Secondly, Obedience. But thirdly, Maintenance also; but Covetousness
will keep back all these: As Levi in a good sense said of his Father and
Mother, I have not seen him, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. so it is through Covetousness more
often practiced in a bad sense, as Prove. 28. 24. Pro. 28. 24
He that robs his father and mother, and says it is no transgression, the
same is a companion of a destroyer: This will Covetousness do, and wipe its
mouth, and say, I have done no evil: This was the practice of the Pharisees,
Matthew. 15. 4. Mat. 15. 4.
says Christ, God command^ To honor father and mother; and he that curses
father or mother, shall dye; but ye say, whosoever shall say to his Father or
Mother, Corban, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me,
and honor not his father or his mother, he shall be free: They would give a
small gift to the Temple, to be excused from a greater duty, and further
charge; Still COVETOUSNES is in all this.

6. COMMANDMENT.
I, but you will say, though Covetousness be a breach of all the Commandments
hitherto, Exo. 20. 13.
yet the covetous man does not kill, and break the sixth Commandment? yea,
Covetousness also is a Blood-sucker, and the covetuous, man-slayers; those that
are gold-thirsty, are blood-thirsty also, especially now in these hard times;
in hard times those that pinch the poor, and grind their faces, do (as it
were) such their very lives and blood: see Prove. 1. 11. Pr^. 1. 11.
My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not; if they say, Come with us,
let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause,
let us swallow him up alive, and whole, as the grave: Why do all this? We shall
find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil; and verse
19. Ver. 19.
says he, So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; for it takes
away the life of the owners thereof.

Therefore Covetousness and Blood are joined together, Ezekiel. 22. 13. Ezekiel. 22.
13.
I have smitten my hand^ at thy dishonest gain; and at thy blood which has
been in the midst of thee. I need not instance the case of Ahab and Naboth, 1
Kin. 21.
Ahab taking away his life to get his vineyard* nor of Judas, Luke 22. 5.
who for gain betrayed Jesus Christ his Lord to death, for thirty pieces of
silver: And if the hands of many covetous persons are not defiled Actually with
shedding of blood, It is the Law, and not Conscience keeps them clean; they
have bloody hearts, though not bloody hands: and to God they are in that regard
guilty of blood, as if they had shed blood: and though man's Law cannot find
them culpable, yet Gods Law does: for that forbids the Murder of the wish, and
of the heart.

7. COMMANDMENT.
But sure he is not guilty of Adultery? yea; for you know Covetousness was the
cause that Tamar suffered Judah to lie with her, Genesis 38. 16. Exo. 20. 14.
What will thou give me to lie with me? Genesis 38. 16.
says Tamar to Judah. What is the cause of the permission of so many Stews and
Brothel-houses in the Popes Territories, at Rome, and Venice, and Dance, and
other places, but Covetousness? for Gain they will a give dispensation for any
sin: And on the other hand how common is it even among us That many refuse
Marriage, merely out of Covetousness, to avoid the charge of marriage?

8. COMMANDMENT.
8. I, but He does not steal? yea surely; for the world having stolen the
heart of a Covetous man from God, Exodus 20. 15.
he himself will make no bones to steal from men: and Thieves and Covetous are
immediately joined together in that I Cor. 6. 10. Judas was a Thief, 1 Cor. 6.
10.
why? John 12. 6. Joh. 12. 6.
This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a Thief, and
had the bag, and bare what was put therein: You see he was called a Thief,
because he was covetous; Defrauding, oppressing, overreaching, cozening,
cheating, gaming, extortion, usury, all of them Worms bred in the dunghill of a
covetous heart.

Nor is it any excuse to say, there is as much evil or more in spending it
prodigally; that excuses not thee at all: as the end of evil asking, may be to
spend it upon their lusts, Jam. 4. 3. Jam. 4. 3.
so we may say of evil Cvetousness, for thy Covetousness is to please thy lusts.

9. COMMANDMENT.
The ninth commandment, Exodus 20. 16
Bear no false witness: He also is guilty of the breach of this: As in the
Commandment before, he made no scruple of false dealing; so here he makes none
of false Accusing: John Baptist to the Soldiers, he puts these together, Luke
3. 14. Luke 3. 14.
Accuse no man falsely, be content with your wages: There is seldom any false
Accusation against our neighbor but Covetousness is in it. And here we may
mention, as guilty of Covetousness, 1. The Flatterer. 2. Knights of the Post,
that will for gain swear any thing. 3. Detractors or Defamers. And 4. Lawyers.

First, Flatterers, spoken of Jude v. 16. ^udev. 16
Whose mouths speak proud things, having men's persons in admiration, for
advantage sake: They will say as they say, Whom they flatter and fain with and
fawn upon, for their advantage sake.

Secondly, Those pitiful poor creatures that will serve any one with Oaths and
False-witness to get money; and may well be called Knights of the Post, which
so hackney out their souls and consciences to such Hellish Monsters.

Thirdly, Defamers, Detractors, and Backbiters, are here reproved, as Covetous,
and Breakers of this ninth Commandment, who watch to take up all the spew and
vomit of the world to please those they seek a meals meat from, or some such
small gain. And care not who they reproach, nor how unjustly so they can but
please their Benefactors.

Lastly, Those Lawyers, who against their consciences will give counsel in a
wrong cause, and so bear false witness for their Fee Sake: How common is this
among Lawyers? If like Balacks Messengers to Balaam, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
they bring the Reward of Divination in their hands, they will (or it shall go
hard, though they break their brains for it) make a bad cause seem good, when
they know it to be otherewise: O hellish practice, and common among Lawyers!
and yet they slight it as a thing of nothing: Must we not speak for our
Clients? (say they) But they are herein deeply guilty of this foul sin of
Covetousness.

10. COMMANDMENT.
And then for the tenth Commandment, I hope you will not say they do not
Covet: for this is their whole practice: Exodus 20. 17.
and is directly against this Commandment: For what can a man have, that a
covetons man does not desire? if his hands could or durst be as nimble as his
thoughts and wishes, he would be like Adam, Alone in the earth, No body should
have any thing but He: for Adam had all, and no body shared with him: such are
the desires of a covetous man, they are boundless. As the Conclave answered
Pope Benedict the twelfth: If he would make more Cardinals, he must make
another world too; for this world was scarce sufficient for them in being,
which were already made.

Covetousness enlarges her desire as hell: Look now upon thy self in this
glass; set it before thee, and see (if thou had no more sins but this One) if
it be not a mighty sin, a massy sin, as heavy as a Talent of lead: O that thou
did but feel it so! It is such a Seminary and Nursery of so many other sins,
that thou have need to cry mightily against it, with David, Incline my heart to
thy Commandments, but not to Covetousness, Psalm 119. 36. Psalm. 119. 36.


Beloved, I do not use to spend time thus against any one particular sin:
because in doing so, in most sins, I cut off but the boughs and branches, but
leave the root to grow ranker and stronger: I therefore still desire to strike
at the root, and then the boughs and branches dye and wither of themselves: But
this sin being so common and indeed Epidemical, as I have showed you; and being
a Root it self, from which so many evil branches spring and grow, I thought
good to spend this short time (though not in my ordinary way of speaking to
you) if so it may please God to bring any one here to abandon and detest this
great and mighty sin of Covetousness.

Now I come to speak a little in brief to the other parts of this Indictment;
which I must run over, and give you but a touch of what I meant to say.
Now for the Extent and generality of this dissease.

It is an Epidemical disease, an universal plague, from which no sort is free.

Some sins are peculiar to the place of Kings, They having gotten so much power
in their hands, they would be Monarhs without control, whose assertion is, That
they owe account of their actions to none but God alone; and they want not for
flatterers and Sycophants to preach such Doctrine in their ears, That no power
on earth ought to call them to Account, for that they are above the law: and
then Covetousness will make them, Make their lusts their Law, and they will
have what they will have, right or wrong; but in this Nation they have been
still curbed and kept off from this Absolute power, by one means or other. You
know what Iezebel said to Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 7. 1 King. 21. 7.
when he would fain have taken from Naboth his vineyard, but the Law manacled
and restrained him: what, says Iezebel, Do thou now govern the Kingdom of
Israel, and art so cast down for this thing, and wilt fast and eat no bread? up
and eat, and be of good cheer, I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth: And
when the Law would not give it him, she devised a wicked device, causing two
sons of Belial, Knights of the Post, to swear blasphemy against him, and so
confiscate not only his vineyard, but his whole estate. Covetousness will
cause even Kings to do this, and what not, if they have but Power enough?

2. Some sins are more peculiar to Noblemen, as Ambition, Pride, desire of
Honors and Preferments, boasting of their great descent; yet there is none of
all these but is spiced and mixed, if not grounded and bottomed on this general
sin of Covetousness, for to uphold themselves in their state: Thy Princes are
as Evening wolves, Ezekiel. 22. 17.
greedy and covetous, they all love gifts, etc.

3. The sin peculiar to rich men, is to oppress and grind the faces of the poor
through Covetousness, To join house to house, and field to field, Isa. 5. 8.
Isa. 5. 8.
therefore the Prophet David gave rich men a good Lesson, If riches increase,
set not your hearts upon them, Psalm. 62. 12. Psalm. 62. 12.
And we may see the covetous mind of rich men, in Nathans Parable, 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 12.
though he had Lambs enough of his own, yet he would have the poor man's One Ewe.

4. Learned men, they are more addicted to credit and applause, and to be had
in great esteem; yet they are not free from this sin of Covetousness; Its plain
in that story of Balack and Balam, who sent Nobles, but not without gifts in
their hands; and when Balack told him, I will thee exalt to honor, yet he puts
that clause in too. Jud^ ^. 11
I would have filled thy house full of silver and gold; Number. 23.
and Balaam was covetous, for Jude mentions his sin, Hired with the wages of
unrighteousness.

5. Wisemen, who wanting the true fear of God, they are Diaboli delitiae, The
Devils delight, Fit men for his turn: and therefore They as most Fit must be
set on work to act for him his Subtle and Cunning devices, his Glorious
Stratagems, His splendida peccata, Those glistring sins, generosa scelera,
Noble Projects, Honorable policies, and Scarlet sins: These be, His Grave,
Black, and Sage Complotters, Cunning Engineers, these are the fittest to carry
on, his Sage and Grave, Mysteria iniquitatis, Mysteries of Iniquity; nay, and
some of his Mysteries of iniquity must carry a Divine face, A reverend show of
holiness and Religion, or else they cannot be effected and accomplished: And
what is the ground of all this, But Covetousness?

But why should I stand to deal with particulars severally? Covetousness is an
Epidemical plague, common to rich and poor; it is a disease incident to the
several ages of man, Childehood, Manhood, Old age; incident to the several
Complexions of men; none free from Covetousness.

The Thief in the old Law, Covetousness caused him to steal: God made a Law for
the Thief, to restrain him from coveting that which was not his own, Exodus 22. 1.
Exodus 22. 1.
If he kill or sell it, He should restore five Oxen for one Ox, and four sheep
for one sheep: It was not a law then, to Hang a man, and cut off the thread of
his life for Thirteen pence half penny: but to make Restitution to the Owner;
and not as it is now, The owner to be bound to prosecute if he accuse, and lose
all himself, and all that can be found of the Malefactors, to fall to the King:
and if the owner take restitution of, or to himself, to be as liable to the Law
as the Thief himself: Yet questionless it is meet that the Restitution should
be given in a Legal way and openly (and not covertly underhand, and secretly)
as it then was, whereby the Thief was known and detected, and condemned to make
restitution, according to the Law: it could be wished these things were well
considered by those whom it concerns.

Our Savior gives a special caveat against this sin of Covetousness; Men
think, O, if they had but such a thing, Luke 12. 15.
as such a man has, Oh how it would content and please them! such a man's
house, such a man's horse, such a man's Estate: I am now possessed of an hundred
a year; O could I make it two hundred, and then three thousand, then five
thousand a year; and thus the Devil deludes the vain heart of man, and steals
from him this rare Jewel of [ Contentment,] and intoduceth and juggels in the
room thereof, that Ugly and Gaping Fiend Covetousness: Therefore our Lord bids
us beware of this devouring foul Fiend, Luke 12. 15. Luke 12. 15, 16.
Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for though a man have abundance, yet his
life stands not in his riches: This is such a Taking Evil with the sons of
men, Christ had need bid them beware again and again: some other dangers and
evils, if they be but seen, it is sufficient to make men eschew and avoid them:
but for this of Covetousness ye must give item upon item, and caution upon
caution, and caveat upon caveat, and yet how few Take heed and beware of
Covetousness^

A word or two of the Intention, the third part of this Indictment, Are given
unto Covetousness.
This does very much Aggravate this sin of Covetousness, and so all other sins,
when men in this kind do not only peccare, but peccatum facere; not only
sin, but sin with delight; this is that which is exceedingly acceptable to the
Devil; for as God commanded, Exodus 35. 5. Exo. 35. 5.
that they should not only bring offerings, but bring them from a willing
heart, whether gold or silver, or brass, or silk, blue or purple or scarlet,
etc. or of goats-hair; if never so small, the free and willing heart was all in
all: So when men not only sin, but sin with a willing heart, when men are not
only Covetous, but given up to it, are covetous with a willing heart, what
more acceptable to Satan? and what more adominable to the Lord?

And hereupon when men thus Give themselves up freely to sin, so that they
choose it, and delight in it, then God himself gives them up to it likewise,
and lets them follow after the gods whom they have chosen; as 1 John 3. 8. 1 John 3. 8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil: that is, he that Commits himself to
sin, he is a free and willing servant to sin: He has chosen Sin to obey it,
and to be his Lord and Master: Men ^ust give themselves up unto sin, and then
God in his righteous judgment gives them up according to their own hearts
lust, and according to their own choice and desire: And is not this a righteous
thing with Almighty God? judge ye.

As Moses to Pharaoh, God sent him to Pharaoh to let his people go; Exo. 4, etc.
who told him if he would not, these and these plagues would follow: Pharaoh
hardens his heart, and would take no Beware, no Caveat; then the Lord said (as
it were) Seeing it is so, seeing he is hardened, and he chooses to be so, he
shall be hardened, I will also harden his heart, that I may show upon him my
mighty wonders. Beloved, Do not your hearts Ache while you hear of these things?
do you not tremble? had you not need to take heed and boware of Covetousness?
Luke 12. 15
especially of the love of Covetousness: For if once you are delivered up to
this, first by your own choosing, and secondly by God Almighty in his righteous
judgment, truly you are in a woe case: Then it may be said of you, as the
Prophet Jeremiah concerning the Israelites, when they had voluntarily forsaken
the Lord, Ier. 13. 23. Jer. 13. 23
Can the Black amore change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye
also do well, who are accustomed to do evil.

In all which regards, take heed and beware of Covetousness; 1 Timothy 6. 8
for a man's life cansisteth not in abundance; But having food and raiment, let
us be therewith content.

Fourthly and Lastly, for the punishment of this sin here threatened, which is
only employed in this word [For;] with reference to the former verses, which I
may call, as I did at the beginning, The Zarah of my Text.

The sin goes before, and the punishment follows: But here like Iudahs two
Sons, Pharez and Zarah, the last put forth his hand first to the birth, and
they tied a red thread to his finger, saying, Genesis 38. 28.
This is born first, but he pulled it in again, and let his brother come first:
So though the punishment offered it self first by this first word in my Text
[For] yet sin being always the forerunner of judgment, this word [ For] pulled
back its hand, and comes now last to the birth, namely, To be handled and
spoken to; wherein also I must be very brief, and gently touch, and not tarry
upon any thing.

How many woes and sore punishments are threatened against this sin? as in that
of Isa. 5. 7. Isa. 5. 7.
He looked for judgment, and behold oppression; for righteousness, and behold a
cry: Woe unto them that join house to house, and land to land; that lay field to
field, till there be no place, that they may be placed Alone in the midst of
the earth; that is, they cannot abide any to be so great as themselves, they
must be Lords PARAMOUNT, to overtop all; therefore says the Prophet, Verse 9.
In mine ears said the Lord of Hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate,
even great and fair without inhabitant: Verse. 9.
yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield but one bath; and the seed of an homer
shall yield but an Ephah, etc. and therefore are my people gone into captivity,
etc. and therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without
measure; And their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp shall descend
into it:

And again, Mic. 2. 1, 2. Mic. 2. 1, 2.
Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work mischief upon their beds, and when
the morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their
hand: But what evil is this? it is Covetousness, as you may see, it follows
there, They covet field, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them
away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage:
Therefore says the Lord, Against this family do I devise an evil, from which
ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily; for, this time
is evil: And Hab. 2. 6. Hab. 2. 6
Woe to him that increases that which is not his; how long? and to him that
ladeth himself with thick clay: Verse. 9. Verse. 9.
Woe to him that coveteth an evil C^vetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on high, that so he may be delivered from the power of evil: Thou have
consulted shame to thy house, and sinned against thy own soul: They think to
bless themselves, and raise their houses and posterity by these devices and
grasping at all; whereas you see there is no way like this to consult the Ruin
of Them, and theirs; they think they are consulting to build their houses, and
those very thoughts are consultations to destroy them: See then how the Lord
overrules the exorbitant thoughts of wicked men, to work his own purposes,
which is their Ruin and destruction; and rather then it shall not be thus, in
Verse 11. Verse. 11.
For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it: Indeed, he thinks he does well, and the covetous blesses himself,
Psalm. 10. 3. Psa. 10. 3.
but it follows in the same Verse, But the Lord abhors him; yea, he so
abhors a covetous man, that he clappeth his hands at him, in token of
disdain, and abhors his wicked devises. Ezekiel. 22. 13. Ezekiel. 22. 13.
Because thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by extortion, and have for
gotten me; therefore have I smitten my hands at thy dishonest gain: yea, He
smites at the covetous man Himself, with his hands, Isa. 57. 17. Isa. 57. 17.
For the iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth, and smote him, and I
suffered him to go on frowardly in the way of his own heart: What greater
smiting can be, then this, for God to leave a man to guide himself, and to
follow his own devices, to be his own Guide and Counselor, and for God to let
him thus go on? Thus you see how this sin is threatened with the punishment in
general.

And for the particular plagues, that God usually Dogs this sin at the heels
with, they are either

In his body, or In his goods, In his posterity, or In his Soul.
1. For the body: To speak nothing of what he makes his body suffer by his
pains and travel, and by his pinching and penuriousness, to save from his back
and belly, and denying himself that for which the creature is made, and given
him for; viz. to use moderately for his refreshing and comfort: which Use he
deprives himself of, when it is in his power, Eccles. 6. 2
and he has no power to eat thereof; which Solomon says, Eccles. 6. 2. is a
great evil under the Sun: Though he have enough, yet he wears and weari^s out
his body and mind; the one with hunger and hardship, travel and labor; the
other with care and thoughtfulness, so that he cannot take his sleep, nor rest
night nor day: what a sore evil is this? That though he have Abundance, yet
there is as great restraint lies upon him, as on him that has nothing; for
They dare not touch another goods; but He, dare not touch his own, but starves
(as it were) in the midst of plenty; all which are whips of his own making for
himself: But moreover, If he will make rods for his own Back, surely Gods rods
will be Scorpions.

What got Gehazi by his rich booty he got from Naaman? 2 Kings 5. 27. 2 King.
5. 27.
for his Covetousness God caused the Leprosy of Naaman, which he was freed
from, to cleave to Gehazi, and unto his house for ever: A deer booty. And had
not Achan better have left the wedge of gold behind him, then instead of heaps
of gold and silver, to get a heap of stones on him? Joshua 7. 26.
Joshua 7. 26. And Balaams Covetousness got him a sword in his bowels: Mat. 27.
5. Act. 5.
And Judas his Covetousness got him a Halter: And Ananias and Saphira the loss
of their lives by sudden death, who were made a spectacle and trembling to all
that heard thereof.

But on the contrary, there are many blessings promised to those that hate
Covetousness; as in that of Prove. 28. 16. Prove. 28. 16.
He that hates Covetousness, shall prolong his days. I will not now stand to
name any more: All this considered, what cause has a covetous man to boast or
bless himself, though he be rich, and have abundance? it is as if Judas should
have boasted of thirty pieces of silver, while he swong in a halter: or for
Balaam to say, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
How sweet is the reward of Divination? when the sword was in his bowels: The
wages was sweet, but how sweet was the sword? But you see in all this, how God
hates and abhors this Sin, and this Sinner, and how just he is in punishing it:
What more just and equal, that he who will covet Naamans silver and raiment,
should be plagued with his Leprosy?

The second particular plague is in his goods, and that is, either

In Gods denying them the use, or In depriving them of the possession.
1. In denying the use of what they have; as I hinted before, they dare not
touch it, even as if it were none of theirs, but another: and so it is, for it
is Gods, and not theirs; and he will not suffer them to make use thereof.
Eccles. 6. 1, 2. Eccles. 6, 1, 2.
There is an evil that I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among men; A
man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof: All the good they have thereof, is but to Look on them, Eccl. 5.
10, 11. Eccles. 5. 10, 11.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance with increase: when goods increase, they are increased to them that
eat them; that is, make use of them: for what good is there to the owners
thereof, save the beholding with their eyes? for as Job says, Job 20. 22. Job
20. 22
In the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits: I, In more straits
then he that has but little. Beloved, what a strange curse follows these men?
to have Enough and Abundance, and yet have Nothing: this is a sin by it self;
for in all other Sins, though they lose Eternal pleasures, yet they have some
pleasure here: But in this, None here, nor None hereafter.

2. In taking them away, though they may like fools, solace themselves in that
poor comfort, to see and behold them with their eyes, which is vanity (says
Solomon) yet oftentimes this comfort also is taken away, they are removed from
them, out of their sight; for God has provided a Worm for this Gourd, and
Vermin to corrupt this Manna: as Job 20. 20. Job 20. 20
He shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save ought of that
which he desired, there shall none of his meat be left: therefore shall no man
look for hi^ goods; when he is about to fill his belly, God (...) all cast the
fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating: When
men like Behemoth think to draw all Jordan into their jaws, they shall so
oppress their stomachs by their greediness, that they shall vomit it as fast up
again, Verse. 15.
Job 20. 15. He has swallowed down riches but he shall vomit them up again;
God shall cast them out of hi^ belly: As Augustine says, Praedo minoris shall
be Prada majoris, Psalm. 37.
Psalm. 37. The devourer of the lesser shall become the prey of the greater. And
says David, I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like
a green Bay-^ree yet he passed away, and lo He was not, I sought him, but he
could not be found.

3. The punishment of this sin is oftentimes and commonly executed in his
children and posterity: Though all his care be To raise his house, yet he does
all the while but consult evil to his own house, Hab. 2. 9. For as the Father
was a rich Beggar; so his sons commonly are poor Gentlemen: for he that
coveteth an evil Covetousness to his house, troubles it, and has consulted
shame to it: His children oftentimes are a great plague to him, Either worms to
him to consume him while he lives, or else they are worms to his wealth when he
dies; Or else as the Prophet Amos says of Riches, and affirms it with a very
great asseveration, That the Lord has sworn By His HOLINESS, Amo^ 4. 1, 2. Amos
4. 1, 2.
That He will take them away with hooks, and their posterity with fish-hooks;
they are plucked, and as it were rent from their estates, and they are left
unto strangers, for whom they were Never intended; or else their estates are
rent from them.

I beseech you therefore, if none of the former Arguments will persuade, Job
19. 17
yet as Job to his wife, For the childrens sake of your own bodies, be afraid
of this sin: Alas, what have these poor sheep done, that thou should consult
misery and shame upon them?

4. And lastly, the punishments that attend his soul: not only have thou
sinned against thine own soul, stuffing it with vexation and carking cares, but
thou have bereft thine eyes of sleep: As also in that earthly appetite, letting
it mind nothing else, contrary to the divine nature of thy soul, which is made
to enjoy things above and heavenly, and not to live upon things below, thou
have by custom quite altered the very taste of thy soul, and its very food; for
thou have made it to live like a beast below, having no other then Caninus
Appetitus, feeding like a Dog, and like a swine, always rooting in the mire and
dirt of this world: And not only so, but which is heaviest of all, thou have
sinned against thine own soul, in disinheriting it of heaven, Ephesians. 5. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 5
For no covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ, or of God.

Now by all this that I have said, thou that art always rooting in the earth,
I would entreat thee but to cast up thy accounts, and see what thou have
gotten, what has it profited thee? what have thou gained by all thy care and
^oil, yea though thou had gained the whole world?

Beloved, God does so hate this sin, and sinner, that in one prophecy he has
sworn two oaths against it, Amos 4. 2. Amos 4. 2
There he swears by his holiness, that he will take away with hooks and
Fish-hooks them and their posterity: he cannot endure the sight of such
Monsters; he so hates them, that he hates the very brood of them, because they
descend from such whom his soul hates. Again, in the 8. of that prophecy, and
verse 7. there he swears by his Excellency, that he will never forget any of
their works, Amos 8. 7
who buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. Shall not
(says He) The land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? etc. Even the heaviest of Judgments are there threatened; Thus I have
endeavored to uncase this loathsome, unprofitable, and Burthensom sin of
Covetousness; and if the Lord has been doing that in your hearts, which I have
been doing to your ears, this will be a happy meeting.

But to all I have said, though the time be past, yet let me name, and only
name four or five Remedies, and so conclude.

REMEDIES.
THE first means I would commend to you, whereby this rooted and prevailing sin
may be overcome, 1 John 5. 4
is by Faith; as the Apostle says, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith: To learn, To cease from living by sense,
and to live upon God. Our Savior uses many arguments to this end, to destroy
this Covetousness and carking care, and sends us in the 6. Mat. 6. 26.
of Matthew, the latter end, to the fowls of heaven, to learn of them; they
neither reap, nor carry into barns, yet your heavenly father feeds them: and
to learn how the Lillies of the field grow, which neither Labor nor spin, yet
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

Secondly, If the Lord would teach thee sobriety in the use of them, to use
them with moderation and with weaned affections, to use them as if thou usedst
them not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not, etc. Using them
only for refreshment and necessity sake; to use this world, as not abusing it,
because the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 30. 1 Cor. 7. 30.
and therefore to live here without carefulness: This would be a notable means
to bring you out of love with this deservedly hateful Monster, Covetousness.

Thirdly, Temperance in the desire of them; be not too much affected with them,
rejoice not overmuch in them, do not overvalue them; but labor to see how vain
and empty these outward things are, and that there is nothing in them to
satisfy or feed thy soul, which must be fed with Heavenly Manna, and not with
Worldly trash.

Fourthly, Another means is, Freedom from that false conceit that men generally
have of them, viz. That they are full of content and satisfaction; for none
ever found them so: The best Happiness that is in them, is not, in having much
of them, but in doing much good with them; and this will bring the owners there
of the greatest comfort; though men in these days cannot as yet be brought to
think so; but the time is coming when they shall be esteemed as they are, Empty
and vain things: God will bring men to be more like himself; who being rich,
delights infinitely to communicate of his Riches and Goodness to his creatures,
but especially to those united and made one with himself.

Fifthly, With Moses before thou go out of this world, go climb up to Mount
Nebo, and take a view of the promised Land; learn to have a sight, and be
acquainted with the pleasures of Gods Right hand; Psalm. 16. 11.
for all these things are but those of his Left; he gives them most plentifully
to those, that (at the consummation of all things) shall stand on his left
hand; And let me tell you, There is little, very little of the love of God in
them; yea, no love at all, without the other: These means, if it please God to
enable you to use them in good earnest, with a strong and eager desire to be
freed from this ugly Fiend Covetousness; then will He without doubt drive him
out of you, and dispossess him from his strong holds within you.

And Lastly, Let us commend all these Helps, Means and Remedies, and all that
we have said to the Lord by Prayer, resigning up our own Power and wisdom to
God alone, who must by his own power cast him out, or he will never stir out of
you, but keep his POSSESSION, till he has dispossessed us of all our Comfort,
Joy, and Happiness.

SOME things in this Sermon also very much offended the Bishops, and heightened
his Charge in the High Commission: The Reader may perceive wherein, without
particularizing.

THE PLUS VLTRA OF THE CREATURES. AN EXPOSITION, OCCASIONED By singing the 148.
Psalm.
Spoken privately in Old-street.
BEloved, we have here sung a Psalm, but if we have not understood what we have
sung, we have but prated like Parrots: for there is a threefold singing; 1 Cor.
2. ^.
there is a singing with understanding; as the Apostle commands, To sing with
the heart, and with understanding: sing with the heart; that is, sing with
zeal; but as the Apostle says, They have zeal, but not acording to knowledge:
For a man may sing with his lips, and sing with zeal, but yet not according to
knowledge not with understanding; Romans 10. 2.
if we understand not what we sing, we exalt not God in our hearts by our
singing. I do not mean such as say they know not what, but they may know the
litteral meaning, and sing with zeal too, and with their Spirit: but their eyes
are not open to see The spiritual mystery of the words: As here in this Psalm,
here be many things easy to be understood, they are clear to every eye; as
when David does exhort King^ and Prince^, Old men and Babes to praise god: this
is easy to be done and we know the meaning as soon as we look on it: but here
are some things again that are hard, and obscure, and they are two.

First, In that David does exhort dumb, unreasonable and senseless Creatures to
praise God, such as cannot hear, at least cannot understand: Does the Holy
Chost in the Gospel bid us avoid impertinent speeches, Mat. 6. 7.
and vain repetitions, and shall we think he will use them himself? no, no. But,

Secondly Not only does he call upon these creatures; but also he calls upon
the deeps, and the seas to praise God: These two things are hard to be
conceived.

But to give you some Reasons:

Reas. 1.
The first Reason may be this why David calls upon the unreasonable Creatures to
perform this duty: he does his duty like a faithful Preacher, whether they will
hear or no that he preaches to, yet he will discharge his own soul: a true
Preacher, he speaks the truth, and calls upon them to hear, though his Auditors
sleep, and regard it not: so likewise does David in this sense, with these
creatures; he does his duty, and calls upon them to do it, though they
understand not, though they comprehend it not.

The second Reason may be this; Reas. 2.
He does it craftily, by way of pollcy, to incite others to perform this duty,
that if such creatures as they ought to do this then those that are above them
in degree, they have more cause, and may be ashamed to neglect it: as an
ill-governed master, though he ^tay himself at home, yet he will send his
servants to Church: so David being conscious of his own neglect, yet he calls
upon others not to be slack and negligent; though he came infinitely short of
that he should do, yet he shows his own desire to perform this duty.

But if these Reasons will not satisfy you, Though they have done Others,
Reas. 3.
a third Reason may be this, to set forth the sweet harmony that is among all
Gods creatures; To show how that all the creatures being Gods family, do with
One consent, speak and preach aloud Gods praise; and therefore he calls upon
some above him, some below him, on both sides him, every where, to speak Gods
praise; for every one in their place, degree, and calling show forth, though in
a dumb sense and way, Their Creators praise.

Or Fourthly and Lastly, Reas. 4.
which I think to be a good Reason: zeal makes men speak and urter things
impossible; the fire of zeal it will so transport him, that it will make him
speak things unreasonable, impossible: as Moses in his zeal desired God for the
safety of Israel to blot his name out of his book, and Paul wished himself
Anathema Maranatha, accursed or separate from Christ, Romans 9. 3.
for his bre^^rens salvation: which was a thing impossible, it could not be:
But I think David does not intend this here; for he calls for nothing but that
which is done, and therefore possible; for No creature can turn out of the way
of His praise; for he is not only glorified in their graces; but even also as
much in their sins and rebellions against him: though men should spit their
malice and their blasphemies in the very face of God their maker, yet they hurt
not him, they cannot touch him, nor his sacred glory; his praise shall as well
and as much every whit arise from their confusion, as from their salvation; the
hurt is their own, not his.

And now to show you how the dumb and deaf creatures sing praise to God, as God
demanded of Job, when he thought as we, that man only praises God, Job 38. 7.
Ioh. 38. 7.
says God, Where were thou, when the morning Stars sang together, and all the
sons of God shouted for joy? God says there they Shouted and Sung; did not you
heat them, did they not sing and shout in your ears? it is no matter, they did
in his and to him they sang melodiously, and Aloud, and he understands their
voice, and their language, though we understand not how they do praise him: As
in a tree, it is the nature thereof to grow and flourish in the spring, and in
Autumn the leaves fall, and the sap returns to the root; Gods will is as well
accomplished in this tree, as in a man; for these visible creatures were made
of invisible; and that which is invisible praised him before, and that praises
him still; for all the creatures, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea the whole
Creation, they all sing sweetly and make a melodious praise, wherein he is
infinitely delighted; as Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the earth shows his handiwork:
And the Song of the three Children, O all ye works of God, bless the Lord,
praise him and magnify him for ever.

There is in all these dumb, and insensible, and unreasonable creatures, A
proper kind of Religion; God gives to every one according to their place,
degree, nature and calling, A Talent, and accordingly he will require of them
again; if he gives the gift of prophecy, we must prophecy according to the
measure of faith: as in the University, Romans 12. 6.
we do not expect those parts and abilities in young beginners, and Sizars,
that we expect in those that are of longer standing; Then by the way it is no
wonder, though God give to those that sit at the Helm of his Church, more
eminent and larger gifts, then he gives to those that are below, in lower
offices; I may say even these unreasonable creatures have a Religion in their
way, according to Gods will; We see God ascribes moral virtues to them; Prove.
6. 6.
As in the Proverbs, Go to the Pismire, thou sluggard; she provideth in summer
for the Winter; and in Isai. 1. 3. Isa. 1. 3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but my people have not
known me, says the Lord: and in the Evangelists it is, He rebukes the winds
and sea, Mar. 4. 39.
and they Obey him: Here are moral virtues in them; care and providence in the
Pismire; thankfulness in the Ox and Ass, to them that feed them; we see they
will acknowledge their owner, and there is obedience even in the Seas. Nay
every Creature does its duty but only MAN.

We will now also see if we can find out their Religion. Religion consists of
four parts; All Religion I say may be reduced to four heads.

The first is, A Creed, what we are to believe. 2. A Petition, what we are to
pray for. 3. A Decalogue, what we are to do. And Lastly, A Sacrifice, what we
are to give.
Now let us see how all these are competible to all these creatures. First, For
their Creed, what they believe, what faith they have; it is true, they cannot
speak as we do, yet they speak in their kind, and as they are able: We require
no more of children then they are able, neither does God of his Creatures: and
so these creatures do in their kind both speak and believe (this is an
undeniable maxim,) That there is a God; for who can look upon an effect, but
he must needs have recourse to the cause? there can be no effect without a
cause; if we see a thing made, we know it has a Maker; and if we look upon the
creature in this kind, as an Effect, it plainly speaks a cause; so that, we can
look upon no creature, but we must inquire after God; There is no attribute
ascribed to God, but all the creatures speak it, and confess it.

As first (to speak of some of his Attributes) for instance, God is one Simple
Essence; this unity is testified and declared by the Creatures, that God is
one, and can be no more; for if there were more then one Creator of them, then
the one would destroy, confouud, and overthrow the other; for, if they be Two,
either they must be equal, or not equal; if they be not equal, then the one is
greater then the other, and the greater will overcome the lesser; and if they
be equal, then there must be bounds and limits set, how far the Ones dominion
must reach, and how far the other: but this to affirm, is most absurd and
ridiculous.

Secondly, They all testify that God is good, and if good, and the only
goodness, goodness it self, then likewise he must be Truth, Entity and Being;
for all these are one: Whatever is one, is God; whatever is truth, is God;
whatever is good, is God; whatever is Entity and Being, is God; for in saying
he is good, or in saying, He is any of these; He is all these: for these are
terms convertible; if he be good, then he is Truth, Entity and Being; and if he
be truth, entity and being, then he is good; these are all one: and so of any
of the rest. And, if there be A goodness in the creatures, then what is He who
is the fountain, that gives all these their goodness? These are but the Channels
that run from the Fountain and Head; but it so falls out in the world, and is
so common, that many, yea most men are so taken up with the pleasantness of the
streams that come from him, that they are drowned in them: he gives us these
outward comforts, that they may draw our eyes to him that bestows them, that so
we may be in love with him, not them. But in our way to him we fall in love
with the creatures: he lets down these cords to draw us up to him, and we hang
our selves with these cords: as those that came a woing to Penelope, many, yea
most of them fell in love with the Handmaids that were appointed to lead them
to her, and so never saw the Mistress; So do we fall in love with the servants,
The Handmaids of God, The creatures, and we make them The Mistress; whereas we
should never rest till we come by these servants and Handmaids, to the True
Mistress indeed, God himself, Blessed for ever, and only BEAUTIFUL.

Thirdly, God is called Light: that is a property ^^^buted to him; but yet God
is not the light we now see, but he is that fountain and being from whence it
comes; and therefore when we behold and see the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the
glorious Firmament, we cannot choose but ask, whose light is this? and they
presently tell us Their Belief, That they are All The works of His hands: There
is no creature but testifies the Goodness, the Wisdom, Excellency and Beauty of
him: You may say, these indeed in themselves are glorious creatures; but say
withal, Where is He that enlightens them, and makes them so glorious? Oh! What
and How glorious is He that thus shines in them, and through them? And as they
All testify the glory of their Creator, so they All suffer him to be their
Lord and Ruler: Every thing is contented to stand in his place, and be obedient
to him; the beasts they are appointed for food to man, as other things are for
beasts, every one increasing and yielding their sweetness and fatness to the
next creature above them; and this they do willingly without grudging.

And, All these creatures, though they do speak [God] yet that they say of Him
it is nothing in comparison of him: Though they say something, yet they all say
not All of him: but in us there is such a deal of ignorance, (which I was about
to say was the greatest sin) that we are so far from using them as we should,
making them serviceable to us, and keeping them in their place, that we are
rather serviceable to them, and are their servants, and we make them Masters;
we are sooner turned into their kind, then they into ours.

And the creatures, though they speak God, and speak aloud of him; yet know
this, they still cry Plus ultra, plus ultra, there is more behind still, look
beyond us, for we are nothing: when thou beholdest The Beauty, glory,
sweetness, or Excelencie of any Creature, or of all the Creatures together,
Hear This voice from Them, Look Beyond us for we All are Nothing Nothing, to
Him who made us and gave us to be What we are: And we all speak infinitely
short of Him. As when I see This Church, or House, I know he was a workman that
built it, yet I know not All of him; I neither knew what age he was of, nor
what means he had, but that he was a workman, this his works do tell me: So in
the works of Creation, when I look upon any of the creatures, I must needs
acknowledge he was a Rare workman, and a wise, that contrived and made it: but
they come infinitely far short of him; And they still cry with that man in the
Gospel, We believe, But Lord, help our unbelief.

2. For their prayers: You know prayer consists of two parts; Of Prayer or
Invocation: Of Praise and Adoration: As I told you, every creature praises God;
the work praises the workman, and every creature praises God, I and with a loud
voice: But whoever heard and understood the noise and the language of the
stones, and the voice of the still and quiet earth? But even All these praise
God Aloud, and he receives it at their hands; They all praise him, in his
Sanctum Sanctorum; The whole world and the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens
are all but His Temple; (as David says) In this Temple does every one speak of
His glory. In this Temple they all sing praise and Hallelujahs to him; every
one, even as it were vocally; as Psalm. 84. 3. Psalm. 84. 3.
David complains that the Swallows, and the Sparrows were more happy then he;
for they might draw nigh unto God in his Temple to praise him: for, what is
their chirping, crying and singing, but the voice of nature? and to whom do
they cry? Psalm. 147. 19.
and to whom do they sing, but to their Creator? and God knows their voice and
their cry, as David says, He feeds the young Ravens when they cry unto him: As
a mother knows the signs the Child makes, knows by the nuzling what it craves;
even so does God by all his creatures, Psalm. 145. 19.
The eyes of all things look up unto thee, and thou give them their meat in
due season: What the eyes of all men? nay of all things; You know one creature
understands the voice of another, they understands one another complaints, one
another singing and rejoicing: one Dog understands the voice of another, and
so every creature in its kind: and shall not God, who is the God of nature? he
knows whereof we are all made, and He knows all our complaints and wants: The
Lions seek their prey of God, and he feeds the Ravens when they cry unto him.

But if these should not preach Gods praise, yet the very stones do speak his
praise, and cry unto him, but yet in such a language as God understands who
made them, and therefore you to whom God has given rongues and understanding,
if you do not praise God, and glorify him, if you hold your tongues, all these
dumb creatures, and even these senseless stocks and stones shall rise in
judgment against you: for this is a true rule, Nature, has done nothing in
vain: What Is the reason the poor sheep bleats when it comes to the slaughter,
and the swine Roars when he is killed? do you think they cry to us that pursue,
them, and kill them; no no, but to God, who is witness of their surrendering up
their precious lives according to his will: STEVEN when he was stoned to death,
nor Jesus Christ when he was crucified, and said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit: they did not cry, more Audibly, I say not Some are offended
at some passages in this Book, whereof This is the chief, W^h in their
apprehension under values Him whom he all along So much magnifies, As no man
more; ergo a clear mistake, To use no other argument; That He should go so
contrary to His Great Design, viz. To list up Christ Above all things in Heaven
o^ Earth.
more Audibly in Gods ears, to God to take notice of their innocent yielding
up their lives, then these creatures do Cry to God, when they suffer cruelly
and unjustly, crying to God, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, And,
Father, into thy hands I commit my life and my spirit, and fall asleep as
Steven did, and return to their rest.

3. The third thing is their Decalogue; but this belongs only to us, because
they need none; they never broke their law, they always walk according to Gods
will; The water, and the sea, summer and winter, hay-time and harvest, with all
other things, these all keep their appointed time, they all obey thy will, O
God: True it is, they have not that reason that we have; and therefore they have
not so exact A Decalogue; Yet, God has power even to break this exact Law: yea
man also may, if God give him a dispensation: and then if he break any of these
Laws, it is no sin: as God commanded Abraham to kill his son, and he did kill
him in his intention; Genesis 22. 2.
and he had killed him, had not the Angel staid his hand; and it was not Evil,
but Obedience in Abraham: But if any one shall do this from their own will,
then it were sin; for he that gave the Law, may break the Law: And for this
third part we need say no more.

4. For their Sacrifices or Sacraments: I do not say they sacrifice as of
themselves; but they are not only an occasion of our praising God, and
sacrificing to him, but they are also the matter of our sacrifices: yet David
in that of I Chron. 16. 31, 32, 33. 1 Chronicles. 16. 31, etc.
Exhorts, Let the Heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice; and let men say among
the Nations, The Lord reigns: so withal says he, Let the sea roar, and the
fullness thereof, let the fields rejoice, and all that is therein: then shall
the trees of the wood Sing Out, at the presence of the Lord; that is, To him to
whom God has revealed himself, and suffered His glory to pass before him: All
creatures, yea the dumb and inanimate creatures sing out, and sing aloud the
infinite praises of God Almighty, Psalm. 145. 9, 10. Psalm. 165. 9, 10.
The Lord is good to all, and his tender mereies are over all his works: All
thy works shall peaise thee, and thy Saints shall bless thee, and talk of thy
Kingdom and Power: And so much shall suffice for these four parts of the
creatures Religion. We will come to make use hereof to our selves:

First, Use 1.
Let it make us ashamed of our backwardness to give God praise: we that are
exalted above these creatures, that they are more ready and cheerful in
praising their Creator then we; we may blush and be ashamed: for, There is
nothing that we can behold, but puts us in mind of our slothfulness: These poor
servants that have received but one talent, do yield more increase of praise to
God, then I or you that have received many talents: These poor creatures do
more sing forth Gods praise, then we with all our wisdom, reason and
understanding: And let us with shame confess, Saying it is I, It is I, that
have depressed thy glory, and caused thy praise to be evil spoken of: and say
with David, when thou see any of the creatures dye, 1 Chronicles. 21. 7.
It is I Lord, that have offended; but what have these poor sheep done, which
are killed and slain for me, unworthy, unthankful sinner?

Second Use, Use 2.
Take notice hence of the vast circumference of Gods Kingdom, it reaches
farther then we are aware of: we think that we are the only creatures that God
esteems of: Was not the earth made for me? and the Sun to shine upon me? and
all creatures to feed and clothe me? 1 King. 19. 10.
and thou think that thou art left alone to praise God: no no, deceive not
thy self, Gods praise is not confined to the Church of men, he has reserved to
himself seven thousand that have not bowed their knee to Baal: Do thou think
poor creature, that thou art only He that I have appointed to worship me? and
that my infinite praise depends only upon thee? no no, His Kingdom is from one
end of heaven to the other; and every creature praises him as much, or more,
then thee, as Col. 1. 16. Col. 1. 16.
All things were created by him, both things in heaven, and things in earth,
visible and invisible: all things were created by him, and for him, for his
praise and glory; and Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Psalm. 2. 10; 11
That at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father: Therefore alas,
alas, do not think that Gods Temple is so narrowly scanted, that thon only
praisest him; thou art the least part of his Church and Temple.

Third Use, Use 3.
Let this teach us to go to God boldly in the name of Jesus, and with great
encouragement to praise God; for though men and Angels be unfit to praise God,
and they cannot do it as they ought; yet he that accepts the Ravens and the
Lions, and all the dumb creatures when they Cry unto Him, be assured, he will
never refuse the sighs and the groans of any poor penitent dejected soul, that
comes bleeding and weeping to him for mercy: He that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast away, Joh. 6. 37.

Fourth Use, Use 4.
Let us learn also, that when we look upon the creatures, we take heed of,
being taken with any of them: But let us consider, that these are but as Iaco
bs Ladder, Genesis 28. 12.
that by these steps, by these Angels of God, we may ascend to him that stands
at the Top: And if God do not by one means or other, by one affliction and
vexation in the creature or other, drive us from the creature that we may look
up to him, we shall for ever live and dye in the creature: And therefore happy
is that man that God hunts from these things* that they may never have any
Rest, till they find Him, where they shall find, Rest, to their souls: As if
there be oil put into a deep glass, it lies at the bottom, and will never rise
to the top: but if you pour water into it, it will still be rising up to the
top, till the oil it self run over; I could apply it thus, A soul that is sunk
in sin, and sunk in the creature, except God of his infinite mercy pour upon
him the water of afflictions, his soul will never Arise, and mount up to God;
this drives us upward to seek rest there, Romans 8. 37.
for here is none; and so thereby shall become more then conquerors through him
that has loved us; where as if these had not been, our souls had been drowned
in the creatures, and sunck for ever to the pit of Hell.

These things I thus unfold to you, that you may see the unspeakable and large
bounds of Gods praise, That every thing may result and yield to him honor and
praise.

A Fifth Use, Use 5.
To teach us, that though it be impossible for us to search out the unspeakable
praises of God that is hid in all the creatures, we may see them, yet we can
never search them to the bottom; howbeit every creature says to us, as the
Angel to John when he would have fallen down and worshipped him; Rev. 22. 9.
See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, Worship God: we are ready to
fall down and worship the creatures; but they all cry, See thou do it not, I am
thy fellow servant, worship God; And they all cry to thee: Do thou see the
beauty of any creature? does the sweetness of any creature take thee? Mic. 2.
10.
I say they all cry to us, Arise and depart hence, for this is not your rest:
Does the Pleasantness, the sweetness, the Comeliness, etc. of any creature
delight thee? it says, and calls aloud to thee, Arise, and depart hence, for
this is not your rest: how sweet, how beautiful, how fair soever, Rest not in
that thou see; but seek for HIM thou see not: Genesis 8. 9.
All creatures are like the waters to Noah's Dove, which could find no rest for
the soal of her foot; but yet she brought an Olive leaf in her mouth: we may
taste and use these things; But, take not too much of them, and hold them
gently, and be always ready to let them fall: take heed of resting, till you
come to the Ark; all come out from him, and all return to him again.

Sixth Use, Use 6.
and the last, Take heed of abusing any creature; it is enough that you may use
them? for they are one of the family you your selves are of, and they groan as
well as you for deliverance: Romans 8. 22
as God complains, that ye make him serve your iniquities: so may they complain
to God of you, and say, thou have appointed me to serve and comfort man, and to
make him more fit to serve thee; but he abuses us, and prostitutes us to serve
his own inordinate will and lust, and regards not thee: And God himself calls
upon you,

Oh take heed you do not abuse them, and make them to serve your sins and lusts
by Drunkenness, Ephesians. 2.
Gluttony, Pride, and Wantonness; for they are of that family, of whom is named
the whole family in heaven and earth: They all call me Father and Maker, as
well as your selves. And he that can look upon every creature as his BROTHER,
he can never abuse it; he will never begin to strike his fellow servants, Mat.
24. 49.
and say, My Master deferreth his coming: and therefore I take that to be a
godly speech of St. Francis, as they call him, for all he was of the Church of
Rome: and therefore some of our literal Divines deride and mock at it; I would
God they would practice it in a godly and reverent manner: It was his manner to
call all the creatures his Brethren, the Ox his Brother, the Ass his Brother,
the Dog his Brother: For God is Father of them as well as of thee: But proud
man is ready to put honor upon himself, when no honor belongs to him; All
honor is Gods: if all be his, what right have thou to claim any? take heed of
abusing then any of these thy brethren at thy pleasure, and thinking that they
were made Only to please and satisfy thee. Solomon says, Prove. 10.
A good man is merciful to his Beast; that is, he uses them respectfully, and
for necessity, and forbears Execrations and cursings of them, and tortures to
them. And so to conclude, let us and all creatures together, sing and sound
forth the Honor and Praise of our great God, from Generation to Generation,
throughout all Ages, Amen.

OF MILK FOR BABES; AND OF Meat for Strong Men.
Luk ^ 2. 40. And the C^ild grew, and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with
wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him.
Preached at Kensington Public Meeting Place.
AS it is said of John, Luke 2. Luke 2. Ult.
ult. That the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts
till the day of his showing unto Israel: so likewise here the same is said of
Jesus Christ; yet with this exception and difference; (...)
John has an (...), or set time, after which he decreaseth and grows less,
John 3. 30. Joh. 3. 30.
He must increase, but I must decrease: And so it is with Believers, they must
grow less and less, and come to nothing, that so Jesus Christ may become all in
all, according to that in Dan. 2. 34, 35. Dan. 2. 34, 35.
That stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which smote the Image, and
brake it to pieces and it became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth:
This stone is Jesus Christ, which breaks to pieces all things; That is, That
all Worships and Religions, and whatever is mixed with Iron, and Clay, and
whatever is of Man, may decrease, that himself may increase and grow great, and
fill the whole earth with the knowledge and manifestation of himself, He being
all in all.

But I must forbear, for I prevent my self.

The Text contains: 1. A Hist^ry. 2. A Mystery.


And this, as I was speaking before, comes under the second part; viz. The
Mystery.

For the History, that is brief, and shows only the truth of his humane
nature: which though Hypostatically united to the Divinity, even from the
instance of his conception, as it follows in the Text, that he was filled
with wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him; and Verse. ult. that he
increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man; which cannot
be meant in regard of his Divine nature, as if there could be any Access or
increase of, or to that which is infinite: but only in the expression and
manifestation thereof, in those Organs which the God of Order had therefore
ordained and co-apted.

So that if any shall ask, Quest.
How that which is full and perfect, can be said to increase?

I Answer, Answ.
as before, not in Augmentation, but in Manifestation: God cannot grow greater
or lesser, be more or less excellent or glorious, but his greatness, power, and
glory is further manifested, more spread and made known; according to that
promise, Numb. 14. 21. and Isa. 6. 3. Numb. 14. 21.
All the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord: Isa. 6. 3.
Our great and infinite God fills the whole earth, and the Heavens, yea, and
the Heavens of Heavens, with his majesty and Glory, at all times, and in every
place Alike. but then he is said to fill the Earth or Heavens with his glory
and greatness when he is manifested more to men or Angels, and when he
enlarges the knowledge of himself, And of his Power and Greatness.

As we have often showed you concerning Jacob, Genesis 28. Genesis 28.
He dreamed and saw the Ladder reaching from earth to heaven; and the Almighty,
The God of Abraham and Isaac was at the top thereof; and from him Angels
ascending and descending continually, thereby God manifesting himself to be
with him wherever he was, and that he would keep him in all places wherever
he went, and that he would not leave him, but fulfill all he had promised:
Jacob awaking he saw God as present there as at home in his Fathers house, and
cries out, The Lord is in this place, and I knew it not; whereat he was ^ore
afraid, and burst out into this ravishing acclamation, How dreadful is this
place! this is none other but the house of God! God was as much present in his
glory and majesty over night, as well as then, but Jacob ^aw not his presence:
God was not more there, but there was a greater manifestation: Jacobs sight was
opened to see the presence of God more: Jacobs Portion and Treasure was nigh
him always, but he saw him not; as Hagar, God opened her eyes, and then she
saw the well of water, Genesis 21. 19. Genesis 21. 19.
Know this, that the fountain of all good is always with us, nigh at hand, if
we could but see him: and we need never fear, nor never despond and doubt so as
we do: For as Moses says concerning the command Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
It is not hiddeu from thee: neither is it far off the: not in heaven, nor
beyond the sea, but nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart: So the
Apostle, Romans 10. 6, 7. Romans 10. 6, 7.
he applies that Scripture to Jesus Christ, who is, Col. 1 16. Col. 1. 17.
the first begotten of all creatures, by whom all things consist, and in whom
they live, move, and have their being.

But the second part is the Mystery of the Text.

That which is more material, is the Mystery: Though all Scripture be written
for instruction; yet know, The Scripture is a Mystery, of (...), (...)
which as Eustathius says, comes from (...), (...)
claudo, because it is kept secret, sacr^d, and shut up: because in all
Mysteries it is necessary to keep close the mind, and not to show the things
which are to be concealed, as one says; for as St. Paul says concerning
Circumcision* Romans 2. 28, 29. Romans 2. 28, 29.
He is not a lew which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is
that of the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is
that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of
men, but of God: So say I of saving knowledge; He that sees the Mystery of the
Scripture, he has the true knowledge of the Scripture: He is not taught of
God, that knows only the Letter, and the Flesh of the Scripture: but true
understanding is that of the Spirit, and not of the Letter: and though men may
^ry up and praise literal knowledge, yet God only esteems of inward knowledge,
and the mind and inside of the Scriptures; All other knowledge is vain, and
makes a man not one hairs breadth the better before God.

Therefore we may observe also what Ministers the Apostle preferres; not the
Ministers of the Letter, but the Ministers of the New Testament; as in that of
2. Cor. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 3. 6.
Able Ministers, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: And those also to be
true Christians, having not the Law only outwardly, in tables of stone: but
within, in the fleshy tables of the heart: he having made us able Ministers of
the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life: all the knowledge of the history is but as
the Law written in Tables of stone, which does us no good; but it is only the
Spirit, the knowledge of the Mystery, And Marrow, That gives life.

But you will say to me, Obj.
How does the Letter kill?

I Answer, Answ.
By resting therein, and not seeking for the marrow, the food and the life; but
contenting our selves with the knowledge of the History and outside: but
because I have at other times unfolded this unto you, I shall here pass it by,
and come to the Spirit and Mystery of our Text in hand.

So then, it rests (This premised) being That we may safely conclude even
thus much, that as our Savior was typisied by others who went before him; he
was the Substance of all those Shadows, both of persons and things: even so
Christ Jesus himself, he is the resemblance and type of himself; his outward,
temporal and visible actions in the flesh, were a type of his inward and
internal actions in the souls of all Believers, He being their life and
Resurrection; they being before but dead men in Trespasses and sins, until his
actions be their life and Regeneration. So likewise, as his life was Typical,
and resembled himself; so in regard of his death and crucifying: whatever he
suffered externally in the flesh, it shows how he is internally crucified
daily, even to the end of the world, Heb. 6. 6. Heb. 6. 6.
Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God a fresh, and put him to an
open shame: So likewise for all his other actions and passages related of him;
as his Nativity, it held out our spiritual birth, and Christ his being born in
the soul; as the Apostle expresses it, Gal. 4. 19. Gal. 4. 19.
My beloved of whom I travel in birth, till Christ be formed, or brought forth
in you. So also in his Circumcision, is held forth our Spiritual Circumcision:
Col. 2. 11.
as in that of Col. 2 11. Ye are complete in him* in whom also ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, etc. So also for
holiness of life: Christ's holiness show us, what holiness shall be in them that
are his children and people, Mat. 5. 16. Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in Heaven.

So also for his outward Teaching, it represents to us, that all His people
should be taught of God; he himself would be the true Teacher in us, as Isa.
54. 13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54. 13.
and great shall be the peace of thy children. And Jer. 31. 34. Jer. 31. 34
And they shall no more teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least to
the greatest, says the Lord. And Christ himself cites these places, John 6.
45. Joh. 6. 45.
It is written in the Prophets, And they shall all be taught of God; every man
therefore that has heard and learned of the father comes unto me. So also in
Christ's Miracles: as in opening the eyes of the blind, it shows that Christ
himself must open our eyes, or else we remain stark blind; yea as those born
blind: And never any man but he, was known to open the eyes of any born blind:
David says, Psalm. 13. 3. Psalm. 13. 3.
Lighten thou mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death: And Psalm. 18. 28. Ps.
18. 28.
For thou will light my Candle: The Lord my God will enlighten my darkness: So
also in opening the ears of the deaf: it is he alone can say to our ears
Ephathah, be ye opened, and it is so: So also for his restoring of limbs,
causing those that are Cripples from their Mothers womb, to leap like an Heart,
and to run his ways with delight.

The like also for his raising the dead, and feeding the Multitudes: And what
shall I say more? you may apply them more to your selves: The time would fail
me to undertake to speak of all his actions. So also of his Resurrection, If ye
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, Col. 3. 2. Col. 3. 2.
And so of his Ascension, and all other his Actions and Miracles, to see all
these things held forth and typi^ied in the Person, Actions and Miracles of our
Savior.

These are all Saving actions, wrought in us, and we thereby partake of the
excellency and virtue thereof: The other, though wrought for us, yet if we are
not quickened, vivified, and put into act by these, we receive no benefit by
them. An outward dead faith, to believe only in an external Christ, is no
better then a faith of Devils: This is that Christ whose day Abraham saw and
rejoced in, Joh. 8. 56. Joh. 8, 59.
and not in regard of the other only; viz. Prophetically, but this chiefly;
This is that Christ and him crucified, whom St. Paul desire only to know, 1
Cor. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 2.
in regard of which, Christ in him, working, acting, and expressing his own
life, himself in him, he slighted the external knowledge of Christ according to
the flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 16. 1 Cor. 5. 16.
Wherefore henceforth know no wan after the flesh, yea though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more.

Now then as all the other actions and passions of Christ were not only
meritorious in themselves, but also typical and Significant: so is this growth
of Jesus Christ; he grows up in us, in wisdom and stature, and he in us waxes
strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom and understanding: He teaches us
the true wisdom, He in us chooses that good thing which shall never be taken
away: He is, Gal. 2. 20.
The grace of God in us: I live, says the Apostle, yet not I, but it is Christ
his life in me: From him comes all growth in grace, not from our selves; the
work is his, none of ours: From him comes Faith, Hope, Charity, Strength,
Virtue, etc. If any of these come from man, from the power, industry or
strength of man, they are false, and good for naught: yet how ready are most
men to assume these to themselves? or at least to think that by their power or
wisdom, or industry they have attained them? Jam. 4. 1.
From whence come wars? come they not from your lusts? So from whence comes
pride, and the lifting up of the creature; high, towering and and swelling
imaginations, that (in plain terms) exalt themselves against Jesus Christ? they
are so far from being from him, or of him, that they are quite contrary to him:
however to some may seem the virtues of Christ himself, but they they are the
excrements of the Old man.

Hence it is said, That John Baptist grew, and waxed strong in spirit, because
Christ by his divine life in him brake forth in John, and his light did shine
before men; they seeing those good works in him, God was glorified, not John;
for says he, I must decrease, but he must increase: Hence it is said here
accentively, twice in this Chapter, (...) and versus ult* (...), (...)
both in our Text, and Verse ult. And the child grew, and waxed strong in
Spirit, filled with wisdom* and the grace of God was upou him: Luke 2. Ult.
And again, Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and
men: As these things were in him, in his person then, so the same things are as
really done in his Mystical body and members: All these influences are his, and
flow from him the head; We are dead in trespasses and sins, bnt he is the
Resurrestion and Life: Eph^s. 2. 1.
And he that believes in him, shall never dye; nay though he were dead, yet
shall he live.

When Jesus Christ does once begin to display and declare the glory of himself
in the soul, Joh. 11. 25.
and to adorn the soul with himself, what a palace, what a Kingdom, what a
Temple is that soul? Well might David say, Glorious things are spoken of thee,
O thou City and Temple of God, Psalm. 82. 3. Psalm. 82. 3.
more glorious then the Temple spoken of Rev. 21. Rev. 21.
and says our Savior, The Kingdom of heaven is within you: All that
description Rev. 21. Rev. 21.
there at large, sets out the Glory and light of that Temple, which was like
Jasper, most precious and clear as Crystal, and the wall high and stately,
wherein were twelve gates, and the gates kept by twelve Angels, and the walls
of Jasper, and the City pure gold, and the very foundation garnished with
precious stones, a Jasper, a Saphir, a Chalcedony, an Emerald, a Sardonix, a
Sardius, a Chrysolite, a Beril, a Topas, a Chrysophrasus, a Iacinth, an
Amethist,

I say all these things are accomplished in a great measure, in some less, in
some more; in all those where Jesus Christ is pleased to display his glories,
and in that soul where he is pleased to adorn it with his own graces, and with
the fruits of the spirit, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Strength, Virtue, Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, Temperance, etc.
Those that are thus qualified, enriched and adorned* let me tell you, they need
no Law, no Light; for they are a Law to themselves; and there is a light within
them, like that City, Rev. 21. 23. Rev. 21. 23.
That had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for, The
Glory of God did lighten it, and the lamb is The light thereof. Nay I may say,
and say truly (as I may say) they are gotten above Law, above Letter, in this
regard: for they have the Gospel and the life within them; yet for all this, do
not think that I speak against Law, or Letter, or Ordinances; use them (as I
say) but Rest not in them: And know this also, that while the soul is Rapt up
in the glory, sight and beholding of Jesus Christ, he knows this, that he
enjoys that which is the Substance, and that which is as far above the other,
as the Substance is above the Shadow, and the Life above the Letter, and the
Spirit above the Flesh; yet he will not slight nor cast away these means or
Ordinances, because God has often appeared in them and by them to him: as I
have showed more at large upon other Scriptures.

But I say, Let us look to find that in us, which Christ affirms, that the
Kingdom of God is within us; Rev. 21.
and that you are in some beginnings of that glorious Temple and City mentioned
before; for if you think the Kingdom of God or Heaven, to consist of such
things as are there declared in the Letter, you are much deceived: But the holy
Spirit is pleased to make use of such expressions and representations, that are
so amiable and Glorious to the carnal eye, that so we may come to see the
Truth and Substance of those Shadows and Representations to be far and
transcendenly more ravishing and glorious; as all those Saints and people of
God, before whom God has Unvailed his glory, can abundantly witness, and seal
to the truth thereof.

Insomuch, that had they all those precious stones, and Houses, and Temples,
built of them really; yet they in comparison of what they see and enjoy of God
would trample them all under their feet, as not worthy to be named the same
hour with those true pearls, and those ravishing, full and satisfying, and
transparent precious stones which are within them: They need not (when they are
in union and communion with him, and when he is pleased to let but his back
parts pass before them) they shall not desire the light of the Sun, Exodus 33.
23.
or of the Moon, to give light in that Temple: Rev. 21. 23.
for the glory of the Lord does lighten it, Ver. 14.
and the Lamb is the light thereof: And as it is expressed there in Ver. 14.
The Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it; and the Kings
of the earth shall bring their glory unto it: This Temple, and this Palace, and
this Glory, darkens all the glory and splendour of all the Kings and Emperors
under the Sun: All their glory vanishes, and makes have before this glory, as
being abashed and ashamed once to appear in sight thereof.

Beloved, I hope, and I know there are some that hear me, which know, and see,
and feel these things to be true, yea, (as you say) as true as Gospel; yea, so
true, as nothing is, nor can be more true. And some others I know there be,
which will believe none of all these things* but they will dwell in the Letter,
and think all the things spoken thereof, are some visible and Ocular glories:
as the Disciples, while they were weak, and but babes, they pleased themselves
with apprehensions, of their Master his being a temporal King, and that he
should sit upon his Throne* and they all should sit about him: and Zebedees
children, nothing would serve them, but That the one might sit at his right
hand, Mar. 10. 37.
and the other at his left: And such childish apprehensions have many; yea most
men, They please their fancies, hopes and imaginations with these things; viz.
That the glory of heaven shall be only hereafter; and that glory to consist in
Thrones, and Crowns, and Scepters, in Music, Harps and Viols, and such like
carnal and poor things, compared to that glory: and though they talk and
prattle, that grace is glory begun, and glory is grace perfected; yet how far
wide are they in this practice? and how harsh and uncouth is this Doctrine to
such men? but it is the rejoicing of my soul, that I speak to some that have
seen and felt, far, far more then my tongue is able to express: for these
things are known not so much by man's teaching, as by feeling and enjoying them,
and by the Teachings of God,

But indeed and in truth, there is so much Litteralness, even among great
Professors, and most Teachers, that they are always but at the very Beginning
of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; Heb. 6. 1, 2.
And if those that profess and think themselves able Teachers, do stick here,
and go no further, how can they be a means to bring others on toward
perfection? I tell you Beloved, this dwelling in the letter, is that which has
been the occasion of so many Errors, Rents and Differences as has been in the
Church: The truth is known by none, but by those that can come to the truth: In
thy light we shall see light. You that are of the truth, Psalm. 16
you have received the Anointing, 1 John 2. 27.
and that Anointing teaches you all things: Not as if any individual man
knows all things; But Ye, Ye the Church, Ye the Body, Ye know all things, as
I have showed you at large upon that Text. Take the complete Body of Christ,
both past, present and to come, and add to them the Head: and then we may not
only say, Cant. 4. 7.
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee; but thou art altogether
Amiable, and YE know all things,

Beloved, one runs away with one interpretation, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
and another with another; as the Apostle says Every one of you has a
Doctrine, a Psalm, an Interpretation, a Tongue, a Revelation: But let us mind
this Anointing, what that teaches us: let us labor to see, that we must be
All taught of God; that we may come to have the Mystery, Jer. 31.
and the Living sense; and this will instruct, guide, lead and conduct us
aright and safely, that we shall not only SEE these hidden things, but we shall
know, yea know undoubtedly that they are the Truth, the life, and the Way, as
Christ says of himself: Did men but see things, and were led by the Spirit,
and by the Truth, they would not run away with such poor, weak, carnal and
empty notions and interpretations as they do: The Book of the Revelation, is a
most Divine Highflowen Revelation of most glorious, and most Divine things: and
yet because men rest in the Letter (as they do in the rest of the Scriptures)
we see how low, and empty, and poor they carry on their works? what carnal
apprehensions men please themselves withal? yet I deny not in the least, the
truth of the Letter, far be it from me; I do not deny but those things may be
fulfilled according to the Letter: But therefore shall we rest and dwell there?
shall we not seek the Truth of all shadows?

Not that I would have men neglect preaching the Letter, or whatever can be
found out externally to be fulfilled; but let us not rest there; but seek for
the Anointing, for the Spirit promised by Christ, that may lead us into all
truth; even into that truth which Christ spoke of, when he said, Joh. 16. 13.
I have many things to say unto you, but as yet ye are not able to bear them;
But I will send the Comforter, Verse. 1 2.
and he shall lead you into all truth: 1 Cor. 3. 2
And of which Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. And I Brethren could not speak
unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ: I
have fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able [to
bear it] neither yet are ye able; 1 Cor. 2. 10.
for ye are yet carnal: that ye may come to see those things God reveals by his
Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the DEEP things of God; for
he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man:
for who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? but we have
the mind of Christ; as there the Apostle, in that of 1 Cor. 2. expostulates,
concerning the Hidden Mystery of the Scriptures, which we cannot have, except
it be freely given unto us of God.

He that is taught these things, has the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; he
has even this Scripture fulfilled in him: And the child grew, Luke 2. 40.
and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon
him: Here you may see the reason, and what Christ meant when he said, Mat. 19.
14. Suffer little children to come unto me, Matthew. 19. 14.
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God: Lev. 21. 20.
And yet Lev. 21. 20. there it is forbid, that any Dwarf of the Tribe of Levi,
should approach to offer sacrifice to God. How shall we reconcile Gods
Commandment and Christ his practice? Truly thus, I suppose Christ in that
saying, holds forth by little children, such as are in an humble, meek, lowly,
and in a growing condition, and coming on to perfection: for says he, He that
receives not the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein: But for Dwarfs, whose growth is stinted, they are at their highest,
and will never grow taller: I mean, such who profess themselves tall
Christians, but are not so much as little children; nor cannot endure to grow
taller, nor hear of new light, or a new Birth, or that any should know more
then they, this is hateful to them; for they think, they have been brought up
with the Scriptures, they have bin at the University, sat at the feet of
Gamaliel, Exercised in the holy Scriptures from a child, studied al points in
Divinity, searched out the judgment of most Authors; Have Epitomized the
quintessence of all their judgments; and shall we tell these men of new light?
they cry New lights are old Errors: Do you think that these men are true
Disciples? or fit to be Christ's Disciples, by him to be led into al truth? is
this voice the voice of the Spouse? which continually looking upon her own
ignorances and infirmities, cries, Oh thou whom my soul loves, tell me, Teach
me, where thou feedest, and where thou restest at noon? Cant. 1. 7.
But you know what the holy Ghost says, Pro. 26. 12.
He that is wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of that
man.

And indeed we much wonder to see a Dwarf, because that if he live to he never
so old, yet he is but of a childs stature, and will never increase or grow
higher: What are such Christians (if they may be so called) but Monsters? like
those silly women the Apostle speaks of, always learning, 2 Timothy 3. 7
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: who cannot endure strong
meat, to make them grow tall men in Christ, but are still feeding themselves
and others with nothing but milk, with the Principles and Beginnings of Christ:
But those Plerophoria's, Those Fat and full things of Gods House, though they
talk of them, yet they never reach them: And those that do speak of them, give
them an offense, and get their hatred, and hard sentence: He must be a
Familist, or a Se^tarie, or an Antinomian, or some such like: and to say the
truth in few words, they censure others, and applaud themselves: and though
they have been long Teachers, yet they themselves had need be taught the very
lowest things in Christianity; And, Children they find their Auditors, and
children they leave them.

You see our Savior grew up in wisdom and stature, and the grace of God was
with him, being filled therewith: He stood not at a stay but increased; he grew
from the Law to the Gospel, he submitted to the Law in all things, and
fulfilled all righteousness; but he rested not in the Law, but grew up to the
Gospel; he begun at Circumcision, and submitted to the Law, and was obedient,
even unto death: and he rested not there neither, but he also ascended and rose
again to Life and Glory: So S. Paul to avoid offense, because of some that were
weak in the faith, he circumcised Timothy, Acts 16. 3. Act. 16. 3.
because of the Jews, for they all knew that his Father was a Greek: yet
afterward he says, Gal. 5. 6.
Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And again,
when Paul saw that they began to rest upon Baptism, he slighted it, and
undervalues it; when men begin to make the Shadow the Substance, or the Image
the Truth, He undervalues them; although being rightly used, he practiced and
used them himself: So they be but used as Means, and Schoolmasters, and Tutors
to bring us to Christ; But if they instead of bringing us to him, keep and bar
us from him, away with them: If we begin to admire them, and cry up them, and
make our duties and the Sacraments themselves, though appointed by Christ
himself, to be our Saviors, we are to slight them, and disesteem them in that
regard, as Paul did the holy Law it self, Gal. 4.
in that Epistle to the Galatians, and elsewhere: For all these Ordinances are
for no other use, but that they may be as steps to him, and as guides to him
who is the truth and the substance: nay Paul went so high, that he not only
undervalued the Law, or Ordinances, or Duties, if they hindered from Christ, but
he attempted to draw aside, and undervalued and slighted the very Person and
Body of Jesus Christ, in that case; If men rest in any outward privilege or
enjoyment, they keep us from Christ.

Beloved, be not offended, see what himself says, 2 Cor. 5. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
when some slighted him, who it may be knew or heard Christ personally, and
began to prefer the Shadow before the Substance: he undervaluing all but a New
creature* he bursts out in an holy defiance of all things else besides it; let
it be Moses, or Christ Jesus himself, in regard of his body and external
presence or knowledge: Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: one would
think he had spoke there generally and inclusively enough: but he boldly adds,
Yea, although we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him
no more: as if he should say, tell not me of outward Privileges or Ordinances,
I seek a proof of Christ in you; show me the New birth, the new CREATURE; is
Christ formed in you? this is that only, that I travel in birth for, and for
nothing else.

And so likewise to instance in Baptism, which some think is come in the room
of Circumcision: Well let it be so, we will not contend about that, Christ
removing that burthensom and legal Ordinance: but for Christ the substance we
ought and must contend for to the utmost: yet some there are that would have
Baptism administered after such manner that it is as burthensom, yea more
burthensom to some then Circumcision: you know what I mean: as to instance, the
unseasonableness of weather sometimes* and the weakness and sickness of some
bodies; besides, that of Circumcision was only for the males, and not for
Females, as the Ordinance of Baptism is; with many other reasons too long to
stand upon; therefore more burthensom then Circumcision: they speak of plunging
over head and ears, as if it were an absolute injunction, because the Apostle
says, Romans 6. 4. Buried with him in Baptism, therefore they must be plunged:

Truly, there is a great deal of s^ir more then need; for Baptism is but a type
and shadow of the true Baptism: and I conceive (and to me its clear) that the
Apostle there sets the shadow against the substance; one to set out the other:
for Christ's Baptism was his humbling himself, and emptying himself, and
submitting to his Fathers will, in his whole Passions and sufferings, which is
the thing Baptism holds forth; For to Zebedees children, when they desired to
sit one on his right hand, Mat. 20. 22
and the other on his left: (he says) Can you be baptized with the Baptism
wherewith I must be baptized? intimating that they were not able to pass
through such a sea of sufferings as he was to pass through; they not knowing
what they said, or what Christ meant, they answered, We are: They thought
submitting to Baptism was but a small thing; neither indeed was it, taking it
only as external.

But because the Apostle says, Buried with him in or by Baptism, therefore a
great deal ado there has been in several ages of the Church by some, affirming
Baptism is no Baptism, except they be plunged or ducked under water; a very
childish and weak conclusion, without any true ground: yet mistake me not, I do
not say childish, in regard of the Appointment, but in regard of Resting and
dwelling therein, and not going on toward perfection it self. And truly with
some men, herein lies the top or quintessence of their Religion, making such
ado about Shadows, and Figures, and Resemblances, while they let the Truth, the
Substance, and the Thing pass; and regard it not; forasmuch as they are so
zealous and hot about Forms: but if they are by any drawn up to speak of the
Substance, they are as men lost, cold and heartless: which is a plain evidence
to me, that they prefer the Shadow before the Substance, being merely exercised
about childish things, and are not willing to come up to the Truth, to the
Excellencies and Glories of what Baptism, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
and other Ordinances signify: And there is no telling them of a more
excellent way, as the Apostle says: They see all excellencies in the Shadow,
none in the Substance: Whereabouts (think you) is these men's Religion and truth
of Grace?

Truly, my Friends, this sticking in the Letter, is that which has been the
bane of all growth in Religion, and an occasion of so many disputes and
differences therein, which I do not wonder at; for Children can do no other
then quarrel about trifles, and things of no great worth: Not that the soul
should slight or undervalue Ordinances, or any other duty. Beloved, I am fain
to use this caution the oftener, because ye are so subject to catch and carp: I
say, Let all those things have their due time, place and esteem: but to rest in
these, is the worm, the Gourd: But this I say, when the soul by these
Ordinances (or in these, or whatever you will name) shall come to see and enjoy
God Her Portion; when she is in the pursuit of her Beloved, she undervalues and
leaves all things of this nature behind, and presses after the mark, the
Price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ: And to this soul in this
condition I may boldly say, what is Duties? what is Ordinances? what is Christ in the
flesh? I beseech you give me leave; what are all these, when the soul embraces
the truth of all these things? Can that soul at that time, leave its Beloveds
arms, and prize the Shadows, the Handmaids above or equal to him? But I grant,
that those that never came to these Embraces, these swallowings up, these
overcomings; This spiritual drunkenness, may censure and revile a soul that may
say indeed and in truth, he is above these: What do you think Paul thought of
these things, when he was caught up into the third Heaven? 2 Cor, 12. 4.
I grant also Beloved, that the most elevated, triumphing, and most raised
soul, lives not always in this condition; these things, and these raptures, and
these embraces come but seldom; and the soul comes to fall lower, and have more
use of Ordinances: but she uses them as Handmaids, so as to conduct her to her
Beloved.

Beloved, I would have you ponder these things well: If ye set up Ordinances,
etc. so as to build and Rest in them, ye do make Idols of them; or at the best,
you play the Babes and the Children with them, by Resting always on such
Crutches and Go-bies, and never come to be Yong-men, much less as Fathers in
Christ; Paul, and Peter, James and John, they would have always enjoyed those
Raptures: Paul in the third Heaven, and the other in the Transfiguration. But
the one had a prick in the flesh, and the others came down again from the
Mount; and in these declinations, and lower enjoyments, I would not for a world
forbid men to use means, not only in regard of themselves, but of others, who
may (by those) come to have the same enjoyments, making them no more but means,
and not the end.

And so much more I will say, to satisfy you, that I have great cause to
mistrust those spirits, whether they come the right way to God, or into such
Raptures, that leap into them on a sudden, without use of means or Ordinances,
But out of a Blind and Profane condition, come suddenly into these
enjoyments: for God does usually make use of these means; yet I may not limit,
nor direct, nor circumscribe the Sovereign Almighty: yet usually faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word preached: But herein lies the general abuse
of these truths, and of these enjoyments; that because some may and do come
thus to enjoy God, and forsake Ordinances at a season, at the very time of such
enjoyments, therefore some having gotten this in notion, have presumptuously
affirmed that they are above these, and so far abuse themselves, and show an
ill example to others, 2 Cor. 8.
that they have quite forsaken the Assemblies, and the use of any Ordinances.

Beloved, all these things are an offense, and hereby many a soul by this
delusion of Satan, drowns it self in perdition: And yet I may say more then all
this, and say properly too, he that uses them, and rests not in them, lives
above them: and in this sense, living above Ordinance^ is most properly taken,
and is a truth, though much abused; viz. That man has not his comfort, his
Life in them; this man lives above Ordinances: I do not say he must forsake all
Ordinances, as men take it usually: But to have our Life and enjoyments in the
Truth and Substance; Mat. 16. 18.
and against this Doctrine the gates of hell shall never prevail.

And this I will say more, those that come into such pretended enjoyments in
this extraordinary way, that for the most part they never hold on in a
Christian course, but abusing this light, run out into fleshly liberty: But the
right enjoyment of God, is such a hedge to a man, that he cannot but love God,
and seek to honor him with all his might. But I conceive all these things are
but to lead us to Jesus Christ; and therefore to put more in them, and depend
more on them then ever was intended, is an high abuse of them.

Concerning Baptism, we see Paul rejoiced, and said, 1 Cor. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 16.
I thank God I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius, and the Household of
Stephanus; for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: and
withal blames them there, that they set their eyes on him, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or whatever it was, either Men, or Means, or Duties, or whatever, that
they once did begin to settle upon, Verse. 17.
and rest in, to make the cross of Christ of no effect: All these things, were
they never so high in esteem among the Famousest Teachers and Professors, he
laid them aside, and undervalued them; If Baptism be set in the room of Jesus
Christ, and men content themselves though in a true observation of it, or of
the Lords Supper, according to Christ's rule, or in Fellowships or Gatherings
together, then we make Idols of them and set them in the room of Christ: and
Christ the Truth and Substance is slighted and neglected.

So also, you know, that at the beginning of the Primitive Church, when it was
weak, and in its infancy, and could not digest strong meat, the Apostles by
consultation fed them with milk, and such Doctrine as they were able to bear:
And all was to this end, that they might use such things as Help to show them
Jesus Christ: as Act. 15. 28, 29. Act. 15. 28, 29.
It seemed good to the holy Spirit, and to us, to lay upon you no other burden
then these necessary things, That ye abstain from things offered to Idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, etc. if you keep your selves from these
things, ye shall do well: Fare ye well. Now in these things, according to the
present infancy and weakness of that Church, 1 Cor. 9. 22.
did as Paul's practice was; He became weak to the weak and became all to all,
that he might win some; They saw they could not bear taking away and removing
all things at once, and so drew them on with cords of love, and indulgence in
things indifferent: It was as much as they at that time could bear, to remove
that unquestionable commanded Ordinance of Circumcision: and because others
began to press it as a thing of necessity, therefore they in wisdom remove it,
laying no such injunction on them, and this they tell them they shall do well
to observe: But after this, when they had been exercised more in the Truth, and
they began to see these things were but Pedagogies, Paul adventured to wave
these things, as being things which are not the Truth and Substance.

And therefore he incourages the Corinthians, not to stand upon such things, in
that 1 Cor, 8. 7. 1 Cor. 8. 7.
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge; for some with confidence of
the Idol, unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an Idol; and their
conscience being weak is defiled: For (says he in the Verses before) An Idol
is nothing, and there is none other but one God: Therefore although it be meat
left at the Idol Sacrifices, the meat is the same afterward which it was
before; the Idol defiles not the meat, for it is nothing: And therefore in 1
Cor. 10. 25. 1 Cor. 10. 25.
(says he) Whatever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no question for
conscience sake: Why? there he gives the same reason again; For the earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof: I might draw out this point to many more
particulars, wherein many are misled in these days; as concerning eating of
blood, and using of Temples or Places dedicated to Idols, I hope I need give no
other Solution at present, but that Answer that there the Apostle does, An Idol
is nothing in the world; there is none other but one God: The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof: Therefore, I say, eat and use what is prepared
for you, making no question for conscience sake: But through the weakness and
childishness of many, there has been great contest about things of this
nature: And if it be evil to prefer the handmaid before the Mistress, and the
Shadow before the Substance, even of things commanded: much more to prefer
these things of such indifferency before the Substance, which are to be laid
aside as we grow stronger (which we are not to do by the things absolutely
commanded) but to use them, and not abuse them; to use them, and not build on
them, or Rest in them.

And as it is in things of this nature, so it is in the general estate of all
Christians: First, they are servants, and under the yoke, before they come to
be Sons; but when once the true Heir comes to age, then cast out the
bondwoman, and her son: as the Apostle alleges that of Abraham for this very
purpose; not that they do cast away obedience according to the Law, but that
they do it upon another account, even from love: Then it is no longer a yoke, but
according to that promise, Ier. 31. 33. Jer. 31. 33.
I will write my Law in their heart; and so they obey out of love, and not for
fear: There was a time when the highest Chri^^ians were but servants; therefore
despise not him who is not as tall as thy self; but let us in whatever we
reprove them, pity them, and pray for them, knowing it was once thine own
condition; only when men are self-wise and conceited, and think themselves to
be great and something, when they are nothing, these deserve a more severe
reproof, according to that of the Apostle Jude, Jude 22, 23.
verse 22, 23. Of some have compassion, making a difference; others save with
fear, pulling, or snatching them out of the fire.

And the Apostle Paul carries this point high, and says, Gal. 4. Gal. 4. I, 2
the beginning; and applies it to Christ himself: Now I say, that the heir as
long as he is under age, differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of
all; but is under Tutors and Governors, until the time apppointed of the
Father: even so we, when we were in bondage, under the elements of the world;
but when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made under the
Law, to redeem those that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons: And Christ himself says, John 8. 35. Joh. 8. 35.
The servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides for ever:
But what is it to be a servant? and what a Son? Christ answers it himself, John
15. 15. Joh. 15. 15
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knows not what his Lord
does; but I have called you friends; for all things which I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you; and ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever
I have commanded you. Servants you know, are kept at a distance, and know not
the secrets of their Master; but if you be Friends or Sons (its all one) you
shall abide in the house for ever: The inheritance is yours, the secrets of the
Almighty are yours; you shall not only have the external and outward command,
but shall see the excellency, the glory, the pleasure and delight of those
Commands: that is, you shall not only have the Letter, but the Life, and shall
know whatever the Lord does; you shall not always be servants, but shall grow
up to be sons: and if ye grow not, you may well question your selves, whether
ye shall ever come to the inheritance or no. But I say, look to your selves
therefore in the name of Jesus Christ; for I affirm boldly in his name, That
faith which is not a growing faith, is not a true faith: If your faith and
light be the same as it was many years ago, that you have only an external
faith, and your faith is taught only by the Precepts of men, and Christ is not
your Teacher, and that he grows not in you: this is but a dangerous and dead
faith; As one says, (...), There is nothing in the world is barren; and says
Christ, Considerate Lilia quomodo crescunt, Consider the Lilies, how that they
grow: and a grain of mustard seed, which is the least of all seed, yet it grows
the tallest: Then ^latter not your selves Beloved; that faith that grows not,
is not true faith; and that light that increases not, is not true light; that
Christ that grows not in you, dwells not in you. Beloved, look about you, this
Doctrine falls heavy as lead upon abundance of Professors.

I would the rather press this point, in consideration of two respects.
1. That ye may know ((...)) the methods of Satan in men, to make men to stand
still, and not to grow; for he can be content to let men have a Religion, and a
supposed true Religion, and to use Ordinances and Duties, and Rules of worship,
and to be content in them: but if he can keep them from growing, as he may very
easily for all the use of them, his Kingdom is never like to be by them much
shaken: Therefore as he sometimes tempts men to despair by making children to
measure themselves according to the rules of the Perfect: so more often to
security and blessing themselves in an unsound condition, by making those that
think themselves strong men, yet still to measure themselves by children, that
because some or many are weaker and darker then they, therefore themselves are
grown men, and tall Christians: This is no other but Satan's method, that though
they have a Religion, yet they shall be never the better for it.

2. Another reason why I would commend the knowledge and consideration of this
point, is, for fear lest some being deceived in their own judgments, they
should also deceive you, making you to rest upon a reed of Egypt, which will
deceive and destroy you: And whilst they never leave the Doctrine of the
Beginnings of Christ, nor regard going on to perfection, Heb. 6. 1. Heb. 6. 1.
they propound unto you all, as one common Faith (which they ought to do) so
one common measure of faith, (which they ought not to do) as though there were
no different degrees of grace, and proportions of faith: And as I said, Babes
and Sucklings they pretended to find you, so such and no other they will leave
you: but the Apostle says, Romans 12. 6. Having gifts differing according to the
grace that is given unto us, Whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to
the proportion of faith, etc. And verse 3. Let no man think of himself more
highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has
deal^ to every man the measure of faith: For as there are Babes in Christ,
which can bear but weak and small beginnings of truth and faith, who can bear
but the first principles: So also there are young men in Christ, which are grown
up to more ripeness and strength of faith, actings and sufferings: So also
know, there are Fathers in Christ, as 1 John 2. 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14.
I have written unto you little children; I have written unto you young men:
and I have written unto you Fathers: Why Fathers? because ye have known him
that was from the beginning: But in these days children will turn Teachers, and
look upon themselves as Fathers, before they are hardly born, or not scarce out
of their swaddling bands, conceiving they know all things, 1 John 2. 27.
when indeed they know very little, if any thing rightly, especially not
experimentally, but quite out of their own line, 2 Cor. 10. 12, 13, etc.
making use of things in another man's line, as the Apostle speaks, and boast
thereof, as if they were their own experiences, when as indeed they have little
or none but what they have catched up from other men. And as there are degrees
of grace, and proportions of faith, so they should be preferred according to
their degrees and proportions: And not do as the common way now is, to prefer
the smaller matters of the Law before the greater and weightiest, and to say,
they are more excellent; if not in word, yet in practice: As

1. Preferring faith acquired before faith infused. 2. Implicit before explicit
faith. And 3. Formed faith before all these; in observing the outward and
formal part of Religion, as hearing, praying, receiving the Sacrament, etc.
when as these are but poor things without the truth and substance: these are
but The Beginnings of Christ, and to rest in these is but to be always
children: As if you should bid a Tailor make a garment for a man, and he should
take measure by a child; and if he be to make a garment for a child, to take
measure by a man: what a disproportion were this? Therefore in all the ages and
degrees of Christians, we must observe what things, and what garments best fit
them; that garment that will fit a child, will not a man: and that which will
fit a man, will not fit a child; therefore there must be consideration had, to
distinguish times and seasons: Under the Law they were led by outward and
visible things, riches, and honor, and prosperity, and health and long life
and such childish things: And are not most men now so, even great Eminent
professors, that are still under the Paedagogie of the Law, and outward
prosperity, and are led by these things? And these are the chief things they
seek, and make petition to God for: which indeed we do allow to children, to
draw them on to a use of prayer: but this garment, though it may fit a child,
yet it will not a grown man in Christ.

But they are to seek first the Kingdom of God, and to rest quietly in the will
of God, whether these things shall be added or no: When I was a child, says
the Apostle, I did as a child, I spoke as a child, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10.
etc. and I prayed as a child; but when I came to be a man, I put away
childish things: Those that are come to be grown men in Christ, for these
outward things they are indifferent, they see no such excellency in them, as
all worldly men do, and even as children in Christ may through their weakness
do the same: But let us now put away childish things, and be ashamed to lie
crying and whining, and begging for Bables and Rattles, for riches, and honor,
and beauty, and favor of great men and such like things: how unseemly is it
for a man to cry or strive for childrens things, O that I had such a
Preferment! and good Lord, let me have such a place; let me have such a house;
I must have such a purchase of Land; Oh that I had my health again, my wealth
again; not but that these prayers are lawful; but to seek these things in our
chief desires, so that if you had but these things, then you would be fully
pleased, and as quiet as Lambs: let who will look after the souls portion and
inheritance. Truly Friends, after all these things do the Gentiles seek; All
the men of the world gape for these things, and see an excellency in nothing
else; but these men that are grown up in Christianity, I tell you worldly men
prize them not so much, but they do as little; and they see, seek and pray for
those things which are of a more excellent nature, viz. things Divine and
Spiritual; these they find worth praying for.

These are those better things which Mary chose, which could never be taken
away: Luke 10. 42.
they see the vanity, the uncertainty, the vexation of the other things; but
the excellency, the certainty, the rarity, the delight of true spiritual
riches: Herein lies the pleasure, the satisfaction, the solace, the sufficiency
of men grown up into Christ: these are their riches, treasures, pleasures,
despising and disdaining all things else, save only for use and necessity, for
bodily sustenance, and wherewithal to relieve and do good to others; were it
not in this regard, they would despise them; for to be in love with them they
cannot; they see no such excellency in them, as to heap up riches, and to add
Land to Land, and House to House, as others do, and to eat up themselves with
care to get them; but if God please to bestow them, they look upon themselves
but as Stewards, to use them for necessity and charity, and not to set their
hearts upon them, knowing that if riches be not well used, they are a curse,
instead of being a blessing.

When they come to pray, they cannot tell what to say, nor what to ask, in
regard of temporal things; blessings (I had almost said) but they seldom are
so, to most men, except as I before said, they are only used for necessity,
and doing good: They dare not direct God what to do in such things; Mat. 11. 16.
but say with a holy resignation, even, Father as it seems good in thy sight;
and Thy will, not mine be done: He dare not assume a will to himself in any of
these things; they can but say at most, give us this day our daily bread, and
for that too they join Thy will be done; The chief end, and Aim of his prayer
is, submission to, and rejoicing in the will of God; and then whatever he has,
be it little or much, he knows that is a blessing, and otherwise they are more
crosses then blessings.

But O Beloved, I know I have herein displeased the most here, and I seem a
blasphemer, and a setter up of new gods; and I know, as David says, Psalm. 31.
12, 13, etc. Psa. 31. 12* 13. etc.
The slander, yea I will say, The blasphemy of the multitude: for as it is a
slander to me I weigh it not; but only as it is a blasphemy against a most
divine truth of God, Mat. 16. 18.
which yet the gates of Hell shall never prevail against; but as then David
says, I know and have heard the slander of the multitude; fear was on every
side, while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my
life: I was a reproach among mine enemies; yea, my familiar acquaintance spoke
against me, and I was a fear unto them, and they fled from me: I am forgotten
as a dead man out of mind, I am cast aside like a broken vessel: Ps* 31. 12.
But I trusted in thee, O Lord, and said, Thou art my God, my times are in thy
hand, O deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute
me: Deliver me; how? it follows in the next verses, Make thy face to shine upon
thy servant, and save me for thy mercies sake: If God make his face to shine
upon a man, it matters not what his trouble be, whether he deliver him or no,
nay, that is the best deliverance.

All this I have repeated before you, as being some bodies case else besides
David's, whom some here know, and I my self know better: And I know most of you
have taken notice of that in Acts 19. 23. Act. 18. 23
when the whole City was filled with the confusion of them that cried, Act. 17.
18, 19.
Verse 28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians; Paul seemed to steal away their
great Goddess Diana, and they cry out, What new Doctrine is this? what odd
fellow have we here? What will this Babbler say? what, to tell us we may not
pray for outward things? away with such a fellow from the earth, it is not fit
he should live: for he seems to rob us of our old god, whom we have
worshipped so long, and to be a setter forth of new gods; But have patience, if
ye can bear with me: I would have you rightly understand me, but I shall not
enter seriously now upon the point: but by the way, I would have you all know,
if God please, In brief,

1. I Affirm, from my soul, I never denied prayer for temporal blessings ( if I
did, Ps. 137. 6.
let my tongue cleave to my mouth) Pray for them, I say, for all temporal
blessings heartily; for I know, that even your Graces, Faith, Hope, etc. as
had, and done, and enjoyed in time, are temporal; but these tend and relate to
a better life, and to eternity, and so are to be prized and looked upon: But
for outward blessings, or temporal blessings, which you call Riches, Honor,
Houses, Lands, Wives, Children, Friends, Health, Beauty, Handsomeness, Long
life; etc. these are the things we differ about: and the doubt is, we know not
what is a BLESSING, and what is not; you call that a blessing oftentimes which
God and his truth calls a curse; and contrary, that a curse, which God calls a
blessing: Physic, though it be bitter and unpleasing to the palate, yet it is
for your health; when that which is sweet and pleasing to the disease, turns to
destruction.

I Will tell you in brief what is a blessing, and what is held forth by those promises
made to the children of Israel; indeed because they were children, they took
them literally; viz. All those Promises in the 28. Deuteronomy. 28.
of Deuteronomie, Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed in the field;
blessed in the fruit of the body, thy cattle and thy ground; blessed in thy
basket, and in thy store; blessed in thy going out and coming in, and in all
thou put thy hand unto: Let me now tell you, that which is held out to us
there in those outward blessings; The blessing is, viz. To enjoy God in all,
above all, and in the want of all: and when thou can say with David, when all
forsake thee: Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and I am safe, Psalm. 31.
16. and again Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Psa. 31. 16 Psa. 4. 6. 7
Many say, who will show us any good? but Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us; hereby thou hust made my heart more glad the^ they that
have corn and wine increased: I, well said, David, thou art right; there was a
man who knew the mystery of Deuteronomy. 28. he knew what a blessing was indeed.

2. I affirm, I never denied children to do as children; they may and must do
so, because they are weak, and cannot go; let them have Gocarts, and Holdbies,
we hope they will come to be men in time, and then they will forsake all those
things, in affection always, and in action too, except it be (as I before
said) for necessity and charity: But if they will remain always weak, and for
all the means and helps they have, yet thrive not, I say in such cases, our
cost and labor is ill bestowed: And sometimes, some children are so froward to
those that would use extraordinary means to strengthen their limbs, that they
may be out of hand, that they will fight and kick with those that would do them
good: And our Saviors counsel is, Mat. 7. 6.
Cast not your pearls before swine, le^t they turn again* and all to rent you.
I say again, some of the Servants of God have found it so: and for goodwil,
freeness and faithfulness, and not keeping back any part of Gods counsel, have
been ill-rewarded, rent and torn for their faithful counsel: and it has
therefore been the Serpentine Wisdom of others, to hide their talent in a
napkin, that so they might avoid the cross of Christ, and sleep in a whole Skin.

I remember a speech of R. Moses More Nevochim, part 3. chap. 34. Legem
accommodatam esse ad totam gentem communiter, non ad singulos; the Law is
fitted for the people in general, for all the Nation, and not for particular
persons only: There was and is many a good man, who wants those outward things,
when those that are evil have them in abundance, as well then as now: And shall
we then say and conclude, the word or promises are not true? no, God forbid,
Heaven and earth shall pass away before one tittle of his word shall fail, Mat.
5. Mat. 5. 18.
Therefore, I say, they in the old Testament, and also we now, mistake, because
by Moses was promised the Kingdom, and the Land flowing with milk and honey,
temporal peace, multitude of children, bodily health; these were in themselves
temporal blessings; but they figured out spiritual, because these were promised
but to the old man, under the old Law; and those that look no farther now under
the Gospel, what are they better then the old Jews, and the CHILDREN of Israel?

3. I affirm, I have always holden it a dangerous thing (especially of late
years) to press God with particulars of temporal things, as of health, wealth,
honor, etc. but to leave all those things to the will of God, walking on in
our duties and calling, and leave the success to him: But while we are in our
childish condition, we are still telling God in this regard, what he shall do
for us, and how he shall govern the world, and when we would have fair weather,
and when rain, and when a fair wind, and so every man would serve his own turn;
and then I pray thee, if thy will be done, who shall take care of thy
neighbor? it is no matter, though thousands miscarry and fail of those things;
so thou have them it matters not: What kind of prayers (do you think) are
these? do thou in thy self think, God were wise if he should answer thy
prayers? that which is for thee (as thou think) is against multitudes of
others, and who shall seek their good? that wind that serves thy design, is as
much opposite for others: And therefore my advice is, be very tender how you
press the infinite wisdom of the Almighty; Who when he will bless, he will turn
crosses and evil things (as thou esteemest them) to be the greatest blessings;
and therefore let the Almighty Alone in governing the Heavens and the Earth, by
his power and wisdom; he has upheld, supported, preserved and ordered the
heavens and the earth to our knowledge, almost these six thousand years well
enough, and I Will warrant thee he will do it still, without thy care or
direction: Who shall teach him knoledge? and, Isa. 40. 13.
Who shall show him the way of understanding? or being his Counselor, has
taught him?

I remember a speech of Bernard, Long a Deoest animus qui in oratione, etc.
That mind is far from God or Heaven, which in prayer is full of earthly
requests: And I say, for the most part, men are mistaken both in the nature and
end of prayer, which is first to ask things according to the will of God, and
our end ought to be God, and the things of God, in which our happiness is
involved.

4. I affirm, it is certainly more excellent to seek the Kingdom of heaven and
the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. ult.
then to trouble God and our selves with wordly requests: I say still,
distingue tempora, distinguish of seasons: there is a time when we may take
more liberty, because we know no better, and we think it a great deal of
Religion, that we will acknowledge God, and will come to him for temporal
blessings: but as the Apostle says, Behold, I show you a more excellent way; 1
Cor. 12. 31.
covet after the best gifts: Then does God best accept thy prayer, when thou
only seek him for himself, and not when thou seek any other thing by or
through him: this will declare what thou love him for, whether for thy self
or himself: what thou most love, what thou most earnestly prayest for, and
what thou most weepest for, when wanting that thou most lovedst when thou had
it: but to all true believers, both in this, as in all thinigs, God is their
end, their chief love, etc. and therefore it is him they seek to enjoy above all
things; Although it be with the loss of all things, Him they esteem Portion
enough.

And to conclude, I affirm, as it is said of Abishai, 2 Samuel 23. 19 2 Samuel 23.
19.
. there were three most honorable among the thirty, but Abishai was the most
honorable of the three; therefore they chose him their Captain: And so say I,
prayer is honorable in its time and season, and seeking for temporal
blessings, according to the will of God, but more honorable, in seeking graces
to adot^ the soul and inward man: but when in prayer we seek God for himself,
having so much love to him, such strong desires after him, that we forget and
lose our selves, and mind only him as our chief end: then say I, let Abishai,
let That Prayer be Captain; for that has done the most honorable of all the
chosen Worthies, the other have done worthily, but this is the more Honorable
of all the three: for if we had time we might show you that there can no prayer
do more worthily then this; for it answers first to the Lords Prayer, Mat. 6.
17. Secondly to Christ's Prayer, immediately before he suffered, John 17.
Self-denialls in his resignation to the will of his Father, and love to his
Flock, Disciples and Members; A most ravishing prayer, and such a prayer as no
man ever prayed; but time will not suffer me now to open any thing about it.
Thirdly, this prayer is most agreeable to the example of the Apostles: who
under-valued all the world to enjoy the life of Christ, insomuch that they
esteemed his Cross their Throne, and his sufferings their Crown. So that by all
this we have said, you may examine your prayers, of what excellency they be;
consider the matter and end of your prayers, whether they be of Flesh or
spirit; whether in them you seek God or your selves: And with the words of the
Apostle Romans 7. 6. I conclude all, Romans 7. 6.
for this time, seeing God has put it into your heart to seek him and to
worship him, Let it not be in the Oldness of the Letter, but in the Newness of
the Spirit. So be it.

THE MYSTERY, OR THE LIFE and MARROW OF THE SCRIPTURES. An Exposition on
Exodus 3. the Six first Verses.

EXODUS 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Now Moses kept the flock of Iethro his father in
Law, the Priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the backside of the desert,
and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb. And the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, and he looked,
and behold the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses
said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not
burnt, etc.
Delivered at a Private Meeting at Kensigton, being in Two Sermons.
THis Chapter contains one of the greatest miracles that the Scripture affords;
namely, That Moses, a plain shepherd, should attempt to bring six hundred
thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty fighting men, Number. 1.
46. Numb. 1. 46.
beside women and children, and young men, besides the TRIBE of LEVI, from
under the bondage of Pharaoh, a great and a mighty King, much less think to
bring it about; or else having done it, he might have pursued after them to
slay them all, which he did, but was not able to prevail, but was drowned in
the sea, He and all his Host, all which was wonderful; and then wonderful in
regard of the people themselves, that they should follow an odd man, who led
them no man knew whither, nor what way they should go, nor where they should
rest and sit down: but as the Apostle Paul says concerning his Gospel, Gal. 1.
22.
He received it not from men* nor by men, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ: So Moses here had not his authority from men, nor by men, but only
from the Lord immediately; as in this Chapter you may see his Commission and
what Authority he had to bring them out of Egypt. And the Almighty hand of the
Lord Acting All.

But that I may not stand long in the History, but come to something profitable
to us; I may say of this History, as one of the Fathers says concerning Nabals
churlish practice, It is old in time, but rife in practice: So may I say most
truly of Moses bringing the children of Israel out of Egypt, it is old in the
History, Long once this time was, but it is ever in Use; Every day is this
History fulfilled, and the children of Israel are daily brought out of Egypt by
a strong and a mighty hand; for whatever was then done, was done in Types and
Figures. Beloved, this (I hope) is not strange to you, for the Apostle Paul
reciting some of these Actions, says plainly 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor 10.
that they were but Figures to teach us; and applies many of the passages: and
what the Apostle says of some of them, I may be bold by the same spirit to say
of the whole, that they were all done in Figures.

But little does any man here think, that he is in Egypt, and that he Toils
under Pharaoh, and that Pharaohs Taskmasters use them roughly, and abuse them:
little do they think that they are Brick-makers: when we are yet in the Kingdom
of darkness, Ephesians. 2. 2
and are governed by the Prince of darkness, by the Prince that rules in the
air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience; what do you
think, are we not then worser then slaves under Pharaoh in Egypt, I, And a more
real slavery then the Israelites underwent? and are we not then employed in his
work, and in making Brick* and Mortar to raise Temples, to set up Antichrist in
to worship, serve and adore, as does all the world? And Truly, Every one here
present does the same: But he that will marry Achsah, Calebs daughter, as I had
occasion to show you upon that Text, he must smite Kiriathsepher, the City of
the Letter. The Letter of Scripture reveals nothing which will be saving to us,
Joshua 15 15, 26.
it is the Spirit that must do us good; to him shall be given Achsah, which by
interpretation is, The Rending of the Vail: As it was at our Saviors Passiou:
so, to this man The Vail of the Temple shall be rent, Mark 15. 38.
from the Top to the Bottom; And he shall Have the Secrets, and See the Secrets
of God Almighty: but this He cannot have, unless he strike the Letter, and
smite the waters, and divide them, else there is no word of God for us, for the
word lies hid, and no man finds it, Exo. 14. 16.
but he only that smites Kiriathsepher, The City of the Letter, that it may be
to him Debir, [The Word] for that City (as I then told you) out of Joshua 15.
15, 16. Josh. 15. 15, 16.
before it was smitten by Othinel, That is, The Lords sit time or opportunity
(who took the City) it was called Kiriathsepher, but being once Smitten, then
it was Debir, and not before: So, if we rest in the Letter of the Word, either
of the old or new Testaments, we shall never come to make it Debir to us, it is
still the words of a book sealed up to us, and resting therein, the letter in
stead of saving us, it will destroy us: for so says the Apostle, The Letter
kills, 1 Cor. 3. 6
but the Spirit gives life: if we rest in the Letter, and think that, Or
external observations or obedience thereunto, will save us, we are deceived,
without caring and endeavoring to get that word which lasts for ever: the
history lasts not for ever; those things then done, are done and past, but that
very word lasts for ever (i. e.) is still in doing, and concerns as much every
time, every age, sex and degree, as well as them: this is the internal sense we
must seek for, that by it we may live for ever: Your fathers have eaten manna,
Joh. 6. 58.
and are dead; I am the true bread: so we must not rest in Manna, but look for
true bread, true food: thousands have perished by resting in the Letter; but
blessed are they that shall taste of this heavenly manna; this is meat indeed,
and drink indeed, Bread from heaven, that bread of life, ch Christ speaks of
Ioh. 6. Beloved, all other knowledge, let it be never so esteemed in the world,
by whomsoever, Perishes a man if he Rest therein: As if I give a Boy Oysters,
and tell him there is meat that will nourish him; but if he know not how to
open the shell, but only licks the outside of the shell, and he thereby not
coming at the meat, it starves him: did not I say true, when I told him, There
was meat to feed him? and do I not say true likewise, in saying, the Oyster
killed him? for the shell killed him, because he could not come at the
nourishment for the shell: in the same sense, The Word, though it be full to
the brim of precious liquor, and Heavenly dainties, yet if a man be taken up in
the outside, in the shell of the word, and never crack the shell, very fitly
may the Holy Ghost say, The Letter kills; Nay, he that goes no further, 2 Cor.
3. 6
and rests on that, goes no further, sees no more then the very Devils: for
they (by long custom and experience) have gotten whatever can be known in the
history, far beyond any man upon earth.

And therefore he whose faith has brought him no farther then to believe in an
external Christ, in that Christ that was born at Bethlehem, and there brought
up, and afterward wrought miracles, and was crucified, dead and buried, and
rose again, etc. This man, The Letter kills him; he knows no more, nay not so
much as the Devils themselves know and believe; nay, I say, herein the Devils
outstrip thee; the Apostle Paul was so far from accounting this any thing, that
he slights the knowing any man after the slesh; 2 Cor. 5. 16.
Henceforth know we no man, says he, after the flesh; no, though we had known
Christ, yet henceforth know we him no more: insomuch, 1 Cor. 5. 16.
that if he had known and seen exactly what Christ did, what he said, how he
lived, how he dyed, and how he rose again, all is nothing; henceforth we will
know him no more after this manner; No, no, but let me know all his actions,
his death, his life, his miracles, his passion, his resurrection, all within
me; let me know and experiment them in my self: if we know him thus, this is
knowledge worth prizing indeed, this is worth Boasting of, as 2 Cor. 5. 16. 2
Cor. 5. 16.
Christ died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again: and again, Col. 3.
1. Col. 3. 1.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above: This is that we
should labor to find, Christ's death, and Christ's life in us, to see if Christ
has done all his actions (not only among the Jews at Jerusalem) other then
spiritually, but in us, I must find that he has been born and brought up in
me, that he has put all the Doctors to silence within me, that he has wrought
all his miracles in me, opened my eyes* as he did then open the eyes of the
blind; Luke 2. 46.
open my ears, as he did then; so opening my lips, that my mouth may show forth
his praise; And as he cast out then, both dumb and deaf Devils, That there are
the same to cast out in us.

If these actions be thus done in thee, as verily as ever Christ did any of
these actions in the flesh; if this knowledge and this experience be fixed in
your minds, and you feel the power thereof in your hearts, then you have
cracked The Shell, you have gotten the Marrow, the Fatness of the word. Yet, for
all this we must not do with the Letter, as I then told you, because it is the
shell, as men usually do with the shells of Oysters, or of Eggs; Having once
the Meat, throw away the Shells; no, no, for they are the means to bring the
Word to us; for to us, because of our weakness, cannot this word be conveyed
without The shell, and therefore our merciful God has bin pleased to convey it
to us in earthen vessels, and under Earthen resemblances, that so we might hear
it, understand and receive it.

If we look upon it, as it runs in black and white letters, it is true; Its a
Lofty Majestical kind of writing, That carries Majesty and Authority in it,
and the proof is in it self; Whereas other Writers are fain to bring proofs and
witnesses of the truth of that they write, whilst this carries proof and
Authority in it self; and at the best, it is no more: but he that can get
within it, He that can get into the midst of the burning bush, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
He shall see Such spirit and life, That eye has not seen, ear heard, nor ever
entered into man's heart to consider: In short, he shall know what it is to marry
Achsah, To have the vail rent; and what it is to enter into the Holiest of All.

And so of this history, concerning Moses bringing Israel out of Egypt, To see
what slavery they were in, and how Pharaohs Taskmasters beat them, and
increased their bondage, taking away their straw and making them Toil harder
and harder, Exo. 1. 12.
and yet the more they oppressed them, the more they increased: I say, All
this, and the rest, in the history, runs High and Majestically, and that is the
best you can say of it; but he that through the history, shall see that the
History was not written barely for a history, but mainly and chiefly, for us;
He shall see there is therein contained an eternal LIVING SENSE: He that looks
within himself, shall find all verified in himself: And not only This
Scripture, but the whole Scripture, All the five Books of Moses, Joshua, the
Kings, and all the battles of the Kings, and so throughout; Luke 4. 21.
that whatever part of Scripture he shall read, he shall be able to say and
feel experimentally, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; this
day is this Scriptare accomplished in me; for the substance of all those
histories throughout, is verified to this day, and shall be to the worlds end:
It is no matter what other Pharaoh there was, what Typical Pharaoh there was,
so we have found the True Pharaoh; Nay it were no matter then, though we had
never heard of that Pharaoh, for that Pharaoh does but Type out unto us what
the Spiritual Pharaoh is; How he labors to strengthen and advance himself in
his Kingdom, and if any offer to go out from him, he will lay heavy burdens
upon them, He will make them groan under service, insomuch that their cry shall
come up before the Lord; And if they do get out from him by strong hand, it is
By Miracles and wonders, and he will be sure to pursue them, till he himself be
quite overthrown in the midst of the Sea; and so he that sought for honor and
glory in overcoming them, Exo. 14. 17.
the Lord shall get himself a name on that Pharaoh, and on all his Host.

And, That we may come to the history in particular, concerning bringing Israel
out of Egypt.

There be three principal things in the Chapter. 1. The Preparation before this
vision, That Moses saw. 2. The vision it self, the bush burned, and was not
consumed. 3. The effect That followed, of the vision, viz. Moses his Commission
to Pharaoh, To deliver Israel.


1. For the Preparation to the vision; that is in the first verse, Moses kept
the flock of Iethro his father in Law, and he led the flock to the backside of
the desert, etc. Moses, it is testified of him in the Acts, that he was a man,
mighty in all the learning of the Egyptians, Act. 7. 23.
for being brought up as a Kings Son, he wanted for no teaching in the Kingdom,
For the Egyptians had the chief learning of the world; For I must tell you, We
and all Antiquity are beholding to the Egyptians for all their and our chief
learning in natural things.

Now, we must labor to see, in all the words of God, Mat. 13. 34.
that the Truth, and the word of God it self, is hid and coucht under mighty
parables; for without a parable spoke he nothing unto them; and indeed without
parables can we not have the truth: As we cannot have meat without excrements;
for in all the meat we eat, there is abundance of excrement, to a very little
nourishment; the greatest part, though never so refined and decocted, is
excrement: And so I say of the Letter, the Letter compared with the Spirit is
but the Shel, the Excrement, the outward Husk of the word, and we have a great
deal of excrement and Husk and Shell (that does us no good at all) to a very
little meat; for you know excrement does not nourish at all; that comes away
again, and goes into the draught, as our Savior says; yet we may not abhor
nor undervalue the Excrement of the Word, because it is Excrement: for we
cannot have the meat thereof, without Excrements; for that which is Excrement,
does but serve to convey the nourishment into the body: God could not possibly
speak to us, nor convey his word but by the Excrement of the Letter, as he has
done: Something must be presented to our eyes and ears externally, that we may
conceive what is done internally; for if Almighty God should have spoken as he
would have spoken, we should not have been able to have heard him, for he
should have quite undone our understanding.

As, the Sun shines to us, and gives us light at such a distance, and through
so many elements, air, and clouds, and Mereors, and many such interruptions, so
many thousand miles of distance, which keeps his own perfect and full luster,
glory and brightness from us; for if it should not do so, we should be quite
blinded, and our sight destroyed by it: for we have much ado, the
strongest-sighed man that is, to behold and look upon the Sun at that distance
as it is; what should we do then if these things, and such a distance
interposed not themselves between our sight and the Sun? So if our great and
Almighty God should speak to us in a spiritual way, and as himself would speak,
if he should shine into us in the least part of his own splendour and glory, all
our sights, all our apprehensions of him, would be quite put out; he would
utterly destroy our sight, and we should be quite swallowed up; for we cannot
possibly see God, nor hear God, but only in that way that he has already
spoken to us.

But happy is that man, who gets not the excrement, but the nourishment of the
Scriptures; And I pray you for all this which I have said, To magnify the
Spirit above the Letter, let us be so far from throwing away the Letter, that
you rather infinitely bless God for it, and be very thankful to him, that he
has so far condescended to stoop so low to our weak capacities, that we may
come as we are able, to receive the knowledge of him, who is our happiness, and
eternal life: O praise his infinite goodness for ever, that the Mighty, Strong,
Infinite, Wise Creator, has been pleased so far to abase himself, as to deal
with us as with Babes, for we are no better; That HE the Mighty Jehovah is
become weak to the weak, that he has made himself a Babe to us Babes: Oh! be
amazed and astonished at it for ever, and fall down continually before his
footstool with all trembling and fear. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
who was but a man, tells the Corinthians, that he could not speak unto them as
spiritual men: how then could God himself speak to them as spiritual, or they
to bear His words? If we cannot bear the words of a weak frail man, how is it
possible to bear the words of God Himself?

As the Poets fain of their God Jupiter, and his Wife Juno; a certain woman
desiring of Juno that she might but lie with Jupiter in all his glory and
majesty; she answered, O woman! thou have asked thine own destruction; but she
persisting in her desire, and having her request granted, presuming upon her
own strength: And as soon as ever Jupiter drew near, she was presently made in
to powder; Showing thereby, thus much unto the people, that the true God was
infinite, and incomprehensible; For let me tell you, they intended as much, as
ignorant as you conceive them to be, though to the common people they spoke
after this manner, Covertly, by similitudes and comparisons; For, there was not
one of all the learned, but knew that such a One must the true God be; Neither
let us be so simple as to think, that they thought these to be Gods; Or that
their Gods and Goddesses were so wicked as to be Adulterers, or the like; They
were not so sottish; but they hid and couched the Truth under these shadows: So
God Almighty, even Our God, who is the true God, if he should speak unto us, as
he is in himself, what creature could stand before him? he would speak all the
world to powder, to nothing; for if he had pleased, he could have spoke All
Truth in One Word, but where had been Auditors to have heard or understood that
word?

As when the people murmured against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 3.
and were divided against them, and for them, They thought that all the people
of God were holy, and Moses and Aaron took too much upon them, and God could
speak by them, as well as by Moses and Aaron; Exodus 16. 19.
but as soon as God began to show himself in his power and majesty, they all
trembled and were not able to stand before him; and again, when the people
thought they would go up to the mountain as well as Moses: Well, says Moses,
if ye will, do; but as soon they drew near to the foot of the mountain, and the
storms began but to arise. and they heard the thunder, and the lightnings, and
the terrible noise, and the trumpets sounding louder and louder, then they
began to tremble and fear, Genesis 19. 16.
and prayed that God would not speak unto them; lest we dye, said they; but let
Moses speak to us, for we can Hear, Him.

Brethren, know this for an undeniable truth, that in Gods word, there is such
a depth of light, and of glory, Such ravishing profoundness, That will serve
all the men that ever were, are, and shall be, yea all the Divines and People
of God through all generations, nay and add to them all the Angels in heaven,
to pry, and dive into, through all eternity, and yet shall never be able to
find out the bottom, and the Vast, stupendous depth thereof: But (as I say)
God is pleased for our capacities, to give us these things, hid under a vail;
That he may give us The Norishment, He is feign to give us with it the
Excrement, which he would not do, if we could receive the Nutriment alone. For
says the Apostle, Till this day, while Moses is read, they have still the vail
over their heart; In the outside of the Letter, you see nothing but the Vail of
Gods word; 2 Cor. 3. 15.
and the truth is, concerning some, God has commanded, Make their eyes heavy,
and their ears dull, Isa. 6. 10.
lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them: that in seeing they
may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand: That
is, And I will be bold to give the interpretation, That seeing the Letter, they
may not see the Life; that hearing the words, they may not understand the
Living sense.

Having premised this, let us now come and take inpieces some part of these
words nowread, that we may come to eat of the bread of life, and of the hidden
Manna, that is as yet fast locked up; and except God open our hearts, as he did
the heart of Lydia, it is and will still be A Book Sealed up, to us. Act. 16. 14


And Moses kept the sheep of Iethro his father in Law, the Priest of Midian and
he led the stock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of
God, even to Horeb: What may be the meaning, that the Holy Ghost does describe
Moses to be a Sheep-keeper, setting down so expressly that particular; and still
all the Patriarchs are described to be Sheep-keepers; certainly there is
something to be observed and learned from Shepherds, because Shepherds are
oftener mentioned then husbandmen, and not only the men preferred before them,
but all their actions also are preferred before the others. Cain was a
Husbandman, Abel was a Sheepkeeper, they both offered sacrifice, one of his
cattle, the other of his ground, but the Shepherds offering was preferred
before the Husbandmans: and so all the Patriarchs are commended for being
Shepherds, Psalm. 78. 71.
and following that trade: and David he followed the Ewes great with young, and
from that employment was taken to feed Gods people, and to be King over them, 2 Samuel 7. 8.
2 Samuel 7. 8. I took thee from the Sheepcoat, to be Ruler over my people Israel.

Well, we need not to instance any further; What may be the meaning of the Holy
Ghost in all this? in one word I will tell you what a Shepherd is; A Shepherd
is one that lives merely and most properly by the providence and blessing of
God upon his Trade; for they fructify and increase only upon Gods will,
blessing, and providence: He acts not much, but resigns up his will, and all he
has to God only, and depends altogether upon that; but a husbandman is he,
who with his expectation of Gods blessing, joins his own endeavors, plowing,
sowing, reaping, changing his ground, rising early, and going to bed late;
Well, I pray is there any hurt in all this? No, I forbid them not to do so, but
this I say; a Shepherds life is preferred with God far before a Husbandmans,
because, he that has given up all to God, all that ever he can do, or say, or
think his whole man is Resigned to God, confessing that they are nothing, that
they can do nothing, and from their very souls acknowledge, (and not in words
only;) they have no wit, no reason, no will, no understanding, their whole
man, all that they are or can do, is wholly resigned up to God, and his will;
Nor will they join any of their works with Gods, but let God act all do all,
think all, speak all in them.

This is the life of a true Shepherd, who has his eye single, on God, and
looks to him in every thing; let him increase his stock, or decrease it, he is
all one, he is nothing grieved at the one, nor lifted up with the other,
because he accounts nothing he has his own, Nor does he think, That he lives
by his own taking care, or by his own industry, but depends merely on the
blessings of God, and the works of nature: but the other, They moil and Toil
themselves, They must do something; and this ye cannot beat out of them; they
must join their wits and their doings with Gods, and do not ascribe all to God,
while they do it, As do the other; And therefore Shepherds are accepted with
God far before Husbandmen; the one does think verily his own care and industry
is the staff of his life, They cannot deny all, give up all that they are and
can do; They cannot but think (say what ye will) but they have some power, some
wisdom, some understanding, some ability to bring about their actions; but the
other, The truly Resigned man, he sees and acknowledges as the truth is, Ps.
62. 18.
That God alone does All, And that His is all the power, all the might, all the
wisdom, and he has nothing at all; he will not by any means obscure or darken
Gods power, nor his wisdom, nor his praise, as the Husbandman does; Though
perhaps they may say (in words) it is their endeavors, and the blessing of God
thereupon: and then they think they have made up all; when indeed in their
hearts, in their thoughts, and in their practices they do not give God his
praise and glory: but sacrifice to their own nets, to their own wisdom, power
and parts. And in effectwith them, It Is MAN al^n^ does All.

You may see then, how this mighty truth is hid under a mystery, and is couched
in two or three words: how Moses does but (as it were) by the way, glance at it
by the by; and if God open your eyes, you may see how this secret warp and woof
runs through this Web: So this Mystery runs secretly along through the whole
Scriptures unseen.

And take notice of this, that above all men, the Egyptians cannot endure this
kind of men and such as live this kind of life; Genesis 42. 33.
for says the Holy Ghost, Shepherds were an abomination to the Egyptians; It
is a life so contrary to them, that they hate them deadly, and esteem them, The
silliest, and ridiculousest, and most improvident people in the word; But it
matters not, God prefers them sbove All kind of men, insomuch that he is
pleased to style himself The God of shepherds, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob very often, because they were these kind of
Shepherds; and most certainly to these men, God ever did and ever will, speak
most familiarly, and to these only; he will to Shepherds reveal himself, and
His Secrets, above all the men in the world; the other are too much buried in
themselves, and their own ways, to have God show them any of his secrets.

Let us then, learn to be Shepherds rather then Husbandmen, if we desire to be
acquainted with God; Luke 10. 42.
for it was Mary whom Christ commends who had chosen the better part which could
never be taken from her. And not Martha, who is troubled about many things;
Although he does not discommend, or altogether condemn Martha; for, such things
must be done; yet know this, Mary has chosen the better part, which shall
never be taken from her: Mary is far to be preferred before Martha, because she
yields and resigns up all, and sits attentively at Christ's feet, while Martha
runs up and down, is troubled how to entertain Christ externally, and how to
bring the world about, she thinks she must mingle her own endeavors, and her
discretion, with Gods blessing; And without question, Ibid.
Martha was offended with Mary: Verse. 40.
These kind of men laugh and deride at those that have given up their wills
and lives to Christ after this manner, To be taught of him, because they are
more slack, and are not altogether so busy and eager as they are (as they
conceive.) But give me leave, and see in all the Scripture, How many Prophets
and Patriarchs God has chosen out of these men, and still preferred them to
draw nearest to himself; consider of it seriously, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. We go on.

And he led his flocks to the back side of the desert, to the Mountain of God,
even to Horeb, and the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire,
etc. But why must Moses come to the backside of a desert, before God would
appear to him? even to teach us thus much, That till a man has for saken all
the world, all the Towns, Houses, Dwellings, Riches, Honors, Glories, etc. All
the hurryings of the world, and tumblings up and down, and is come into a Lone
and silent Desert, where all things have forsaken him, and he them; until then,
we can never find Jesus Christ (at least forsaken them All, in affection) I
say, God will never show himself to any man familiarly till then: He that comes
to Christ with his child in his hand, or with his wife in his hand, or with
father or mother, or riches, or credit, or the like: Christ will hide himself
from such a man: You will think this strange, but you know what our Savior
says, (...)
He that for sakes not all, father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
houses, (...)
and lands, and all for my name sake, he is not worthy of me: that is, he that
has not resigned up the love of father, and mother, and wife, and children,
for the love of Christ, and loves Jesus Christ with all his mind, and with all
his might, (...)
and with all his strength: So that you have willingly and gladly let go out of
your eye, and out of your desires, all manner of comforts and delightful pomps
of the world and all the rare buildings and contentments, and whatever the
world esteems excellent, or can afford: so that you have forsaken all, and are
gotten into the desert, retired from all contents but God himself; There God
will reveal himself to you, and never before: for if you love any thing
whatsoever in the first place ye love not God, Mat. 22. 37.
nor Jesus Christ with all your heart, mind and strength; for if All were set
upon him, where would there be any to spare to set upon any creature? you know
Elias must travel forty days into the wilderness, then God revealed himself to
him. 1 King, 17. 6.


Beloved, so long as your affections run after any thing, after any one lust,
we cannot hearken to God Almighty: in such a case, if a man should speak unto
you with the wisdom of of Solomon, nay, if God himself should speak unto you
the very words of Spirit and Life, it were impossible any man should hearken to
him; for our lusts, so long as they live and rule, make such a clamor, and such
a noise within us, that God cannot be heard; for this lust cries, I would be
beloved; another cries, I would be honored; another, I would be rich; another,
I would have my health, etc. therefore before ever we can hear God speak, al
these lusts must be cast out silenced: put all the minstrels out of doors, (...)
5. 40.
and let Christ and his attendants enter al^he, that so all those lusts which
make such a noise in^us, and draw the soul another way, may be put to silence:
what says Job? I heard a voice in silence: that is, when every thing was
silent in the soul, Job 4. 16.
then Job heard a voice; for be assured, our lusts cry louder, and make more
noise in the soul, then all the trumpets in the world can do, to deaf the ears
of the body; nay all the Artillery in the world, were they all discharged
together at one clap, could not more deaf the ears of our bodies, then the
clamourings of lusts in the soul, deaf the ears thereof: so that you see a man
must go into the silent desert, or else God cannot be heard speak; for it is
the whole care of the natural and old man, how he may be pleased, which way he
may satisfy his unruly desires, how he may be rich or honored, etc. though
not one of you by taking care can add one cubit unto his stature: Mat. 5. 17.
Beloved, which of you by all your care, and pains and rising early, can add
the least tittle, or the least jot unto his health, or wealth, or honor, or
credit in any thing? no not one hairs breadth? but all you have, be it little
or much, it is merely by the will and providence, and special ordering of God
alone: thy taking thought cannot add one whit, one jot to thy heap, to thy
wealth to thy credit; Not thy not taking thought, cannot diminish one jot.

But I know flesh and blood can never believe this though God himself has
spoken it; and till our eyes be opened by him, these things are to us, As a
fountain sealed; Cant. 4. 12
or as a garden walled about; ye cannot believe them, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
because they are spiritually discerned, they are mere riddles and Nonsense,
The ridiculousest things that your ears can hear: Mat. 6. 24, etc.
as when our Savior, Mat. 6. the latter end, dehorts from serving of Mammon;
for if they do serve it, they cannot serve God, For who can serve two Masters?
but seek first the Kingdom of heaven, and all other things shall be added: take
no thought for your life, what to eat, or drink, or put on: And he there sends
Man, a reasonable creature, to learn of the fowls of the Air, who neither sow,
nor reap, not gather into barns, yet our heavenly Father feeds them: And then
sends them to the Lilies of the field, Luke 12. 27.
to see how they grow, which neither Toil, nor spin; yet Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these: And tells us, this caring and taking
thought is not for Christians; for that is the way of the Gentiles who know not
God. After All these things do the Gentiles seek.

But see, Beloved, and it may be some of you may be convinced too, what a
boundless truth Moses has here couched under two or three words; that which he
does but only glance at and glide by; take notice what a little touch he gives
at such a mass of Endless and unconceivable truth: When you have forsaken, (in
one word,) your selves, that is, all that your eyes can see, or your ears can
hear* or your heart can think, and stripped your selves of all stark naked, then
you may look to find God and to see Him as he is in himself, and consequently
truth, but not before. And truly this work being done in the soul, there is
such a miracle wrought, as none but only the finger of God could do: He that
thinks ever by his own power to bring it about, is utterly deceived*

This is a great question now adays, Whether miracles be ceased now, or no? But
it shows that such men have little experience of these Divine, sublime truths:
It is a most foolish, ridiculous question to him who enjoys these things; for
he sees there are as great miracles done now every day, as ever was done since
the world stood; but the fault is in us, we see them not, our eyes are blinded
that we can see no miracles; Oh! were they but open, we should see such
miracles as would make all the understandings of Men and Angels stand amazed,
and a thousand times greater then ever any that Christ did in the flesh.

And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in the midst of a burning bush;
Ver. 2.
and behold, the bush burned, and was not consumed. In these bare literal
words, there is a mighty miracle; yet there is hid in them a miracle far
transcending this outward miracle; there is couched in them an abstruse, hidden
sense: One would wonder to what purpose God should show such a miracle of this
nature, A burning bush, and not consumed: What did this concern the work God
Almighty was about, namely, to bring the Israelites from under Pharaohs
bondage, and grievous slavery? Yet it being opened and unfolded, you may see
how fit it was every way, upon this occasion.

As for instance, Genesis 28. 16.
That of Jacobs vision. Jacob, when he was to leave his Fathers house, and
forsake all his kindred, and friends, never looking to see them again; and he
was to walk a long tedious way, and un-inhabited, as the world was in those
times; he having many sad thoughts, and knew not what he should do, nor what
should befall him, having gone one days journey; and meeting with no lodging
at night, but weary as he was, lay down in the open field; and having nothing
to lay his head on, he gathered a heap of stones, and laid his head on them (a
hard pillow, as you may well think) yet at last (it should seem) fell asleep,
and dreamed such a dream as never was dreamed on a pillow of Down: And his
dream was, Genesis 28. 12.
he saw a Ladder reach from Earth to Heaven, and God himself stood at the top
of the Ladder, and the Angels of God were ascending and descending on it: But,
as I said of this vision to Moses, What was all this to Jacob? this seems not
suitable to his necessity at that time. One would think, that if God had
appeared to him, and said, Jacob, I will be with thee, I will provide for thee;
take no thought, I will be thy God, thou shall want for nothing; though thou
have forsaken Father, and Mother, and all, yet fear not, I will be all in all
to thee. This, or else somewhat to this purpose, had been more fit for Jacobs
condition.

Beloved, Whatever it seems to be in the History, in the Mystery it was the
suitablest, the fittest, the seasonablest vision that could possibly have been
revealed to him: namely, to let Jacob see, that while all the Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, which are Gods Angels, or Messengers, and do his will, and
all go of his errands, He himself holds the Ladder at the top; they all come
from him, and they all return to him again: And not only so, but he being their
essence, their being, their life, their motion, they are all moved and actuated
by him Himself; there is not one Creature, Psalm. 103. 21.
not one of these Angels or Messengers, but does his will; and he is with them,
in what part of the Ladder soever they are; if they be in the middle, or
bottom, or at the top, yet they are not absent from him, but he rules and
guides them all to do his work which he appoints them to do. Now, my Brethren,
this being fixed in Jacobs mind, that every Creature was formed, actuated and
moved by God himself; and that not any one of them could do any thing to him,
nor he could want nothing, but a supply was at hand, because he commanded it,
because he was so near it, he was in it: This was that which comforted Jacob in
all his journey, That whatever he met withal, or wheresoever he was, he still
had recourse to what his vision taught him.

And so likewise in this vision to Moses, it was the fittest that could have
been showed him upon this occasion, and in this business, which he was to go
upon. Now you may observe three kinds of Miracles, to three several divisions
of persons.

1. To Moses, and that only this One, the bush burned, and was not consumed:
and this was sufficient to work upon Moses, and to encourage him to his work.
But,

2. The Israelites, they will not believe for one miracle, but they must have
three miracles. But,

3. The Egyptians, ten miracles would not work upon them; something is included
in this: For Moses being a man Near God, being a Shepherd already, he had in
part resigned up himself to God, and therefore one miracle was enough to make
him believe; for as soon as ever he saw it, and God called unto him, and said,
Moses, Moses, he presently answers Gods call, Here am I Lord: but Israel being
further off from God, Ver. 4.
having been long in Egypt, they were so well accustomed there, and also to
their slavery, that they had as live remain there still as depart; therefore
before they could be persuaded to Obey, and follow Moses, there must be three
miracles wrought. 1. Moses threw down his Rod, Exodus 4. 3.
and it became a Serpent; then he took it up by the tail, and it became a Rod
again. 2. He put his hand into his bosom, Ver. 7.
and pulling it out, it became leprous; and putting in his hand again, and
pulling it out, it became as his other flesh. 3. Says God, If they will not
believe for the first, nor for the second miracle, for the third they shall
believe: Take up of the water of the brook, Ver. 9.
and pour it on the ground, and it shall turn into blood: These being further
removed from God, God did not live in them, he was exalted in them, as he was
in Moses, but was as dead and buried in them, and to them.

But ten, and ten to that, can never work upon the Egyptians: Those that will
live and die Egyptians, all the miracles in the world can never make them
believe: Moses, he said at once, Lord, here I am; he was ready to obey God; and
the Israelites, they answered at three times: But some there are that are so
hardened in their own ways, and so frozen on their dregs, that let God do what
he will with them, let him strike them with sickness, famine, plague,
pestilence, what he will, yet it does no good upon them, they will never let
the Israelites go, Exodus 9. ult.
to serve the Lord: but if they do, they will pursue them, and never leave them
till they themselves are drowned in the Sea, Ibid. 14. 23.
and utterly destroyed.

Now for the vision it self in hand, And the bush burned and was not consumed;
Ver. 2.
A strange miracle that a bush should be all over of a red, glowing fire, all a
day, and not consume: Indeed trees that have stood close together, by the
violence of wind rushing them together, have been known to set on fire; but
then they consumed: but who ever saw wood on fire, a whole day together, and
not consume? Moses it seems, at first, took no great notice of it; but seeing
it burn all day, and not consume, I will turn aside (says he) and see what the
reason is, and see this great sight, why the bush burns, Ver. 3.
and is not consumed.

But before I come to the vision it self, here is yet one thing that will
detain us, and I fear for the whole time of the these few minutes allotted us:
but God may offer ere long another opportunity for to speak of the vision it
self. It is said in this second verse, That the Angel appeared to Moses in the
midst of the bush; and in the verses following it is said to be the Lord God:
how could one and the same be an Angel and God too? Ver. 14.
Tell the Children of Israel, I AM has sent you unto them; Which name can
belong to no Creature, but is proper only to God Almighty. And again, you know
in all the Old Testament, when any Angel appeared to any man, if they fell down
and worshipped them, never any man was blamed: but St. John did but offer to
fall down to worship the Angel that had showed him all those visions, and he
was forbidden; See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants; worship God.
Rev. 22. 9.
What may be the reason of this? was there any difference between the Angels of
the Old Testament, and the Angels of the New? Obj.
No certainly. Answ.
The truth is this, and that which will bear the touch, and the trial against
all opposition; That every Creature is an Angel, a Messenger of God Almighties;
not the greatest nor the least nor meanest that is, but is one of Gods Angels
or Messengers; and being so, He is the Essence and Being of every Creature, The
Substance of all things: Insomuch that nothing can have a Being but only
Himself. No Creature can say I AM.

If he were not so, how could God say, I am, if any Creature could say so,
Truly of it self? And God is so the Essence and Being of all things, not only
as most men affirm and believe, an Essence giving Being to all things: so as
every thing has no Being in it self, but from him, and of him: but he is the
Essence of the Essence; He is the Being of the Being; for he it is only, that
is Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1. 8.
the first and the last; He only is He that was, and that is, and that is to
come; if any Creatures were s^arers in this title, he were not God Almighty:
This is such a truth as all the world shall never be able to overthrow; ye may
bottom upon it; for, Mat. 16. 18.
The gates of hell shall never prevail aginst it.

God being the Substance and Form of all things, the Form of Forms, he is as
Really, and as Gloriously, and as Omnipotently present in the Meanest and least
Creature you can show me, as he is in the greatest: Let flesh and blood, and
Satan, and Hell, and all the powers of darkness set against it, with all the
might they have, they shall never prevail against it: I say, he is as
Infinitely, as Magnificently, as Gloriously, as Incomprehensibly present in the
basest Creature, in the least m^te, in sticks and stones, name what ye will, as
he is in Heaven it self, and in all the world besides; for, He cannot be more
fully present in One place then another, but in all places, all present at
once; he is as Fully, as all-sufficiently, as Graciously, as Vnboun^ably
present in the barrenest Mountain, as in he fruitfullest Valley: But where is
he, that c^n see him so? who can see this glory and this ^ower of God in every
Creature? Most certainl^, undeniably the thing is so; but we want eyes to see
him so: Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23. 24.
says God? If any thing fill Heaven or Earth besides him, in the least j^t or
period, that saying were not true.

He is not present in the glorious Heavens in his Majesty, more, then He is in
the Earth; He is not present (as most men teach, and too many believe them) in
one place, in regard of his Essence; and in Another, in regard of his Power;
and in another in regard of his Judgment; and in another, in regard of his
Mercy; and in another, by his Patience, etc. These be fond fopperies; hearken
to none of them, let them be who they will be; know this is truth, He is in all
alike Essentially, but we see him not so, and therefore we think him not so.
That we see him not so, the fault is not in God; for he is the same in all
places, and through all ages: but the fault is in our selves, we are so
weak-sighted we cannot see him.

As suppose I speak to these three several Creatures, to a man, to a dog, and
to a stone; the man he hears my voice, and understands me what I mean; the dog
hears, but he understands not; but the stone, it does neither: And if you
should ask the Stone what I said (supposing there were a possibility of
answering therein) it would say, I spoke not at all; if you ask the dog, he
would say, I heard a voice, a noise, but he said nothing: but ask the man, and
he would tell you That I spoke, and What I spoke: Was it therefore true, that
which the dog and the stone affirmed? Because they either understood not, or
heard not; or Was the fault in me they heard not or understood not? No, the
fault is in themselves; for I did speak, and spoke sense, but they had not a
capability of hearing and apprehending. So, God shines Gloriously, and
Majestically, and Super-exaltedly in all his Creatures: but, if we see him not
so, blame not God, and say, He is not so, nor He is not there because you see
him not, nor cannot apprehend him there: but blame your own ignorance, your own
blindness; for, God is as much in one as in another; he cannot be Glorious in
one, and not in another, but the same in all.

And God being there, he cannot be without All His Accoutrements, of Majesty
and Glory; Al His Glorious Attributes attend him wherever he is, And he cannot
be Sequestered from them, nor they from him: And if God has opened your eyes so
far, as to see him Thus, in all Creatures, Do not offer to take from him His
Glory, or Greatness, as if God, wherever he is, could want His Glory and
All Sufficiency, etc. As, my whole soul is in my whole body, and the whole is
in every part and member of my body; yet my soul sees not in my ears, but there
it hears, yet the same soul does see in my eyes: And though my soul tastes not
in my nose, but smells, yet the same soul does the same action in another
member; and so of all the rest: For there is not one soul in my ears, another
in my eyes, but all one and the same; but it works diversely in diverse members:
So Almighty God has not one property in himself in one Creature, and another
in another, but he is One and the Same in all, as he is in himself: If he be
gloriously present in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, he is as gloriously present in
the least pill of grass, in the least particle of dust; but he works diversely
in diverse Creatures, yet he in himself is One and the Same. And because we
cannot see him so, let us not say he is not so, but blame our selves we see him
not so.

For were a man's eyes but opened, as Elisha his servants were, when he arose in
the morning, 2 King. 6. 16.
and looked out at the window, he saw themselves in a great strait, compassed
about, and besieged with Armies: but his eyes being opened, his Master bid him
look again, and then he saw the Mountains full of fiery Chariots and Horsemen
for their defense: Now they were there before, Ver. 17.
as well as then, but his eyes were not opened; It is not said that Elisha
prayed to send them, but he prayed God to open his servants eyes, that he might
See; The alteration was not in the place, but in Gehazies eyes: And so of
Balaam, because he did not see the Angel a great while, it was not because the
Angel was not there, for the Angel was there before, Number. 22.
but Balaams eyes were not open to see him there. So were our eyes but opened,
we should see God in every Creature Alike; for he is there already; our eyes
want but opening, and then we should give him the praise of his Goodness, of
his Greatness, of his Infinity, because we see him as well in every Creature as
in any.

The Apostles when they were in Prison, and sung Psalms at midnight, when their
eyes were open, they saw a light to lead them out; Act. 16. 25
but the same light was there as much before, but their eyes were so closed
they could not see the light. Oh Beloved! could we but see The Eternity, The
Everlastingness, the Incircumscriptibleness that fills the least shrub, we might
then see God Almighty.

As for example; would we see God in an Oak? ye must strip it of all manner of
Accidents, of all greatness and littleness, for those cannot be The Oak; for a
little Oak is an Oak as well as a great Oak: so take away all manner of color,
shape and form; for Oaks are of diverse colors, and of all manner of shapes;
for the shape is not the Oak, but that which is the Form of the Form, that is
the truth of the Oak; and that is God blessed for ever; Col. 1. 17.
Jesus Christ is the beginning and foundation of all Creatures. Heb. 1. 3. 1
And when you conceive God to dwell in light, Cor. 8. 6.
etc. Oh strip your selves of all manner of thought, or of any such thing as
you can imagine: for he is nothing you can imagine: He is not High or Low, but
He is He that Bears up high and low; He is not Great or Little, but he Bears up
Great and Little; he is neither Young nor Old, but he bears up Youth and Age;
He is not any manner of color or shape, but he bears up all shape and colors,
for we cannot see any thing but visible corporeal things: Now God can be no
such thing; but when you are gone as high as possibly you can, that you are
come to the very light it self, the highest of accidents, which is next unto
God, then fall down, and say, O my God! thou art still infinitely far above
all this.

Beloved, God is now in this room; do you wonder you do not see him? wonder
not; for accidents hide him from our sight; for you cannot so much as see a man
behind the hangings: God is infinitely more veiled from our eyes; he is veiled
in every place; Accidents cloth him; he is clothed in all Creatures, and all
Creatures are his garments; and he is the substance of all Creatures: If ye
will see him, yea must uncloath him of what ever belongs to a Creature; of all
highness and lowness, weight and lightness, youth and age, greatness and
littleness, of all manner of shape; for God is behind, and beyond all these,
and all that you can name, think or imagine.

And knowing God thus to be the Essence and Being of all Creatures, The life
and motion of them all, beholding him as One Eternal, Omipo: tent God, in all
Creatures, you may upon any occasion, seeing and beholding him in it, fall down
in the Apprehension thereof before any Creature, so you worship not the
contracted Creature, but the Incontractible, Incomprehensible God. And this was
the reason the Fathers and Patriarchs were not blamed, and did not sin in
falling down to Angels, because they worshipped not them, but the infinite God
at that instant, discovered to be in that creature; for Abraham and the rest
intimate so much, Let not the Lord be angry; shall not the judge of all the
earth do right? They knew that God was invisible; only they took occasion upon
the sight of the visible Angel, to worship the invisible God: for had Abraham
had A Thought of worshipping the Angel or any thing below God, he had committed
Idolatry; have patience (I pray you) I shall clear out this truth also.

For hence is the Error of the Papists, because they think the infinite God can
be included or represented by any manner of figure or form: and this was the
fault of St. John, who would have worshipped that Angel that had showed him
those visions: but (I say) The soul that can see God Almighty, not finite and
bounded in any creature, or in any form whatsoever (but infinite and unbounded
above all manner of forms, The Form of Forms, filling every thing, and yet not
comprehended by any thing) may in a holy and reverent manner fall down and
worship this Infinite God: And therefore (I say) the Patriarchs doing so, were
not blamed; and John was forbidden; and if he had done it, he had committed
Idolatry: The one worships God in his Infinite, Immense, Glorious Being, as
abstracted from all creatures: the other worships him as finite and bounded, or
represented in that Form.

So in this sense, Moses here in this place, when he calls God by the Name of
An Angel, he has relation to the burning Bush: not that God is that burning
Bush, but infinitely above and beyond it: for when he speaks of God in himself,
he has no relation at all to any burning Bush, or any figure, Mat. 22. 32.
but as Abstracted and above all creatures: and so he is the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: but take him Concretely, as included or
represented in any creature, so it is Idolatry: But if in the former sense,
then ye worship him after the example of the Patriarchs. Beloved, I beat upon
these things the more, and the larger, because I would fain have you understand
me: and it may be this may seem to you an Error, or a Novelty at least, till
you have eaten it, and chewed the cud* and debated it in your own souls: but to
have a thought of worshipping God as included in any creature, or representing
him in regard of his Essence; to justify worshipping of Images, I abhor, and
curse all such thoughts to the pit of hell: and surely you cannot have such a
thought of me; for this is the very thing, I so much endeavor to persuade you
from.

But for instance, There is the Sun that shines in at this window, yet (you
know) that is not the Sun, but a beam from the Sun, though I lie not in saying
the Sun is there: for that could not be there without the Sun, yet it is not
the real Sun: and in seeing that, I do not see the Sun: yet if I desire to see
the Sun in this room, and were loath to go out of doors, let me but lay my eye
in that beam, to see whence it comes, and I should see the Sun: it self; for
that beam, it goes directly to the Sun: for if I were in a dungeon, though
thirty miles deep in the ground, if the Sun could but shine in at any cleft or
pin-hole, though the Dungeon were never so dark, yet if I lay my eye in that
beam, I should behold the face of the Sun: Even so it is with Almighty God;
there is in every Creature a beam that comes from him, which is the Being and
Essence of the Creature; Now if we shall fall down and worship that Beam, as
simply considered, as contracted and included in the Creature, this were sin:
but if I lay my eye in that beam, I shall see it leads me to the Eternal, One,
Immutable, Incircumscriptible, Iuconceivable Essence of the Divine BEING; And
that Angel beholds the very face of God Almighty. Hence you may learn to
interpret that place where our Savior commands, Matthew. 18. 10.
Take heed ye despise not, nor offend one of these little ones; for their
Angels always behold the face of your Father which is in Heaven: Not that it
is lawful to worship that beam or Angel, but He alone from whence that Beam
comes, who is far above every Angel, and all manner of Creatures and Creation.

As (to take the former instance) suppose there were a Religion that it were
lawful to worship the Sun, if one should fall down and worship that Beam that
comes from the Sun, did not he sin? for that is not the Sun, but comes from the
Sun; and therefore for any one (according to that Religion) to worship that
Beam, were Idolatry; for he worshipped not that he was commanded, but was taken
up in a thing Infinitely below his God: So in the same sense. Every Creature is
a beam of the Divinity, which is the Substance thereof: and though you see not
the face of your Father in Heaven, yet that beam does; yet, He that shall see
that beam, and fall down to that, worships that he ought not; something else
instead of God.

I pray God ye understand me; for I fear the simile I before named and
instanced in, is too true among men. Some there are that do hear me, and
understand me, to whom God has revealed these things; and some, though they
hear me, yet they are like the dog, they understand not what I say, I speak
riddles to them: but others there are which understand not, neither will they
hear, but are like a stone; therefore I say it again, God is really present in
himself in every Creature; but if he worship God as included in, or represented
in that Creature, he sins and commits Idolatry, because he worships that beam
instead of God, and falls down to a Creature instead of God: But if I take
occasion upon the sight of any Creature, To behold God himself above and beyond
all Crea^ures, and so worship him; he that will deny this, and say This is sin,
let him also deny God himself. So far as any thing can be called an Angel. so
far we are forbidden to worship it: but if that Angel occasion us to look
beyond it to him that sends that Angel, to him that is the Essence and
Substance of that Angel, Here we are commanded to worship, because then Our
Angel always Beholds the Face of Our Father which is in Heaven, being One, Mat.
18. 10
Eternal, Almighty, Immense, Incircumscriptible, Glorious BEING, even God
blessed for ever and ever.

Use. We will only make one short Use and Application of this point to our
selves, and so conclude. Is it not then more then apparent, that God is every
where, in all Creatures, and in every place? he is near us, yea nearer us then
our selves are to our selves; he is the Ideal form and first beginning of us,
and all Creatures, and whatever is in us: But if we would see him, we must
first strip your selves of all manner of visibility, and whatever can come
under any thought of an Angel, Beam, or any conception; for God is unknowable,
unconceivable: And as long as you know or conceive any thing, you are short of
what God is; else we make him comprehensible and knowable, who is altogether
unknowable and incomprehensible: And therefore whenever I meet with any thing
whatsoever that will show me how to know the incomprehensible God, I must cast
it away, because I know it seduceth and misleadeth me; for God is unknowable;
yet God is nearer to me then any thing I can call (I) or my self; he is nearer
then my touching, tasting, smelling, seeing, hearing; so near, that he is the
form of our forms, the soul of our souls.

And therefore Beloved, Isa. 65. 24.
if we would send our desires to him, he is so near, that we can no sooner
think any thing, but he knows it; as the Prophet Esaias says, Before they call I
will hear, and before they pray I will answer: God knows all our thoughts and
desires beforehand, for he is the desire of the desire. And therefore do I
want any thing, any benefit, any good thing, any counsel in any difficult case?
Yet (mistake me not) I do not mean about lands and livings, or riches and
pleasure, honor and praise, or good name; when I speak of these things, I mean
not, nor intend concerning matters of right and wrong so much, or those things
wherein flesh and blood please themselves, which come to nothing and perish
with the using, As the Apostle says; But, do I want direction to guide my
soul? to bring me nearer to God? to live the life of Christ? do I want counsel
and support to make me bid defiance to the world, and the things below, that we
would fain walk evenly in all change of conditions? do thou want spiritual
riches, and those things which God accounts Good things, things which he gives
only to his own people, And not those he gives promiscuously, and most
plentifully to those he hates, Romans 10. 7
and are given to destroy and to undo them? Then I say unto thee, thou needst
not say, Who shall ascend into Heaven? or who shall descend to bring Christ
from the grave? behold, he is nigh thee, Even within thee. What need thou go
out of thy self for help or counsel? there is that Great Counselor dewls
within thee: What need have thou to go out to any Creature? What need have thou
to rely upon man, or the Arm of flesh? Thou have such a Counselor and
Comforter within thee, that is able to darken and obscure all the counsels and
comforts of all Men, and all Creatures: But thou must first strip thy self of
all manner of thoughts and fantasies, and all imaginations, and then thou shall
find such an infinite, bottomless God whose name is called wonderful,
Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.
the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace; That thou
may say of all Creatures, as Job of his friends, Miserable Comforters are ye
al.

For, There may be such an occasion, and a man may be in such a condition,
wherein all the world cannot help a man, nor comfort him: But there can be no
case wherein this great Counselor, this mighty Helper, cannot uphold and
comfort a man: Though all the world were set against a man, to undo and
overthrow him, yet he is so safe with God, that he needs not regard it: If God
will keep a man under his wings, what need he fear? Though thou art oppressed
and wronged, I do not mean only outwardly; do not take me too much in that
sense; but inwardly, by Satan, and by thy wicked lusts: so that thou cryest our
with David, Ps. 56. 2.
Mine enemies fight against me daily, and I am oppressed on every side: and
with Jeremiah, Ier. 20. 8.
Lord, help me, I suffer violence and spoil: Have thy eye and thy heart most
upon these inward violences; so that thou see a mighty battle fought within
thee, Esa. 9. 5. Esa. 9. 5.
For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled
in blood: but this shall be with burning, and fuel of fire. Is this thy case?
There is one nigh thee whom thou may cry to, as Jeremiah does, Lord, help me,
I suffer violence: There is one within thee that can make thee not to fear, but
can make thee laugh at all these things. As Job says the Horse does in the
Battle at the shaking of the spears. As here, Moses went about a desperate and
a mighty attempt, viz. that he, A poor Shepherd, should offer to go to so great
a King, and to cause him to let half his Kingdom depart from him: but there was
such a Supporter within Moses, that made the work seem possible to him, though
impossible to men. Beloved, your heavenly Father is so near you, that he knows
what ye need before ye ask; he is so much you, that he is more near to you then
your selves: He is not so present, as the King is present in all his Kingdom,
because his power is over all and reaches to all: In that sense every Justice
of Peace, every Constable, and every Officer is a finger of the King: and
therefore it is a vain, foolish thing to say, It Is true, Gods power is here,
and he is present in regard of his Attributes; for will ye separate God and his
power? Will ye make God and his Attributes two things? that cannot be: for Gods
power is his essence, And what ever is in God, is God; and where he is present
by his power, there he is present by his Essence: if you do not see it so,
blame your selves, lay not the fault on God, and deny him therefore to be
there, but blame your own eyes which are not opened, and your own ear, because
they are not bored.

And so I say, conceiving God to be thus take any, yea all occasions of
magnifying, worshipping and praising him; and with the Prophet David when ye
behold any of the Creatures, Say, Praise the Lord in the heights, Praise him in
the Sun and Moon, Praise him in the Stars, Praise him in the Firmament of his
power, Psa. 158. 1, 2.
and Praise Him according to his most Excellent Greatness.

So much for this time.

THE MYSTERY, OR THE LIFE and MARROW OF THE SCRIPTURES.
An Exposition on Exodus 3. the Six first Verses.
EXODUS 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Now Moses kept the flock of Iethro his father in
Law, the Priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the backside of the desert,
and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the
midst of a bush, and he looked, and behold the bush burned with fire, and the
bush was not consumed.

And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush
is not burnt, etc.


Delivered at a Private Meeting at Kensington,
OUt of which words, we have observed three things:

1. Moses his Preparation or disposition to this Vision: and that is in the
first Verse, And Moses kept the flock of Iethro his father in Law, Priest of
Midian: and he led the flock to the back side of the desert, and came to the
mountain of God, even to Horeb.

2. The Vision it self, that is in the 2, 3, 4, 5. Verses, The Angel of the
Lord appeared to Mose; in a flame of fire in the midst of a burning bush, and
the bush burned, and was not consumed, etc.

Lastly, the consequence, and what followed thereupon.

In the preparation of Moses his disposition to this great sight, we observed
something in that it is said here that Moses was a Shepherd, and showed you the
reason why the Holy Spirit takes such special notice of Shepherds, and still
prefers them before Husbandmen: as the first of men that were begotten, Cain
and Abel, Genesis 4.
the Shepherds offering was accepted, and the Husbandmans rejected: and then we
produced and traced all the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and Jacobs
twelve sons, all Shepherds; and so David, The first of Kings that was accepted,
Ps. 78. 71.
he was taken from following the sheep, to sit upon the Throne to feed Gods
people: and still all the stock of the Messiah, of whom Christ came, were
generally Shepherds: This is the Letter of the word: but what may be the
meaning that Shepherds are more esteemed then Husbandmen? what is the mystery?
what is the living sense of these words?

As I take it, the meaning is this, that the life of a true Shepherd was to
depend more upon God and his providence, then Husbandmen, because they more
resign up their wills to God, and liye altogether upon his blessing, And do not
so labor and Toil: they cannot rest in themselves, and in their own care and
industry, as the Husbandman does; for they think nothing can be done, but they
must put in a hand; they must rise early, Psa. 127. 1
and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulness; they must plow, sow,
harrow, weed, reap, and take a great deal of toil and industry, or else they
think there can be no good done: yet they may in words say, The blessing of God
is all; but their practice says, and their hearts say, their carking, and their
caring, and their diligence, and their discretion does all.

Mistake not, I do not say that these things are evil; To sow, plough, reap,
rise early, to use wisdom and discretion in their affairs; but in that they
ascribe this to themselves, and think that they have the mainest stroke of
getting their own living and maintenance: when as our Savior says plainly,
Not one of them can add by all their labor and care, Mat. 6. 27
plowing and sowing, and spinning, They cannot add one cubit to their stature;
that is, not the least mite is added to them by all the care, discretion and
toil they can use. Solomon, it is true, commends diligence, and says, the
diligent hand makes rich: that is, Pro. 10. 4.
having their chief dependence on God; but in this sense it does nothing: it is
certain, such things must be done, and ought to be done: for a Political State
cannot stand without them; Luke 10. 42.
but this is that better part which Mary chose. He that is a true Shepherd,
that has given up his life and being, and all to God Almighty, he dares assume
nothing to himself, but confesses really, to the glory of God, that he is
nothing, nor can do nothing; and that he is no more in doing all these things,
then the Accomplisher of, (not his own will) but Gods; and that (as the truth
is) he is but an instrument in the hand of the great master; that he is but a
staff in the hand of him that carries it; that though he act, Gal. 2. 20.
yet it is not he, but God; though he live, yet not he, but God in him: this is
the life of a true Shepherd, of a true resigned man; But to the Egyptians A
Shepherds life is an abomination to them says the text. Genesis 46. 34. Genesis 46.
Ult.
they cannot endure to have all their actions, their wisdom, policy,
discretion, industry to be made nothing, by which they think they bring about
all things they do.

Such a one was Martha, she was busy in making all things ready to entertain
Christ (although Christ condemned her not, for doing those things) because (as
I said) they are necessary to a Political life, and such men in that regard are
needful; yet it was Mary whom Christ commends for choosing the better part, who
had resigned up all those things, Luke 10. 42.
and sat Attentively at Christ's feet, to receive those dropping hony-sweet
words that came from him, being better to her then thousands of gold or silver,
Ps. 19. 10.
and sweeter then the honey, and the honeycomb, as they were to David; To have
all our eyes up to him; as Iehosaphat said, 2 Chro. 19. 12.
We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee: we have no wisdom, no
discretion, no ability to bring any thing to pass; but we see, we do all, by
thy wisdom, by thy counsel, by thy direction, it is thou that guidest us, and
directest us in all our actions. Now Beloved, in this sense labor, and be as
diligent as you can, so you ascribe all to God; but if we say, or do as
Husbandmen, or thinking thus, Except I plow, except I harrow, except I weed,
except I reap, except I observe times and seasons, in this sense, men are not
justifiable: but in that sense all their actions, all their wisdom, strength,
gifts, labor, all is evil. But in doing these things, that we always have, as
David says, an ear to him, Psa. 85. 8.
I will hear what God the Lord will say; but I would hear you say thus, Alas, I
dare not say, that I have any disposition to be wise, any inclination to
labor, that I have any wisdom. that I bring about any business, or that I have
any disposition as of my self, to labor or not labor, that I have any
disposition to health or sickness; that I have any disposition to fair weather
or foul; that I have any disposition to liberty or imprisonment: but that in
these conditions, and all other, I have no will of my own, but I have given it
wholly up to him, so that whether he send me wisdom or folly, business or no
business, fair weather or foul, health or sickness, riches or want, liberty or
imprisonment, His blessed will be accomplished in all: for I desire to have no
will but his, no thoughts but his, no actions but his: These, these are those
men that God accepts, These are the men that please him: The other, Hab. 1. 16
they dig to their own sense and reason and they sacrifice to their own nets:
say they, is it not I that labor? and is it not I that plow, sow and reap,
etc. Is it not my diligence that brings these things to pass? if I did them
not, they would be undone; and thus flesh and blood reasons, Is it not apparent
to my senses? to my tasting, feeling, seeing, smelling, hearing, that it is I do
these things, and not another for me, nor by me (as you affirm)?

And one while rain pleases them not, and another while fair weather pleases
them not; if barrenness come, they murmr why God did not give fruitfulness,
etc. and if they have one thing, Oh, I would have another; I would have such a
thing, and such a thing: so that these men are never pleased: but the other are
never displeased with whatever God does; This man He knows not what he would
have, nor what to ask, but what Gods will is: if Gods will be done, he has
what he would have.

These are the men* these are the Shepherds God Almighty regards so much; the
other are not well-pleasing to him, and he has no regard to them, not to their
sacrifices; pray as much as they will, and fast as much as they will, they pray
not at all; for they pray but for themselves, and to satisfy their own
desires, and to have what they think is best. They seek to Him for Corn and
wine and oil, and these outward things Mich. 2. 11. and Zac. 7. 5.
and not for love to Him. But to eat for themselves, and to drink for
themselves, as the Prophet Zach. speaks: Oh, of a certain, these men are not
well-pleasing to God Almighty.

The next remarkable thing we named in this preparation to the vision was,
Moses was not only a Sheep-keeper, but he led them to the backside of the
desert, to the Mountain of God, even to Horeb: Had not Moses left the Cities
and Towns, and gotten into the desert, he had never seen God; for before this,
Moses was but a stranger to God, and God to him, in comparison of what he was
afterward: for after this, Moses and God talked familiarly face to face, As a
man talks with his friend: D^u. 5. 4.
And Israel, so long as they were among the fleshpots in Egypt, they were
never acquainted with Quails nor Manna: till a man has forsaken all, and
gotten into the desert, God may call long enough, and knock at the door of our
hearts, but we will not hear nor open to him.

But it may be you will say unto me, Obj.
What shall we do then, who live far off any desert how shall we find God?

Going into the desert, Ans.
is meant forsaking all things in our affections, that we have no propension to
one thing more then to another; that we use these things as if we used them
not: and that we are as willing to leave them in action, if God call for them
from us, or us from them. as to enjoy them, if it be his will: then are we
gotten into the desert with Moses, and then God will appear to us, then God
will Reveal himself, and show us not only his backparts, but show us his face
also, if we are able to see it.

This is also, going into the high hilly Country with Mary, Luke 1. 39.
after the Angel had been with her, whose salutation was at first so strange to
her: so when we have forsaken all that ever the eye can see, or the ears hear,
or the heart conceive: till we have forsaken houses, lands, wives, children,
friends, Exo. 33.
and all: nay, as long as our affections mingle with these, we cannot love God
aright: if he cannot have all, but with him we must love these, he will have
none at all: and if he must have all, where is any to spare to any thing in the
world? Therefore I tell you, If ye love God, ye may not love your health, ye
may not love your wealth, your houses, your lands: you may not love your wife,
your child, your good name: nay, you may not love your lives, nay not your own
souls: John 12. 26.
nay more then this, He that hates not father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and his own life, and his own soul too, cannot be my disciple: how,
what not love my father, mother, wife, children? what, not love these good
blessigns of God? what, not love my body? nay, what not love my soul, nay hate
my soul? O these are sore sayings! no; for the love of God cannot be mingled
with these: if you love your wife, as your wife: and your goods, as your goods:
and your life, as your life; and your soul, as your soul; then your love is
divided between God and them: Luke 16. 13.
then you have played the harlot, and the adulterer with them: but you must
love them for God, and in God, and as coming from him, and to be used for him,
and if you do so, Then I say unto you, Love them as dear as you will: you
cannot love them too much: But then I must tell you, this will follow: if so,
they instead of separating you from God, They draw you nearer to him: but if ye
love them for themselves, then they will draw you from God, they will make God
and you at enmity; they will make a division and separation between you: but if
your love be set on God, it will be also on them for his sake: and this is to
love not them, but God in them; Then this will also follow, This man can let
God do what he will with them; either give them to him, or take them from him,
and yet God and he fall not out; for whatever God does to him or with them,
still he loves God: Genesis 19. 20.
but if ye love them in the other sense, then he will say with Lot, Is it not a
little one, and my soul shall live? could not God have spared me this one
thing, it is but a little one? what, may I not love One creature? no, says this
soul, I will let all go, so I may enjoy thee; I enjoyed thee in them, and thee
I shall enjoy without them.

And those that thus joy in them, may joy that they did joy in them: I say,
they may joy and rejoice that ever they did joy and rejoice in them; but the
other joy, was such a joy, that they must sorrow and repent that they did joy;
for they joyed in the Shadow, and that vanished away: but the other joyed in
the substance, in the body, and that remained, that shall never decay; for God
is the substance of all things, but all things that are visible, are but
shadows, but appearances, bubbles, soon up, and soon down, like bubbles in the
water.

And the reason why we are so disquieted in the loss of them is, because we
take the shadow to be the substance; and if that vanish, we must needs be
disquieted, and we are all out of order; Then let God give us what He will,
nothing shall please us: why? because our Absalom is dead, 2 Samuel 18. ult. 2 Samuel 18. Ult.
but he that loves them for God, and in God, he is a quiet man however they
change; he is the same; let God give them to him, or take them away from him:
he is still contented. Beloved, This is the man that loves them aright, and he
loves them infinitely more, and more dearer, then all the world can love his
own, or that it most prizeth; for that love and joy brings them but grief and
sorrow: but these may joy that ever they had such a joy; and he loves God, as
giving him that love.

Until we have forsaken all, God will never appear to us; as he did not here to
Moses, till he had forsaken All the world, and come into the Desert, having
forsaken flock and all, till then God appeared not to him: Not forsaken all (as
some expound it) that is, say they, when the love of God, and these outward
things comes into competition, or when we can enjoy them no longer: but I say,
forsake them all in affection, even while we enjoy them: for he that will love
them till that time, may love them so long, that he cannot forsake them: that
is, not quietly, but he is, as it were, Rent in pieces to forsake them: though
in act he may be made to forsake them, yet his affections do not: but as soon
as ever we have forsaken all, and have cast all the creatures behind our back,
so that we stand indifferently affected to all; Then GOD will appear to us,
Then GOD will show Us miracles as well as Moses, then God will speak Familiarly
to us, face to face, as well as to Moses: for there are as great miracles done
every day, as was then: but our eyes are blinded, we see them not: The reason
why our old men do not dream dreams, Exodus 33. 11.
and our young men see visions, is, because we go not into the desert: The
reason why God appears not To Us, Act. 2. 17.
is, because we do not with Elijah, 1 King. 19. 4.
fast forty days in the desert, but we are buried in flesh and blood, and in
the world, we are swallowed up in Sense and Reason.

We wonder, it may be, that such mighty miracles should be done daily, and we
not see them: Truly, the fault is in our selves, not that Miracles are ceased:
but our eyes are blinded, and we cannot see them: and therefore it is we say,
There is no miracles now adays, Miracles are ceased; you are deceived; for
there wants not either power or willingness in God to show thee as great
miracles as he showed them: and he is as willing to show his face to thee, as
to Moses and the Patriarchs: but thou want that measure of faith that they
had to see him: thou art so deep set in the earth, and so buried in unbelief,
that he can do no mighty works in thee; as it is said concerning our Saviors
working miracles in his own Country, Matthew. 13. 58. Matthew. 13. 38.


The next thing is the Vision it self, Ver. 2, 3, 4
And the Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in a burning bush, and the bush
burned, and was not consumed: and Moses said, I will turn aside, and see this
great sight, why the bush is not burnt: and when he turned aside to see, God
called unto him, and said, Moses, Moses; and he said, Here am I: and he said,
Draw not nigh hither, but put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place
where thou stand is holy ground, etc.

Here is now a large field before us, Here is a vast Sea before us: and like
the river and holy waters in Ezekiel, at the entrance into the Sanctuary, which
though at first it took a man but to the ancles, Ezekiel. 47. 1, etc.
and then to the knees, yet at length it became a vast Sea to swallow up all;
those whose vessels are large enough, may now lanch out into the deep: But
first, Put off your shoes from off your feet, before ever you adventure into
this holy ground; that is, put off all self-conceit of your own understanding;
all conceit of your own knowledge, or of your own abilities to discover those
depths that are hid in these words: The ground you are now going to set your
feet on, is mavelous holy ground: it is not for every unclean beast to touch
this mountain: it is only a Moses may, or can ascend this mountain: if you
bring with you the judgment of flesh and blood, or your own abilities, to
search these mysteries, and to judge of these things, I must tell you, Other
men shall see miracles, but you shall see none: Act. 9. 7.
Paul shall see the vision, when they that are with him shall not see it.

Strip your selves therefore of all manner of conceits, and confess you know
nothing, and give up your selves to be taught of God: neither regarding me that
speak to you, nor your own abilities to judge of these things; cast away all
things of that nature; for you have to do with God, not man: and if you see no
Miracles, I believe you may blame your selves, and your too great wisdom; for
now adays men are too wise to learn any thing. And I, for my labor, look for
no other recompense from such wise men, Mat. 7. 6.
but that they shall turn again, and all to rent me.

But in the entrance into this 2. Verse, here is one thing (which I before
touched at) and that is, why it is said, the Angel of the Lord appeared to
Moses: and in the verses following, it is said to be the Lord God that called
to Moses: how can it be God, and yet an Angel? I find not one Interpreter
unfold this Mystery, but either slides or slubbers over this thing, wherein
indeed there is such a depth of truth included, as is able to make the man of
God perfect and wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
and to build him up in all good works.

And to that end, know, That every Creature is an Angel of Gods, being
considered as Angel or Messenger (for so the word imports) it is a name not of
nature, but of office: and every creature is sent of an Errand, they all come
out from him: and when they have done their errand, they return to him again:
And, the sole business every creature comes about, and is sent for into the
world, is, to glorify and magnify God: I say, the whole work, the business
all creatures have to do, is only to magnify and praise our great God: after
it has done its errand, and sung an Hymn to God Almighty, then it departs and
returns to him again.

For, All creatures do sing his praise in whatever they do; if not the praise
of his goodness, yet as much to his praise, the glory of his justice: the most
senseless creature that is, is a Messenger from God, An Angel of his sending:
the winds, the sea, the flames of fire, the earth, the air, the lions, and all
beasts, and what creature you can name, they are all his Angels and do his
pleasure. Number. 2. 2.
Balaams Ass was made an Angel to him, Ps. 103. 21
when his eyes were opened: But, Because I say these are Angels, I would not
have you presently conceive, that there are no other Angels above us: not so,
but what they are we know not, they are such as God Almighty has appointed
them to be: and because we cannot know what they are, let us not say there are
none; for they being in a sphere above us, we are ignorant of them, ignorant of
their Nature and cannot Comprehend it. As, bruit beasts, they are in a sphere
below us; and although they have not Reason in that degree that man has, yet
they have some reason; yet man is called the Reasonable creature, though even
beasts have something like man: yet because he is so many degrees above these
creatures, he is denominated, The reasonable creature, as if nothing had any
reason but him; but it is otherwise: Now these creatures are not able to
understand (though they have some reason) the life and happiness of a man
because they are so much below man: So neither can man, created in a sphere so
far below Angels, know the life, happiness, being and nature of Angels (though
something they may know) yet far short of what they are: But every creature
has his happiness in his own sphere, a fool, he is called a fool, not because
he has no reason in him, but because he is so far short of that understanding
that is in other men.

There is reason in a kind, in all the creature, in beasts and trees, etc.
their life does express reason, though themselves understand not their own
reason: for they grow and increase, and therein they express reason: for God
does not in any creature work unreasonably, but [Man] being made (as it were)
The Master of Reason, he is led altogether by reason (as he is a man) and what
is above that, he is not able to judge of, because he never knew no life above
it, no happiness above it.

And therefore man, if he go about to define those Angels that are nearer to
God then himself, he must make use of that which is within the compass of his
own sphere; therefore he would fain define them by reason; but herein man shows
himself a fool: for those Creatures above us are super-rational, but man thinks
there is nothing above Reason, because he never knew any thing greater. It Is as
if a toad or a horse should undertake to define the nature of a man, he could
not but he must of necessity make himself the measure of his judgment; what he
had not in himself, he could not judge excellent: So, if men define Angels,
they would measure and define them according to the excellencies of a man.

But all those invisible Blessed Creatures that are next unto the Burning
Throne of Almighty God, what are they? Alas, if we should go about to define
their nature (as some have done) we should prove our selves ignorant, yea
fools: yet thus much we may safely say of them, That the nearer to God, they
nearer to the spiritual nature of God, because they are further off from
matter: though they have matter, and are bodies, yet they have but so much
matter as to distinguish them, and separate them one from another.

God he is a pure spirit, only form, without any manner of matter; and all the
Creatures, the further off from him, the more matter; and the nearer, the less.
For example, If ye have observed it, Angels are pictured with complete bodies;
yet to show that they are further off from matter then man, therefore they have
always wings; and Archangels, they being nearer God then Angels, are pictured
with bodies cut off by the middle, with wings: but Cherubims, having less
matter, and nearer God himself then either, are pictured only with heads and
wings: but Seraphims, being furthest of all from man, and nearest of all to
God, they have no bodies at all, but only represented by a certain yellowish
or fiery color; All this, is to show the very same thing that I am now
unfolding to you; it is a thing remarkable, though it may be you have took no
notice of it.

For the present let this be enough to limit our ranging thoughts in these
mysteries. In man, matter prevails above the form because the form is limited
and bounded by the matter; that though the form be quick, and full of agility,
yet the matter hinders it, it cannot do what it would: but in these Angels,
form is predominant over the matter; that wheresoever the form would be, the
matter is obedient.

Then let us lay this for a ground, for a maxim undeniable, That all
Creatures, from the highest to the lowest, are to God, As a sweet-tuned
Instrument; They all harmoniously and with a joint consent Sound forth his
praise; all the Creatures praise him; from the highest and sweetest Treble, to
the lowest BASE of the immovable Earth, they all express and sing aloud aloud
and Harmoniously, His praise: It is the main business all Creatures do, and
shall do for ever, to sing praise and Hallelujah to God on High: this is the
business, the Commission that all these Ambassadors are sent about; Even the
very destruction of evil Angels, and wicked men, do aloud sound forth his
praise and glory for ever and ever.

Thus this name of Angels has all this while detained us from answering our
question; Obj.
Why God is here called an Angel? and likewise in many other places, as Judges
6. Judges 6. 11, 15.
It is said an Angel appeared to Gideon; and afterward, ver. 15. it was the
Lord.

The reason is this, Ans.
and included in that I have now said. If we look upon any one Creature, so far
forth as it is a Creature, it is infinitely short of God, for God is nothing
that we can see or imagine; and therefore as long as you see or imagine any
thing, Phil. 4. 7.
you are short of God; for as the peace of God passes all understanding, so
does God himself; and there is not one Creature but God is the peace thereof:
For whatsoever it be, be it never so glorious and splendent a Creature, that
falls within the compass, I will not say of a man's understanding, though the
soul be a spiritual and a divine thing; but, let it be within, in the
understanding and mind of an Angel above us; that same is not, nor cannot be
but an Angel; for God passes all understanding, both of Men and Angels; none
know what He is, but his own Blessed Self.

Whatever comes within the conception of any created Being, that is but a
finite thing, and falls infinitely short of the infinite God. If an Angel
should appear to me, and tell me that he was God, in that I can but either see
him, or hear him; I know, forasmuch as I hear him, or see him, or can imagine
him under any form, or name, or expression, that He was but a Creature, be it
never so high an Angel; and if I should fall down and worship Him, I were well
worthy of blame (with S. John, Rev. 22. 9.
who would have fallen down and worshipped that Angel that had showed him all
those things) for it is But our fellow servants, though it appear in never
so much glory; for all the imaginations of Men and Angels ( poor drops as they
are) fall infinitely short of God Almighty.

But if in any Creature, you strip it of all manner of form and imagination,
and behold God the Essence and Substance thereof, as One, Infinite, Eternal
Essence, as abstracted from all manner of Creatures: then I may with fear and
reverence fall down before, or take occasion by any Creature, to adore God: If
we can behold God thus, then the whole Scripture commands us to praise and
magnify him: Then praise him in the Sun, and praise him in the Moon, Psa. 148.
Then praise him in ^ll the works of his hands: not praise the Sun, nor the
Moon, nor the works of his hands, nor any Creature, but praise Him.

As suppose there were a Religion that it were lawful to worship the Sun (as I
instanced last day) if the worshippers should fall down to a bean of the Sun
instead of the Sun, should not he be an Idolater? So he that shall fall down to
a beam of the Divinity, as included or represented in any Creature, does not he
sin? But if through that Creature we have recourse only to him that is in the
midst of the bush, in the midst of the Creature: Seeing God to be the existence
and being thereof, and fall down before him, herein I do no more but that which
is commanded. If I look through the body of that Creature, which body veils God
from me, then I will praise The High and Holy One in his Holy place; Ps. 149. 6.
then will I praise him in the firmament of his power, Ps. 150. 1.
and in all the work of his hands: Then A Gods name praise him in a tree,
praise him in the wind, and in all Creatures; for the life of every Creature,
of every tree, is Christ Jesus, the Son of God, and his first begotten of all
his Creatures; The power of the wind is Christ Jesus, the life of a man is
Christ Jesus, etc. But now if I fall down to a Man or an Angel to worship him,
I sin; or if I fall down to Jesus Christ as included in that man, or in any
Creature, I sin likewise: But if in men, and beasts, and trees, and in all, I
behold God (...), Immutable, Incomprehensible, Incircumscriptible Essence, so I
may praise God, and take any occasion to fall down before him, and say, O thou
God, That Fillest Heaven and Earth! O thou God, that Fillest and movest every
thing, and thou thy self art not moved nor changed; in all things I see thee,
who art One, and for ever the same.

If you shall now ask me, Quest.
how you may behold God thus?

I will tell you; Ans.
In every Creature is a beam of the Divinity, which is an Angel; and that
Angel, be it never so small, beholds The face of God Almighty; that beam that
lives in me or thee, that beam, I say, sees the very face of God: And therefore
says our Savior Christ, Mat. 18. 10
Take heed ye despise not one of these little ones, for their Angel always
beholds the face of your Father which is in Heaven. Although you see not the
Sun when you behold a beam that comes in at the window, yet if you do but lay
your eye in that beam, you shall see the Sun it self: So though you cannot see
God Almighty in any Creature, yet if you do not despise any of these little
ones, They behold God; and if you lay your eye in that beam, you shall come to
behold God himself: and then, in the name of God* praise God, even with all
your might, Mat. 22. 37
and with all your strength; then you can never praise him enough in all his
Creatures.

Only take this along with you, Thar so long as you are capable to see, touch,
or understand what you see, so long you see not God, it is but a Creature: but
if you let that little spark guide you, That Angel within you, it will bring
you to the very face of God: For God is in the Midst of the bush, in the midst
of the Creature, yet he is not The burning bush; though he be in the Creature,
yet he is not the Creature: So long as he appeared to Moses under any form, he
was but an Angel; The Angel of the Lord appeared unto Moses in the midst of a
burning bush: And if Moses had worshipped that burning bush, he had been blamed
as well as S. John. But God is Hid, he is Veiled from our sight by Accidents*
He is not in the Out-parts, but he is Within.

Beloved, if God would be pleased to unfold these things to you and me, and
make us understand them aright, Romans 8. 39
I know, that Then, neither heights nor depths, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor any thing, should ever be able to separate between us and these blessed
truhs; nay nothing could hinder us from union with this Our ever Blessed God;
for these are such infallible Truths, such glorious Truths, Against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail.

When Jacob was to go three or four hundred miles from his Fathers house, Genesis
28. 10
He saw a vision in his first nights sleep; and it was a Ladder that reached
from heaven to earth, and the Angels of God went up and down ascending and
descending on it, and at the top of the Ladder stood God himself: What do you
think was the meaning of that Ladder? We deny not the truth of the Story; for
let that heart that has such a thought, consume for ever in endless flames:
but let us labor to find out the mind and meaning of God in all his words: God
stood at the top of Ladder; what God is in himself, we meddle not with, we have
nothing to do with that. O blessed God! be thou what thou art; thou have said,
I AM that I AM; and we say so too, THOU ART that THOU ART, Holy and Blessed be
Thou in what thou Art, for ever and ever. And as Thou art in Thy Self, we
neither know thy Name; nor thy Sons Name, But the Word became flesh, and dwelt
amongst us; Christ Jesus is the Substance and Being of all things, He is He
in whom all Types and visions ended. This Book of God is a great Book, and many
words are in it, and many large Volumes have been drawn out of it: but Christ
Jesus He is the Body of it, He is the mark all these words shoot at, He is
the Truth and Substance of all those Types, Shadows, Metaphors, Allegories,
Parables and Paradoxes, He is The MARROW in that Bone, and the Kernel in that
SHEL.

There cannot one Creature come into the world, nor go out of the world; not
one Angel ascends or descends upon that Ladder, but it comes from God and by
Jesus Christ, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
He is the Substance and Being thereof; and there is not One Creature but does
the Errand God sends him on: And therefore David ascribes the very worst of
actions to him; when Doeg cursed him, he said, Let him alone, for God has bid
him: Ps. 39. 9.
He knew no Creature could move toward him, to do him either good or hurt, but
what God bid it do: And therefore (says he) in whatever befell him, I held my
tongue and spoke nothing, because thou did it.

Beloved, know this, the interpretation of visions is from the Lord, as Joseph
said to Pharaoh, It is not in me to interpret dreams or visions, but God shall
give Pharaoh an Answer of peace; And so say I of this, A vision it is, and we
shall find it no where expounded; but God has set it down; It is thrown
amongst us, and writ for every one to read; some take it one way, and some
another; As Pilate said, What I have written, I have written: he that can find
the interpretation, let him.

Beloved, we spent much time the last Sabbath, but we could not get from under
the cloud, nor espy the bright pillar of light and comfort to discover the
meaning of the VISION: but you know I was forced to leave my discourse (as to
the Vision it self) Mu^^led up in those Sacred and Holy discontents, which yet
are like physic; though a little distastful, yet exceeding whollom. My beloved
is a garden walled about, Cant. 4. 12
and as a fountain sealed up. And (says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar) the
interpretation of dreams and visions is from the Lord. Dan. 2. 28.
There is a God in heaven that reveals secrets. Judge. 14. 18.
And he that Ploughs not with his heifer, shall not find out his riddle. He
which sent that vision to Jacob, taught him also how to interpret it: For in
the bare relation of the vision, what is in it, to comfort Jacob in the
condition he was in? And so here, to what purpose was this vision showed to
Moses? what concerned this the business in hand? (as you may conceive) Beloved,
He that can find out Gods meaning in these visions, shall find Hidden Manna to
nourish him: But he that thinks by his wit, and by his policy, and by his own
strength to find it out, be sure shall find nothing but a bone to choke him.

Jacob, Genesis 28.
as it seems, being gone from his Fathers house, and traveling all alone,
had many sad thoughts; he knew not what to do, nor what entertainment he should
have where he went; and it was a long journey; and Jacob was to go from his
Fathers house, where he had been brought up in the knowledge of God, and was to
go among Heathen Idolaters: These thoughts much perplexing Jacob, at night in
the open field, laying his head upon a heap of stones, he fell asleep* and
dreamed This Dream; which, whatever it seems to be in the History, In the mind
and meaning of God, it was the fittest that could have been revealed to him:
Behold (says the Lord) v. 15. I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou go, I will not leave thee. And Jacob being taught by God, and
not by his own wisdom, presently makes the right use of it; Thought he, I had
thought that I had left God behind me, In my Fathers house only; but I see God
goes along with me, God is in this place, and I was not aware: Had I been aware
God had been with me all this while, and that where ever I go, he is still with
me, I would not have been afraid: Now, Genesis 28. 16.
What shall I fear, Seeing God is with me in all my Journey, and where ever I
am? What need I be careful?

To see God Thus Really present with a man what will he, nay what can he be
afraid of? though there were a thousand deaths before him: God being so near a
man, And to see and believe this really, it would make him not afraid, though
he were to enter into a Sea of molten lead; who would be afraid, if God were
thus present with him, to back him, to defend, to preserve, to protect and to
encourage him, as here he was with Jacob? Its no marvel, Paul went through al so
bravely, having such a one to back him.

Now Jacob, whatever he thought when he left his Father, and knew not what
should become of him, nor whether he should go, nor where he should stay: Now
all these thoughts are vanished; for now, He sees God is with him wherever he
is, and withal the Creatures he meets with. And, that they can neither do me
good or Hurt Except He Order it. Then also (thought he) He being so near me, I
am sure all my prayers shall reach him, and he knows all my wants: (And what
has Jacob lost now? He has forsaken father and mother, and house and home; he
has bidden them all Farewell, and now he has [ God] instead of All) who I am
sure will suffer me to want nothing, and he is able and willing to relieve me:
He was with me yesterday, and I saw him not, and he is with me to day, and will
be to morrow, and for ever.

And so I say of this vision of Moses: this vision that he had here of Christ
(for it is no other) Whatever it seems to be; To him, at this time it was the
suitablest and the fittest that could be revealed to him: For Moses was to be
sent to Pharaoh, a great King; and He was but a Shepherd, such a one as was An
abomination to the Egyptians, Genesis 46. 34. Genesis 46. 34.
And besides, He was an Exile, a banished man out of Egypt: for he was fain to
fly thence for killing a man; and being come thither again, Exo. 2. 15.
he might be questioned for his life: for Pharaoh sought to slay Him for that
very thing. Exo. 10. 26.
And besides all this, he went to entreat for almost half the people of his
land to depart from him; and they must carry all their goods and all their
substance with them, all their cattle, and all their jewels; they would not
leave a Hoof behind. And besides, all the Kingdom depended upon their making of
bricks therefore no wonder though Moses made so many objections as he did; no
marvel he asks, Who am I that I should do this thing? Ib. 3. 11.
Who would have thought it possible for Him, To have brought it to pass? The
thing was of such admiration, and attended with so many difficulties.

And the vision was; The Wonder which made Moses turn aside to see it; Not that
the Bush Burned: for oftentimes Trees, in a violent wind, standing close
together, have been known by rubbing and rushing together to fall on fire, and
by many other occasions: but in that it Burned, and was not Burnt, Therein was
the Miracle. Who ever saw Trees on fire, and not consume? who ever saw a
forest on fire a whole day, and the wood not burnt? Now, I say, This
represented Christ so fitly, so oppertunely on this occasion, as could possibly
be.

It may be you may say unto me, This was a great miracle, Obj.
but I see no great matter in it for this occasion.

But though you see nothing, Ans.
yet Moses saw enough in it to bear up his mind against all those weighty
objections I before named.

You will say, Obj.
it may be; It Is true, in the sequel of the story God fitted Moses with
miracles for to bring about this great work.

It Is true, Ans.
the Egyptians had ten miracles, and the Israelites Three, Exodus 4.
and here Moses but One: but This One Miracle had such strength in it, Quest.
that it persuaded Moses, The work was possible. But wherein was the strength
of this argument unto Moses? Ans.
Suppose I could not tell you, Suppose God had not Revealed it unto me: what
would you do? But, Be not careful, God will Expound and Reveal it to us; He
that taught Moses the Text, Taught him the Comment and the meaning; Nay, He
that was the Text, was the Comment, to him: The Text is common to all, it is a
well that stands open for all to draw water at, and men expound, every one as
they understand: but the True Comment is a spring shut up, Cant. 4. 12
a fountain sealed; And truly, He that wrote the text, must give the
interpretation, or we shall never find it. But, be not careful, God will be
merciful to us, not only to show us the vision, in the letter, but the meaning
thereof; and it may be here is some one poor word that will give us light to
find it.

It is here said, God appeared to him Out of the midst of the Bush; from this
word [Ou^,] we have a hint of the meaning: he appeared to him outwardly by a
burning bush, but inwardly he taught him the meaning Out of it: All visions are
Typical, and represent and intend something equivalent to the outward
representation, Having a Reach beyond the External Sign; leanding us to the
Thing signified.

It is certain Christ jesus is He that all Visions tend to, HE is the substance
of all the Types, Shadows, Sacrifices; HE is the business that the whole world
was ever, and only is About, or ever shall be; He has been, is and shall be
the business of all ages, in one kind or other: they have been still busied in
setting forth HIM to us, by all Means and by all Helps: All Prophesies tend to
him, and all actions end in him.

But in what sense is he here set out, Quest.
In this Vision? It Is true, All actions are from him, and all tend to him, and
end in him: but all representations are not fit, proper, nor useful for all
occasions; in what sense therefore is this action or representation revealed in
this place to Moses?

I Answer, Ans.
In effect this Vision was the same that Jacobs was; the end of it was to
encourage Moses in the work in hand: Christ Jesus is often in Scripture
compared to fire, The light of Israel shall be for a fire and his Holy One for
a flame. Esa. 10. 17.
It shall burn and devour his Briers and his Thorns in one day. He was, and is
that Burning fire, that burns and consumes every thing, but not it self, as you
know fire does; Though it consumes every thing else, yet it cannot consume it
self: nay, indeed I may say, Fire, it burns every thing, and consumes Nothing;
for fire does but separate every thing to its own Element; Air to Air, Fire to
Fire Earth to Earth, and Water to Water: Fire makes a change, but there is
nothing lost: Such a Fire, is Christ Jesus in this place, who changes and
alters things according as he pleases: He it is that causes creatures to rise
out of the Elements, and creates them of the Elements, and brings them All (at
his pleasure) back again: He Creates them, and says when he pleases, not only,
Return again ye sons of Men: Ps^. 90. 3.
but to all Creatures, Return, Return.

And so thousands of thousands of millions of ceatures have been, and are daily
Made of the same Elements, and having continued their Creators pleasure, they
must dissolve and return whence they came, And out of That same matter,
successively, creatures have been and are daily made; Trees grow out of the
earth, and having fulfilled their work and their time, they fall to the earth
from whence they again arose; All things are in a continual change, Operation
and Distillation; Even as you see, Water put into a glass, and put on the fire
to still, Being close stopped, the vapors and the spirits ascend by heat, To the
very Top, and the heat being allayed, they fall and descend again: Now observe,
There is a change made, but there is nothing lost; for being close stopped,
nothing could go out of the glass: Even so, Things are Altered and Changed by
Christ Jesus; He makes Creatures of the Elements, they Ascend and Descend, but
he consumes nothing; for, Whether should they go? They cannot go out of the
world; And nothing They cannot be made, but by God himself; for, All the
creatures cannot bring the least Gnat to nothing; This is an undeniable Maxim*
There is required the same power to Annihilate it, as there was to Create it,
All the Kings in the earth cannot bring One creature to nothing: if they should
burn this body of mine to ashes, and scatter the ashes in the air, or cast them
into the River; Yet, there is nothing lost of me, but only every Element has
its part, to which it Returns.

Now I say, Christ Jesus is this FIRE, It is He that burns the Bush, Job 38. 14
but consumes it not: It is He (as Job says) that Turns them as wax to the
seal: You know wax is Altered and changed to any form; and change it as often
as ye will, The Seal, the Form you last gave it, that stands, till you destroy
it, and give it another: So does Jesus Christ, of one and the same Elements,
does he make and unmake and remake daily, new forms, and new impressions: and
that impression it last had, That stands, Till he cause it to Return, till he
unmake it, and new make it again: And I dare be bold to Affirm, That if our
great and glorious God should weigh the heavens and the earth now, as he did at
the making thereof, For the Scripture says, He measured the waters in the
Hollow of his Hand, and comprehended The dust of the Earth in a measure, and
weighed The Mountains in Scales and The Hills in a Balance. I say, it would be
found That Nothing were lost; For all he has Created and Raised, Made and
Unmade, Altered and changed All the whole world, as he does continually, having
raised thereout, such infinite millions of thousands of men, beasts, trees,
etc. and is still in changing and making them New, and Unmaking them again;
yet, I say, If He Weigh the whole matter of Heaven and Earth, of which they are
made, they would not weigh One Grain, less or more, then at the first Creation.
I say,

It is He that weighs the mountains in scales, Isa. 40. 12.
and the hills in a balance: It is He that measures the waters in the hollow
of his hand: It is He that Spans the heavens, and Measures the earth: he it is
that alters all things, And metes out his workmanship out of the four Elements,
and yet preserves the substance thereof, so that nothing is lost: Rev. 21. 5.
Behold, I make all things new, Rev. 21. yet he consumes nothing; They all
shall wax old as does a garment; and as a vesture shall thou change them, Heb.
1. 11, 12.
and they shall be changed: And who is it That does all this, but only Jesus
Christ the Son of the Father? who works all things, according to the mind of
his father: who is always Changing, always Renewing: There is not one Creature,
be it never so glorious, be it never so solid, but it is still In changing: no
creature is One and the same, not one minute; only God is One, God is the
Same; there is no house, no wall, no stone, no man, no Angel, no Archangel, no
Cherubim, no Seraphim, but is still in motion, it is still changing: Only
Thou, O Lord God, Blessed for ever, Thou alterest not, nor changest not, Thy
years are the same, Psa. 102. 26. 27.
They shall perish, but thou s^alt endure, They all shall wax old and change as
a garment, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years
shall have no end. Though some be so durable that they move not, nor change
not, in our apprehension, yet they do: As you know the Dial is in continual
motion, though you perceive it not: so, Though to your weakness they are
insensibly moved, yet there cannot be, Any thing at Rest and Unchangable but
only God Almighty.

Now then Moses (unto whom God spoke in this Sacramental Vision) he saw what
was the Meaning, the Substance thereof: it is as if the Lord should say, Moses as
thou see me Externally Burn This Bush, and consume it not; the same am I in
thee, and in All things else: And if I be So Present, In every thing, and with
every thing, what need thou to fear? what need thou to fear thine own
inability? what need thou to fear Pharaohs hard-heartedness? what need
thou to fear, the Peoples believing and obeying thee? If I be with thee, and
with them, what need thou doubt of any thing? though thou see things cross
and thwart, and contradict one another, and that the confusion of things
confounds thine understanding, yet be sure I am with them, and in them, and I
order all; and to me, all things work harmoniously: though to thee cross and
contradictory, yet all effect and bring about my Ends: they can do nothing, but
what is agreeable to my will; for they are all led by one spirit: Ephesians. 4 3.
they all to me do keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; with me,
Even all Contradistories, Coincide, And so far forth as thou can see and
believe this, they all shall do the Same to thee.

Beloved, you know, these my two hands are moved by the same spirit in me, and
the same soul moves all the members of my body; and think you will one member
hurt another? No: will my hand smite or pierce any member to hurt it? No
surely: and if it do, yet it is to better its condition; though for the present
it may hurt, and wound, and make it smart, yet it is not to Hurt it, but for
its greater good: So say I, In the world, what can happen, or fall out to hurt
us, or displease us? Truly nothing at all, If we were but come to this that we
could but keep the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 3.
in the bond of peace: If we did But Behold ONE Spirit moving and ruling
through the whole earth: And if we did but see that He is the cause of all Wars
and Tumults; and that He stirs up their spirits (for what End, is best known to
himself) and thought we see such varieties and changes in the world, yet in
him, and to him all things Coincide, Even those things that are contradictories
to us; even all changes, and oppositions, and contentions, and clashings in the
world, all in him Coincide; That is, all things to him are in agreement, in an
Harmony and work to his Almighty praise, to the Highest to the utmost that can
be. Yet, in regard of men, he may be dishonored; but in himself, and by
himself He Works out His own praise in all contrarieties; Because Really and in
truth Nothing contradicts his will; but if it do, His revealed will, yet, He
makes every act in the creature, be it good or evil, to contribute to his
praise.

And he whom God has been pleased to show this vision to, which he here showed
to Moses, and the interpretation thereof, he sees it so; and his will and Gods
clash not, but Harmonize and coincide; Gods actings, and their wills agree;
these Blessed Souls, They cannot find fault with any thing, Mar. 7. 37.
but subscribe that He has done all things well: How then can this man
distrust or murmr against God, in whatever falls out? because he sees God
doing all, Ps. 62. 11.
he sees one Spirit moves all, acts all; but, so far forth as men are Drowned
in the Letter of this Vision, they see none of all this; They only look upon
it, As a wonderful thing, that God did thousands of years since, and so take it
as an History; or according to their utmost interpretation, viz. That God in
the midst of the Afflictions of the Church, yet he preserved them, even as in
the ve^^s^re; though Pharaoh oppressed them, and Egypt was as a furnace to the
Israelites, in which God kept them, and brought them out of it: which
interpretation I condemn not: but I think there is more held forth: for God bid
Moses tell the Israelites, Exo. 3. 14.
I AM had sent him; He that was the Substance and Being of all things; the
worker and orderer of all things in heaven and earth: But so far as men see not
this, When they hear of wars, and rumors of wars, and Nation rising against
Nation, Mat. 24. 6.
they tremble, and they fear, and are at their wits end, not knowing they are
all led by the same spirit himself is; when as those who see the Almighty thus
working, ordering and filling all creatures; yea, Burning and Changing, Melting
and reducing the Elements from one form and shape to another; so that they see
one generation come, and another go; These men, they go on, in an holy Serenity
and Tranquillity of mind, knowing there shall not an hair of their head perish
without their Fathers pleasure and ordering, Luke 21. 18
Beholding his wisdom, and power, and goodness in all things, in all turnings
and tumblings, and overturnings, Having Cast all their care upon him: for they
know He takes care of them, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
and infinitely beyond what they could do for themselves: Therefore, they
Repose themselves sweetly upon his will and disposing: which condition they
prize above all earthly enjoyments, yea more then a thousand natural lives, if
they had so many: for, They have forsaken Houses, Lands, Wives, Children, etc.
and all for Him; and in him they enjoy and possess a hundredfold instead
thereof, even in this life: Mar. 10. 30
If they have them, they enjoy God in them, and through them: and though they
want all, yet they have God instead of all, who is to them more worth then all.

But others not being able to Hear or Bear these things, being not yet come to
be, either Fathers or Yong-men in Christ, living still in the Letter, and in
Shadows: whom indeed these fathers in Christ pity and pray for, 1 Cor. 9. 22
and their Bowels yern for them, and such is their strength that they are fain
to become weak to the weak, and all to all: not that they shall gain all, but
that they may gain some: for some are like the Egyptians here spoken of, that
not all the precepts or examples, nor all the Plagues in the world will
convince them; They will not take knowledge, That they are Acted and Guided by
an unseen hand and power; They see not, that the whole Universe is guided by
One Spirit; But they think that there is one Spirit in the English, and another
in the French, another in the Spaniard, and another in the Dutch, another in
the Turks; one in Europe, another in Asia, another in Africa, and another in
America: but be assured, As to the carrying on of the affairs and designs of
God in the world, One and the same Spirit rules in all: 1 Cor. 12. 6
And though there are diverse and contrary operations, yet all is by the same
Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 11.
it is God that works all in all: and though they be never so far asunder,
yet all act by the same Spirit.

As in my body, what is further asunder then my head and my foot? yet the same
soul in both: and know, that this One soul within me, has as great a care of
the lowest member as of the highest: And so in the world, though Almighty God
has set some in a high condition, and some in a low; yet know He Guides all;
He takes care (whatever thou think) that the Higher Members, and more
Exalted and Empowered, shall not oppress the lower (no further then he in his
wisdom thinks meet) He it is, that lets one man find favor in this man's eyes,
and another not: This, (as other actions) all along, are ascribed to him: He
gave them favor, and he hardened the heart of Pharaoh; 2 Samuel 16. 10.
and He bid Shimei cur^e David, and the like. Be assured (whatever clashing and
dashing thou observest in the world, So, (as to thy thinking) all will come to
Naught and Miscarry, yet be assured He it is that keeps all, Guides all, from
dashing one against another (but so far as his wisdom will have it so) and it
must be so, for the accomplishment of his most holy ends.

O therefore, let Vain man (and his ignorance, Nay his wisdom, and his will)
stoop, yea stoop to the very dust before him, and leave all to him, and be
afraid To Censure His doings; or to say, concerning the Almighty, Such an
action was not well done: Such a man, O it were well, if he were Removed: Oh!
he does a great deal of hurt: Oh! let him be cut off: Oh! Beloved, know, God
Almighty is a God of Infinite wisdom; and art thou wiser then he? must it needs
be as thou conceivest? no, no, you are deceived; submit your judgments to him;
Expand and give up your selves, and all you are and have, to his Wisdom and
Soveraignity, and do not once dare to oppose that Infinite, Infinite Wisdom of
God, in comparison of whose wisdom, all the wisdom of all men and Angels put
together is but folly before him. He charge his Angels with folly, Job 4. 18.
Chapter 15. 15.
and the Heavens are unclean in his sight: what art thou then, Poor Crawling
worm, to lift up thy self in his presence?

But, Heb 11. 24.
thus to see God Doing all, This is that Moses saw by the eye of faith in this
Burning Bush: It is He, that Overturns the world; It is He that burns every
Creature; New-forms, and New-shapes The whole Universe; He is that Great
Potter, that makes, destroys and Re-makes at his pleasure, what vessels he
pleases: He makes vessels of honor and dishonor; Romans 9. 21
He alters and changes every Creature, New-moulds and New-makes all, and yet he
destroys nothing. And know this, and set to thy seal, that whatever He does, He
cannot but do all things well, superlatively well; Mar. 7. 37.
so well, as it cannot be better. And hereby, the Lord will also, set His seal
to this soul, so that He and It, are so joined together and made One, that they
will never part.

But he that looks upon the bare vision, in the bare letter, he cannot see
these things: What is it to him, that Moses saw the vision? That is gone and
past: But, do thou see what Moses saw? Do thou see all acted, altered and
changed by him? Do thou see Him alone doing all? That it is He that Vn-makes
and New-makes? That it is He that makes men young, and makes men Old? That it is
He, that brings to the grave, Ps. 90. 3.
and turns man to destruction, and says, at his pleasure, return again ye
sons of men? That it is He that makes and forms man, and all Creatures, and
brings them back again to their first principles; and thereof Creates,
Raises and re-makes new Creatures? Do thou Thus see, That the whole Universe
is but a Body, acted and guided by one soul, by one spirit? And that it is
nothing else but a Carcass moved and led up and down by one spirit? And that He
is the substance of all and of every Creature; the meanest, the smallest, the
vilest, as well as of the most glorious? Do thou see HIM in the midst of all
this changing and tumbling up and down? That it is He, that destroys and
preserves all things; Unmakes and Re-makes as the Potter does, and yet, the
clay is the same, but that it is he which is still producing new forms? Do
thou see that it is He that does all these things? that it is He that preserves
all, and weighs all? so that nothing is lost.

For did not he Preserve all entire in themselves, every element in its
Property and Nature, and keep them within their own bounds, (which is His
Excelling glory) they would presently devour and Overcome one another. Fire, if
it did predominate, and were not bounded, it would turn all things into Fire,
it would make all things like it self. And so of Water, it would turn all to
Water, and so of the rest. But he has set them their bounds, which they cannot
pass; hitherto shall thou come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed. Job 38. 11
So that he keeps all things Entire, in their own Element, and every thing in
its Proper place. And in all this change or alteration and tumbling of the
elements together, Herein is His power seen, That there is nothing lost, nor
diminished. Do thou see all this? Psalm. 93. 1.
and that it is He that rules the Nations, and that it is He alone that
reigns; and that HE commands and orders the affairs of Princes and all
Nations, and that all the Kings of the earth are in his hands? Psa. 31. 15
My times are only in thine hand, says David: And know, though thou think,
That Kings and Rulers, and others walk according to their Own wills, and
contrary to thine, and thou art therefore offended: yet know, They all walk
according to my will and pleasure, says God; and though thou and they think
otherwise, and though they have no such purpose, to obey my will, but to please
themselves, and fulfill their own wills, and not mine; yet I have them so in my
hand, that they shall all in the end serve to my praise and glory; yea, even in
that they think they serve themselves, and their own ends: Poor Ignorant souls!
Alas, when as they glory and pride themselves in their great pomp, attendance
and command; and think that it is They that Rule, when as they see not, Psalm.
66. 7. Psalm. 66. 7.
that it is He that rules by his power for ever and ever. And Dan. 4. 17. Dan.
4. 17.
The most High rules in the Kingdoms of men: He it is alone, that does
whatsoever He will, and not they will, He sends the sword, and gives it a
Commission; Jer. 24. 12
The Sword never awakes Till he say, Zac. 3. 7.
awake O sword: And it is said of our Savior, That he came to bring peace unto
men, Luke 2. 14. Luke 2. 14.
Peace on earth, and good will toward men: And yet our Savior says again,
Matthew. 10. 34. Mat. 10. 34, 35.
I come not to send peace but a sword: and verse. 35. I am come to set a man
against his father, and the daughter against her mother; and the daughter in
Law against her mother in Law* etc. what strange contradictions are here? What
flesh and blood can reconcile these Scriptures? yet both very true.

Again, Phil. 3. 21.
do thou see, That it is he that shall change these our vile bodies, and make
them like the glorious body of Jesus Christ? Phil. 3. 21. Jesus Christ will
purify tho^^ that cleave to him, and purify them like unto himself. Fire, I
told you, never rests working and purifying, till it has brought All things to
be as pure as it self: 1 John 3. 3.
So, That Divine Fire Jesus Christ, will never leave purifying and cleansing
His people, till he bring them to be Purer and Purer, Isa. 10. 17. and 9. 18.
Finer and Finer, till they be all made pure, Mar. 9. 49.
As himself is pure: He who is called often [Fire] in Scripture, as Mar. 9. 49.
He will purify the impure from the pure, the dross from the gold; The light of
Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame, and he shall burn and
devour his briars and thorns in one day; All wickedness shall be before him
like the Thorns of a forest before the fire, and shall not be able to stand
before Him; It shall All, be burnt up, and nothing remain thereof: as it came
of nothing, so it shall return to nothing: And this Christ will do, not at
once, but by degrees; as Fire makes not a thing at first, as hot as it self,
but by degrees: but it will not rest nor cease till it has; Heb. 12. 29.
Heb. 12. 29. Our God is a consuming fire: Wickedness, nor any impurity, shall
not be able to stand before this consuming fire; no more then thorns and
stubble before devouring fire: but by degrees he will purify us throughout, in
bodies, souls and spirits: All the works of man (as of man) shall be burnt up,
and he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire: as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. 15. 1 Cor. 3. 15.
For the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is: Therefore, I say
take heed of Standing Up before this fire; If thou ar^ not (...) ^own
beforehand, this ^^e will burn thee down to ashes. Do not quench the motions of
the Spirit in you, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
do not strangle them in the birth, as Pharaoh commanded the Hebrew Midwives;
To strangle the Malechildren of the Israelites in the birth, Exodus 1. Exo. 1.
18.
18. But, let this Fire have its Perfect work; as the Apostle James ^am. 1. 4.
says of Patience; Expand* and give up your selves to Him: Let him work his
will in you, give him leave to burn up your dross, That you may be brought
nearer and nearer to him, and be made more like unto him, that ye may more
fully enjoy him; That so at length ye may be Swallowed up and Emptied into him;
Even into that Ocean whence ye came, as all the small rivolets which come from
the Sea, Eccl. 1. 7.
never rest till they return into the Sea: And let us continually Magnify the
infinite goodness of Almighty God, who of his Mere mercy will so far Humble
himself, Mal. 3. 3.
to sit as a refiner over his work, and never cease, but is always Purifying,
Clarifying and Refining, from one degree of purity to another, till we come to
be like unto his own Dear Son Jesus Christ; and all our dross so separated,
till we be made all pure silver; and pure gold: and that all our chaff may be
removed, Mat. 3. 12.
till we become pure wheat, and fit to be gathered into our Lords Garner: Even
till we be Clarified, Rarefied and Glorified: even like unto the Precious and
Glorious body of Jesus Christ himself, who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

TRUE and DIVINE EXORCISM, OR THE DEVIL CON-JURED BY JESUS CHRIT.
MARK I*^5, 26. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came
out of him.


The Substance of several Sermons preached at Kensington Public meeting place.
AS the holy Apostle Paul divides a man into body, 1 These. 5. 23.
soul, and spirit, so do I this present Text; the body is the history according
to the letter; the soul is such moral observations as arise and are deduced
from the letter and history; the SPIRIT is such heavenly instructions, and
divine documents, as rightly applied, may be fitly termed, The Marrow and
Quintesscence of the Word of God.

The History, according to the letter, is so plain, that he that runs may read
and understand it, Hab. 2. 2.
and so needs no explanation; and therefore I intend to collect the moral
observations: And,

1. From the place where this (...), This man with an unclean spirit was, in
the Synogogue at Capernaum: We from hence are taught, That no place can secure
from an unclean spirit; it is not a Church, Chancel, Communion Table, or Pulpit;
no Bishop, or rigid Chancellor, or stout Archdeacon, nor yet any Politic
Official, can with all their wit, wealth or power, excommunicate him, or drive
him out, when he has once entered in: He appeared among the Sons of God, Job 1.
6. Job 1. 6.
He stood at Ioshuah the High Priests right hand, Zech. 3. 1.
Zech. 3. 1. nay into Heaven it self, and Paradise he intruded: therefore we
should, as our Savior says, Beware even of Men, Such men as are of His
spirit, Unclean; they will deliver yon up to their counsels, Mat. 10. 17. Mat.
10. 17.
And the Apostle has it, Phil. 3. 2. Phil. ^2.
Beware of dogs, That is, beware of men of proud, cruel, fierce and dogged
spirits. And then,

2. As no place can secure us from Others, Evil Men or Devils without us; So,
nor can none of us assure our selves that we are what we should be; If Templum
Domini, If the Jews crying out, The Temple of the Lord, would have served the
turn, Ier. 7. 4. Ier 7. 4.
but that did not* though they rested secure, and blessed themselves in it: So
also do we now in the Outward Baptism; so in the Outward receiving of the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and also in the outward profession of
Christianity, etc. Sed ista omnia folia sunt, but all these are but leaves, but
it is the fruit God looks after: For though no tree that bears fruit, but has
leaves, yet Woe to those Trees which bear nothing but leaves. Then,

3. From the Devil his confessing Christ, we learn, That though, as Paul says,
Ore fit confessio, with the mouth confession is made, Romans 10. 10. Romans 10. 10.
yet that is nothing without the other, except the heart believes unto
salvation; for that confession is vain, which is void of faith, says
Fulgentius.

4. Observe, For all the uncleaneness and strong possession of this unclean
spirit, as soon as our Savior speaks (for he spoke a s one Having Authority,
and not as the Scribes) 'twas a destruction to him, for he cries out, (...),
Art thou come to destroy, or to torment us? Luke 8. 28. Luke 8. 28.
the Scribes and Pharisees might have preached long enough ere this Devil would
have Roared: For as some go not out, but by fasting and prayer, Mat. 17. 21.
Mat. 17. 21.
so some unclean spirits will not stir out of men, but by powerful preaching,
which is Christ coming Himself with power, and casting them out: And,

5. From this Renting the poor man, we learn how furious and raging his malice
is to man; Tearing and renting Them whom he may not, cannot longer possess: The
Dragon never watched the Woman so narrowly, as when nearest her time of
deliverance, Rev. 12. 4. Rev. 12. 4.
So Pharaoh pursued the Isralites most eagerly, when departing his land. And
the Prophet Isaiah says, For unto us a Child is born and a Son given, Isa. 9.
6. Isa. 9. 6.
but immediately before he says, That every battle of the warrior is with
noise, and garments tumbling in blood; and this shall be with burning and
devouring fire. And it is true what our Savior spoke, Mat. 10. 34
I came to send fire on the earth; and, I came not to send peace, but a sword,
etc. And,

6. In that our Savior would not, did not hear the Prayers of the unclean
spirit, though implicitly here, as explicitly Chap. 5. 6. it is said, Mar. 5. 6,
7.
he wor^hipt him; and v. 17. adjured him, and v. 10. much besought him. You
will say to me, It Is nowonder;' Iwas a Devil that prayed; and so I say too,
it is no wonder we are not heard when we pray; for (if we be Evil and
unregenerate men) it is the Devil in us that prays. Proclus tells us in his
Tract called [(...)] of the Athenians, that they had a strange way in pleasing
themselves by Antiphrastical expressions, as by calling things and persons by
their contraries; as to call their common Hangman* the Lover or Friend of the
people; the Grave, and House; a Prison, or Dungeon, a Place; Vinegar,
Sweetness; Dirt, Crystal; Gall, Honey.

So men may spice this Cake, and sauce this Dish, and please themselves as they
will with the^^ own prayers and duties; they may as it is Isa. 5. 20. Isa. 5. 20.
call sweet, sour; good evil; darkness, light, etc. But woe be to them (says
the Prophet there) for that which is highly esteemed among men, is in Gods
sight an abomination. And for certain, if we will take Christ's Word in this
particular, Luke 11. 23. Luke 11. 23.
He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad: The Application is easy; Only a Question is to be resolved.

Seeing, Quest.
as Ioh. 9. 31. Joh. 9. 31.
God hears not sinners; and the Prophet David says, If I incline my heart to
wickedness, Ps. 66. 18.
the Lord will not hear my prayers: then how shall that man do, that is yet in
his sins? pray he cannot, may not; if he should, no hopes has he to be heard;
nay as Solomon has it, The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 15. 8. Pro. 15. 8.


Augustine on John 9. says, If God should not, would not hear sinners, Answ.
in vain had the Publican said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: And Chrysostom
upon that place, Mat. 7. 7, 8. Mat. 7. 7, 8
To him that asks shall be given, etc. Every one, says he, whether just or
unjust, shall receive, if he, or when he shall pray or ask really by Christ and
in Christ: And therefore there are two things to be considered in the sinner:
1. The sin it self. 2. The purpose and intention of him that commits it.


Now for certain it is, That God is so propense to mercy and forgiveness, and he
sees not as man sees; Mat. 12. 20
that according to his Word, smoking flax he will not quench, if there be a
smoke; if but true desires wrought by Jesus Christ: but if it smoke not, it is
dangerous; and then, I say, nothing is absolutely and undequa* evil, but sin;
nor any thing perfectly good, but God. It Is good therefore men should try their
prayers, whether of the flesh or spirit. Too many (though they pray, yet there
is no smoke, no fire from heaven to kindle their sacrifices,) they seek
themselves, not the things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. Phil. 2. 21.
Our prayers should be for our selves and outward things, as the morning dew,
which does ascend and vanish: Dwell not upon those Petitions, insist not long on
them but cut them off short, and say, Father, if thou will; yet not my will* but
thine be done, Luke 22. 42. Luke 22. 42.
And as Grego. says, What God has not predetermined to grant, cannot by
prayer be obtained; and therefore be very tender of urging God much in that
case: Nay though many times God does defer to give presently, what yet he may
intend to give; as the Apostle confesses, 2 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. I 2.
I besought the Lord thrice, and obtained his request then: Yet as Augustine on
Psalm. 53. v. 4. Psalm. 53. 4.
Let not the sick depart from the Physician but wait his time and opportunity;
nor let him counsel his Physician, nor direct or prescribe him: but let him
wait on him, and wait in patience, both for what, and when he will grant. To
proceed:

7. In that Christ, (...), rebuked him, it shows to us, That Christ is stronger
then the Devil. Although some places of Scripture seem to contradict this;
Quest.
As in the fall of Adam all dyed, The Devil prevailed over the seed of the
Woman: And by the confession of Christ, This is the hour and the power of
darkness, Luke 22. 25. Luke 22. 53.
and though Satan be called the Prince of the Air That rules, etc. And lastly,
from that place, Luke 13. 23, 24. Luke 13. 23, 24.
Few there are that shall be saved. The Devil in all this seems to have more
power then Christ.

But it is said again, Answ.
Ioh. 19. 11. Joh. 19. 11.
Thou could have no power over me, except 'twas given thee: And for those
seeming contrarieties in the forenamed places; First; though it is said, As in
Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15. 22.
yet it is said, in Christ shall all be made alive; Now he is of more might that
revives a man, then he who only kills hi^^. For the second, This is the Hour;
but that is but a short time to rule in: what is an hour to a year, or to
eternity? And thirdly, though Satan be called the Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2
yet there is a limitation; and though he rules, Only he now rules; it is but
for a short time; and not absolutely neither, but only permissively. And for
the last; Few there are that shall be saved: that is not said positively, but
by way of Interrogation only: for Peter asked our Savior, Are there few that
shall be saved? by way of question only: And for the further manifesting of
this truth; though Satan be fortis armatus, Luke 11. 21. Luke 11. 21.
The strong man armed: yet our Savior is fortior superveniens, A stronger then
He coming upon him, ver. 22. And though Job speaks of a Behemoth and Leviathan^
yet he also mentions a hook for his nostril: though Peter in his Epistle
speaks, that the Devil goes about as a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom he may devour: yet we know, that Vicit Leo de Tribu Iudae, the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah has conquered: And though John in his Revelation,
styles him the Old Dragon; yet the Prophet David says plainly, Ps. 91. 13.
That thou shall go upon the Lion, and tread upon the Dragon, Psalm. 91. 13.

And that Our great God, and Our Savior may have their due, know for certain,
and believe it, that all Power, all Might, all Strengh, all Dominion and
Omnipotency, are all His, Absolutely and solely, so that no creature share;
with him in the least: and therefore those distinctions of the will of God, 1.
Antecedent. Of the Sign, and Of his Beneplacit. 2. Consequent. As also of his
Revealed and Secret, Permissive and Operative, Wills.

Are no other but Subterfuges of ignorance, and so confessed by the Authors and
Inventors themselves: and yet withal, I do profess my detestation with
Augustine, to say that God is the Author of evil: for it is impossible, that
Entity should be Nonentity, for such is all evil.

And yet I say, that Coincidence of Contraries, nay of Contradictories, which
in any created nature are impossible, may be, and are in God: as wisdom in him
is said to be, Wisd. 7. 22.
1. Stable. One; yet 2. Moveable Manifold.

Yet, in Psalm. 139. 12. Psalm. 139. 12.
The light and the darkness to him are both alike: and All Actions are (...) to
him, though not the Evil, or (...) He it is Alone. That (...) the (...) slay,
Isa. 54. 16. Isa. 54. 16.
So of Cain against Abel; and Giants of the old world against Noah* Philisti^s
against Isaac; Esau against Jacob; Pharaoh against the Israelites; Magicians
against Moses; the Tempter against Christ; Simon Magus against Simon Peter;
Gentiles against Believers; Antichrist and Christ: Thus throughout the whole
Creation, Good is set against Evil Life against death; and so are the sinners
against the godly: So look upon all the works of the most High, and there are
two and two, One against Another, Ecclus. 33. 16. Ecclus. 33 16.
And therefore, Further know this, we must not measure Eternity by temporary
Moments: I confess, I have been a man almost fifty years longer then when I was
born: and never a one that now hears me, but is a week elder then he was this
day seventhnight; but God has not been God One Hour longer, then when the
world was first made, Almost six thousand years yet ago. I grant, that here in
the Kingdom of Matter (as I may call it,) During the Hour and Power of
darkness, Luke 22. 53. Luke 22. 53.
There may be some contest, some Prevalence. Moses hands may flag, and the
Amalekites prevail, Exodus 17. 11. Exodus 17. 11.
but what is that to God? Neither has Place any proportion to the Immensity of
our God; nor Time to his infinity: And further, to the clearing this question,
Vter fortior, whether is the stronger? I say, as St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 3. 2 Cor.
13. 3.
if ye seek an experim^nt, take this for a scantling: never did our Savior
Christ Command any Unclean spirit, but He Obeyed, when commanded, but he
trembled before commanded, knowing the power of Christ to be above himself:
Look into, and search the Scriptures, and it will plainly appear so.

But if any shall further object, and say, Object.
Si scirent etiam rabidi sculpsisse Leones; If Lions should turn Limners, the
Devil then would draw a large story, and show manifold Examples of his power
and strength: He knows how many times Christ has stood at the door and
knocked: And we would not let him enter; How many times, He has Cried aloud,
when the unclean spirit was in men, and he has been like a deaf Devil, and
would not let them Hear: How often God himself has called to the Creatures for
their Testimony when he suffered dishonor, when he like a dumb Devil in them,
would not let them speak: What Miracles of blessings and judgments; And what
stupendous acts of his power and providence Christ has wrought in the earth;
When yet The Unclean spirit, as a blind Devil, would not let men see or
perceive them; And did not the Devil by his Policy and Power, Sweep down The
third part of the Stars of Heaven? Rev. 12. 4
What that? but the Third part of such who have been as STARS in the Profession
of Christ, yet are fallen from Their own Stedfastness, And what can be s^^d to
all this?

It Is true, Quest.
All this, and a thousand times more mischiefs has he wrought: All this power
has He had, has still, and will have over his own Vassal, the children of
Unbelief: But, All these, Help as so many demonstrative arguments, to
exemplify the Infinite, Incomprehensible power of God: for All the power the
Devil has, is from God: for as the Apostle Paul has it, There is no po^er but
of God; the powers that are, are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1. Romans 13. 1.


Beloved, let not this pass, without our circumspect and diligent
consideration: Can there ^e (think you) any power stronger or greater then Gods
power? seeing all power is Essentially, Originally and Really in God, and flows
from God: nor no power but of God; nay Every power is Under His; And what
powers are, He constitutes, appoints, ordains, orders and limiteth, as he
pleases, to his own will and pleasure, for judgments or mercies.

It was and is undeniably true, what Christ said to Pilate, boasting of, and
abusing his power, Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee: Joh.
19. 10.
and have power to release thee? said Pilate: but Christ replied, Thou could
have no power, Except it was given thee from above: which implies, as if Christ
should say, That Even, Thou Pilate, who Accountest and judge thy self so
great and powerful; why thou thy self art under Caesar; Thy Power is subject to
His; and His, how great soever it be, is from God: nay further, though thou
should desire and Hunt after, or purchase, by bribes or favor, to be
instated with judicial strength and power; yet it is for certain, Thou, even*
Thou, could not obtain nor enjoy it: and I know for truth, what power thou
now art entrusted with it is not thine own; It Is given thee, and may be taken
again from thee: so that its plain, that the very power that Pilate had over
our Savior, was given to him even by our Savior himself.

And now, who can doubt whether is the stronger? When that the strength and
power the Devil has, is from God; and we know that God (though in himself
infinite) yet is but finitely received in or by the Creature: And what
proportion or measure the creature has of power, God himself (who knows the
capacity of his creatures) orders and distributes to them as much as he
pleases: who can doubt whose ARSENAL and Magazine is better furnished: When
all the Fiery Darts and Arrows of the Devil are from Gods Storehouse? His
quiver indeed may Rattle, Nah. 3. 2.
and he may shoot out sharp and bloody arrows, which wound and kill; yet it is
Gods Hand that fills His Quiver, and it is Gods Power that sends and directs his
arrows to the right mark, and he orders every dart, How deep it shall pierce.

In brief, as Isaiah says, Isa. 26. 12. Isa. 26. 12
Thou, O Lord, have wrought our works in us: so the Devil must confess, Even
the worst, the blackest, saddest Devils must say, and acknowledge, that God is
their life, without whom they could not live: God is their strength, without
whom they could not move: God is their BEING, without whom they were nothing,
and could not be at all. Beloved, these are truths; But are ye able to bear
them? take away [God] from the creature, and the creature is not: and
therefore it is worthy our observation, that there are very few or none, Evil
Actions (as they are Actions) that are in Scripture attributed to Satan, that
are not likewise ascribed to God, either for things External, or Internal.
Truly friends, I may not keep back any part of Gods counsel, for fear of the
Jews, Although they be Angry at the preaching of these things. First, For
External Actions; If we look upon Job, Did the Sabeans come, and take away his
Oxen, and slew his servants? and was that done by Satan, upon that Commission
given to him? Job 1. 12. Job 1. 12.
All he has is in thine hands: why, yet we know, it was God gave him that very
Commission, who is the Lord of all Hosts; yet acted by Bands of Sabeans and
Armies of men. Did the Chaldeans set upon his Camels, drove them away, and slew
his servants? know, Ps. 18. 34.
as David says, The Lord teaches my fingers to fight: And the mouth of the
sword of the Chaldeans, could not bite, till God bad it: Did the fire burn up
his sheep and his servant? yet we know, that it is the Lord God, Who raineth
snares, fire and Brimstone, Psalm 11. 6. and in that very History, (...)
it is called Ignis Dei, The fire of God, Job 1. 16. Job 1. ^^
Did a great wind come from the wilderness, and blew down the house and killed
Iob^ children? yet it is certain, He that is the Lord* Bringech the winds out
of his treasure, Psalm. 135. 7. Ps. 135. 7.
and Job says, The Lord has taken away, etc. Job 1. 21. Job 1. 21.
But to come nearer yet; Did the Devils enter into the Girgasites swine, So
that they ran headlong into the sea and were drowned? Mar. 5. 13.
but yet they did not, could not enter into them, till Christ bade them go: no,
no, He that sends, is greater then he that is sent, the Lord is above the
servant; though the Devil may desire to do mischief, yet he cannot accomplish
it, till he be authorized and empowered by God himself.

Now to come to spiritual Actions, and such as may seem to have a Near, and
almost inseparable ^ffinity with the worst sort of evil [Sin] for the other
were but Medicines, Nocumenta Documenta, Nocuments are Documents: Did the Devil
Harden Pharaohs heart? yet the Text says plainly of God, I will harden
Pharaobs heart? Exodus 7. 3. Exodus 7. 3.
Obduration and hardness of heart is a grievous sin, and a Heavy punishment,
yet God says I will harden: Did the Devil tempt Absalom to take his fathers
Concubines? yet 2 Samuel 12. 11. 2 Samuel 12. 11.
(says God,) I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house: Yet
again, Thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel: Did
a Lying spirit, that is, (the Devil) Seduce Ahab, that he might go up, and fall
at Ramoth-Gilead? yet it is recorded in the same place, Behold, the Lord has
put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, says Micaiah, 1
King. 22. 23. 1 King. 22 23.


I will sum up all in HIM who is the sum of all, Christ Jesus: Ioh. 12. 40.
Joh. 12. 40
who citing that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 6. 10. Isa. 6. 10.
where God commands to make the heart of this people fat, and shut their eyes,
etc. Christ says plainly, Ioh. 12. 40. HE has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart, that they should not see^, nor be converted: And (says
he) These things spoke Isaias, when he had seen the glory of God, And then
spoke of him. So likewise did the Devil enter into Judas his heart, to betray
his Lord, Luke 22. 3. It was true, yet I will say, as Austin upon Psalm. 61.
toward the end of it, Malignus Judas Traditor Christi: Maligni persecutores,
etc. Judas was wicked, who betrayed Christ; the Jews were wicked, who
persecuted him with malice to death; all of them were impious, and miserable
wretches to crucify the Lord of life: And yet, Paul says to the Romans, Romans
8. 32. Romans 8. 32.
The FATHER^ spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, (...)
tradidit, BETRAYED HIM: yet it was HIS FATHER; And Ephesians. 5. 2. Ephesians. 5. 2.
tradidit seipsum, And He gave up Himself, and yet Judas He betrayed him

What shall we say herein? Dispone si potes, distingue sipotes; dispose and
distinguish if thou can: To that end, Let us then take the counsel of our
Savior, Let us give unto God the things that are Gods, and unto man, what is
man's: let us ((...)) with boldness, give unto God; as the SOLE, SUPREME Agent,
The Glory of all Actions, of what nature or kind soever (as actions.)

As to the soul, The power and act of seeing, but of seeing doubly or dimly to
the organ it uses: so God gives to the soul, the Act and power of Hearing,
smelling, tasting, speaking, thinking, Going, and Doing, and the like: but for
the Evil and viciousness of any, or all these, to the organ they use and
employ: In b^ief, Take this as the sum of all; let God have all the glory,
honor and praise of all actions; they belong to him alone: but to our selves
let us take shame and confusion, Baldness to every head, and shame upon all
faces, Ezekiel. 7. 18. Ezekiel. 7. 18.
Gods righteousness, in all these, is like the great mountains, and his
^udgements are a great depth, Psalm. 36. 6.
Psalm. 36. 6. like the mountains indeed, Eternal, and Eternally mountains,
though we climb never so long, never so high, They are still past finding out:
and are like the great DEPTH, Depth still, though we sink never so low; and
therefore Cusanus speaks learnedly to this point, Omnia creat Deus, etiam
alterabilia, mutabilia, corruptibilia and contraria, etc. that is, God creates
all things, alterable, changeable, corruptible, contrary; yet he created not
Alteration, Changeableness, Corruption nor Contrariety: for seeing that he is
HIMSELF Entity Life and Substance, Essence, and Being, He does not, cannot
create Nonentity Destruction, Death or Ruin, but He is Alone BEING,. LIFE
and SUBSTANCE.

And yet so it musts needs be; for God is the God of Order: 1 Cor. 14. 33.
and order implies plurality and diversity.

And then secondly, what harmony or music is made upon one string? or if it be
a Monochorde, yet there must be diverse f^ets, and stops, and cliffs: In this
case you know, The sweetest Harmony is made where there is the greatest
discord, and Variety.

To go a step or two further: In that famous and memorable story of Joseph; his
Brethren, it is said, sold him to the Midianitish Merchants in their malice, and
they into Egypt, where he was tempted by his Mistress, An act worse then the
other: yet when he makes himself afterward known to his brethren, Genesis 45. 5.
Genesis 45. 5.
Joseph says plainly, Misit me Deus, etc. God sent me hither before you into
Egypt; They did it, and God did it; they indirectly, God directly: yet Joseph
says, it was not you, but God sent me before. So also in that act of Shimei,
he was set on by the Devil to curse David, yet David says, Let him alone, let
him curse; the Lord has sent Shimei, and bid him, To curse David, 2 Samuel 16.
11. 2 Samuel 16. 11.


In all these actions, sin cleaves so near and fast to the Action, that
Chrysostom in Tom. 1. upon the 45. Chapter of Genesis, cries out, Vidisti
Joseph? toll malitiam fratrum ejus, toll invidiam fratricidii, commentum,
etc. simul abstuleris omnia illa quibus Aegypti stetit incolumitas: have thou
seen Joseph? take away the malice of his brethren, their envy, and their lie,
you will then take away all those things whereon Egypts safety stood, and the
interpretation of Pharaohs dreams, revealed by God himself to Joseph. And
Drexel. Heliotrop. lib. 5. cap. 8. says further and clearly, Toll Iudae
avaritiam, Iudaeorum invidiam, simul abstuleris gen^is humanae lytrum, Christi
sanguinem and mortem: Take away Judas Covetousness, and the Jews Envy and
Malice, and you will take away the virtue and efficacy of the blood of Christ
Jesus. Again, Toll Diabolos, certamina, victoriae, praemia magna ex part
cessabunt: Do but take away Devils, and then spiritual conflicts and trials,
victories and conquests over temptations, nay, rewards for them, will also
cease and end: these quotations out of the Primitive Fathers, I rather use for
your help and good, then any way to strengthen truth, which needs not any
humane assistance: but the weakness and childishness of men need all helps,
that they may receive and digest such meat as is fit for strong men.

Beloved friends, were it not for Tyrants, where should we find glorious
Martyrs? The furious sire tries and distinguishes the gold from dross: From
Contraries, every action seems necessary: it is God himself, by his Prophet
Isaiah, that says, I make peace, and create war, Isa. 44. 7. Isa. 44. 7.


Some may say, Object.
This is hard, and seems impossible to distinguish betwixt Actio and Culpa
Actionis, the Action and the faultiness or sinfulness of the Action.

True, Answ.
it is so to us, impossible; but the word of God, Heb. 4. 12. Heb. 4. 12.
is sharper then a two-edged sword, and divides betwixt the soul and the
spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and secrets of the heart: so also,
WE cannot divide the fire: yet the voice and the word of the Lord divides the
flames of fire, Psalm. 29. 7. Psalm. 29. 7.
his word and voice divides between the fire and the heat, ^asil Hexam. Hom. 6.
which to man is impossible: for as Basil speaks, Fire, It Is heat for the
wicked, it is light for the just; so also it purifies gold, it consumes stubble;
it softens wax, it hardens dirt.

From what has been said, we may learn three things: First, HUMILITY toward
God: Woe to him that striveth with his Maker, Isaiah 45. 7. Isa. 45. 7.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee? to walk humbly with thy God, Mic. 6. 8. Mic. 6. 8.
You know, Luke 1. 48.
God did regard the humbleness of the Virgin Mary: as for the proud, He sends
them empty away, beholds them afar off: if we be proud and haughty, and lifted
up in our selves, he has power enough; (for all power is in his hands) to
bring us down: This is more for our benefit, then we are aware of, to be
Emptied and laid Low in our selves, To be Children in our own esteem, Little in
our own eyes, as God Commands and highly Commends. This fits us for His
Heavenly Kingdom; And all that God requires of us, Is out of mere Love to us,
and out of tender care for the Good of Man. There is not One of His
Commandments but they are made more for man's good and Salvation then out of
respect to Himself, as Eliphaz and Elihu confessed, Job 22. 23. Job 22. 23
A wise man may be Profitable to Himself but not to God? Is it any Pleasure to
the Almighty that thou Art Righteous? Is it Gain to Him that thou make thy
ways Perfect? and again, Job 35. 6, 7.
Job 35. 6, 7. If thou sinnest, what can thou do against Him? or if thy
Transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto Him? Or, If thou be
righteous what give thou unto Him? Or what receives he of thine hand? Thy
wickedness may Hurt a man, as thou Art, and thy righteousness may profit Him;
But, what can thou take away from God, or add unto Him? certainly nothing;
He remains Perfect, Eternal, Unchangeable, Impassible, to Him nothing can be
given or added, detracted or subtracted. If a man throw up a Heavy stone into
the air it will return down again upon his own Head; we can make God neither
Richer nor Poorer, Greater or Lesser, but He has a care of Us and Our Good, He
has a hand always open, Ready to give if we could but receive, He is Rich and
free to all that call upon Him, And He requires nothing at our Hands but only
this; That we quietly receive of Him, what he is willing to give.

Secondly, we may learn hence, confidence and trust in God; for he is stronger
then all our enemies; though the hills should be moved, and those hills carried
into the midst of the Sea; and though the seas roar, Ps. 46. 2, 3.
and the heathen rage: yet God is mightier, and can curb and command the waves,
Mar. 4. 39
and make A great calm: when the Nations are in a Hurly-burly, and they are
like a tempes^uous sea, and as contrary winds ru^^ing and fighting one against
another: if Jesus Christ do but say to these troubles, Peace and be Still; they
must obey, and become still and cal^: and therefore we should with David, check
and correct our weakness and diffidence, Why art thou so cast down, O my soul?
and why art thou so disquieted within me? still trust in God. Psalm. 41. and 42.
Ps. 41. 42.
And indeed, as David says, why should not we trust in him at all times? Our
fathers trusted in thee, They hoped in thee, and thou did deliver them, lb.
22. 4.
Psalm. 22. we should do and say as Paul, I know in whom I have trusted: and
with Job, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him: And therefore David
exhorts, O trust in him at all times, all ye people; for he has wrought
deliverances for Jacob, and is terrible to the Kings of the earth.

Thirdly, hence we may learn Content, in all estates and conditions whatsoever:
for nothing c^mes to us but by him, and from him; as Job confesses, when he
rebuked his wife, Shall we receive good at the hands of God and not evil? Job
2. 10. Job 2. 10.
why should we at any time murmr against him, in whatsoever he does to us,
when as, The judge of all the earth cannot but do right? Genesis 18. 25. Genesis 18.
25.
And I have learned, says the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4. 11
in what estate soever I am in, therewithal to be content: and the Prophet
David, when he was afflicted and visited by Gods hand, Rested contented; I held
my tongue (says he) and said nothing; for I knew it was thy doing, Psa. 39.
Psa. 39. 9.
9. Job looked not so much in his affliction, upon the Sabeans or Chaldeans;
Nor reviles, frets against the fire or the winds, but quiets Himself, relies
and trusts in the wisdom and love of his father: and looks upon all his
sufferings as ordered and sent from God: The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. Job 1. 21.


To come now to another, Quest.
and that is the last Observation from the soul of the Text, Why Christ rebuked
him for speaking truth?

Mendacium erat; Answ.
dicebat se scire quod nesciebat; it was a lie: He said he knew, what indeed He
did not: Now here arises another Question:

Whether Christ's Incarnation was known to the Devils or no? Quest.


It Is certain, Answ.
that they are full of knowledge; for his very name is derived from knowing,
(...), from (...), disco, quasi (...), doctus: so it is read, Acts 16. 16. Act.
16. 16
(...), a spirit of Divination or Knowledge: In brief, Nolebat hoc testimonium
ab illis. Christ would not have any testimony from the Devil: He wanted no such
Testimony, Helper or Upholder; therefore it is said Acts 16. 18. Act. 16. 18
(...), Paul rebuked the spirit of Divination in the like kind: so says
Austine, God would let the Devil know no more then what He pleased; that
pleased God, which was fitting for the Devil, in lib. 9. c. 21. de civit. Dei.
And further, Christ knew well, that the Devil spoke this to tempt him: for the
Devil in all his actions has an ill and indirect end. And lastly, the Doctrine
of Christ's Incarnation, was no ways agreeable for the Devils knowledge; it did
not reflect any ways upon him* he was not to have any benefit by it; and
therefore there was no necessity of his knowledge of it: It was Balm for
mankind, but of no virtue to the fallen Angels.

These several Observations now gathered and confirmed, which I termed the Soul
of the Text; I proceed on now to the Summity, the Height or Spirit of the Text:
I would not have you wonder at the Definition, for the Scripture is frequent in
this definition. To cause us to look further then the Letter.

And we may often find it so; Exodus 14. Exodus 14.
we read of the Cloud, and the Red Sea; yet 1 Cor. 10. the Apostle calls them
Baptism: So Exodus 17. Exodus 17.
the Rock in Horeb; yet 1 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 4.
That Rock was Christ: And Exodus 34. 33. Exodus 34. 33.
we read of Moses Vail; yet 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.
we find the Apostle applying it to the Vailing of the heart: Abraham had two
sons, one by a bondwoman, another by a freewoman; yet Gal. 4. 24. Gal. 4. 24*
we read, that these things were an Allegory: So in reading the History of our
Savior, to raise moral Instructions; as of his love to mankind, readiness to
help; of his power, mildness, obedience, patience and long-suffering, etc. this
is to do as Moses did, Exodus 15. to sing songs unto the Lord, and to render him
praise. But this is not all; But, to mind the Spirit and life couched under the
Vail and Curtain of the Letter, Viz.

The living bread which comes down from Heaven, which will make us live for
ever. To eat of Christ's flesh and drink his blood is meat indeed and drink
indeed. Moses brought not the Children of Israel into Canaan; therefore, as 1
Cor. 10. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
All things happened to them in figures, in types and shadows (As his face, so
his words were) Veiled: Joh. 6.
So to us now, Till Christ be pleased to Reveal the Mystery of the Word, the
Truth is hid and kept secret: For as it is said of our Savior, Without a
parable spoke he not unto them; but to his own Disciples He declared and opened
every parable, Mark 4. 34. Mar. 4. 34.
And as he spoke nothing without a parable, So He did nothing without a
parable; and therefore without controversy, (...), Great is the mystery, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And for this cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might
Destroy the works of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
1 John 3. 8. 1 John 3. 8.
And can we think there are no more Devils to be destroyed yet? yes sure; Quot
Crimina* tot Daemonia, Yea, as many Devils, as sins.

It Is true, that when our Savior, John 19. 30. Joh. 19. 30
cried, Consummatum est; It is finished, There was no more to do; That is, No
more* for the fulfilling of the Scriptures, verse. 28. Joh. 19. 28
No more for that individual flesh assumed of the Virgin Mary to suffer.

But yet there are (...), Remnants of Afflictions, for Paul to fill up in his
flesh, Col. 1. 24. Col. 1. 24.
So we also and the Rest of the members must bear, (...), the marks of the Lord
Jesus in our bodies, Gal. 6. 16. Gal. 6. 16.
And for certain, It Is better to feel compunction of spirit, and the crucifying
the Old man in us, then to know only those quaint, finical and neat
definitions of it which men, by their wit and parts have drawn from the Letter,
to please the ears and fancies of men; Making so many divisions and
sub-divisions, to set forth the Wits of men, and not the Truth, so much used by
many men. Know, a minutes feeling spiritually, is worth seven years speaking:
To feel these things spiritually, Is to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God;
to talk of them, or only to know them, Are but The Tabernacles of Meseck and
the tents of Kedar. And therefore Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever, Heb. 13. 8. Heb. 13. 8
As to instance in some particulars, whereby you may enlarge upon any other.

1. Was Christ formed in the Virgins womb? it is true: so ought we to be as
little Children, that Christ may be formed in us, Gal. 4. 35. Gal. 4 35
That we may become Nothing in our own eyes that so, He may be to us All, and
in All.

2. Was that done by the Holy Ghost coming upon her, and by the power of the
Most High over-shadowing her? so must our spiritual birth be; the Holy Ghost
must overshadow and sanctify us, and the power of the Most High convert us,
and turns us from sin to newness of life.

3. Was Christ circumcised? so must we be circumcised in heart: For this is
true Circumcision, according to Gods own interpretarion, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Deu. 10.
16.
Circumcise therefore the fore-skins of your hearts. Stephen complained of the
Jews for want of this, O uncircumcised in hearts and ears! Acts 7. 51. Act* 7.
51.
And Paul; says, Romans 2. 29. Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit
not in the Letter.

4. Did he grow in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor? Luke 2. 52. Luke 2.
52.
so ought we to incre se with all the increase of God, and to grow from grace
to grace, Col. 2. 19. Col. 2. 19.


5. Did he dispute with the Doctors, and captivate their judgments, Convict
their thoughts, and overthrow their reasonings, in the Temple? so must he do in
us, bring every thought, though never so high, to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 5.


6. Did he heal the sick and diseased, give light to the blind, open the ears
of the deaf, untie the tongues of the dumb, feed the hungry, preach, teach to
pray, sigh, and groan, and weep, reprove with Authority? Was he hungry and
thirsty, and went up and down doing good? Was He Arraigned and condemned under
Pontius Pilate? did he dye, rise again, ascend into Heaven, and sit at the
right hand of his Father? All these are true.

So let us in all these mind that these mighty works be done in our souls, that
they be cured from the putrified sores of sin and lusts, Isa. 1. 6. Isa. 1. 6.
and from our spiritual leprosy; and cry, Open thou, O Lord, mine eyes, that I
sleep not the sleep of death, Psalm. 13. 3. Ps. 13. 3.
We should labor and pray that our understandings may be enlightened; that we
may have The seeing eye, and Hearing ear, to confess and praise him with our
tongues, that they may speak the language of Canaan; and say, Open thou my
lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: Ps. 51. 15.
And that we should hunger after righteousness, and be watchful in prayer;
sigh, and groan, and weep for sins committed against God; Mine eyes gush out
with tears, Psa. 119. Psa. 119.
O that my head was a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night, etc.
Jer. 9. 1. Jer. 9. 1.
Reprove, and rebuke, and loath our selves, as Job, I do abhor my self, Job 42.
6. Job 42. 6.
Do good, especially to those of the household of faith: Condemn, and accuse,
and judge our selves; I called mine own ways to account, says David: I dye
daily, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 15.
Christ rose again; Arise and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.
And so we should rise again to newness of life: If ye be risen with Christ,
seek the things that are above, Col. 3. 1. Col. 3. 1.
He ascended, and so do we, when our conversation is in Heaven: He sits at the
right hand of his Father; All power is given unto me, Mat. 28. 18. Mat. 28. 18.
Now I live (says the Apostle) yet not I* but Christ in me. And Jesus Christ
cast out Devils too: and so must we, cast out spirtiual wickedness in high
places. Gal. 2. 20.
All these are the works of Christ in us, and happy are we if we can truly say,
This day are these Scriptures fulfilled in us.

But must our Savior cast out Devils in us? what in me? Object.
If an Angel should tell me so, I cannot believe it; and I would ask with the
Virgin Mary, (...); How can this thing be? Luke 1. 34.
Luke 1. 34. If our Savior himself should tell me, it is and must be so; and
except I cast the Devils out of thee, thou can not be saved; I should ask
him, as Nicodemus did, (...)); How can it be, Ioh. 3. 4? Joh. 3. 4.
For where is there any Devils in me, to be cast out?

Just so Peter said to our Savior, Ioh. 13. 8. Joh. 13. 8.
Thou shall never wa^h my feet: Answ.
but certainly, as our Savior then told Peter, Except I wa^h thee thou have no
part in me: So in this case; except he cast out the Devils, they are in us
still; for Beelzebub will not cast out Beelzebub.

But it may be, Here you will say to me, as the Jews said to Christ, John 7. 21.
Joh. 7. 21.
(...), Certainly thou have a Devil, To tell us such strange things, To make us
believe that we are Possessed.

For this purpose it will be necessary to see what the Devil is; for that which
is here called (...), An unclean spirit in Luke 4. 33. Luke 4. 33.
is called (...), that is, The Spirit of an unclean Devil.

Devils for substance are Angels; for quality Evil ones, or Angels of darkness.
A man is in substance [a man] though Evil; and his Evilness of quality, does
not make him lame* or blind, or deformed. There are, secondly, many good
Angels, as our Savior testifies, More then twelve Legions of Angels, Mat. 26.
33. Matt. 26. 33.
And there are many bad Angels, My Name is Legion, for we are many. Mark 5. 9.
Mar. 5. 9.
Whereas it is said of both of them, that they are spirits; it is true, it taken
comparatively, not positively or simply; for this word, spirit, has diverse
Acceptions in Scriptu^e: As,

1. Spirit is taken for the Air; Ve-ruach: The Spirit of the Lord rested upon
the waters, Gen 1. 2. Genesis 1. 2.


2. It Is taken for the Wind; Ve-ruach: The East wind brought in the Locusts,
Exodus 10. 13. Exodus 10. 13.


3. It Is taken for the spirit of life; All flesh died in which was Ruach, the
spirit of life, Genesis 6. 17. Genesis 6. 17


4. For the immortal part of man: Ve-ruach; The spirit of man returns to God
that gave it. Eccl. 12. 7. Eccl. 12. 7.


5. For the purpose and mind of man: Kol-rucho; A fool opens and speaks all his
mind, or spirit, Prove. 25. 11. Prove. 25. 11.


6. For the influences of the spirit; As, I will take of the spirit that is in
thee, and put it on them, Number. 11. 17. Numb. 11. 17.


1. So then, Devils are Angels, yet different from good Angels; Yet not in
substance, power, strength, agility, or the like, but in that one accident of
Evil: Therefore they are called Evil Angels, Psalm. 78. 49. Ps. 78. 49.
And Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 4
And, The Devils Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Mat. 25. 41.
and Angels of Darkness. Good and evil Angels differ not then in substance, but
in quality.

2. The Devils are spirits; who makes his Angels spirits, Heb. 1. 7. Heb. 1. 7.
And so in the words of my Text, The Unclean Spirit: But yet they are spirits
comparatively or respectively not simply or positively; for so only God is a
Spirit, it is his peculiar Title, John 4. 24. Joh. 4. 24.
And as God is a Spirit, so he is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12. 9.
Heb. 12. 9


3. They are Bodies, But not Natural or Terrestrial, but Spiritual and
Celestial, 1 Cor. 15. 40, 44. 1 Cor. 15. 40.
Non ut nos, yet have not bodies as we have. So speaks the Nycene Synod,
Corpora multo tenuiora quam natura; But much more subtle bodies have they then
we, not so gross and heavy as ours are, but more Aerial and sublime; so speak
the Greek and Latin Father; for God is Only Incorporeal.

Yet know this, That, their Corporiety or Materiality hinders not the being of
many in one place; As, a whole Legion in one person, Mark 5. 9. Mar. 5. 9.
and seven Devils were cast out of Mary Magdalen; for the Penetration of bodies
spiritual, is not, As of bodies Terrestrial: For, As the light of many Candles
through One hole, they are to our senses confounded, yet in themselves
distinct, like the lightning, from East to West, Luke 17. 24. Luke 17. 24.
And as all the Sunbeams make but one JUBAR, till received by several
subjects: so is it with spiritual bodies.

5. That every Devil is, As the Star of His ORB: as concentring of light, to
our sight is, of things near or far off; Ibi est ubi operatur, There he is,
where he works: In his operations, He works upon us, As the spokes of a wheel
upon the Ring; and in his possession, as upon the Nave; As a Spider upon his
Web, If any one thread be Touched He presently seizes upon the fly; He is not to
seek, not will miss his prey, for He is always either watching or working to
destroy. Yet for all this, As the earth rent with thunder, blasted with fire,
drowned with water, shaken with winds, must not, cannot blame the Heavens,
because the cause of all these distempers came forth of the Earth at first: So
if we be Heavily punished by the Devil, we may blame our selves: For we have
taken into our selves of His Nature, whereby he has gotten power over us. For,
could we but say as Christ, He has Naught in me, He could have no power upon
us. Let therefore these spiritual Enemies keep us up (as whips do Tops)
continually, with our eyes up unto God; That He may help us, To leave and abhor
all sin, which procures and draws down such heavy and spiritual torments: And
here I must lay down this Maxim:

As all things aim either at a good or evil end: so effectum testatur de causa:
the effect witnesses of the cause: all things proceed either from a good or
Evil cause: A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree good,
Matthew. 7. 28. Mat. 7. 28
Now we know WHOSE the good is, (...), there is none good but one, which is
God, Matthew. 19. 17. Mat. 19. 17.
and we know likewise who is the Source and fountain of all Evil; who is
therefore, in so many places of Scripture called (...), and from whom we are
taught by our Savior to pray for deliverance under that name, Deliver us from
Evil, Matt. 6. 13. Mat. 6. 13.


All these Actions of this sublunary world, whether External, or Internal,
Corporal, or Spiritual, Visible or Invisible.

Are divided between these two, whom our Savior calls God and Mammon, Matthew.
6. 24. Mat. 16. 24.
S. John, Light and Darkness, S. Paul, Christ and Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 15. 2 Cor.
6. 15.
Elias, God and Baal, 1 Kin. 18. 21. 1 King. 18. 21.


Accordingly, Is that Text of our Savior, He that gathers not together with
me, scatters abroad: and he that is not with me, is against me, Matt. 12. 30.
Mat. 12. 30.
So also that Text, Romans 14. 23. Romans 14. 23.
All that is not of faith, is sin.

Hence the word of God makes it plain, That many Diseases and Evils inflicted
upon men, are called Devils, because coming from him, and inflicted by him: as
Lunacy is called a Devil; my son is Lunatic, Matthew. 17. 15. Mat. 17. 15, 19.
yet verse. 19. it is said, (...), The Devil came out of him: so Mark 9. 17. Mat.
9. 17
it is said of one that was dumb, that he had (...), a dumb Devil: so also of one
that was blind, A blind man possessed with a Devil, Matthew. 12. 22. Mat. 12.
22.
the like is said of of Deasness, or of a Deaf Devil, Luke 11. 14. Luke 11. 14.
So in the same manner, of Crookedness, (...), Having a spirit of infirmity,
Luke 13. 11. Luke 13. 11.
and yet at verse 16. Verse. 16.
(...), whom S^tan, or the Devil has bound; and thereupon, Luke 8. 2. Luke 8.
2.
we find that Infirmities and Devils ((...)) are joined together, And includes
One and the same thing: All the plagues of Egypt, Flies, Frogs, Caterpillars,
Locusts, Hail, Frosts, Thunderbolts, etc. Are all called Psalm. 78. 49. Ps. 78.
49.
Evil Angels: and so also Jobs blains and botches pass under the same
denomination: so that as Hippocrates said, (...), in every disease, as there is
something of God in it, so may we say (...), something of the Devil in it.

Now I pray you Resume, and take up again what I have formerly delivered, God
is a God of Order: Order implies plurality and diversity: Now, as all the
Actions of Christ are Mystical; So, all of the Devils are likewise: and as
Omnis actio Christi est nostra instructio: as every action of Christ is our
instruction, so is every one of the Devils actions too: and therefore as there
is Mysterium Evangelii, The Mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Ephesians. 6. 19.
And the Great Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 16. and 3. 9.
as also, The Mystery of faith, 1 Timothy 3. 9. The Mystery of God, Revel. 10. 7.
Rev. 10. 7
In like manner there is Mysterium iniquitatis, The Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
And as Paul cries out, Romans 11. 33. Romans 11. 33.
(...) Oh the depth of the Riches, and Wisdom and Knowledge of God! so S. John
tell us, Rev. 2. 24. Rev. 2. 24
(...), of the Depths of Satan.

When you consider and contemplate The mercies and miracles of Christ toward
mankind, and his mighty works in the flesh; Do you only consider them as His
mercies to the Bodies of men, Or only done to them then? no, no, Duc in altum,
as Christ said unto Peter, Luke 5. 4. Luke 5. 4.
Lanch forth into the deep: And Let down your Nets for a Greater draught, Rest
not there, Look into your selves also, reflect and see what God and Christ did,
and does unto the souls and spirits of men, even in thy self: for as he cures
the one, so he cures and saves the other: He it is that gives light to them
that sit in darkness, of sin and ignorance, and makes them to be Light in the
Lord: and loses the Captives which are bound in Spiritual Captivity by Satan,
Luke 4. 18
and makes them free men in the Lord: He heals those that are
brokenhearted, and sets at liberty them that are bruised: He opens the prison
doors to them that are bound; And lets the captives go free. He makes to grow
strong in faith, to grow in grace and favor with God and men: He it is has
sent Redemption unto his people, psa. 111. 9. Ps. 111. 9.
But, all this, not only to their persons in corporal deliverances, but
chiefly to their souls and spirits, doing the same actions over again in us.
Heb3 ^
And herein, Is Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

And so also, when you consider the malice of Satan, do you only look upon his
malice to the Estates of men, or to their bodies: As His vexing Jobs person
with diseases and botches? his blowing down the house upon Jobs children; or
the fire he sent to burn up his sheep? or do you only look upon the Sabeans
and Chaldeans? Job 1.
or only upon the loss of the Girgasites swine: or upon the Tempests at sea,
Mat. 8. 32.
and the sicknesses which he lays on the bodies or estates of men, etc. O
Beloved, you will Catch little or nothing here, Though you fish All night: and
though you hear all the Sermons, or read all the Books you can get, you will be
little the better: stay not your contemplations or experiences here: but Duc in
altum, Lanch forth, mind these workings in you, look into your own souls: and
you shall better consider and know his malice, not only to the bodies, but to
the souls of men: as it is said (1 Samuel 18. 10.) Saul was vexed by an Evil
spirit: so when you hear of casting out of Devils, Take heed, lest your selves
fall ((...)) into the snares, and nets, and condemnation of the Devil.

Further to this point, St Paul says, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 4.
that there are (...), Differences of graces: yet (...), but one spirit: As
there are the graces of wisdom, of Knowledge, of faith, All different in their
several acts, operations and degrees, yet flowing all from the same spirit: so
I may say, there are (...), Differences of sins and lusts in the soul: some
being spiritual wickednesses, others carnal and fleshly; some for stature and
growth like the sons of Anack, mighty, and great, and strong: others of a less
and lower size; Differences too there be in sins length and time; as Job says,
His bones were full of the sins of his youth: Some do not leave their sins
but increase them and carry them in them till they dye, and they grow strong
and numerous, even to a Legion of Devils: There be some also that though they
come up in a night, yet by the blessing of God, they are wasted and gone in a
night, like Ionahs Gourd; Jon. 4. 7.
they are like a wafaring man, of no continuance, they take no deep rooting in
the soul: There are differences too, in respect of obstinacy, purpose of mind,
malice and HATRed of God, etc. some going before others, others following after
unto judgment, as the Apostle speaks: It was said to Jerusalem, Thou have
justified thy sister Sodom in all her abominations, Ezekiel. 16. 51. Ezekiel. 16. 51.
her sins did exceed for grievousness those of Sodom: and yet all sins, of what
nature or quality soever, how different soever they be, are all (...), from
that Evil One in us, The Devil; and though, as our Savior says, Mat. 15. 19.
Mat. 15. 19.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, thefts, etc. yet these are suggested
into the heart by Satan's malice and policy: As it is said of Judas, That the
Devil put it into his heart to betray His Master.

So that it is not only Hard, but impossible for any man, that has not been
rapt up into the third Heaven, To know, How God sends Good motions into souls,
whether by Angels or not: Yet I am sure, (though the Apostle says) That to
will is present with me, Phil. 2. 13. Phil. 2. 13.
But yet that will, is from him. For,(...), Every good and perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17. Jam. 1. 17.
Nay all natural actions; as, to think, and to do, or to move, etc. are all of
him, from him, and by him: For, In him we live, move and have our BEING.

And As hard it is to say directly, Though the Prince of this world, Joh. 12.
31. Joh. 12. 31.
The God of this world, 2. Co. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
(very lofty titles, you see are given him by the Holy Ghost; To show, what
great power he has) I say, it is very hard to know How he Tempts and moves us
to Evil, whether by His Angels, or not: For HE has Angels called properly and
peculiarly HIS, Mat. 25. 41. Mat. 25. 41.
Prepared for the Devil and His Angels; and termed, The Angels that sinned. 2.
Pet. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
And again, it is said, He drew the third part of the Stars from Heaven, when he
fell: And the Devil is called, The King of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9. 11. Rev.
9. 11.
Sure I am, that there are great store of several sorts of Evil spirits; For
there is The spirit of jealousy, Numb. 5. 6. Number. 5. 6.
The Evil Spirit of lying, 1 Reg. 22. 22. 1 Reg. 22. 22.
The spirit of deep slumber and sleep, Isa. 29. 10. Isa. 29. 10.
The spirit of this world, 1 Cor. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 12.
The spirit of dissension, Judge. 9. 23. Juge. 9. 23.
The spirit of perverseness, Isa. 19. 14. Isa. 19. 14.
The spirit of wheredom, Hosea 4. 12. and 5. 4. Hos. 4. 12. and 5. 4.
And the spirit of seducing, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
And once for all; As we read of the Spirit of Christ, so also do we find the
spirit of An^ichrist, 1 Ioh. 4. 8. 1 John 4. 8
And yet necessary it is, th^^ th^s it should be; I say, Necessary, with that
necessity of which our Savior speaks, Mat. 18. 7. Mat. 18. 7.
(...) It is necessary that offenses should come: For, As in visible things,
there is no change without corruption: so in civil things, Lex non est posita
justo, sed injus^o; 1 Timothy 19.
The Law is not made for the righteous, but for the transgressors; for the
lawless and disobedient, as the Apostle says.

And so, and no otherwise is it, in spiritual things; Men cannot imagine How
God should have made known the Riches of his goodness, Romans 2. 4. if no Evil
had been: nor The Greatness of the Riches of his Glory, Romans 9. 22, 23. Romans 2.
4. and 9. 22, 23.
if there had been No vessels of wrath and dishonor, Fitted for destruction:
Neither should he have shown the Depth of his wisdom and knowledge, Romans 11.
33. Romans 11. 33.
If there had been no folly and ignorance: Nor yet, The riches of his grace.
Ephesians. 1. 7. If there had been None that stood in need of pardon and grace:
Beloved, How could the sons of men have known or understood, Either the
plenteousness of His REDEMPTION, If there had been no Captives? Or the
exceeding greatness of his love, wherewith he has loved us in Christ, If there
had been none that were his Enemies, and hated him?

So that now, I will say of the Devil and his Angels, as once Augustine said of
Original sin; Whereof, after he had long disputed, whence it should flow and
proceed; at length he concludes, That it is A more vain and fruitless thing, to
stand disputing about its Rise, or Original, when as we feel the flames of evil
concupiscence in our selves still Burning, then it is for a man when he finds
his house on fire, to stand still, Demanding how the fire came, but doing
nothing to quench it: Or whereas he should find his son fallen into a well
ready to be drowned, yet should stand still, Asking How he came to fall in, but
not using any help or means to get him out, and so save his life.

So may I say of the Devil and his Angels: It being so, that they Are, And that
they are so Active and Destructive to men; and that they move in, Rule and
reign in the Children of disobedience: and have already climbed our works, and
are gotten in our very hearts, and there wound, kill and slay; if we did but
see it so, I say, It Is but a fruitless question to enquire, Ephesians. 2. 2.
how they entered or came into us, or of what they are made? or what Power they
have to do us mischief? or the like. But sure I think, it is our best policy,
and greatest wisdom, to consider How to remove them, how to dispossess them,
and to cast these unclean Devils out of our souls and spirits. And if you
desire to know How this may be done; For, though it be Hard and difficult, yet
it is not a needless thing to undertake, nor a thing impossible; nay, it is high
time 'twas done, left you be utterly Undone, and without any hope: For, Quanto
diutius inhabitat, tanto difficilius ejicitur; The longer he stays in us, the
Harder will he be gotten out: His quiet possession will plead custom and
Prescription; An Old disease is hardly Curable; And we cannot but with
Augustine confess, Quot Crimina, tot Daemonia; Every Sin in our mortal bodies,
is no other, Then A Devil: And, according to the Old Man, and the Unregenrate
part, the best of us (however we may flatter our selves) are in worse state
then Mary Magdalen was, out of whom our Savior cast seven Devils, Luke 8. 2.
Luke 8. 2.
So that we may too truly say of our selves, we have more then Seventy times
seven within us: For if Our Savior should speak Audibly to our ears, as he
does intelletually in our souls, to the Devil in me, or you, as he did to the
Unclean spirit, who came out from the Tombs and Deserts, What is thy name? he
would reply, My Name is LEGION, For we are many.

Beloved, thus to see our selves in the Word, Mar. 5. 9.
is the right understanding of it: And this Word and Glass, when Christ sets it
before us, and teaches us by it, then we cannot forsake it, but view our
selves in it, though it represents us to our selves never so ugly and deformed.
And he that sees himself Thus, A Captive to the Devil, Oh! Jesus Christ is A
welcome REDEEMER indeed To that soul; For, the two great and Highest ends of
Gods Word To us, are (in our now fallen condition) to throw the Creature low in
its own esteem, to make it a Beggar, as it is indeed, to bring it to see its
own Nothingness, Nay, its undone and miserable condition; and to make our
Sovereign Lord Christ, High, Exalted, Rich, and All in All things. Ephesians. 1. 23.
To preach, to the understanding of the Word thus, to have such a powerful
influence i^ to the soul; this can no man do, no nor all Men and Angels, but
only Jesus Christ himself: His alone All-powerful Voice who spoke (says the
Holy Ghost) As never man spoke, Joh. 7. 46. Joh 7. 46.
Man Could never speak: so, to have any such operation on the spirit of man,
but only that High and Mighty Conqueror through the whole Earth, that is so
powerful that wherever He will conquer, he will conquer; Of whom, all those
Mighty Emperors, Warriors and Conqueroars we have heard or read of in the
Scriputure, or elsewhere, are but dark, obscure, glimmering shadows and
resemblances. O Beloved! what Heights and Depths of sin, are in every one of
us! Alexander himself, with all his victorious-Armies, nor all the Magistrates
and Powers in the world, cannot weaken them in the soul one jot, no, no^ all
the Angels in Heaven, One of which could kill and destroy, A hundred fourscore
and five thousand valiant men in one night in Sennacheribs Army; Yet are not
able to conquer Those Legions of Devils in our souls, to bring us into
subjection to the Crown and Scepter of our only and true Liege-Lord, Esa. 37.
36.
the Lord Christ: What Is thy name? says he to that man so possessed in the
Gospel, that he was so fierce, that no bands or fetters would hold him among
men, but he broke from all, and lived among the Graves and Sepulchers; yet, he
confessed (Christ's powermaking him, full sore against his own will) for the
Devil in us will not let us, either see or confess him to be there: says he, my
name is LEGION, because many Devils, Lu. 8. 30. Luke 8. 30.
This and all other miracles Christ did, that we by this man, and them night
See ourselves, as in a glass: And so likewise by all the miracles that ever he
did, and by all the parables that ever he spoke, All were written for us: All
those Rebellions in our souls, are LEGIONS, Armies of Rebels; they are, as it
is expressed, Judge. 7. 12. Judge. 7. 12.
In us like the Midianites, which were As thick as grasshoppers upon the earth:
They are in some, as thick as motes in the Sun, innumerable, not to be numbered
by millions: Who can number the thoughts of a man? They are not only of a
spiritual nature, but they are as quick and swift as the lightning. Luke 10. 18.
I saw Satan fall down from heaven like lightning. Genesis 5. 6.
And you know what the Scripture of them, The thoughts of man's heart are evil,
and only evil, continually, Genesis 5. 6.

I have read, some are of opinion, the Angels good and bad, are as thick in the
Air as motes in the Sun: but I am sure, so thick in us are these desperate,
barbarous, inhumane, cursed (as I may say) Irish Rebels, and English Traitors
in our souls; And as I said before, As all the victorious Conquerers in the
world are a Type or Shadow of Christ, in this spiritual Soul-war; so also the
Characters and expressions of any evil that ever was or ever shall be in the
world, are but dark shadows of this Evil One within us. This is truth, but none
can see and acknowledge this, but those in whom this evil one is in some
measure discovered, fought withal and overcome: How far then are they deluded,
that dream, they can by a power in themselves overcome this mighty, mighty
Giant, 1 Samuel 17. 23.
this Goliath of Gath, that stands for the whole Army of the Philistines; who is
so armed and so terrible, that were our eyes but open to look upon him Dressed in
all his Armor and Accoutrements, he would would make all Creatures Amazed,
Agasht at him: What a hiddeous cry was there (think you) when the earth gaped
so wide open, to swallow up Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and their whole kindred,
and all that sided in that rebellion? it swallowed up them* their houses, their
tents, their wives, their children and all their substance: Such would be, and
such is the astonishment of the soul, where this Evil One, Number. 16. 32.
this Antichrist, (as I may properly call him) is discovered; For herein is set
before us the true Antichrist, real Antichrist, the Ugly deformed Person of
Antichrist fO whom all Outward Antichrists are but the Picture: take the Turk,
the Pope, or Heretics, or who you will in this kind, they are but the
Symboles, the Resemblance, the Shadow of HIM.

Let the Ministers of Christ then, look on their work: they are called
Ambassadors; let them look on their message and errand they are sent on, and to
whom they are sent. Moses was a grown man in grace, a man of Admirable parts,
skilled in all the Arts of the times he lived in, the meekest man on earth:
therefore I conclude thence, a grown man in grace (as I shall touch by and by)
Yet when he was to grapple with Pharaoh, a mighty King, and But the type of
this spiritual Pharaoh; You see how discouraged he was but to come into his
presence, but to ask to let the people go to serve the Lord (and much more to
bring the thing to pass he went for) No m^rvel if an Ambassador for Christ be
in this regard discouraged; for All the Powers of darkness are before him:
Christians look on your enemies; they have Cities walled up to heaven; You have
the tower of Babel to climb, the soul to be Rescued and brought out of the
claws of all the Devils in hell: But this is your comfort, Christ does this for
you; but it must be done in you: What Is thy name? LEGION. If all the whole
earth were gathered into one Body, into one Army, All the Engines and Politic
Engineers for war and all the Artillery thereof: this were a potent, mighty,
almost inconceiveable strength: yet this is Nothing to these Legions; One of
which, One Sin is able to destroy the soul for ever, which is of more value
then all the world; yet all this power cannot destroy one soul whom Jesus
Christ has purchased. Luke 12. 21.


Then what shall they soul do that has Legions of these, as thick in thy
understanding, will, affections, as Motes in the Sun, as Devils in the air, as
thick as words, as actions, ^y as thoughts? For where this strong man keeps the
house, Mat. 12. 29. Mat. 12. 29.
all he does, speaks, thinks, all is sin; and he lies close and safe in his
trenches and strong holds; he thinks himself invincible, unconquerable.

And indeed so long as Men do but take up Arms against him, Or use never so
many ordinances or duties which they force themselves unto, he laughs at the
shaking of your spears, Job 41. 29. Job 41. 29.
And the neighing of your horses, and all the strength you can make of your
selves, though you call in all the parties you have, from all quarters in the
soul, Yet he is quiet; as it is said David was, or as a Christian ought to be in
his God, he can lie down and sleep in the midst of his enemies, because God is
his strong hold, his Castle of defense: So sure and safe is Satan (in his
conceit) in the soul, where he has kept long possession; for he has all the
men in the world, the whole Arm of Fesh; he glories in his Offensive and
Defensive weapons: And indeed till the Lord Jesus begins To rouse up himself,
That King of Kings and Lord of lords, that Mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah
A^ise in us, and dress himself in his Glittering Armor, (as David speaks) he
fears nothing; for as I said before, Psalm. 69. 11.
he is so strong that indeed he thinks himself too strong for Christ; for so
long as Christ suffers himself to be Overmastered by our sins, and strong
lusts, he seems Too weak for him; And he insults over him, as a Turk over his
poor Gally-slave (as I may so say) or as (if you will) some cruel Marshal over
his prisoners, (though the Kings best subjects) he lays them at his pleasure,
Neck and Heels, he casts them into noisome dungeons, where is nothing but
Satan's excrements, and the filthy spuings of our lusts; and These also he sets
as Sentinels, that they stir not; whilst he himself jets up and down in pride,
and says, I Will bring down the oroudest of you all: What know you not me? I have
his Majesty's Commissino for what I do: So also, This is that Spiritual and
true Nebuchadnezar, that jets up and down in his own pride; Saying, Is not this
great Babel that I have built for the honor of my majesty, and for the glory
of my Kingdom? Dan. 4. 30. Dan. 4. 30.
This Devil in us, he looks on himself as a Peacock, and says, What a goodly
Christian am I? what a height I have gotten what large knowledge have I
obtained? I think there is no point in Divinity, but I am able to speak to it:
what does no body take notice of me? and so Arrogates the doing of all good to
himself, and All Evil, as none of his.

Ah, where is the man that can say, I find all these things truly and really in
my self? this were a certain forerunner of the Sun Arising: Of the day- Break,
and of the day-stars arising in Our hearts: Now, will the Lord Christ arise
triumphantly in thy soul, and make All these beasts of the forest to tremble:
Now, as it is expressed in Rev. 6. 2. Rev. 6. 2.
He will ride on conquering, and to conquer: as David says, Gird on thy sword
upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty, Ride on
prosperously; thine arrows shall pierce deep into the heart of all Our, and the
Kings enemies: now though Satan in us muster up All his forces, as now most
certainly he will; Yet he shall fall from heaven like lightning; that which he
has Enjoyed as his heaven had the command of our souls, where he has ruled as
Lord and King (but yet as a Tyrant) though we saw it not, but were willing
servants, as to our Leige-Lord and natural King, and were at the command of
every servant and lust, more then ever the Israelites were under the External
Pharaoh: under him we made bricks and did all servile work; and our wages was
but hard fare and tripes: Oh! was not this an Egyptian blindness and darkness?
a darkness that may be felt: but Israel when they most felt their slavery, and
groaned, were nearest deliverance from under Pharaoh: we are always in
darkness and slavery, but when we begin to feel our spiritual darkness, when we
begin to feel the plagues of Egypt upon us, Our water turned into blood, and
the frogs crawl and cover over all the Land: when we are sensible of the
murrain, the boils and blains, and the Plague and Carbuncles in our flesh: the
hail and the locusts, Even the LOCUSTS of the bottomless pit, which come all
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and from Beelzebub Prince of the Devils: then we
shall see the death of our firstborn, Mat. 5. 19. 30.
our dearest right hand and right eye sins: then we shall feel in our selves,
that this conquering King begins to carry captivity captive; then shall Pharaoh
with all his Host be overwhelmed in the midst of the sea: Then the soul shall
sing the song of Moses, Exodus 15. Exodus 15.
The Lord is my strength and song, he is become my salvation: the Lord is a man
of war, the Lord of hosts is his name: Pharaohs Chariots and his Host are
drowned in the sea, the depths have covered them, they sank to the bottom as a
stone as lead in the mighty waters; thy right hand alone is become glorious in
power; thy right hand O Lorp has dashed in pieces the enemies: and David,
throughout his Psalms, is full of these expressions, all tending to empty the
creature of all good, and all power, and to ascribe all to the Lord neither had
the Israelites any good success any further then the Lord went with them, Isa.
26. 17
and did their works for them.

Here we see what A Great work it is, To bring the soul out of Egypt
spiritually; and which is wo^st of all; That we (with the Israelites) after the
Lord has thus gloriously and triumphantly b^ought us forth, that we should
have so much as a look toward Egypt again, or any inclination to be under
Pharahs bondage again: which desires of ours, will certainly bring us nothing
but sorrow and vexation; we shall not get so soon to Canaan as otherwise we
might: but the Lord will exercise and sit us forty years in the wilderness: Oh!
the difficulty of the New Birth: Oh! The Throws! Here is iron labor women (if
ye talk of iron labor) and many times Throws to no purpose; the child sticks*
somewhere in the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth: Here needs a
skilful Midwife indeed, Isa. 37. 6.
a faithful practical Physician: one that has the Practick part as well as the
Theorick or else the child may miscarry: But here is our comfort, the work is
in the hand of the Lord; and this child being designed for life, shall (...)
miscarry, though the birth be the worst of ^^^ths, And as cross as cross may be.

Oh WONDER, wonder! That ever this child should be saved! This simile the
Apostle himself uses to the Galatians, My beloved of whom I travel in birth,
till Christ be formed in you: And Christ being once born in the soul, then he
grows, and by degrees comes to perfection: as it is said of him, Luke 2. 52.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and favor with God and man: then he
begins to work all those miracles in our souls that he did in the flesh, cures
the blind, casts out Devils blind and dumb, so that we could not hear nor see,
nor believe our selves to be in this miserable condition: we cannot See our
selves in Egypt, in bonds, in slavery: or if we see, yet we are dumb, we are
not able to open our mouches to express our misery: fain we would express what
we feel, but cannot utter it: Therefore you shall find our Lord in one place
mingling clay and spittle to anoint the eyes: John 9. 6. Joh. 9. 6.
in another place opening the eyes of a poor blind man that cried after him, so
that he would take no nay, Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me, Mark. 10.
47. Mar. 10. 47.
in another place Raising the dead, in another place causing the poor lame
Cripple to walk and dance, and all sounding out his praise through all the
Regions: before they could not speak, and now they cannot hold their peace, but
must proclaim what great things the Lord had done for them: Out of Mary
Magdalen he cast seven Devils, and then she sat attentively at Christ's feet,
to hear his words: O Beloved! Such words (from such an experimental Teacher,
from such a faithful High Priest, who knows our condition) as they are
powerful, so to an experimental soul they are as sweet as honey: and more
desired then Gold, yea then much fine Gold, Psalm. 19.
His words were so suitable so aptly spoken, to what she experimentally found in
her own soul, No marvel Mary sat so contented and quietly at Christ's feet,
Luke 10. 41.
while Martha was troubled about many things, and minded not so much her inward
condition.

And though I have a little digrest, yet I hope it is for yours and my good: I
could not but follow my thoughts, and express them to you, which came in of a
sudden, and beyond my premeditation.

Beloved, seeing we are so full of these unclean spirits, it is but necessary
they should be cast out and that will be effected, when our Savior shall be
pleased to cast them out, and to do to us, as he did here in the Text, Rebuke
him in us, and bid him hold his peace, and Come out of us; for he has the
Only power and strength to do it: Therefore this Text may betermed a New, And
a true, Divine EXORCISM: let not the word offend you, for Satanis here Conjured
by Jesus Christ, and commanded forth: here needs none of the Papists fooleries,
no holy Water, no Copes, Vestments, Adjurations, Crucifixes, Relics, Lights,
Candles, nor any mumbling Mass-Priests, nor Christened Bells: Nay, no use of
ordinances, nor all your duties can do it (simply) no; it is Virtus, the Power
and Word of Christ that only expels Sin, and these foul spirits out of the
soul: not but that we should use the word of God, and pray often to him, that
he would be pleased to exercise his power over these great and potent enemies:
And when he will please to work, A short work h^ will make of it; when he
pleaset to begin, nothing shall stand up in his way; and blessed shall we be,
when the Lord himself shall effect it for us; for he does it with two words,
here in the Text, (...)
1. (...)* 2. (...), Hold thy peace, Come forth: And therefore let us pray unto
him, and say, Lord, speak thou the word only, and thy servant shall be healed:
And Genesis 1. Genesis 1. 3, etc.
it was no more but one word, Let there be light, and Let there be a firmament,
etc. and it was so: and such is the power of God in the soul, when ever he will
arise; and till then, where is your power?

And note this also further, that as our Savior speaks by way of Authority and
Rebuke unto Satan, Come out of him: So in this particular, Satan counterfeits
them in himself, who will in all things turn himself into an Angel of light:
for he will sometimes in men, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
silence himself, and Rebuke himself: and seem to help to destroy his own
Kingdom, but he does it as Augustus Caesar once said of Rome; Inveni
lateritiam, relinquam marmoream: that is, I found it built of mud and bricks,
but I will leave it of the hardest marble: He seems to be cast out in one sin,
But he does but change shapes, to root himself the surer, in another Shape; he
many times makes a Retreat, but he does it to take breath (as I may so say) to
Rally up his forces for a stronger encounter. And when the unclean spirit
returns, he enters with seven other spirits worse then himself.

So it is in many men, Even by Beelzebub they cast out Devils: as when outward
respects, and the fear of shame only keeps them from some sins and
exorbitances: As many, who love the upper end of the tables, Mat. 23. 6.
and the uppermost rooms at feasts, Mat. 23. 6. but yet abstain; some to avoid
the cost; others for fear of censure: so diverse do refrain from lust, because
they are afraid to lose their reputation and credit: so many forbear to do
actions of violence, as Murder, etc. but it is for fear of the Law: so also many
forbear to be drunk, because none but base people use it: so many resrain
themselves from committing whoredom, for fear they should get noisome and
infectious diseases; so many turn religious, and use constancy in duties of
Religion public and private, but all is because it is of good Report, and now
in fashion and credit: but this is not done for the love of God, nor of grace,
but for to get the praise of men, and for love of themselves, for fear of
punishment or hope of Heaven or Rewards. In these, and such like cases, Satan
gives a (...) a check to himself, (...).
silences himself in one case when he sees it is not for his security, that
there is a distaste against some sin, or a convincement in the soul: And so
changes that practice that he may be heard and received in another, and all is
to get more and stronger possession.

Nay, which is more, he will Command himself out in one shape, that he may be
admitted the easier in another; as when one leaves Drunkenness, because his
brain will not bear it any longer* but then turns covetous, and it may be a
Usurer: So also, when as a man follows not lust, nor Wantonness because he is
old, or sickly, or weak, yet betakes himself to Idleness, or Pride, or
Ambition: so also, when as any one leaves pride, because its too costly, yet
gives himself over to Glunttony and Rioting, so he can but get it on other men's
cost; and thus it is in diverse other vices; and not only in civil or external
things, but in Religion; Now you may know and discern Satan his subtle
workings and plottings in these ways by this: in such cases as this, He never
Rents nor Tears them whom he so leaves, bur deals fawningly, and placidly, and
smoothly with them: he deals easily and insensibly with them: In these kinds,
Of Satan's casting out himself in men, and shifting shapes (yet it is still
Himself, for he never Tears nor Rents them) He departs not though he seems to
depart, but so much the more keeps in, and strengthens himself in his
possession: As, the natural changes do in our bodies, which are not to be
discerned: but infancy goes away, and youth steps in: and youth departs, and
manhood comes on: so manhood decays, and old age creeps upon us, as it were
insensibly: Thus Satan departs in lesser and weaker sins, that he may Reenter
in greater and stronger; nay, he may break off in some Great Sins too; but then
he aims still to bring in greater, yea the greatest impieties, that he may
reign solely and absolutely, without any control or rebuke at all.

And thus he deals with men for many Reasons: As,

1. That he may have the easier Readmission, he departs gently, makes no
combustion or commotion, for he leaves all in quiet, the sooner to ins^nuate
again; as a cunning Enemy, who will quit some outworks, that he may the sooner
get into the heart of the City; like a wayfaring man, who leaves his lodging
quietly, and discharges all, and departs in peace: but it is that he may be
Entertained with the greater respect at his return.

2. Satan departs from men so quietly, that they may be the securer, and the
more careless; that they may have no suspicion of his wiles and subtilties; As
when a man departs with smooth carriage. sweet language, and civil deportments,
he will be the sooner invited thither again; nay, the parties will be glad to
enjoy his company: As those profane Jews, that cried out for the return of
those days, wherein they baked Cakes to the Queen of Heaven; Jer. 44. 17.
they were so besotted with the deluding spirit of Idolatry, and spiritual
whoredom, that they wished for, and cried out for the days of the Queen of
Heaven to return: Was it not better then with us (say they) then now?

3. Satan does thus in policy, and deep subtilty; for he doubts, if he should
dwell too long, or always in one and the same habit and practice, he would be
discovered; and therefore he transforms himself the oftener, that he may not be
discerned and known to be, Satan.

4. And further; Satan is a Thief, and steals something at his going out, and
therefore departs in the night, nay, while the good man of the house was
asleep; Security is the bane of the soul, when men are careless* and a^e in the
night of ignorance: Now Thieves when they go away, they steal out without any
noise or tumult, softly, and without any Candle, Joh. 3. 20.
because they hate the light: And as Thieves do not reside always in one
place, but shift fro none place to another, departing from one road-way to
another, from one corner to another, to avoid discovery: so the Devil he goes
about, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
(says the Apostle Peter or rather Job) and compass eth the earth and goes to
and fro in it; Job 1. 7.
and it is for the most part without any noise or Renting at all.

And hereupon it is that men are the easier persuaded to yield him admission,
because he departs fairly and smoothly, there is no Tearing or Renting at all,
when Satan casts out himself; but when Christ casts Him out, then he Tears and
Rends, for then he comes forth against his will. But else he suffers them to
sleep (as we say) in a whole skin; He does not then disturb or rack the
conscience, nor wound the soul at all: And therefore it is with men in this
case, as it was with the Israelites in Gideons time, when they pleaded for Baal;
How long (says Ioash) will you plead Baals cause, and contend for him? Judge.
6. 31* Judge. 6. 31.
The Devil did so mask and cover himself, that most people cried him up as a
true God; his sleights were so subtillty woven, that they took him for the
only God, and his service for the pure service of God: So that not discerning
him truly what he was, they pleaded for him, and contended for him; 1 King. 28.
18.
and in Eliahs time they Rent themselves, and Cut their flesh for his Cause. 1
These. 2. 5.
And so Covetousness is said to wear a cloak, that is, because it will never
appear in its own shape; and so neither will Satan, that he may the better
deceive. Our Savior bids us to beware of false Prophets in Sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravenous Wolves, Mat. 7. 15. Mat. 7. 15.
Such an one is Satan for all his quietness and stillness within you.

Now if Satan shall stir up any false Prophet, or lying spirit, as he did to
Ahab, saying, Whatever this odd fellow says, Go in peace, Go on and prosper, 2
Chro. 18. 21.
and will nto let you believe these things; you may then, if you will, Go on,
And go up with confidence, But ye shall surely fall: And it is very like, some
may call you aside, as Peter did our Savior, Mat. 16. 22. Mat. 16. 22.
And he began to rebuke him, saying, Master, favor thy self, none of
thosethings shall happen to thee; Thou may go on in a fine, smooth way of
Religion, and never feel this Tearing or Renting He speaks of: But my counsel
is, to make them that answer our Savior does Peter, Ver. 23.
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me: And labor to see this
Renting in thy self; for if Satan do in reality depart, he will Tear and Rent
the Man; and when he does not, though he seem to depart, he keeps possession
still, or will Return with seven other spirits worse then himself.

Many persuade themselves, they have grace, because they are of a smooth, fine,
affable disposition and carriage; and many Prophets daub them up with
untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 22. 28.
as if they had grace from their Cradles; whereas indeed All men are as deep in
Adams fall, one as another, and one as hard to be recovered as another. I have
showed you upon another Text, how all must suffer with Christ, none excepted,
if they will be glorified with him; and showed you wherein, viz. All and every
one must be emptied and humbled as Christ was. When Christ comes to cast the
Devil out of these men (in person himself) I Will warrant you he will Rend and
Tear them: When for Christ, and to enjoy the life of Christ, they must be
emptied of all their fine, natural endowments, and come to see the ugliness,
the sinfulness of all their thoughts, words, actions, and to be arraigned as
the vilest Malefactors for all their great progress in Religion, for even these
are as far off the life of Christ as the other: And they must be at the mercy
of the Judge as much as the other; And their Secret and Heart-Idols and
defilements, are as odious to God as the other: I pray where is then their
Inbred gracious natures? If they must pass through that Condemnation, and
annihilation, and abdication and indifferency, etc. as I then showed you; And
must fight with the strong man Armed, before he be cast out: I Will warrant you
they will find this A Fiery Trial. 1 Pet. 4. 12.
Also the Apostle calls it A new birth: Joh. 3. 8.
What throws and pangs is there in natural births? And do you think there is
less and easier in the New birth? No, no; deceive not your selves far, far
more; for ye must be Slain and Crucified with Christ. I pray consider seriously
of these things, and be not deceived and lulled asleep, nor receive not any
such pillows under your Elbows from any; for they cry peace, peace, when there
is no peace; and they say, Thus says the Lord, Jer. 6. 14.
when he has not spoken unto them, but they flatter you with the visions of
their own heart, Jet. 23. 16. Jer. 23. 16.
But be sure, these unclean spirits are in every one of us naturally, and they
depart not without Tearing.

Beloved, know, All these are the unclean spirits in men, that God will cause
to pass out of the Land, Zech. 13. 2. Zech. 13. 2.
And I say, it is to be suspected, That when as the unclean spirit goes out
without RENTING, he intends a second return: And contrarily, where Satan
departs with Renting, he has no hopes of re-possession: For where he spoils
and tears his lodging at his departure, he finds that he that is stronger then
himself casts him out, and that such a soul is weary of such a troublesome
Guest, and turbulent intruding Inmate; whom he rents, he leaves; and whom he
Tears, God Repairs; whom he Rents, God Renews: Oh, how I desire to have all
our hearts Rent! for then, and not till then, will God regard them; Rent your
hearts, says Joel, Joel 2. 12. Joel. 2. 12
And A broken heart, a soul that is contrite and rent, O Lord thou will not
despise, Psalm. 51. 17. Psalm. 51. 17
And therefore, O sweet Savior, Rebuke thou all our unclean spirits with
power; command all our sins and corruptions to depart out of our hearts; let
them not reign, or have the dominion over us; but be thou our Lord, Isa. 26. 13.
our King, and reign over us: Other Lords indeed have had rule over us; but do
thou set up thy Kingdom, O Lord, and cast down thine Enemies under thy feet;
Thy Kingdom come, for thine is the Kingdom, power and glory for ever. AMEN.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. ALL POWER Given to JESUS CHRIST, IN HEAVEN AND
IN EARTH.
MAT. 28. 18, 19, 20. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, etc.


In one Sermon, Preached at a private Meeting in Old-street.
Augustine and others with him, reckon this to be the ninth and last time of
our Saviors appearing to his disciples after his Resurrection; And that, for
this end he appeared so often, to manifest the truth of his Resurrection: and
yet for all this, some still doubted; as you read in the foregoing Verse: And
they had great cause, for though he had appeared to so many, and so many times,
as this being the ninth time: and it is also said, He was seen of more then
five hundred brethren at once; yet for all this some doubted: and although the
Disciples were particularly appointed by Jesus to come at this time into this
mountain, and when they saw him, they fell down and worshipped him, yet some
for all this doubted; they knew, they had seen him in great and extreme sorrow
and anguish of soul, even to the utmost that the malice of men and Devils could
invent; they saw him yield up the Ghost, and they thought they had done their
last office for him, accompanying him to his execution and death, and so to his
grave and sepulcher: but here, He after many appearings to them, to confirm
their says, appears this once more; and it seems to be, very probably, the
last time of his appearing, immediately before his ascension: and now he gives
them a commission and command To go and teach all Nations, Ver. 19. 20.
as it follows in the 19, and 20. Verses, baptizing them in the name of the
Father etc. and teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you:
for ^o I am with you always, even to the end of the world: And because they
should be able to show their Authority and Warrant, if any should ask, who
sent them? he tells them, He that is IAM, has sent you, IAM is with you; and
further tells them, that their power they shall derive from Him; For all power
is given to me in heaven and earth: And these words, however they be few in
number, yet there is in them an Abyss of matter; there is a mighty power and a
vast length and breadth, height and depth in all His words: for His words are
always full of sense, spoken to the highest pitch that our capacity can
conceive or reach: The words of Christ are most pure, free from all concourse
of the depravedness of the creature: they are like the pure wine that he made
at Canaan; there is no tincture, no brackishness, no leaven of the old Adam, or
of the Pharisees: Men's writings and speakings are always low, they have in
them some Allay of humane weakness: but in his words there is not the least
allay, they cannot admit of any moderation or modification; Others it may be
writ they knew not what themselves (as I may so speak) even the Penmen of the
holy Scriptures, for they wrote things beyond their own comprehension, they
being directed by another spirit: they spoke not of themselves, but the holy
Ghost In them; 2 Pet. 2. 21
for all Scripture was given by inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. after they were once
set apart by God to write the holy Scriptures, they all spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost; as Dan. 12. 4. Dan. 12. 4.
God commands Daniel, Shut up the words, and seal the Book; even till the time
of the end: These holy men being once set apart for this use, they prophecy
Beyond themselves, and out of course; and latter and aftertimes shall make
known that, which they themselves which wrote them, knew not; for they spoke as
inspired by God: but Christ's words are always absolute and perfect truth: he
knew, and saw very well, what he said: there is nothing useless in his words:
there is no Tautologies (as we call them) no vain repetitions: when Christ
speaks, they are words of weight, words of power, they carry virtue with them:
as for instance, if ever the winds blow, and the storms arise in thy soul, Then
thou shall find experimentally and feelingly, that One word from Christ's mouth,
will do thee more good then all the words and all the power of men, To Still
those winds and storms; those who have experience here of know it full well: as
we see, when the ship was like to be Overcome by the winds and storms, and
Christ was asleep: Mar. 4. 39
you may see there, how One word from him Ceased them; Psalm. 107. 29.
No more but Peace and be still; and it is the same in the soul: and Psalm. 107.
29. He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.

These words we have now read, All power is given to me in heaven and earth:
They signify, that Christ is God equal with the Father: but there seems to be
a great difficulty in the words, in that Christ never said, before he was ready
to leave the earth, All power is given unto me in he^ven and earth.

The question is, Quest.
What power had Christ now committed to him, that he had not before? what new
power received he? that when he was to leave the earth, and had given his
Disciples a Commission, and it was to be sealed at the day of Pentecost, that
he should say now, and never before, All power is given me in heaven and earth?
what addition of power had he now, which he had not before, if he be God equal
with his Father? and he says many times, The Father has committed all
judgment to the Son: and again, Before Abraham was, Ioh. 5. 12. and 8. 58.
I am, and many such like words: which shows, he is God, and of Equal power and
Authority with his Father; John 14. 28.
and yet he says in the 14, of John, The Father is greater then I: Can God
receive any new Access of power?

No certainly: but these words are so hard and difficult to reconcile that in
the days of Arius it filled the Church full of Errors and Heresies: Answ.
the Church fell much at Odds; for many from hence denied the Divinity of
Christ, because they could not reconcile these Scriptures: And (by the way) if
he be Lord of all power, then he leaves none for man to claim to himself.

But that I may answer this doubt, and make it clear, I will lay down two
grounds.

First, Although God receive no new power in himself, yet he does receive power
by being made further known unto man. And Secondly, By man's being made further
known unto him.

First, By his being made further known unto man; the revealing and discovering
of God unto man, making himself more known; the manifestation of this is said
To Add power to him; but not That any thing can be added to him who is
infinite: if there could, he were not infinite, and He were not God.

But know this, whatever attribute God has ascribed to him, it is in regard of
his creatures, not in regard of himself; for there are no such things in God,
Neither in regard of his incommunicable, or communicable Attributes, as
Eternity, Infiniteness, Omnipotency, Immensness, etc. Or in regard of his
communicable, as Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy, and Patience, etc. as if these
were several things in God: for God is One, and cannot be more: for when he is
said to be any of these, Just, or Good, or Severe, or the like: these are all
One and the same thing in him; they are but Attributed to him, that we may
conceive of him; it is but spoken of him according to the several workings of
God on the creatures.

As for instance, the Sun makes the Ro^e to smell sweet and pleasant, and it
makes the Nettle to sting: it makes the fields to grow, and cast a Pleasant
savor: but it makes the Carrion, and the Dunghill to stink; and all this
variety is by one and the self-same Sun: the same light and heat does diverse
things, causes diverse effects in the subjects: Says the Rose, it makes me
fragrant and sweet; and says the Dunghill, but it makes me stink, and be
unsavory: says the Wax, it makes me soft and pliable; but says the clay, it
makes me hard and obdurate: yet the Sun does not do one thing to one and
another thing to another: Even so Beloved it is with our God; One man He finds
God A comfort, and a rejoicing to his heart; another he finds God A Terror and
an Amazement to him; One he finds God A sweet guide and direction to him, and
thereby and therefore he draws nearer to God, loves and embraces him; Another
apprehends God an enemy to him, and this makes him run away from God: Is God
therefore thus various? no no; He is the self-same God to the One and to the
Other; and the self-same action in him is to the One and to the other; He that
is a Hammer to the Hard heart, he is also mollifying and softning Oil to the
Penitent soul; He that is A comfort to the fatherless and widow, Ps* 146. 9.
he is as an Enemy, A Revenger, and a consuming fire to the obstinate and
rebellious: And yet for all this, Our God is always the same; he is not, nor
cannot be changed; in him is no shadow of change. Iam. 1. 7.
And therefore we cannot imagine that he can grow greater or less in regard of
himself, but as To us he does; that is, if he manifest himself more to us, more
within us, in our souls, then he is said to be greater: and if he lessen the
knowledge of himself As to us, then he is said to grow less; And in this sense
also, he is said to come nearer to us, and go further from us: As also he is
said so to do, when he expresses, as to us, more or less, some act of justice
or mercy, or any other artribute: then I say, he is only said to be so, in
regard of us To grow greater or less, to come nearer or depart further; but He
in himself is for ever blessed and perfect, Unchangeable, Immovable, always
the same; we can no way Touch him, or Alter him; but it is only We, the
Creature, is Altered, and he is altered to us, as to our feeling, to our sight,
to our apprehension and comprehension but not at all in himself.

We cannot Honor him, no, nor dishonor him, as to himself; he is infinitely
Far Above our praises or dispraises; neither touches him; as David says, Ps.
16. 2.
My goodness extends not to him; and Job, If I sin it touches not him; He is
neither better or worse by all our works, either by sin or righteousness.
Beloved, be sure of this; we can neither diminish nor increase his praise in
Himself, though in regard of ^s we do: for though we hold our tongues, though
we run upon our own destruction, yet All, (as Creatures) Praise him: if he be
not glorified by us in his Mercy, he is and will be in his Justice.

It is said in Phil. Phil. 2. 6, 8.
2. that he emptied himself of all his glory; that is, he (as it were) drew a
curtain between Our eyes and His glory; not between his own eyes and his glory;
for he was the same in himself; but as to men, He drew a Curtain or Vail before
his glory; for he honored himself most, in that he Emptied himself; and
therefore he says here, All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; not
but that he had the same power before, But now, All power is given me, that is,
Now men shall see it, how in this very thing I honored my self, How in this
very thing, I manifested my self to be the Savior of the world; And though he
seemed to Unclothe, and dis-robe himself of all power and glory, yet men shall
now see and acknowledge, that he still At that very instant retained it as much
as ever, yea manifested it more; to them I seemed to lay it down, and now to
them I will be seen to Take it up again; and they shall see that it never
departed from me, nor I from it.

But now it may be you will say to me, We see you have partly cleared it, and
made it appear in what sense it is to be understood, that All power is given to
him in Earth; but how is all power given him in Heaven? do the Angels add any
thing to him, or is any thing added to them? yea certainly; for by the Church
these things are More made known unto them; for they were not created in such
an estate but they may be made better; nor are they so perfect but that they
desire an increase in their perfection; for it is said, 1 Pet. 1. 12. The
Angels do stoop down to pry into these mysteries; 1 Pet. 1. 12.
therefore their knowledge and perfection is increasing. And indeed it is
certain, They see their imperfections more then man, because of the great light
they have; they are nearer to God, who is light, and therefore see their
darkness and imperfection more then we; for we are more dark, and further off
the light* but alas, Vain men think they see a great deal; and because of their
blindness, they think themselves such excellent Creatures; being thereby puffet
up in themselves, looking on themselves as Lords of all; every thing was made
for Him; and that Christ was sent Merely to Redeem him, to save him: God
overlookt (as he conceives) All Creatures, both above him and below him, and
had respect to none but to him; as proud Haman said, Hest. 6. 6.
I only am in the Kings favor: O poor Creatures! you are deceived, think not
so; this is only a fruit of your ignorance, of your blindness; limit not Gods
Church to so narrow a scantling; The Dominions of his Church reach infinitely
further there then you are aware of: but we must not now enter upon that.

But hereby you may see, that things in Heaven have a revelation and
manifestation of Christ unto them; and his power is given unto him There, as
well as on earth; if so it be, That you do take Heaven according to our general
and common Notion of taking Henven, which we Vulgarly con^eive to be above the
Circumference of the Sun, and God to be present more especially there; but this
also is a limiting The bounds of his Church and Kingdom: His Kingdom (as I
conceive) is every where; and Heaven is where he is, for he is Every where.

Yet, I remember I was taught, when I was a Child, either by my Nurse, or my
Mother, or Shoolmaster, that God Almighty was above in Heaven, viz. above the
Sun, Moon and Stars; and I thought of a long time afterward that there was his
Court, and his Chamber of presence; and I thought it a great Height to come to
this knowledge: but I assure you, I had more to do, to unlearn this principle,
then ever I had to learn it; and I am afraid too many of us are gone no further
then this Childish principle; whereupon follow many errors.

But it is more safe, Taking Heaven in the largest sense; Either as God Filling
all places, and all things, as well above the Sun as below, and below as above;
and so Heaven to be where God is, that is, ever where: for he cannot be
excluded from any place; but he is not only in every place, but in every place
Alike.

Or else to take Heaven in that sense the Prodigal does, Luke 15. 18.
Luke 15. 18. Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; to take
Heaven to be in our souls. When God comes into our souls, and dwells there, that
is, when he manifests his presence in us, and to us, then he is said to dwell
there: not but that he dwelt there in regard of himself as much before; but
then he is there as in his Temple, Ps. 50. 2.
As in his glory, to Usward: then we see him there, In the Beauty of Holiness;
Then He is compassed about with our praises, Ps. 68. 24.
as it is expressed in that 68 Psalm, It is well seen, O God, how thou go; How
thou My God go, when thou art in thy Sanctuary: The singers go before, and
the minstrels follow after, in the midst are the damsels with timbrels, etc.
When God is not only in us as he is in all Creatures; but when he is there
sensibly to us, that we feel him, and see him, and Rejoice to behold his
Presence and Glory, and so we come Thereby, to glorisie him more.

Whenever we come to this Sight, then are we come into a degree of the kingdom
of Heaven, Into Gods Chamber of Presence; There we shall see all Creatures, all
Angels and Saints, and the whole Creation compassing him round about with
Glories and Hallelujahs; Then ( as to us) is He set upon his Throne; And till
then he is As Crucified, As upon the Cross, as Buffetted, as Spit upon, as
Emptied, as disrohed, as Slighted, Trod upon, As upon the dunghill, as separa^e
from his glory: but all this is, but as to men, not as to Himself, as I said
before.

For to him all Angels Cry A loud the Heavens and the Earth, Isa. 6. 3.
and all the Powers therein, and all Creatures cry continually, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbaths; Heaven and Earth are full of the majesty of thy
glory. And He knows His own glory and praise Infinitely Beyond our
apprehensions; but, as I said, He is more praised and glorified, As to us, and
by us. And in this sense are our Saviors words here, that he has now All
power given him in Heaven and in Earth, in regard there is a great deal more
light come to us, and he is revealed unto more; for Christ, as he says, Joh.
1. 9.
Ioh. 1. 9. He is the true light that enlightneth every man that comes in to
the world.

As you know, He was once made known to the Jews, and the Gen^iles lay in
darkness; but now he is made known to the Gentiles, and the Jews are in
darkness; Judge. 6. 36, etc.
like Gedions fleece, They were wet when all the ground about was dry; which
was the time that the Jews had the knowledge of God and Christ: but then again,
all the ground was wet, and his fleece dry; The fall of the Jews was the rising
of the Gentiles, as the Apostle expresses, Romans Romans 11. 12.
11. 12. The Gospel, it first shined to the Jews, and afterward to the
Gentiles, which was All the rest of the world. And our Savior says, That he
was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; Mat. 15. 24.
And he commanded his Disciples when he first sent them out, Go not in the way
of the Gentiles, but go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Mat. 10. 5, 6.
He did very strictly tie himself to the Jews, so that hardly any others could
get any mercy from him; They never got any, but they got it very hardly, and
very sparingly; as the Centution, Luke 7. he would not go himself immediately
to Jesus, Luke 7.
knowing how unwelcome they were to him, and what harsh answers he gave them:
therefore he went by the Jews, and got the Priests and Elders to go to him; And
they also were fain to use many words to persuade him: it is said, they were fain
to persuade him instantly, commending him for a good man, Verse 4.
and that he had done them much good, and had built them a Synagogue, and at
last Jesus went with them, etc.

And so likewise, the woman of Canaan how hardly did she get mercy from him,
and how often gave he her a repulse, Mat. 15. 22.
and beat her off, and would not be overcome, till her faith prevailed with
him, and she got it by force? it is wonderful to see how our Savior tied
himself to the Jews; again, its said, God wrought salvation in the midst of the
earth: Isa. 12. 6.
Great is thy God, says the Prophet, Isa. 12. 6. in the midst of thee, or in
the heart of thee. Historiographers say that Jerusalem is in the very midst of
the earth, that it is the very Navel of the world.

And Christ began his miracles, and preached first at Jerusalem, and from
thenc^ sent out his Disciples into all the world: from which Observation we may
apply thus much to our selves, that whenever Christ teaches any man to
Salvation, That when he preaches Healthfully and Savingly in the soul, he
preaches first to the heart, begins there, sets that right, and from thence
His word is derived and sent forth to all the members of the body: Christ and
his Disciples first began at Jerusalem, and then afterward their Commission was
to go into all the world: he tied himself very str^ctly to the Jews, before
ever he would suffer them to go to the Gentiles. This truth I would commend to
you as a Stable Maxim of truth; All faith and holiness is first to be preached
to the heart before we go about to rectify the members and the actions: which
in this regard may well be called Jews and Gentiles.

Religion, if it begin not at the heart, is nothing worth; it is but a folly to
preach to the eyes, and to the ears, to the hands, and to the feet, before we
preach to the heart: we must observe Christ's rule, first begin at Jerusalem,
and then go into all the world; first preach to the Jews, afterward to the
Gentiles: God only speaks to the heart, and Teaches that: to begin with the
Outward man, that so they may teach the heart, is the way of man, not of God:
Great is thy God in the midst of thee, in thy heart; do but rectify that, and
the actions cannot be amiss: make the tree good, and there will follow good
fruit: Can you expect figs of thorns, or grapes of thistles? nay, can you by
all your manuring, Mat. 7. 16.
watching and dressing, or forcing them, cause them to bear such? certainly no:
therefore see the folly of many men in our days; they think by their pains and
by their Discipline, to force men into Religion, into faith and good works, and
Spiritual actions. When thereby they have only restrained the outward man, And
with them, they pass for Excellent Christians: Alas, alas! Either (says our
Savior) make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree evil,
and his fruit evil: whatever fair pretenses their actions may have, and though
they seem Good to men, if the heart be not reformed, they are but Golden Vices,
Botten Nutmegs and rotten apples gilded over; Gilded Sepulchers; they neither
have a good root, nor tend to a right End: fair without, but false rotten and
stinking within, they are carried on by Self to base carnal and fleshly ends;
self is both the Rise and End of their actions, and they no better then thorns
and thistles, and fit for nothing but to be burnt up: 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14.
As the Apostle says, The fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

Great is thy God in the midst of thee: Satan it is that preaches first to the
out-parrs: He it is that preaches to the outward man by Laws, by Credit, by
Honor, by Riches, by Praise; and you know what verdict Christ gives of this
preaching, and of this learning; Verily, I say unto you, you have your reward:
Mat. 6. 15.
ye do it that ye may be seen of men, and ye are seen of men, ye have your
reward: ye restrain your hands and your feet from evil, because you would not
come under the penalty of men's Laws, and you do escape them; verily Herein you
have your reward: and you do your good works, for the praise of men, and you
have it. Verily I say unto you, you have your reward.

And though you may think highly of such works, and of your selves for them,
yet there is nothing of God in them: and to him they are no better sacrifice
Then cutting off a Dogs neck, Isa. 63. 3.
or the offering up of swines blood, as the Prophet Isaiah says: this is
nothing but One sin casting out Another for self-advantage: Mat. 12. 24.
this is nothing but Beelzebub casting out Devils by Beelzebub, and yet he has
nothing less possession: for it is nothing but the old man working within his
own sphere, and to his own advantage: ye do it that ye may be counted honest
among men, and ye are accounted so; ye would be and are esteemed great
professors, verily you have your reward, Many such like ends you have, and so
Many such rewards: This is nothing but the Devils preaching, and the Devils
learning within thee; its no better then the Devils work, and thou can expect
no other But the Devils Wages. All these things will I give thee, Mat. 4. 9.
if thou will fall down and worship me: He is the God of this world, and has
great power given him over the Kingdoms of this world, and he can bestow much
of the glory of them upon his servants: but God He speaks first in the center
of the earth: He begins first with the heart, Preaches within thee, reforms
first the heart: here only preaches His well-beloved Son in whom Only he is
well pleased.

Except Thy actions be The actions of his own Well-beloved Son in thy heart, he
neither owns nor accepts them; they are strange fire to him: and you know what
became of Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire before the Lord: Lev. 10. 2.
The Lord He Pours precious ointment on this Aarons head, Psalm. 133. 2.
and from thence Drencheth his beard, and so down to the skirts of his
garments: so far as the heart is reformed, the actions cannot be amiss: That
soul that is in love with Jesus Christ, Beloved, where the love of God is shed
abroad in the heart, it is death to him, Prove. 7.
to that soul, to go a whoring with the creatures; he can have no peace to
commit adultery with the world, That whorish woman; he cannot endure Satan's
preaching: hearken to me, and I will give thee these and these thing: no, no:
his peace lies in hearkening to what the Lord says in him, and he preaches no
such doctrine, but bids him leave the world, for its enmity to him; he bids
part with these things, Take up the cross, expect reproaches, persecutions, and
death from the world, This preaching is of God, let thy life be in forsaking
the glory of the world; though thou live in the world, yet let thy heart, thy
affections dwell and abide with me: Use the world as if thou usedst it not: 1
Cor. 7. 30, etc.
count nothing in the world thine own: be thou but as a steward in whatever
thou have, Always ready to give an account of all; This preaching is from God,
from Heaven: The Devils preaching is quite contrary; And when thou hear such
preaching as is contrary to this, and such whisperings within thee, Conclude it
is the Devil and not God; and that such preaching and learning will destroy thy
soul; therefore I say, always look to thy heart, that It be set right, before
ever thou expectest the actions can be good: if that be not so, conclude all
that proceeds from it, is naught: we must look mainly to the center, to the
Heart, that life may come from thence.

Even as the life in the body by the blood flows from the heart to all the
members: if not, those members are dead: so the life of true grace flows from
the heart as from the fountain: for if either fear, or Law, or Heaven, or Hell,
reward, or any hopes, or by-ends, Urge the heart To goodness, These are but
dead works: and you shall know it by this, do but take away these respects, and
by-ends, and these works Cease: take away hope of reward, and fear of
punishment, and this body is dead, he works no more: why? because there is no
life, no heat within to move him: tell him, I mean he whose heart is set right
for God, reformed by him, tell him he must deny, forsake the world, he must be
emptied of all the glory of the world, of all self-seeking, self-glorying,
self-praising; why herein is his life, his peace, his glory; but to the other
who has been only taught by such PRECEPTS as come from men, from Self, This
preaching is death to him: Mar. 7. 9.
but his life, and peace, and joy is to hear How he shall be advanced,
esteemed, honored etc. how he shall be made rich and great: therefore you may
easily hence distinguish what preaching and practice is from God, and what from
Satan and Self.

Thus much may serve for the first thing, to open unto you the meaning of these
words, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: to me it seems very
plain and clear, and I hope to you also, that That which before seemed obscure,
now is made manifest.

The second ground: Christ also, as he is man, has all power given unto him,
as being united to God, so also to man: and this definition, as being united to
God, is very large and deep, as the river at the entrance into the Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 47. 4, 5.
which at the first entrance took a man but up to the ankles, and then a little
further up to the knees, and then to the middle, and at last it would quite
down and swallow up all, it grew into a vast Sea: The meaning of the words in
this sense, we are not able to comprehend or understand; but the more we wade
into them the more we are drowned and swalloed up.

Jesus Christ, he had the same glory in himself when he was upon earth, as he
had with his Father before all worlds, Mat. 3. 17.
and he is his well-beloved Son, in whom only he is well-pleosed; But as he is
man, he to Usward emptied himself of all his glory, And came in the form of a
servant; he was subject to the like passions and infirmities as we are except
sinful; and hereby man came to be further made known unto him: that is, in
regard of his humane nature, he was hungry and thirsty, and weary, and suffered
death, and the like; and yet in regard of his Divine nature, he held his glory
and Union with his Father: and it was necessary it should be so in both
regards; for had it not been so, he could not have complied so with the
creatures, and felt their wants and necessities: and had he not retained his
unity with his Father (which he could not in regard of himself As God, either
lose, or diminish, nor increase) he could not have complied so perfectly with
his Father for the salvation of mankind: For as he was in the bosom of his
Father, he was unknowable to any creature; he was known only to himself; he
was inexplicable, not to be unfolded; and in this regard, the more ye enter
into darkness, and unknowing, the more ye know of him; for he is nothing that
we can comprehend or understand, as (we are creatures,) until we come to be One
with him, and swallowed up into him.

But let us observe, that Christ never made this boast of himself, that All
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, till he was ready to leave the
earth: never till he had been crucified, dead and buried, and rose again: It is
remarkable, he never all the while He was on earth, ever appropriated all power
to be his, till he was ready to depart out of the earth. And Beloved, this is
for our imitation: Christ was no boaster, though none might boast more; but he
was meek and lowly; he became a servant to all; when he might have been
advanced and made a King, John 6. 15.
he ran away from among them: he was Far of another Spirit then is now in the
world, and always was in the world, among the men of the world: and no greater
sign of a carnal, earthly, low, base spirit, then to be always seeking the
great things of the world; to be tickled and itching after the praises of men,
to lift up our selves, to be somebody in the world, to desire to sit above,
and to trample upon their brethren, to have the cap and the knee: and yet how
many of such men forsooth, must be the only gracious and religious men of this
age* but you see these are far from the life of Christ, As far as the East from
the West: As far asunder as darkness and light: Are these the men that brag of
Power, and Wisdom, and Holiness, and yet are thus swallowed up in the world,
love the praise of men, and greetings in the Market, Luke 20. 46.
and the Highest seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts?
Their Phylacteries must be broad and long; viz. to be known from other men,
that they may be bowed to, and reverenced of all men: Are these the Doctors and
Teachers of all others? Are these the Disciples and Ministers Christ has sent
out to preach to us the life of Christ, by their Doctrine and example? Judge ye.

Beloved, ye must know, that all Christ's actions which were imitable, while he
was here upon earth, Heb. 13. ^.
they were symbolical; they show that he is yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever: for whatever he did then, he did but show and represent to our
senses, by external actions, what he is still* Doing in the souls of men, and
will be to the end of the world.

For, did he cure diseases in the body? he did it to show us how be cured the
diseases of the soul; Did he heal the blind, and cure the lame, cast out
Devils, dumb Devils, and deaf Devils? yes: yet these do but show what he does
daily: Mar. 9. 25.
when our mouths are shut up as to things appertaining to God and his glory,
his power dispossesses this dumb Devil: when our ears are shut up, and we can
hear nothing, Psalm. 58. 5.
but what pleases self and flesh, and the carnal man, Let the Charmer charm
never so wisely: now Christ's power and wisdom in us, dispossesses al of his
nature: Mar. 5. 40.
he turns the minstrels out of doors; to those deceiving pleasures and
allurements of the world, that in our crosses make us such deceiving music, he
says, Give place: and He Himself enters a^one, and brings us to own and
delight in him, and in what he administers to us.

Those actions of his he did then upon the bodies of men, do but show what he
does upon their souls: for he then cast out but some Devils, not all: he healed
and cured but some of their diseases, not all; for that was not the end of his
coming; for had it been so, he would have cast out all Devils as well as some;
and cured all diseases as well as some: but he only by them did teach our dull
capacities, which else could not conceive what he did in the soul, but by
representing the same thing Outwardly, even by those things which were most
equivalent to them.

Did he resist the temptations of Satan, and so made him depart from him? it
was to show that he does the same in those that are his, even by himself, in
his own person, and through his own power in them: For whatever actions he did,
they were done by him only for a resemblance of his internal workings: Did he
pray whole nights? it does but show, that his Spirit in us, makes continual
requests and expressions, Romans 8. 26
even with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. Did he come before
Pontous Pilate, and was accused, arraigned, whipped, buffered, mocked and
crowned with thorns? yea he was; and this was to show how our carnal judgments
Arraign him, and How we whip him and pierce him by our sins, mock and grieve
his blessed Spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30.
Was he nailed to the Cross? did he dye? and was he put to death by the Jews?
and was he buried, and a stone rolled upon him, never to rise again? they did
so; and in these and other his actions, lies all our hope and our faith: this
is our Anchor-hold and our trust; and whoever shall deny it, let his tongue
cleave to the roof of his mouth: Yet these were but symbols and representations
of our killing of him, crucifying and burying of him daily in our souls by our
sin^, by following our own wills, and by our Arrogance Pride and selfness, and
thereby his life is crucified: And also it is to show how we have daily
quenched the motions of his blessed spirit, so that it lives not in us, 1 These.
5. 19.
but the Old Adam, the Old man is alive, and Christ the New-man is dead within
us: And so likewise in the rest of his actions.

Did he ^ise again the third day, and triumph over hell and death? it shows How
this mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah has and will raise up himself, and
overcome all his enemies, and has and will put them all under his feet in our
souls: and then after he is once arisen, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
he will appears to all the brethren; to five hundred brethren at once:
wherever Christ^ is risen, ^ohn 12. 32.
he will appear and show himself: If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto
me, as he says, John 12. 32. As you know, it is the nature of fire to draw all
things, to ascend upward to its own center: so if Christ be risen and ascended
in us, he will so display his own glories and beauties in us, that he will draw
all our affections upto him, so that we cannot bu^ eagerly, and vehemently
desire to be like him: to draw all our love to the love of him, and all our
hatred to hate that which he hates; and all our love to love that which he
loves; our hate and love, joy and grief, and all our other affections to be
like his* Even as fire also endeavors vehemently to make every thing like it
self: so does Christ, wherever he comes with his life, light and glory.

Thus you see, that what Christ did for a time in the history, the same he
still also does as truly, as really and as constantly in the mystery; he did
some things visibly, to show that he does the same things as truly invisibly;
he did so much as was enough, Mat. 1. 23.
to manifest himself to be Emanuel, and that he was God manifested in the
flesh. 1 Timothy 3. 16.


And as I said when Christ was ready to leave the earth, then he made this
boast of himself; and never before did he ascribe this power to himself: Even
so, till we are made one with him, till we are made like him, and till we can
sit so loose to the earth, that we are with him ready, willingly and freely to
leave the earth, we can never claim this power: till thou art dead to every
creature, thou can never make this boast. Mat. 11. 12.
Beloved, if you would have power to remove mountains, and to offer violence to
the Kingdom of heaven, then you are to be thus qualified, that thou have
experimentally seen and felt in thy own soul, Psa. 129. 3.
how that thy sins have ploughed and made long furrows upon his back, as David
says; and how, you by your sins have quenched the light that is in you; and
how in thee he is crucified, dead and buried; and how thou have drawn
grave-stones of custom over him; and how you have buried his light, resisted
and grieved his spirit in you; and that you have found him arise in your own
souls; that you have really seen and felt all these things actually done within
you, his birth, his life* his death, his resurrection; that as his enemits have
overcome and crucified him within you, so you have found him ^rise gloriously
and triumphantly within you; and that he has put down all his enemies under
his feet In thee; Ps. 110. 1.
insomuch that thou have heard him, and seen him, Job 29. 25.
and felt him crying within thy soul, Isa. 1. 24. Isa. 1. 24.
Ha, ha, I will now arise, I will avenge me on my adversaries; Now, I that was
crucified, am now risen again: so that you see his glory, and the love of him
triumphing in you; so that now, thou can truly say with David, Psalm. 27. 4.
Now I am so far gotten from, Ps. 27. 4..
and forsaken the world, and my self, that now I desire but one thing, and that
will I seek after; even that thou would give me thy self, unite me and make
me One with thine own life, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, and visit his Temple.

You being once come to this pass, Really in experience, then you also may say,
All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth; for then you are (as I may say)
within an inch of being swallowed up into God; and then are you ready to leave
the earth, and all things therein; for this man he is become one spirit with
the Lord: And if we be one spirit, Joh. 17. 21.
as Chri^ts prayer has purchafed, Ioh. 17. 21. That they may be one, as thou
and I are one; that thou may be in me, and I in them, and they in me, that
the world may believe that thou have sent me; if it be so, then Christ himself
lives in us, and all our words are the words of Christ; we have no thoughts but
the thoughts of Christ; we have no life, but Christ lives in us, as the Apostle
says, I live, Gal. 2. 20.
yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And then also, as the Apostle again says,
and so may you say, 1 Cor. 3. 21, etc.
All is yours, and not before; Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods; You being come to this, as you may claim a right to all things, so you
may claim a Power over all things; for you are already set down in Heavenly
places with Christ himself in the very glory of God the Father, who is blessed
for ever.

But yet many there be that will claim this right, and appropriate to themselves
this power and life, when alas they are far from it; they will assume and
presume that this is their condition, when indeed and in truth, Christ and his
life is as yet buried in them; He is not risen in them, he has not conquered
nor gotten victory over his enemies, Isa. 43. 24.
but he is still crucified, and made to serve their sins and their lusts;
Self-will, and pride, and arrogance, and vain boasting, is still alive in them;
he has not as yet Avenged himself on his enemies; But pride, and covetousnes,
and love of the world, and praise of men, these things live in them still, and
Christ is dead; and so much the more dead and crucified, in as much as they
glory of that which is not, conceiving Christ is theirs, when as all their
ways, are contrary to him, and yet they conceive themselves, made One with
him, when as it were far better they had a true sight of their opposition and
contrariety to him; And therefore thou must know, thou art but an usurper, to
claim this power and right to all things in which thou have no part.

For when a man is come to that life we formerly spoke of, then he is made Lord
of the earth, and has then Real dominion over all the Creatures, And made
little lower then the Angels, as it is expressed in Psalm. 8. Psalm. 8. 5.
Then thou belongest to, and art one with him, who is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, though you see it not.

A supposition of two drops reasoning together.

As suppose two Drops apart from the Sea, should Reason together, and the one
should say to the other,

Whence are we? can thou conceive whence we are? either whence we come, or to
whom we belong, or whither we shall go? something we are but what will in a
short time become of us, can thou tell? And the other Drop should ans^wer;

Alas, poor fellow-drop, be assured we are Nothing; for the Sun may arise, and
draw us up, and scatter us, and so bring us to nothing.

Says the other again, Suppose it do; for all that, yet we are, we have a
Being, we are Something.

Why, Isa. 6. 3.
what are we? says the other.

Why, Brother Drop, do thou not know? we, even we, as small and contemptible
as we are in our selves, yet we are members of the sea? Poor Drops though we
be, yet let us not be discouraged: we belong to the vast Ocean.

How? says the other, we belong to the sea, to the Ocean: how can that be? We
have heard of the mighty greatness of the Ocean: we have heard, Job. 41.
that there is the huge Leviathan, that sports himself there, who is so great
and terrible he fears none; whose heart is as firm as a stone, and as hard as
a piece of the ^ether millstone: the mighty are afraid before him; who fears
not the spear, nor the dart, nor the Habergeon; who esteems iron as straw,
and brass as rotten wood: the arrow cannot make him flee-darts are as stubble,
and he laugheth at the shaking of the spear: who makes the deeps to boil like
a pot and makes the sea like a pot of ointment: so that he makes a hoary path
to shine after him, and upon earth there is not his like: What? that we are of
the Sea? how can it be? We have heard the Sea is great and wide, Wherein also
are things creeping innumerable, Psalm. 104.
both small and great beasts: there is that Leviathan who is made to play and
sport therein: and they that go down into the sea in ships, Psa. 107.
and do their business in great waters., they see the wonders of the Lord in
the deeps: there are the huge and roaring waves that mount them up to heaven,
and suddenly they fall down into the depths, and their souls melt because of
trouble: and those great waves make them roll to and fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, so that they are at their wits end: In the Sea also we hear there
be those huge and mighty rocks, whose foundations are unmovable: Thou say
that we are of the Sea and we belong to the Ocean; where is any such vastness
in us? where is any of all those wonderful and mighty things in us? therefore
we cannot be of the Ocean.

No, it is true, says the other, for the present we are not of the Ocean,
because we are not yet joined to the Ocean: and except we perish, and be
dissolved as it were to nothing, we are nothing; but if the Sun draws us up,
and dissolve us to nothing, that we are not seen to be much as drops, then are
we like to be something; for then we shall return into the Ocean, to which we
belong: Then we are those that have in us those rocks and those ships, and
those Leviathans, and fish innumerable, both small and great; And they have
room to play and sport themselves in us: Then we may claim and appropriate to
our selves whatever may be appropriated to the Sea, or to the Ocean as well as
any other drop: for we are united and made One with the Ocean.

The Application by way of Dialogue.
So, just so in like manner, suppose Two mortal men reasoning together the one
in Jealousy, and the other in Revelation.

What are we? says the one.

We are Nothing, says the other: we are but a Shadow, Ps. 73. 20.
a Dream, Is. 40. 15. and 47. 14.
a Bibble; not so much as the drop of a bucket, Hos. 13. 2.
or as the dust of the balance: we are but as stubble before the fire, and as
smoke before the wind, ready to be consumed, scattered and dissolved into
nothing.

Oh,! says the other, though in our selves we are poor drops, and as thou
say, we are no more then a drop, a bubble, soon up and soon down: we have no
power, the least and weakest of all things imaginable; yet we are, we have a
Being: nay, we are more then thou can imagine.

Why what are we?

Why? I Will tell thee what we are; we are members of the very body of Jesus
Christ: we are (as I may say) flesh of his flesh, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and bone of his bone; And we are to be made one spirit with him; and therefore
be contented; though we in our selves are Poor, and contemptible, and apart
from him Nothing, yea worse then Nothing, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
yet by the grace of God we are what we are; we in our selves cannot say, I am,
or ^ ^^ve; we cannot call our selves I; I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and in time I shall see my self to live in him, and then I may, And thou
may claim the same life, the same power with him: for we shall return into
Him, who is Almighty, we shall be dissolved into him who is infinitely Vaster
then then ten thousand Seas or Oceans.

Ah Brother! Says the other, how can these things be? we have heard, that
Jesus Christ is God equal with his Father; that he is Almighty,
incomprehensible, Immense etc. we have heard that he has All power given him
in heaven and in earth; that he Rules over all his enemies, and treads them all
under his feet; Psalm. 2. 9.
that he Rules them with a rod of iron, and crushes them in pieces like a
potters vessel; and He is set upon his Throne, and Triumphs in glory and
majesty, and is Set down in holy and heavenly places with his Father, in his
Throne, and full Authority. In us, behold, There is None of these things: we
are poor drops, and weak creatures: as little as we are, we are full of nothing
but sin and corruption; we are empty and vile and despicable, not only because
of our smalness and nothingness, but by reason of our sinfulness and impureness.

We have none of our enemies at command; we are empty and changeable, and no
stability in us: all our actions declare and render us to be always in a dying,
perishing condition; but Jesus Christ, to whom (thou say) we belong, He is
glorious and blessed, and lives for ever. And therefore I will not, I cannot
believe: will thou make me believe I am a part of him? it can never be.

Oh! says the other, 1 Cor. 15. 36.
be contented: Corn cannot bring forth fruit except it dye: neither can a drop
return to the Ocean, except it be dissolved in it self, and from its own proper
being: So, Even so, We poor drops in our selves, we are nothing, empty, poor,
despised Nothings, less then Nothings, Apart from the immense Ocean. But If we
can be Content to dye, and forsake our selves Then should we Return, and be
made One with that immense Ocean: Could we but be contented to annihilate our
selves, to be brought to Nothing, we should be made Something, If That Sun of
righteousness would but arise and dissolve us, Mal. 4. 2.
and draw us up into Himself, then we, even we, as poor as we be, should be
united and made one with the Almighty. Beloved, Beloved,

The Only Reason Why WE Remain such Empty Drops, is because we esteem our
selves to be Somewhat, when indeed we are nothing: while we set such a great
price upon our selves, and look on our selves as good, holy and pure, and take
notice of our selves what a progress in Religion we have made, and despise
others. This keeps us from being united to him: Oh! those High-swelling,
towering thoughts must be brought down: those Thrones, and Powers, and
principalities set up in us by Satan The Prince of this world: Those strong
holds that keep us from being overcome and being brought to nothing, 1 Cor. 10.
5.
must be brought down, that so we may be joined to the Lord himself, to be made
partakers of his life and glory.

My eye can never be united to the Sun, till I behold and look upon it; Then
those beams that come from it, draw my eye in a direct line to be joined to
it: so thou art never united to Christ, till the Lord himself, by the eye of
faith, which is as a beam that comes from him, unites and draws up thy soul in
a direct line to him again: As long as thou art Something in thy self, so long
thou art Nothing; and when thou beginnest to be nothing in thy own esteem, then
thou beginnest to be really Something: then is Jesus Christ Beginning to Arise,
and to Exalt himself in thee: Then, is I said before, have thou a right to All
things, and thou may claim all those great things, spoken of before to thy
self to be thine: though not to thy self individual, and as separated, But as
united to him to whom all power is given both in heaven and in earth: but till
this work be done, Christ is kept under, and thy self is exalted* and it rules
thee and governs thee and terminates all thy actions However they seem to thee,
and to other men ( as much lift up in themselves as thou art); though (I say)
to thee and to others in the same sphere with thee, they seem never so glorious
and beautiful, yet Christ is crucified and Self is alive, and set in the Throne.

As David says, Up Lord, why sleep thou? Avenge us on our adversaries:
Psalm. 44. 23.
God is asleep in men, till this work be brought about in them: and again,
Arise, O Lord, exalt thy self above the Heathen: Psalm. 59. 5.
Till thou, Till thy self be brought down, the Heathen are exalted, and Jesus
Christ is trampled down: as the heathen in old time, typically got the upper
hand, and took possession of the Land, and the fair houses of God, and banished
and carried captive the people of God, Psalm. 83. 12.
kept them under, made them tributary, and overrun the Land; Even so, are those
very things accomplished in us, when lust and sin commands and bear rule, and
overrun the soul like locusts, which are the very locusts of the bottomless
pit; Rev. 9. 3.
Which also are ANTICHRIST, and they keep him under, and daily crucify him,
that is, crucify his life in us: And these are those enemies we continually
ought to make war with, Judge. 5. 23.
and hate and pray against; these are that Meroz that we ought to curse
bitterly (as the Angel commands:) and not men, nor any thing which God has
made: for all creatures, As they are made by God, are good, very good: but the
seed of the Serpent we must war with and persecute, Even to the very death, and
nothing else.

These things Brethren we ought still to find in our own experience; Not only
to hear and read the history of them, as done in and by others: but to see and
feel how they are really accomplished in our selves; for except we see This
fighting and resisting accomplished in us: Mat. 12. 29.
except we have found the strong man bound in us, and felt those fightings and
resistings that he makes, till he be bound and overcome, we are yet in our
sins: Strangers possess the Land, Psalm. 74.
and the Temple of God lies waste and the enemies of God roar in the midst of
the Congregations, and they set up their Ensigns for signs and break down the
carved work with axes and hammers: Could we but see all these things in our
selves, then we might be sure that Light was approaching to us: And if This
Light were but set upon a candlestick, then it would give light round the
house, and we should discover these things more and more: but till then, the
lights is hid under a bed, Mat. 5. 15.
or under a bushel, as our Savior says.

And if we have not found these things in our selves, we have not been so much
as in the way to union with Jesus Christ: but having found it, we have cause
infinitely to rejoice: for then Those Masters and Lords that formerly commanded
thee, now thou shall command them, and they shall obey: then thou shall find
that he has in thee broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in
sunder, Psalm. 107. 16. Psalm. 107. 16.
thou (through him) shall have power now, to rectify thy understanding, thy
will, thy affections, to rule and govern them As a King, because Christ is
exalted as King in thy soul: then thou shall be taught of God, and shall
receive An unction from that holy one, and thou shall know all things: 1 John
2. 20.
In our selves indeed, and in our own strength, we can do nothing: but by the
power of Christ, and by his strength in us, we shall be More then Conquerours;
and we shall find these words true to our selves, that our Savior here says,
All power is given to me, in heaven and in earth; you shall feel it true in
your selves; for you being united and made one with him, you shall so derive
his power to your selves, that you may say, All power is given to me in heaven
and earth: then you shall come to see such things, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
as never eye saw, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, 2 Cor.
12. 4.
things unutterable: For till this comes to pass within you, you shall never
see the new heavens, and the new earth, so often promised in the Scriptures:
not till then, shall we ever see the day that old things shall pass away, and
all things shall become new, as it is expressed, Rev. 21. 4. Rev. 21. 4.
Then is the day come that God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: And
thou shall hear Christ himself in thee, proclaiming, Behold, I make all things
new. Then shall thou have power over the earth; then also art thou that blessed
Meek one spoken of Mat. 5. That shall inherit the earth: then shall thou have
power to meet thy Savior, Mat. 5. 5.
Prepared And adorned as a bride to meet the bridgroom at his coming; then
indeed shall all those spiritual promises be fulfilled and accomplished in
thee; And all this by being risen again, and united to thy Bridegroom Jesus
Christ.

And the way to this life is by being dead to the world, Gal. 6. 14.
and dead to the flesh, the world being crucified to us, and we to the world:
I Will tell thee, such a pass thou art now come to, that as thou stinkest to the
world, so the world stinks to thee: As all things are ready to forsake thee, so
thou art as ready to forsake them: so that thou beginnest to see no excellency
in any thing the world presents to thee: no, not in PROPRIETY, which the whole
world, yea generally al esteem so highly of, and are of all things lothest to
forgo; I say to this man even propriety begins to dye to him, and he to it; It
departs from us, and we depart from the love of propriety, or with affection
laying claim to any thing in the world, but having it, as having it not; as 1
Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 30.
That both they that have wives, be as though they had none; and they that
weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced
not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this
world, as not abusing it; for all the fashion of this world passes away.

This man is an a man dead, and clean cast out of sight, as David says, clean
out of mind he is as a bubble that no body sets by: but yet be contented,
h^ppy, yea thrice happy are those men, that are come to this, to be dead men:
You know dead men are not affected with any thing; dead men lay no claim to any
thing; dead men cannot so much as say, This is I: they esteem not of
themselves, they boast not of themselves; praise and dispraise is all one to
them: they can let men do what they will with them, they are all at one pass;
they claim no interest, no propriety in any thing: let them be merry while he
lies by, or let them be sad, all is one to him: let them be sharers of his
goods* One will have one part, and another another part; let them make merry,
and spend lavishly of His goods, He is not moved: why? The reason is, because
he has lost all his SENSES, in this world his life is gone, he is a dead man.

Beloved* This was the condition the blessed Apostles and Disciples were
brought to: Oh! but where are such Disciples now? where are your Great Doctors,
and your learned men? Are they Doctors in this School of the Cross of Christ?
No, no, nothing less: Are They Dead men? Are They come to this, to let others
rejoice in the heaping up riches, And adding Land to Land, and making
themselves and their posterity great in the world? These things should not
concern Dead men: And says David again, I am as a broken pitcher, that can
hold no water: Just so is This man: He is a broken pitcher that can hold
Nothing: Pour Riches into him, Health, Wealth, Praise, Honor, or the contrary;
Whatever ye give to him, or take from him, He is all one: if ye take his Cloak
from him, he will give you his Coat: if ye strike him on the one cheek he
cannot revenge, He will rather turn the other: Curse him, and He will pray for
you: And all this he learns of his dear Savior JESUS CHRIST: And all this He
has attained by being united, and by being made One with Him, whose practice
and Command you know it was, so to do; and whose Nature and life he partakes
of, knowing assuredly by experience That there is No other way to find rest to
his soul, But by forsaking his own will and living Free in the world, and Dead
unto it, and to his own proper will and affections.

Oh Beloved, How Happy, and how Free does such a soul live? how at liberty, and
free from those Chains, that most men are fettered with? as love of Money and
Honors, and Houses, and Lands; Distracted with hopes on one hand, and Fears on
the other, and are never at rest; but are like the Troubled Sea, tumbled this
way and that way, rolling to and again and never quiet: But this Man is
Delivered, Set free from all such things: What a comfort is it for a man to be
made Willingly to leave the love of the world? to live free, and above all
hopes and fears: What a comfort is it not to fear death? (for this man dies
daily) not to fear To Answer All our enemies in the gate? Ps. 127. 5.
to look boldly and undauntedly on Death, on Satan, as knowing them overcome
and brought under? what a comfort is it to Find, See and Feel, The life of
Christ In Us? and that we are in some measure, and every day more and more,
made conformable to our Head, And that we shall now for ever Overcome and be at
Rest, and Sit down with Him upon His Throne, Rev. 3. 21.
even as he is set down upon his Fathers Throne? what a comfort is it to feel
and see our graces, Faith, Hope and Patience, And the rest, to Revive, to live
and flourish, which in former times flagged and dyed? what a comfort is this?
To see That when either the North wind, or the South wind blow, Cant. 4. 16.
Let him be in any kind of condition, Yet His Garden prospers; His Soul
flourishes, And the Spices thereof flow out; and Christ and He, To eat the
pleasant fruits thereof; To this man, Nothing is a Rod to him, Nothing a
judgment, Let God do what he will with him, He can see no Anger, no Frowns in
any thing, but all that comes, is to Him Mercy and Loving kindness: This is The
Soul That lives with God, and lives in God, This soul is at Rest, And none else
But This Soul: For he has in p^rt, Possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Kingdom of Heaven Possession of him, Even while he is in the body: which
possession he knows he shall never be deprived of, but shall have the FULL
Possession and Enjoyment thereof, for ever and ever, In His Fathers due Time.

O my Dear Friends, To What A Blessed Tranquillity AND SERENENESS of SPIRIT Is
This Soul Attained. These are to Him BLESSED and HALCION DAYS.

Here end the SERMONS of JOHN EVERARD And All that can be of His Expected.
Here follow certain brief Collections out of some Sublime and Mortified
Authors, Translated out of Latin by Dr. Everard.
Hereunto Annexed to these Sermons, as things suitable to His preaching, and
giving further light each to other, viz. To him who is in the light.

1. The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. These two placed in the midst of
this book; the other six herefollow 2. The Tree of Life in the midst of the
Paradise of God. 3. Dionysius the Areopagite his Mystical Divinity. 4. Certain
grave and notable sayings in Latin and English. 5. The saying of a certain
Divine of great note and name. 6. A lovely glass or example of our Lord Jesus
Christ his life, taken out of Taulerus his works. 7. Another short Instruction
out of the same Author. 8. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a
Beggar.
THE MYSTICAL DIVINITY OF Dionysius the Areopagite, Converted by Paul the
Apostle, who did at Athens believe and cleave unto him, ACTS 17. 34. Written to
Timothy.

Translated into English By Dr. EVERARD.

JOB 36. 26. Behold, God is great, and we know him not.

ISA. 55. 6. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, says the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by John Owsley, for Rapha Hartford, at the Bible and States
Arms in Little Britain. 1657.

THE MYSTICAL DIVINITY OF Dionysius the Areopagite, Written to Timothy.
CHAP. 1. What the Divine Mist or Darkness is.
OTRINITY! That art above ESSENCE, above GOD, above Goodness, the Governor of
the Christians wisdom concerning God: Vouchsafe to direct us to the
More-then-unknown, More-then-shining, Highest-top of Mystical Oracles, where
the simple and absolute, and unchangeable MYSTERIES of Divinity do Hide: by the
More-then-lightsome MISTINES of Secret-Teaching, SILENCE in the Darkest
Darkness; Even Him that over-shineth That which is More-then-most-Glorious, and
under that, which is utterly impalpable, and invisible: does More-then-fill the
blinded or Eye-less Minds with More-then-fair Shinings.

2. And these things I pray for: but do thou, O my friend Timothy, by thy most
intent study and exercise about MYSTICAL Visions, leave and forsake thy senses,
and all sensible and intelligible things, and thy mental operations, and all
things that are not, and that are; and after an unknown manner, lift up, and
advance thy self to the Conjunction and Union with Him who is above all Essence
and Knowledge: for by a free and purely absolute departing from thy self, and
all things, having separated all things, and being freed and loosed from all
things, thou shall be brought back to the Super-essential BEAM of the Divine
Darkness.

3. But take heed, that none of them that are not Entered or Initiated in our
MYSSERIES, do hear these things: I mean such as are still detained and holden
in the things that are, and do imagine nothing to be super-essentially above
the things that are; but presume by their own knowledge to understand HIm that
makes DARKNESS his Secret place: Psalm. 18. 11.
And if these Divine Institutions concerning Mystical things, be above Them;
what is to be said of such as are yet more strangers, and farther off from
these Mysteries, which out of the last and lowest of all things that are, do
frame and make the figure of the SUPER-EMINENT cause, and think or say, that it
has nothing more excellent, or is no way better then their ungodly and
MANY-FORMED Images? whereas they ought both in it, as the cause of all things,
to place and affirm the positions of all things that are, and also more
properly to deny them all unto it, as being far above all things: And yet not
to think that the Negations are opposite to the Affirmations: But that it is
above and before Privations, which is above all, both Ablation and Position, or
above any thing that can be denied or affirmed of it.

4. In this sense therefore S. Bartholomew says, That Theology is both MUCH
and LEAST, and the Gospel Broad and Great; and again short and Concise: It
seems to me that he wonderfully understood thereby, that the great and good
CAUSE of all things, may both be spoken of, In Many words, and in Few and in
None, as admitting neither speech nor understanding, because it is
SUPER-ESSENTIAL, Super-Eminent to all things, and shines out, or appears only
to them without Vail and Truly, who do pass through all things both impure and
pure, and transcend every ascent of all HOLY HIGHNESSES, and leave behind them
all DIVINE, Lights, Sounds, and Heavenly words, and enter into That MIST where
He is, Really (as the Scriptures speak) who is Above All things.

5. For it is not without Cause, that the Divine Moses is first commanded to be
purged himself, and then to be separated from them that were not such: and
after All this purifying, He hears the MANY-SOUNDING Trumpets, and sees the
MANY LIGHTS, which Dart from themselves Pure and much scattered RAYS, or
Beams: Then is He separated from the multitude, and with the Selected Priests,
He labors up to the top of the Divine Ascents; and in them he does not meet
with God; but he sees, Not Him, for He is invisible, But Only The PLACE, where
He is.

And this I think intimates o^ signifies thus much; that the most Divine and
highest of things Seen and understood, are but certain Reasons, and
significative Arguments of things subjected to Him, who is Above all things, by
which His Presence, which is Above All thought, is shown, walking in the
intelligible HEIGHTS of His Most Holy Places.

6* And then is He freed both from the things that are Seen, and the things
that do see, and is swallowed up, into the Truly-Mystical-Cloud, or MIST of
Unknowing; in which he shuts up all manner of Scientifical Apprehensions; and
is in Him that is utterly inattingible, and invisible, being All His Who is,
beyond ALL THINGS, and NOTHING; Neither His Own, nor any bodies Else, United
after the best manner to Him, that is wholly UNKNOWN, by the Cessation of all
Knowledge: and in that he knows Nothing, Knowing above any Mind or
Understanding.

CHAP. II. How we must both be united, and render praise to HIM that is the
Cause of all things, and above all things.
1. IT is That we pray for, that we may be in this MUCH-ABOVE-
Light-shining-Mist: and by Unseeing and Unknowing, to see and know that which
is above All sight and Knowledge; Even in that, we do not See nor know at all:
For This is, To See and know indeed, and Super-Essentially to praise Him that
is Super-essential; by the taking away of All things that Are, Even as They
that would make A Self-ingraven Image, taking away all the Impediments that
stand before the pure Sight of that which is Hidden, and only by taking Away,
show forth That which is Concealed and Covered by it self.

And we must (as I think) praise and commend TAKINGS-AWAY contrarily to
Pos^ions and Affirmations: for them we appointed, beginning at the first, and
so by middle ones, ascending to the last: but here making our Ascents from the
last, unto the Most-Ancient, we take away All things, that we may without any
VAIL know, that Unknown, which is All things that Are, or is covered under All
things that are Known: and that we may See, That Superessential-MIST which is
Hid by All the Light that is in things that Are.

CHAP. III. What Speeches of God are Affirmative, and what Negative.
1. IN our Theological Descriptions, we have expressed the most principal
things of affirmative Divinity, how the Divine and Good Nature is called One,
and how Three; and what it is which in it, is called PATERNITY and FILIAL: and
what the Divinity of the HOLY GHOST means: How from the Immaterial and
Indivisible GOOD, sprung out the Cordial lights of GOODNESS, which still abode,
not going Out (the Mansion of being COETERNAL to the Emanation or Germination)
both in It self, in Themselves, and in One Another.

2. How Super-essential JESUS was essentiated in the TRUTHS of Humane nature:
as also Other things which we have Celebrated in our Theological Descriptions,
as delivered unto us from the Scriptures.

3. Likewise also in the book of Divine Names we have declared How He is called
GOOD, How BEING; How LIFE, and WISDOM, and POWER, and whatsoever else belongs
unto the Intelligible Divine NOMINATION.

4. But in our Symbolical Divinity we have showed what are the Metonymies, or
Translations or Borrowed NAMES taken from sensible things, and applied to
Divine things, viz. What are the Divine FORMS; What the Divine Figures or
Shapes, Parts and Organs, or Instruments; What are the Divine-Places and
Ornaments: What the Angers, Sorrows, Furies; What the Drunkennesses and
Surfets; What the Oaths and Curses; What the Sleeps and Wakings, and other-like
things Appertaining to this Part of Divinity, which they call Symbolical;
speaking of such Forms and Figures as have been Holily invented, To Represent
God by.

5. And I think Thou have seen as well as I, how many more words are used in
the latter then in the former: For it behoved, that the Theological
Descriptions, and this Explication of the Divine NAMES, should need fewer words
then Symbolical Divinity: For by how much Higher we climb toward That which
is Above, by so much the more are our words Contracted and Concentred in the
View and Sight of Intelligible things.

As now, when we enter into that DARKNESS which is above All mind and
understanding, we shall find not shortness of speech, but utter silence and
dumbness, as also want of understanding.

And from thence our Speech and discourse descending from the Highest to the
Lowest, according to the Quantity of its Descent, is Enlarged into a
proportionable breadth or multitude.

But now Arising from the things Below, to that which is Above, according to
the measure of its Ascent, it is Contracted and grows Less, till after all
ascent it becomes quite Void of words, and so united to that which is
Unspeakable.

6. But thou will ask, to what purpose? We laying down the Divine Affirmations,
began with the first; and now begin the Divine Ablations or takings away with
the last. I answer; That was because putting Down or describing, that which was
Above all Affirmation or Position, it was fit to Begin and Establish the
Fundamental Affirmations from that which is most Proper, and Nearest unto it.
But now when we go by way of Taking away from that which is Above All Ablation
or taking Away, it is likewise fit we should begin our takings away, at Those
things that are furthest temote from it.

For is He not, Rather and more properly Life and Goodness, then Air or A
Stone? And may it not Rather and more Properly be said, that he is not Weak or
Angry, then that he is not Spoken, nor Understood?

CHAP. IV. That He that is eminently the Cause of all sensible things, is yet
no sensible thing at all.
1. WE say therefore, That the Cause of all things, and that which is above
all things, is neither void of, nor without Essence, nor Life, nor Reason, nor
Mind.

2. Neither is it A Body, nor has it shape, nor Form, nor Quality, nor
Quantity, nor Bigness: neither is it in Place, nor is it Seen, nor has it any
Sensible touch.

3. It neither Perceives by Sense, nor is it Perceivable by Sense; it has
neither Disorder nor Trouble, as if it were Agitated by material Passions.

4. It is neither Impotent, as subject to sensible Passions or Accidents;
neither is in Any want, or Indigence of light (neither needs it any Light to
see By, or Withal.)

5. It has neither Alteration, nor Corruption, nor Division, nor Privation,
nor Flux (or a Continual flowing and Succession of Parts) nor any other
Sensible thing: Nor is it Any of all these.

Chap. V. That he that is eminently the Cause of all intelligible things, is
none of those intelligible things.
1. AND going downward again, we say it is neither Soul nor Mind, nor has it
Fantasy, nor Imagination, nor Opinion, nor Reason nor Understanding; neither
is it Reason nor Understanding, nor is it Spoken or Understood.

2. It is neither Number nor Order, nor Greatness, nor Littleness; it is
neither Equality nor Inequality, nor Likeness nor Unlikeness.

3. It neither Stands still,* nor is Moved, nor Rests: It neither has
Power, nor is Power nor Light; It neither Lives, nor is Life; It is neither
Essence, nor Eternity, nor Time, nor is there any Intellectual Touch thereof.

4. It is neither Knowledge, nor Truth, nor Kingdom, nor Wisdom; nor One thing,
nor Unity, nor Godhead, nor Goodness.

5. Neither is it a Spirit, as we can know or understand, or after Our manner
of knowledge; nor SONSHIP, nor FATHER-HOOD, nor any other thing Known to us,
or to any Other of the things that Are.

6. Neither is it any of the things That are Not, Nor any of the things that
Are; neither do the things that Are know it, as it is; nor does It know the
Things that Are, as they Are.

7. There is no Speech of it, nor Name, nor Knowledge; it is neither Darkness
nor Light, nor Error nor Truth.

8. There is of it No Position or Affirmation, nor Ablation or taking Away, or
Negation: But when we make Affirmations or Negations of the things That are
After it, yet we do neither Affirm nor Deny.

9. Because He that is PERFECT, Complete, Only and Singularly the Cause of All
things, is Above all Position or Affirmation: And the SUPER-EMINENCE of Him,
which is most Simply and Absolutely freed from all things, and is Above All
things, is likewise Far Above All Negations.

The end of the Book of Dionysius the Areopagite, concerning Mystical Divinity.
Blessed be he that is, that was, and that is to come, AMEN.
Dr. Everards ADVICE upon these following Sentences in Latin and English.
REad not what follows, till thou have Read and Felt, and do Understand what
goes before: For here follow certain Grave and Notable sayings, whereby the
diligent Disciple of Christ may examine himself, and know what is to be thought
or determinated of the True and Inward Union to the Only and Supreme Good,
that we may depart from our selves; and being dead to our own will, may live to
God alone, and to his will: Grant it, O God, by him which resigned up his own
will to his Heavenly Father, who lives and reigns with the Holy Spirit in a
perfect Trinity for ever. Amen.

These, in regard of their succinct and pithy shortness, they were hard to be
understood, if put into so few words as the Latin: I have therefore not only
translated them into English, but also annexed the Latin to them, that where
the one Language shall be obscure, it may be helped by the other.

1. DEus est unicus, and unitas existit, and manat ab eo solo: nec tamen de eo;
alioquin enim decresceret fieretque minor.

1. God is only One, and Unity is in him, and flows from him alone: yet not of
him, nor any way from him; otherwise it would decrease, and become less.

2. Ubi sunt duo, quae una servari, aut convenire oportet, fieri potest ut
inter ea oriatur discordia.

2. Where there are two things that must be kept or agree together, it may come
to pass that discord or dissension may arise between them.

3. Haec duo non nisi voluntate dissidere possent, id quod esset summa causa
and occasio omnis dissidii, etiam in Deo, sit duo possent esse in eo.

3. These two could not disagree, but in Will, which would be the greatest
cause and occasion of all discord or disagreement Even in God, if Two things
could be in him.

4. Nihil enim est quod dissentionem pariat inter omnia quae dissentire queant,
nisi dissimilitudo voluntatum.

4. For there is nothing can breed dissension among all things that can
disagree, but the dissimilitude and unlikeness of wills.

5. Hoc unum (Deus) vult unum, estque omnibus binis contrarium.

5. This one (God) wills One thing, and is contrary to all Two things.

6. It aque ergo quicquid etiam creavit ipse super unico illo creavit; alioquin
ei defuisset ordo.

6. Therefore also, whatsoever he created, he created upon, or To that One
alone; otherwise it had wanted order.

7. Praeterea nullam potuisset ejus creatio sive creatares habere
consubstantiam, propter voluntatem contrariam. quemadmodum videlicet nunc fit
ideoque eam interire oportuisset.

7. Moreover, His Creation or created thing, could have had no constancy,
because of the contrary Will, to wit, as it is now done; therefore it must
needs have dyed.

8. Ea unit as metiri, cogitari, tractari, cognoscive non poterat, nisi
duntaxat ab uno, and per unum, idque interdum in suo contrario.

8. That Unity could not be measured, thought, handled or known* but only of
One, and by One, and that sometime in its contrary.

9. Contrarium existit a se ipso sine culpa adversarii.

9. The contrary is* or exists of it self, without the fault of the Adversary,

10. Hinc apertissime perspici potest oportuisse ut uni and optimo esset
aliquod objectum, ex quo illud quoad ejus fieri posset disceretur.

10. Hence it may be most plainly perceived, that there must have been to that
One and BEST some object from which that might be, as much as were possible,
learned.

11. Id objectum fuit, and est omnium animalium essentia and esse.

11. That object was, and is the essence and being of all living creatures.

12. Maxim and optime in rationali, and per rationale animal, qui Adamus fuit.

12. Most of all and best, in and by the reasonable creature, which was Adam.

13. Hic se videndam exhibet omnipotentia and misericordia infinataque bonitas
supremi cui nomen est Dominus.

13. Here shows it self to be seen the Almightiness and Mercy, and Infinite
goodness of the highest, whose name is the Lord.

14. Ad majorem insuper cognitionem liberum creavit quod creavit; quoniam quod
ita liberum fuit, est, and manet, id nihil proprium naturaliter creare, aut
facere potest; ^am etiam liberum illud nulla in re seipsum convenientius
exerere aut videndum praebere potest, quam in suo objecto.

14. Furthermore, to the greater knowledge, he Created FREE that which he
Created: because that which so was, is, and abides Free, cannot naturally
create or make any thing proper: Now also, that which is free, cannot in any
thing put forth or show it self to be seen more conveniently then in its object.

15. Qui aliquid quod liberum est, and esse debet, concludit, propriumque
facit, is contra eum facit qui illud liberum fecit, and creavit; hoc est
peccatum.

15. He that concludes or shuts up, or makes Proper any thing which is, or
ought to be Free, He does against Him which has made and created that free;
this is sin.

16. Peccatum clarissime cognoscendum est, id si perfect odisse velis.

16. Sin is clearly to be known, if thou would hate it perfectly.

17. Odium situm est in contrario, quod vere nominatur semen Dei, sicut imago
Dei, quae libertatem cupit sine intermissione.

17. Hatred is placed in the contrary, which is Truly named, the Seed of God,
or the Image of God, which desires Liberty without intermission.

18. Hoec durat and est, and duret necesse est, quamdiu est, in eo quod ipsa
est, and esse, and manner potest: est enim ab uno, nec unquam se depelli
patietur.

18. This ( Seed or Image of God) continues, and is, and must of necessity
continue, as long as God can both be and continue, in that which it is: for it
is from the ONE, Neither does it ever suffer it self to be driven or expulsed
from thence.

19. Ut ea and cite and rite instauretur, interponit se unum illud perfect ad
illud omne quod a se disjunctum est in integrum restituendum.

19. To the intent, That that Image of God, may be both quickly and duly
Restored, there interposes it self, That perfectly One, to make whole again,
all that is disjoined from it self.

20 H^c fieri non poterat, nisi in quopiam quod se dis^unctum assimilaret, sed
citra omne detr^mentum unitatis.

20. This could not be done, but in a certain THING, that must liken it to that
which is disjoined, but without all loss of Unity.

21. Id oportuit, and necesse fuit, ut seipsum quatenus unum est, and solum
unicum apertissime declararet, quo libertas in statum suum rediret, quem tamen
nunquam amiserat.

21. It behoved and was needful, that That should most openly declare it self,
in as much as it is One, and only One, to the intent that liberty might return
into its state which yet is never lost.

22. Hinc illud, videlicet Jesus Christus Nazarenus long liberrimam voluntatem
docuit exercuit, habuit atque usurpavit.

22. Hence that, Namely Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Taught, Exercised, Had and
Used, A most perfect Free Will.

23. Hoc non erat ejus (quemadmodum ipse testatur) sed Unius illius a quo id
acceperat, ut id per eum patefiret.

13. This was not His (as himself witnesses) but that ONES, From whom He had
received it, that by Him it may be made manifest.

24. Nec tamen eo privari poterat, tum propter ^us, tum ob perfectionem quam
necesse erat ut haberet propter libertatem, ut eam optime (sicuti par erat)
declararet.

24. Yet could He not be deprived thereof, as well because of his Right, as of
the Perfection which it was necessary He should have, because of the liberty,
That he might (as it was meet) best declare it.

25. Omnium in eo perfectissimum fuit integra and omnibus numeris absoluta
unitio voluntatis, quae sibi id non arrogavit a quo erat ipse unum; alioquin
discessisset uni.

25. The perfectest thing of all in him, Was the Free, Entire, and most
absolute Uniting of the will, which arrogated not that to himself, from whence
himself was the ONE; otherwise he had departed from the One.

26. Nunc extat adhuc (quemadmodum jam indicatum est) liberum illud quod
admittendum non est; perdidisset enim illa aliquid quod in nihilum abisset, and
aliquid fuisset, unde consequi posset ut totum eodem pacto periret.

26. Now there is yet extant (as is already shown) That Free Thing which is not
to be lost; Otherwise it would bring loss to the Divinity from which it is, and
whose Property it is; for that had lost something, which had Vanished into
Nothing, and there had been Something, from whence it might have followed; That
the whole should perish after the same manner.

27. Ut igitur id fiat, necesse fuit secundum exemplar (quod perfectissimum
esse propter officium necesse est) fiat, idque plane ad arbitrium and
voluntatem unius quod nunquam a seipso discordavit.

27. That that therefore may be done, it is necessary that it be done according
to the example (which must needs be most perfect, because of the duty thereof)
and that wholly after the will and arbitriment of the One which never disagreed
from it self.

28. Hoc est, and vocatur redire ab omni dissidente in unicum quod per omnem
vitam studendum est; qui vult, potest; qui id non credit, tentet.

28. This is, and is called to return from every disagreeing thing, to the One
and Only, which during all a man's life, is to be studied: He that will, Can;
He that believes it not, let him try.

29. Hoc potest, and oportet ^ieri tantum amissione ejus quod uni contrarium
est; alioquin non potest: ea est obedientia in obedientia, videlicet integra
traditio, perfectum quoddam sacrificium quod voluntarium est; breviter is
Christus est verus Dei Filius, primogenitus fratrum, cujus proprium est,
quicquid Pater potest; qui verus intercessor est, per quem unicum possis, and
necessario debeas ad unicum, hoc est ad Patrem venire, qui Pater eum huic rei
destinavit.

29. This may and must be done Only by the losing of that which is contrary to
the One; otherwise it cannot; that is Obedience in Obedience, to wit, An Entire
Resignation, A certain Perfect Sacrifice, which is Voluntary: Briefly, that
Christ is the true Son of God, the first begotten of his Brethren, To whom it
is Proper whatsoever the Father can, who is the True Intercessor, by whom alone
thou may, and necessarily must come to the only One, that is, to the Father
who has appointed him to this end.

30. Si quis hujus orationis rationem consequi nescit, is caret spiritus
testimonio, cujus ipse disciplinam excludit and repudiat. Si quis eam
intelligit, judicet: judicat autem Dei Spiritus omnia. Si quis eo destituitur
and caret, ejus culpa est, quod de casu sollicitus non est, ut corrigatur, qui
tamen corrigendus est. Si quis haecdicat acutiora, sciat maximam Sancti
Spiritus stultitiam (ut it a loquar) acutiorem esse summa totius mundi
sapientia.

30. If any man understand not the meaning of these speeches, he wants as yet,
The Testimony of the Spirit, whose discipline He shuts out and re^uses. If any
man understand it, let him judge, and the Spirit of God Judges all things. If
any man Want, and be destitute of it, it is his own fault, because he is not
careful of his fall, that it may be Amended, which yet must be Corrected. If
any say, that these things are somewhat subtle and acute; let him know, that
the greatest Folly of the Holy Ghost (if that I may so speak, not derogating
from him) is wiser then the Highest wisdom of the whole world.

* Non est mirum, si haec carni acuta videantur; sunt enim divina, de quibus
judicare caro non potest; Ideoque acuta judicat, quemadmodum si noctua neget se
posse cernere claritatem diei, quippe ut ens luce noctis, cujus clarissima pars
obscurior est quam obscurissima diei.

* It is no marvel if these things seem somewhat Acute and Subtle to the flesh:
for they are Divine, of which flesh cannot judge; and therefore it thinks
them Acute: as if an Owl should deny that it can see the brightness of the Day,
when it uses only the light of the Night; the clearest part whereof is more
dark then the darkest part of the day.

To the Eternal Trinity in Unity, neither confounded nor divided, be all glory
and praise. Amen.

The Sayings of a Certain Divine of great note and name.
IN conclusion, I will hereunto Annex the judgment of John Denqui, concerning
the holy Scriptures, made in his Recantation, not long before his death, and
printed.

I do (says he) prefer the Holy Scriptures before all Humane Treasure: yet so
that I do not so much esteem them, as the Word of God which is Living, Potent
and Eternal* and which is Free, and at liberty from all the Elements of this
world: for if that be God himself, it follows that it is Spirit (not the
Letter) written without pe^ or ink: so that it can never be Obliterated: And
for this cause, True felicity, or the word of God, is not tied to the Letter of
the Scriptures: The reason is, because it is impossible that by the Scriptures
alone, an Evil mind should be Amended, though it may be made more learned: but
a good mind that is, such A One as is endued with any spark of Divine study or
knowledge, is made better by All things: so that the Holy Scriptures are Clean
to them that are Clean, Good and wholesome (i. e.) to those endued with the Holy
Spirit: but to the Unclean and Unbelievers, they (as all things else) are
Unclean and Deadly.

Thus then it is possible, that a man chosen by God, may be saved without
Preaching, or the Scriptures: yet it follows not, that therefore no witness
taught of God is to be heard, or that the Scriptures are not to be Read and
Enquired into: but on the other side, that all Unlearned Illiterate men are not
in the state of Damnation, because they cannot Read: neither whole Cities and
Nations sometimes, because they have No Preachers sent them from God: Thus far
He.

All these things aim at this, That we should by a Received power from God, do
our endeavor to hunger for God and his word: and not go on so securely with
the Killing Letter of the Scriptures: but giving them all Convenient Honor,
should grant them to be a certain Image, Splendor, Lanthorn, Scabbard, Manger,
and Vestry of the Word: but withal should know, that there is more required;
namely A Sword to this Scabbard, A light to this Lanthorn, that it may cut and
shine: but we know, that whilst these things are saying, There are some that
are much Troubled and Offended; as in the case of Mary, Saying, we would reject
the Scriptures, whereunto we say, There can never be Too much Honor given; but
the truth is, whilst unto the Scriptures as unto Mary, is ascribed the Honor
due to God Alone, it becomes the Worshipping of Idols; and of the Scriptures,
as of Mary, is made a certain Idol, which is Put, Honored, Accounted, Adored
and Consulted with, in the place of God: The Scriptures indeed, as an Holy
thing, ought to be a Terror to men, and to be Read with Religious Fear and
Trembling: and as before is said, to be preferred above all earthly Treasure;
but not made Equal to God and His Word: The Scriptures (as the Law and all
things else,) Are Good to the Good, who only know How to use them well.

But as now adays, many ignorant people handle them, and are conversant in
them; without all doubt, it were Better they were asleep the while. For from
the wrong understanding and abuse of them, flow All Heresies, Sects,
Superstitions: so that not only the Jews, but the Turks also, make them their
Advocates, and think the Holy Scriptures are the foundation of Their faith: My
self know at least twenty Christian Religions, all which rest upon the Holy
Scriptures, and every one Hopes they are on their side; all these things
proceed, Either from far-fetcht Expositions and Allegories, nothing to the
purpose, or from the dead Letter of the Scriptures: or lastly, from a certain
Arrogance and Abuse of them: Now it is far better (in many cases) not to use A
thing at all, then so to abuse it; therefore I must needs say Once again, that
the Scriptures are Shut up, and Forbidden to all flesh, because it can Never
understand them: for to that end, there is required to them, a Supernatural,
Divine NEW-MAN, Born of God, who may bring with him to them, The light of the
Holy Ghost: Such a man, can Compose, Dispose, Understand, Interpret, Place, and
Accommodate, All things, in their due places: nay more, that which is the
Table, Feast and Life, of these God-born men, the same is the Snare, Poison,
and Death of all Natural men.

Therefore, As All Works before Faith and Regeneration, are Sin and Unclean: so
also, To Read the Scriptures, to praise God, to fast, pray, and the like, and,
not only to torture and kill men, or to steal, and the like: for seeing that
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and to the Unclean nothing is Clean, but
they are Reprobate to every good work: It must needs follow, that all their
Seemingly good life, exercises and virtues are sin, and nothing but
dissimulation: So God does often in Scripture reject the Fasts, Holidays,
Sacrifices, Prayers, Praises, Preachings, Gifts, and Charitable Deeds of the
Pharisees, as well as the known and gross impieties of the Publicans: the
wicked words of men* and their Violences, Usuries, Murders, Adulteries,
Thefts, etc.

Therefore is Regeneration Principally necessary, before which All things are
alike sin, whatsoever thou can Think, Speak, Do, leave Undone, Read, Hear,
Write, Give, Love, Worship, Will, Know, Have, or Be; for as to them that Love
God, all things are to their Good: so to them that love the world, all things
are to their Evil; yea, God himself is to them Perverse, contrary, and a Devil:
and his True word is to them hateful and deadly: for it is meet, that to the
froward all things should fall out Untowardly: and to them that are Contrary to
God, all things should be Cross: wherefore as they are not Enough, so they are
not always good: those Sayings, Fast, Pray, Give to the Poor, Read the
Scriptures, etc. But these, before all things; Be Regenerated and Born Again of
God and his word: and, then Thou will be Fit to do All things, which that
New Birth will teach thee, which Cannot Sin: and whatever thy hand shall find
to do, thou shall do it Well: for God will be present with thee: for then thou
being Just, shall do Just things: It is not enough to do a thing, but to do it
Well; else better be idle, and leave doing: By this means, the good deeds,
which good men do, are not rejected: but only the show and feigning of good
deeds, which that Herd of Apes do imitate.

It were expedient indeed, to read and hear all things, if a man knew how to
read or hear: but few there are that have the Art of God to hear and read his
word: and far fewer, that can so pierce into this Thorny-thicket, that they be
not rent and torn: Therefore I will not by these my writings, scare any man
from any right Art of writing, learning or reading; but do admonish all men, to
see they use and do all things rightly; and first of all in the word of God, to
grow Fools and Infants, and then at the length we shall know how to read, do,
and Use all things profitably: and then we may safely Philosophize, even in the
writings of the Gentiles, or any others: and like Natural Birds, fly among all
the boughs and branches not taken: whereas before, we could not safely be
conversant, no not in the Sacred Scriptures themselves, without eating Death
from God and his word. Briefly, by this you may See the conclusion of the whole
business; And be it thus determined; Only the Pious and Regenerate man can and
does use All things Well, and with pleasure and profit read all Arts, and all
Heathen Books: to him there can be nothing Prohibited or Corrupt; He is a
certain clean Be; upon what thing soever He Sits, He sucks from it mere Honey
and Life: yea, even from Death and Sin.

Again, the old and Natural man, which in Scripture is called flesh and blood,
can use nothing at all well: and to him all Arts, and all the Nature of things,
nay, the very Scriptures, and God Himself and His Word, do bring Death and
Evil: He can neither Do, nor Read, nor Know any thing Profitably or Pleasing to
God: He is Abuse and Poison it self, and an Unclean Spider, which, Si^ where it
will, sucks nothing thence but Poison, Sin, Death, even out of the Scriptures
themselves, Out of things Well done, out of God and His word.

So it comes to pass, that to the wicked all things are deadly and forbidden:
such as are good deeds, to make or hear Sermons, to read the Scriptures, to do
good to the poor, to pray, to fast, and such like, as is before said: for to
the unclean all things are unclean and hurtful: so that it cannot be, but the
things that to the Good are profitable, shall be to them Unclean and deadly.
Briefly, the good man, in point of God, is never at rest, till being Entered
into God, He have lost his own Pleasure, Will, Act, yea, Himself, and all His
things in God: so that wanting Sense, Will, Desire, He does now (as the word
requires at his hands) Covet nothing: so that now God in him freely Wills,
Knows, Desires, Does, leaves Undone, How, What, Why, and to whom he pleases.

Summarily, In such a man, God has freely his Will, Kingdom, Pleasure, Place:
so that he is not now, The man he was, but is as A dead man, who attributes
nothing to himself: yea, so far that God is in him All things: God in him
Loves, Reads, Writes, Preaches, Gives, Prays, Hears, Knows, and is All things:
and therefore it is, that the great God, has determined to Crown, own, or
Reward Nothing in us, but His own work: the rest, which himself in us does not
Know, Read, Write, Do, leave Undone, Speak, Preach, Hear, Think are Sin: and
therefore says St. Paul, Now live not I, but Christ lives in me: And I dare
not Do, nor Say anything which Christ does not Say or Do in me.

To this Judge let every man refer all his life: he shall then soon find in
what estate all his Affairs are, and to whose Service he has addicted himself,
and offered his members as a living sacrifice: Let him observe himself, and
understand who it is that works in him: And That he to whom he lives and
bears fruit, His Servant he is. Now the fruits of the two Masters are
reckoned up in the Epistle to Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc.
against such there is no Law: and they that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts: if we live in the spirit, let us also walk
in the spirit, etc. I would be glad with all my heart, if by the help of God, I
might have so much power as to drive all natural men from their good Deeds,
Actions Omissions, Life, Arts, Reading, Writings, and the rest, unto God the
True Sabbath: that lacking both hands and feet, and utterly void of will, Art,
Desire, they might keep Holy Day from their own works: Truly, then God (which
otherwise goes not forth in our strength) would go forth in them with great
strength: for indeed God must and will go forth (and the time is at hand) that
the heavens must keep Holy day; as it is in that pious and precious proverb,
All things must be comprehended, and keep Sabbath; there must be no going up,
no running out, nor no work done; Seeing God desires not Our works, but Our
Sabbath; and that himself in us, Free and None Hindering him, a MASTER and a
GOD, may Work, Know, Love, Praise, Pray, Hear, Crown, and Reward HIMSELF in us.

Beloved, without all doubt, this is the ONE, and Only thing that pleases
him: And he commands All Flesh, that in Divine matters, it never Stir it self,
or desire any thing: And therefore it is, that I in this Book have Robbed man
of all, and Rejected him, with all his Best Ware, and most Precious Riches,
that he had in Divine businesses, viz. Of all his Will, Knowledge Wisdom,
Goodness: All these must we Unlearn; from all these must we Fast, and keep
Holy Day, as from the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, from whence Death is
eaten. And therefore there is in Heaven, mere Peace, Gladness, Felicity; as
where there are Eternal Sabbaths, and no Will, but Gods Will, Light, Knowledge,
Art, Wisdom in all his Saints, whereby he does Illustrate and Enlighten them:
And Christians do pray in the Lords Prayer, that the same thing may be upon
earth, and that the will of God may be there done, as it is in Heaven, where no
man Does, Wills, Knows, Speaks any thing but God, who will have, and in Christ
has Appointed this Sabbath also upon Earth. This God grant unto us all. Amen.

A most clear Glass, and lovely Example of our Lord Jesus Christ which as he
practiced in himself, so he propounded unto us to be followed; and it may serve
for an EPILOGUE or Perclose of this Book, out of the 106 page of John Taulerus
his Works, printed at Colen in Folio, 1548.
Whosoever desires to order his life according to the most Acceptable will of
God, and to be Partaker of his grace, without any impediment, ought warily to
look into this Instruction following of the life of Christ, which contains
all good things, and to express it in his life and conversation.

Therefore every good and religious Christian, ought in all things, and above
all things, and at all times, with all the strength of his soul, in all his
thoughts, words and works, purely to love and intend for God (who is the
eternal happiness and blessedness of all men) as his own Portion: which that he
may the better do, he shall most strictly observe himself within: and in
silence hear^ what the Lord says within him: and avoiding all Employments and
Multiplicity, he shall rest with God in unity: He shall Shut up all his Senses
in quietness, Continually Praying and Calling upon God, His eye being Fixed on
him, in all his actions: He shall enjoy His Presence in every place, time, and
thing: He shall be A perpetual inhabitant of himself, and shall Especially love
Truth of heart, and peace of conscience: He shall be mild and Humble in heart
as well as in word, and be Divine and God-like in his life and conversation:
Taking Patiently All things at the hand of God; He shall Praise, Thank, Honor,
and intend him in all his works: He shall be always Endued with a certain
humble Abnegation, ordering of himself to what God wills; and shall submit
himself not only to God, but to All creatures, avoiding those hateful vices,
Pride, Envy, Wrath, and Arrogance. Moreover, perpetually considering and
marking the Goodness and Perfection of God, He shall wonder and be astonished
at the great love and faithfulness of God toward him; and contrariwise at his
own Unthankfulness and Infidelity, judging himself (from his heart) The Least
and Unworthiest of all men; He shall more diligently take heed of his own Sense
and Estimation; and of all the wickedness of his nature; neither shall he think
More of Himself, then he has from or of Himself, which is indeed Nothing.

He shall always take in hand a certain New life, and exercise himself in New
virtue, and in New Truth: He shall be Sober, and Sparing in words, but
Plentiful in Holiness of life, and shall desire to be Left and Despised of all
men (as men) He shall much weigh Small sins, and shall think The least defect
not light, He shall take so great care of Himself, that he be never frustrated
of the presence of God in his soul; and that other men may be by him provoked
to better things, he shall do all his works in the most Perfect manner, and
shall Satisfy those things which he comprehends in his understanding: He shall
(by his good will) do nothing in this life to repent of hereafter; He shall
have In daily Adversity, either within him or without him, perpetual patience,
and in continual Multiplicity, A Recollected mind: he shall not (...) either to
Have, or to Will any thing Proper in this world, but be ready to distribute to
others wants, nor to have any Election o^ Choice in things, but receive
thankfully The goodwill of His Father in every thing: He shall admit nothing
within himself but [God] continually; He shall diligently Eschew and withdraw
himself from all men (as men) and shall preserve himself Naked and Free from
all Inwardly-received Images, and his soul Untangled from all Accidents
whatsoever, that he may continually receive The Influence of His Heavenly
Father into his soul.

He shall often behold and Exercise himself in the Most worthy Life and Example
of our Lord Jesus Christ, As in a glass, considering well, How like or unlike
He is unto Him; and He shall in himself give an Ensample and Testimony to all
men Of A Better life then This; He shall be True in all his words, Religious
and Mature in His conversation; He shall contemplate His beginning and Original
From whence He and All things flowed forth; and shall Strive with all diligence
To return into the same again: Finally, tending diligently, What He is, whether
He Ought, what He Does, and for What cause he does every thing; and shall most
constantly persevere in virtue and truth, even unto Death: And all this, not by
any power of his own, but by Christ, He alone Working all these things in him,
and not Himself, nor Any His own Industry or Acquiring.

Another short Instruction, taken from the same place in John Taulerus his
works, pa. 107.
WE shall most certainly Attain The Various and Numerous exercises of this
Book; yea, whatsoever can be written of a Perfect and Divine-like Life, viz. by
this means* if we withdraw our selves from the love of all frail and mortal
things: if we study to attain an humble Resignation, and inward Nakedness, and
embrace Only God, by faith and love in the bosom of our souls, and hide our
selves wholly with our Souls, Spirit, Body, Heart and Senses in his Most Holy
Humanity; and labor by a certain lively imitation, to become comformable
thereunto: and Finally, by His life and merits, Inhere and cleave continually
and perpetually to his Divinity. Who^oever is enabled by Jesus Christ to do
These things, does doubtless Obtain all the aforesaid Things, and is Comforted
and Led by God, and has always a Free introversion or turning inward into
himself; And all his works, and Himself also, are made Divine: so that in this
Perfect imitation of Christ's example, He does plainly and clearly know the
Lively Truth of the Sacred Scriptures in his own experience, and as it shines
into all Pure Hearts.

The PRAYER.
THE Almighty power of God the Father, vanquish and overcome in us, whatsoever
may hinder us from him, and give us strength to do his most acceptable will in
all things: The most bright wisdom of God inlighten us, and lead us to all good
things, which may bring us forward to him Alone: The unspeakable and
super-abounding love of the Holy Ghost, pierce through all the oppositions in
us; kindle and unite our love unto himself, with a most Ardent and Pleasant
Turning, all our powers and strengths; So that forgetting those things that are
behind, we may follow His most Sweet calling and Amorous drawing, whereto from
Everlasting, The-more-then Most-glorious Trinity has predestined us, Namely,
from the love of This deceitful world, to the enjoyment of Himself, and to all
His Riches and infinite Blessedness; So that by Grace we may be made that which
we are not, Nor cannot be by nature: To whom be All Praise, Obedience and
Reverence, from Every Creature, Through Infinite Ages, Amen.

A SHORT DIALOGUE Between a Learned Divine and a Beggar.
A Certain Divine, who (if we may believe the ancient Copies) was John Taulerus
himself, who meeting with A Beggar, Had this Discourse, Containing A most
Excellent Example of a Perfect man; whence we may be taught, How in All things
we ought to be of the same mind, Resigned to the Will and Appointment of God.

There was in times past, a certain famous Divine, who by the space of eight
years, had continually importuned the Lord by prayer, conceiving He wanted the
Right knowledge of the Truth, notwithstanding all his Learning; And spent whole
Nights therein, begging of God to let him know Him, and know himself, and to
show him Any man that might teach him The way of Truth: and when upon a time,
He was inflamed with a most Vehement desire thereof, a voice from Heaven Thus
spoke unto him, Go forth to the Church-doors and there thou shall find A man
that can Teach thee the way of Truth: And going forth, he found there a certain
BEGGAR with Patcht and Torn apparel, and filthy dirty feet, all whose Apparel
was scarce worth three half pence; to whom by way of Salutation He thus spoke
unto.

Divine. God give thee a good morning.


Beggar. Sir, I do not remember that ever I had an Evil one.


Divine. God make thee Fortunate and Prosperous; why do thou speak in this
manner?


Beggar. Neither was I ever Unfortunate or Unprosperous.


Divine. Be Happy! what mean these words of thine?


Beggar. Nor was I ever Unhappy.


Divine. God save thee^ now at last speak more plainly.


Beggar. Truly Sir, I will do it willingly: Thou Sir, did wish me a
prosperous and good morning; and I answered, I never had an Unprosperous or
Evil one; for when I am pinched with hunger, I praise God: if I suffer cold, if
it hail, if it snow, if it rain, if the weather be fair or foul, I praise God;
if I be wretched and despised, I likewise praise God: and therefore there never
happened any Sad or Evil Morning to me. Thou did likewise wish that I might
be Fortunate: and I answered, that I had never been Unfortunate: Because
whatever God Gave me, or I suffered, or whatever happened to me, whether it
were agreeable to Me, or otherwise, were it Sweet or Bitter, I gladly received
it at his hands as the best: And therefore I was never U^fortunate.

Thou said moreover, that God would be pleased to make me Happy: whereunto I
likewise answered, that I never had been Unhappy: for I am fully resolved
through his grace, to adhere and only to cleave to The will of God as the best
(as abandoning mine own will) into which I have so wholly poured out mine Own
will, that whatever He Wills, that I Will also: and for this cause (as I said)
I was never unhappy, Seeing that I will cleave to his will only, and have
wholly resigned mine own Proper Will.


Divine. This is very strange: But what I pray thee would thou say, if the
Lord of Majesty would Drown Thee in the Bottomless pit, could thou Then be
content with His Will?


Beggar. Drown me in the bottomless pit? Why certainly, if he should, I have
Two Arms, by which I would still Embrace Him And claspe fast about Him: One is,
True humility, and that I lay Under Him: and By Him, I am united to His Most
Sacred Humanity: The other, and that is the Right arm, which is Love, which is
United to his Divinity: And by this love Given to me, from Himself, I hold him
so fast, that he would be Forced to go down to Hell with me: and it were much
more to be wished by me to be in Hell with God, Then to be in Heaven without
him.

By this, That DIVINE learned That the most Compendious way to God, is, A True
Resignation with profound Humility: Hereupon the Divine spoke again to the
Beggar, and asked him.


Divine. Good Lord, Whence came Thou?


Beggar. From God.


Divine. Where foundest Thou God?


Beggar. Even There, where I left All the Creatures.


Divine. But where did thou leave him?


Beggar. In Humble and Clean hearts, And In Men of Good Will, Which is His
Temple and Dewlling Place.


Divine. I pray thee friend, who art Thou?


Beggar. Who am I^ Truly, I am a King, and and Jesus himself has Crowned me
with Peace, power, and Rest.


Divine. Art thou A King! But, Where is thy Kingdom?


Beggar. Sir, The Kingdom of Heaven is Within me, In my Soul, And I Can Now,
and Do, by His power in me, So Govern and Command, All my Inward and Outward
senses, That all the Affections and Powers of the Old man in my soul are
Conquered, and are in Subjection To the New man In me; Which Kingdom, No man
can doubt, But is better Then All the Kingdoms, Scepters, Crowns and Glories of
This world.


Divine. Lord! What brought Thee To This Perfection?


Beggar. My SILENCE, Sublime Meditation, and, Above All, My Union with the
Ever-Blessed God of Peace and Rest; Which is MY Kingdom, And To say the Truth,
I could Rest in Nothing which was Less Then God; And Now Having found My God, I
have Forsaken, The Un-Quiet world, And In HIM I have Found,


Everlasting Peace and Rest.

JOHN 1. 45. PHilip Finds Nathanael, And says unto him, We have found HIM,
Of whom, Moses in the Law, And The Prophets, did write.

ISA. 53. 7. OH! How Beautiful, Upon the Mountains, Are the Feet of Him That
brings Good Tidings, That Publishes Peace, That brings Good Tidings of
Good, That Publishes Salvation, That says Unto Zion, Thy God REIGNS.

LUKE 1. 29. LOrd, Now let Thou Thy Servant Depart in peace, According to
Thy Word; For, Mine Eyes Have Seen Thy Salvation, Which Thou have Prepared,
before the face of All people, A light to lighten the Gentiles, And to be The
GLORY Of Thy People Israel.

EPHESIANS. 6. 23, 24. GRace be with All Them That Love The Lord Jesus, in
Sincerity. and PEace be to All the Brethren, And Love, with Faith, (...) God
The Father, And The Lord Jesus Christ.

JUDE 25. ANd To the Only Wise God And Our Savior* Be Glory And Majesty,
Dominion and Power Now and Ever. Amen, and Amen.

JOB 42. 1, etc. THen Job Answered The Lord and Said, I Have Heard of Thee by
the Hearing of the Ear, But Now Mine Eye Sees Thee,

Therefore, I Abhor my Self in Dust and Ashes.

Now After The Lord had spoken These Words unto Job, The Lord Also said unto
Eliphaz The Temanite,

My wrath is kindled against Thee, And against Thy two Friends; For Ye have not
spoken of me The thing That is Right Like my Servant Job.

Therefore, Take unto you Seven Bullocks and Seven Rams, And Go to my Servant
Job, And offer for your Selves a burnt Offering, And my Servant Job shall Pray
for you:

For, I will Accept Him, Lest I should Put you to Shame, Because Ye have not
spoken of me The Thing which is Right, Like My Servant JOB.

The Heads of the Particular Sermons Analyzed, and may serve as a TABLE.
Part 1.
UPon this Text, Mark 9. 50. Have salt in your selves, he first stirs up to
attention, and then He shows 1. What Salt is. 2. What it is to have salt. 3.
What to have it in our selves.
Page 3. Several judgments what is meant by salt, page 6. In what sense the
Apostles were called salt, page 7. Christ is the salt 1. To season our duties;
nothing from man accepted, only Jesus Christ in us. page 9. 2. To heal our
sin-wounds, p. 11. 3. To preserve the soul from putresaction p. 13. 4. Salt
has a virtue to preserve it self.
All Gods promises are as a Covenant of salt like himself, unalterable: it is
childishness to think God to be al^ered or changed by prayer. p. 13, 14. The
fifth and main reason (as the Author conceives) as salt is the substance and
knitter of all things, so Christ is the salt of the salt. p. 15, 16, 17.
Object. Christ comparing himself to salt: if Christ can lose his savor as
salt, and be good nothing, in what sense this may be in regard of Christ,
answered under the two heads explained, p. 18, etc. The Exhortation by way of
Use* p. 29* Third head is, to see we have salt in our selves, and to leave
censuring and condemning others, p. 30, etc. That soul is a glorious Temple,
where God reveals himself in the graces of his Spirit, p. 35, etc.
Two Sermons upon that Text, 1 Cor. 2. 2. But I determined to know nothing
among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.
HE shows Paul's undervaluing all things but this knowledge, p. 41, etc. Then
what it is to know Jesus Christ truly, which must not be externally only, but
internally also, p. 43, etc. Men may know the letter, and never know Jesus
Christ, for he is hid therein, p. 45. Yet we may not slight the letter. p. 46.
True Christ (as to us) must be formed in us, or he does us no good, p. 48. All
men, yea the learned, and all the Princes in the world, ignorant of Jesus
Christ, except it be revealed from above, explained under two heads, p. 49,
etc. How Abraham (more then Prophetically) saw Christ's day explained, p. 56.
Christ is always in us, in regard of his being, yet revealed but to some, p.
57. True Demonstrations of Christ his being in us, in several particulars: and
how he is said to be in us, p. 58. 1. His birth, if he be born in us, ibid. 2.
Christ's star arises in us, manifesting him to our selv^s and others, p. 59.
The manifestation or birth of Christ terrible to the fle^h, p. 61, etc. 3. We
are circumci^ed with him, ibid. 4. His silencing all the Doctors in the Temple,
which is done also in the soul before he can be entertained, p. 65, etc 1.
Pleasure. 2. Profit. 3. Honor, all dispute against Christ, p. 67, etc. A
digression, occasioned by a terrible from of thunder and lightning, encouraging
against fear, p. 69. 4. Arrogance, A dangerous and Common disputant, p. 70, etc.
5. Reason, another great disputer against Christ in us, p. 72, etc. An
Exhortation to look within our selves, while these things are unfolding, p. 73.
6. After Christ came to preach, being thirty three years of age, his first
miracle, turning water into wine; how done in us, p. 74. While men are in
unr^generation, they wholly seek themselves, Neither the glory of God, nor good
of others, p. 76. Christ his coming to us, and departing from us, further
explained, p. 77. Third head, what it is to know Christ crucified, p. 79. 1. So
long as the strong man keeps the house, Christ is crucified, p. 81. The
knowledge of Christ not to be had without knowing the Mystery of the Trinity,
briefly explained. p. 82, etc. 2. While we hearken to, and obey the flesh,
Jesus Christ is crucified, p. 88. The Letter of the Scripture owned, justified,
but resting barely therein condemned, p. 89. A Question answered, how Christ
should suffer, and not God, in regard they are One and the same, p. 92. An
example to clear these truths to us, p. 98. A conclusion and application of
all, p. 99. He that truly sees he has crucified Christ, cannot do it again
for a thousand worlds. p. 100
Eight Sermons upon Romans 8. 17. If so be we suffer with him, that we may be
glorified with him.
Showing as there were three rooms in Solomon's Temple, so there be three kinds
of sufferers, p. 118, etc. The last only the true sufferers, p. 125. If this
definition of Christ's sufferings amaze us: Two qualifications are propounded to
encourage the weakest, if true sufferers, p. 134, etc. All outward sufferings
nothing, if we suffer not with Christ in those two things expressed, Phil. 2.
6, etc. in emptying our selves p. 148, etc. in Humbling our selves p. 148, etc.
There is no suffering with Christ, but by overcoming the Old man. p. 160. He
is desc^ibed by twenty several names, explained, and showing what Armor each
one wears, p. 149. Called 1. The Old man, p. 164. 2. Adam, 165. 3. The
Serpent, 168. 4. Lucif^r, 161. 5. The Red Dragon, 164. 6. The Roaring Lion,
174. 7. The Devil, 175. 8. Antichrist, 179. 9. Rebellion, 180. 10. Sin, 188.
11. False-light, 190. 12. D^rk^ess, 194. 13. Flesh, 195. 14. Selfness, 196. 15.
Propriety, 197. 16. S^lf-love, 199. 17. Our own will, 200. 18. Error, 201. 19.
Satan, 203. 20. The evil one, ibid.
These Enemies being overcome, we have six steps to ascend to the Throne of
Rest or Glorification, 1. Condemnation, 2. Annihilation, 3. Abdication, 4.
Indiff^rency, 5. Conformity. 6. Deiformity. p. 205. 1. Real condemnation of our
selves, and not only verbal, p. 206, etc. In this Condemnation three sorts of
men sit Judges. 1. The Carnal man. p. 209. 2. The Rational man, and he (...)
the Carnal, p. Ibid. 3. The Spiritual man^ and ^e ^udges both the former, p.
210. The spiritual^ty of the (...) opened, and the first Commandment set before
us as a glass to behold our condition. p. 215. Further explained, p. 224. Yet
for all this guilt, the blood of Jesus Christ purget^ from all sin: if Christ
apply it, and not only our selves, p. 229. 2. Step, Annihilation, reducing our
selves to nothing, what it is, p. 231, etc. The effects of this Annihilation.
This Man 1. Receives all as from God, p. 237, etc. 2. He does all by the power
of God, 238. to the glory of God, ibid.
3. He rejoices in others goods as his own, 239. 4. He is not glued to any
temporal things, but is ready to part with them when God calls, ibid.
3. Step, Resignation: for saking all things in the world, of what condition
soever, p. 240. 4. Step, Indifferency to all conditions, p. 251. Effects of
indifferency. This Man 1. He has two eyes, two feet, as to the body, so to his
soul, p. 264. 2. His eye is not divided between God and Mammon, p. 265. 3. He
resigns his judgment to God alone, regards not what man's judgment is, ibid.
4. He is gotten above all heights and depths, principalities and powers, etc.
ibid. 5. He is an Anabaptist, his former name is changed, and his Father has
given him a new name, p. 268.
The Author being interrupted, came not to preach of the two last steps, which
is Conformity, and Deiformity, p. 270.
Four Sermons on Josh. 15. 15, 16. And Caleb said, He that smites
Kiriathsepher, and takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife,
etc.
THe History of Moses sending the Spies to discover the Land of Canaan; of the
peoples murmuring and mutining upon the ill report raised by the ten Spies; of
Calebs and Ioshuas faith: these things run over and applied to our selves, as
concerning as much (...) as them, from p. 272 to 280. Part of this Chapter, and
2 Cor. 3. Compared, and answering face to face, as the two Cherubims, p. 212,
etc. The words opened and explained, p. 287. Kiriathsepher, the City of the
Letter, must be smitten and taken, before it can be to us Debir, The word: then
we likewise shall marry Achsah, signifying The rending of the vail, p. 294,
etc. The Letter, or Ordinances, not to be thrown away, nor yet to be rested in,
p. 295. The spirituality of the ten Commandments briefly explained, applied,
from p. 296 to 319. In what sense the Scriptures are, and are not the word of
God, explained, p. 318, etc. The text divided into two parts, 1. Onus, the
work, 2. Honos, the reward, p. 334.
Those that rest in the letter, either are starvelings or dwarfs, always
children in stature, and grow not, p. 337. Christ's body and actions in the
flesh symbolical, p. 343. Jesus Christ the substance and soul of all creatures;
false conclusions hence abandoned, and showing the soul of man is infinitely
below God, p. 351. An Objection answered, about undervaluing the Letter, p.
353. The Awfulness of God in that soul that truly sees him, p. 357, etc.
Pilates question what thing is truth, answered, p. 363. A short view of some
Privileges which are to be enjoyed within the Holiest of all, after we have
married Achsah, and obtained The r^nding of the vail, p. 364, etc. The two
Wonderful and unknown Trees of Eden, viz. The T^ee of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, p. 379. The Tree of Life, in the midst of the Paradise of God, p. 385.
How the Tree of Knowledge, etc. Is the Seed of the Serpent in man's Heart, p.
389. That Great Idol a Man's Self, 392.
Two Sermons on Psalm. 61. 17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands
of Angels: the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the Holy place.
Part 2.
THe parts of the text, p. 7. God has his Chariots of Triumph and Terror p. 8.
All the Creatures are Gods Chariots, wherein he gloriously rides; so many
creatures, so many chariots, p. 11. God in himself always invisible to men and
Angels, p. 17. All creatures infinitely short of God, and the most excellent
speak him but darkly: and though he fill all creatures, yet all cannot
comprehend him, nor all men and Angels by them, p. 18. How God is said to be in
Hell, and in Lucifer himself, p. 21. God not to be found or known by Addition,
but only by subtraction, p. 23. The Kingdom of Heaven commonly mistaken, which
consists not in meats or drinks, or crowns or scepters, music, etc. or any
ocular or carnal glory, p. 25. All creatures, the Amiable tabernacles of God,
p. 30, etc. Two Scriptures propounded, whereby to represent a a small glimps or
scantling of God, p. 34. None like the God of Iesurun, who rides upon the
Heavens in his excellency, etc. p. 39. What repose of heart the people of God
may take in this their infinite God and Father, because his everlasting arms
are under them, p. 44. Angels are Messengers or Ambassadors. p. 48. All
creatures sing aloud Gods praise; even the worst and wicked st sing a part: and
how, p. 49. What to think of the Angels above us, being out of our sphere, we
not able to define them, p. 52. That God is in all the creatures, and though
the creatures change, yet he is unchangeable, p. 53. Yet he is not in every
creature, according ^o his infiniteness, but as every creature can receive him,
p. 55. 1. use. To teach us love and charity toward all creatures, p. 57. 2.
use. To learn to know our selves, p. 58. 3. use. That nothing comes by chance,
but all things ordered by providence. p. 59. Considerations of the Immenseness,
and infiniteness of God, p. 60, etc.
Two Sermons on Cant. 1. 7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou
feedest, and where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon; for why, etc.
THe division of the text, p. 70. The nature of a soul in love with Christ,
though he be still filling her, yet she is never fully satisfied wi^h him, p.
71. Things in heaven, are neither visible, material, ocular o^ tangible, etc.
p. 77. To try whether we have love to God, by our love to our brethren, p. 78.
Many can come to God in prayer, under this notion, O thou whom my body loves;
but how few, O thou whom my soul loves! p. 80. The letter of the word but a
dead resemblance of the life within, p. 85. They that limit Jesus Christ
according to the thirty three years he lived on earth, do circumcise and cut
short the large vastness of his greatness, p. 88. The Question answered, what
need Christ any rest, seeing he is in heaven, p. 94. If Christ be not the souls
Teacher, she is still turning aside to the creatures, p. 97. A sweet
illustration thereof by a comparison, p. 99, etc. If we love Jesus Christ, love
will not suffer us to be our own, but his, p. 104.
The heads of a Sermon on Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to
^at of the Hidden Manna, etc.
ALL the words of God have not only a dead letter, but a living sense in all
ages alike, p. 109. Overcomers do eat this Hidden Manna, and these that eat
overcome. p. 110. Three things laid down to understand the text: 1. All the
seven promises to the Churches, though diversely expressed, are but one and the
same thing in it self, p. 111. 2. They all imply that which is here began in
this life, and to be perfected in that to come, p. 113. 3. Not one promise to
be understood according to the letter, yet the letter undeniably true, p. 115.
As Gods ways not like man's, so not his Covenants, nor Knowledge, nor Love, nor
Hatred, Election or Reprobation, etc. p. 118. Man's foolish wisdom would square
out God like unto himself, else not own him nor his ways, p. 110. Which things
should have been enlarg^d, because therein there are so many mistakes, but time
prevented, ib.
A Sermon on Jer. 6. 13. From the least of them, even to the greatest, every
one is given to covetousness, etc.
THe whole house of Israel Accused Condemned
of Covetousness, p. 122. This Indictment includes 1. Fault. 2. Extent. 3.
Intention, 4. R^proof and Sentence.
p. 122. Covetousness hard to be uncased; it ever wears a cloak, p. 124 A
competency ought to be the limitation of our desires: A Question answered, what
is sufficient or a a competency. p. 125, etc. Wherein Covetousness consists 1.
Eager desires, 2. Inordinate love,
p. 126. The covetous man known 1. By his course of life, p. 127. 2. By his
Company, p. 128. 3. By his Breath, ibid. 4. He can dispense with any sin, p.
129. 5. He is a man of all arts, or no art, ibid.
The Covetous and Covetousness in Scripture rankt with the vilest sinners and
sins, p. 131. No Saint read of in Scripture, though stained with other sins,
yet not with this; and why, ihid, etc. Covetousness the breach of all the
Commandments, showed particularly, 136 to 148. 2. Head, the Extent, it is
Epidemical, p. 149. How particula^ly to 1. Kings. ibid. 2. Noblemen. ibid. 3.
Rich men. p. 150. 4. Learned men. ibid. 5. Wise men. ibid. 6. Poor men. p. 151.
3. Head, the intention, which is the greatest aggravation, They give
themselves up to it, p. 153. 4. Head, the Pu^ishment of this sin of
Covetousness, p. 155. First, The peculiar plagues are either 1. In his body, p.
157. 2. In his goods, ibid. 3. In his posterity, ibid. 4. In his soul, ibid.
Secondly, in Gods denying them the use, p. 159. Depriving them of the
possession, ibid.
Six Remedi^s. 1. Faith, p. 163. 2. Sobri^^y, ibid. 3. T^mperance, ibid. 4.
Abandon conceit of cont^nt in them, ibid. 5. Compare (if ye are able) and view
them with the true riches, p. 165. 6. Pray for a right knowledge of both, ibid.
A brief Exposition, occasioned by singing, Psalm. 148.
THere is a threefold si^ging, with the lips, with the spirit, and with
understanding: we may sing with lips, and with zeal (as the Apos^le says of
knowledge) yet not with understanding, p. 167, etc. Two things in this Psalm
hard to be und^rstood, p. 168. 1. That David does exhort unreasonable creatures
to praise God, ibid. 2. That he calls upon the deep^ and seas, and all
vegetative and inanimate creatures to do this d^ty, ibid. Some Reasons given in
answer, viz. four, p. 169. How, even the dumb and deaf creatures sing aloud
Gods praise, p. 170. Wherein these creatures may be said to have Religion, p.
171. Religion of men consists of four parts, and how agreeing to the creatures,
p. 172. 1. A Creed, and therein they give testimony to some of his Attributes,
ibid. 2. Petition, p. 176. 3. A Decalogue, p. 178. 4. Sacrifice, p. 179. Uses.
1. To make us ashamed of our backwardness to this duty, p. 180. 2. To take
notice of the vast circumference of Gods Kingdom, ibid. 3. To go boldly to God
in the name of Jesus Christ p. 181. 4. To look upon all the Creatures as Angels
on Jacobs Ladder, ascending and descending according to his commission, p. 182.
5. Because it is impossible to find out the ^^finiteness of Gods praise by all
creatures; therefore to take notice they all cry Plus ultra, look beyond us, p.
183. 6. Take heed of abusing any creature, it is enough that we may use them,
ibid.

A Sermon on Luke 2. 40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled
with wisd^m, and the grace of God was upon him.
THe words contain 1. A History, 2. A Myst^ry,
p. 187. The History brief, and shows only the truth of Christ his Humane
nature, Hypostatically united to the Divinity, ibid, etc. That which is more
material is the Mystery, p. 189. The Letter of the Scripture kills; and how, p.
191. What imitable actions Christ wrought in the days of h^s flesh he works
still spiritually; the other though wrought for us, yet do us no good, except
these also be wrought i^ us, p. 193, etc. Where we may in p^rt take a view of
the glory of the great City, the Holy Jerusalem, spoken of Rev. 21. and what
the 12 gates represented, p. 196. The Kingdom of God is within us, and
wherever he is pleased to unvail his glorious presence, p. 197. All these
things hid to those that stick or rest in the Letter, yet the letter not to be
neglected, p. 200, etc. The Apostle his undervaluing Ordinances, du^ies, yea
the knowledge of the person of Jesus Christ, if they keep us from Christ, p.
205. A caution not to make Idols of Ordinances, p. 209. Yet high raptures
sometimes questionable, p. 210. Instances in Baptism, p. 211. The Apostles
consultation and message to the weak believers, Acts 18. p. 213.
How the Apostle carries this point very high, Gal. 4. 1, 2. p. 215. This point
pressed in two respects, 1. In regard of the M^thods of Satan with men, p. 217.
2. From the deception of some pretending to be high in Christianity, because
much in literal knowledge, when indeed they are but Pigmyes and Novices. ibid.
Appearing in preferring faith 1. Acquired, before faith infused p. 219. 2.
Implicit, before expli^i^, ibid. 3. Formed, before all these, ibid.
4. In making temporal blessings the main of their desires and prayers, though
professing the contrary, p. 220. After what manner grown Christians pray for
temporal blessings, p. 222. Four several affirmations by the Author, concerning
praying for temporal blessings, p. 224. Three d^grees of the excellency of
prayer, ibid. Which Honou^able, p. 229. More Honorable, ibid. Most Honorable,
and that which wears the Crown above all; and to p^ess to attain the last, as
the best and most excellent, ibid.

Two Sermons on Exodus 3. 6. the first six verses. Moses kept the flock of
Iethro his father in Law, and he led them to the back side of the Desert; --
And the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire, in the midst of a
bush, etc.
THis is one of the gr^atest miracles in the whole Scriptures, p. 232. This
History and Miracle concerns us now, as much as the Israelites then, p. 233.
The Spirit magnified above the Letter, p. 237 The truth couched under parables,
p. 240. The infinite condescension of God to become weak to the weak, p. 242.
The depth of the true word, is employment for Men and Angels for Eternity, p.
244. Why Moses and the Patriarchs are taken such notice of that they were
Shepherds, p. 246. What the life of a true Shepherd is, and why preferred
before Husbandm^n, p. 248. Moses led the flock into the desert, before God
appeared to him: so must we fo^sake the world, or God will not manifest
himself, p. 250, etc. Whether Miracles be ceased now o^ no, an ignorant
question, p. 253. Greater miracles done in accomplishing the truth of miracles,
then in the type or shadow, p. 254. Yet this a mighty miracle in the letter,
but the mystery a miracle far transcending, p. 255. How suitable Jacobs Vision
of the Ladder, reaching to heaven, was to him: and so this miracle to encourage
Moses so the great work he was to go about, p. 255. Why the Almighty is
som^times termed an angel; and why angels were worshipped in the Old Testament,
and St. John forbidden, p. 258 God not more present in heaven then in earth, p.
260, etc. God is to be worshipped as present in all places, and in all
creatures, p. 265. The error of the Papists in worshipping Images, condemned;
and why, ibid. Hence a ground to interpret that saying of our Savior, Their
Angels always behold the face of their father, etc. p. 268. The use and
Application from the foregoing truths, p. 269, etc.
The second Sermon on the same Text.
THe life of a Shepherd, and of a Husbandman further explained, p. 27^. The
life of a Husbandman not condemned, but a Shepherds life pr^ferred before it,
p. 276. Going into the D^sart, not meant of forsaking all things actually, but
in a^fection, and using them as if we used them not, p. 280. The reason of all
men's unquietness, p. 283. The way to understand the vision, is to put off our
shoes from our feet, as Moses; and what that means, p. 285. Men (as men) can
comprehend nothing but what is within their own sphere of reason, p. 288.
Something about the name and nature of angels, ibid. Every beam of the Divinity
is an Angel, p. 294. Christ the Substance of all types and visions, p. 296. The
true interpretation of visions and types from God alone, p. 297. He that can
see God thus, cannot (so far) fear any creature, nor any cross, or death it
self, p. 298. The wonderfulness of the vision opened, p. 300. Making known
Jesus Christ, is the business of all creatures, of all men, and all ages, p.
302. The substance of this vision is Jesus Christ; he is that fire that burns
and changes all things, but not himself, ibid, etc. He weighs the mountains,
and measures the waters; he alters all things, yet preserves the substance
entire, so that nothing is lost, p. 304, etc. How Gods will and theirs
harmonize and coincide, to whom God has showed this vision, p. 308. They
cannot find fault with anything God does, but they see one spirit moving and
guiding all actions of men and creatures through heaven and earth, p. 310. Vain
man, as his ignorance, so his wisdom is to stoop and bow before the Almighty,
p. 311. He that looks no further then the letter of the vision, he sees not
these mighty things, p. 312. But he that does, he sees Jesus Christ not only
changing all things, but how at last he shall change our vile bodies ta make
them like his glorious body, p. 315.
The substance of several Sermons on Mark 1. 25, 26. And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him; and when the unclean spirit had
torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.
THe Text divided, as Paul di^ides a man into body, soul, and spirit, p. 318.
Six moral observations only named, from the soul or letter of the Text not
stood upon, ibid, etc. Nothing absolutely evil but sin: and nothing perfectly
good but God, p. 323. Ob^^r. 7. That Christ is stronger then the Devil, though
he seem weaker, and lets the Devil sometimes prevail in the world more then
himself, p. 324. Distinctions in the will of God, as Revealed, Secret,
Permissiv,

