An Exact Account of the CEREMONIAL AT THE CORONATION Of Their Most Excellent
MAJESTY'S KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY, The Eleventh Day of this Instant April,
1689.
Published by Order of the Duke of Norfolk, Earl-Marshal of England.
THEIR Majesty's being come from Whitehall to Westminster, (the KING by Water
in his Royal Barge, about a quarter past 10 of the Clock in the Morning, and
the QUEEN by Land in Her Chair, a little before 11 of the Clock,) the Heralds
began forthwith to put the Proceeding in Order in the Court of Requests, and
after that, to Marshal the several Classes of the Peers and Peeresses, the
Peers being called over in the House of Lords, and the Peeresses in the Painted
Chamber, where Their Majesty's were Graciously Pleased to be Present: And by
half an Hour past Eleven, Their Majesty's, and the whole Proceeding were
conducted into Westminster Hall, at the upper end whereof a Throne being
Erected, Their Majesty's repaired thereunto, and took Their Seats under Their
States on the inside of the Table.

Whereupon, the Master of tile Jewel-House presented to the Lord High
Constable, the Sword of State, the Sword Curtana, and the two pointed Swords,
severally one after another, who delivered them in like manner to the Lord
Great Chamberlain, who drew them out of the Scabbards, and laid them on the
Table before their Majesty's.

Sometime after which, the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster attended with
the Quire of that Church, etc. brought the Regalia in solemn Procession from
the Collegiate Church there to Westminster Hall, viz. The Dean of Westminster
the Bible, the Sub-Dean the Chalice, Dr. Killigrew the Patin., Dr. Patrick the
King's Crown, Dr. Littleton the Queen's Crown, Dr. Busby the KING's Orb, Dr.
Briavell the QUEENS Orb, Mr. Annesley the KING's Scepter with the Dove, Mr.
Pelling the QUEENS Scepter with the Dove, Dr Delangle the KING's Scepter with
the Cross, Mr. Berkley the QUEENS Scepter with the Cross, and Mr. Sartre St.
Edward's Staff; and after the usual Reverences, the Dean first presented the
Bible to the Lord High Constable, who delivered it to the Lord Great
Chamberlain, by whom it was laid upon the Table before Their Majesty's; And the
rest of the Regalia being delivered severally by the Prebendaries who brought
them, to the Dean of Westminster, he presented them in like manner to the Lord
High Constable, and He to the Lord Great Chamberlain, who laid those that
appertained to the KING, before His Majesty, and those that appertained to the
QUEEN before Her Majesty.

Then the Prebendaries being withdrawn to the lower end of the Hall, Garter
Summoned up the several Noblemen, who were appointed to carry the said Regalia
in the Proceeding, and the Lord Great Chamberlain by Their Majesty's directions
delivered them accordingly.

Thus all things being ready, the Heralds Marshalled the Proceeding in this
manner,

First Drums and Trumpets; then the Six Clerks in Chancery, two Abreast, as
all the rest of the Proceeding went; then Chaplains having Dignities; Sheriffs
and Aldermen of London; Masters in Chancery; the Kings Solicitor and
Attorney; Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber; Judges:

Next, Children of the Quire of Westminster; the Sergeant Porter and Sergeant
of the Vestry; Children of the Chapel Royal; the Choir of Westminster;
Gentlemen of the Chapel Royal; Prebends of Westminster; Master of the Jewel
House; and Six Privy Counselors not Peers.

Two Pursuivants of Arms, Baronesses, Barons, Bishops; Another Pursuivant of
Arms, a Vicountess, Vicounts; two Heralds of Arms, Countesses, Earls; One
Herald of Arms, A Marchioness; Two Heralds of Arms, Duchesses, Dukes; The two
Provincial Kings of Arms next before the Marquis of Halifax Lord Privy Seal,
and the Marquis of Carmarthen, Lord President of the Council; and next to
these, the Lord Archbishop of York.

Then His Royal Highness Prince GEORGE of Denmark, Duke of Cumberland, in his
Robes of Estate with His Train born; followed by two persons in Robes of
Estate, (being two Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, viz. the Honorable Sir
Purbeck Temple and Sir Edw. Sutton Bar.) Representing the Dukes of Aquitain and
Normandy; and after them the Lords who bore Their Majesty's Regalia, viz. The
Earl of Manchester St. Edwards Staff, and the Lord Gray of Ruthin the Spurs,
The Earl of Clare the QUEENS Scepter with the Cross, and the Earl of
Northampton the KINGS. The Earl of Shrewsbury the Sword Curtana in the middle
between the Earl of Derby with the Second Sword, and the Earl of Pembroke with
the Third Sword. Then Garter Principal King of Arms, between the
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, and the Lord Mayor of London. Then the Lord
Great Chamberlain single; the Earl of Oxford with the Sword of State in the
Scabbard between the Duke of Ormond Lord High Constable for that Day, and the
Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal. The Earl of Bedford with the QUEENS Scepter with
the Dove, and the Earl of Rutland with the KINGS; the Duke of Bolton with the
QUEENS Orb, and the Duke of Grafton with the KINGS; the Duke of Somerset with
the Queens Crown, and the Earl of Devonshire Lord High Steward of His Majesty's
Household, and Lord High Steward of England for that Day, with the King's Crown;
The Lord Bishop of London with the Bible, between the Bishop of Rochester Dean
of Westminster with the Chalice, and the Bishop of St. Asaph with the Patin.

Then the KING and QUEENS MAJESTY'S Supported by the Bishops of Winchester and
Bristol, under a rich Canopy, having eight Staves carried by sixteen Barons of
the Cinque Ports. His Majesty's Train born by the Master of the Robes assisted
by the Lord Eland, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Lansdowne, and the Lord
Dunblaine; And Her Majesty's Train born by the Duchess of Somerset assisted by
the Lady Elizabeth Pawlet, the Lady Diana Vere, the Lady Elizabeth Cavendish,
and Lady Henrietta Hyde.

After the King followed the Earl of Monmouth Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and
two Grooms of the Bedchamber; and after the Queen the Countess of Derby Lady of
the Bedchamber, and two of Her Majesty's Women. Lastly, the Captain of His
Majesty's Guard in Waitng between the Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard and
the Captain of the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners, followed by the Lieutenant,
Ensign, and Band of Yeomen of the Guard.

The Sergeants at Arms went on each side of the Regalia, and the Gentlemen
Pensioners on each side of the Canopy.

In this manner Their Majesty's arrayed in their Royal Robes of Crimson Velvet
Furred with Ermine, the KING on the Right Hand with a Crimson Velvet Cap on His
Head, and the QUEEN on the Left with a Rich Circlet of Gold on her Head; all
the Nobility in Robes of Crimson Velvet, with their Caps and Coronets in their
Hands; and the rest who formed the Proceeding being richly clad, or wearing
their proper and peculiar Robes or Habits, but all uncovered, marched on foot
upon two Bredths of Blew Cloth, spread from the steps of the Throne in
Westminster Hall, to the steps of the Theater in the Quire of the Church of
Westminster. The whole passage being railed in, and guarded with His Majesty's
Horse and Foot-Guards: And all the Streets, Windows, Balconies and Scaffolds
crowded with such an infinite number of Spectators, as was scarce ever seen
before, expressing their great Joy by Shouts and universal Acclamations.

Being entered the Church, and the Nobility and others, all duly placed, Their
Majesty's ascended the Theater, and repaired to their Chairs on the South side
of the Area or Sacrarium, with Faldstools before them, for their Private
Devotions. Then the Bishop of London, who performed this great Solemnity, began
the Recognition, which being concluded with a mighty shout of all the People
present, Their Majesty's came to the Altar and made their first Oblation; which
done the Lords who carried the Regalia, presented them severally at the Altar
to be there deposited.

Then the Litany was Sung by the Bishops of St. Asaph and Bangor; which ended,
the Communion Service began. The Epistle taken out of 1 Pet. II. 13, 17. was
read by the Bishop of Carlisle, and the Gospel taken out of St. Matt. XXII. 16,
22. was read by the Bishop of St. Asaph. After which followed the Nicene Creed;
which ended, the Bishop of Salisbury being ready in the Pulpit, repeated the
Lords Prayer, and took his Text 2 Samuel XXIII. 3 and 4 ver. The God of Israel,
The Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in
the fear of God. And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun
rises, even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the
Earth by clear shining after Rain. Upon which words he made an excellent
Discourse, Their Majesty's sitting in their Chairs on the South side the Area,
and hearing the same with great Attention.

After Sermon, which lasted just half an Hour, Their Majesty's took the New
Established Oath; and Veni Creator being Sung, and the Holy Oil Consecrated,
Their Majesty's were conducted to Their Regal Chairs placed on the Theater
(near the East side thereof) that they might be more Conspicuous to the Members
of the House of Commons, (who, with their Speaker, were Seated in the North
Cross,) and were disrobed of their Crimson Velvet Mantles, and being Solemnly
Anointed, were Presented with the Spurs, and the Sword, (which being Offered,
was Redeemed by the Earl of Portland,) and Invested with the Imperial Palls,
and Orbs; and then with the Rings, and Scepters; and at Four of the Clock the
Crowns were put upon Their Majesty's Heads by the Lord Bishop of London,
assisted by the Lord Bishop of Rochester, at sight whereof all the People
shouted, the Drums Beat and Trumpets Sounded, and the great Guns at the Tower,
and in St. James's Park, etc. were discharged, and all the Peers and Peeresses
put on their Coronets.

Then the Holy Bible (brought in the Procession for that purpose,) was
presented to Their Majesty's; and after the Benediction Their Majesty's
vouchsafed to Kiss the Bishops. And Te Deum being Sung Their Majesty's Ascended
the Throne, and being Inthronized, the Archbishop and Bishops did their Homage
to them jointly, and Kissed Their Left Checks, and after them Prince GEORGE,
and the other Temporal Lords in like manner, each of them touching the Crowns
upon Their Majesty's Heads, and severally Kissing Their Majesty's Cheeks.
During which time, the Treasurer of the Household threw about the Coronation
Medals, Inscribed on one side Ne totus absumatur, and on the other side
Gulielmus and Maria Rex and Regina.

Then began the Communion, Their Majesty's making their Second Oblation, And
the KING and QUEEN having received the Holy Sacrament, and the Bishop having
read the Final Prayers; Their Majesty's went in State into St. Edward's Chapel,
where being divested of their Imperial Palls, etc. and arrayed in their Royal
Robes of Purple Velvet; The whole Company (except the Church of Westminster)
returned to Westminster Hall in the same Order they came, Their Majesty's
wearing their rich Crowns of State, and all the Nobility their Coronets on
their Heads. The Spectators all the time continuing their Acclamations of Joy.
And being Entered into the Hall were conducted to their several Tables to
Dinner, which were all ready furnished before their coming in.

The first Course for Their Majesty's Table was served up with the proper
Ceremony, the Lord High Steward betwixt the Lord High Constable and the Earl
Marshal preceding it on Horseback; And before the Second Course was served up,
Charles Dymoke Esquire Their Majesty's Champion in Complete Armor, between the
Lord High Constable and Earl Marshal, all on Horseback, performed the Ceremony
of the Challenge after the usual manner, York-Herald Pronouncing it in these
Words:

IF any Person of what Degree soever, High or Low, shall Deny or Gainsay our
Sovereign Lord and Lady KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY, King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to be Rightful King and Queen of
this Realm of England, or that They ought not to Enjoy the Imperial ^^own of
the Same, Here is their Champion, who says he Lies and is a False Traitor
^^ing ready in Person to Combat with him, and in This Quarrel will adventure
his Life against him, on what day soever he shall be appointed.

After which Garter (with the Officers of Arms) cried Largess and Proclaimed
Their Majesty's Styles in Latin, French and English, after the accustomed
manner.

Dinner being ended, and the whole Solemnity performed with great Splendour and
Magnificence, and with all possible Expressions of an Universal Joy; About
eight in the Evening the Company broke up, and Their Majesty's returned to
Whitehall, the night being concluded with Bonfires and other Illuminations,
Ringing of Bells, Drinking Their Majesty's Healths, and all other Tokens of the
Highest Affections, Loyalty and Satisfaction.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones. MDCLXXXIX.


