NAVIGATION AND Commerce, THEIR ORIGINAL AND PROGRESS. Containing A succinct
Account of Traffic in General; its Benefits and Improvements: Of Discoveries,
Wars and Conflicts at Sea, from the Original of Navigation to this Day; with
special Regard to the ENGLISH Nation; Their several Voyages and Expeditions, to
the Beginning of our late Differences with HOLLAND; In which His Majesty's
Title to the DOMINION of the SEA is Asserted, against the Novel, and later
Pretenders. By I. EVELYN Esquire S. R. S.

Ciceroad Attic. L. 10. Ep. 7. Qui MARE tenet, eum necesse est RERUM Potiri.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Benj. Took, at the Sign of the Ship. in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

TO The King.
SIR,
THAT I take the Boldness to Inscribe Your Majesty's Name on the Front of this
little History, is to pay a Tribute, the most due, and the most becoming my
Relation to your Majesty's Service of any that I could devise; since Your
Majesty has been pleased among so many Noble and Illustrious Persons, to name
me of the Council of Your Commerce, and Plantations: And if it may afford Your
Majesty some diversion, to behold, as in a Table, the Course, and Importance of
what Your Majesty is the most Absolute Arbiter of any Potentate on Earth, and
Excite in Your Loyal Subjects a Courage, and an Industry becoming the
Advantages which God and Nature have put into their Hands, I shall have reached
my humble Ambition, and Your Majesty will not Reprove these Expressions of it in

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Dutiful, Most Obedient, and ever Loyal Subject and
Servant, J. EVELYN.

NAVIGATION AND COMMERCE THEIR Original and Progress.
1. WHosoever shall with serious Attention Contemplate the divine Fabric of
this Inferior Orb, the various, and admirable Furniture which fills, and
Adorns it; the Constitution of the Elements about it, and, above all, the
Nature of Man (for whom they were Created) he must needs acknowledge, that
there is nothing more agreeable to Reason, than that they were All of them
Ordained for mutual Use and Communication.

2. The Earth, and every Prospect of her Super^icies, presents us with a
thousand Objects of Utility and Delight, in which consists the Perfection of
all Sublunary things: And, though, through her rugged and dissever'd Parts,
Rocks, Seas and remoter Islands, she seem at first, to check our Addresses;
Yet, when we ag'en behold in what ample ^aies, Creeks, trending-Shores,
inviting Harbors and Stations, she appears spreading her Arms upon the
Bordures of the Ocean; whiles the Rivers, who re-pay their Tributes to it,
glide not in direct, and praecipitate Courses from their Conceil'd, and distant
Heads, but in va^ious flexures and Meanders (as well to temper the rapidity of
their Streams, as to Water and refresh the fruitful Plains) methinks she seems,
from the very Beginning, to have been d^spos'd for Trafick and Commerce, and
even Courts us to visit her most soli^ary Recesses.

3. This Meditation sometimes affec^ing my Tho^ghts, did exc^edingly confirm,
and not a little surprise me; when reflecting on the Situation of the
Mediterranean Sea (so aptly contrived for Inter-course to so vast a part of the
World) I concluded; That if the Hollanders themselves (who of all the
Inhabitants in it, are the best skilled in making Canales and Trenches, and to
derive Waters) had joined in Consultation, how the scattered parts of the Earth
might be rendered most Accessible, and easy for Commerce; They could not have
contrived, where to have made the Inlet with so much advantage, as GOD and
Nature have done it for Us; Since by means of this Sea, we have admission to no
less than Three Parts of the habitable World, and there seems nothing left (in
this regard) to humane Industry, which could render it more consummate;
R^ederi^o de Toledo, lib. 1. c. 6.
So Impious was the saying of Alphonsus (not worthy the name of Prince) That
had he been of Counsel with the Creator when he made the Universe, he could
have f^am'd it better.

4. If we cast our Eyes on the Plains and the Mountains; behold them naturally
furnished with goodly Trees; of which some there are, which grow as it were,
spontaneously into Vessels and Canoes, wanting nothing but the Launching, to
render them useful: But, when the Art of Man, or of God rather (for it was he,
who first instructed him to Build) conspires, and that he but sets his divine
Genius on work, the same Earth furnishes Materials, to equip, and perfect the
most Beautiful, Useful, and stupendous Creature (so let us be permi^ted to
call her) the whole World has to show: And if the Winds, and Elements prove
Auspicious (which was the Third Instance of our Contemplation) this enormous
Machine (as if inspired with Life too) is ready for every Motion, and to brave
all encounters and adventures, undertakes to fathom the World it self; to visit
strange, and distant Lands; to People, Cultivate, and Civilize un-inhabited,
and Barbarous Regions, and to proclaim to the Universe, the Wonders of the
Architect, the Skill of the Pilot, and, above all, the Benefits of Commerce.

5. So great, and unspeakable were the Blessings which Mankind received by his
yet infant Adventures; that it is no wonder, to see how every Nation contended,
who should surpass each other in the Art of Navigation, and apply the means of
Commerce to promote and derive it to themselves; God-Almighty (as we have
showed) in the Constitution of the World, promp^ing us to awaken our Industry
for the supply of our Necessities: For Man on^y being obliged to live
Politickly, and in Society, for mutual assistance, found it would not be
accomplished without Labor and Industry; Nature, which ordains all things
necessary for other Creatures, in the place where she produces them, did not so
for Man; but ennobling him with a superior Faculty, supplied him with all
things his needs could require. Wheresoever therefore Men are born (unless
wanting to themselves) they have it in their power, to exalt themselves, even
in these regards, above the other Creature; and the Lillies which spin not, and
are yet so splendidly clad, are not in this respect, so happy as an Industrious
and prudent Man; because they have neither knowledge, or sense of their Being
and Perfections: And, though few things indeed are necessary for the Animal
life; yet, has it no prerogative by that alone, above the more Rational, which
Man only enjoys, and for whom the World was made; seeing the variety of
Blessings that were ordained to serve him, proclaims his Dominion, and the
vastness of his Nature; Nor, had the great Creator himself been so Glorified,
without an Intellectual Being, that could Contemplate, and make use of them. We
are therefore rather to admire that stupendous mixture of Plenty and Want,
which we find disseminated throughout the Creation; What St. Paul affirms of
the Members of the Little World, being so applicable to those of the Greater,
and no one Place, or Country able to say, I have no need of another, Considered
not only as to consummate Perfections, but even diverse things, if not
absolutely necessary, at least, Convenient.

6. To Demonstrate this in a most conspicuous Instance, we need look no farther
than HOLLAND, of which fertile (shall we say) or Enchanted Spot, it is hard to
decide, whether its Wants, or Abundance are really greater, than any other
Countries under Heaven; Since, by the Quality, and other Circumstances of
Situation (though otherwise productive enough) it affords neither Grain, Wine,
Oil, Timber, Metal, Stone, Wool, Hemp, Pitch, no^, almost, any other
Commodity of Use; and yet we find, there is hardly a Nation in the World, which
enjoyes all these things in greater affluence: and all this, from Commerce
alone, and the effects of Industry, to which not only the Neighboring parts
of Europe contribute, but the Indies, and Antipodes: So as the whole World (as
vast as it appears to others) seems but a Farm, scarce another Province to
them; and indeed it is That alone, which has Buil^, and Peopled goodly Cities,
where nothing but Rushes grew; Cultivated an heavy Genius with all the politer
Arts; Enlarged, and secured their Boundaries, and made them a Name in the
World, who, within less than an Age, were hardly considered in it.

7. What Fame and Riches the Veneti^ns acquired, whilst they were ^rue to their
Spouse, the SEA (and in acknowledgment whereof, they still repeat and celebrate
the Nuptials) Histories are loud of: But, This, no longer cont^nu'd than whilst
they ^ad regard to their Fleets, and their Trafick, the proper business, and
the most genuine to their Situation. From hence, they Founded a glorious City,
^ixt upon a few muddy, and scattered Islands; and Thence, distributed over
Europe, the product of the Eastern World, 'till changing this Industry into
Ambition, and applying it to the Enlarging of their Territories in Italy, they
lost their Interests, and Acquists in the Mediterranean, which were infinitely
more considerable. Nor in this Recension of the advantages of Commerce, is her
Neighbor Genoa to be forgotten; whose narrow Dominions (not exceeding some
private Lordships in England) have grown to a considerable state; and from a
barren Rock, to a proud City, emulous for Wealth and Magnificence, with the
stateliest Emporiums of the World.

8. The Easterlings, and Anseatick Towns (famous for early Traffic) had
perhaps never been heard of, but for Courting thi^ Mistress; no more than those
vaster Tracts of Sweden, Norway, Muscovy, etc. which the late Industry of our
own People, has rendered considerable. The Danes, it is confessed, had (...)
signalized themselves by their importunate Descents on this Island, and
universal Piracies; whilst negligent of our Advantages at Sea, we often became
Obnoxious to them; But, when once we set-up our moving Fortresses, and grew
numerous in Shipping, we lived in profound Tranquillity, grew opulent, and
formidable to our Enemies.

9. It was Commerce, and Navigation (the Daughter of Peace, and good
Intelligence) that gave Reputation to the most noble of our Native-staples,
WOOL, exceedingly Improved by Foreigners; especially, since the Reigns of
Edward the Second, and Third; and has been the principal occasion, of
Instituting, and Establishing our Merchant-Adventurers, and other worthy
Fraternities; to men^ion only the esteem of our Horses, Corn, Tin, Lead, Iron,
Saffron, Fullers-Earth, Hides, Wax, Fish, and other Natural, and Artificial
Commodities, most of which are Indigene, and Domestic, others Imported, and
brought from foreign Countries. Thus, Asia Refreshes us with Spices, Recreates
us with Perfumes, Cures us with Drougs, and ado^ns us with Jewels: Africa sends
us Ivory and Gold; America, Silver, Sugar and Cotton: France, Spain and Italy,
give us Wine, Oil and Silk: Russia, Warms us in Furrs; Swethen, supplies us
with Copper; Denmark, and the Northern Tracts, with Masts, and Materials for
Shipping, without which, all this were nothing. It is Commerce, and Navigation
that Breeds, and Accomplishes that most honorable and useful Race of Men (the
Pillars of all Magnificence) to skill in the Exportation of Super^luities, See
Mr. Coock.
Importation of Necessaries; to settle Staples, with regard to the Public
Stock: What it is fit to keep at Home, and what to send Abroad: To be Vigilant
over the Course of Exchange; to employ Hands for Regulated Salaries; and, by
their dexterity, to moderate all this, by a true, and solid Interest of State,
which, without this Mystery, cannot long subsist, as not always admitting
permanent, and immutable Rules: In a word, the SEA (which covers half the
Patrimony of Man, renders the whole World a stranger to it self, and the
Inhabitants, for whom 'twas made, as rude as Canibals) becomes but one Family,
by the Miracles of Commerce, and yet we have said nothing of the most
Illustrious product of it; That it has taught ^s Religion, Instructed us in
Polity, Cultivated our Manners, and Furnished us with all the delicacies of
Virtuous and happy Living.

10. Whether the First Author of Traffic were the Tyrians, Trojans, Lydians;
those of Carthage; or (as Josephus will) the Mercurial Spirits soon after the
Flood, to repair, Antiq. l. 1.
and supply the Ruins of that universal Overthrow, we are not solicitous: That
it entered with the Earliest, and best days of the restored-VVorld, we shall
prove hereafter, by the timely applications of Industrious Men, to enlarge, and
improve their Condition. The Romans indeed, were not of a good while,
favorable to Merchandising; For, the Patricians, Senators and Great-Men might
not be Owners in particular, of any considerable Vessel, besides small Barks,
and Pleasure-Boats, and the most illustrious Nations have esteemed the gain by
Traffic and Commerce incompatible with Nobless: Not, for being Enemies to
Trade; but, because they esteemed it an Ignoble way of Gain, Quaestus Omnis
indecorus Patribus, says Livy, Lib. 1. Dec. 3.
and were all for Conquest and the Sword; for, otherwise, they so encouraged
this Industry, that the Latins (whom for a long time, L^tini multis modi^
consequuntur Civitatem Romanam; Vt, si Navem ^d^ficaverint duorum Millium
M^di^rum capacem, etc. Ulpian, Instit. Tit. Latinis, N. 6.
they held under such servitude, that they might not devise their Estates when
they dyed) if any one of them came to be able to build an handsome Ship, fit
for Burden and Traffic, he was Liberate donatus, and obtained his Freedom,
with power to make his Testament, and capable of bearing Office: And one would
wonder that Traffic being so profitable, Lycurgus (that great Lawgiver
amongst the Lacedaemonians) should prohibit it; some believe it was for its
being so obnoxious to Corruption, and the Luxury introduced amongst the People
by Commerce with Strangers; the Lying and Deceit, Perjury and Theft, in buying,
selling, and making bargains; for which reason Plato designed the Towns of his
Commonwealth to be built far distant from the Sea; and our Savior scourged
the Mony-Changers out of the Temple; so difficult a thing it is for those who
Deal much, to preserve their hands clean: But, it is said, Pl^to changed his
mind; and we all know, that as the Romans themselves grew Wiser, so they
dignified it, and took-off that illunderstood Reproach, as the Orator has
himself told us, when (condemning the Pedlary, and sordid (...). l. 1.
Mercatura, si tenuis est, sordida putanda est. -- Nihil enim proficient, nisi
admodum mentiantur.
Vices of Retailers) he acknowledges, That where Staple, and Useful Commodities
can be brought in to supply the Needs of whole Countries, it is a commendable
Service, Videturque jure optimo, posse laudari; nay, showed by their own
Example, that for the Greatest Men to turn Merchants, did less taint their
Blood, than their Sloth and Effeminacy; and upon this account, the Wisest of
the Heathens (for such were Thales, Solon, Hippocrates, and even Plato himself)
have honored Merchandise; and, of later times, many Kings and Princes; and
then indeed, does Traffic rise to its Ascendent, when it is dignified by their
Example, and defended by their Power: This, the Dukes of Florence, and other
Potentates have long since understood; and, now at last, the French King:
witness the Repair of his Ports, Building of Ships, Cutting new Channels,
Instituting Companies, Planting of Colonies, and Universal encouragement of
Manufactures by cherishing, and ennobling of Sedulous and Industrious persons:
But, more yet than all this, or rather all this in more Perfection; His Majesty
(our glo^ious Monarch) by whose Influences alone (after all the Combinations of
his late powerful Enemies) such a Trade has been Revived, and Carried on, and
such a Fleet, and Strength at Sea to protect it, as never this Nation had a
greater, nor any other of the past Ages has approached; Witness, You Three
mighty Neighbors, at Once, taught to submit to him! For the Blessings of
Navigation, and visiting distant Climes, does not stop at Traffic only; but
(since it is no less perfection to keep, than obtain a Good) it enables us
likewise with means to defend, what our honest Industry has gotten; and, if
necessity, and Justice require; with Enlarging our Dominions too: Vindicating
our Rights, Repelling Injuries, Protecting the Oppressed, and with all the
Offices of Humanity, and good Nature; In a word, Justice, and the Right of
Nations, are the Objects of Commerce: It maintains Society, disposes to Action,
and Communicates the Graces, and Riches which God has Variously imparted: From
all which Considerations, it is evident; That a Spirit of Commerce, and strength
at Sea to protect it, are the most certain marks of the Greatness of Empire,
deduced from an undeniable Sorites; That whoever Commands the Ocean, Commands
the Trade of the World, and whoever Commands the Trade of the World, Commands
the Riches of the World, and whoever is Master of That, Commands the World it
self; so as had the Spaniard treble his Wealth, he could neither be Rich, nor
Safe with his prodigious Sloth; since, whilst he has been sittingstill; We,
and other Nations have driven the Trade of the East Indies, with his Treasure
of the West, and, uniting, as it were, Extremes, made the Poles to kiss: They
are not therefore small Matters, you see, which Men so much contend about, when
they strive to Improve Commerce, and, by degrees, promote the Art of
Navigation, and set their Empire in the Deep, from whence they have found to
flow such notable Advantages. Instances of this we might add in abundance; and
that it is not the vastness of Territory, but the Convenience of Situation; nor
the Multitude of men, but their Address and Industry which improve a Nation.
Cosmo di Medices would often say; That the Prince who had not the Sea to
friend, was but half a Prince: And, this, Charles the Fifth had well
considered, when he gave it for a Maxim to his Son Philip, That if ever he
would sit quiet at home, and advanc^ his Affairs abroad, he should be sure to
keepup his Reputation on the Waters. The truth is, this great Emperor had
neglected his Interest at Sea, and it laid the foundation of the Rebellion of
his Low Country Subjects, against his Successor: To pretend to Universal
Monarchy without Fleets, was long since looked on, as a Politic Chymaera, and
was wittily insinuated to Antigonus b^ Patroclus, Athenaeus Deipnosoph. l. 8.
when (being a Commander under Ptolomy Lagus's Son) he sent him a Present of
Fish and gr^en Figgs, intimating, that unless he had the Sea in his power, he
had as good sit at home, and tri^le: it was but labor in vain* And this was
the sense of another as great a Captain, when reckoning up the infinte
prerogatives which the Sea afforded; In Repub. (...).
Xenophon seems to despise the Advantages of the Land in Comparison: Truly the
Romans themselves, were longer in struggling for a little Earth in Italy only,
than in subduing the whole World, after once their Eagles had taken ^light
toward the Sea, and urged their fortune on the deep. When once they had
subdued Agrigentum, Polibyu^.
Carthage was no longer impregnable; and after they had passed Gad^s and the
Herculean Straight, nothing was too hard for them, they went whither they
would, and cruiz'd as far as Thule.

11. We shall not adventure to divine, Illirobur and aes triplex circ^ pectus
-- Hor. digitis a morte remotus quatuor --
who the hardy Person was who first resolved to trust himself to a Plank within
an inch of Death, to compel the Woods to descend into the Waters, and to back
the most impetuous, and unconstant Element; though probably, and for many
Reasons, somebody long before the Deluge; Isti sunt potentes: 6. Genesis 4.
Grotius on the place will have the Navigationis repertores, piratae, such as in
succeeding Ages were Jupiter, Cretensis, Minos, etc. Since it is not
imaginable, the World, that must needs be so Populous, and was so Curio^s,
should have continued so many Ages without Adventures by Sea: But, the first
Vessel which we read of, was made by divine Instinct and direction, and whilst
the Prototype lasted (which Histories tell us was many hundred years) doubtless
they built many strong, and goodly Ships: But, as all things are in continual
flux and Vicissitude; so the Art in time impaired, and Men began anew to
Contrive for their Safety or Necessity in Rafts, and hollow-Trees; nay, Paper,
Reeds, Twigs and Leather (for of such were the rude beginnings of the finished
Pieces we now admire) till advancing the Art, by making use of more durable
Materials, they then began to Build like Ship-Wrights, when Pyrrhon the Lydian
invented the bending of Planks by Fire, and made Boats of several
Contignations; nor contented with the same Model, the Platenses, Mysians,
Trojans and other Nations, contended for the various Shapes. Thus to Sesostris
is ascribed the Long-Ship ^itted for Expedition: Hippus the Tyrrian devised
Carricks and Onerary Vessels of prodigious bulk, for Trafick or Offense:
Athenaeus speaks of some that for their enormous structure had been taken for
Mountains, and floating-Islands; such was that of Hiero described by the
Deipnosophist, Oneraria Cerealis Sirac^sia, and^.
a mooving Palace adorned with Gardens of the Choicest Fruit, and Trees for
shade: Hippagines is said to have transported the first Horses in larger Boats;
Others ascribe it to Darius, when he retired into Thrace; though we think them
rather of antienter date; for what else means, the Ferrying over King David^s
Goods and Carriages, mentioned in the Second of Samuel? 2 Samuel 19.
Thus far the Keel; for to the diverse parts of Vessels, for better Speed, and
Government, several were the Pretenders. The Thasii added Decks; Pisaeus the
Rostrum or Beak-head; Tiphys the Rudder; Epalamius completed the Anchor, which
was at first but of one Flook: But, before all these, was the Use of Oars,
which from the Bireme, invented by the Erythraei, ^iremis ^istrix, Vallata
Turrita, etc.
came at last to no less than forty Ordines, or Banks (for so many had Ptolomy
Philopater's Gally) which, Plutarch. in D^met. Athenaeus, lib. c. 9.
how to reconcile with possible (though that famous Vessel were built for Pomp,
and Ostentation only, and therefore with a double Prow) together with those
monstrous Ships of War set forth by Demetrius, which had in them 4000 Rowers,
let the Curious consult the most learned Palmerius, in his Diatriba upon a
fragment of Memnon: ^ho^. 717.
and f^r porten^ous and Costly Vessels, The late Vendosme built by Lewis the
XIII th. of France; the Swedish Magaleza, the Venetian Bucentoro; not to omit
those Carricks which the Spaniard emploies yearly to his Indies. But, neither
did all these helps suffice, 'till they added Wings too: They attribute indeed
the Invention of Masts, and Cross-Yards to those of Creete; but to Theseus,
Icarus, and Dedalus the application of Sails, which it is said, Proteus first
skilled to manage, and shift with that dexterity, as he was feigned to turn
himself into all shapes; and it was doubtless, no little wonder, to see that a
piece of Cloth (or, as Pliny, wittily, a despicable Seed, for so he calls that
of Hemp, of which Sails were made) should be contrived to stir such a Bulk, and
carry it with that incredible celerity, from One extreme of the Earth to the
Other: Of that esteem was this ingenious Invention, that, besides Prometheus,
and the rest we named, whole Countries challenged it, and the Rhodians,
Ionians, Corinthians, those of Ty^us, Egypt Aegineta, ^oetia with innumerable
other, vaunt themselves Masters of the Science, nor is there any end of their
Names. It were a thing impossible, to investigate by whom the several Riggings
of Vessels, and complete Equipment were brought into Use: The Skill of Pilotage
has aids from the Mathematics, and Astronomy; Vegetus, Pollux, Laz. B^ji^ius,
Cr^sentius, Fournier, etc.
and that of governing Ships in Fight is another, and a different talent.
These, and many more, were the Daughters of Time, Necessity, and Accident; so
as even to our Days, there is ever something adding, or still wanting to the
Complement of this incomparable Art. Of the Magnet we shall speak hereafter,
nor are we to despair in the perfecting of Longitudes, Dies, Diem docet, and
whilst many pass, Science shall be sti^l improved: We shall only observe,
concerning Men of War, Fleets, and Armada's for Battle, that Minos was reported
to be the Author, which shows that manner of desperate Combat on the Waters, to
be near as ancient as Men themselves, since the Deluge: Indeed, to this Prince
do some attribute the first knowledge of Navigation, Dio^ (...), l. 6. S^r^bo.
l. 10.
and that he disputed the Empire of the Seas with Neptune himself, who, for his
Power on the Watery Element, was esteemed a God: But, however these particulars
may be uncertain, we are able to make proof, That the first Fregats were built
by the English, and generally, the best, and most Commodious Vessels for all
sort of Uses in the World; and, as the Ships, so Those who Man them,
acknowledged for the most Expert, and Courageous in it. But,

12. From the Building of Ships, we pass to the most Celebrious Expeditions
tha^ have been made in them. The Gentiles (who doubtless took Saturn for Noah,
and his Sons, for other of the Deities) magnify sundry of their Adventures by
Sea: And, if from the immediate Offspring of that ancient Patriarch, Sem, and
Iaphet, the Asiatick-Iles, and those at remoter distance in the Mediterranean
and European Seas, were peopled (whilst the Continent, and less dissever'd
Africa, was left to Cham) we have a certain Epoche, for the earliest
Expeditions, and, shall less need to insist on those of the Mythical, and
Heroic Age; the Exploits of Osiris, Hercules, Cadmus; the Wanderings of Ulysses,
and the Leaders that expugn'd Troy. To touch but a few of these; Bacchus, whose
Dominion lay about the Gulf of Persia, made of the first Adventures, when from
him (after the Rape of Ariadne) the Tyrrian Pirates learned the Art of
Navigation, or rather to become more skillful Rovers; If at least, they were
not of the first for Antiquity in this Art; Since the Phoenicians (whether
expelled by Joshua, or transported by their Curiosity) having spread their name
in the Mediterranean, were admired as Gods for their boldness on the Waters,
and esteemed among the first that Navigated, according to that of the Poet,
Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus. Tibullus.
That Cadmus sailed into Greece, Peopled those Isles in the Aegaean, taught them
Letters, and Sciences, as he had learned them from the Hebrews, we have
undoubted testimony: Some affirm that the Phoenicians circl'd the World long
since, the Herodotus has something to that purpose, where in his Melpomene, he
speaks of those whom King Necus caused to Embark from the Red Sea, and that ten
years after returned home by the Columns of Hercules through the Streights:
However, that they penetrated far beyond the Western Ocean, and the Shores of
Africa, the Expedition of Hanno in a Navy of LX. Ships makes out by Grave
Writers; so their coming as far as our Britain, the Pillars which they fixed at
Gades, (...).
and Tingis, to which some report they were crept in early days: And as
toward the West, so Eastward, taking Colonies from Elana and the
Persian-Gulph. As to what they might be for Merchants, illustrious is the proof
out of Esaias, where Tyrus is called the Crowning City, whose Merchants are
Princes, and whose Trafickers the honorable of the Earth; when under the
pretense of Transporting Commodities into Greece, they carried away Io,
Daughter of Inachus, which the Cretans requited, when shortly after, their
amorous God, sailed away with the fair Europa in the White-Bull; for so was the
Vessel called, which gave Occasion to the Fable, and serves to prove, how
ancient the giving Names, and Vide Valor, Flaccum Ag^n^ut. l. 8. Herodot.
H^^^chinum, Suidam, Sen^^am, Lucianum, S^rabonem. Amongst the Poets, V^^gil.
P^^s. S^atius, etc.
Badges is. Indeed so expert were those of Cr^te in Sea-Affairs, and so
numerous in Shipping, as by the suffrage of ancient times, there were none
durst contend with them for Sovereignty: let us hear the Tragaedian, O maria
vasti Creta Dominatrix freti, Sen. Trag. in Hippolyto.

Cujus per omne littus innumere, Rates
Tenuere Pontum: quicquid Assyria tenus
Tellure Nereus pervium Rostris secat.


13. The Colchick Exploit in the famous Argo (so called from her nimble
Sailing) was performed by above 50 Gallants, of which Nine were Chief under
Jason, and Glaucus his Experienced Pilot: But, whether they went to those
Countries about the Euxine Shores in hopes of Golden Mines (shadowed by the
Fleece) or in expectation of the Philosophers Stone (said to be in possession
of King Aeta) we leave to the Romancers: There is in Homer a List of Hero's,
and Ships under their command, mentioned to be set out by the (...), or
States General of those Provinces, reported to have been no less than a
Thousand; Non anni domuere december, non mill Carinae. Iliad. 2.
And that this Number is not fictitious; not only the wondrous exactness of
the Poet in describing the Commanders by Name, but the Number of Ships under
each Flag, as the Learned Mr. Stanley makes it good beyond exception in his
excellent Notes upon Aeschylus, and we propose the Instance, because it is so
very remarkable for its Antiquity.

14. But, to quit these dark, and less certain Memorials, and mingle that of
Commerce with Martial Undertakings: The First for whom we have Divine, and
Infallible Record, is of the Greatest, and the Wisest Prince, that ever swayed
a Scepter: For, though it appear, the Phoenicians had used the Sea before, and,
perhaps, were the (...). Dionys. (...).
first Merchants in the World since the Deluge: Yet, it was Solomon doubtless,
who opened the Passages to the South, when animated by his directions, and now
leaving-off their Rafts, and Improving their Adventures in Ships, and Stouter
Vessels, they assayed to penetrate the farthest Indies, and visit an Unknown
Hemisphere: or if happily, they prevented him; yet, were now glad to join with
this glorious Monarch; because of those advantageous Ports his Father had taken
from the Idumeans, which might otherwise interrupt their Expeditions. What a
Mass of Gold, and other precious things (the peculiar Treasure of Princes) this
Fleet of his brought home, the succeeding story relates; 2 Chro. 9. 21.
and there is farther notice of Mariners, whose Trading was for Spices and
Curiosities; and the Voyage to Tarshish (which by some is interpreted the
Ocean, as indeed it signifies in the Chaldaean Language, but doubtless, means
Tartessus in Spain) is again repeated. Iehoshaphat, after Solomon, neglected
not these prosperous beginnings, though, not with equal Success; for the Ships
were broken at Esion-Geber: We shall only remark, upon the Account of
Commerce, that Solomon had no less than two Fleets destined for Trafick, of
which, One went to Ophir (perhaps Sophra, Taproban, or Ceilon) in the
East Indies, Cant. 5. 11. Dan. 10. 5.
and the Other to Tarsis, that is ( Tartessus) Cales; which being Then, and
long after esteemed for the utmost Confine of the World, had its name from the
Phoenicians, as well as diverse other places, and Ports of Europe (even as far
as Italy, France, and Britany it self) which both They, and We reserve to this
day in no obscure footsteps: And that Spain abounded in plenty of Gold too
(whatever some superficial Searchers think) we learn from Strabo, Diodorus,
Mela, See Bochartus Phaleg. l. 3. c. 7. Canaan, l. 1. c. 34.
Pliny, and several Grave Authors, whose attestation may be of good weight; the
Tyrians, and Phoenicians frequently Sailing into those Parts. But, though we
had yet no print of this from the Sacred Volumes, it is not to be devised, how
the Isles of the Gentiles, and other Places of inaccessible distance could be
planted and furnished, without those early Intercourses by Sea, which, by
degrees (as in part is showed) accomplished the Dominions of Warlike-Men, and
States, and encouraged some to stupendous Attempts.

15. To proceed to Instances of unquestionable Credit, we have those of the
Persians, and Greeks both before, and since the Peloponnesiack War: And, indeed
the Greeks were the first of the Heathens that joined Learning with Arms, that
did both Do and Write what was worthy to be remembered; and that small parcel of
Ground, whose greatness was then only valued by the virtue of the Inhabitants,
planted Trapizond in the East, and diverse other Cities in Asia the Less, the
protection of whose Liberties was the first Cause of War between them and the
Persians: As to Exploits, the Athenians, and smaller Islands of the Aegean,
exceedingly amplified their Bounds with their Naval-Power; so as Thucydides
enumerates their Annual descents upon Peloponnesus, during that Quarrel: But,
the Exploits of Alcibiades, both when so ungratefully Exiled from his Country,
and after he was again restored to it, were celebrated in story, Justin. l. 5.
as well as those of Conon, under whom, we first hear of a Treasurer of the
Navy, for the better Paying of the Seamen, even in those early days: But,
these Conflicts did many of them concern the Persian by Tissaphernes under
Darius, Artaxerxes, and others: The Differences also with the Megarenses, where
Pisistratus obtained the Victory, and the Exploits of Themistocles; but,
especially that decretory Battle in which Xerxes's Fleet of 1500 Men of War,
was vanquished by less than 400, which gave the absolute Dominion of the Sea to
one City, and so enriched it, that the Lacedaemonians (envious at her
prosperity) maintained a War against it, to the almost ruin of both, see the
effects of Avarice! But this was indeed before the Peloponnesian War, between
the LXXX and LXXXIV Olympiad, and first commenced against Strangers, and then
the Lacedaemonians, Corcyreans, and other their Neighbors for the space of
Seven years contin^ance, till by the Courage, and good Conduct of Lysander, a
Peace was at last concluded, with the destruction of Athens, as it usually
happens to the First who give the Occasion, and are the Aggressors. She was yet
set-up once again, by that gallant Exile whom we nam^d, under the Banner of
Artaxerxes; but so to the desolation of poor Greece (weakn'd by her many
Conflicts) that King Philip, and his Son Alexander, soon took their Advantage,
to make themselves, first Masters at Sea, and then of the World; for they are
infallible Consequents. And here we might speak something of Corinth, a City
(if ever any) emulous of the highest praises for Traffic, and Exploits at Sea;
but we involve her amongst the Grecians, and pass over to the opposite shore;
where* upon division of the Macedonian Empire, we find the Carthaginians (a
People originally from Tyrus) of the earliest fame for Commerce, and so well
appointed for the Sea, as gave terror to Rome her self: Nor do we forget the
Syracusans, renowned for their many glorious Actions at Sea, which continued to
the very Punick War, the most obstinate that History has recorded.

16. It was 492 years from the Foundation of the City, before they had
Achieved any thing considerable on the Waters; when ^inding the wonted
Progress of their Victories obstructed by those of Carthage (then Lords at Sea)
they fell in earnest to the Building of Ships of War, and devising Engines of
Offense, which before they hardly thought of. Their first Expedition by Sea,
was under Appius Cl^udius, against the Sicilians, which made those of Africa
look about them, and gave rise to the Punick War under Cajus Duillius, and his
Colleague, with an hundred Rostrated Vessels, and 75 Galleys: But, the most
memorable for number, was, when the two Admirals Regulus, and L. Manlius, with
above an hundred thousand Men (in Ships that had every one 300 at the Oar) were
encountered with a yet more prodigious force, in the Battle at Heraclea,
unfortunate to the Carthaginians: But, neither did it so determine: For, when
Hannibal (returning out of Spain) invaded Italy; The Romans found no better
expedient to divert him, than by dispatching Scipio, with a Fleet into Africa.
The third, and last Contest (after a little repose) determined not till the
utter ruin, and subversion of that emulous Neighbor. These several Conflicts
with this hostile City (which lasted near Twenty years) are admirably described
by Polybius; especially that of M. Regulus, who, with that unequal Power,
fought three Battles in one day; and, in another, Aemilius (with about the same
number of Ships) took, and sunk above an hundred more, and ^lew near 40000 of
the Enemy, though by the terrible and unfortunate Wrack, which afterward
surpised him, such another Victory had undone them. They made War, after this,
with the Achaians, Balea^ians, Cilicians, Sertorians, and those of Crete;
indeed, wheresoever they found Resistance, diffident yet at first, of this
unaccustomed manner of Combat, and which for sometime, caused them to lay it
by; but, they quickly resumed it, and overcoming all difficulties, then Only
might be said to speed Conquerours of the World, when they had Conquered the
Sea, and subdued the Waters.

17. The Piratick-War of Pompey we find celebrated by Tully, pro Lege Manilia:
He invaded the Cyclades; won Corcyra, got Athens, Pontus, Florus, Plutarch.
and Bithynia, and cleared the Seas with that wonderful diligence, that in
forty days time, he left not a Rover in all the Mediterranean, though grown to
that power, and number, as to give terror to the Common-w^alth. We forbear to
speak of Sextus his unfortunate Son, vanquished by the Treachery of his
Libertus Called (...) Menas by ^^race Epo^.
Menodorus, and pass to the great Augustus, who in many Sea-Conflicts
signalized his Courage; especially, in that Decretory Battle at Actium, where
the Contest was de summa Rerum, and the World by Sea, first subdued to the
Empire of a single Person. What discoveries this mighty Prince made, did as far
exceed his Praedecessours, as the frozen North, and horrid Coasts of Cimbria,
the milder Clime of our Britain, which was yet in those days esteemed another
World, and her ^oundaries, as much unknown, as those of Virginia to us: 'Twas
called Alter Orbis; and Grave Especially Clem. Romanus. See also Claudius,
Servius, Josephus, Dio, Eutropius, Scaliger, etc.
Authors, who speak of the unpassableness of the Ocean, mention the Worlds that
lay beyond it: Morinorum gentem ultimam esse Mortalium, says Ptolomy; and the
^rince of Poets* -- Extremique hominum Morini. For it appears no late fancy,
that all was not discovered long before Columbus; though those who took the
Heavens for a kind of hollow-Arch, covering only what was then detected,
little dreamed of Antipodes: It Is ^amous yet what the Prophetic Tragoedian has
offered at, S^n. in Med.
and a thing beyond dispute, that the Ancients had the same notions of our
Country, as we of America: But to leave th^se Enquiries at present (till we
come more particularly to speak of our Country in the following Series) we
shall only, as to the Romans, give the Curious a taste, what Care these Wise
People had of their Naval Preparations, when once (as we have showed) they
found the Importance of it, and after how prudent a Method they disposed it.

18. Augustus had in his Military Establishment one Squadron of Men of War at
Ravenna, as a constant Guard of the Adriatic; and another riding at Misenum,
Suet^^. in Aug. c. 49.
to scowr the Tyrrhen-Sea, together with a Brigade of Foot-Souldiers at either
Port, to clap on Board upon any sudden occasion. The Misenian-F^eet lay
conveniently for France, Spain, Morocco, Africa, V^getius.
Egypt, Sardinia, and Sicily; That at Ravenna, for Epirus, Macedon, Achaia,
Propontis, Pontus; The Levantine parts, Creete, Rhodes, and Cyprus, Notitia
Imperi^.
etc. So as by the Number of their Vessels, and Arms, they made a Bridge (as it
were) to all their Provinces, and vast Dominions at what distance soever; MIL.
CL. P. R AR. Miles ^lassis Fraeto^iae Ravennatis.
And many of these particulars we could farther Illustrate by M^da^s, and noble
Inscriptions, to be gathered out of good Records, PRAETOR. MAR. E^ CL. M. R.
Mili^iae (...)
did we need the Ostentation of any farther Researches: We shall only observe,
that they had their Praet^rio Praefectus, who Inspected all this. Marine Laws
and Customs they also had: Whence was it else that the Corn-fleet was still
from Alexandria to make Puteoli, as it were by Coquet bound? So the Ships of
that Port: See Acts 28. 11, 12, 13. Whence else was it that only the same
Corn-fleet, as being of so absolute necessity for the sustenance of the
Imperial City, had the Privilege to come into Harbor with Top and
Top-Gallant; unless the rest did Supparum dimere, or strike Sa^l to the Ports
of the Empire? So early was the claim to the Flag, and the Ceremonies of
Naval-Honour stated. Yet higher; Their Rostrate-Crowns; See Tully de S^n^ct.
and that pretty Insolence by Act of Senate allowed to C. Duillius after having
won the Romans their first Victory at Sea, that he should, all his life after,
be brought to the public Entertainments in the Town Hall with a Pipe playing
before him; and ^lambeaux on each side; G^^ter's Inscriptions.
that Column too, whose Fragments yet preserved, exhibit with the memory of
that Illustrious Action, perhaps the Ancientest piece of Latin now extant, at
least in the Originals. All these allegations do abundantly testify with what
transports of joy that aspiring people received the Accession of Power by Sea.
They also had their Decuriae Fabrorum Rhavennatium, Master Ship-Wrights of the
Dock at Rhavenna; and, we ^ind Fireships mentioned in Front. Stratagem, l. 4
c. 7.
Frontinus; Stink-Pots, nay Snake-Pots, and False-Colours; for such, we read,
were used by Cassius, Scipio, Annibal, M. Portius, Iphicrates, Pisistratus, and
others: And, if the Trajan Port at Ostia were now extant, we might see such a
pat^ern of a Mole, Lantern, Magazine for Ships, and Accommodation for Merchants
Goods, as was never before in the World, and would put to shame all modern
Industry of that Nature; to show the care they had, and the prodigious Expenses
they made, for this so important, and necessary a Work: But these things
happening in her early and best days, the fervor quickly abated; for from the
Death of Augustus, and some few of the succeeding Emperors (as in that Vide
P^ocopiu^, l 3. Paulu^ (...), l. 14.
decline, by the Conduct of Belizarius, Artabanes, and some of the later
Captains) the Romans, as powerful by Land as they were, performed no^ much at
Sea: those glorious Actions were the Consequents of a frugal and vigilant
People; But, when Softness, and Prodigality took off their Minds from the
great, and noble Enterprises of their Ancestors, and the Defense of their
Country was discomposed by Factions among themselves, the Goths, Vandales,
Lombards, and Saracens broke in upon them, to the utter ruin, and subversion
of that renowned Empire.

19. But the Business of Navigation, and Commerce (which could not long be
Eclipsed, so soon as a Magnanimous Prince appeared) was again Revived un^^er
Charles the Great; about whose time, it we^e not hard to find out the Original
of a^most all the Naval-Offices, and Thalassarchia or Admiralty, to this Day
continuing; as appears in both the Notitiae Imperii Occidentalis and
Orientalis, wherein there occur diverse notable Particulars concerning them,
even till the loss of Constantinople, and the Impe^ial S^at it self: But, to
trace this great Article from its source, and show the Progress it has made in
the Ages past, we have but to look over the Catalogue which Eusebi^s has given
us, (...)
adjusted to the ^poche in which they had successive Dominion of the Sea:
namely, the Lydians whom (as appearing the most Conspicuous) he sets in the
Van: Then the Pelasgi, Thraces, Rhodians, Phrygians, Phaenicians, the
Egyptians, Milesians, those of Caria, Lesbia, the Phocenses, Naxii,
Eretrienses, Aeginetae and others too long to recite: Let us look back to the
Egyptians, who we read, were so addicted to Traffic, as they essayed to join
the Mediterranean with the Red Sea, and thereby open a passage to the Commerce
of Arabia, Aethiopia, and the Shoars of India: Which attempt (unsuccessful as
it proved) did not yet impeach the Alexandrian Staple, from whence Rome of Old,
the Genoezes, Venetians, and others of later date, have inricht themselves: For
the Eastern Scale being in Caesar's time at Coptos, and afterward, removed to
Alexandria; when the Arabs and Goths overran the World (and the Indian Trade
interrupted) was conveyed to ^rebezond upon the Euxine, and from thence by
Caravan to Aleppo, thence again recovered to the Red Sea, and Alexandria by the
Sultan, who then possessed Cairo, where it was long Monopoliz'd by the
Venetians, of whom we give a more particular Account. What immense Treasure
the Romans received out of Asia, and Syria; out of Africa from Egypt, and by
the Nile; the Persian Gulf, and from India, we are told out of Strabo Lib. 17.
. This Merchandise was first conveyed over-Land from Berenice, by Philadelphus
(to avoid the perils of Navigating the Red Sea) to P^pta on the Nilus; and
thence (with the Stream) to Alexandria, though many Ships adventured to pass
from M^ris (or the Berenice abovementioned) even to the very Indies; by which
means there came Yearly to Rome, no les^ then 1000 Tuns of Gold, besides other
precious Commodities. But, when the Empire fell to decay, the Venetians (as we
noted) took their advantage, till then a few scattered Cotages of poor
Fishermen, and others, Fugitives from the Gotic Inundation, and settling by
degrees upon a Cluster of diverse muddy, and almost, inaccessible Islands: See
what Commerce can effect! But, these Industrious People assayed another way,
namely, from Ganges through Bactria, and the River Oxus, and so the Caspian
Lake, As^racan and the Volga; thence to Tanais by the Euxine, and so to Venice;
truly an immense Circle, and which soon wearied them out, when even of later
times, the Negoce of India was supplied from Tripoly, and Alexandretta (Cities
of Syria) and from Aleppo by Caravan, to which Scale Merchants came from
Armenia, Arabia, Egypt, Persia, and generally, from all the Oriental
Countries. From Aleppo again they returned to Bir near the Euphrates; thence to
Badaget, or Ophram in Media; Balsara, and the Gulf all down the Stream: To
this Balsara is yet brought all sorts of Indian Commodities, as far as
Aethiopia, and the Islands of that Ocean; where being charged on smaller
Vessels, they are tow'd-up against the Euphrates to Bagdet* in which Passage,
being now and then interrupted by the Thievish Arabs (especially at the
Frontiers) Intelligence is familiarly conveyed by the Inter-nunce of Pigeons
trained up for the purpose, that is, carried in open Cages from the
Dove-houses, and freed, with their Let^ers of Advice (contrived in narrow
scrowls about their bodies, and under the wing) which they bring with wonderful
Expedition: as they likewise practice it from Scanderoon to Aleppo upon the
comingin of Ships, and other Occasions, These were the later Intercourses from
Venice to, and from the Oriental Parts, till in the Year 1497, 1497.
that the famous Vasco de Gama (that fortunate Portugueze, and whom we may
truly call ^he Restorer of Navigation) found out a nearer Way, by going
farther about: For Henry, 1410.
the Third Son of John the First of Portugal, hearing that Bethen-Court, a
Norman, had detected certain Islands in the Atlantic Ocean some years before;
sent two Ships in search of the Africa Shoars Southwards: Ten Years after this,
1344.
Consalvo, and Tristan Vaz made discovery of Det^cted bef^^e by one M^cha a^
Englishman.
Madera, and certain Genoezes had sailed as far as the Sierra Lione, within
eight Degrees of the Equator; after which, there was little advance till the
Reign of Alphonsus the Second, in whose time, the Portuguezes Coasted as far as
the ^romon^ory of St. Katharine under the second Degree of Southern Latitude:
But, John the Second sending men by the old Way of Alexandria, and the
Midland-Sea to Goa, Peter Covilan, an Active Spirit amongst them, hearing of a
famous Cape, which extending it self far into the Sea and that being doubled,
did open a passage into the East, brought News of it to King Emanuel (then
Reigning) who thereupon, employed the two Brothers Vasques (whom we named) and
Paulo, with four Vessels, and 160 Men, with that Success, as to discover a
passage to the Indies by Long-Sea, to the almost utter ruin of Venice; and, in
a short time after, to the total Interruption of that tedious Circle by Land,
Rivers, and Lakes, which we have been describing; nor are we to forget Petrus
Alvarez, Almeida, and others: And in this manner, for diverse Years (at least
till the Reign of John the Third) did the Portugals and Spaniards carry the
Trade of the World, from the rest of the World, till the HOLLANDERS (being
prohibited all Intercourse with the Ports belonging to the Catholick-Rings)
attempted the same Discovery, and in short time, so out-did the former; that,
by the Year 1595, 1595.
they had Established a Company for the East Indies, and within a while after,
another for the West, which has subdued the best part of Brazile, and in the
Year 1628, 1624. 1628.
fought, and took the Spanish Plate-Fleet, to their immense Inrichment: But, in
what manner they have settled themselves and Factories in those Parts, and by
what Arts maintained it, will require a fuller discovery.

20. We not long-since mentioned the Goths and Vandals, and who almost has
taken Notice of the Ancient Port of Wisbuy, formerly a Receptacle of Ships, and
famous Emporium in those Parts? when even the Laws, and Ordinances of Wisbuy,
took place like those of Oleron, from Muscovy, to the Streights of Gibraltar;
and though both Olaus Magnus, Herbestan, and Others have exceedingly celebrated
this City, and Haven; Yet we cannot learn, how it came to be deserted, unless
by the Luxury, and Dissentions of the Inhabitants; by none (that we can find)
recorded: But, that it was once in so ^lourishing a state, testify the yet
remaining Heaps, the Columns of Marble, Jasper, and Porphyrie: the Gates of
Brass and Iron, exq^isitely wrought, and other footsteps of August
foundations. Albertus the Swedish King, endeavored by great Privileges, to
have (it seems) established again, and restored it to its ancient splendor,
but it did not succeed: Nevertheless, the Laws we mentioned (written in the Old
Theutonick Language, and without date) obtained amongst the Germans, Danes,
Flemmings, and almost all the Northern People: We mention the Instance to show,
that as some Places have set^ up, and thriven by their Industry; so Others,
have lost what they once possessed; and that this Vicissi^ude is unavoidab^e,
Tyrus, and Carthage, and Corinth, and Syracuse (that in their turns contended
with all the World for Navigation and Commerce) are pregnant Examples. The
famous Brundusium (whence the Great Pompey ^led from the fortune of Caesar) is
now quite choak'd-up: Ioppa is no more, and Tingis, which of old derived its
Name from Commerce, and was a renowned Emporium near three hundred Years before
Carth^ge was a City, was lately the Desolate Tanger; though now again, by the
In^luence of our glorious Monarch, raising its aged head with fresh vigor:
But, what is become of hundreds we might Name; S^rabo, Dion^s. (...). See
Isa^a^, c. 23.
Spina n^ar Ravenna, Luna in ^truria, Lesbus, and even Athens her self? When
nearer home, and at our own doors, Stavernen in Friezland, anciently a famous
Port, now desolate, Antwerp (lately the Staple for the Spice and Riches of the
East, and that Sold more in one Month, than Venice did in four and twenty) lies
abandon^d: The stately Genoa (which once employed twice-twenty thousand hands
in the Silken Manufacture) is now, with her Elder^Sister Venice, ebbing apace;
Venice, I say, the Beloved of the Sea, s^ems now ^orlorne, compared to what she
was, and from how a small a principle she had spread!

21. The Bretons and Normans (especially against the Saracens) those of
Province, Marselles, ^arbon, etc. had long since been famous at Sea, we say,
long since; for the ancient Gauls had great Commerce with those of Carthage
(as appears out of Polibyus and Livy) but the French in general, have of later
days, and since the Reign of Charles the Eighth, ^^il. C^min^s.
performed little considerable: Francis the First (that Magnificent Prince, who
had made the famous Andrea d'Oria his Admiral) built indeed no less than ^ifty
Galleys for the Italick-War, and had some Conflicts with our King his
Neighbor; But Henry the Fourth, seemed wholly negligent of Sea-affairs, as
relying upon the Generosity of Queen Elizabeth, in whose days, neither He, nor
any other Potentate about her, durst pretend to Shipping, or such Fleets as
might give jealousy to their Allies; which, had this incomparable Princess,
or, rather, her ^eaceful Successor, as well observed with the Hollanders in
point of Commerce and Trade too; the Ages to come, as well as present, had been
doubly obliged to their memory: But the Scene is now changed, as well with them
as with France; since Cardinal de Richlieu, in the Reign of Lewis the
Thirteenth, Instituting a College, and Fraternity of Merchants about thirty
Years since; and by Opening, Enlarging, and Improving their Ports and
Magazines, has put the present Monarch into such a Condition, as has
exceedingly advanced his Commerce, and given Principle to no inconsiderable
Navy; and if D^ R^^ub. Galliae, l. 2.
Claudius Sesellius the Bishop of Marselles's Prophecies succeed (who writ
about the time of Lewis the Twelfth) the Northern World is like to have an
importunate Neighbor within few Years to come, from his growing Power, even
upon the Ocean.

22. The Danes, and more Northern People were formidable (especially to this
Island) under the Conduct of their brave Canute, Ubbon the Frizian, and other
Captains; making frequent descents upon Us in mighty Fleets, encountered by the
Saxons: But, all these living more by Brigandize, and Piracy, than by Tra^^ick,
gave place to the Spaniard, and Portugals, whose successful Expeditions, and
Discoveries, have rendered them deservedly more Worthy for these last six, or
seven hundred Years, than any we have hitherto mentioned, for their shedding of
Blood, and Invasions. Nor with less Glory, and timely application of themselves
to Sea^ Affairs, did the formerly-mention'd Genoezes, and others of the
Ligurian Coast, signalize their Courage, as well as their dexterity in
Traffic; especially, against the Saracens; since which, they did exceedingly
flourish; till the Dukes of Tuscany, by better Policy, and the direction of
Count Dudley (pretended Duke of Northumberland) raising its Neighbor Ligorn
from a desp^cable, and neglected Place, to a Free and well-defended Port, did
well nigh (...) it; for, by this means, the greatest Merchants ^or repute in
the World (namely those of Genoa) are become the greatest, and sordidst Usurers
in it; as having otherwise little means to employ the Riches, which they
formerly got, by a more honest, and natural way of Trade: But, as the Opening
of Marselles may in time endanger that of Ligorn, whilst the French King is
co^rting all the World with Naturalization, and other popular Immunities; other
Princes are instructed how to render themselves Considerable, who are blessed
wi^h any advan^agious Post upon the bord^res of the Ocean; and, of This,
Gotenberg (not to mention Villa-Franca, and some other Ports) is now a worthy
Instance, which, till of late, was hardly known bevond its Wooden Suburbs,
though it must be acknowledged, that both the Danes and Sweeds had performed
notable Explo^ts; the former from Herald the^ Third, by the Conduct of Ubbon
the Frisian (not to insist on their heavy Impositions on this Island) and the
latter from Gustavus the first, who served himself of Galleys even upon the
Northern Seas, built for him by the Venetians, and set out that enormous Ship,
we mentioned, which carried 1300 Men: What Conquests the late Great Adolphus
made, who went into Prusia with an Armada of 200 Ships, is known to the
amazement of Europe.

23. We have more than once showed, from how humble a rise Venice had exalted
her head, and spread the fame of her Conquests, as well as Navigation, over
Asia, Egypt, Syria, Pontus, Greece and other Countries, bordering upon the
Ocean: she War'd against the Istrians, vanquished the Saracens. In the Holy^
land; they won Smyrna, devasted all the Phoenician Shoars, especially under
Dominico Michaele, who with 200 Vessels, having raised the Siege of Ioppa, took
ch^us, Samos, Lesbos; to omit their Successes against the Genoezes emulous of
their growth, but never to forget the former, and of late, strenuous resistance
against the Turk; especially in that signal Battle of Lepanto, and what their
famous General Capello did at Tunis, and Algiers of later time, and the
Building, Furniture, and Economy of their Arsenal, and Magazines Celebrated
throughout the World; when (before the lucky Portuguezes had doubled the Cape
of BonI^speranza) the sweet of the Levantine Commerce (transferred from this
Port only) invited men to build not Ships alone, but Houses, and Palaces in
the very bosom of Neptune, with a stupendous Expense, and almost miraculous:
The Government of their Maritime-Affairs, care of their Forests, Victualling,
Courage and Industry of their Greatest Noblemen, who are frequently made
Captains of si^gle Galleys, and sometimes arriving to be Chief Admirals, come
near a Dictatorship; are things worthy of praise; and of the Name they have
obtained. Genoa (whom we mentioned) had sig^aliz'd it self against the
Saracens, the Republic of Pisa, and even Venice it self, especially under
Paganus Doria in the Year 1352, near the Bosphorus Straight; and with the
Island of Tenidos had been hired by the Young Andronicus to come into his
assistance: From the time of Cosino di Medices, and Sylvius Piccol^mini their
Admiral, the Flore^tines gave proof of their Valor in Africa, and of their
Care for Sea Affairs, the Arsenal at Pis^ gives a commendable Instance.

24. The Rhodans (to whom some attribute even the Invention of Navigation, and
whose Consti^utions were ^niversally received) ob^ain'd a mighty repu^e at Sea;
and the Cour^gious Exploits of the Maltezes, and other Military Orders against
the Common Enemy, the T^rk, are renowned over the World; wi^ness, ten thousand
which they ^lew, and half as many that they took in the Year 1308, with hundred
thousands of those Miscr^ants destroyed by them since their removal to Malta;
espec^ally when joined with the ^allies of Venice and Genoa, in the Years 1601,
1625, 1638, and other slaugh^ers innum^rable. We name the T^rk, and they give
us Cause to remember them, by what the Christian Pale has too often felt, when
more by their Numbers, than their Courage, they took from it Cyprus, Rhodes,
and the never to be forgotten Candi^; besides, their Conquests and Incursions,
on the rest of Europe and Asia: They are not,'it is Confessed, of any Name for
much Commerce, but for the Disturbance of it, which calls aloud upon the
Christian VVor^d to put a ^^mely period to their Insolence, before it be
incorrigible, and to pursue the bold, and brave Exploits of our Blakes Lawsons,
and Sprags against the Moors and Barbares, and by Examp^e of our Heroic
Prince, to restore that Security to Trade, which can only make it Re-^lourish.

25. The Aethiopians, Persians, Indians and Chinezes (for those of Tartary,
present, or ancient Scyths, come hardly into this Account) may be reckoned
among the Nations of Traffic; Especially, the last named, as who are by some
thought to have had knowledge of the Magnet before the Europeans* nay, so
addicted were they to Sailing, that they invented Veli^ero^s Chariots, and to
Sail upon the Land: It was long since that they had intercourse with those of
Madagascar, and came sometimes as far as the Red Sea with their Wares; and for
Vessels, have to this day about Nankin, Ionks of such prodigious size, as seem
like Cities, rather than Ships, bui^t full of Ho^ses, and replenished with
whole Families: In sh^rt, There is hardly a Nation so ^ude, but, who is some
degree, Cultivate Navigation, and are Charmed with the Advantages of Commerce:
But, it would cost an immense Volume, to discourse at large of these things in
particular, and to mention only, the brave Men, who have in all Ages
signalized themselves at Sea for their Arms, or, more peaceful Arts; to Count
the Names of the famous Captains, and Adventures of later times, whose
Expeditions have been VVar-like, and for Invasion, and many for Discoveries and
Commerce. Here, then we Contract our Sails, and shall direct our Course nearer
home, from whence we have been so long diverted.

26. The First, that presents it self to our second Consideration, are the
Spaniards, and Castilians, who (upon the Success of their Neighbors the
Portugals) making use of that fortunate Stranger Columbus, prompted by a
magnanimous Genius, and a little Philosophy, discovered to us a New World:
This Great Man, being ^urnish'd-out by Ferdinand, and Isabella of Castile, in
four Voyages, which he made from the Year 1492, 1492.
to An. 1502, detected the Antillias, Cuba, Iamaica, etc. with some of the
Terra firma; though to let pass Zeno (a Noble Venetian, reported to have
discovered the North-East part of America above an hundred Years before) there
be, 1390.
who tell us, that a certain obscure Mariner ( Alphonso Zanches de Huelva by
name) had the first sight of this goodly prospect, eight years before this
glorious Gen^ez^ (for Columbus was of that City) or any the pretenders: This
poor Seaman, hurried upon those unknown Coasts by Tempests (which continued
for almost a ^ull Month) was carried as far as St. Domingo in Hispaniola: How
he returned is not said; but, that from the Observations of this Adventure,
Christophero received the first notices of what he afterward improved, being
at that time in the Maderas, where Zanches arriving, died not long after, and
bequeathed him all his Charts and Papers. There are likewise who affirm, that
some mean Bisayers (loosing themselves in pursuit of Whale-Fishing) had fallen
upon some of the American Islands, above an hundred years, before either of the
former; but, since of this we have no Authentic proofs; Certain it is, that
Columbus, taking his Conjectures from the Spiring of certain Winds from the
Western Points, by st^ong Impulse, concluded, that there must needs be some
Continent toward those Quarters: Upon this Confidence, he offers first, his
Service to John King of Portugal, and then, to our Henry the Seventh of
England, by both which Princes rejected for a Romantic Dream, he repairs to the
Court of Spain, where, partly by his Importunity, and much by the favor of
Isabella, he was with great difficulty setout at last, when to equip him, the
Royal Lady was fain to pawn some of her Jewels: But it was well Repaid, when
for the value of 17000 Crowns, he not long after, returned her almost as many
Tuns of Treasure, and, within eight or nine Years, to the Kings sole Use, above
1500000 of Silver, and 360 Tuns of Gold: See the Reward of Faith, and of things
not seen! 1497.
These fortunate beginnings were pursued by Americus Vesputius (a Florentine,
and a Stranger too) who being sent by Emanuel of Portugal to the Molucca
Islands (five Years after) happening to be driven upon the same Coast, carried
away the Name, though not the Honor from all the former, though there be, who
upon good proof affirm, that John Chab^t a Venetian, and his son Sebastian
(born with us at Bristol) had discovered Florida, and the Shoars of Virginia,
with that whole Tract as far as New Foundland, before the bold Genoeze; nay,
that Thorn, and Eliot (both Countrymen of ours) detected this New-World before
Columbus ever set foot upon it; for we will say nothing of the famous Owen
Gwynedd, whose Adventures are of yet greater Antiquity, and might serve to give
Repu^ation to that noble Enterprise, if we had a mind to be contentious ^or it,
But,

27. That indeed the most shining Exploits of this Age of Discoveries, were
chiefly due to the several Hero's of this Island, we have but to call-over the
Names of Drake, Hawkins, Cavendish, Furbisher, Davis, Hudson, Raleigh, and
others of no less merit: For impossible it was, that the English should not
share in Dangers with the most Renowned, in so glorious an Enterprise; Our
Drake being the First of any Mortal, to whom God vouchsafed the stupendous
Atchievment of Encompassing, not this New-World alone, but New and Old
together: Both of them Twice embraced by this Demi-God; for Magellan being
slain at the Manillias, was interrupted in his intended Course, 1528.
and left the Exploit to Sebastian Camus his Colleague.

28. This Voyage of Drake was first to Nombre de Dios; where coming to a sight
of the South-Seas, with tears of Joy in his eyes, his mind was never in repose,
till he had gotten into it, as in five years after he accomplished it, when
passing through the Magellan Straight toward the other Indies, and doubling
the famous Promontory, he Circum-navigated the whole Earth, and taking from the
Spaniard St. Iago, Domingo, Cartagena, and other signal Places, Crowned in the
Name of his Mistress the Queen, at Nova Albion, he returned to his Country, and
to a Crown of Immortal Honor. This gallant Man was Leader to Cavendish,
another Countryman of Ours, of no less Resolution; for these brave Persons
scorning any longer to creep by Shoars, and be obliged to uncertain
Constellations; plow'd-up unfathomable Abysses, without ken of Earth or Heaven,
and really accomplished Actions, beyond all that the Poets of Old, or any
former Record (fruitful in Wonders) could Invent or Relate.

29. And now Every Nation, stimulated by these Adventures, daily added
New-things to the Accomplishment of the Art: Things, I say, unknown to former
Ages: And herein were the Portugals very prosperous, One of whose Princes
brought first into Use the Astrolabe, and Tables of Declination, with other
Arithmetical, and Astronomical Rules, applicable to Navigation; besides, what
several others had from time to time Invented: But, neither were these to be
compared to the Nautic Box, and feats of the Magnet; before which the Science
was so imperfect, and Mariners so terri^ied at Long Voyages; that there were
Laws to prohibit Sailing even upon the Mediterranean, during the Winter Season;
and, however great things have been reported of Plato's Atlantic, the
Discoveries of Hanno, Eudoxius, and others of Old time, from the Persian Gulf,
as far as Cales; it was still with sneaking by the Shore, in continual sight of
Land; or by Chance, which indeed has been a fruitful Mother in these, and most
other Discoveries; that Men might learn Humility and not Sacrifice to their own
uncertain Reasonings. 1305.
In that memorable Expedition of the French to Invade our Country, there was
hardly a Pilot to be found, who durst adventure Twenty Leag^es into the Main;
and those who had been the most assured, did hardly reach within many degrees
of the Aequinoctial. The Azores were first stumbl'd-upon by a roming Pirat,
surpised by Storm: All the Asia^ic Indian Seas, and some of Africa, lay almost
as much in the dark, as the Hyperboreans, and horrid North. 1465.
And though this de^ect was encountered more than two Ages past, by that ever
to be renowned Italian ^lavio of Amalphi (for we pass what is reported of the
Ancient Arabs, Pa^lus Venetus, and Others) yet, was it near fourscore Years
after, ere it came so far North as these Countries of Ours, to which his
Needles continually pointed. But, it was now when the Fullness of Time was
come, that by this means, the Western Indies should be no longer a Secret, and
what have been the incomparable Advantages, which this despicable Stone has
produced (the property whereof is ever to have its Poles, converted to the
Poles of the World, and its Axed directed Parallel to the Axes of the World) is
Argument of Admiration: But, that by virtue of this dull Pibble, such a
Continent of Land, such Myriads of People, such inexhaustible Treasures, and so
many Wonders should be brought to light, plainly Astonishes, and may Instruct
the proudest of us all, not to contemn small-things; since so it oftentimes
pleases the Almighty to humble the Loftiness of Men, and to Choose the Base
things of the World, to Confound the Things that are Mighty. And less than This
we could not say, concerning that inestimable Jewel, by whose Aid and
Direction, the Commerce, and Traffic of the World has received such Advantages.

30. We have now dispatched the Portugals and the Spaniards: There rema^n the
ENGLIGH and the HOLLANDERS, who Cour^ing the good Graces of the same Mistress,
the TRADE of the WORLD, divide the WORLD between them: Deservedly then we
Celebrate the Industry of the Batavians: They must really be looked upon as a
Wonderful People; nor do we diminish our selves whilst we magnify any worthy
Actions of theirs; since it cannot but redound to our Glory, who have been the
Occasion of it; and, that as often as they have forgotten it, we have been able
to Chastize them for it: It is, I say, a Miracle that a People (who have no
Principle of Trade among themselves) should in so short a space, become such
Masters of it: Their Growth ('it is Confessed) is admirable; and if it prove as
solid, and permanent, as it has been speedy, ROME must her-self submit to the
Comparision: But, we know, who has Calculated her Nativity, and that Violent
things are not always lasting. Bentivoglio hist. Flan.
We will yet give them their due; They are Giants for stature, fierce in Beard
and Countenance, full of goodly Towns; Strong in Munition, Numerous in
Shipping; in a World HIGH and MIGHTY-STATES, and all this the product of
Commerce and Navigation; but by what just Arts equally, and in all parts
improved we may hereafter enquire, as well as to whose Kindness they have been
the most Obliged, and the most Ungrateful: We omit to speak here of their
Discoveries, and Plantations, which the Curious may find in the Journals
Heemskerk, Oliver Vander-Nordt, Spilberg, Le Maire (who went six Degrees
farther South than Magellan himself, and found a shorter passage into those
Seas) to these we may add L'Eremite, the late Compilers of their Atlases, and
Others, which many Volumes would hardly comprehend, and because they are
generally known; Tacitus, and other famous Authors have celebrated their Early
Exploits at Sea, and of later times, Fredric Barburossa did bravely against the
Saracens at Pelusium in Egypt: 1219.
The Frizians greatly infested the Danes, and those of Flanders, especially
under William the Son of John Count of Holland, and in the time of Philip the
good Duke of Burgundy: They were the first that wore the Broom, when, Anno
1438, they had cleared the Levantine Seas, subdued the Genoezes, V. Pont.
Heuterus Austr. l. 13.
and vanquished the French about an hundred years after: How they plagued the
Spaniard and Portugals, from the year 1572 to almost this day, there is no body
ignorant of; and for that of their Discoveries, Quae vero ignota littora, Dec.
1. l. 1.
quasve desinentis mundi or as Scrutata non est Belgarum Nauticae? was justly
due to them from Strad^; and the Truth is, they have merited of Fame for many
Virtues, and showed from what small, and despicable Rudiments, Great things
have emerged; and that Traffic alone, which at the first raised, has hi her^to
supported this Grandeur against a most puissant Monarch, for a most an Age
entire: But, their Admission of Foreigners, Increase of Hands, Encouraging
Manufactures, Free, and Open Ports, Low Customs, Tolleration of Religions,
Natural Frugality, and Indefatigable Industry could ^ndeed, portend no less. We
conclude then with ENGLAND, which though last in Order, was not the last in our
Design; when upon reflection on our late Differences with our Neighbors of
HOLLAND, we thought it not unsuitable to Praeface something concerning the
Progress of that Commerce, which has been the Subject of so many Conflicts
between us.

31. To the little which has been hitherto said of the great things which Our
Nation has performed by Sea in the later Ages, we might super-add the
Gallantry, and brave Adventures of former; since from no obscure Authors we
learn, the Britains to have accompanied the Cimbrians and Gauls, Camdenus*
Strabo, l. 3.
in their memorable Expedition into Greece, long before the Incarnation of our
Lord, and whilst they were yet Strangers to the Roman World; not to insist on
the Cassiterides, W. Howel Instit. Hist. B^charti Cana^n, l. 1. c. 39. and l.
3. c. 9.
known to the Phoenicians, and with so much judgment, vindicated by a Learned
Author, in that his excellent and useful Institution: In all events, we resort
to the greatest Captain, and, without dispute, the purest of Ancient Writers:
De Bello Gall. lib. 3.
The Description which Caesar makes of the Supplies this Island afforded the
Gauls (and, which made him think it worth his while to bring-over his Legions
hither) will inform us, that the structure of their Vessels was not altogether
of Twigs, and Oxes-Hides; And the Veneti, it seems, had then a Navy of no less
than 200 Sail, built of goodly Oak, tall, and so bravely equipped for War, and
to endure the Sea, as that great General acknowledged the Romans themselves had
nothing approached it: which we mention, because diverse grave Authors believe
the British Vessels (sent sometime as Auxiliaries) were thought to be like
them: And the slender Experience which the Gauls (or, in truth any other
Neighbor of theirs) had of the opposite Shoars, when the Britains were thus
Instructed both for Defense, and Commerce (and, at that time per^itted certain
Merchants only to frequent their Coasts) is a fair Praescription, how Early
She Entitled her self to the Dominion of the Seas; which, if at any time
interrupted by barbarous Surprise, or Invasion (as in the Ages following it
seemed to be) yet, neither did That continue any longer, than till the
prevalent Force was established, which soon Asserting the Title, as Lords, and
in Right of England, maintained her Praerogative from Time immemorial: I know
not why therefore, a solitary Writer, or two, should go about to deprive this
Nation of more than Twelve hundred Years at Once; because an Heroic Prince has
had the Misfortune to have his Mighty Actions reported by some weak, and
less-accurate Pens: Yet, such, as the Times wherein they lived, could furnish;
especially too, since this has been the Fate of as brave Men, as any whom
History has Recorded: But, by this Pretense, some there are, who would take
from us, the Renowned ARTHUR, who is reported to have led his Squadrons as far
as Ise-Land, See ^APXAIONOMIA, sive, de Priscis Anglorum Legibus, written by
Lambard, and Published by Mr. Wheelock.
and brought the Northern People under his Flag, planting the Con^ines of the
British-Ocean, as far as the Russian Tracts; and this (together with all the
Northern, and Eastern Isles) to be D^ Iure, Appendices unto this Kingdom, me
may find in the Leges Edwardi, confirmed by the Norman Conqueror; for so it
had indeed been left to the famous EDGAR (to mention only Egbert, Althr^d,
Ethelfred, etc.) Princes, all of them, signally meritorious for their Care of
the Sea) who soon finding by Experience what Benefit, and Protection his
Country received by the extraordinary Vigilance on the Coasts, and the
Vindicating of his Dominions on the Waters, Covered them at Once, with no less
than Four thousand Sail; nor, it seems, without Cause (the time considered)
since we lay so exposed to a barbarous Enemy. Alfred (whom we mentioned) found
it so in his days; a sober, and well-Consulted Prince; and therefore provided
himself of the same Expedient against the troublesome Danes, whom he not
seldom humbl^d: But, this MAXIM, as often as Neglected, did as certainly
expose the Nation to Prey, and Contempt, as not long after it, to the Norman
Power, Nimis multa extare documenta Britanniae esse Domin^s, qui essent Maris.
Grot. Hist. l. 13.
and may so again to a Greater, when through a fatal Supineness, we shall
either Remit of our wonted Vigilance, and due Provisions, or suffer our
Up-start Neighbors to Incroach upon us; so True is that saying, By what means
any Thing is Acquired, by the same it is Preserved. Did this Island wisely
Consider the Happiness of not needing many Fronteirs to protect her from hourly
Alarms, or Inland Fortresses to check the sudden, and rude Incursions, to
which all Continents are Obnoxious; she would not think her Bounty to her
Prince a Burden; who by maintaining a glorious, and formidable Navy at Sea,
not only renders her Inhabitants secure at Home, without multiplying of
Governors, and G^arnisons (which are ever jealous to a Free, and Loyal People)
but, unless wanting to themselves, Repairs their Layings-out, with immense
Advantages; and by securing, and Improving that Trade, and Commerce, which
only can render a Nation flourishing, and, which has hitherto given us the
Ascendent over the rest of the World: so True is another Axiom, Qui MARE tenet,
Cic. ad A^ic. l. 10. Ep. 7.
eum necesse esse rerum potiri; but, without which, it is in vain to talk of
Sovereignty.

32. By these Politics King John was enabled to pass the Seas into Ireland
with a Fleet of 500 Sail; Imperiously Commanding whatever Vessels they should
m^et withal about the Eight Circum^luent Seas, to Arrest them, and bring them
to understand their Duty: But, our Third Edward (to whom the House of Burgundy
owed so much) Equipped above a Thousand tall Ships upon another Occasion; with
an handful whereof, he defeated a prodigious Navy of the French, and Spaniard,
that were gotten together; and we have seen a perfect, and undoubted List of no
^ewer than 700 Men of War, which this Prince brought before Calais, though he
made use of but 200 of them, to vanquish a Fleet consist^ng of more than double
the Number with the loss of Thirty thousand French; which had such an Influence
on his Neighbors, that, whereas, till then, there had been some Remisness in
the Nation, and a declension of Sea-Affairs; the bravest, and greatest Men in
the Land, began greedily to embrace Maritime Employments; and the Title of
Thalassiarcha. See Vossius de Vitii^ Sermonis Lat. l. 2. It Is derived from
Emir, or Amir Praefectus in Arab.
Admiral, introduced in his Praedecessors time, was now held in highest Esteem.

33. We mentioned the House of Burgundy, and it had reason to Remember us, and
our Wool, which was the fairest Flower of that Ducal Coronet, and as some good
Antiquaries remark, really gave Institution to their Golden Fleece: However it
were, this Wise Prince, representing to the ^lemings their miserable Posture
(at that time obnoxious to the French, as of late they have likewise been) and,
Inhibiting the Importation of Foreign Cloths; the Serene and quiet Condition
of this happy Island, invited them over to settle here, erect their
Manufactures amongst us, and join their Art to our Nature.

34. We pass by the Exploits, and glorious Atchievments performed by our Kings
against the Saracens in the Holy-War, which charged the Sheilds of the ancient
Nobless, and, of which, all Asia resounded: Here, our Edwards, Henry's, 1358.
and Richards did memorable things; in particular, Richard the Second took of
the French, almost an hundred Ships at once, of which some were Vessels of
great burden, richly Fraite: And an Earl of Arundel (bearing this Princes
Name) beat, took, and destroyed 226 Ships deep laden with 1^000 Tuns of Wine,
coming from La Rochelle, after an obstinate Encounter, and many brave
Exploits: T^ these we might add, the Gallant Preparations of Henry the Fifth,
and of several more, had we a design, or any need to accumulate Instances of
our Puissance, and Successes at Sea, so thick sown in Foreign, as well as
Domestic Histories: But, he that would be Instructed for a more ample
Discourse, may take notice of the League made between Charles the Great, and
our Mercian Offa (now more than 700 years since) as he may find it in an
Epistle of Albinus, or the Learned Alcuin ('it is all one) and Consult our
Countrymen Walsingham, Malmesbury, and other Writers; where he will see in
what high repute this Nation has been, both for its numerous Shipping, and the
flourishing Commerce it maintained in most known-Parts of the World; and, which
we may farther confirm, by the several Authentic Statutes, and Immunities yet
extant, not omitting the Policy of Keeping the Sea, facetiously, yet solidly,
set forth in the good Old Prologue, entitled, The Process of the Libel,
written more than 200 years past, not unworthy our deepest reflections: And
verily, it were a madness in us to neglect the Care of those Causes, from
whence (as by a Series of them will yet appear) the Effects of all our Temporal
Blessings spring, and, by Virtue whereof, they can only be maintained.

35. Henry the Seventh, and his Magnificent Successor, were both of them
powerful at Sea; though the too weak-Faith of the former, deprived him of the
most glorious Accession, that was ever offered to Mortal-man: This, he
endeavored to have repaired, by the famous Cabot, whom he afterward employed
to seek Adventures; and, though the Success were not equal, it was yet highly
laudable, and (as we have showed) not altogether without Fruit.

36. Henry the Eight his Son, bad diverse Conflicts with the French, Lord
Cherbery Hist. Hen. 8. See also that rare piece of Hans Holbein 's in his
Majesty's Gallery at White Hall.
Triumphing sometimes in Sails of Cloth-of-Gold, and Cordage of Silk: But, that
which indeed repaired the Remisness of the One, and Profusion of the Other, and
gave a Demonstration of how absolute concern, Traffic, and Strength at Sea are
to this Island, was the Care which Queen ELIZABETH took, when by her Address
alone, she not only secured her Kingdoms from the formidable Power of Spain;
but, Reaped the Harvest too, of that Opulent Monarch, and brought his Indies
into her own Exchequer; whilst that Mighty Prince, had only the trouble to
Conquer the New-World, and prepare the Treasure for her: And this she did, by
her Influence on Navigation, and by the Courage and Conduct of those renowned
Hero's, who made her Reign so famous.

37. This glorious Princess had 130 Sail of fair Ships, when she sent over for
the Island Voyages, of which 60 were stout men of War; and with these (besides
many other Exploits) she defended HOLLAND, defied Parma, and awed the whole
Power of Spain: With an handful of these (comparatively) she defeated the
Invincible Armada in LXXXVIII, 1588.
Encountered, and took Gallions, and other Vessels of prodigious strength and
bulk; and, what havoc was made at Cales, by yet a smaller number, her Enemies
to this day feel: Ann^l. l. 5.
: Grotius, speaking of this Action, tells us, that the Wealth gotten there by
the Earl of Essex, was never any where paralleled with the like Naval Success;
and, that if these beginnings had been pursued (as with ease they might, had
the brave Man's Counsel been followed) it had proved one of the most glorious
Enterprises that History has recorded: However, besides the immense Spoil, and
Treasure they took, and the Marks they left of their Fortitude (to the loss of
120^ Great-Guns of the Enemies, irreparable in those days) the Spaniard was
not so redoubted Abroad, as they le^t him miserably weakn'd at Home: To these,
we may number the Trophies won by particular Adventurers: Sir Francis Drake,
having with four Ships only, taken from the Spaniard a Million, and 189200
Ducats in one Expedition, Anno 1587, in a single bottom 25000 Pezos of the most
refined Gold; and after, with a Squadron of Five and twenty Sail, terrifying
the whole Ocean, he sacked St. Iago, Domingo, and Cartagena (as before
mentioned) and, carried away with him, besides other incredible Booty, 240
Pieces of Artillery, which was a prodigious Spoil in those early days, and,
when those Instruments of Destruction were not in such plenty as now they are.
What shall we say of John Oxenham, one of the Argo-nauts with Drake? who, in a
slender Bark, near Nombre de Dios (having drawn-up his Vessel to Land, and
covered it with a few boughs) marched with his small Crew over unknown paths,
till arrived at a certain River, and there building a Pinnac^, with the Timber
which they felled upon the Spot, he boldly launches into the South Sea, and, at
the Island of Pearls, took from the Spaniard 60000 l. weight of Massie-Gold,
and 200000 in Silver! though lost in his Return with it, by the perfidy of his
Associates; such an Exploit is hardly to be paralleled in any story. Sir
Richard Grinvill, in another Voyage to Cadiz, with but 180 Soldiers (of which
90 were sick and useless) in the Ship Revenge, maintained a Conflict for 24
hours, against 50 Spanish Gallions, and slew above 7000 Men, sinking four of
their best Vessels: Than this, what have we more --! What, can be greater! In
sum, so universal was the Reputation of our Countrymen in those days, for
their strenuous Exploits at Sea; That even Those who took all Occasions to
depress, and extenuate them, are forced here to Acknowledge, and that from the
Pen of an Author whose Word goes far, Graiorum, Romanorumque gloriae, qui res
olim sua^ Navales per acies asseruerunt, non dabie tunc Anglorum and fortun^,
and Virtus respondit. Grot. Hist. l. 1.
That the Greeks and Romans, who of Old, made good all their mighty Actions by
Naval Victories, were at this time, equaled by the Fortitude and Gourage of the
English.

38. 'Twas in Her days, they discovered far into the North-East, and
North-West, Gathaian, and China Passages, by the indefatigable diligence of
Willoughby, Buroughs, Chanceler, Button, Buffin, Furbisher, James, Middleton,
Gilbert, Cumberland, and others, worthy to be consigned to Fame: In her
Brothers the Sixth Edwards Reign, the formerly mentioned Chabot, had six times
attempted the North-West Tracts to the Indies; and, long before these, a bold
Prince of Ours, essayed to pass the Moluccos by the same Course; entered the
streights of Anian, and is, by some, entitled to the first Discovery of the
Canaries. The Summer-Islands, and the goodly Continent of Virginia, were first
detected, and then Planted by the English; among whom we may not pass by the
Industry of Captain Jones, Smith, and other late Adventurers, whose great
Exploits (as Romantic as they appear) were the steady effects of their Courage
and good Fortune: We have said yet nothing of Pool, who began the
Whale-fishing, nor of Captain Bennet, who discovered Cherry-Island: Pet, and
Iack-man that passed the Vaigates, Scythian lces, and the River Ob, as far as
Nova Zembla: Of John Davis, who had penetrated to 86 degrees of Latitude, and
almost set his foot upon the Northern-Pole: Here let us also remember Captain
Gillan, to the lasting honor of his Highness, Prince Rupert, and the rest of
those Illustrious Adventurers; nor forget to celebrate the Heroic Inclination
of his Sacred MAJESTY, our Great CHARLES, under whose Auspices, Sir John
Norborough has lately Passed, and Re-pass'd the Magellan Straight; by which
that Modest, and Industrious Man, has not only performed what was never done
before; but has also made way for a Prospect of immense Improvement. Finally,

39. It was Queen Elizabeth who began, and established the Trade of Muscovy,
Turkey, Barbary, and even that of the East Indies too, however of late
Interrupted by ungrateful Neighbors: Nor less was she vigilant at Land, than
at Sea; Mustering at once no fewer than One hundred and twenty Thousand
fighting-Men of her own Vassals, not by uncertain Computation; but, effectually
sit for War: And indeed, but for the extraordinary Virtue of this brave Virago,
not England alone, but even France and Holland had truckl'd under the weight of
Spain, whose Ambition was then upon its highest Pinnacle: In one word,
Navigation and Commerce were in her days in so prosperous a Condition, that
they seem to have ever since subsisted but upon the Reputation of it; and the
success of our Countrymen in their Attempts at Sea was so far Superior to
other Nations, as by the suffrage of the most Learned Strangers (and to show it
was universal) they could not but acknowledge, Omnibus hodie Gentibus Navigandi
industria, Keckerman.
and peritia, Superiores esse Anglos, and post Anglos, Hollandos; for we do not
fear to give even our greatest Enemies their Dues, when they deserve it.

40. We now arive to King JAMES, and CHARLES the First (Princes of immortal
Memory) And for the former; there was in his time built (besides many others)
those two gallant Ships, The Trades-Increase, and the Prince; The one for
encouragement of Commerce, and the other a Man of War; And, though upon
different Accounts, and at different times, they both unhappily miscarried;
yet, they served to testify, that neither Defense, nor Trade were neglected;
since, as to that of the first, Sir Walter Raleigh doubts not to affirm; That
the Shipping of this Nation, with a Squadron of the Navy-Royal, was in this
Princes time, able, in despite of Europe, to Command the Ocean, much more, to
bring the Nether-Lands to due Obedience: But, says he, as I shall never think
him a lover of his Country, or Prince, who shall persuade His Majesty from
Cultivating their Amity; so would I counsel Them to remember, and consider it:
That seeing their Inter-course lies so much through the British-Seas, that
there is no part of France, from Calais to Flushing, capable of succouring
them; that, frequently, Out-wards by Western-Winds, and ordinarily, Homewards,
both from the Indies, Straites, and Spain, all Southerly-Winds (the Breezes of
our Climat) thrust them of necessity into His Majesty's Harbors; how much his
Majesty's favor does import them: For, if (as themselves confess) they subsist
by Commerce only; the disturbance of That (and, which England alone can
disturb) will also disturb their Subsistence: I omit the rest: Because I can
never doubt either their Gratitude, or their Prudence. But, this brave Man was
it seems, no Prophet, to fore see how soon they would forget themselves: They
began in his days to be hardly warm in comparison, and indeed it is not (as
observes the same Person) much beyond a Century, that either the French,
Spanish, or Hollander, had any proper Fleets belonging to them as Kingdoms, or
States; the Venetians, Ienoezes and Portugals, being then (as we have noted)
the only Competitors both for Strength, and Traffic; the Dutch litt^e
Considerable; since within these fifty years, the Spanish and Portugals
employed many more Ships at Sea than the Hollander (their Fishing-Buffes
excepted) who, 'til furnished with our Artillery, were very Contemptible, as
might be made out by undeniable Evidence: Insomuch that the formerly mentioned
Raleigh affirms, One Lusty Ship of his Majesty's, would have made forty
Hollanders Strike Sail, and come to an Anchor: They did not then (says he)
dispute de Mari Libero. But will you know in a word from him, what it was that
has exalted them to this monstrous Pitch? It was, the employing their own
People in the Fishery upon our Coasts; by which they infinitely Enriched
themselves; 2. Their Entertaining of Auxilliaries in their difficult
Land-Services; by which they preserved their own Vassals: 3. The Fidelity of
the House of Nassaw; from which they had a wise, and experienced General: 4.
The frequent Excursions of the Duke of Parma into France, hindering the
Prosecution of his growing Successes: 5. The Imbargo of their Ships in Spain,
and interdicting them Free-Trade with that Nation, which first set them upon
their Indian Adventures: 6. And, above All, the Kindness of Queen Elizabeth:
But, the Case is (it seems) much altered since that worthy Knight made his
Observations and took his Leave of the Prince of Orange at Antwerp; When (after
Leicesters return) he prayed him to say to her Majesty, Sub Umbra Alarm tuarum
Protegimur; for that they had withered in the End, without her Assistance.

41. We have yet but only mentioned the Inherent Right of the Crown of England
to the Dominion of the Seas; because the Legality and the Reason of it have
been Asserted by so many able and famous Pens, from which we learn, that it
does of Justice appertain to the Kings of Great Britain, Selde^^s,
not only as far as Protection extends (though there were no other Argument to
favor us) but, of sacred, and immemorial Royalty: But, it is Pretended by those
great Names, Grotius. Mari^^^us. Cl^irac. ^s. Pontanus. ^alal^^s, etc.
who have of late disputed this Subject, and endeavored to Depose our Princes
of this Empire Iure Naturae and Gentium: That the Sea is Fluxile Elementum, and
quod nunquam idem, possiderinon posse; That it is always in Succession, and,
that one can never Anchor on the same Billow; That Water is as Free as the Air;
and that the Sea terminates Empires which have no Bounds; and therefore, that
no Empire can terminate that which acknowledges none; and, though all this were
nothing; That his Majesty's Father, had tamely lost it to the late Usurpers,
which is an insolent scoff of Marisotus's, orbis Marit*
triumphing ore a setter'd Lion; Whilst for all this, to patch up a wr^^ched
Pretense, he descends to take hold of a certain Obsolete, and Foeudatarie
Complement, sometime since passing between the two Kings; as if a Ceremonious
Acknowledgment for a Province or two in France (which is an usual deference
among Princes upon certain Tenures) gave sufficient Title, and Investiture to
All that the Kings of England possess in the World besides. But in this sort do
the Partisans of aspiring Monarchs manage their egregious Flatteries, Whilst to
silence all the World, we can show it Prescription so far beyond the present
Race of Kings, that even the Name of their PHARAMOND was not known, Mela.
when our EMPIRE on the SEA set Limits to the Coasts of Gauls, and said,
Hitherto shall ye Come -- Nor, to that alone, but even as far as Spain it self:
For, what pretense could those Princes have to this Dominion, whose very
Monarchy is but of Yesterday, in respect to the goodly extent, which now they
call France? and especially when the only Maritime Provinces were shread into
so many Fragments and Cantons, under their petty Princes; for so were Narbon,
Bretayne, Aquitaine and even Normandy it self (portions belonging then to our
Kings) nor had they 'till of later days, so much as the Office of Admiral
belonging to the Sea, that is, till their Expedition into the Holy Land, when
yet they were fain to make use of the Genoezes to transport them as we have it
confessed Io. Tillius de ^eb. Gal. L. 2.
by their own Authors. As to their other Arguments, we need not spend much
breath to ^ilute those pitiful Cavels of the Instability, and Fluctuation of
the Waves etc. which could not be there, without a Channel and a Bottom to
contain them, as if we contended for the Drops of the Sea, and not for its
situation, and the Bed of those Waters; and since Rivers and Streams have the
same Reason on their side to exempt them from being in Common, and at every
man's disposure.

And these things I have only touched, to repress the pruriency of some late
Flatterers, who not only injure a Truth as resplendent as the Sun; but the
Justice of a great Prince, whom by these false Colors, they would provoke to
unrighteous disputes; whilst we pretend to nothing but what carries with it,
the strongest Eviction, a thing of this nature is capable of.

42. Needless it would be to amuse the Reader with recounting to him at large,
how in the ancient Division of things, the Sea, having here assigned over with
the Land, there sprung up from the same Original, a Private Dominion; but
undoubtedly, when God gave to Man the Soveraignt^ of the Ocean, by intitl'ing
him to the Fish, which were produced in the bowels of it (that is, to the Thing
it self, by its Use, and Enjoyment) by the same Grant, he passed over to him,
and consigned to his disposure, the distribution of it, and introduction of a
separate, and peculiar Jurisdiction: There is nothing more perspicuous in our
Case, and as to his Majesty's Claim (the Reasons for it rightly considered)
from so many Royal Predecessors, and so long a tract of years, who for
security of Navigation, and Commerce between their Neighbors and Allies, were
at such vast expenses, to Equip, and set forth Great Ships, and Navies; and
that, upon the entreaty, and solicitation of those, who recurr'd to their
protection; and might themselves justify the prescribing Rules and Boundaries
to such as should pass the Seas, and receive such Recognitions, and Emoluments,
as were peculiar, and within their Circle, both for their Honor, and
Maintenance.

The deduction shall be very short, considering how vast an Ocean of matter
lies before us; but it shall be full.

43. Caesar, (...)
ere he had invaded Britain, summoning the Gallic Merchants to inform him of
the shores, and situation of our Ports, could it seems learn nothing from them;
for, says he, not a man of them frequented that Rivage without license; and
when Claudius had subdued the more Southern parts of the Nation, the British
Sea, following the fate of the whole Island, came with the same privileges to
be annexed to the Empire, and did never loose them, through all the Revolutions
which happened; but that as soon as the prevalent power came to be settled,
they immediately asserted their Dominion on the Sea. That of very wide extent
this Nation had peculiars of its own, the Consternation of the Calidonians
evince; when in the time of Domitian, Agricola Tacit. in Vit. Agric.
sailing round the Island, they were in such perplexity to see him in their
Chambers, for so they called those Northern Streams. But not longer to insist
on these early beg^nnings, and what the Romans did; when the frame of that
Empire was changed, about the time of the Great Constantine, N^titia Imp. Occid.
the Comites of the Saxon shore (substitutes to him who commanded the West) had
their Jurisdiction over all the Sea, from the Borders of that Shore, and West
part of Denmark, to the Western Gallia, all along the other side.

44. There are who put some stress here, upon ancient Inscriptions, especially
that mentioned by Greuter, of a Proefect of a British Fleet; and on the
Ornaments, and Ensigns of Dominion, found in several Medals, and Antiquities to
be met withal in the Collections of learned men; vindicating the peculiar we
contend for, and continued from Edward the Third in several fair stamps, nor
are they to be rejected: It suffices us, that whatever the Government were,
still the dominion of the Sea returned with that of the land to the Nation;
Z^zimus l. 6. An. 43^. See Claud. in La^d. Stil^. l. 2.
as when the Britains rejected the Roman Yoke, which how extended, when it came
under the power of the English Saxon Kings, and Danes, is known to all the
World, as well as with what mighty Navies, Edgar, Canutus and others, asserted,
and protected it, under no lower Style, than that of King, Supreme Lord and
Governor of the Ocean, Lying round about Britain; for so runs the settlement
of certain Revenues, given by King Edgar, to the Cathedral of Worcester, says
Mr. Seldom.

45. Since the Norman Conquest, the Government of the several Provinces, or
Sheriffs, exercised Jurisdiction on the Sea, as far as their Countys extended.
Henry the Third constituted Captain Guardians; and our First Edward distributed
this Guard to three Admirals; so did the second of that name; and the form of
our ancient Commissions to the several Admiralties, mention the dominion of our
Kings upon the Sea; nor did any other Nation whatsoever Contest it, as having
little, or nothing on the opposite Shoars; whilst it is evident, the English
Monarchs possessed their Right in its entire Latitude, for more than a thousand
Years, under one entire Empire, and an un-interrupted enjoyment of the Sea, as
an appendant.

46. To this we might add the Pass-Ports sued for by Foreigners from the Reign
of Henry the Fourth, and so down to Queen Elizabeth, who during her War with
Spain sometimes gave leave to the Swedes, Dances, and Ansiatic Towns, and
sometimes prohibited them, Petitioning for Passes, to sail through her Seas;
nay, more, she caused to be taken, and brought into her Harbors, Laden-ships
of those Nations transgressing her Orders; as far as the Streights of Lisbon,
which she could never have justified, had she not been acknowledged Sovereign
of the Seas, through which they were to pass: And though her Successor King
James, appointed certain limits on the English Coast, by imaginary lines drawn
from point to point, round the Island, in which he sometimes extended them far
into the Sea; I was not to Circumscribe a Jurisdiction (a thing which he most
industriously cautioned his Ministers never to yield, R^t. pat. 2. Iac. part 32.
so much as in discourse) beyond which he did not pretend; but in relation only
to Acts of Hostility, between the two great Antagonists, the Spaniard and the
Hollander, declaring himself both Lord, and Moderator of the British Seas from
his Royal Predecessors.

47. In several Commissions given to Sea Commanders, by Edward the Third, Rot.
Scot. 10. Ed. Membran. 16.
the words are, Our Progenitors, the Kings of England, have before these times,
been Lords of the British Seas on every side; and in a certain Bill, preferred
in Parliament to the same Prince, Rot. pat. 46. Ed. 3. N. 2.
it is said, That the English were ever in the Ages past so renowned for Navies,
and Sea-Affairs; that the Countries about them, usually esteemed, and called
them Sovereigns of the Sea; And from the same Parliamentory testimony in the
Reign of Henry the Fifth we learn, that the Estates in that august Assembly,
did with one Consent affirm it as a thing unquestionable, Rot. pat. 8. Hen. 5.
Mem. 3. A^t. 6.
That the Kings of England were Lords of the Sea, and that That Sea was all
which flowed between the stream on both sides, and made no doubt, but a Tribute
might be imposed, by Authority of Parliament upon all Strangers passing through
them, as we shall find Richard the Second to have done long before.

48. In the Reign of Edward the Second, Rot. pat. 14. Ed. 2. p. 2. M. 26. in
dorso.
Robert Earl of ^landers, complaining of Injuries done his Subjects at Sea,
alleges, that the King of England is bound in Right to do him Justice, for
that he was Lord of the Sea: But there cannot in the World be a more pregnant
Instance for the vindication of this dominion, and the silencing all
Objections, than the famous complaint against the Genoeze Grimbaldi, who during
the War between the French and those of Flanders, infesting the Seas, and
disturbing Comme^ce, occasioned all the Nations of Europe, bordering on the
Sea, to have recourse, and appeal to the Kings of England; whom from time to
time, and by Right immemorial, they acknowledged to be in peaceable possession
of the Sovereign Lordship and dominion of the Seas of England, and Islands of
the same; This Libel, or Complaint was exhibited in the time of Edward the
First, almost three hundred years since, and is still extant in the Archives of
the Tower.

49. And thus we have seen how the Sea is not only a distinct province, Capable
of Propriety, Limits, and other just Circumstances of Peculiar Dominion, as a
Bound, not Bounding his Majesty's Empire, but as bounded by it in another
respect; and that this was never violated so much as by Syllogism, 'till some
Mercenary pens were set on work against Spain, through whose tender sides, at
that time, and with great artifice, 1509. Treaty with Spain, concerning Trade
to the Indies.
the Barnevelt faction endeavored to transfix us; Soon it was perceived, and
as soon encountered; in the mean time, that one would smile to find their
mighty Champion then fairly accknowledg upon another Occasion, and when it
seems he resolved to speak out. Angliae Regina Oceani Imperium -- That the
Queen of England, Grot. Annal. l. 2. 1570.
was Dominatrix of the Sea -- So great is the Truth, and will prevail: In a
word, if the premier Occupant. be a legal and just plea to the Right of other
possessions, the Kings and Queens of England, descending from, or succeeding to
them who first asserted the Title, are still invested with it; sure we are,
this Argument was held good, and illustrated by the First, and best foundation
of Empire, when the State of Venice (claiming the Adriatic by no other) held
that famous Controversy with Ferdinand of Friuli by their Advocate Rapicio and
Chizzola, Commissioners being mutually chosen to determine it; and how far
Antiquity is on our side, The Greeks, Romans, Tyrians, Phoenicians, and othe^s
have abundantly declared, and with what caution they interdicted Strangers here
with us, till the Claudian Expedition annexed it, with the dominion of all
Britain, to that Glorious Empire* which to protect against the Piratical Saxons
(then not seldom infesting our Coasts) the Comites Maritimi Tractus were by the
Prefect established, as we have already showed: And so it continued for near
five hundred years after, when the Saxons taking greater advantage of the Roman
remissness (distracted as they grew by intestine troubles) made their descents
upon us, and with the fortune of Conquest, carried that likewise of the Sea.

50. We have but mentioned King Edgar, whose survey is so famous in Story, when
with more than four thousand Vessels, he destined a Quaternion to every Sea,
which annually circl'd this Isle, and as a Monument of their submission, was
sometime Rowed in his royal Gally by the hands of Eight Kings. This Signal
Action becoming the Reverse of a Medail, was by a like device illustrated in
the Rose-Noble, in which we have represented the figure of a King invested with
his Regalia, standing in the middle of a Ship, as in his proper, and most
resplendent Throne; for the Same reason likewise (as some interpret) did Henry
the Eight, add the Portcluse to his current Money, as a Character of his
peculiar Title to this Dition, exclusive to all others.

51. We have spoken of the Danes, and Normans, and their successive claim, and
of the Custodes Maritimi, more ancient than that of Admiral, as now
constituted, which indeed began with the Edwards, when the French, at war with
Flanders, but pretending to usurp that dignity, were fain to abolish their new
office, and acknowledging they had no Right, pay the damages of the
depredations they made, as appears by that famous Record in the Tower,
mentioned by Sir John Buroughs in which the Title of our Kings is asserted
from immemorial prescription; nay, when at this time, he had not all the
opposite Shore to friend.

52. The Constitution of our Cinque Ports give another noble Testimony to this
Claim, and the addition of two more Admirals by our Third Edward, guarding as
many Seas, as there were Superior Officers of this denomination, not omitting
the Title of Lords of both Shoars, anciently used from hence to Henry the
Fifth; nay, when Edward renounced his Claim to Normandy 1166.
(as at the Treaty of Charters) the French themselves acknowledged this Right,
and therefore neither here, nor at the Court of Delegates in France, did they
claim any pretense to the Islands, or Inter^luent Seas. But what need we a more
pregnant Instance, than that Universal deference to the Laws of OLERON (an
Island of Aquitania then belonging to this Crown) published after the Rhodan
had been long Antiquated, which obtained over all the Christian World. And to
this we might add the Dane-Gelt (in plain English, a Ship-mony Tax) imposed as
well on Strangers as Denisons that practiced Commerce upon our Coasts and Sea;
East and North, where the great Intercursus was; nor expired it here, but
continued Customary, as appears by innumerable Records, for enabling the King
to protect the Seas, and to Obstruct, or Open them as he saw convenient, with
Title to all Royal Fishes, Wracks, and Goods found floating in Alto-mari, as we
can prove by several Commissions, and Instruments, and confirm by precedents,
not of our Municipal constitutions alone, but, such as have been binding, and
accepted for such, of the Nations about us; Witness that famous Accord made
between our Edward the First, and the French King Phillip and Fair, calling him
to account for the piracies we have mentioned. And

To this we might produce the spontaneous submission of the Flemings in open
Parliament, in Edward the Seconds Reign, and the Honor, or rather Duty of the
Flag, which King John with his 1200
Peers, had many Ages since, M. S. C^ mmen. de Reb^s. Admir. ^ol. 28.
challenged, upon the Custom ordained at Hastings, decreed to take place
universally, not barely as a Civiliy, but as a Right of importance for the
mak^ng out, and confirmation of our Title to the Dominion we have been
vindica^ing; And that this has been claimed and paid Cum debita Rever^ntia (to
use the express words of those old Commissions, which had been long since given
by William and Maurice Princes of Orange) to all the Sea Commanders in those
days; we have for almost this whole later Century, seen the matter of fact
testified not only by continual Claims, Orders, commissions and Instructions;
but by searching diverse a^thentick Journals, which have noted the particulars
in a thousand Instances: Nor has this been paid to whole Fleets only, bearing
the Royal Pavillion; but to single Vessels, and those of the smaller Crast (as
they are styled) wearing his M^jesties Cognizance, to whom this homage has been
done, even by the greatest Navies, meeting them in any of the British Seas in
their (...) most La^tudes. Nor has this been so much has questioned, ti^l that
arch Rebel for end^ of his own, (...)
would once have betrayed it; and that the late D^magegue (...) the Dutch^ and
what all the World has paid us, which puts it ou^ of dispu^e: In the mean time
it was necessary, and no way improper to the Scope of this Treatise, that after
what has been so newly pretended, to the prejudice of the Title we have
asserted; some thing should be said to abate the Confidence of impertinent Men,
and to let ^he World know, that our Princes (to whom God, and Nature has
imparted such prerogatives) will not be ba^^^'d out of them, by the sentences,
and ^ophisms of Lawyers, much less b^ S^^ophan's, and such as carry not the
least shadow of reason: But it would fill many Volumes to exemp^^fie the Forms
of our ancient Commissions from time to time, Investing our Admirals, with the
Exercise of this Sovera^gn Power; as well as that of safe Conducts, Writts of
Seizure, and Arrests; the Copies of Grants, and Permission to Fish (of which in
the next period) obtained of our Kings, by P^tition etc. to be found at large
in our Books, Parliament Rolls, and other Authentic Pieces too long for this
Tract: But, if any will be contentio^s, because they are some of them of
ancient Date, we have, and shall yet show Instances sufficient, and Ex
abundanti for this last age, to which our ^^ntagonists have from time to time
submitted, not only in the wide, and ample Sea, or at our own Coasts, but in
the very Ports, and Harbors of Strangers, where they looked for Protection;
that all the World may bl^sh at the weak and unreasonable Contentions, which
would invalidate this Claim, if at least there be in the World any such thing
as Right, Pres^ription, Deference, or other Evidence, which amongst so^er men,
is agreed to be LAW, for the Clearing of a Title. To Sum up all then, If Right
of Pres^ription, succession of Inheritance, Continual Claim, Matter of Fact,
Consent of History, and confessions even from the mouths, and pens of
Adversaries, be of any moment to the gaining of a Cause; We may bespeak our
Nation, as he did King James upon another Occasion, and as justly transfer it
to his glorious Gro^. Sy^va. l. 2.
Successor -- Qu^is dat jura Mari etc.

And with this I should conclude, did not the Fishery, which is another
irrefragable Proof of his Majesty's Dominion, require a little Survey, before
we shut up this discourse.

54. How far this Royal Jurisdiction has extended, may best be gathered out of
the Reverend Camden, Speaking of King James the Sixth of Scotland, Fliz. and
^ritan.
and of Queen Elizabeth of England; who first discovering the While-Fishing,
had consequently, Title to those Seas, as far as Green-land Northward; and what
it was to the South, the Proclamation of our Third Edward (yet extant)
abundantly makes appear: This, consumed by the Fourth of that Name, Guards, and
Convoys, were appointed to preserve the Rights inviolable; as was likewise
continued by the Three* succeeding Henrys, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, and their
descendents, who imposed a certain Tribute upon all Forreiners, in Recognition
of their Indulgence to them. Witness the French, 1489.
the Dukes of Britain, of Burgundy (espec^ally Philip) and those of F^anders,
who never presumed to cast a Net without Permission, and a formal Instrument
first obtained, the Originals whereof, are yet to be seen, and may be collected
out of both the French, and Burgundian stories; and, as it does indeed to this
day appear by his Majesty's neighbourly Civility, granted to the French King
for the Provision of his own Table, and to the Town of Bruges in Handers, (...)
by a late Concession; the number and size of Boats, and other Circumstances
being limited, upon transgression whereof, the offenders have been Imprisoned,
and otherwise mulcted.

55. And, as the French, so the Spaniard did always sue to our Princes for the
like privilege and kindness: King Phillip the Second (as nearly related as he
was to Queen Mary (...)
his Wife) finding a Prov^so in an Act of Parliament, that no Forreiner should
fish in those Seas without permission, paid into the Exchequer no less than an
annual rent of one thousand pounds, for leave to fish upon the North of Ireland
for the supply of his dominions in Flanders: Now for the Dutch.

56. That famous Record Pro Hominibus Hollandiae (so the Title runs) points to
us as far as our First Edward, 1295.
not only how obsequious then they were in Acknowledging the Kings Dominion on
the Sea, but his Protection, and permission to Fish on the environs of it; R^t.
pat. 23. Ed. ^. Memb. 5.
And his Successor Edward the Third, as he gave leave to the Counts of Holland
(who always petitioned for it) so he prescribed Laws, and Orders concerning the
Burden of the Vessels to be employed about it: The like did Henry the Sixth to
the French, (...)
and others; with the Season, Place, and Method to be observed, which are all
of main importance in the Cause: And this was so religiously inspected in
former times, that Edward the Fourth, constituted a Triumvirat power to guard
both the Seas, and the Fishery against all Pretenders whatsoever, as had
Richard the Second long before him, who imposed a Tribute on every individual
Ship that passed through the (...) Admiralty, for the maintenance of that
Sea-Guard, amounting to six pence a Tun, upon every Fishing Vessel weekly, as
appears by a most authentic Record, and the Op^nion of the most eminent
Judges, at that early day: who upon consideration, that none but a Soverein
power could impose such a pa^ment, gave it in as their opinion, that this Right
and Dominion, was a (...) of the royal Patrimony, and inseparable: Nay, that
wise Prince Henry the Seventh, thought it so infinitely considerable, that
(upon deeply weighing the great Advantages) he was setting up a Trade, or
S^ap^^ of ^^sh, in preference (say some) to that of Wool itself, and all other
Commerce of his Domi^^ons; which being long before (...) Low Countries had a
Name for M^rchau^^, they had still perhaps, (...), if some Renegado's of our
own ( (...) and Stephens by Name) had not enc^^^^g'd the Dutch of Enchusen
(with other Malcontented Persons of the Craft, deserting their Country, and
their (...) to molest his Majesty's S^re^^s, (...) the account of these M^n;
since w^^^h, They, and Others, have con^i^^^^ their Presumptions even to
Insolence:

57. Neither was less the Care of King James, 1606.
to vindicate this incomparable prerogative, than any of his vigilant
Predecessors, 1458.
who, having derived that accession of the Shetland Islands by marriage with a
Daughter of Denmark, 1609.
published his Proclamations immediately after his coming into England: For it
must be acknowledged, that Queen Elizabeth did not so nicely and warily look
after this jealous Article, as had been wished; diverted by her extraordinary
Pity, and abundant Indulgence to the distressed States. But, this Prince
roundly asserts his Patrimony, See Copy of a Letter in Sir ^ob. Cotton's
Library, and the Credentials given to Sir Hen. Wotton.
upon many prudent Reasons of state, and especially, for encouragement of the
Maritime Towns, fallen much to decay, and plainly succumbing under the
injurious dealing of such as took the Fish from before their doors; and renewed
his Commands, that none should for the future, presume so much as to hover
about, much less abide on our Coasts, without Permission first obtained under
the Great Seal of England and upon which the Hollanders petitioned for Leave,
and Acknowledged the Limits appointed them, as formerly they had done: Let us
hear the Historian ^escribe it and blush.

The Hollanders (says he) taking infinite plenty of Herring Camden in Br^
upon this Coast, and thereby making a most gainful Trade, were first to
procure leave (by ancient Custom) out of Scarborow-Castle; for the English
permit them to Fish; reserving indeed the Honor to themselves, but, Resigning
the Benefit to Strangers, to their incredible enriching etc. What could be said
more to our purpose, or to our Reproach? This was that which King James
endeavored to bring into a better method, when taking notice of the daily
incroachment of our Neighbors, he enjoined his Ambassador (who was then Sir
Dudley Carleton) to Expostulate it with the States, 1618.
as may be seen in that sharp Letter of Mr. Secretaries: Dated the twenty first
of December 1618, in which he tells them, That unless they sought leave from
his Majesty, and acknowledge his Right, as other Princes had done, and did; it
might well come to pass, that they who would needs bear all the World before
them by their Mare Liberum, might soon endanger their having neither Terram,
Nec Solum, Nec Rempublicam Liberam: I do only recite the Passage as I find it
published, and take notice how Prophetic it had lately like to have been.

58. This happy Prince taking umbrage at the War between the Hollander and the
Spaniard, did ^ix Limits by Commission, and Survey, nearer than which (though
as Moderator, he offered equal Protection to both) no Enemy to another State,
might commit any hostile Act, Seld^n^^s l. 2. ^. 22.
and producing his Reasons for it, asserted his Right so to do; not as if those
Boundaries circumscribed his dominions, but, as being sufficient for the
vindication of his due in that great Article. And their not observing this,
incited King Charles the First of Blessed memory, to Animadvert upon it, when
in the year 1639, 1639.
our good friends behaved themselves with so little respect, in that memorable
Conflict with the Spaniard; and when approaching too near our Shoars, they were
checked for their Irreverence in his Majesty's Imperial Chambers; Indeed, for
the First (but seeming) A^^ront, that this Nation did ever receive upon it.

59. And now it will not be amiss, nor inconsistent with our Title, to let the
World see, the immence advantages of the Trade which has been driven upon the
sole account of the Fishery; by the prodigious emolument which it has (to our
cost and reproach) afforded our more industrious Neighbors, the foundation of
whose Greatness has been laid in the bottom of our Seas; which has yielded them
more Treasure than the Mines of Potosi, or both Indies to Spain.

Who would believe that this People raise yearly by the Herring, and other
^isheries, a Million of pound Sterling, and that Holland, and Zealand alone
(whose utmost Verge does hardly exceed many English Shires) should from a few
despicable Boats, be able to set forth above Twenty thousand Vessels of all
Sorts, ^it for the rude Seas, and of which more than 7000, are yearly employed
upon this Occasion? It Is evident, that by this particular Trade, they are able
to breed above forty thousand Fishermen, and one hundred and sixteen thousand
Mariners (as the Census has been accurately calculated) and the gain of it is
so universal, that there is hardly a Beggar in their Country, nor an hand, which
does not earn it is bread: This is Literally true, and the Consideration of it
seemed so important, that even in the days of Charles the Fifth, that great
Monarch is reported to have sometimes visited the Tomb of Bueckeld (where he
had been above two hundred years Interred) in solemn recognition of his Merit,
for having, as it is said, been the Inventor of Pickling and Curing Herring: In
a word, so immense is the advantage which this article alone brings the State,
that a very favorable Rent, still in arrear to his Majesty's Exchequer, for
permission to Fish (as should be prescribed, and appointed them) amounts to
more than half a Million of pounds, and a Custom only at home of what they
take, with the Tenth Fish for Waftage, to near five hundred thousand pounds
more; but the quantities which they sell abroad, to a sum almost not to be
reckoned: Then let it be computed, the Hands employed for Spinning of Yarn,
Weaving of Nets, and making other necessaries for the Sa^ting, Curing, Packing,
and Barelling, Building of Vessels, and fitting them out to Sea: It is certain
the Shipping (which is more than all Europe can assemble besides) Seamen,
Commerce, Towns, Harbors, Power, Publick-Wealth, and a^^luence of all other
things, is sprung from this source; and, that in Barter for Fish (without
exportation of Coin) they receive from Spain, Italy, Germany, etc. Oil, Wine,
Fruit, Corn, Honey, Wax, Alum, Salt, Wool, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Sope-Ashes,
Iron, Copper, Steel, Claw-Boards; Timber, Masts, Dollars, Armor, Glass,
Millstones, Plate, Tapestry, Munition, and all things that a Country (which
has no one Material of these of proper Growth) can need to render it
consummately happy. The Indies and farthest Regions of the Earth, participate
of this Industry; and to our shame be it spoken, we blush not to buy our own
Fish of them, and purchase that of Strangers, which God, and Nature has made
our own, enriching others to our destruction, by a detestable sloth; whilst to
encourage us, we have Timber, victuals, Havens, Men, and all that at our doors,
which these people adventure for in remoter Seas, and at excessive charges; And
thus the prize is put into our hands, whilst we have not the hearts to use it;
nor do we produce any reasons, See Mr. L' E^^^^'s late Discourse of the Fishery.
why we are thus unconcerned, that ever I could find, were solid; some
Objections indeed are presented, but they appeared to me so dilute, and
insignificant, that it is not possible to compose ones Indignation at the
hearing of them, and see a Kingdom growing every day thinner of People, and
fuller of Indigence, without some extraordinary emotion: To see with what
numerous, and insulting Fleets, our Neighbors have been often prepared to
dispute our Title to these Advantages, by the benefit and supply of that which
we neglect, and condemn as unpracticable: If this be not enough to raise in us
some worthy Resentments; Let the Confession of the Dutch themselves incite us
to it; who (in a Proclamation, published near fifty years since) have styled
their Fishing Trade, the Golden Mines of their Provinces, 1624.
and stimulated an Industrious and emulous people with all the Topics of
Encouragement: Were this alone well considered, and briefly pursued, there
would need no great Magic to reduce our bold Supplanters to a more Neighbourly
temper: The Subjects of this Nation have no more to do, than apply themselves
to the Fishery, to recover at once their Losses, and as infallibly advance the
prosperity of the Kingdom, as it is evident it has enabled our late Antagonists
to humble Spain, and from little of themselves, to grapple with the most
puissant Monarch of Europe, and bring him to the ground: For my part, I do not
see how we can be able to answer this prodigious sloth of ours any longer; and
especially, since it is evident, it will cost us but a laudable Industry; and
(in regard of our situation, and very many Advantages above them) much less
trouble and charge: Or suppose a Considerable part of our foreign lessneedfull
Expenses were diverted to this Work, what were the dis-advantages? We talk much
of France (and perhaps with reason) but are we so safe from our dear friend,
upon this Composure, as never to apprehend any future unkindness? For my own
part, I wish it with my Soul: But of this I am sure, We may prevent, or
encounter open desiance; but whilst we are thus undermined, we suffer a
continual Hostility; since the Effects of it ruin our Commerce, and by
Consequence the Nation: Nor speak I here of our Neighbors the Hollanders only;
but of those of Hamborough, Lubee, Embden, and other Interloopers, who grow
exceedingly Opulent, whilst we sit still, and perish, whose advantages for
Taking, Curing, Uttering and Employing of hands (were the Expedients mentioned
put in practice, or the ruinous numbers of our Men, daily ^locking to the
American Plantations, and from whence so few return, prudently stated, and Acts
of Naturalization promoted) are so infinitely Superior to theirs: But, so our
cursed Negligence, will yet have it, not for want of all Royal Encouragement,
but a fatality, p^ainly insuperable.

60. We have said little yet of our American Fishery, and the loss we make of a
vast Treasure on the Coasts of Virginia, Green-land, Barmudas, etc. sacrificing
infinite Wealth both at home, and abroad to the Spaniards, French, those of
Portugal, and Biscay. It Is well known that Green-land, was first detected by
the English, about the latter end of Queen ^l^zabeths reign, and afterward the
Royal Standard erected there, in token of Dominion, by the Name of King James's
New-land, his Majesty asserting his just Rights, by many Acts of State, as more
particularly on the Tenth of January 1613, 1613.
when he signified his pleasure by Sir Noel Caroon then in Holland, in
vindication of his Title both to the Island Fishery, and all other emoluments
whatsoever Iure Dominii, as first discoverer, and to prohibit Strangers
interposing, and fishing in his Seas without permission: 1608.
For this effect, 1609.
Commissioners were established at London to grant Licenses, yearly renewable
for such as would fish on the English Coast; at Edenbrough, on the Northern,
and by Proclamation, 1616.
Interdicting all un-licenced Practices; the Duke of Lennox (as Admiral of
Scotland) being ordered to assert the Right of the Assize-Herring, which was
paid.

61. The following years, what interruptions 1617.
happened, upon our Neighbors desires of coming to an adjustment for the
Indu^gences they had found, is universally known, 'till the Year 1635, 1635.
when to prevent some encroachments, and disorders of those who Fished under
his protection, the late King Charles of Blessed Memory issued out his
Proclamations, See Mr Secretary C^^k's letter April 16. 16^5. to his Majesty's
Resident at the (...).
and gave Instructions to his Ministers abroad, signifying that no Strangers
should presume to Fish in the British Seas without out his Majesty's License;
and that those who desired them, might be Protected, he thought fit to equip,
and set forth such a Fleet, as became his Care, and Vigilance for the good and
safety of his People, and the honor of the Nation: This was the Year, and the
Occasion of building several considerable Ships, and amongst others, that
famous Vessel, the Royal Sovereign, which to this day, bears our Triumphant
Edgar for its badge and Cognizance, and to mind the World of his undoubted
Right to the Dominion of the Seas, which he had by this time asserted and
secured beyond danger of dispute, had not a deluded people (as to their own
highest Concern, Glory, and Interest) and the fatality of the Times, disturbed
the project of an Easy Tax as an imaginary invasion of their Liberties, which
that blessed Prince, designed only to protect them; It is fresh in memory what
were the Opinions of Attourny Noy, many learned Civilians, and near a Jury of
grave Judges upon this Conjuncture; and the Instaces of King Ethelred's having
levied it many hundred years before, showed it to be no such innovation; nor
could there be a more pressing Occasion than when all our Neighbors around us
were (as now) in a state of Hostility: but I list not here to interrupt my
Reader upon this Chapter, which has already suffered so many ^ore digladiations
and Contests; only as to matter of Fact, and as concerned the Navigation, and
improvement of Commerce, I touch it briefly, and pass to what followed, which
was the setting out no less than sixty tall Ships, first under the Earl of
Lindsey, 1635.
and afterward Northumberland, 1636.
by the Account of whose accurate Journal, it appears, how readily our
Neighbor Fishermen (though under convoy of ^^eets superior to ours in
number) sued for, and took Licenses to the value of Fifteen hundred Pounds,
Fifteen Shillings and two Pence, as I have perused the particulars: I do only
mention the Licenses, which were also taken, and accepted at Land, and they not
a few, distributed by Sir William Boswell at the Hague it self, upon which his
Majesty's Minister then at Bruxelles, adver^is'd the Infanta, that the
Dunkerkers should take care not to molest such of the Hollande^s (though at
that time in actual hostility with them) as had his Majesty's Permission, and
accordingly, the Cardinal did grant them Passes, which they took without
Scruple; so as we find it was not for nothing, that they came under protection,
but received a real benefit; Nor was this a novel Imposition, but familiar, and
Customary, as appears by the many precedents which we have recited; to which we
may add, that of the Scotch Fishery, under King James the first: 1424. 21. Act.
of the first Parliament, having already spoken of what concerned our own
Princes, especially what Richard the Second imposed, Henry I. V. VI. VII.
Queens Mary, etc. with that of Edward the First Pro Hominibus Hollandiae etc,
which protection is yet extant, and granted frequently by Treaties, as a
privilege only during the subsistence of such Treaties, and no farther, totally
res^inding and abolishing the pretenses grounded by some upon the Intereursus
magnus 1495.
made with the Dukes of Burgundy: So as to sum up all that has been produced
to ^orti^ie our domestic Evidences, we have many Acts of Parliament, we have
the several Successors of our Princes granting Licenses to Strangers; we have
the assiduous instances made by King James, by his Ambassadors, and
Secretaries of State; We have the Acknowledgments actually, and already paid,
and accounted for to the Exchequer, and have seen the occasion of the ^ate
Interruptions of it, and the invalidity of men's pretenses; and if these be not
evidences sufficient to subvert the Sophisms of a few mercenary pens, and
dismount the Con^idence of unreasonable people, it is because there is so
little rigor in our resolutions at home, and so little Justice in the World
abroad: Nor has this been arrogated by the Monarchs of th^s Nation, but a Right
established upon just reason; namely, that they might be enabled to clear the
Seas of Rovers, and Pirates, and protect such as fo^low'd their lawful affairs:
And for this effect, the ^ings of England, did not only take care to defend
their own Subjects, but to Convoy, and secure all Strangers, so^^times (as we
have seen) by Proclamation, sometimes by Fleets, and Men of War, where they
Fished by Agreement, upon Treaty, or leave obtained, yet restraining them to
certain (...)* retaining the dominion of the Neighboring Seas, as in the Reign
of Henry (...) Fourth, where we find an Accord made between him and the French
King, Rot. Fra. Hen. 4. 29.
that the Subjects of either Nation might fish in one part of the Seas, and not
in another; the Possession of all Privileges of this nature ever accompanying
the Royal License, and Strangers having either special Indulgences, or being
under protection of special Officers, appointed in former times for the safe
Guarding of the Fishery, (...). 4.
who were so empowered by Patent, Rich. 3.
and had certain dues appointed for that attendance, Henr. 7.
which they levied upon all Forreiners, with the express Direction (in the
reign of Henry the Seventh) that the Accknowledgment was to be so levied,
notwithstanding any Letter of Safe Conduct, which Stranger Fishermen might
pretend from any King, Prince or Government whatsoever: So as by all the
Arguments of Right, Claim, and p^^scription, the Title is firm; all other
pretenses of Right or possession interrupted, arrogated and precarious, or else
extinguished by Infractio^s of Treaties, never since revived by any subsequent
Act:

62. We ^^^ght here mention the Toll paid the King of Denmark at the Sundt, and
the respect which Strangers show to his Castle at Cronnenburg, according to a
Treaty made between them and the Dutch; 1649.
and to the Swedish King, whom they acknowledge Sovereign of the Baltic, and
Northern Tracts to an immense extent, where he receives Tribute, as well as
those of Denmark, and Poland by impositions at Dantzick and the Pillan, where
they only enjoy for it a cold and hungry passage, whilst with us, we give them
not only Passage, Harbors, and Protection through a dangerous Sea, but an
Emolument accompanying it, which inriches our Neighbors with one of the most
inestimable Treasures, and Advantageous Commerce under heaven: To this we also
might add what has obtained the Suffrages not only of our own Countrymen of the
Long Robe and others, but of almost all the dis-interested Learned persons who
have discussed this Subject; universally agreeing, that as to a pecnliar, and
restrictive Right, Fisheries may, and ought to be Appropriated, and that as
well in the high-Seas (as the Lawyers term them) as in Lakes, and Rivers, and
narrower Consinements, and as the Republic of Genoa does at this day, let to
Farm their Fishery for Thunnies in their neighboring Seas; and the Contract
between Queen Elizabeth, and Denmark about the like liberty upon the Coast of
Norway, and the Prohibitions made, and the licenses given by that Crown at this
present, do abundantly evince; namely that the Dane is, and has of long time,
been in possession upon the Coasts we have mentioned, and of as much as we
asser't to be due to his Majesty in the British Seas

THE TABLE.
A
A Chaians. page 32 Accidents. vide Chance. 21 Action. 14 Actium. 33 Admiral v.
Officers. 38. 70. 84. 95. 99 Adriatic. 35. 93. Adventurers, vide Merchant.
Adventures. v. Expeditions, Exploits, Voyages, Discoveries. 4. 22. 65. 78.
Aegean. 23. 29 Aegineta. 21 Egypt. 39 Aemilius. 32 Equator. 42 Aethiopia. 39.
41. 53 Africa. 9 Aggressor. 30 Albion. 58 Alcibi^des. 29 Aleppo. 39. 41
Alexandretta. 41 Alexandria. 36. 39 Alfred. 67 Almeida. 43 Alphonsus. 3. 42
Alvares. 43 Ambassadors. 116 Ambition. 8 America. 10. 34. 55. 111 Americus
Vesputianus. 56 Anian, v. Streights. 77 Anchor. 19 Antillias. 54 Antiquities, v.
Medails. 93 Antipodes. 7. 34 Antwerp. 46 Anseatick-Towns. 8 Appius Claudius. 31
Aquitain. 84 Arabia, Arabs. 39. 41 Architecture Naval. 4 Argo, Argo-nauts. 25
Armada, v. Fleet. 21. 50. 74 Arms. 28 Arsenal, v. Magazine. 51. 52 Art. 4. 18
Artaxerxes. 29, 30 Arthur, Prince. 67 Asia. 9. 22 Astracan. 40 Astrolabe. 59
Astronomy. 21, 59 Athenian. 29, 30 Atlantic. 42, 59 Atlas, v. Books. 63.
Avarice. 30 Augustus. 35 Azores. 60
B
BAcchus. 23 Badges. 24 Bagdat. 41 Balearians. 32 Balsara. 41 Baltick-Sea. 119
Battles. v. Fights. 21. 32. 44. Bays, v. Harbors, Ports, etc. Bennet, Cap. 77
Beotia. 21 Bethen-Court. 42. 76 Biscayans. 55 Blake. 53 Boats, v. Ships,
Vessels. 19. Books, v. Atlas, History. Bounds, v. Limits. 106. Brasile. 43
Britans. 46. 65, 66, 67 Britain, v. England. 24. British-Sea, v Sea. Broom. 63
Bruges. 101 Brundusium. 45 Bullion, v. Treasure. Burgundy. 69, 70. 116 Busses.
82 Button, Capt. 77
C
CAdmus. 22 Caesar. 65. 86 Cairo. 39 Cales. v. Gades. 17. 27. 59. 74. 76
Calidonian-Sea. 87 Camus Sebastian. 58 Canaries. 77 Candy. v. Creete. 52.
Canon, v. Guns. Canoos. 4 Canute. 48. 88 Cape of Good-Hope. 43 Captains. 54
Caravan. 39. 41 Carricks, v. Ships. 18. Carthagena. 58. 75 Carthage. 11. 17. 31
Carthaginians. 31 Cassiterides. 65 Caspian-Sea. 40 Cathaia. 76 Catharine,
Promontory. 42 Cavendish. 57, 58 Ceilon, v. Zeilon. 17. Chabot Sebastian, John.
57. 72. 77 Cham. 22 Chamber. 87. 106 Chance, v. Accident. 59. Channel. 385
Cha^^^o ^s. 53 Charles the I, II, VI. 14. 16. 78, 79. 106 Charles the Great.
the Fifth. 71 108 Chinezes. 53. 76 Cicilians. 32 Cimbrians. 65 Cinque Ports. 95
Circum-navigation. 57, 58 Claudius. 87. 93 Clothing. 70 Colchos. 25 Colors. v.
Flag. 37, 97. Columbus. 34. 54 Commerce. v. Trade, Merchandise, etc. 4. 5. 8,
9, 10. 11, 12. 14, 15. 26, 27. 38. 47. 51. 54. 62. 64. 69. 78, 79. 86. 111.
Companies. 43 Commissioners. 69 Comites Maritimi, etc. 87. 93. 95 Conon. 29
Conquest. 12. 94 Consalvo de Vaz. 42 Continent. 68 Convoys. v. Guards. 99. 100.
117 Coptos. 39 Corcyreans. 30 Corinth. 30 Covillan, Peter. 42 Creation. 1. 3
Creature. 4 Creet. 24 v. Candy. Cuba. 54 Custom, v. Law-Tax. 64. 97. Cyclades.
33
D
DAne. 8. 48. 67. 88. 119, 120 Dane Gelt, v. Tax. 96. Darius. 29 Davis. 57. 77
Deck. 19 Defense. 68 Deluge, v. Flood. 17 Denmark. 10 Descents, v. Invasion. 9.
48. 94. Discoverers. 33. 57. 77 Discovery. v. Voyages, Exploits, 48. 57. 60. 63
Adventures. Dock, v. Harbor. 37. Domingo. 58. 75 Dominion. v. Empire,
Sovereignty. 6. 29. 37. 38. 66. 82. 100. 102. 103. 114 Drake, Sir Fr. 57. 58.
75 Duillius, C. 31. 36 Duke of Florence, v. Florence. Dutch. v. Hollander. 80,
81. 103
E
EArth. 2. 3 Edgar. 67. 88. 94. 114 Edwards, I, II, III, IV. 9. 69. 71. 77. 88.
90, 91. 96. 100, 102. 116 Egbert. 67 Elements. 47. 73. 78. 100 104. 120 Eliot.
57 Elizabeth, Q. 14. 47. 73. 78. 100. 104. 120 Emanuel, K. of Portugal. 43. 56
Empire, v. Dominion. 15. 83 Emporium. v. Port, Scale, Staple. 8. 44, 45
England. 64 English. 57. 76. 79 Essex, Earl. 74 Ethelred. 67. 114 Euphrates. 41
Europe. 8 Euxine. 39. 41 Exchange. 10 Expedition. v. Voyages, Adventures. 22.
75 Exploit. 30, 76. 77 Exportation. 10
F
FActories. 44 Faith. 56. 72 Ferdinand of Castile. 54 Friuli. 93 Ferries. 19
Fights. v. Battles, War. 21. 71. 76. 106 Fireships. 37 Fishery. v. Herrings,
Whales. 81. 85. 100. 102. 107. 110 Flag. v. Colors. 36. 81. 97, 98. Flattery.
84. 85 Flavio di Amalphi. 60 Fleece, Golden: v. Wool. 70 Fleets. v. Ships,
Fregats, Vessels, Armada's. 14. 16. 27. 48. 69. 81. 110. 114 Flemmings. 67
Flood. v. Deluge, Noah. 11. 21 Florence, Duke. 13. 48. Florentine. 51 Florida.
57 Forraigners. 9. 64. 101 France. 10. 27. 84 Francis the First. 46 Fregats, v.
Ships. 22. French. 13. 46. 60. 95. 111 Frobisher. 57. 77 Frontires. 68
Frugality. 64
G
GAin. 11 Galleys. 19. 50. 94 Gama, Vasco. Ganges. 19 Gardens. 19 Garrison. 68
Gauls. 65 Genoa. 8. 46. 51 Genoeze. 39. 48 Gillan, Captain. 78 Goa. 13 Gold.
v. Fleece, Treasure. 28. 70 Gottenberg. 49 Goths. 38. 44 Greece. 23. 65 Greeks.
28 Green-Land. 112 Grenevil, Sir Rich. 76 Grimbaldi. 91 Guard of the Seas. v.
Convoy. 100, 103 Guardian. 89 Gulf, v. Persian. Guns, v. Canon. 74.
H
HAnnibal. 32 Hanno. 24. 59 Hanse- Towns. v. Anseatick. 8. 89. 111 Harbor. v.
Port, Dock. 44. 80 Hasting. 97 Haukins, Sr. Io. 57 Hemp. 20 Henry's, III. V,
VI, VII, VIII. 56. 71, 72, 73, 89. 91. 94. 101, 102, 103. 118 Hen. III. of
Portugal. 42 Hen. IV. of France. 47. 118 Heraclea. 32 Hercules. 22 Herrings. v.
Fishery. 105. 113 Hippocrates. 13 Hispaniola. 55 History, v. Books. 67.
Holy-War, v War. 71. Holland. 6 Ho^landers. v. Dutch. 3. 43. 61. 105 Horses. 9
Hudson. 57 Humility. 60
I
IAgo. 58. 75 Iamaica. 54 James, K. 79. 90. 100. 104 James, Cap. 77 Iaphet. 22
Jason. 25 Iehosaphat. 27 Isles. 28 Importation. 10 Imposition. v. Tax. 116, 119
Indian. Indies. v. Companies. 15. 26. 30. 43. 77, 78 Industry. 3. 16. 64. 111
Ingratitude. 18 Innovation. 114 Inscription. 88 Insolence. 98 Intelligence. 9.
31 Intercursus Magnus. 96. 116 Invasion. v. Descents. 48. John K. of England
Portugal 42. 56. 69. 97 Jones, Cap. 77 Iunks. 53 Ioppa. 45. 50 Joshua. 23
Iournals. 63. 97 Isabella of Castile. 54, 55 Iseland. 67 Italy. 8. 10. 17
Jurisdiction. 90 Justice. 14
K
KEEL. 19 KINGS. 13
L
Lacedaemonians. 12. 29, 30 Land. 17 Laws. v. Oleron, Rhodes. 36. 44, 45. 96.
102 Lawyers. 98 Lawson, Sr. I. 53 Learning. 28 Lepanto. 50 Lesbia. 39 Libel. 72
Licenses. 113, 114, 115. 120 Lindsey. 115 Licester, Earl. 82 Ligorn. 48
Liberty. 12. 114 Limits. v. Boundaries. 90. 92. 106 Longitudes. 21 Longobards.
38 Luxury. v. Sloth. 38. 44 Lycurgus. 12 Lydians. 11. 37 Lysander. 30
M
MAdera: 42. 55 Magazine. v. Arsenal. 37 Maggellan. v. Straight. 58. 78 Magnes.
21. 53 Maltezes. 52 Man. 5 Manlius. 31 Manners. 10 Manufactures. v.
Merchandise. 14. 64. 70 Mare Liberum. v. Sea, Dominion. 105 Manners. 27. 107
Marselles. 46. 49 Masts. v. Stores. 20 Materials for Ships* 10 Mathematics. 21
Maxim. 68 Medails. 35. 88. 94 Mediterranean. 3. 8. 39. 59 Megarenses. 29 Men
of War. v. Ships. 21 Merchants. v. Commerce. 9. 11. 13. 24. 26. 47. 49. 87. 103
Milesian. 39 Misenum. 35 Mole. v. Port. 37 Moluccas. 56. 77 Moors. 53
Mountains. 3 Monarchy. v. Empire. 16 Morini. 34 Muscovy. 8. 44
N
NAssau, House. 82 Nature. 5 Naturalization. 42. 112 Navigation. 5 9. 10. 14,
15. 21. 23. 38. 52. 54. 59. 62. 72. 79 Navy. v. Fleet, Armada. 65. 74. 94
Necessity. 21 Negligence. 111 Neptune. 22 Newfound-land. 57. 112 Nilus. 40
Noah, v. Deluge. 22. Nobility. 11. 14 Nombre de dios. 58 Norborough, Sir Io. 78
Norman. 46 Normandy. 84, 85 Northumberland, Earl. 115 Norway. 8. 120
Nor-west-Passage. 74. 77 Nuptials. v. Venice 7
O
OArs. 19 Ocean, v. Sea. Offa. 71 Officers. v. Admiral. 38 Oleroon. v. Laws.
44. 96 Ophir. 27 Ordnance. v. Guns. 81 Osyris. 22 Owen Gwynedd. 57 Oxenham. 75
P
PArliament. 116 Parma Duke. 82 Pass-ports. 89. 116 Paulo, Vasco. di Gama. 42
Paulus Venetus. 60 Pelasgi. 39 Peloponnesus. 28 Permission. 101. 104 Persian.
28. 53 Persian Gulf. 4^ Phoenicians 2^. 2^. 28 Philip the Fair. 96 Philip the
Second. 16. 101 Philosophy. 54 Phrygia. 39 Pickling. v. Herring. 108 Pigeons.
41 Pilotage. 21. 60 Piracy. 48. 96 Pirates. 7, 8. 23. 33. 117 Pisa. 51
Pisistratus. 29 Plains. 3 Plantation. 112 Plate, v. Treasure. Plato. 12, 13
Plenty. 6 Poland. 119 Polity. 10 Pompey. 33 Pool, Cap. 77 Port. v. Harbor. 37.
49 Port-Cluse. 94 Portugal, Portugueze 32. 48 Possession. 93 Praeorio
Praefectus. 35 Prerogative. 104 Presc^i^tion. 84. ^9. 118 Proclamation. 100.
104. 113. 117 Prophecy. 106 Propriety. 92 Protection. 83. 99. 106. 114. 117
Punic-War. v. Carthage. 31
R
RAfts. v. Ships, Vessels. 26 Raleigh. 57 Ravenna. 35. 37 Records. v. Laws.
102, 103 Red Sea, 24 40 Regulus, M. 31 Religion. 10. 64 Rent. v. Tribute. 102.
108 Retailers. 13 Rhodes. v. Law. 52. 96 Richards, II. etc. 71. 91. 116 Riches.
15. 108. 110 Richlieu, Card. 47 Rigging. 21 (...)* 2. 85 (...). 11. 13. 17. 34.
87 Rome. 31 Rose-noble. 94 Rostrum. 19 Royal-Soveraign. v. Ships. 114 Rudder.
19 Russia. 10. 67
S
SAils. 20 Sailing. 25. 53 Sanches de Huelva. 55 Saracens. 46. 48. 51. 71
Saxons. 48. 88. 93 Scale, v. Staple. Scanderoon. 42 Scarborough. 105 Scipio. 32
Sea. v. Mediterranean. 7. 10. 16. 34. 83. 85 Security. 68. 86 Sem. 7 Senators.
11 Servitude. 12 Sheriffs. 89 Shetland. 104 Ship-Mony. v. Tax. 96 Shipping. 3.
8. 10. 72. 80 Ships. 4. 18. 24. 31. 50. 65. 79. 114 Ship-Wrights. 37 Shoars. 2.
59 Sicily. 31 Silk. 46 Silver. 23 Situation. 16 Sloth. 15. 109 Smith, Cap. 77
Snake-pots. 37 Society. v. Companies. 14 Solomon. 26 Solon. 13 Sovereignty. v.
Dominion. 69. 91 Spain. 28 Spaniard. 15. 48. 54. 78 Spoils, v. Treasure. Sprag,
Sir Edw. 53 Squadrons. 34 Staples. v. Scale, Emporium. 10. 13. 39. 103 States.
62. 104 Stink-pots. 37 Stock. 10 Stores. v. Magazine. 10 Strangers. 93. 109.
113 Streights. v. Magellan. 90 Submission, v. Flag. Succession. 100
Summer-Islands. 77 Sundt. 118 Sweden. 8. 10. 49. 119 Syracuse. 31
T
TAnais. 41 Tangier. 24. 45 Taproban. 27 Tarshish. 27 Tartarian. 53 Tartessus.
27 Tax. 96. 114 Territory. 15 Themistocles. 29 Thorn. 57 Thracians. 11 Thule.
17 Time. 21 Tissaphernes. 29 Title. v. Laws. 99. 100. 112. 118 Toll, v.
Tribute. Tolleration. 64 Towns. v. Sea-Towns. 104 Trabizond. 28. 39 Trade. v.
Traffic, Commerce, Merchandise. 11. 15. 61. 107 Treasure. 39. 56. 74. 107
Treasurer of the Navy. 29 Treaties. 116 Trees. 3 Tribute. 91. 101. 102. 118.
119 Tripoly. 41 Tristan de Vaz. 42 Trojan. 11 Tunis. 50 Turk. 52 Tyrians. 11.
28 Tyrus. 24
V
VAigates. v. Streights. 77 Vandales. 44 Vasco de Gama. 42. 43 Venetian. 7. 39.
42 Venice. 43. 46. 59. 93 Vessels, v. Ships. 27 Victory, v. Fights. Villa
Franca. 49 Violet. 103 Virginia. 57. 77 Ulysses. 22 Volga. 40 Voyages, v.
Adventures. Use. 2 Usurers. 49
W
WAftage. 108 Want. 6 War. 71. 32 Water. 33 Whale-fishing. 55. 77. 100 Winds.
4. 80 Winter. 59 Wisby. 44 Wool. 9. 70. 103 World. 15. 30 Wracks. 96
X
XErxes. 29
Y
YArds. v. Rigging. 20
Z
ZEilon, v. Ceilon. Zembla nova. 7^ Zeno. 55
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 21. in Margent r. Vegetius.

25. l. 6. innumerae rates.

26. l. 6. Stanley shows us.

55. r. 54.

85. l. 26. 1. having been.

86. l. 9. r. than our case.

106. l. ult. immense.

110. l. 23. briskly.

117. l. 12. vigor.

119. l. 9. r. Pilla^.

With (...) mis-interpuns^ations.

BOOKS sold by Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
SKinneri Etymologicon Lingae Anglicanae. Fol.

Waraeus de Praesulibus Hiberniae. Fol.

Thorndicus, De Ratione a^ Iure. Fol.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons. Fol.

Bentivolio and Urania, by D. Ingelo. Fol.

Dr. Heylyn's Commentary on the Creed. Fol.

Usserius de Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum. 4o.

Horae Hebraicae and Talmudice in Evangelium S. Johannis,

Authore Johan. Lightfoot, 4o.

The Controversial Letters, or the grand Controversy concerning the pretended
Authority of Popes, and the true Sovereign of Kings in their respective
Kingdoms. 4o.

A brief Account of some Travels in Hungaria, Servia, Bulgaria, Macedonia,
Thessaly, etc. as also some Observations on the Gold, Silver, Copper,
Quicksilver Mines, Baths, and Mineral Waters in those parts, with Figures. 4o.

A Sermon preached at the Spittle by the Lord Bishop of Down. 4o.

An English Inquisition for an Heretic: A Visitation Sermon by R. Neville. 4o.

Chr. Merret, M. D. Pinax rerum Naturalium Britannicarum. 8o.

The State of Christianity in England, and of its Decay and Danger from
Sectaries as well as Papists. 4o.

Some few Questions concerning the Oath of Allegiance, proposed by a Catholic
Gentleman, in a Letter to a Person of Learning and Honor.

Two Letters of Advice; I. For susception of Holy Orders. II. For studies
Theological, especially such as are Rational. 8o

Poems and Songs, by Tho. Flatman. 8o.

Elenchus Antiquitatum Albionensium, Britannorum, Scotorum, Danorum
Anglo-Saxonum, etc. per D. Langhorn. 8o.

The Colloquies of Erasmus, in English. 8o.

The French Gardener. Translated out of French by Jo. Evelyn Esquire 8o.

DEUS NOBISCUM: A Narrative of a great Deliverance at Sea, by W. Johnson, D.D.
8o.

Of Gardens, Four Books, first written in Latin Verse by Renatus Rapinus, and
now made English by John Evelyn Esquire 8o.

Phaedri Fabularum Esopiarum, Libri 5. in usum Scholarum Angliae. 8o.

A Priest to the Temple, or the Country Parson's Character and Rule of Holy
Life, by Mr. Geo. Herbert. 8o.

A Letter of Advice to a Young Gentleman leaving the University, concerning his
Behavior and Conversation in the World, by R. Lingard, D.D. 12o.

Junii Juvenalis, and Persii Satyr. in usum Scholae Westem. 12o.

FINIS.

