An Exact ACCOUNT Of the taking by Storm THE English Town of ATHLONE, June the
21st.
In a Letter from Dublin June the 23th.
ON the Nineteenth, about 3 in the Morning, our Advanced Guards began to March
from Balliburno, toward Athlone, and by 9 Beat the Enemy into the Walls of the
Town on this side the River, out of some Ditches they seemed to Dispute; our
Men lodging themselves in those Ditches: We Planted Three Guns on the Ford, on
that side of Athlone toward Lanesborough, and played all day on a Breastwork
the Enemy had above it: About Six in the Morning our Cannon came up, and Nine
Guns of Eighteen Pounders were drawn to a Battery, raised between Isker, and
Athlone: This Night came up and joined us the Party sent from Balliburno to
Lanesborough, under Command of the Lord Lisburn.

The 20th, at 7 in the Morning, the Battery was finished, and Nine Eighteen
Pounders mounted; at 8 they began furiously to play on a Bastion that defended
the Curtain between the Dublin Gate and the River, and by 12 made a Breach the
whole breadth of the Bastion, on which they continued to play, to hinder the
Enemy from making any work within the Breach: About 3 in the Afternoon, the
General gave Orders for all things to be made ready, to Storm that part of the
Town on this side the River; which was put in Execution about five. He detached
500 Granadiers, sustained by several Regiments of Foot, and a good Body of
Horse; a Lieutenant of Camboon's Regiment Headed the first Party of Granadiers,
who from under the Cover of a Hill, about 400 yards from the Town, advanced a
good pace, and the Lieutenant with that Party of the Granadiers, came to the
Breach, the Enemy Firing briskly against them, all which hindered our M^ns
advancing, who without firing one Shot, came up to the Breach, and threw in
their Grenades; which so frighted the Enemy, that they quirted their Walls;
and fled to the Bridge: Our Men got over the Breach, pursued them Bravely, and
possessed themselves of the Church. The Brave Brigadier Steward Commanded the
Attacque, as he did the Trenches the Night before, and pursued the Enemy to the
Bridge, with his Sword hewing the Enemy, and the Men throwing Grenades among
them, Killed a great many; and great numbers, to avoid the fury of our
Soldiers, leaped into the Shannon, and there Perished.

Brigadier Steward was shot in the Right Arm. We lost few Men in the Attack,
and few wounded: The Enemies loss is uncertain. We made a Lodgment at the Foot
of the Bride, where we covered our selves with Tachines, and made a Work; and
this Evening drew off our three Guns from the Ford, and the nine Guns from the
Battery, into the Town. This Morning the eleven Guns, and three Mortars, left
at Balliburno, were sent for. In this Action, all our Men behaved themselves
with great Resolution and Bravery, to the General's great satisfaction.
Lieutenant Colonel Kirk, of Brigadier Villiers his Regiment, was shot dead by a
Cannon Ball from the Castle, as he lay on a Hill to see the Action.

From Cork, of the 19th. they write, that 1500 of the Army and Militia, with
four Fieldpieces of Cannon of 24 l. Ball, under the Command of the Lord
Justice Cox, and Colonel Hastings, Marched toward Ballicloph, a Garrison of
the Enemies, and as the Letters came away, say, an Account came of some Action,
and some Hundreds of the Enemies being killed: but the particulars do not tell
us,

The Militia has likewise been scouring the Beg of Allen, and have killed
several Raparees.

This is what is worth notice, since my last has come to the knowledge of

Your most Obedient Servant, etc.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms Inn, i^ ^^^^wick-Lane.
MDCXCI.


