AN EXACT and PERFECT LIST Of the NAMES Of the Knights of the Counties,
Citizens of the Cities, Burgesses of the Boroughs and Towns, and Barons of the
Cinque Ports That serve in this Present PARLIAMENT; Taken at the last Session,
Annoque Regni Car. 2. Regis 16/7:

royal blazon or coat of arms CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1664/5:

An exact and perfect List of the Names of the Knights of the Counties,
Citizens of the Cities, Burgesses of the Buroughs and Towns, and the Barons of
the Cinque Ports that serve in this present Parliament, Jan. 12. 1664/5:
Annisque Regni Car. 2. Reg. Decimo Sexto and Decimo Septimo.
Bedford.
SIR Humphery Winch, bar. Sir John Nappier, bar. Town of Bedford
Pawlet St John, esquire Richard Tailor, esquire

Berks.
John Lovelace, esquire Sir Richard Powle, Knight of the Bath. Borough of
New-Windsor.
Sir Richard Braham, Knight. Sir Thomas Higgons, Knight.
Borough of Reading
Sir Thomas Doleman, Knight. Richard Aldworth, esquire
Borough of Wallingford
Sir John Bennet, knight of the Bath. Robert Packer, esquire
Borough of Abingdon.
Sir George Stonehouse, bar.

Bucks.
Sir Will. Boywer, kn. and bar. Sir Will. Terringham, knight of the Bath. Town
of Bucks
Sir Richard Temple, bar. Sir William Smith bar.
Borough of Chipping wiccomb
Sir Edmond Pie, kn. and bar. Sir John Burlace, bar.
Borough of Aylesbury
Sir Richard Ingoldsby, knight of the Bath. Sir Thomas Lee, bar.
Borough of Agmondessham
Sir Will. Drake, kn. and bar. Sir Thomas Proby, bar.
Borough of Wendover.
Richard Hampden, esquire Robert Croke, esquire
Borough of great Marlowe
Peregrine Hobby, esquire William Burlace, esquire

Cambridge.
Thomas Chichely, esquire Sir Thomas Wendy, knight of the Bath. University of
Cambridge
Sir Richard Fanshaw, knight. Thomas Crouch, Mast. of Arts.
Town of Cambridge
William Lord Allington. Roger Pepis, esquire

Chester.
Peter Venables, esquire baron of Kinderton. Sir Foulke Lucy, knight. City of
Chester
Sir Thomas Smith, bar. John Radcliff, esquire

Cornwall.
Jonath. Trelawney, esquire Sir John Corryton, bar. Borough of Dunhivid alias
Lanceston
Sir Richard Edgcombe, kn. of the Bath. Sir Cha. Harbord, kn. his Majesty's
Surveyor General.
Borough of Leskeard
John Harris, esquire Barnard Greenvile, esquire
Borough of Lestwithiel.
Sir Chichester Wray, knight and baronet. John Bulteele, esquire
Borough of Truroe
Nicholas Arundell, esquire Edward Boscawen.
Borough of Bodmin
Sir John Carew, baronet. Hender Roberts, esquire
Borough of Helston
Sir Peter Killigrew, knight. Thomas Robinson, esquire
Borough of Saltashe
Francis Bulter, junior, esquire John Bulter, esquire
Borough of Camelford
Thomas Coventry, esquire Charles Roscarrock, esquire
Borough of Port-Pigham, alias Welstow
Sir Henry Vernon, baronet. John Trelawney, esquire.
Borough of Grampound.
Charles Trevanion, esquire John Tanner, esquire
Borough of Estlow
Henry Seymour, esquire Sir Robert Atkins, knight of the Bath.
Borough of Penryn
William Pendarvis, esquire John Birch, esquire
Borough of Tregoney
Hugh Boscawen, esquire Thomas Herle, esquire
Borough of Bossiny
Robert Roberts esquire Richard Rous esquire
Borough of St. Ives
James Praed esquire
Borough of Fowey
Jonathan Rashley esquire John Rashley Gent.
Borough of St. Germans
John Ellyot esquire Edward Elliot esquire
Borough of St. Michael
Sir Edward Mosley Baronet. Matthew Wren esquire
Borough of Newport
John Speccott esquire
Borough of St. Mawes
Sir Richard Vivian Knight and Baronet. Arthur Spry esquire
Borough of Kellington.
Sir Cyrill Wych Knight Sir Humphrey Bennet one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State.

Cumberland.
Sir Patricius Curwen Baronet. Sir George Fletcher Baronet. City of Carliste
Sir Phillip Howard Knight. Christopher Musgrave esquire
Borough of Cockermouth.
Robert Scawen esquire Sir Wilfrid Lawson Knight

Derby.
William Lord Cavendish John Fretchvile esquire Town of Derby
John Dalton esquire Roger Allestry esquire

Devon.
Sir Hugh Pollard Bar. Comptroler of the Kings Household. Sir John Roll Knight
of the Bath. City of Exeter
Sir James Smith Knight Robert Walker esquire
Borough of Totnes
Sir Edward Seymour Bar. Sir Thomas Clifford Knight.
Borough of Plymouth
Sir William Morice Knight. one of His Majesty's principal Secretaries of State.
Samuel Trelawny esquire
Town and Borough of Okehampton
Sir Edw. Wise Kn. of the Bath. Sir Thomas Heal Baronet
Borough of Barnestaple
Sir John Chichester Bar. Nicholas Dennis esquire
Borough of Plympton
Sir William Stroude, kn. Thomas Hele, esquire
Borough of Honiton.
Sir Courtney Poole Bar. Peter Prideaux esquire
Borough of Tavistock.
George Howard esquire William Russell esquire
Borough of Ashburton.
Sir Geor. Sonds Knight of the Bath. John Fowel esquire
Bor^ugh of Glifton Dart-mouth Hardness
William Harbord esquire Thomas Kendall esquire
Borough of Beerealston
Sir John Maynard Knight. Richard Arundel esquire
Borough of Tiverton
Sir Thomas Carew Henry Ford esquire

Dorset.
Gyles Strangwayes esquire Sir John Strode Knight. Town of Poole
Sir John Moreton Bar. Sir John Fitz-James Knight.
Borough of Dorchester
James Gould esquire John Churchill esquire
Borough of Kings-Lyme
Sir John Shaw Knight. Henry Henley esquire
Borough of Weymouth
Sir John Strangwayes Knight. Sir Winston Churchill Knight.
Borough of Kings Welcombe
Bullen Reymes esquire Sir William Pen Knight.
Borough of Bridport
Humphrey Bishop esquire John Strangwayes esquire
Borough of Shaston alias Shastbury
Henry Whittacre esquire Sir John Low Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Wareham
George Pit esquire Robert Culleford esquire
Borough of Corfe Castle
Sir Ralph Banks Knight. Sir John Tregonwel Knight of the Bath.

Essex.
Banestre Maynard esquire Sir John Brampston Knight of the Bath. Borough of
Colchester
Sir Harbottle Grimstone Baronet; Master of the Rolls. Sir John Shaw Knight.
Borough of Malden
Sir John Tirril Knight. Sir Richard Wiseman Knight.
Borough of Harwich
Sir Capel Luckin Knight. Tho King esquire

Gloucester.
Sir Baynham Throckmorton Bar. John Grubhamhow esquire City of Gloucester
Sir Edward Massey Knight. Evan Seys Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Cirencester
James Earl of Newburgh John George esquire
Borough of Tewksbury
Sir Henry Capel Knight of the Bath. Richard Dowdswell esquire

Hereford.
James Scudamore esquire Thomas Price esquire City of Hereford
Roger Vaughan esquire Herbert Westphaling esquire
Borough of Leomster
Reynald Graham esquire Humphrey Cornwall esquire
Borough of Weobly
John Barnaby esquire Sir Thomas Tompkins Knight.

Hertford.
Sir Richard Franklyn Knight and Baronet. Thomas Lord Fanshaw Borough of St.
Albans
Richard Jennings esquire Thomas Arris Doctor of Physic.
Borough of Hertford
Sir Edward Turner Knight, Speaker. Sir Thomas Fanshaw Knight of the Bath.

Huntingdon.
Robert Vicount Mandevile Henry Williams esquire Borough of Huntingdon
Sir John Cotton Bar. Lyonel Walden esquire

Kent.
Sir Thomas Peyton Bar. Sir John Tufton Knight. and Bar. City of Canterbury
Thomas Hardes esquire Sir Edward Masters Knight.
City of Rochester
Sir Francis Clerk Knight. Sir William Batten Knight.
Borough of Maidstone
Sir Edmund Pierce Knight. Sir Robert Barneham Bar.
Borough of Queenborough
James Herbert esquire Sir Edward Hales Bar.

Lancaster.
Sir Roger Bradshaigh Knight. Borough of Lancaster
Richard Kirkby esquire Sir John Harrison Knight.
Borough or Town of Preston in Amoundernes.
Edward Rigby esquire Jeoffery Rishton esquire
Borough of Newtowne
Richard Lord Gorge Richard Leigh esquire
Borough of Wigon
Charles Earl of Ancram Sir Jeoffery Shakerley Knight.
Borough of Clitheroe
John Heath esquire Attorney of the Duchy. Ambrose Pudsey esquire
Borough of Liverpoole
William Stanley esquire Sir Gilbert Jreland Knight.

Leicester.
John Lord Roos George Faunt esquire Town of Leicester
Sir William Hartop Knight. Sir John Prettyman Knight. and Bar.

Lincoln.
George Vicount Castleton Borough of Boston
Robert Lord Willoughby of Ersby. Sir Anthony Irby Knight.
Borough of Great Grimsby.
Jervas Holles esquire Sir Adrian Scroop Knight. of the Bath.
City of Lincoln
Sir Thomas Meeres Knight. Sir John Mounson jun. Knight. of the Bath.
Town of Stamford
William Stafford esquire William Mountague esquire
Borough of Grantham
Sir John Newton Baronet Sir William Thorold Knight. and Bar.

Middlesex.
Sir Lancelot Lake Knight. Sir Thomas Allen Knight. City of Westminster
Sir Philip Warwick Knight. Sir Richard Everard Knight.
London
Sir John Frederick Knight. Sir William Thompson Knight. William Love esquire John Jones
esquire

Monmouth.
Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland. William Morgan esquire Borough of Monmouth.
Sir George Probert Knight.

Norfolk.
Thomas Lord Richardson. Sir Ralph Hare, bar. City of Norwich
Christopher Jaye, esquire Francis Corey, esquire
Town of Lynn-Regis.
Sir Edw: Walpoole, knight of the Bath. Sir William Hovell, knight.
Town of Great Yarmouth
William Coventry, esquire Sir William Doyly, knight.
Borough of Thetford
Sir Allan Apseley, knight. Sir William Gaudy, bar.
Borough of Castlerising
Sir Rob: Paston, kn: and bar: Robert Steward, esquire

Northamton.
Sir Justinian Isham, bar: George Clark, esquire City of Peterborough
Charles Lord Le D'Spencer. Humphry Orme, esquire
Town of Northampton
Christopher Hatton, esquire Sir Henry Yelverton, bar:
Town of Brackley
Robert Spencer, esquire Sir Thomas Crew, knight.
Borough of Higham-Ferrers
Lewis Palmer, esquire

Northumberland.
Henry Vicount Mansfield. Sir William Fenwick, bar: Town of Newcastle upon Tine
Sir Francis Anderson, kn: Sir John Marley, kn:
Borough of Morpeth
Sir George Downing, kn: Sir Henry Widdrington, kn:
Town of Berwick upon Tweede
Edward Gray, esquire

Nottingham.
Anthony Air, esquire Sir Gervas Clifton, knight and baronet. Town of Nottingham
Arthur Stanhop, esquire Robert Pierpoint, esquire
Borough of Eastretford
Sir William Hickman, bar: Sir Clifford Clifton kn:

Oxon.
Sir Anth: Cope, kn: and bar: University of Oxon.
Lawrence Hide, esquire Sir Henage Finch, kn: and bar: his Maj. Solicitor General.
City of Oxon.
Robert Croke, esquire Brom Whorwood, esquire
Borough of New-Woodstock.
Sir Thomas Spencer, bar: Sir William Fleetwood, kn:
Borough of Banbury.
Sir John Holeman knight

Rutland.
Edward Noell, esquire Philip Sherrard, esquire
Salop.
Sir Francis Lawley, bar: Sir Richard Oately, kn: Town of Salop
Robert Leighton, esquire Thomas Jones, esquire
Borough of Bruges, alias Bridgenorth
Sir William Whitmore, bar: Sir Thomas Whitmore, knight of the Bath.
Borough of Ludlow
Timothy Littleton, Ser: at Law Sir Job Charleton, Ser: at Law.
Borough of great Wenlock.
Sir Thomas Littleton, knight. George Weld, esquire
Town of Bishops-Castle
Edmond Waring, esquire William Oakeley, esquire

Sommerset.
John Pawlett, esquire Edward Philips, esquire City of Bristoll.
Thomas Earl of Ossory. Sir John Knight, knight.
City of Bath
Alexander Popham, esquire William Prynne, esquire
City of Wells
Richard Lord Butler, Earl of Arran. Sir Maurice Berkley, knight and baronet.
Borough of Taunton
Sir William Portman, bar: Sir William Windham, kn:
Borough of Bridgewater
Edmond Windham, esquire John Tynt, esquire
Borough of Minehead
Francis Lutterel, esquire Sir Hugh Windham, kn:
Borough of Ilcester
Edward Philips jun: esquire Henry Dunster, Merchant.
Borough of Milborneport
Francis Windham, esquire Michael Mallet, esquire

Southampton.
Charles Lord St John. Sir John Norton, bar: City of Winchester
Richard Goddard, esquire Lawrence Hide, esquire
Town of Southampton
Sir Richard Ford, kn: William Leg, esquire
Town of Portsmouth
Richard Norton, esquire Sir George Carterett, knight and baronet.
Borough of Yarmouth
Richard Lucy, esquire Edward Smith, esquire
Borough of Peterfield
Sir Humphry Bennet, kn: Arthur Bold, esquire
Borough of Newport, alias Medona
William Glascock, esquire William Oglander, esquire
Borough of Stockbridge
Sir Robert Howard, kn: Robert Philips, esquire
Borough of Newtown
Sir John Barrington, knight and baronet. Sir Henry Worseley, bar:
Borough of Christchurch
Humphery Weld, esquire Henry Tulse, esquire
Borough of Whitchurch
Henry Wallop, esquire Giles Hungerford, esquire
Borough of Lymmington
Sir William Lewis, bar. Sir Nicholas Steward, bar.
Town of Andover
John Collins, esquire Sir John Trot, bar.

Stafford.
Sir Edward Littleton, bar: Randolph Egerton, esquire City of Lietchfield.
John Lane, esquire Sir Theophilus Biddolph, kn:
Borough of Stafford
Robert Milward, esquire William Chetwinde, esquire
Borough of Newcastle under Line
Sir Caesar Colclough, bar: Edward Manwaring, esquire
Borough of Tamworth
Amos Walrond, esquire John Swinfein, esquire

Suffolk.
Sir Henry Felton, bar: Sir Henry North, bar: Borough of Gippi
John Sicklemore, esquire William Bloise, sen: esquire
Borough of Dunwich
Sir John Rous, bar: Richard Coke, esquire
Borough of Orford
Sir Allan Broderick, kn: Walter Devereux esquire
Borough of Aldborough
Sir John Holland, bar. Sir Robert Brook, kn:
Borough of Sudbury
Sir Robert Cordell, bar: Thomas Walgrave, esquire
Borough of Eye
Sir George Reeve, knight. Charles Cornwallis, esquire
Borough of St Edmonds-Bury
Sir John Duncombe, kn: Sir Edmond Pooley, kn:

Surrey.
Sir Adam Brown, bar: Sir Edmond Bowyer, kn: Borough of Southwarke
Sir Thomas Bludworth, kn: George Moore, esquire
Borough of Blechingly
Sir William Howard, kn: Sir Edward Bish, knight of the Bath.
Borough of Rygate
Roger James, esquire Edward Thurland, esquire
Borough of Guilford
Arthur Onslow, esquire Thomas Dalmahoy, esquire
Borough of Gatton.
Thomas Turgis, esquire Sir Nicholas Carew, kn:
Borough of Haslemere
George Evelyn, esquire Thomas Morris, esquire

Sussex.
Sir John Pelham, bar: John Ashburnham, esquire City of Chichester
Sir Henry Peckham, kn: William Garraway, esquire
Borough of Horsham
Sir John Covert, knight and baronet. Henry Chowne, esquire
Borough of Midhurst
Sir John Lewkenor, knight of the Bath. John Steward, esquire
Borough of Lewis
Sir John Staple, knight and baronet. Sir Thomas Woodcock, kn:
Borough of New-Shoreham
Edward Blaker, esquire William Quartermaine, Doctor of Physic.
Borough of Bramber
Sir Cicill Bishop. Peircy Goring, esquire
Borough of Steyning
Sir John Fagg, bar: Henry Goring, esquire
Borough of East-Grimstead
Charles Lord Buckhurst. Sir George Courthop, kn:
Borough of Arundell
Roger, Earl of Orrory. Francis, Lord Angier.

Warwick.
Sir Robert Holt, baronet. Sir Henry Puckering, alias Newton. City of Coventry
Sir Clement Fisher, bar: Thomas Flint, esquire
Borough of Warwick
Sir Francis Compton, kn: Foulke Grevile, esquire

Westmerland.
Sir Philip Musgrave, baronet. Sir Thomas Strickland, kn: Borough of Apulby
John Lowther, esquire John Dalton, esquire

Wiltes.
Henry Lord Cornebury City of New Sarum.
Stephen Fox esquire
Borough of Wilton
Sir John Birkenhead Knight. Sir Thomas Mompesson Knight.
Borough of Downton
Gilbert Raleigh esquire Walter Bockland esquire
Borough of Hindon
Edward Seymore esquire Sir George Grubham-How Bar.
Borough of Westbury.
Richard Lewis esquire Thomas Wancklyn esquire
Borough of Hetsbury
Sir Charles Berkley Knight, Treasurer of His Majesty's Household. John Jolliffe
esquire
Borough of Calne
William Ducket esquire George Low esquire
Borough of the Devises
William York esquire John Kent esquire
Borough of Chippenham
Sir Edward Hungerford Knight. of the Bath. Henry Baynton esquire
Borough of Malmesbury
Sir Francis Henry Lee Bar. Philip Howard esquire
Borough of Cricklade
Sir George Hungerford Knight. Sir John Earnely Knight.
Borough of Great Bedwin
John Trevor esquire Henry Clerk esquire
Borough of Lugdersall
William Ashburnham Esquire Sir Richard Brown Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Old Sarum
Edward Nicholas esquire Sir John Denham Knight of the Bath
Borough of Wootten Basset
Sir Walter St. John Bar. John Pleydal esquire
Borough of Marleborough
John Lord Seymour Jeoffery Daniell esquire

Worcester
Sir John Packington Bar. Samuel Sandys sen. esquire City of Worcester
Sir Rowland Berkley Knight. Thomas Street esquire
Borough of Droitwich
Henry Coventry esquire Samuel Sandys jun. esquire
Borough of Evesham
William Sandys esquire Sir Abraham Cullen Bar.
Borough of Beawdly
Sir Henry Herbert Knight.

York.
Conyers Darcy esquire Sir John Goodrick Knight. and Bar. City of York
Sir Metcalf Robinson, bar:
Town of Kingston upon Hull
Anthony Gilby, esquire Andrew Marvel, Gent.
Borough of Knaersborough
Sir John Talbot kn; William Stockdale, esquire
Borough of Scarborough
Sir Jordan Crosland, kn: William Thompson, esquire
Borough of Rippon
Sir John Nicholas, knight of the Bath. Thomas Burwell, Doctor of Laws.
Borough of Richmond
John Wandesford, esquire Sir William Killigrew, kn:
Borough of Heydon
Sir Matthew Appleyard, kn: Sir Hugh Bethell, kn:
Borough of Burrowbridge
Sir Richard Maleverer, knight and baronet. Sir Robert Long.
Borough of Malton
Sir Thomas Hebblethwaite, knight. Sir Thomas Gowre, kn:
Borough of Thirske
Sir Thomas Ingram, kn: Walter Strickland, esquire
Borough of Aldborough
Sir Solomon Swale, bar: Sir Francis Goodrick, kn:
Borough of Beverley
Michaell Wharton, esquire Sir John Hotham, bar:
Borough of North-Allerton
Sir Gilbert Gerrard, knight and baronet. Roger Talbott, esquire
Borough of Pontfract
Sir John Dawney, kn: Sir William Lowther, kn:

Barons of the Cinque Ports.
Port of Hestings
Edward Walter, esquire Sir Denny Ashburneham, bar:
Town of Winchelsea
Sir Nicholas Crisp, kn: Francis Finch, esquire
Town of Rye
Sir John Robinson, knight and baronet. Herbert Morley, esquire
Port of new Rumney
Charles, Lord Fitzharding Sir Norton Knatchbull, bar:
Port of Hyeth
John Harvey, esquire Sir Henry Wood, knight and baronet.
Port of Dover.
Sir Francis Vincent, knight and baronet. George Montague, esquire
Port of Sandwich
Edward Mountague, esquire James Thurbarne, esquire
Port of Seaford
Sir William Thomas, knight and baronet. Sir Thomas Dikes, knight.
WALES.
Anglesey.
Nicholas Bagnall, esquire Town of Bewmorris
John Robinson, esquire

Brecon.
Edward Progers, esquire Town of Brecon
Sir Herbert Price, bar:

Cardigan.
John Vaughan, esquire Town of Cardigan
Sir Charles Cotterell, kn:

Carmarthen.
Francis, Lord Vaughan. Town of Carmarthen
Sir John Vaughan, knight of the Bath.

Carnarvon.
Sir Richard Win, bar: Town of Carnarvon
William Griffith, esquire

Denbigh.
John Win, esquire Town of Denbigh
Sir John Salisbury, bar:

Flint.
Sir Henry Conway, bar: Town of Flint
Roger Whitley, esquire

Glamorgan.
William, Lord Herbert, of Cardiffe. Town of Cardiffe
Robert Thomas, esquire

Merioneth.
Henry Win, esquire
Pembrooke.
Arthur Owen, esquire Town of Haverford-West
Sir William Moreton, kn:
Town of Pembrooke
Rowland Lagherne, esquire

Montgomery.
Andrew Newport, esquire Town of Montgomery
John Purcell, esquire

Radnor.
Sir Richard Lloyd, kn: Town of Radnor
Sir Edward Harley, knight of the Bath.

FINIS.

