An EXACT RELATION OF THE Late King JAMES's Embarking for France: And of the
Proclaiming K. William: WITH THE Present Condition of Dublin, and other Places
near that City.
In a LETTER from DVBLIN.
DVBLIN, Saturday, July 5. 1690. Honored Sir,
I Presume, er'e this, you have received the Letter I sent you from our Camp,
near the Boyne. Since that, you have known by other hands, that by one Fight we
have frighted and scattered our Enemy, and were presently possessed of the
strong Town of Droghedah, and are now as quietly settled in this City, yet in
much better Condition than was expected. They left Stores filled with Provision
of Mouth and War: They have great Stores likewise in the Country; which are all
open for our receipt.

Their King is run away, with the Duke of Powis, Tyrconnel, and some few more,
toward Kingsale; their Army all scattered in the Country; so that the War
seems new to be at an end. Galloway, Limerick, and Athlone are, as I hear, the
only places like to stand out against us; and having no hopes of Relief, will,
as its thought, be easily surrendered.

His Majesty you see has conquered this Kingdom, with a Veni vidi vici, it
will require more of his trouble to settle then to conquer it: I cannot now
further enlarge, the Express waiting the motion of my Pen, but to tell you,
this day by the Post, if possible, will send you a more particular account.

Dublin, July 5th, 1690. Honored Sir,
I Sent you one of this Date by the Express, and have now to add, That we have
sure and certain Advertisement sent us by an Express, that the late King James
on Wednesday-night last embarked at Duncannon, a Fort that commands
Passage-Harbour, viz. the Harbor of Waterford; and that he, Duke Powis, and
Tyrconnel, and some others, are gone direct for France. Their Army are
scattered in the Country, and are forced to turn Tories to get them a support;
so that it is believed our King's work will be applied now rather to settle,
then make further Conquests here. His Majesty is not yet come to this Town, but
is this Night. Encampt within two Miles of this City, and as we hear, intends
to be here to morrow.

The Protestants of Wexford has seized that Garrison, and declare for K.
William and Q. Mary: The other Towns where Protestants are, will, we expect,
follow that President. Of which we have already some Reports, particularly as
to Waterford and Kilkenny.

We cannot learn, that there is 5000 of the Enemy in a Body, not understand
that there are any of them appears within thirty Miles of this City. What
Forces they lately had of the Germans that were Protestants are come in to us.
The French are gone with Three Fieldpieces toward Lymerick, but its thought
they will be met in the way: Our Horse are now scattering to pick up the
Scatterers of the Enemies scattered Army.

We all believe, that there will not be struck one stroke more in this War; and
we have many Reasons to wish and expect it; but none more important, then that
we hope thereby our King may return to you, as safe as he came to us.

His active and invincible Courage gave us horrid frights, finding that he
acted in the Field, rather as a Courageous Captain, than a great King. This
Success may, we hope, justly entitle him to the Character of the greatest
Monarch in the European World.

Our Enemy is run in that have, that they have left vaster Stores than we could
have imagined they had, not only of War, but Provision behind them.

Not an hour but we have some News of loss to them, and gain to us. I am under
those straits of Time, that I can neither be so full or methodical in account
of Persons and Things, as I wish. I have sent you enclosed a Copy of a
Prophecy, which you may put into English, having only time to write it; and
that I am

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant.
A Prophecy found near One hundred years since in Chancellor Loftus his
Studdy, and since this War showed often to King James his Ministers here.
SI post hac aliquando rem militarem exactius dedicirint inordinata and
incomposita Hibernorum numerosa Phalanges, eoque Viribus, aere and art
militari creverit Gens ista pauperrima, ut numero, pondere and magnitudine
intumescat and laboret, hunc equidem mole sua ruet, subitoque casu and flatu
Boreali e facie terra at peccora obigitur, sibique (spe-profligata) in Secula
omnia abjudicabit Libertatem, Seque Regemque suum exteris, Saxonibus, Danis and
Battavis mancipia reddit.

IF at any time hereafter the rude and disorderly numerous Phalanxe's of the
Irish shall more exactly learn the Art of War, and that poor Nation shall by
means of brass Money, and the Art of War, increase to that degree of Strength,
and to swell and labor under their Number, Weight, and Multitude, then shall
they fall with the weight of their own Bulk, and by a sudden Accident, and the
force of the North Wind, shall be scattered like Sheep from the face of the
Earth, and hopeless of all Relief, shall for ever renounce all thought of
Liberty, and Surrender up themselves and their King absolute Slaves to Saxons,
Danes, and Hollanders.



ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Secret History of the Duchess of Portsmouth; Giving an Account of the
Intreagues of the Court, during her Ministry. And of the Death of King CHARLES
the Second Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Bailey.

London: Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey. 1690.


