MEMENTO MORI:

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY On the Death of JAMES HOARE, Esquire Master Controller of his Majestys
Mint at the Tower, Who departed this Life November the 24th, 1696.
HARK now, methinks I hear a dismal Cry,
As if some fatal Tragedy drew nigh:
Alas, What means this tingling in my Ears
These doleful Sounds, that fill my Breast with Cares.
The fatal Omen must protend some Ill;
Surely some sacred Saint to Day is fell.
Alas! It is too True, the worthy Hoare,
This Day has lanch'd Eternity's wide Shore,
Never to rise, till Time shall be no more:
Oh! How could he so soon bequeath his Breath,
Without a Comet to protend his Death.
Yet so it is, Fate often proves unkind;
To take the Best, and leave the Worst behind.
Let us then mourn in Eleagic Verse,
And weep in Brine ore his renowned Hearse:
For Death, his most Tyranick Force imparts,
That we with melting Grief may break our Hearts.
Oh! Let this Melancholy Hour be
Griefs everlasting Day of Jubilee:
For he is gone untimely ravished hence,
Who lived in Love, and died in Innocence:
Admired and beloved by all Mankind;
The poor Man's Father, and the rich Man's Friend.
Great was his Worth, but his Compassion more,
Dispencing liberally to the Poor,
A sort of daily Pension from his Store:
Nor was his Virtues only here confined;
For large was the Endowments of his Mind:
Stade in his Judgment, and approved in Sense,
Fit for the Service of so great a Prince.
Stay daring Muse, Oh! whither will thou fly;
Alas thou can not reach his Piety,
He was so Great, so Good, and yet he fell:
Thus died that worthy Saint who lived so well.
Weep! wring your Hands, and bitterly Lament,
The Fall of this departed Innocent;
And let your mournful Accents upwards fly,
And with repeated Terror rend the Sky:
Mourn as that Prophet mourned when Saul did lay,
Weltring in Gore on the Mount Gilboa;
Or as that doleful Lamentation fell,
In Aggamemnon's melancholy Vale.
Yet hold my Muse, forbear thy melting Tears,
Alas! He Is fled above the reach of Cares;
Whose pious Shade with singing Cherubs ly's,
Reposed in everlasting Paradise,
Where joyful Hims to their God they sing,
And praise the Name of Heaven's Almighty King.
Crowned with the fearful Labors of his Life,
He Is exiled from a wretched World of Grief,
To Life for ever in that bright abode,
Prepared to entertain the Just and Good.
EPETAPH.
Within this dark and gloomy Monument,
Behold there lys the Relics of a Saint:
Who left these fadeing Glories, to posses
An everlasting Seat of Happiness.
When in this moving World he lived, his Life
Was free from Broyls and vain tumultuous Strife.
In Deeds of Charity he did excel,
And took his chief Delight in doing well.
So here he lived beloved, and at his Fall,
He died lamented and bewailed of all.

