Exceeding good News AGAIN FROM IRELAND OR, A true Relation of the great
overthrow which the English gave the Rebels before Troheda, sent in a Letter to
Sir Robert King Knight, at Cecill House in the Strand, bearing date, February
28. 1641.

Printed by Order from the PARLIAMENT. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Whereunto is added the Copy of a Letter written from Bruxels by the Rebels
Agent there, unto the Lord Montgarret in Ireland, February, 24. 1641.

Which Letter was taken by the Scout-watch of Sir Richard Grenvill.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas.

The Copy of a Letter written from Bruxels to the Lord Mountgarret in Ireland,
February, 24. 1641
My dear Lord,
I Hope that I have obtained at last, the Aim of my Employment, from my Lord
Cardinal of Richleu, to the perfect contentment of all your Lordships, sworn
to the maintenance of the Catholic League, and for the good of my dear
Country. The said Cardinal by the means and continual intercession of his
Confessor.

(Our right faithful Patron) has granted and assigned us 7. Ships already, to
set Sail (under pretense it is given forth) for Portugal, but I trust your
Lordship and copartners shall find them nearer home, laythey be not only with
Victuals but Arms of all sorts viz. 1500 Muskets, 2000 Pikes, 500 Bills and
Halberts, 600 Barrels of Powder, 3. Tonne of Match 9. demi Sakers, but also
with great quantity of French coin, which the Friars of our Nation have begged
of all the Nobility and Gentry, yea of all people whatsoever of abillitie
through out France, for the maintenance of the Catholic Cause, with 2.
Thousand Crowns of his Excelencies own Gift, The College of the Fathers of
the Order of Jesus, at Antwerpe, have likewise made a most charitable
Collection, and have entrusted it in the hands of Dominickc Galloway, our Agent
there for that Design, so that I hope, nay assuredly believe, that your
Lordship shall have money enough to pay your poor Soldiers the Arrerages, and
to let them have 3. Months Pay beforehand, I have likewise dispatched an able
Messenger to his Hollinesse, beseeching him in all Humillity to lend somewhat
out of the Stock of the Church, toward the raising of succors for the
advancement of the Catholic Cause, and his own Interest, according as his
Holiness shall find convenient and requisite, the Gonor of Dunkirke has been
showed a way (and I trust intends to follow it, whereby he will let let our
ships laden with our Soldiers and Arms at ease depart) and yet keep his
credit both with the Governor of Dunkirke, and my Lord his Master, and to
answer in any point of breach of League, the French Gennerall Mounsiur De Boys,
has promised upon the word of a Catholic, that he will do his best to arive
with his Ships in the Haven of Dublin, by the twentieth of March, New-stile and
those of Dunkirke (if possible) shall as near as we can about the same time
put in at Cork, under the conduct of Collonell Roach, and young Patricke
Co^piager our coutryman, God almighty and the blessed Queen, of Heaven, at the
intercession of our dear Saint, St. Patricke, guide conduct, defend, and
prosper them, so that they may find enough to do for our Enemies, so that our
native conntry may be delivered from more then Turkish slavery of all
Heritikes, as well English as Scots, I entreat you and all my courageous
Lords, to be in a readiness, and well appointed for the entertainment of this
so able and considerable asistance, and auxiliary Forces of our Friends, so
that we may obtain the top of our desires, and once be masters of of the
Metropolitan, of our native Realm, which if it shall come to pass, assure
your self my Lord that our country entire through the asistance of the Mother
of God (our blessed shield) and eternal Queen of Heaven) shall speedily be in
your possesion, and that all all Strangers and Heritikes either be chased out
or destroyed, and that which they have most unjustly and cruely refused to
grant us by our right humble suplications thereto desired, they shall be forced
to give us (yea and more too we trust) by the puissance of our Arms, and
justice of our cause.

J understand for certain from those that wish us well in England, that it is
impossible that the new Livetenant Liecester, with his Army, should be ready to
take Shipping before Easter, if therefore we shall have won the garland,
before he imbarkes, the English shall be discouraged, your Soldiers fleshed
with victory and enriched with Spoil, all our Catholic friends are
encouraged to send us more plenty of Aid, you therefore my Lord with all your
noble and resolute Fellows, and valiant and courageous countrymen follow my
advice in this affair, set aside all Enterprises but this, and wholly endeavor
and force and that obtained, all is yours, without it nothing long, for the
happy, wished, and joyful carrying of which City, all your Countrymen that
are persons Religious here abiding, and other well-wishers, offer their hearty
vows, prayers most incessant, and desires most ardent, day and night, at the
foot of the Altar, and at the Sacrifice of the Blessed Mass, in the presence
of all Saints both of men and women, and my self principally.

Yours Honors most affectionate and faithful servant and Minister, and of all
the true Catholic League till death. Mack Me Cherrey.
Bruxels, this present, Feb. 24. 1641. New Style.
Joyful News from Ireland, OR, A true Relation of the great overthrow which
the English gave the Rebels before Droheda, etc.
Noble Sir,
IN my last Letter to you, I signified to you the difficulties which were like
to befall us by the relieving of Droheda, but God by his infinite mercy has
freed us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard, for when our men there were
driveu to that extremity to eat horseflesh; (...)y Tichbourne sallied out of
the Town with (...) ^orty Mus^^^iers, and forty horse, and beat off (...)
^undred of the Enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore
Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred sheep, burned four Towns, and brought home
two of their Colors; Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodness
unto us, in that the night before the relief and succors which we sent by Sea
from Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor of Troheda) which was
strongly fenced over with a Chain and several boats) there happened a storm
which broke their Chainer, and gave our men so free a passage, as with little
difficulty they came safely to the Town. The Rebels were gathered at
Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they
were settled in a very strong Wood, My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our
Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into
the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable
loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant and courageous
Gentleman. This was an Act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles Coote did, (as
he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as
any man living could; and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and
good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side. Our
Soldiers are in great want of Money, which c^uses a General want of all
other necessaries, Yet Notwithstanding GOD has infused such courage into them
(for undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great,
but they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lievtenants Regiment of fifteen
Hundred Foot; and Sir Richard Grenvill with nere four Hundred Horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our Neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to relieve our friends in other parts; but I hope when
our full succors shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but add
comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief, yet their
hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or on his way thither; By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things
which concern me, And that I am, Sir,

your most affectionate Servant. Ed. Loftus,
Feb. 27. 1641. Martii. 7.
It is this day Ordered forthwith; that this Letter be published in Print.

H. Elsing Cler, P. D. Com.

FINIS.

