An Exact Representation of the LATE COMET, OR BLAZING-STAR, Which appeared in
Hamburgh this YEAR 1677. at NORTH-EAST; Together with a Description of the Most
Remarkable COMETS since CHRIST's Nativity, and the dangerous Consequences.
Translated out of High Dutch.
depiction of the comet of 1677 surrounded by constellations THE COMET Ao^^
1677.
North

Perseus
depiction of the constellation Perseus Cassiopea
depiction of the constellation Casseopeia Algol or Caput Medusae
depiction of the star Algol (eye of Medusa) and the constellation Caput Medusa
Pes
depiction of a star in the constellation Andromeda Cingulu^
depiction of the belt of Andromeda depictionof a the constellation Andromeda
Triangulum
depiction of the constellation Triangulum Apis
depiction of the constellation Apis East



HORIZON

depiction of the comet on 19 April As it was seen on the 19th. of April

Northward

Eastward

Horizon

depiction of the comet on 22 April Northward

Easrward

Horizon



IT has been ever the Opinion of Rational and Understanding Men, that COMETS
are the unfortunate Tokens, which God sets up in the Firmament at once to warn
and (...) Men, when nothing else will do it. Who knows not, th^^ when such
unusual Lights appear in Heaven, there have eve^ followe^ in a verry short time
after, great and bloody Wars, Plagues, Dearths, and other Public Calamities,
which have swept away infinite numbers of Men, or where their Lives have been
given them for a Prey, have involved them in the danger of being Robbed,
Plundered, and having their Houses and Goods consumed by Fire, etc. So true is
that of the Poet, No COMET in the Heavens does appear,
But does foretell great Plagues and Mischiefs near.


We will give you an Account of some COMETS, and some unhappy Consequences, out
of Ancient, and Modern Histories, and then come to discourse of that before us.

In the year XXIX, before Christ's Nativity, appeared a COMET, the Effects of
which were soon seen, not only in a very bloody War, wherein Augustus the
Emperor overcame Anthony King of Egypt, and all Egypt became subject to his
power, but in a very dreadful Earthquake, which shaken all Judaea, and killed
many thousands.

In the First year of our Saviors Nativity, together with a very great Eclipse
of the Moon, was seen a very dreadful Comet, which burnt like a Torch for three
days; and shortly after followed King Herod's barbarous Murder of the Infants
of Bethlehem: nor did the bloody King spare his own Son, whom, together with
other Jews, he caused inhumanely to be Butchered.

In the year 71. after Christ, there appeared a Comet in the shape of a Fiery
Sword, which stood over Jerusalem, and was seen for a whole year together, and
proved the fatal presage of the overthrow and destruction of Jerusalem, and the
Jewish Commonwealth.

In the year 78. appeared another Comet of a very terrible Aspect, for it
looked like a sharp Arrow, and its Effect was, a very great Pestilence, which
invaded Rome, and raging two years together, consumed vast multitudes of Men,
Women, and Children.

In the year 323. a Comet foretold the Inundation of the Arrian Heresy.

In the year 454. was seen a Comet, which burnt like Fire for 21 days, and was
possibly a presage either of the savage C^uelty, or Death of Attila, who burnt
and destroyed all Countries he came into, and called himself The Scourge of God.

AC. 539. or as others 538. appeared a Comet for 15 days together, upon which
there happened these following accidents. The King of the Goths was Conquered
and taken Prisoner by Belarius the Roman General, and his eyes put out by
Justinian the Emperor. Cosroes with a vast Army invades Italy, and his Army is
ruined by the Plague. At the same time there happened a very great Earthquake
at Constantinople, which lasted ten days, and killed vast numbers of Men.

A. C. 729. in January, two Comets appeared, one before the Suns rising, the
other after hi^ going down, whereupon Leo the Emperor met with very great
Troubles in his Government, and the Lombards made great havoc in Italy, and
besieged Rome.

A. C. 745. A Comet seemed to be the Forerunner of a dreadful Pestilence, which
in the City of Constantinople alone swept away above 300000 Men.

A. C. 828. Men took notice of a Comet, the Effects of which were very
dreadful, viz. tempestuous, unusual Winds, which destroyed abundance of Men and
Houses, and Towns, and Villages, both in France and Germany.

A. C. 831. A Comet was seen, which was attended with a great Famine and
Dearth, insomuch that in many places Parents murdered their own Children, and
did eat them.

A C. 838. A Comet appeared, and lasted 25 days, and was the Forerunner of
another great Famine, and of the great difference among the Sons of Ludovicus
Pius, which ended in a very dreadful War, wherein above 100000 Men were killed.

A. C. 841. A Comet presaged the fatal War, which happened shortly after,
between Lotharius and his Brethren.

A. C. 869. Appeared one, and immediately after, all Germany felt very great
Earthquakes, as also a great Famine, and a very bloody War, which was thought
would have proved the utter Extirpation of the Inhabitants.

A. C. 876. the 20th of June, appeared a very dreadful one in Saxony, whereupon
in July following happened such incredible Floods of Water, as did infinite
mischief both in Saxony and Thuringia, and particularly the Town of Aschenbrun,
by a sudden and violent Rise of Waters was carried away with Houses, Men,
Beasts, Trees, and Church; and all this in one Night, insomuch that next day no
Man could tell, that ever there had been a Town there.

A. C. 905. in March, appeared another, and immediately upon it, the Hungarians
fell into Germany, plundered it, destroyed and wasted it everywhere. In Italy
also there happened very great Calamities, and Ludovicus King of the Lombards
chased Berengarius, pretending to the Empire, but was on a sudden overcome
again by Berengarius, and at Ditrichs-Bern had his eyes put out.

A. C. 1005. Appeared another Comet very terrible, which presaged the violent
Plague and Famine following very shortly after, in which more Men were killed
than remained alive, and which overspread almost the whole habitable World; and
within a little while after happened the Holy War, which lasted 88 years, and
consumed an infinite number of Men; not to mention the mighty Troubles which
arose in the Church about this time about the Election of Popes.

A. C. 1165. Appeared another, and presently after, there happened the great
Earthquakes in Syria and Sicily, which destroyed a great number of Cities and
Towns. A very bloody War also ensued between the Poles and Prussians, and
betwixt Duke Henry the Lion and Marquess Albert surnamed the Bear, about the
Country of Saxony, wherein Henry was put to flight, and which occasioned a
great quarrel betwixt Welphus Duke of Bavaria, and Paltsgrave Hugo, who had the
Counts of Zollern for his Auxiliaries. They destroyed many Towns and Countries,
till at last Duke Wolf besieged Tubingen, which Siege the Paltsgrave came to
raise, and therefore occasioned a bloody Fight, in which the Duke was forced to
fly, who yet within a very short time after, having got the Bohemians to be on
his side, destroyed Bavaria and Suabia, and all Germany, to the very Lake of
Geneva. About this time the Emperor found trouble enough in Italy from his
Adversary, and was forced to go to Rome, which City very much opposed him, but
was in a short time Conquered by the Emperor, who killed above 12000 men, and
made himself Master of the City.

A. C. 121^. The 18 of May, another Comet appeared, which was a Forerunner of
the bloody Invasion of Europe by the Tartars.

A. C. 1264. in August appeared another, which lasted three Months, and
foretold the sad Fate of the Famous and Noble City of Acon which by a terrible
Earthquake perished, and was totally destroyed.

A. C. 1312, 1314, and 1362. Diverse Comets were then seen, which had this
Effect, that a great Mortality of Men and Cattle, and Famine, and other sad
Disasters, followed upon it, and especially A.C. 1314. the Comet which was seen,
appeared with a very long Tail toward North-west, and for a whole year
together it rained, which occasioned a very great Pestilence, and a very cruel
Famine, insomuch that Men could not contain themselves from feeding on dead
Carcasses, and Parents from eating their own Children.

A.C. 1403. April the first, in the Evening, at North-east appeared a Comet,
whose Tail cast it self toward the North, and immediately thereupon happened a
great War between Sweden and Denmark; and about December following, such Floods
of Water rose, that many Towns, Villages, Men and Cattle were drowned.

A.C. 1472. A Comet was seen with a very long train stretching it self toward
the East, and continuing above Eighty days, and causing, besides other miseries
and disasters, a very dreadful Pestilence, and a very dry Summer, and such vast
numbers of flying Locusts in Hungary, Poland, Silesia, Mahren, etc. that the
people could not see the Sun, they flew so thick together.

A.C. 1475. appeared another, which looked pale, and sometimes of a bluish
dark color; whereupon there followed the great dearth of Corn, and a very
bloody War among three Kings, Casimir King of Poland, Vladislaus King of
Bohemia, and Matthias King of Hungary; who wasted and destroyed Silesia,
Mahren, Bohemia, and the neigbouring Countries. And the effects of this Comet
were also felt by Victoriosus Duke of Burgundy and Lorrain, who that very year,
besides the loss of 17000 Burgundians in a Fight, lost his own life also.

A. C. 1527. appeared a very unusual Comet, and which cannot be paralleled by
any other, seen all Europe over, full of fire, and of a very great length, in
whose Circle was seen a bended Arm, with a Sword, in a threatening posture; and
about the point of the Sword appeared three Stars, with Tails, as if they were
three Comets; and round about those Stars, Spears, and bloody Swords, and Faces
of several Men with long Beards, lasting an hour and a quarter, a sight so
astonishing, that many that saw it fell sick upon it, and died. The Effects were
seen shortly after, for the Turks fell into Hungary, besieged Vienna, and a
great deal of blood was shed. This very year, the City of Rome was taken by the
Duke of Burbo^, and great Insolences were committed by the Soldiers.

A.C. 1531. appeared another Comet, seen in Germany, Italy, France, and in the
neighboring Countries; a forerunner of that bloody Helvetian War, in which
the Towns of Zurick, Zug, Vri, Vnderwalden, and Lucern were engaged.

And much more mischief did that Comet portend, which was seen in Hungary, in
the year 1541. which at last changed it self into the shape of a Dragon before
whose mouth was seen the Figure of a Man's Head, and at his Tail a bloody Flame,
and the Dragon turning his mouth toward Austria. That very year the Germans
and Hungarians were totally routed and beaten. And presently after this
disaster happened a great Plague, which swept away many thousands.

A. C. 1572. and 1577. the two Comets then appearing, portended the ensuing War
between Spain, and England and Holland; not to mention the broils and miseries
which Germany then groaned under. And what need we speak of Comets which
appeared in Ages past, when the great Comet that was seen in the year 1618. is
yet fresh in many Men's memories? A Comet which lasted thirty days, and presaged
a War of thirty years; which accordingly happened, and proved a scourge, whereof
the marks are to be seen yet at this day. This War was seconded by a very cruel
Plague, which consumed those whom the Enemy had left alive; and it is hard to
say whether more died by the Sword, or by the Pestilence.

One would have thought, when the German Peace was made in the year 1648. that
God had then done with the tokens of his anger; but alas! in the year 1653.
appeared another Glass of Gods indignation in Heaven, a Comet which presaged
troubles and destruction to Poland, Sweden, Denmark, Muscovy, etc. in which
Wars, abundance of Christian blood was shed.

And in the year 1661, in the Eagle in the Firmament there appeared another
Comet, which sufficiently hinted to us, that the Roman Eagle was to grapple
again with the Enemy of Christendom; a passage so universally known, that I
need not enlarge upon it.

What the two Comets in the year 1664 and 1665 foretold, the Wars which ensued
thereupon can sufficiently witness. Ask Holland, Brabant, Westphalia, Collen,
Lubeck, the Palatinate, Alsatia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Macklenburg, Bremen,
Schonen, England, and other Countries, and they will soon tell you what the
consequences of these Comets were. They Will relate to you with tears and sighs,
what miseries they have felt. Go to the North and East Sea, they will show you
thousands of Carcasses, which owe their fall to the poisonous influences of
these marks of Heavens anger. They Will let you see the Places of their Battles,
the Bones of their killed men, and the Monuments of those persons, who have
been swept away with these inundations; and on their Tomb-stones you may find
these words engraven, In this place, Death in one Fight has torn away so many
thousands out of t^^ La^d of the living, whose bones are her^ interred.
Consider the Element of the Fire, and let it be r^membred, what hurt, what
mischief it has done within these few years: How many Cities and Towns of late
have been buried in ashes by this merciless Element. Nor has the Water ceased
to offer violence to Men of late years; for we have had news from several
places, and with amazement we have heard, what Floods have happened up and down,
to the ruin and destruction of Men and Countries. And the Winds have been for
some years so violent, that one would have thought they threatened ruin to all
the Vessels that plough'd the Sea, and to all the Towers and Steeples which
adorned the nobler Buildings. Witness the Hurricanes in the year 1674. whereof
Holland has felt the smart.

What the two great double-tail'd Comets, which were seen the 10 of November,
1675. in Alsatia and Swisserland portended, let the Inhabitants of those
Countries spea^* where you might see nothing but murder, and fire, and ruin,
caused by the French Army. Let a Man ask the famous Towns, Haguenaw,
Cronweisenburg, Deuxponts, Cassel, Newenburg, St. Wendel, and many hundred
Villages in that Neighborhood, and they will acquaint you with the sad
disasters, that within these few months have befaln them. The Cities and Towns
which a little while ago were full of people, are now nothing but heaps of
stone, and Wildernesses, and the Inhabitants Beggars and Alms-folk, that must
beg a piece of bread from door to door. Insomuch that it may now be truly said,
What new Experiment of Death and Plagues
Will Heaven invent, Alsatia, after this!
God has tried all. How is thy pristine state
Altered, and changed, and turned upside down!
The Market once of precious things thou wast,
Things which can make a place renowned and great*
Thou went beyond the Countries we admire
Things seen elsewhere, are epitomized in thee.
Thy Praise is gone, thy Ornaments are lost;
Thy Coffers rifl'd, and thy Gold cashiered,
Thy Cities ruined, and thy Towns laid waste:
And thus thy Garden is a Desert grown.


From what we have said it sufficiently appears, that Comets are no useless
things. God grant, that the Comet which has lately been seen, may bring us
better news. It appeared, and was seen on the 16th day of April at Hamburg;
and, as those that took an exact view of it, tell us, it was very fiery, and
cast its beams toward the East. Afterward, when the Heavens were clear, and
without Clouds, it appeared perpendicular, and standing bolt upright. It rose
at North-East in the morning, about two of the Clock, and had its situation
betwixt the left foot of Andromeda, and the Triangle in the Firmament. Its Tail
has been observed to be of an unequal length, having appeared sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter; but its ordinary length was about three quarters of
a yard.

What the Learned will judge of it, will be seen ere long by their Writings. To
sp^ spiritually of it, let every man that has either seen or heard of it, or
read of it, lay his hand upon his breast, and think with himself, That God has
sent this Comet for his sins, and threatens destruction to him: Let him search
and examine his Conscience, and confess his sins, and repent, by mending his
life; and without doubt this will be the best interpretation of the Comet.

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Jonathan Edwyn at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street, 1677.

Licensed,

May 14. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.


