AN EXACT DIARY OF THE SIEGE Of the CITY of MENTS, FROM THE Time that the
IMPERIALISTS first sat down before it, to the surrender of the Place.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by R. Janeway, 1689.

AN EXACT DIARY OF THE Famous Siege OF THE CITY of MENTZ, FROM The Time that
the Imperialists first sat down before it, to the Surrender of the Place.
THE City of Mentz by the Latins called Magontiacum, said to have been Built by
Moguntius, the Son of Hector, the Son of Priam, King of Troy, is the seat of an
Archbishop, who is one of the Principal Electors of the German Emperor, b^ing
the Place where Printing was first invented, and is Situated four Leagues
distant from Francfort, where the Main falls into the Rhin; fortified with a
Citadel, and adorned with a fair Academy. This City, having for some months
groned under the Tyranny of the French Conquests, the Duke of Lorraine being
numerously assisted by the Princes in Confederacy against the common Enemy of
Europe, resolved to wrest out of the hands of the French King and restore it to
it is former Imperial Freedom.

To this purpose the Duke of Lorraine, upon the 29 of May departed from
Francfort, and took up his Head Quarters at Hockheim, about a German mile from
Mentz; and the next day went with four hundred Horse to observe the Place,
advancing within Cannon shot of the Fort of Cassel which is over against Mentz;
tho the French at the same time fired a great many shot, one of which killed
two Men very near the Duke's Person.

The 31 of May ten Imperial Regiments, five of Horse and five of foot, encamped
between Wisbaden and Morback, His Highness having his Quarters near to
Costheim. The Troops of Hesse were quartered from Hocheim as far as the Rhine;
and the Forces of Wolfenbuttel were marched to Wisbaden; and the Munsterian
Troops, to the number of 5000 Men lay encamped at Ratingen within two German
miles of Keiserswert. And in a short time after the Fort of Cassel, lying on
the other side of the River, over against Mentz, was taken by the Imperialists.

This done the Duke of Lorraine returned to Francfort in Expectation of the
Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hesse; there being already come to
that Place the Dukes of Saxen Gothen, and Saxen Coburgh, the Bishop of
Wirtsbergh, and the Generals Souches, Commercy, Lip, and Fleming.

Toward the latter end of June Keyserwaert was Besieged by the Elector of
Brandenburgh, and upon the finishing his Batteries and their beginning to play
into the Town, was surrendered upon Composition. From hence the Elector of
Brandenburgh marched forward and invested Bonne, while the Prince of Waldeck,
and the Prince of Vaudemont watched the Motions of the French under the Marshal
d' Humieres, who had suffered much by a great Tempest, attended with such
violent Rains and Floods, that he lost a great part of his Baggage, and several
of his Men, himself also with some difficulty escaping being drowned. Other
detachements there were of the Confederates which were ordered to have an Eye
upon the Duke of Duras, who was forming an Army and lay not far from
Philipsbourgh.

The French being thus secured from doing much Mischief to the Besiegers of
Mentz, the Imperial Army encamped between Creutsnach and Altzey, about six
leagues from Mentz, and there made a Halt till they had made themselves Masters
of the Castle of Eberburgh, which they attacked upon the sixteenth of June with
their Cannon and Mortars; the Castle being advantagiously situated, and of
difficult Access, and lately fortified by the French with additional outworks.

At the same time Letters were intercepted from Monsieur Louvois to the
Marquess d' Vxelles, Governor of Mentz, to let him know that the French King
had sent the Arriere-Ban to the Coasts, and that by reason of some
disappointments, he was not to expect very powerful Succors, for that there
was every where too great Occasion for his Forces, in regard the Enemy had
never been so numerous in the Field before.

And now all things being ready, and the Methods of proceeding being concerted
between the two Princes; the Duke Lorraine advanced with the Imperial Army
within two German miles of Mentz, having sent four thousand Croats before, who
posted themselves near the Town; upon whom the French Horse in the Garrison
made a Sally, but perceiving their Strength, immediately retreated again. The
same day the Electour of Saxony with seven thousand of his Foot passed the
Rhine in Boats, and joined the Imperial Army, having sent his Horse to
Gernsheime, in ordet to pass the River there upon a Bridge of Boats. The forces
of Hess and some Saxon Regiments, to the number of eight or 10000 Men, were
posted on this side the Rhine, where they had raised several Batteries at
Costheim and Cassel, from whence they very much annoyed the Besieged with their
Bombs and great shot. But the Confederates resolving to make quick work, upon
the eighteenth of July began to work at their Lines of Circumvallation, to
which purpose they summond in three thousand Peasants from the Country
adjoinning. And all the care imaginable was taken to supply the Besiegers with
Ammunition and Provision by Water from Frankfort.

The Lines of Circumvallations and Platforms for the Batteries being thus
completed, upon the twenty second in the Evening they opened their Trenches
without any disturbance from the Enemy, who were in a little disorder that
night occasioned by the Bombs which the Hassians shot into the Town from their
Battery on the other side of the Rhine, and which set several Houses on sire.
The next morning by break of day some of the Horse came out of the Garrison to
disturb the Workmen; but were quickly beaten in again. They had also placed
several Field Pieces all along upon the Counterscarpe, from which they fired
upon the Besiegers Workmen; by one shot from whence the young Prince Frederick
of Newburgh was unfortunately slain; and indeed the Enemy often showed
themselves in small Parties, but retired again.

The 24th. the Saxons posted themselves in the Monastery of the Carthusians,
and then it was that the Besiegers finished their Lines of Communication.

The next day the Imperialists removed their Bridge of Boats up higher toward
the Mill, and secured it with a Redoubt; and by this time they had finished two
Batteries, the one of 15, the other of 25 pieces of Canon.

At the same time the Elector of Bavaria joined the Imperialists, and all the
Saxons were posted on this side the Rhine: And upon the 27th. at night, the
Besieged played very smartly from the Town, so that there were 10 of the
Besiegers killed and 30 wounded. All this while in order to a general Assault,
two Attacks were carried on; one upon the left hand by the Imperialists and
Lunenburghers, and another on the right hand by the Saxons and Bavarians: In
the mean time General Dunwald, was ordered to march with a body of 8000 Horse
to observe the D. of Duras, who lay encamped with the Forces under his Command
near Newstadt.

Upon the 29th. of July, the Sieur Damas de Courmaellon, who had served in the
Bavarian Troops in Hungary, was seized as he was endeavoring to get alone into
the Town. The next night the Lunenburghers relieved the Trenches, and advanced
two Lines upon the Right and Left, and finished the Redoubts, the places of
Arms and other Works, with the loss of 5 Soldiers killed and 7 wounded; among
which M. General du Mont was wounded in the Hand.

Upon the 29th. 3000 Imperialists and 1000 Hassiens, relieved the Trenches, and
finished the Lines upon the Right and Left; and withal began to raise a Redoubt
to cover their Batterries, with the loss of 3 Men killed, and 4 wounded.

Upon the 30th. the Imperialists mounted the Trenches, and advanced them
considerably; and the Bavarian and Sazons carried on their Works at the other
Attack, with no less Vigor and Success; insomuch that the same night they made
two Assaults upon the French, who were posted in a Garden near the Town; but
the Enemy still maintained their ground.

Upon the last of July at night, the Besieged made a Sally with 1500 Men, and
falling upon the Hassiens, at first put them to some disorder; but being
seconded by the next Guard, the Enemy was forced to retire with loss.

Upon the 1st. of August, Three persons entered the Besiegers Camp on
Horseback, and got before they were well perceived, into the Enemies Guard of
Dragoons, which was a little advanced from the Town. It was afterward
understood that they were the Marquis of Barbasieres, who was to command the
Garrison, the Marquess d'uxelles being said to be sick, the Marquess of Crequi
and another French Officer.

The 2d, 3d, and 4th. of August, the Besigers continued advancing their
Trenches, and finishing their Batteries, with all the Success they could
desire; considering that the Enemy plied them very hard both with great and
small Shot; by means of which extraordinary toil of the Besiegers, they were
got within Fourscore paces of the Glacis: And the Saxons had made themselves
Masters of the Garden before mentioned.

At the same time also a German Engineer who had served the French, with
another person made their escape out of the Garrison; and gave the D. of
Loraine a particular Account of the condition of the place, and particularly of
their Mines. During these Progresses of the Besiegers, the grand Master of the
Teutonic Order and the Prince of Savoy, were slightly wounded.

On the other side the Duke of Duras, in hopes to make some Diversion, crossed
the Rhine with 1500 Men; and having taken a small place upon the Nechar by
Assault, put all the Inhabitants to the Sword; after which he advanced toward
Heidelbergh, where he began to raise a Battery against the Town: But the
Regiment of Wirtembergh, commanded by the Count of Oltinghen, getting in
opportunely into the place, the French were repulsed in the Attack which they
made upon the Town; with the loss of between 3 and 400 Men: So that the D. of
Durass being also informed, That Count Serini with the Bavarian Forces, and
General Dunwald with another great Body were upon their March toward him, he
drew off, and returned toward Philipsburgh; burning Seven or Eight Villages in
his Retreat.

On the 10th. of August, the Redoubt against the Counterscarp on the side of
the Imperialists Attack was finished, and the Bavarians and Saxons at the same
time advanced their Trenches toward the Garden of Scadians: That night there
were about 20 Men killed and wounded on both Attacks. On the other side the
Imperialists had continued playing into the Town with a Battery of 25 pieces of
Canon; which had almost ruined two Bastions: And the next day they began two
new Batteries more, the one of 7, the other 10 Guns. The next morning the
Besieged made a Sally with 400 Men upon the Saxons, and possessed themselves of
a Redoubt, which the Besiegers were casting up at the end of the Trenches;
where they began to entrench themselves: But Major General Reus, who commanded
in the Trenches, hastening to the Assistance of the advanced Guards, the French
were beaten back into the Town in great Confusion; having lost the Officer that
commanded them, and a considerable number of their Men: On the Besiegers side
Major General Reus was wounded, and Colonel Schevenitzan who died afterward
of his Wounds; with several other Officers, with many common Soldiers were
slain: Which however did not discourage the D. of Lorain, nor the Electors of
Bauaria and Saxony, from being every night in the Trenches.

The 12th. of August the Besiegers advanced their Trenches very considerably,
which nevertheless cost them the loss of one of their best Engineers, who was
killed that night, and another wounded; and they also loft a Lieutenant and 18
common Soldiers: The same day news was brought to the Camp, That the Count de
Rabatin, who had been detached from the Body of the Bavarian Forces commanded
by Count Serini, to observe the motion of the French, had defeated 800 of their
Horse, killed about 100, and taken threescore Prisoners. The same day also
several Deserters came into the Camp from the French Army and one from the
Town; who informed the Duke, That the Garnison had sustained considerable
losses, since the beginning of the Siege; but that the Governor was resolved
to defend the place to the last.

The next night the Imperialists raised a new Battery of 4 pieces of Cannon,
and the Saxons planted their Mortars against the Town.

The 14th. the Elector of Bavaria went to view the Lines of Circumvallation,
and that Evening received advice, That the two Battalions of his Troops that
were posted at Bruchsall, after they had withstood several Assaults, were
constrained to surrender at discretion, and that together with the Inhabitants
they were carried away Prisoners to Strasburgh and other Places; and that the
French had burnt Bruchfall, Brachtam, Dourlack, Ettingen, Heildesheim and
Werngarton, and then marched away toward Baden. Upon the 15th. the Elector of
Saxony left the Camp, finding himself not well, and retired to Frankfort, After
whose departure, the Besieged made a great sally, and at first somewhat
disordered the Workmen, but at last were beaten back into the Town with the
loss of Two hundred slain on their side, and Fifty of the Imperialists, besides
three Captains.

Within a night or two after, the French made three Sallies out of the Town,
but were as often beaten back with great loss, and not without some damage to
the Lunenburghers, who had then the Guard of the Trenches, of whom above One
hundred were killed and wounded with several Officers; the Prince Hanover
himself narrowly escaping, for that a Bullet passed through his Hat.

By the 24th. of August, on the side of the Lorrain attack, the Besiegers were
advanced so near the place, that the Cannon from the Town did no longer annoy
them. The Bavarians and Saxons were also advanced on their side to the very
Glacis of the Counterscarp. But their great Battery could not be finished so
soon, in regard the Engineers thought it convenient to make some Alterations in
the first design of it; However a thousand Men who had voluntarily offered
their Service, were continually at work upon it, for which his Electoral
Highness promised them a good Reward.

Much about the same time three French Disserters made their escape out of the
Town, by whose direction the Imperialists discovered three Mines, out of which
they took no less than fifty Barrels of Powder; all which could not be done but
that some Men must drop every day: Among the rest on the Besiegers side the
Counts d' Arco and Goli were wounded, and several others were killed and hurt.

Nor did it a little conduce to the benefit of the Besiegers that Marshal d'
Humiers was so far from being able to succor his Friends, that he was about
this time reduced to a worse condition than before by the Forces, under the
command of the Prince de Waldeck. For upon the 25th, of August the Foragers of
the Dutch Army being abroad by nine of the Clock in the Morning, discovered
from a Hill a great many Squadrons of French Horse being the Van of their Army
which was upon its march, who discovering the Dutch Foragers, made up directly
toward them. Now between the Dutch and them was a Valley and a Village, where
some Squadrons of Dutch Horse and Dragoons, and Coll. Hodges with Six hundred
English Foot were posted to guard the Foragers. The Dutch Horse being
overpowred by the Enemies numbers retired. But Coll. Hodges in the mean time
having lined certain Hedges that lay very advantagous for him, and kept firing
till between ten and eleven a Clock, at what time most of the Foragers were got
home. Upon this the French brought Foot and Dragoons to force Coll. Hodges from
his Post, who thereupon retired to a Mill which he maintained, till he received
Orders to retreat, which he did with a Bravery more than ordinary, still firing
upon the Enemy, till about twelve a Clock he came to a little Town called
Walcourt, about a mile from the Camp and the Pass to it, where lay a Regiment
of Lunenburghers who fired very thick upon the French. And thus with the loss
of Lieutenant Coll. Graham, Capt. Davison, mortally wounded and thirty Men
killed, Coll. Hodges got safe to the Camp. But by this time Prince Waldeck had
raised a Battery, and posted some Horse and Foot upon a Hill which commanded
Walcourt; and the French also raised another Battery, and brought nine
Battallions of Horse and Dragoons to attack the Town in three several Places.
Upon that, Prince Waldeck ordered the English Regiment of Guards, and a German
Regiment to force their way into the Town, which they did with an extraordinary
Resolution about two in the Afternoon: And the Attack of the French continued
till fix, both with Canon and small Shot. More especially about Two hundred of
the French Guards came up to the very Gate of the Town with Fire and
combustible Matter, to have set the Town in a slame; but of them, the greatest
part were slain; and so between six and seven of the Clock the French retired
in great disorder to their Camp, leving behind them between five and six
hundred of their Men that lay dead under the Walls of the Town, besides a
great many Prisoners; among the rest Monsieur de Saint Gilain, Field Marshall,
killed with a Canon shot as he was speaking to Marshalld' Humieres himself,
Monsieur de Metz Tiercelin, Commissary of the Artillery; the Chevalier Colbert,
Colonel of the Regiment of Champaigne mortally wounded, and Monsieur de
Tibergeau, Lieutenant of the Artillery, wounded.

Of the Guards.
The Count d' Artagnan, killed. Four Captains killed. Three Captains wounded.
Five Lieutenants killed. Eleven Lieutenants wounded. The Adjutant Major
wounded. Two Gentlemen Volunteers killed, and one wounded.
Of the Regiment of Champaigne.
The Lieutenant Colonel wounded. The Major mortally wounded. Two Captains
killed, Five wounded. Two Lieutenants killed, and three wounded.
Of the Gendarmes.
An Exemp of the Guards wounded.
Out of Vilpians Regiment of Horse.
One Captain killed. Two Captains wounded. An Adjutant Major wounded.
Out of Greders Regiment of Foot.
One Captain killed. Two Captains wounded. A Sergeant Major killed. An Adjutant
Major wounded. A Lieutenant killed.
Of the Dutch side were lost not above thirty or forty Men, and two Officers.

Upon the 25 of August, being Saint Lewis's day, the Besieged not having heard
as yet of this Disaster, intended to have made a very great Sally, but were
prevented by the firing of three thousand hand Granado's designed to have been
made use of in the said Sally, which was occasioned by one of the Besiegers
Bombs falling in among them.

The same day the Imperialists threw a great many Bombs into the Counterscarp,
and the night following sprang a Mine at the lest Angle of the Attack of the
Covered way, and made a Lodgment there, during the heat of which Action the
Prince of Weldentz was mortally wounded in the Trenches.

The 26 the Besiegers continued sapping the Glacis of the Enemies Counterscarp,
and secured their own two new Redoubts with Palisado's.

Upon the 28, the Saxon and Bavarian great Battery of 36 great Guns and ten
Mortars being finished, that morning they began to play upon the Town and the
Citadel, the Elector of Bavaria having given Orders, that all the Musketeers
should first give three Volleys, and that at each Volley eight Bombs should be
shot into the Place, which was performed accordingly with the sound of Drums,
Kettledrums and Haut-boys. At the same time the Imperialists and Lunenburghers
made agreat fire from their Battery of 18 pieces of half Cannon. To which the
Enemy answered with their Cannon and Haut-boys from the Rampart. The same night
the Besiegers continued their works at both Attacks; and the Imperialists
advanced with their sapping above sixty Paces on the right and left, while the
Bavarians made a line of Communication to their great Battery, and a new place
of Arms.

The 29th. the Besiegers discovered several of the Enemies Mines, and played
very fiercely on the Bastions of St. James; St. Martin, Alexander, and
Boniface, as also upon the Curtins.

Upon the 30th. one of the Bombs which the Besiegers threw into the Enemies
Counterscarp, fired another parcel of Hand Granado's, which the Enemy had
brought together to make use of our Men that were at work upon the Attacks: In
revenge of which, the besieged sprung a Mine, but without any damage to the
Besiegers; had not the Besiegers received a greater prejudice that night by the
death of Duke Christian of Saxony, who was killed in the Trenches the 2d. of
Setember, at night. However, the Besiegers Cannon had made such large Breaches
in the Works which defended the Town, that they could see into the Streets of
the City.

On the 2d. of September the Besiegers finished their great parallel Line, and
the Saxons planted twelve Pieces of Cannon and six Mortars upon a new Battery,
in which Action Coll. Schett was mortally wounded in the Trenches, together
with forty or fifty common Soldiers.

Upon the 3d. of September the Garrison sallied out upon the Trenches, but their
number was much lessened before they got back; not without some loss to the
Besiegers, among whom as has been said, was Duke Christian of Sax-Hall, who was
wounded at the same time, and died within two or three hours after of his
wounds.

And now Orders being given for the storming the Counterscarp between four and
five in the Afternoon of the 6th. of September; after the firing of four Pieces
of Canon, and the shooting of a Bomb into the Air, which were the Signals
appointed, the Besiegers began the Attack at three several places, with 12000
Men at each place, who were drawn up into several Bodies and Detachments, to
second one another as there should be occasion. The Enemy on the otherside,
sprang their Mines, but somewhat too early, so that they did the Besiegers
little harm. But the Besiegers Mines had a much better effect; for they made
very large Breaches, while at the same time the Assaylers Canon and Bombs
played very furiously. The Dispute lasted above four hours and a half, and such
was the Courage and Resolution of the Besiegers who pressed so hard upon the
Enemy, cutting all in pieces that opposed them, that they not only made
themselves Masters of the Counterscarp, and lodged themselves upon it, but
pursued the Enemy to the Gates, and had almost entered the Town with the flying
Enemy. The Hessians forced their way to a Fort which the Enemy had near the
Rhine, which they took by main strength, with their Swords in their hands, but
afterward quitted it again: For that not thinking they should have been able to
advance so far, they were not provided of such Necessaries as were requisite to
make a Lodgment. They also possessed themselves of the Galgenbergh, where till
then the Enemy had kept a very strong Guard. In this brave Action the Besiegers
had about 2500 Men killed and wounded, of which two thirds were Imperialists
and Lunenburghers, in regard the Enemy made the greatest Opposition on that
side; for that they believed the Bavarians and Saxons made only a false Attack
merely to allarum them; which was the reason that the latter became Masters of
the Counterscarp about an hour before the Imperialists.

A List of the Officers killed and wounded in the Assault of the Counterscarp
of Mayence of the Imperialists.
Genesis Starenbergh died since of his wounds. Genesis Souches wounded. Genesis Wallis
killed. Count Lambergh who had both his Legs shot off, is since dead.
Schomberck wounded. Holster wounded. Major Haneke killed. Ensign Sching killed
Sekliger wounded.
Of the Regiment of Guards of Saxony.
M. Genesis Zahte wounded. C. Fitterhof wounded. Ensign Glitsing killed, and
Ensign Grettoff wounded.
Of the Regiment of D. Christian.
M. Genesis Zirgter wounded. C. Dunhoff wounded. C. Stange wounded. Ensign Kaiser
wounded.
Of the Regiment of the Count of Reissi.
Capt. Clunter wounded. Lieutenant Zirgister killed. Lieutenant Niswich killed.
Ensign Welmuth wounded.
Of the Regiment of Kupfer.
Capt. Pforter wounded. C. Sander wounded. Lieutenant Michel wounded. Ensign
Reiswick wounded.
Of the Regiment of Zinsendorf.
The Coll. and Lieutenant Coll. Rotel wounded. Capt. Burgsdorf wounded.
Lieutenant Rumor wounded. Lieutenant Walks Hoffen killed. Ensign Winkell
mortally wounded. Ensign Herling killed.
Of the Regiment of Flemming.
M. Genesis Rodewitz wounded. C. Beneck killed. Lieutenant Hauwitz killed. Ensign
Walden killed. Capt. Bistorians wounded. Ensign Nostiz killed. Lieutenant Man's
Huffe mortally wounded. C. Vicethumb wounded.
Of the Regiment of Saxony of the Imperialists side.
Lieutenant Coll. Bergholtz wounded. Sergeant Major Geiersbergh killed. C.
Techler wounded in both Arms. Adjutant Remnitz wounded. Lieutenant Grange
mortally wounded. Capt. Bonekam wounded.
Of the Regiment of Goet.
Six Captains killed of which number is Capt. Seietres.
Of the Lunenburghers.
Fourteen Captains killed and wounded, but the number of the inferior Officers
and Soldiers is not known.
Of the Hessians.
Coll. Gorts shot quite through the Body. Coll. Schenk and Major Butler
received two wounds apiece. Major Lovensteme wounded in the Foot. Three
Captains wounded, and three killed. Two Lieutenants wounded and several
inferior Officers.
And as for the loss which the Besieged received, it was computed to be no less
than Twelve hundred Men slain, besides those that were disabled.

The next day the Besiegers continued playing upon the Town from their several
Batteries, and began to prepare for a general Assault upon the Town.

But then the Governor of the City being sensible of his loss by the taking of
the Counterscarp, and no less fearful of the hazard of a general Storm, which
he understood the Besiegers were preparing to make, thought it his best way to
beat a Parley. Thereupon the 8th. of September Hostages were exchanged on both
sides, and the next day the Capitulation was signed, and upon the 11th. the
Place was surrendered. Of which the Dutch Resident in the Brandenburgh Camp,
gave the States an Account by the following Letter.

MY LORDS,
LAST Night arrived here an Express from before Montz, being sent by the Here
Vandesloo, Envoy extraordinary from the Elector of Brandenburgh, with an
account, That on the 8th. instant the Garrison of that Place began to
capitulate, and this morning arrived the Son of General Dunewald with Letters
from the D. of Lorain to his Electoral Highness, which not only confirm the
former Advice, but add these farther particulars, That the Capitulation was
signed, and that the Garrison was to march out the 11th. instant, with Colors
flying, Drums beating, etc. and that they were to leave behind them the Money
which they had extorted from the Neighboring Countries.

Upon surrender of the Town, the Magazines were delivered up to those Persons
that were appointed by the Duke of Lorain to take an Account of them, and then
the Garrison which at the beginning of the Siege, consisted of about Ten
thousand of the best Men the French had marched out, in all 4500 Foot, 400
Dragoons, and 280 Horse; besides, Six or seven hundred Foot that went in small
Parties, with the Baggage laden upon Three hundred and fifty Wagons, and
thirty one Mules, with which were eleven led Horses, and two Coaches with six
Horses apiece, all under a Convoy of Ten thousand Men to guard them to Lindaw.
The sick and wounded which amounted to Fifteen hundred Men, which were all in
the Electoral Castle, of which the French had made an Hospital; and the six
Pieces of Cannon and two Mortars which the French were to take along with them,
were sent away by Water to Philipsbourgh, but the Garrison Soldiers were
convoyed to Lindan, as is said before: And then the Boors were set to work to
demolish the Trenches and other Works which had bin raised during the Siege.

So soon as the French Garrison and their Luggage was marched out, which took up
six hours complete; and that the Marquess d'Uxelles the late Governor, had
taken his leave of the Imperial Generals, who treated him with extraordinary
Civility, the Confederates entered, and set up the Imperial Colors upon the
Bastions, None of the Churches or Monasteries were endamaged by the Bombs, only
one Nunnery; but the greatest part of the private Houses suffered very much.
There was but very little Powder left in the Town, which was the reason they
were forced to capitualate. For to say truth, the Fortifications which the
French had made during the nine Months that the City had been in their
possession, were very noble; and if the French had been suffered to keep it any
longer, it had been almost impregnable.

General Thungue is made Governor of the Place for the Emperor.

According to the best Computation that can be made, the whole Siege has lost
the Imperialists about 8000 Men.


FINIS.

