An Exact and True RELATION OF THE Present Posture of AFFAIRS in IRELAND.
Giving an Account of the Designs of the Late King JAMES and His Army.
Published for General satisfaction, by a Gentleman belonging to the Bishop of
Londonderry, that was taken Prisoner by King JAMES his Men, and since made his
escape from Dublin the 26th of June last, and arrived at London on Tuesday
last, being the 2d of this Instant July, 1689.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

SIR,
WE have this Relation, by a Gentleman who was taken Prisoner at Londonderry
by some of King James's Men the eighteenth of April last, and from thence
carried to Dublin by a strong Guard, where he was forced to give in 5000 l
Security for his Appearance every day at the Castle: But seeing that King James
had so good Intelligence every day from England, he persuaded his Bail to come
for England; who thereupon left Dublin the. 26th of, June, in a small Wherry,
with only two Boatmen; and arriving at Mossen the 29th of the same Month came
to London the 2d instant. Who certainly affirms:

That Colonel Kirk has been in the River of Londonderry for three weeks past;
but could not get in by reason of some Floats of Timber which the Enemy has
sunk at Brook-Hall.

That about the first of June the Royal Regiment marched from Dublin toward
Londonderry, where they intended to do great Feats; but the Garrison bravely
sallying out, killed every Man of them, except only two Lieutenants, who
escaped on Horseback; In pursuing of whom, the Besieged got a brave Prey of
Three Hundred Cows, and other Provisions: The next day the Enemy sent to have
leave to bury their Dead, which was granted; in the mean time, while they were
at work, Colonel Walker had occasion to send a Message to the Enemies General,
by a Captain of the Garrison* after he had delivered his Message, and was
returning back, one of the French Officers drew his Sword, and vowed that he
would revenge his Friends Blood upon the Rogue, and immediately r^n him through
the Back, and killed him. The Town had immediate News of the said Murder, and
Sallyed out, upon which the Enemy, according to their old Custom, took to their
Heels.

As for Iniskilling, if they could be provided with Ammunition, it would hold
out for Twelve Months; for they have all the Cows, Sheep, and Salt, that was in
the Three Neighboring Counties: They have made two very Large Redoubts,
enclosing all the Island, that was about the Town; so that they have Grass
enough under the Command of their Guns, to keep their Horses; which consists of
1500, their Foot of 5000. The Enemy never made any Attempt there, only upon
their March to Londonderry, they thought to have taken it in by the way, but
were defeated with the Loss of Four Pieces of Cannon, and 15 Barrels of Powder,
and Shot equal, which they had not time to Plant; for the Besieged Sallied out,
and took their Cannon, with the Loss only of Ten men; and killed 40 of the
Enemy.

The Protestants of Dublin and Drogheda live pretty peaceably; but all the
Country besides, though they have Protections, yet nevertheless they are daily
Robbed, Plundered and abused by the Soldiers and Rabble: And when complaint is
made, they have no satisfaction.

The Earl of Tyrconnel is out of all Employment, and has betook himself to a
private Lodging at Chappel-Lizard; Colonel Macharty finding King James kinder
to the French than to the Irish, said one day in a Tavern, That he would lay
down his Commission, rather than be subjected to the French. Next morning
somebody told King James, who immediately sent for him; who, instead of
denying, or excusing what he had said, added much more: So that he insensed the
King so much against him, that he disposed of all his Employments to the
French; He was Major General of the Army, Governor of Cork, and Colonel of a
Regiment of Horse: this happened upon the 16th of June; the 17th, in the
evening, he went out of Town on Horseback with one Servant toward Kilmanan,
it was thought he went to Chappel-Lizard to Tyrconnel. The Lord Brittas being
much in favor with the King, was unfortunately at the Globe Tavern upon
Cork-Hill with some French Officers, somebody came into the Room, and gave an
account that there was an Express arrived from France, giving an account of
Queen Mary's being with Child; but it was his ill luck to say, That if she was
with Child, it was got by the French King: next morning it came to King James's
ear, who immediately sent for him, and turned him out of his Command, as
Colonel of Foot, and gave it to a French Captain before his face, upon which
my Lord went immediately into the Country, and will not return any more, it is
thought.

Their whole Army of Ireland, besides them that are in the Garrisons, consists
of but 15000 Foot, and 5000 Horse and Dragoons, such as they are. There is at
the Siege of Derry 9000 Foot, and 2000 horse, the rest is all scattered up and
down There is Coined in Dublin Shillings and Six pences of Copper, with the
Cross and Crown in the middle on the one side, and James Rex on the other.

All the old Furnaces and Brewing-Kettles are called in by Order, and those
they make this Coin of; for before this Invention, they had no way of Paying
their Army.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Art of Curing Diseases by Expectation, with Remarks on a supposed Great
Cure of Apoplectick Fits. Also moct useful Observations on Coughs,
Consumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Fevers, and Smallpox. With a Confutation of
Dispensatories, and other various Discourses in Physic. By Gideon Harvey, M.
D. Their Majesty's Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the College of
Physicians of the Hague, in 12o. Printed for and sold by James Partridge at
Charing Cross, and Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

London: Printed for James Partridge at the Post House at Charing Cross. 1689.


