Excceding Joyful NEWS FROM The Earl of Stamford, the Lord Whorton, and the
Lord Kymbolton, Wherein is Declared the Proceedings of the Lord Whorton near
Kittermaster with 5. Troops of horse, against Prince Robert with 20. troops,
October 18. and how Prince Robert were forced to retreat. Also a famous victory
obtained by the E. of Stamford near Hereford, with 1000. foot, and 500. horse
against 3000. Cavaleers, with the Number that were slain on both sides. Also
the Lord Kymbolton his Proceedings in Gloucestershire against the Cavaleers.
Likewise a true Relation of his Majesty's marching from Shrewsbury toward
Coventry with his main Army, and how his Excellency is within one days march
of His Majesty with all his forces. Sent in a Letter from His Excellency to
the House of Commons, October 21.

Printed for Richard West, October 22.

Exceeding Joyful NEVVES FROM The Earl of Stamford, the Lord Kimbolton, and
the Lord Wharton, Wherein is manifested their Happy Proceedings against the
Cavaleers, declaring also their Onsets and Skirmishes, which they have had
near Hereford.
THe Earl of Stamford, according to the Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament,
having s^^led the Militia in Liecestershire, and cleansed that Country of the
Cavaleirs, he forthwith (...) with his Forces toward His Excellency the Earl
of Essex, where at His first coming ^ amongst all the Parliament forces, both
by the Officers and common soldiers.

But he had not remained there not above 7. or 8. days, but Post presently
came to His Excellency, intimating that the E. of Devonshire, and the Lord
Lovelace, accompanied with a great Number of C^valeirs, had laid siege against
the said City of Hereford, and had made many Onsets against the same.

Yet such was the courage of the Inhabitants of the said City, being much
animated on by the goodness of their cause, that they most unanimously set
down their Resolution to fight it out to tht last man.

And though the Malignants gave out diverse speeches, that they would (...)
(...) City (...) with the ground, and not ^^ve a Horse standing; (...) such
(...) the providence of the Almighty in preserving the Inhabitants thereof,
that although the inhumane and blood-thirsty Cavaleirs did for the (...) of one
day and a night (...) most furiously against the said, City, yet was there not
one man hurt in all this time.

But they had not continued in this their barbarous and inhumane action above
two or three days, but the Noble E. of Stamford appeared with his forces,
consisting of one thousand foot, and five hundred Horse, who immediately gave
battle against the Malignant Cavaleers, but such was the base cowardice of them
that they soon betook themselves to flight, leaving behind them of their
Confederates about 200 slain and wounded.

Thus has the noble Earl obtained the Victory, with the loss of five men, and
has possessed himself of the said City of Hereford.

The Lord Kimbolton has behaved himself very valiantly in Gloucestershire, and
has raised 500 Dragoneers in the said County, and has cleansed the same of the
Malignants, being now resolved to pursue Prince Robert who does much spoil
whersoever he goes.

A true and exact Relation of His Majesty's marching with his Army toward
Coventry and how his Excellency has advanced from Worster with his main Army,
and is now within one days march of the Kings Army.

ON the 19. day of this instant month, Letters came to both the Honorable
Houses of Parliament from His Excellency the Earl of Essex, showing that the
forty thousand pounds which the Parliament lately sent down to pay the Army,
was safely conducted unto Gloucester, and that he had sent a sufficient Guard
to conduct it unto him, declaring that it came very seasonably to pay the
soldiers.

His Excellency also informed the House that His Majesty is now advanced from
Shrewsbury, and is marching with His Army toward Coventry.

His Excellency further Declared, that he had sent forty Troops toward
Wolverhampton, where Prince Robert kept his Rendevouz, and that he was advanced
with his main Army from Worster after his Majesty's Army, and was within one
days march of them.

It was also signified by diverse Letters to the House of Commons, that the Lord
Whorton showed himself very valiant and resolute at Kittermaster, as is
plainly related in these ensuing particulars.

Upon the 18. of this month the Lord Wharton having information and
intelligence that Prime ROBERT were come to the said Town, with a Resolution
to plunder and pillage the same, his Lordship immediately drew out five troops
of horse and marched toward Kittermaster, where he faced Prince Robert at
about three miles distance, and he them, the said Prince having at least twenty
troops, continually expecting an encounter, for the space of 3. or 4. hours.

But the Lord General having notice of the same, he immediately sent a Post to
the Lord Wharton; desiring him to make some Retreat, until more Forces should
come in to assist him. But Prince Rob ^^ving information that more Forces w^^^
lomming to aid the Lord Wharton, he i^^mediatly marched away with all his
Fo^^ces. It was also signified by Letters from His Excellency to the House of
Commons, that His Majesty has granted Commission to diverse great Papists i^
the County of Lancaster to raise wha^ men they can for His Majesty's service o^
that Faction, and what Money, Plate, o^ Horse can be by them raised, and to
sen^ the same to His Majesty, with power t^ perforce and seize upon the goods,
money horse and Plate of any Persons whatsoever, that shall refuse to contribute
the same to relieve His Majesty's present necessity, as Enemies to His Majesty,
and as disloyal and traiterous Subjects, which many have done according to the
said Commission in the further parts of Lancashire, to the great terror,
trouble, and oppression of the Protestants, and well affected persons in those
parts of that County.

FINIS.

