MEMENTO MORI

AN ELEGY On that great Example of Charity and Virtue, The Right Honorable
The Countess Dowager of Thanet: Who died on Monday the 14th of August Instant,
At the House belonging to that Noble Family in Aldersgate Street.
AS the other night perplexed with Cares I lay
Wishing the arrival of expected day,
I saw the Stars grown on a sudden pale,
Heaven doubly shrouded with a Mourning-vail;
A doleful Shreek invaded straight mine ear,
And filled my mind with horror and with fear.
Frighted I rise, and trembling reach the street,
Where Throngs of Poor and Needy Souls I meet,
Whose deep-fetch'd Sighs and Joynt-united Cries
Pierced at once my Heart, and rent the Skies.
In every Look Symptoms of Grief I spy,
Too great at first to speak the reason why.
But when an Ebb of Sighs allowed them breath,
They sadly told me this Good Lady's Death,
Thanet! whose liberal Hand and open Door
Has long time been the Exchequer of the Poor,
The Public Ordinary of helpless Guests,
For whom her Bounty every day made Feasts:
She! She! is snatched away, and we have none
To keep us now, our great Reliever's gone,
Gone as a- Pearl drop in the Main, to get
Which, we may sink, but not recover it.
I grieved to hear the News, and their Complaint,
And sat me down in Tears my Grief to vent.
For such a worthy Gause there is no excuse,
Sorrow can make a Verse without a Muse.
What she did here, by great Example, well
T'inlive Posterity, her Fame may tell.
Her sweet obliging Charms, her Courtesy,
Her wary Guards, her wise Simplicity,
Were like a Ring of Virtues 'bout her set,
And Piety the Center where all met.
Though Streams of Grandeur flowed in her high blood,
She before Great, preferred the name of Good;
Her Life so Regular, her Virtue such,
Some commenced Saints of old with half so much.
She had a mind as calm as she was fair,
Not tossed or troubled with fantastic Air.
A Curl disordered, or a Pin misplaced,
Could not disturb the serene Peace that graced
Her Soul; nor would she suffer thoughts to fly
Out after gaudy Toys of Vanity;
But by a solid course, this Conquest got,
To use the world as though she used it not.
To say she is now an Augel, is scarce more
Praise than she had, for she seemed such before.
Whilst Pilgrimaging here, she stood possessed
Of Heaven in part; for her rich furnished breast
Was a fair Temple, and her Heart a shrine,
So purged, that she appeared All-Divine.
You that the World with Panacaea's vex,
Knew you no succor against an Apoplex?
How happens it, that every day we meet
The looser sort of people in the street
From desperate Diseases freed? And why
Can you help them, and suffer her to die?
Who was all Virtues in Epitomy.
She in whose Fate the fainting World sustained
A general Loss, too great to be regained
In aftertimes: For her Example wrought
Through each Degree, and glorious Actions taught
To all mankind, whilst they by Copying her
In each Relation, learned their own (...).
Beauty and Modesty mixed in her Youth,
And in her Age D^scretion, Grace, and Truth.
Her H^^^^^ dictated Humility,
And Riches did but feed her Charity.
How nobly she dispatched each Scene of Life!
A tender Mother! a most loving Wife!
A gracious Mistress, an unwearied Friend!
Whose Love on Fortune's Smiles did never depend.
Truly Religious, and in every thing
Fast to the Church, and Loyal to her King.
She having thus tutored the Standers by
So well to live, now teaches them to dye.
Nor need we bid her sleep secure, who know
That God himself rocked her to sleep below.
Her Soul being sweetly snatched away to Bliss,
As if some Angel stole it in a Kiss,
There mounted high, beyond the shades of Death,
She draws pure Joys and Everlasting Breath,
Whilst here a generous Odor shall be fanned
By soft perfumed Winds throughout the Land;
Which like Rich Essence in the locks of Fame,
Shall stick, and there Embalm her Deathless Name.
FINIS.
With Allowance,

Aug. 17. 1666. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1676. 91.


