AN EXACT COPY OF THE IRISH REBELS COVENANT.

Imprinted by Robert Young and Evan Tyler, and are to be sold by Andro Wilson
Bookseller, at his shop near the Ladies steps, IN EDINBURGH, 1641.

THE IRISH REBELS COVENANT.
_1 N. N. Do with firm faith believe and protest all and singular the
Articles and Points which the Catholics and Roman Church believes and
confesses, and to my dying day will by Gods grace maintain and defend the same
faith against all Sectaries, Jews, Atheists, and enemies whatsoever, even with
the loss of life, estate and goods.

2 I also in my conscience believe and acknowledge King Charles to be my*
Sovereign Lord and King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, whose
privileges, prerogatives, attributes regal due to his imperial Crown and
royal dignity, I promise and vow to God to maintain and defend by Gods grace
against all ill-affected persons, be they of what Country or Sect whatsoever,
to the loss of life, estate and goods.

3 I promise and vow likewise to be true to my poor oppressed Country, the
Kingdom of Ireland, with loss of life, goods and estate, and will endeavor
to free it from the Bondage and grievous govemment and oppressions under which
it groans by the means of evil Officers and Ministers of Justice, contrary to
his Majesty's most gracious intentions.

4. I do vow and promise to God, to wrong no Catholic nor challenge any
estate or Lands, if so they be possessed of the same before the plantation
began in the year 1610. or any Lands possessed by them, since then, so he or
they bought the same or purchased it for money or otherwise.

5 Item I further promise and vow to make no difference of or disparitie
between the mere Irish, and them of the pale, between the old Irish and new
Irish, be they of what standing, calling, or quality whatsoever so they be
professors of the holy Church and maintainers of their Countries liberties. All
these and every precedent Article, I the said N. N. do promise, vow and swear
to maintain, and cause all others over whom I shall have power, to maintain
and defend inviolable by Gods grace. So God help those of his Gospel.

FINIS.

