Exceeding Joyful NEWS From the Earl of ESSEX Being a true and real Relation
of His incompassing the Kings Army near the City of Oxford, December. 7. and
the great skirmish which they had at the same time. Also how Sir John Meldrum,
and Collonell Langham drew out their two Regiments of Blew-Coaths, seven troops
of horse, and 9. pieces of Ordnance, and got beyond Oxford, and there set their
men in battle array, raising two half-moons, and planting their Ordnance
against the Cavaleers. Likewise the Proceedings of the E. of Essex since his
departure from the Earl of Northumberland, E. of Holland, E. of Pembroke, and
the Lord Sey, as Windsor, December. 5. and what skirmishes he had in his march
toward Oxford.

December. 9. Printed for H. Blundo. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S RESOLUTION Concerning his marching toward Worster and
Salisbury, and so to York.
HIS Majesty having seriously weighed and considered the present estate and
condition of these West and Southern Counties, and likewise of the Proceedings
of his EXCELLENCY the Earl of Essex, who is now in a speedy pursuit of His
Gracious MAJESTY and His Army, and does use all possible means he can for to
rescue His Royal Majesty from the Cavaleers, who does now detain and keep his
Person by violence, and opposition.

The Cavaleers (...) that (...) Excellency is resolved to follow and pursue
them, and to let no time of opportunity slip, they do therefore most earnestly
desire his Majesty that he would be pleased to leave these parts, and to b^take
himself toward the Northern Parts of this Kingdom, together with his Mayn
Army, that so they may relieve His Majesty's true and Loyal Subjects, which
are now encompassed and surrounded by the Parliament Forces, under the Command
of the Lord Fairfax, Sir I. Hotham, and Captain Hotham.

They further declared to his Majesty, that if His Highness were in those
parts with his Army, it would prove very advantagous to all his Forces, by
reason that Arms and Ammunition, and all other Warlike Provision might the
better be conducted unto them from foreign Parts.

And that he might also put in execution his Designs against Hull, who having
gathered a great Power and Strength in those parts, his Majesty might the
easier beleag^er Hull, and so bring the Inhabitants thereof to due obedience
and subjection.

But his Excellency having (...) informa^ion and intelligence of the Cavaleers
Intention, and that they did (...) to withdraw his Majesty (...) his great
Council the high Court (...) toward Hull, to be revenged upon Sir John
Hotham. His Excellency to prevent and stop their Passage, sent to the Counties
of Norhamton, Warwick, Bedford, Darby-shire, and diverse other places, that they
should ra^se all the strength they possible could, and oppose, kill and slay
all that should come against them, and that they should raise as many horse for
Dragoons, as they could.

His Excellency is likewise resolved to pursue and march after them, with his
Train of Artillery, and has sent to those Forces which lie about Worster to
be in a readiness, and to have a Watchful eye to the Kings Party, that they
do not pass that way.

His Excellency has also sent to the Lord of Stamford the like Message,
desiring him to be in a readiness, and to have a diligent care that the Kings
Party do not enter into those parts, or in that County; because it is reported
and given out, that the Lord Digby is coming that way, and is resolved to give
him a charge about the City of Hereford.

But the Lord of Stamford has strongly fortified himself about the said City,
and is able with one thousand men to hold play against ten thousand.

This is a perfect Relation of his Majesty's Resolution concerning his
advancing toward the North to besiege Hull.

A most Real RELATION OF THE Proceedings of the E. of Essex, since his
departure from Windsor, December. 5. from the Earl of Northmmberland, E. of
Holland* E. of Pembroke, L. Wharton, and the Lord Sey.
UPon Monday last his Excellency advanced from Windsor, where he took his
leave of these worthy Peers, Namely, the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of
Holland, the Earl of Pembroke, the Lord Wharton, and the Lord Sey, who went to
take their leaves of his Excellency, before he set forward his Journey.

Upon Monday toward Evening he overtook his Forces, where they marched most
part of that night, because his Excellencies Desire was to be as near the Kings
Army as he could for fear the Kings Army should get ground of him and his Army,
and the more because he would execute the desires of both Houses of
Parliament, and the Citysens of this Honorable City.

Upon Tuesday his Excellency marched to Stoken-Church, where he found some
opposition, there being about three thousand Cavaleers billeted near to the
said Town, but after one hours fight the Kings Army retreated, and his
Excellencies Forces pursued them as far as Aston in Oxfordshire, killing
about two hundred of them, with the loss of eight men, and another or two
wounned.

Upon Wednesday his Excellency marched to Tedstot ten miles on this side
Oxford, and has strongly entrenched himself there, making many Breast-Works
and Half-Moons, and has also sent Colonel Goodwyn with his Regiment of Foot
and five Troops of Horse toward Abington, where they now lie with undanted
valor and courage, although the Enemy be within one mile of them.

Colonel Sir John Meldrum, and Colonel Langham with their two Regiments of
Blew are also got beyond Oxford, and have taken up their Quarters near to
Woodstocke, being about six miles from Oxford, having also seven Troops of
horse, and nine pieces of Ordnance, and about four small Drakes, the enemy
being near unto them.

Sir John Meldrum and Colonel Langham has planted their Ordnance against the
Kings Army for their own saf^guard and defense, and has also raised three
Half-Moones, for the safeguard of their Forces.

His Majesty being now surrounded and encompassed by his Excellency the Earl
of Essex, it is very probable there will be a sudden Battle; for both Armies
are making of great preparation for the same, and most of their forces are
drawn up to a head.

The Cavaleeas gives out speeches that the Troopers of our side for the
greatest part, are resolved to stand as Nuters, but that is false, for both
horse and foot have entered into an Association to ass^st each other, and to
fight it out to the last man.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, that all Soldiers
that do commit any offense or contempt, contrary to their Orders, shall b^
severely punished, according to Law.

John Brown Cler-Parliamentorum

FINIS

