Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM Warwick-Castle and Banburie: SENT In a Letter
from Mr. Fines, Son to the Right Honorable the Lord Say, to Mr. John Pym, Esquire;
a worthy member of the House of Commons.

Wherein is Declared how the Earl of Northampton had besieged Warwick Castle,
and planted against it diverse pieces of Ordnance, and how he was beaten off by
the Soldiers that were within the said Castle.

Also comfortable Tidings from Portsmouth, declaring the manner how M. NORTON
one of the Lieutenants for Hampshire, has took the Works which Colonel Goring
had made three miles from the Town.

Hen. Elsing Cler. D. Com.

Printed for John Cave. August 17. 1642.

Exceeding JOYFUL NEVVES FROM WARWICK-CASTLE.
Upon Tuesday last, being the 16 day of this instant month of August, the House
of Commons received a Letter from Mr. Fines, Son to the right Honorable the
Lord Say (who had the Charge of the Ordinance, in the absence of the Lord
Brooks) the said Letter was directed to Mr. Pym, an Honorable and worthy
member of the Commons. House and at the completing of the said house, Mr. Pym
acquainted them with it, and openly read the same in the presence of all those
members that were residing ^^^^e.

The Substance and Form of the said Letter, is Declared and laid open in these
ensuing Particulars.

The Letter.
SIR,
OUt of the love and affection, which I bear unto you, I thought it very
expedient to acquaint you with our proceedings in these parts, which I have
here briefly set down, as follows.

The Earl of Northampton having no sooner had information, that the Volunteers
that came out of Hartfordshire were returned back again, by reason of a forged
Letter that was sent unto them, by the plot and procurement of the said Earl in
the name of Mr. Hambden, desiring them to return back again, pretending that
there was no need of their going to Banbury, he immediately marched toward
Banbury with 600. horse, and coming thither, he commanded the said town to be
restored up into his custody, but the Inhabitants of the said town would not
consent thereto, but resolved rather to spend their dearest lives in the defense
of both Houses, then to prove false and treacherous unto them.

The Ordinance and Ammunition that were in Banbarie, was carried to the Lord
Say his House, and Mr. Fines is Resolved to lose his dearest blood in the
defense and preservation of them, and if it were possible, would break them in
pieces, rather then the Earl of Northampton should have them to employ against
the Parliament.

The House of Commons having spent some time in debate of these tidings,
immediately drew up an Order, and resolved that the Lord Brooks should go down
with all speed, with those Forces that are raised here, to preserve the peace
and safety of that County.

The said Lords and Commons have also given him power and command to raise the
Country, and to kill and slay all those that shall oppose him.

These particulars aforementioned was agreed on by the Honorable House of
Commons, and having prepared and made ready the Orders and Commissions that
were to be granted to the Lord Brooks, they sent a message to the Lords to
Desire their concurrence therein, which they most willingly agreed and consented
to, and it was forthwith dispatched by the Lords.

These are the Orders of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Lord
Brooks, Lord Lieutenant of Warwickeshire.

Both Houses of Parliament has also taken into consideration the proceedings
of the Earl of Northampton, and after some time of debate thereupon, it was
Ordered, that the Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, Mr. Hambden, and Mr.
Goodwyn (being both made Colonels) should go down into Buckingham-shire to
raise Forces in that County, and to march with them toward Banbury, for the
preservation thereof against the Earl of Northampton.

But it was reported to both houses of Parliament for certain, that the Earl
of Northampton has taken the Ordinance and Magazine that were at Banbury, and
carried them to Warwick, and has planted them against the Castle, and has
also gathered together a great Number of men, being credibly reported, 14. or
1500. at the least, and that Mr. Fines when he saw that he was no ways able to
make resisti^^^^ ^^livered up the Ordinance, so that there was no hurt done,
the Townsmen being willing that the Ordinance should be carried away, thereby
thinking to free themselves of the present Fears, and danger they were in.

The said Earl of Northampton has also since his besieging the Castle of
Warwick, made many attempts against it, and endeavored to beat down the Walls
of the said Castle, thinking thereby to obtain it, but he was prevented of that
damnable project; for the Inhabitants that were within, seeing the Resolution
of Spencer, and that he were mounting his Ordinance against them, forth with
discharged three of their Brass Pieces against the Pioners that were raising
of Fortifications and Bulwarks, and slew about the Number of 12. or 13. men.

There was intelligence also brought to both Houses of Parliament from
Portsmouth, declaring the proceedings of one Mr. Norton, one of the Deputy
Lieutenants for Hampshire, relating, that he had ^^^^n the works, that Colonel
Goring (...) ^king at the Bridge, three mi^^^ (...) Town, with 200. men, which
^ ^ed in the Parliaments name.

They were also informed, that the Cavaleers that are in the said town of
Portsmouth, do steal away, so that he has in the town not above 200. soldiers.

Hen Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.


FINIS.

