An Exact and true Relation of the many several Messages, That have passed
between His Excellency Sir THO. FAIRFAX, and the Marquess of Worcester,
Governor of Ragland-Castle, touching surrender thereof.

Together, With A Copy of the Propositions sent to the General from the
Marquess of WORCESTER, out of Ragland-Castle, and his Excellencies Refusal to
treat on them.

Also, The Names of our Commissioners appointed to treat with the Enemy, upon
the Propositions sent to them from the General.

Certified in a Letter, to a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, on
Tuesday, August the 18th. 1646. And commanded to be forthwith printed and
published.

London, Printed for Fra. Coals, in the Old Bailey, August 19th. 1646.

An Exact and true Relation, etc.
SIR,
IN my last I acquainted you with the Generals leaving of Bath, and coming in
person to the siege before Ragland, where he was entertained in the army with
great acclamations of the soldiers: After which, he sent a summons into the
Castle, to which a dilatory answer (though not an absolute denial was sent; a
civil Reply was made unto it: And after a days consideration thereof, the
Marquess took occasion to write a calm Letter unto the General: Expressing
how much he did respect the Generals Family, and what long acquaintance he had
with his Grandfather: In conclusion, invited to have some Propositions sent
him, which were accordingly sent: The Conditions were honorable for the
soldiery, but as to the Marquess to submit to the mercy of the Parliament.
The Marquess having considered of the Propositions, remained doubtful,
whether the Parliament would confirm what the General should grant, in case
they should agree, to which the General returned him an answer; assuring him,
That what he concluded of would be performed. Whereupon, Thursday, August 13.
the Marquess sent out a Drum, desiring leave to send out his Commissioners,
Friday at 10 of the clock: Whereupon (he says) his Excellency should see he
would not be an obstruction to a peace: which we conjectured was as much as to
say, He would send a positive answer to our Propositions: And thereupon the
Drum was returned with a safe conduct for the Commissioners coming forth, and
a cessation of arms from 10 of the clock till three. The Commissioners
appointed on our part to meet theirs, were, Colonel Birch, Master Herbert, one
of the Commissioners of Parliament residing in the army, and Major Juliday;
whose Commission was to receive what they should deliver, and to present it to
the General.

I shall now give you an account how near our approaches are made unto the
Castle: That which is our maine work, is about 60 yards from theirs, and
that is the most. We have planted 4 Mortar pieces, each of them carrying Granado
shells, 12 inches Diameter, and 2 mortar pieces planted at another place,
carrying shells about the like compass: So that in case the Treaty do break
off, we are then ready to show by what extremity they must expect to be
reduced. This we are very confident, that the Grenades will make them quit
their works, and outhouses, and solely betake themselves into the Castle;
which indeed will be a work of time before we shall be able to undermine it,
in regard we must mine down the hill under a moate, and then their works,
before we can come to the Castle; yet we conceive it feasible to be done with
some loss. Our Engineer, Captain Hooper, a painful and honest man
(proceeding as he has begun) with exact running trenches (which are made so
secure, as if they were works against a storm) will (with Gods Blessing) come
within 10 yards in few days, and then I believe we shall make galleries,
mines, and many batteries: The General is every day in the trenches, and
yesterday appointed a New Approach, which the Engineer of this Army, who is now
returned from Worcester is to carry on with all expedition: He has already
broke the ground, thrown up approaches of about an hundred yards in length and
circuit, and is within 60 yards of under part of their works.

During the Parley yesterday, which held from Nine till Two, they permitted us
to come to their Works, stand close to their Stockadoes and trenches and
discourse with them, so little do they regard our knowledge of their Works
they are so strong: The Propositions sent out by the Marquess yesterday, were
as high as ever any Garrison yet propounded, to which the General returned a
short and positive Answer, letting his Lordship know his Propositions deserved
no answer, and as for himself, he must expect no other conditions but to
submit to the mercy of the Parliament, and gave him time till this day at Ten a
Clock to receive his final Answer; We are all persuaded if he could but have
leave to go beyond Seas, the Soldiers having honorable conditions, he would
submit, and were it not better to grant a man of 84. years those terms, that
probably will be in his grave before the affairs of Parliament will give leave
to call him to trial, and thereby save the lives of many an Officer and
Soldier that have adventured their lives in the Parliaments Cause (and may yet
do them great service) to gain this old man's Carcass at so dear a rate.
Colonel Rainsborow is already come to the Leagure, and his Regiment and
Colonel Hamond's this day expected: The Marquess has this Morning sent forth
word that he will treat upon the Generals Propositions: Whereupon the Treaty
is appointed at Master Oats his house about a mile and half from Ragland,
where it is to begin this afternoon at Two of the Clock. The Generals
Commissioners are Colonel Morgan, Colonel Birch, Master Herbert one of the
Commissioners of Parliament in the Army, Quartermaster General Grasvenor,
Liutenant-Colonell Ashfield and Major Iulida: By the next you shall hear
further from

Uske. Aug. 15. 1646. Your assured friend and Servant, W. C.

Here follows the several Messages and Replies.
Sir,
I Do so much confide in your Honor, as that being at stake concerning leave
to send to His Majesty, I will at this time forbear to make further motion in
it: Only one thing which is extraordinary, I offer to your consideration for
the just cause, besides my Allegiance of my reasonable request: which is; That
upon His Majesty's promise of satisfaction, I am above twenty thousand pounds
out of purse, and if I should do any thing displeasing unto him, I am sure all
that is lost, and no benefit to the Parliament. If you knew how well known I
was in Henry Earl of Huntingtons time, unto your noble Grandfather at York: I
am assured I should receive that favor at your hands that safely you might
afford. God knows, if I might quietly receive my means of subsistence, and
be in security with the Parliaments approbation, and freed from the malice of
those Gentlemen that are of the Committee within this County, I should quickly
quit my self of the Garrison, for I have no great cause to take delight in it.
I have that high esteem of your worth, nobleness, and true judgment; that
knowing you will offer nothing ignoble or unworthy for me to do, as the case
stands with me: I desire to know what Conditions I may have, and I will return
you present answer, and in the mean time rest:

Aug. 8th. 1646 Your humble servant, H. Worcester.

Sir Th. Fairfax Reply.
My Lord.
ACcording to your Lordships desire, I have returned you Conditions, such as
may be fit and satisfactory to the souldierie: To your Lordship and Family, I
have granted quiet and security from all violence of any that belongs to me: I
would persuade your Lordship not to fear any ill, or disrespect from the
Committee of this County (I shall easily reconcile that party) or that they
will do any thing, but as they shall receive order from the Parliament. By
this means you are at liberty to send to the Parliament, and upon a present
surrender, and submission to their mercy and favou^, your Lordship cannot but
think to receive better terms for your self, then if you stand it out to the
last extremity; when besides the hazard of your person, and of those in your
Family (which I do presume are dear to you) and the spoil of the Castle,
which cannot be avoided in extreme undertake against it. Your Lordship has no
reasen to expect better then the Marquess of Winchester received; who in
making good Baling, house to the last, narrowly escaped in his own person, lost
his friends subjected those that escaped to great frights, and hazard, his
House and estate to utter ruin, and himself to extremity of Justice. Touching
your Lordships twenty thousand pound, your Lordship has ^iberty to solicit
about that, by the same hands your Lordship shall give an account of the
surrender to His Majesty. I desire your Lordship upon Receipt of these to
dismiss my Trumpeter, and to return answer by one of your own.

August 10 th. T. F.

The Earl of Worcesters second Message.
Sir,
THe difficulty of resolution by the soldiers and Officers (other then I
thought) causes my request for your patience in not giving you full Answer to
the conditions you sent me yesterday; but as soon as I shall obtain it, you
shall not be long without it. But one thing, and that of moment, I desire to be
satisfied in; whether if any conclusion should be made, that afterward I shall
be left to the mercy of the Parliament for alteration at their will and
pleasures; and if it be so, I shall endeavor in vain to study more about it:
For example, in my Lord of Shrewsbery his Case, and diverse others, how
Conditions have been broken, does a little affright me: I know by your will and
consent it should never be; but soldiers are unruly, and the Parliament
unquestionable, and therefore I beseech you pardon my just cause of fear, and
I will rest:

August 11th 1646. Your humble servant, H. Worcester.

Sir Thomas Fairefax Second Reply.
My Lord,
I Have perused your Letter of this Eleventh of August. As to your scruple
wherein you desire to be satisfied (so far as I understand it) I can only give
you this Resolution, that what I grant, I will undertake shall be made good: As
to the instance you give in my Lord of Shrewsberies Case, the Actors in that
breach (who were none of my Army) have received their censure, and by this
time I believe the execution. But here, if any Conclusion be made while I stay,
I dare undertake there shall be no such thing, or if any, there shall be
reparation.

August 11 th. 1646. T. F.

The Earl of Worcesters Third Message.
Sir,
FOr the better Accommodation of these unhappy differences, if you please that
there may be a Cessation of Arms and working, and to engage your Honor for
the return of my Commissioners to morrow by Ten of the Clock, they shall
wait upon you in your Leagure, where they shall vindicate me for being the
only obstruction of the general Peace: So in expectation of your sudden
Answer: I rest,

August 13. 1646. Your humble Servant, H. Worcester.

Sir Thomas Fairefax Third Reply.
My Lord,
HAving not yet received in any of your Letters a direct Answer to the
Conditions I sent you; I have no grounds or consideration for such a Cessation
of Arms and working, as in your Letter you desire; But if it be your purpose
to return your Answer by Commissioners, I shall by the hour you mention,
appoint Commissioners of mine own to receive the same in the Leagure as you
desire, and engage my self for the safe return of yours, not exceeding six
Commissioners, and as many servants: And in order to this, I shall be content
there be a Cessation of Arms and working, from nine of the Clock to morrow
morning, till two in the afternoon:

August. 13. 1646. Your etc. T. F.
I Appoint Colonel John Birch, Thomas Herbert Esquire, Commissioners of
Parliament for the Army, and Major (...) Tuliday, or any two of them
Commissioners on my part, to receive such Answers or Returns as are or shall
be made or offered by the Commissioners of the Marquess of Worcester, for or
concerning the Renditiou of the Castle and Garrison of Ragland for the use of
the Parliament.

Given under my hand and Seal at Uske the fourteenth day of August. 1646. T. F.



Sir,
HAd I not thought you had been in the Leagure, to the end that Propositions
from the place in answer to yours, might have been first presented unto you,
and to avoid delays, which I thought your side would best like of, it was
resolved to send Commissioners together with our Propositions; but considering
it was otherwise, I have sent you such as I am advised unto, to take into your
consideration, and because there is some addition to yours, I would have been
glad you had heard the just Reasons thereof, to the end you might not have been
persuaded to slight them without just cause; your pleasure for the ordering of
business, I, at your leisure expect, and if you please, the dismission of this
Messenger: and so rest,

August 14. 1646. Your humble Servant, H. Worcester.

My Lord,
I Have perused the Propositions sent out by your Commissioners, which I find
such as deserve no Answer: I have offered your Lordship and the rest conditions
which you may yet have if you accept in time: If there be any thing in them
obscure, needing explanation, or wanting circumstantials, for the better
performing of the things intended therein: I shall be willing to appoint
Commissioners on my part to treat with yours to that purpose, upon those
Propositions of mine, provided you send Commissioners instructed with power to
treat and conclude and return your resolution herein by six of the Clock
this Evening.

August 14. 1646. Yours etc. T. F.

FINIS.

