Exceeding good News FROM THE JSLE OF VVIGHT.

Being a true Relation of a great quantity of Ammunition, viz. 1500 Muskets
many Loades of Bullets, and great store of Powder lately taken there from a
Ship which was going to the Rebels in IRELAND.

Wherein also was much Bees-waxe, to make Tapers for the Priests and Friars.

With a Discovery of another great Plot near Mayden-head in Barkeshire.

All which was discovered to the House of Commons on Saturday, Febr. 11. 1641.

Whereunto is added the Relation of a Prodigious Birth, borne near Fullers
Rents in Holborne, Ian. 30. 1641.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

EXCEEDING Good NEWS from the Isle of WJGHT.
ABout eight or ten days since, a Ship laden fully with great quantities of
Shot, about 1500 Muskets, many loads of Bullets, Powder, and other Engines for
War, coming from Dunkirke (as is supposed) and bound for our Enemies the
Rebels in Ireland, was forced by extremity of weather into a Harbor in the
Isle of Wight, where being commanded by one of the Castles, there ^^^^e was
stayed till further examination ^ow to dispose of those goods aboard, wherefore
presently by advice of the Governors of the Isle, Letters were sent
immediately to London to the Honorable House of Parliament to whom on
Satturday last a Packet was delivered, and the messenger received with great
courtesy, with desire of stay till the Honorable Houses of Parliament, shall
debate of the matter, and fully dispose of that Business, the said Messenger did
farther notify that there was diverse other parcels of Ammunition, Powder, and
shot, found out in a great Warehouse there, all which are also stayed, till
full direction be given to dispose of them.

Also that there was a great quantity of Bees Wax in the Ship, it cannot be
imagined for what, unless it were to make tapers for the Mass Priests, but I
trust in God it will now be disposed of to a better use.

A wonderful preservation.
MAster Patricke Oneale, Servant to Sir William Clotwerthy, being the first
discoverer of that divelish Plot of I reason by the Rebels in Ireland, coming
from thence, being well rewarded for his good Service; repaired into England,
where in London he has since lodged, at the sign of the George, near
Barnerds Jnne, in Holborne, and is now made a Captain, and to go in the Irish
Fxpedition, in the interim he entertained into his Service an Irish Youth, who
fained himself to be a Barber, which Youth was soon inveigled by some Popish
Priests here in town, to murder his said Master, for which he should be
pardoned by the Pope their holy Father, the young man was soon drawn on to
act mischeife, in regard as the Priest; told him it was a meritorious Act to
make him away, who was the hinderer of that great design that was to be
effected in Ireland, he was also persuaded to make away Sir John Clotworthy, by
strewing poison on his meat, the day was prefixed for the acting of this
hellish, and diabolical Act, but mark the hand of God in the timely
preventing thereof, for this Boy went to a Countrywoman of his, a Maid Servant
in Drewry Lane, to whom he told his full mind and intent, thinking she had
been a Romish Catholic, but she was otherways, and declared the truth to
her Mistress, how he should have done it, and fained himself to be drunk, all
which was timely discovered to the Gentleman, and the Boy now lies in Newgate,
to answer for it at the Sessions.

A Wonderful Accident.
ABout a quarter of a mile from the Bridge at Mayden-head, upon the right hand,
on the side of a Hill was an ancient House standing among a Thicket of Trees,
which house has of a long time been inhabited by Papists, and a great shelter
for Priests and Seminaries, who have there continually lurked, and now of late
the Jnhabitant of the said House being a great Papist, did procure a place to
be made under the Hill and House, by digging many large Vaults and Sellers,
wherein he did store many Horses, Arms, Ammunition, Powder and Shot, with the
like Engines of War, for what use may be easily conjectured, in regard of the
ill success by many such Hellish Plots and Practices, which had not God
prevented might have fallen upon us, but our God, which never fails his that
trust in him, can and will in his good time bring all their imaginations to
naught, for while they were lately extraordinarily employed in their Divelish
undermining Plots, and disposing of the Gunpowder in these Cells, the hand of
God brought all to confusion, both Man, Women, Children, Beasts and all, one
with another, for by the Powder taking fire all was blown up into the Air,
where now is nothing left but a dreadful Spectacle of so miserable a Confusion.

The truth of this was fully confirmed by a sufficient honest man, the Clarke
of the Parish of White Waltham near adjoining, who was an eye witness thereof.

A strange Birth.
THat there have been many strange and prodigious Births, brought forth from
time, to time, yet in these latter Ages, none more monstrous and wonderful,
then this which was lately produced from the body of one Mistress Hide near
Fullers Rents in high Holborne, in the Parish of St. Andrews, it was a Male
Child, borne dead, having a Seame dented from the crown of the head, to the
bottom of his forehead instead of the eyes, the appearance of two blathers of
blood, and which was most wonderful, it had a double row of Teeth in either
Jaw, both above and below, the Gumes standing as full as they could hold,'
which bred a great astonishment, and much amazement to all beholders.

FINIS.

