An Exact NARRATIVE OF THE Trial and Condemnation OF John Twyn, FOR Printing
and Dispersing of a Treasonable Book, WITH THE TRIALS Of Thomas Brewster,
Bookseller. Simon Dover, Printer. Nathan Brooks, Bookbinder.

FOR Printing, Publishing, and Uttering of Seditious, Scandalous, and Malicious
Pamphlets.

At Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly London, the 20 th. and 22 th. of February
1663/4.

Published by AUTHORITY.

London, Printed by Thomas Mabb for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1664.

To the Reader.
IT is by Authority, that these Trials are Published; and exact care has been
taken, that the Criminals may be as fairly used in the Narrative, as they were
at the Bar; and how they were there dealt with, let the Reader judge.

It may be noted in the first place, that of Four Lives forfeited to the Law,
the Kings incomparable Clemency would take but One: for (as the Lord Chief
Justice Hide, often, and excellently observed) It was only his Majesty's Mercy
toward the other three, to call that a Misdemeanour, which the Law calls
Treason.

In the next place may be observed, the Tenderness of the Court, not only in
the large allowances of Freedom, and Favor to the Prisoners, while they were
upon their Trials, but in the Adjournment of the Sessions from Saturday till
Monday, only for their sakes; that they might want nothing, which even they
themselves thought necessary for their defense.

And Thirdly; It is considerable, That the One half of the Jury were
Booksellers and Printers, whose Interest lay against the Verdict, if they had
not been Governed by a stronger Impulse of Loyalty and Justice.

To descant upon the Hainousness of their Offenses, is not within the Prefacers
Commission; neither shall any mention be made unnecessarily of their Names; but
to speak one word concerning the Books Themselves, for which they have
suffered; and Another, touching the Reasons of laying open to the World, what
is here Exposed, will not I presume be altogether Impertinent, or Useless.

Of the Treatise for which Twyn dyed, a little shall suffice. It was Molded
and Timed for the 12 th* of October, and any man that shall compare the Cast,
and Bias of it, with the Rebels late Declaration in the North, will swear that
they were Both written with the same Ink. It was in fine, an Arrow drawn out of
a Presbyterian Quiver [Lex Rex] The very Shaft, that formerly pierced the Late
King through the Heart, now Levelled at This.

As to the Pamphlets whereupon the other Three were Indicted: viz The Speeches,
and Prayers of some of the late Kings Judges, etc. Be it known to the Reader,
that this Book was not, as it pretends to be, a true account of the words
(written, or spoken) of dying men; but a mere Forgery and Imposture, Fathered
upon those, that were Executed; but contrived by the Traitors that escaped; as
deeming it their safest way, to publish the designs of the living, in the words
of the dead; and the most conducing to their Project of destroying the Present
King, to persuade the Multitude into a good Opinion of the Murder of the Last.
To conclude; Notorious it is, that the whole Libel is a Cheat, the Letters and
Speeches a Counterfeit, and framed only by Recommending one Rebellion, to stir
up Another. The Phaenix, (whereupon Brewster only was Indicted) was Printed
soon after the burning of the Covenant by Order of Parliament, and bears for
the Device, a Phaenix Rising out of the Flames. The Drift of which Book is to
Charge Damnation upon the Deserters of that Impious League, and to Authorize a
Rebellion.

Upon the whole Business, These are but Three of above Three Hundred several
Sorts of Treasonous, Seditious, Schismatical, and Scandalous Books, Libels, and
Papers, Printed since His Majesty's Return; which are already Gathered into a
Catalogue, and the Pamphlets Themselves in Readinss to be produced, whenever
Authority shall Require it. (Beside Those Numbers that have Escaped the
Observation of the Collector) If there be any Man that will yet pretend to
doubt of a Settled, Formal Plot against His Sacred Majesty, and the Established
Government; let him but advise, with these Horrible Luxuriances of the Press,
and he shall either Renounce his Reason, or Confess, that The Generality of all
the Separate Factions, within the Kings Dominions, are Engaged in the
Conspiracy, And it is no more wonder to find a People Distempered, that is
entertained with Poison, instead of wholesome Nourishment, then to see the Sea
Rage, when the Winds blow.

Thus much said, might seem to give the Disaffected Party a greater Reputation
then Convenient, were it not that their maine Design has lately suffered so
Fatal a Disappointment; that many of them are at this Instant, under a Course
of Justice; Others in Custody, and Expecting it; and the Residue neither in
Humor, nor Condition to prosecute the Quarrel; Being so fully satisfied of the
Vigilance, Power, and Activity of the Kings Friends, (which in Effect, are as
many, as either Love the Public, or themselves) that they find it morally
impossible for them ever to bring any Villainy to Perfection, upon so desperate
a Bottom; Beside that they have Undeceived the World, and made appear to His
Sacred Majesty, that all Mercy is lost upon them.

To pass now to the Reasons of Publishing this Relation, and there to make an
End.

First, There has not been any One Traitor cut off by the Stroke of Justice,
since the Blessed time of His Majesty's Restoration, whose Case, and Trial has
not been Surreptitiously Printed, and Published; and impudently, in
Justification of the Offender, with most Scandalous Reflections upon the King,
and His Government (Except the Late Trials in the North, which are violently
presumed, to be at this Instant upon the Forge) So that, To Prevent
mis-informations, is one Reason of Publishing This Narrative.

A Second is, To manifest the Insufferable Liberties of the Press, and the
Necessity of bringing it into better Order.

Thirdly and Lastly, It is Published for a Caution to all Persons whatsoever,
that they may see the Hazard of Dispersing of Books, as well as Printing of
them, and to the end that none presume to flatter themselves with an
Expectation of coming off, in Cases of Treason and Sedition, upon the Plea of
Trade, or Ignorance. His Majesty being Justly Resolved upon a Strict, and
Necessary Severity toward all Offenders in that Kind for the Future.

Five several Indictments
Being drawn up, viz. One, of High Treason; against John Twyn, Printer, and
the other Four, for Sedition, viz. Two against Thomas Brewster, Book seller*
One against Simon Dover, Printer* and One against Nathan Brooks, Bookbinder,
were Presented to the Grand-Inquest in London, at the sessions of Goal
Delivery of Newgate, holden at Justice-hall in the Old Baily, the 19th* day of
February 1663. Except that against Brooks, which was found the day following,
by the same Inquest. And after diverse Witnesses were Sworn and Examined before
the said Grand Inquest, the said Bills of Indictment were severally returned,
Billa vera.

The Names of the said Grand Inquest, being as follows, viz.
Arthur Jourdan, Arthur Brown, Simon Rogers, James Whetham, Ralph Blore,
Isaac Barton, Roger Lock Thomas Cooper, Roger Heart, John Watson, Christopher
Pits, Thomas Gerrard, John Cropper, Thomas Partington, Ralph Coppinger, Matthew
Pelazer. Samuel Tailor.
At Justice-hall in the Old-Bayly. February 20. in the Morning.
THE Court being set, Proclamation was made: O Tes, All manner of Persons, that
have any thing more to do at this Sessions of the Peace and Sessions of Oyer
and Terminer, held for the City of London, and Sessions of Goal Delivery,
holden for the City of London, and County of Middlesex, ^aw near and give your
attendance, for now the Court will proceed to the Pleas of the Crown of the
said City and County.

God save the King.

Silence Commanded. Clerk of the Peace. Set John Twyn to the Bar,

[who was set there accordingly.]
Clerk John Twyn, Hold up thy hand.


Twyn I desire to understand the meaning of it;

[But being told he must held up his hand in order to his Trial, he held it
up]
Clerk. etc. Thou stand Indicted in London by the Name of John Twyn late of
London Stationer, for that thou as a false Traitor against the most Illustrious
Charles the second, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King; Defender of the Faith, etc. Thy supreme and natural Lord and
Sovereign --, not having the fear of God in thine heart, nor weighing the Duty
of thy Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the
Devil, and the cordial Love, true Duty, and natural Obedience, which true and
faithful Subjects toward our Sovereign Lord the King, bear and of right ought
to bear, altogether withdrawing, minding and with all thy sorce intending the
Peace and common tranquillity of this Kingdom to disturb; and Sedition and
Rebellion within these his Majesty's Kingdoms to move, stir up, and procure;
and discord between our said Sovereign and his subjects to make and move; The
27. day of October in the Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord Charles
the second, by the grace of God etc. the 15th. at the Parish of St. Bartholmews
in the Ward of Farrington without London aforesaid, traitorously did compose,
imagine, and intend the death and final destruction of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, and the Ancient and Regal Government of this Kingdom of England to
change, and subvert: And our said sovereign Lord the King of his Crown, and
Regal Government to depose, and deprive; And these thy most wicked Treasons,
and Traitorous imaginations to fulfill, thou the said John Twyn, the said 27.
day of October in the year aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid,
advisedly, Devillishly and Maliciously did declare, by Imprinting a certain
Seditious, Poisonous and scandalous Book, Entitled, A Treatise of the
Execution of Justice, etc. --

In which said Book, amongst other things, thou the said J. Twyn, the 27th. day
of October in the Year aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, falsely,
maliciously and Traitorously did imprint, etc. -- Against the Duty of thy
Allegiance, and the Statute in that case made and provided; and against the
peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity. What say
thou, John Twyn, art thou Guilty of this High Treason, whereof thou stand
indicted, or Not Guilty?


Twyn. I desire leave to speak a few words; My Lord, I am a very poor man: I
have been in Prison several Months --


Cl. Are you Guilty, or not Guilty?


Twyn. With all due submission to your Honors; I desire to speak a few words
--


Lord Chief Just Hide, You must first plead to your Indictment, and then you
may say what you will; That Is the Rule of the Law; We receive no expostulations
till you have pleaded to the Indictment, Guilty or not Guilty.


Twyn. I do not intend to answer to the Indictment, by what I shall now say; I
am a poore*man, have a Family and three small Children, I am ignorant of the
Law, and have been kept prisoner diverse months. --


L. Hide Pray plead to the Indictment; you shall be heard; say what you will
afterward.


Twyn I humbly thank you my Lord.


Cl. Are you Guilty, or not Guilty?


Twyn. I beseech you to allow me Council, and some consideration; I desire it
with all submission.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You must Plead first; then ask what you will.


Cl. Are you Guilty or not Guilty.


Twyn. Not Guilty of those Crimes.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. God forbid you should.


Cl. How will thou be Tried?


Twyn I desire to be Tried in the presence of that God that is the searcher of
all hearts, and the disposer of all things.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. God Almighty is present here; there is no other Trial by the
Law of England, but by God, and the Peers; that is the Country; honest men.
You shall have all your challenges, and all that is due to you, by the help of
God; we are bound to be your Council, to see you have no wrong; therefore put
your self upon your Trial, say how you will be Tried.


Twyn. I desire to be Tried in the presence of God.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. So you shall; God Almighty is present here; looks down, and
beholds what we do here, and we shall answer severely if we do you any wrong.
We are as careful of our souls, as you can be of yours. You must answer in
the words of the Law.


Twyn. By God, and the Country.


Cl. God send thee a good deliverance.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Now say what you will.


Twyn. I am a very poor man.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Nay, let me interrupt you thus far, what ere you speak in
your defense to acquit your self of this Crime, that you may reserve till by
and by; This is but an Arraignment, afterward the Evidence for the King is to
be heard, then make your defense; If you have any Witnesses on your part, let us
know their names, we will take care they shall come in. If I did not mistake; you
desired to have Council; Was That your request?


Twyn. Yes.


L Chapter Ju. Hide. Then I will tell you, we are bound to be of Council with you,
in point of Law; that is, the Court, my Brethren, and my Self, are to see that
you suffer nothing for your want of knowledge, in matter of Law; I say, we are
to be of Council with you; But for this horrid Crime, (I will hope in Charity
you are not Guilty of it, but if you are) it is the most Abominable and
Barbarous Treason that ever I heard of, or any man else; The very Title of the
Book (if there were no more) is as perfectly Treason as possibly can be: The
whole book through; all that is read in the Indictment; not one Sentence, but
is as absolute High Treason, as ever I yet heard of. A company of mad brains,
under pretense of the Worship and Service of God to bring in all Villainies and
Atheism, (as is seen in that Cook) what a horrid thing is this! But you shall
have free liberty of defending your self. To the matter of Fact; whether it be
So or No; in This case, the Law does not allow you Council to Plead for you;
but in matter of Law, We are of Council with you, and it shall be our care to
see that you have no wrong done you.


Cl. Set Simon Dover to the Bar;

[Who being set, his Indictment was read, to the purpose following.] Thou
stand Indicted in London, by the name of Simon Dover, late of London,
Stationer, for that thou, etc. the 15th. day of February, in the 13th. year of
the Reign, etc. at the Parish of St. Leonards Fosterlane, in the Ward of
Aldevsgate, London, Falsely Maliciously and Wickedly did Imprint a Certain,
Falls, Malicious, Scandalous and Seditious Book, Entitled.- The Speeches and
Prayers of some of the late Kings Judges etc. and the same did Sell and
Utter, against the duty of thy Allegiance, etc. How say thou Simon Dover;
art thou Guilty of this Sedition and Offense, whereof thou stand Indicted;
or not Guilty?


Dover, My Lord, and the Honorable Bench, I desire I may be heard a few words,
--


L. Ch Ju. Hide. When you have Pleaded, you shall.


Dover, I shall be willing to Plead, --


L. Ch Ju. Hide. You must either confess it, or Plead not Guilty. I hope you
are not Guilty of this Foul Crime.


Dover, I am Not, by the Laws of England, Guilty


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, You shall be Tried by the Laws of England, whether you are
Guilty or No.


Dover, I am willing to be so, and I am glad I am come before you to that
purpose; having been long a Prisoner, I am not Guilty of any thing in this
Indictment, neither as to Matter, Time, nor Place.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, What do you mean by Time, and Place?


Dover, I am not Guilty in Manner or Form; And now my Lord, I being altogether
ignorant of the Law, I humbly beg Council, and a Copy of my Indictment; I
hope I shall not be destroyed, because I am ignorant of the Law; I have been
eighteen weeks close prisoner.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, What would you have?


Dover, I desire Time and Council assigned me, and a Copy of my Indictment.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, For a Copy of your Indictment, though it be for a Foul
Offense, yet (in favor to you, it being not made so Capital as the other) we
cannot deny it you, for Council, you may have what you will, we need not assign
it. [Make him a copy,] but I will tell you, We shall try it, now.


Dover, I do protest I knew not what I came for, I never imagined what my
Indictment was, I know not what there is in it. --


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, You shall have a Copy made presently; If you have Council,
or Witnesses, send for them; we must try you to day, but you will have some
time, for we will begin with the other.


Dover, I beg I may have a Copy of the Indictment, in English, I cannot
understand Latin.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. That that is against you, is in English; the Latin signifies
no more, but that you did Seditiously and Maliciously Print all that which is
in English


Dover, I hope I have done nothing, but I shall acquit my self of.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide, I hope you may; But we can give you nothing but a Copy of
the Record: send for your own Clerk to understand it.


Cl. Set Thomas Brewster to the Bar. [Who was set; And then his Indictment was
read;] which was, that he the faid, Thomas Brewster, late of London Stationer,
Not having, etc. (in the form aforesaid) the 15th. day of February, etc. at
the Parish of Little St. Bartholmews, in the Ward of Farington without London,
Maliciously, etc. did cause to be imprinted the aforesaid Book of Speeches, and
Prayers, etc. and the same did Sell and Utter, against the duty, etc.

Who being demanded whether he was Guilty of that Sedition and offense?
answered.

Not Guilty.


Cl. How will you be tried?


Brewster, By God and the Country.


Cl. God send thee a good deliverance.


L Chapter Ju. Hide, Say what you will now.


Brewster, May it please your Lordship, I am wholly Ignorant of the Proceedings
of the Law; I have been a close prisoner these eighteen Weeks, no body to
advise with me, scarce my wife suffered to come to me; I desire some time to
take advice.


L Ch* Ju. Hide, I doubt we shall not be able? If you mean till next Sessions,
--


Brewster, No my Lord, I have had too long Imprisonment already, would I had
been here the first Sessions after I was a Prisoner.


Lord Chapter Ju. Hide. If you desire a Copy of the Indictment, and Council, you
shall have it.


Brewster* I humbly thank you; but I must have time to consult them, or they
will do me little good.


L Ch Ju. Hide, If you have any friends, or Witnesses, you may send for them.


Brewster, I thank you my Lord.


Cl. Thomas Brewster, Thou standst again Indicted in London by the name of,
etc. For that thou not having, etc. The 10th. day of July, in the 13th. year,
etc. at the Parish of Little St. Bartholmews, in the Ward of Farington without
London, etc. Falsely, Maliciously, Scandalously and Seditiously, did cause to
be Imprinted; a Book Entitled, The Phaenix, Or the Solemn League and Covenant:
etc. -- And the said Book did Sell and Utter, against the duty, etc. How
say thou? Art thou Guilty of this Sedition and Offense, whereof thou stand
Indicted; or Not Guilty.


Brewster, Not Guilty my Lord.


Cl. How will you be Tried?


Brewster, By God and the Country.


Cl. Nathan Brooks to the Bar.

Thou stand Indicted in London by the Name of Nathan Brooks, late of London
Stationer; Not having, etc. (the same as to make time and place with that of
Dovers) and knowing the said Book to be Scandalous and Seditious; did Sell,
Utter, and Publish the same against the duty, etc. How say thou Nathaniel
Brooks? Art thou Guilty of this Sedition and Offense whereof thou stand
Indicted, or Not Guilty.


Brooks, Not Guilty.


Cl. How will you be Tried?


Brooks, By God and the Country.


Cl. God send thee a good deliverance.


L. Hide, If you desire to have a Copy of your Indictment, and Council, you
may have it.


Brooks, I am a poor man, I have not money to get Council, I hope I shall not
want that that belongs to me by Law, for want of money.


L Hide, You shall not by the Grace of God.


Cl. Set John Twin, Simon Dover, Thomas Brewster, and Nathan Brooks to the Bar.


Cl. John Twyn, Those men that you shall hear called, and Personally appear,
must pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you, upon Trial of your Life
and Death; if you will challenge them, or any of them, you must do it when they
come to the Book to be Sworn, before they be Sworn; And you that are for the
Seditions and Offenses, look to your challenges.


Dover, We desire we may have a Jury of Booksellers and Printers; they being
the men that only understand our business.


L, Hide, There are those already that understand it as well as Booksellers or
Printers; besides, half the Jury are such, and they are able to make the rest
understand it, but you may challenge whom you will.


The Jury were,
William Samborne, William Hall, William Rutland, John Williams, Thomas
Honylove, James Flesher, Robert Lucas, Simon Waterson, Robert Beversham, Samuel
Thomson, Richard Royston Thomas Roycrost.
Who were severally Sworn by the Oath following.

You shall well and truly Try, and true deliverance make, between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar whom you shall have in charge
according to your Evidence, so help you God.

All four. We are all satisfied with this Jury. Cl. Crier, Make Proclamation.
O Yes, If any one can inform my Lords, the Kings Justices, the Kings Sergeant,
or the Kings Attorney, before this Inquest be taken between our Sovereign Lord
the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, let them come forth and they shall be
heard, for now the Prisoners stand at the Bar upon their Deliverance; and all
others that are bound by Recognizance to give Evidence against any of the
Prisoners at the Bar, come forth and give evidence, or else you will forfeit
your Recognizance.


Cl. John Twyn, Hold up thy hand, You of the Jury look upon the Prisoner and
hearken to his Cause, you shall understand that he stands Indicted in London,
by the name of John Twyn Late of London, Stationer; [here the Indictment is
read over again;] Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and thereunto
has pleaded Not Guilty; and for his Trial, has put himself upon God and the
Country, which Country you are* your charge is to inquire whether he be
Guilty of the High Treason, in manner and form as he stands Indicted, or not
Guilty; if you find him Guilty, you shall inquire what Goods and Chattels,
Lands and Tenements he had at the time of committing the said Treason, or at
any time sithence: If you find him not Guilty, you shall inquire whether he
fled for it; if you find that he fled for it, you shall inquire of his good
and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, as if you had found him Guilty; if you find
him not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it, say so, and no more, and hear your
Evidence.


Mr. North, Barrister of the Law. John Twyn, Stands here Indicted, for that he
as a false Traitor to the most Illustrious Charles the second, etc. Not having
the fear of God before his eyes nor weighing the duty of his Allegiance, etc.
[here was opened the form of the Indictment] to which he has Pleaded Not
Guilty; if there shall be sufficient Evidence given you of the charge in the
Indictment you must do the King and the Nation that Justice as to find him
Guilty, that sentence of Law may pass upon him.


Mr. Sergeant Morton, May it please your Lordships, and you Gentlemen that are
sworn of this Jury, I am of Council with the King* against John Twyn, the
Prisoner here at Bar; who stands Indicted of a most Horrid, and Damnable
Treason. It is, The Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King, to deprive
him of his Crown and Royal Government, and to Alter and Change the Ancient
Legal and Fundamental Government of this Kingdom: which he has endeavored to
do and did intend to do, by Printing a Traitorous and Seditious Book, which in
it self contains as many and as great Treasons as it was possible either for
the Malice of the Devil or the Corrupt and Treasonable thoughts of
Blood-thirsty Men to invent; It contains Treasons against the King in his own
Royal Person; against his Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; full of
Treasons, (as my Lord Chief Justice was pleased to observe to you) Treasons
against the Queen, Scandals against all manner of Profession both in Church and
Kingdom, of Magistracy, and Ministry: My Lord, there are in this Indictment
Thirteen Paragraphs of that Treasonable Book Recited, and each of them contains
as many Treasons, as there be lines in it; nay (My Lord) this Treasonable Book,
it was intended to set a Flame in this Nation; to raise and stir up Rebellion
in this Kingdom against the King and his Government. I shall observe to your
Lordship, the Time when it was to be Printed: It was in the beginning of
October, your Lordship knows, and I do not doubt but the Jury have heard, that
there was a great and dangerous design in this Nation, set on foot by men of
dangerous Principles, to Imbroyle this Nation in a New War, for the
destruction of the King and his Government; It was Executed in part, as far as
Time and other Circumstance would give way and leave to the undertakers; (the
12. of October last) and my Lord, it was proved upon the Execution of a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer at York, that there was a Council here in
London, that sat to prepare matter for an Universal Rebellion all England over;
they sent their Agitators into the North, West, all parts; to give notice to
their Party to be ready to Rise at a certain time; several days were
appointed, but it seems they could not be ready till that 12th. of October. for
the Seditious Books that were to lead on that Design, and the Libels and
Declarations could not be Printed before that day; and truly that had been
Printed and Published too, if there had not been great Diligence used by the
Kings Agents and Ministers, to take them just as they were preparing it. This
Book, Gentlemen, does contain a great deal of Scandal upon the Kings
Government, dispersing False and Base Rumors, to the prejudice of it. It is a
rule in my Lord Cook, that the dispersing of false and evil Rumors against
the King and Government; and Libels upon Justices of the Kingdom; they are the
forerunners of Rebellion.

We shall now go the proof; we shall prove that this Prisoner at the Bar, to
Print this Book, had two Presses in one Room; that he himself did work at one
of those Presses, his Servants at the other, by his Command and in his
presence: That he did Compose part of it. Print the sheets, Correct the Proofs,
and Revise them all in his own house, which were corrected and brought back
into the Workhouse by himself, in so short a time that they could not be
carried abroad to Correct, so that he must needs Correct them himself: That
this Work was done in the Night time, (and it was proper, it was a deed of
great darkness and not fit indeed to see the light, and it was well it was
strangled in the Birth, or else for ought I know we might by this time have
been wallowing in our blood) We shall make it appear, that this man when Mr.
Le-Strange came to search his house, brake the Forms, conveyed away as many of
the Sheets as he could from the Press to other places; yet notwithstanding,
Gods Providence was so great in the thing that he left there three or four
sheets, which Mr. Le Strange, then seized on, and many more within a little
time after: And somewhat of the same matter, remained upon part of a Form of I
etter, which his have would not give him leave to break; When he was charged
with it by Mr. Le Strange, he confessed that he had printed some sheets of this
Seditious Book, and being demanded by Mr. Le Strange, what he thought of it? He
told him, he thought it was mettlesome stuff; he had great joy in it, he
confessed he had received money for printing of this; and much other matter,
taken upon Examination before Mr. Secretary. We shall call our Witnesses; I
should have observed to you, that this man would have it done with all the
privacy that could be, and to be done forthwith; there was great have of it,
about the beginning of October and the design in the North, was upon the
Twelfth, so that it was clearly intended for that Design.


Several Witnesses new sworn. Joseph Walker My Lord, whereas my Master is
Indicted for Printing this Book --


Lord Hide Your Master? Who is your Master?


Walker He at the Bar.


L. Hide. What say you of it?


Walker I desire to see the Book, [it was showed him.] About the four first
pages of this Treatise I composed.


L. Hide. Who delivered it to you to compose?


Walker. My Master delivered the Copy to me.


L. Hide. What do you mean by Composing?


Walker. Setting the Letters.


L. Hide. Well, and you set the letters to Print according to the Copy, and you
had it of your Master, had you?


Walker. Yes my Lord; but all this Copy we did not print.


[Part of the Copy in manuscript being showed him, he said, he composed by that
copy.] Serj. Morton. How much did you Print?


Walker. About three sheets.


Serj. Morton. How many of those did your Mr. compose?


Walker. Truly Sir I cannot tell.


L. Hide. Did he compose one?


Walker. As to a whole one, I cannot say.


Mr. Recorder. Did he Compose the Title?


Walker. Here is no Title.


Mr. Recorder. No? Read the top.


Wall. A Treatise of the Execution, etc.

[He reads the Title.]
Recorder. Did your Master Compose that?


Walker. No, I did.


L. Hide. Did your Master give you that to Compose?


Walker. Yes.


Serj. Morton. Who Composed the second, third, and fourth sheet?


Walker. I Composed some of them, but to particularize I cannot.


L. Hide. Who gave you what you did?


Walker. My Master.


L. Hide. Can you turn to any part of that you did Compose?


Walker, I cannot tell that.


L. Hide. You Composed you say four pages; there are eight in a sheet, who
composed the other of the same sheet?


Walker. I think my Master did.


L. Hide. At the same time and in the same room with you?


Walker. He wrought not in the same Room.


L. Hide After you had stamped the sheet, who did peruse, and over-read it, to
see if it were right?


Walker. I carried them into the Kitchen and laid them down upon the Dresser by
my Master.


L. Hide. Who compared them?


Walker. I know not.


L. Hide. Who brought them back to you?


Walker My Master brought them into the Workhouse and laid them down.


L. Hide. Was there any body in the house that might Correct it?


Walker. Not that I saw.


L. Hide. When you had carried a sheet down, how long was it ere it was brought
back again?


Walker. About an hour, or an hour and a half.


L. Hide. Was there any body in the house besides you and your Master?


Walker. There was my fellow Apprentice, and the Woman that keeps the House.


L. Hide. Were there no strangers there?


Walker. No my Lord.


Mr. Rec. Were they Printed in your Masters house?


Walker. Yes.


Serj. Morton. What room?


Walker. In the Press-room.


Serj. Morton. Did your Master work at the Press about this work, any part of
the time?


Walker. Yes, I saw him beat some sheets.


L. Hide. When you had printed one sheet, were there not some mistakes of the
Letters to be mended?


Walker. Yes, there were Literals.


L. Hide. Who made the Amendment?


Walker. Upon my Oath I cannot tell.


L. Hide. Do you believe it to be your Masters?


Walker. I cannot tell that.


L. Hide. Have you seen your Master write heretofore?


Walker. I have seen him write, but because I have heard of them that could
counterfeit men's hands, I dare not swear it was his Writing.


L. Hide. Were the amendments that were brought back, like his hand?


Walker. The Letters were something like them, but I cannot swear positively,
that they were his.


L. Hide. No, that you cannot, unless you saw him write them; but was it like
his hand?


Walker. It was not much unlike his hand.


Mr. Recorder. Did not your Master use to correct other works before this?


Walker. Yes.


Mr. Recorder. Then by the Oath that you have taken, were not the corrections
of this Book like those of other corrections by his own hand?


Walker. I know not that.


Mr. Record. Did any body correct books in your house but your Master?


Walker. No Sir.


Serj. Morton. Did not you see your Master with Copy?


Walker. Yes he had Copy before him.


Serj. Morton. What time was this Printed? by night, or by day?


Walker. In the night time.


Serj. Morton. What directions did your Master give you about Printing it, did
he direct any privacy?


Walker. He was not much desirous of that.


Mr. Record. At what time did you work about it?


Walker. In the morning, from two till four or five


Serj. Morton. Pray Sir thus; were you in the house when Mr. L'Estrange came up?


Walker. Yes.


Serj. Morton. Were you at work then, or before?


Walker. Not when he was above, but immediately before, I was.


Mr. Record. You are not bound to conceal Treason, though you are bound to keep
your Masters secrets.


Serj. Morton. What were you then at work upon?


Walker. Upon the signature D, the sheet D of this Treatise.


Serj. Morton. What did your Master say when you told him Mr. L'Estrange was
below?


Walker. Very few words* I cannot be positive in them.


Seri. Morton. To what purpose were they?


Walker. Hearing some body knock at the door, I went down into the Composing
room, and looked through the window, and saw people* I imagined Mr. L'Estrange
was there, and I told my Master* whereupon he said, he was und^ne, or to that
effect.


Mr. Record. Did he not wish you to make have in composing it.


Walker. No he did not.


Mr. Record. How long had you been at work upon it? how many days?


Walker. I cannot tell justly.


Mr. Record. You can gess.


Walker. About three or four days.


Mr. Record. Did not your Master work in that time?


Walker. He was in the Workhouse, and did set Letters.


Mr. Record. Did he not likewise Print?


Walker. Yes he did.


Serj. Morton. Did not you by his direction break the Form when Mr. L'Estrange
came to search?


Walker. I brake one indeed.


Mr. Serj. Morton. What became of the other?


Walker. My fellow prentice brake it.


Mr. Serj. Morton. By whose direction?


Walker. I had no order for it, I brought it down and went to set it against a
post, and it fell in pieces.


Serj. Morton. Did you ask your Master who delivered him this Copy to Print?


Walker I did ask him two several times, but he made no answer.


Lord Hide. Did he not say, He would not tell you* or that it was no matter to
you? nor nothing?


Walker. Yes he did afterward say it was no matter to me.


Mr. Record. Did not your Master nor fellow-apprentice tell you who brought the
Copy?


Walker. No.


Mr. Record. And did not you know?


Walker. No.


Serj. Morton. Was he not used to tell you the Authors of books that you
printed?


Walker. The Authors he did not; but for whom they were printed he used to tell
me: My Lord I humbly beg pardon for what I did, I was his Apprentice.


Lord Hide. How many sheets did you print?


Walker. Two Reams on a sheet, which makes 1000.


Lord Hide. The first page, being the Title of it, your Master brought to you
to compose; At the same time when you were composing one part, your Master was
composing another part of the same sheet in the next room, And part of it your
Master did print as well as compose, I think you said this.


Walker. Yes.


Lord Hide. Likewise that the proofs were carried to him to overlook, and he
brought them back within an hour or an hour and half after, and laid them down
in the workhouse; and that you saw the hand of the amendments, but you cannot
swear it was his, only you say, that it was not unlike it; and that he had
corrected former sheets that you had printed, and that the hand with which he
corrected others, and this, was alike; and that there was no stranger in the
house to correct it.


Walker. Not that I saw.


Lord Hide. This is the substance of what you said.


Walker. Yes.


Mr. Record. Did your other man, or you, ever correct?


Walker. No.


Mr. Record. Did he use other Correctors at any time?


Walker. Yes about some books.


Mr. Record. What Books.


Walker. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy.


Lord Hide. You did rise to work at two of the clock in the morning about it,
and your Master said when you told him Mr. L'Estrange was below, that he was
undone.


Walker. It was so my Lord.


Mr. North Mr. L'Estrange, Pray tell my Lord and the Jury of your taking this.


Mr. L'Estrange. My Lord I do remember that three or four days or thereabouts
before the twelfth of October last, I had notice of a Press that had been at
work for several nights in Cloth fair, and employed a person to watch the
house; who told me that they still gave over early in the morning, at day
light, or soon after; At length, intelligence was brought me in these very
words, That now they were at it as hard as they could drive (which was about
four in the morning) I arose, went to one of the Kings Messengers, and desired
him to take a Printer by the way, who did so, and I called up a Constable, and
so went to Twyns house, where we heard them at work: I knocked a matter of a
quarter of an hour, and they would not open the door, so that I was fain to
send for a Smith to force it; but they perceiving that, opened the door and let
us in; there was a light when we came, but before the door was opened it was
put out: when I was got up stairs, and a candle lighted, I found a form broken,
(that is, the letters dispersed) only one corner of it standing entire, which
was compared by a Printer that was there, with a corner of a page newly
printed, and appeared to be the same; This form was brought down out of the
Press room into the composing room. As yet we could not find the whole
Impression, but at last they were found thrown down a pair of back stairs, (I
remember) they told me the Impression was a thousand: I asked him where he had
the copy? he told me he knew not: it was brought to him by an unknown hand; I
told him he must give an account of it; he told me at last he had it from
Calverts Maid; I asked him where the copy was, he told me he could not tell,
(when I speak of the Copy, I mean the manuscript) we searched near two hours
and could not find it; and at length went thence to the Constables house in
Smithfield, and staid there a while with the prisoner. I asked him (Mr. Twyn
said I) who corrected this sheet? Alas, said he, I have no skill in such
things; who revised it then? who ^i^ted it for the Press? Truly I had no body
but my self; I read it over; What thought you upon reading it? Methoughts it
was mettlefome stuff, the man was a hot fiery man that wrote it, but he knew
no hurt in it.


Serj. Morton When you had taken these sheets, were they wet, or not?


Mr. L'Estrange. They were not only wet, but half of them were imperfect,
printed only on one side; missing the copy, I told him after he was carried to
Whitehall, (Mr Twyn said I) it may possibly do you some good yet to bring forth
this Copy, if you will be so ingenuous to produce the Copy, and discover the
Author you may find mercy for your self, pray therefore get this copy,
perchance I may make some use of it. After that, his servant, Bazilla Winsor
brought out this part of the Copy. [producing a sheet of the Manuscript in
Court.]


Lord Hide. Joseph Walker, was the whole copy of this book in the house at that
time when you composed that which you did?


Walker. I cannot tell; I saw it but sheet by sheet.


Mr. Recorder. Did not you see the whole entire Copy in your Masters hand?


Walker. No, but [taking some part of the Manuscript in his hand said] this is
the hand that I composed by.


Mr. Record. Mr. L'Estrange where had you the entire Copy.


Mr. L'Estrange. It was only the Copy of the last sheet that I took in the
Press.


Mr. Record. Who helped you to that?


Mr. L'Estrange. Bazilla Winsor, by direction of the Prisoner as I conceive,
for I told him if you can help (...) to the Copy, it may do you some good and
soon after, part of it was brought me by her. I asked Mr. Twyn further, How did
you dispose of those sheets which you had printed, those several heaps whether
are they gone? He told me he had delivered those sheets to Mistress Calverts
maid, at the Rose in Smithfield


Mr. Record. You say he told you Mistress Calverts maid received them of him,
Did you since speak with that maid.


Mr. L'Estrange. I was long in searching Twyns house and one of his Apprentices
made his escape, and probably gave notice of it, for the night I went to
Mistress Calverts house, she and the maid too were fled, I have since taken the
Mistress and she is now in custody, I have heard nothing of the maid since


J. Keeling. Twyn owned to you that he had corrected some of the sheets, that
he had read them, and sa d it was mettlesome stuff


Mr L'Estrange. I did ask him in the house of the Constable: Who corrected
this? the Corrector must certainly know what it was. Said he, I have no skill
in correcting. But when I speak of correcting, I mean who revised it,
overlooked it for the Press; I read it over, says he.


Twyn. I never said such a word.


Mr. L'Estrange. He spoke this in the presence of two or three here present;
could you read over this Book, said I, and not know that it was not fit to be
Printed? I thought it was a hot fiery fellow, it was mettle or mettlesome
stuff, some what to that effect.


Serj. Morton. What did you hear him confess before Sir Hewy Bennet?


Mr. L'Estrange. He owned the thing, that is, he acknowledged he had printed
the sheet, I showed there, and two other sheets of the same Treatise.


Serj. Morton. Did he acknowledge he corrected them.


Mr. L'Estrange. I know not whether before Sir H. B. he did, or no.


Serj. Morton. What know you about money received by him.


Mr. L'Estrange. He said Calverts maid paid him 40 s. in part for that work.


Twyn. I said I had received money of Calverts maid for work I had done, but
named not that.


Mr. Dickenson Sworn. About the seventh day of October, it being Wednesday as I
remember, about five a clock we attended Mr. L'Estrange, my self and others; we
came to the house of the prisoner, in Cloth-fair and*upon the backside of his
house we stood listening a good while, and heard Presses a working; upon that,
I came to the fore part, by Mr. L'Estranges order, and knocked, but none would
answer, I took the Constables staff and knocked again, and none would answer
yet; After that, Mr. L'Estrange knocked near half an hour and no body coming, he
at last sent for a Smiths hammer to force it open. Afterward, they came down,
and opened the door. Then Mr. L'Estrange, and the Printer (Mr. Mabb) went up
stairs, I continued below with the Constable, and the Kings Messenger to
observe whether any went in or out. After which, some sheets fell down on the
other side of the house, meeting with one of them, and perceiving they had
discovered the sheets they inquired after, I read some part of it, and finding
what it was, I went up and found the sheets thrown behind the door; Mr. Twyn
(said I) I wonder you would Print such a thing as this, you could not choose
but know that it was very dangerous to do any such thing; he answered, that He
did not consider what it was; questionless said I, you could not but know it
was very dangerous, for when you revised it, you must needs know the sense of
it, and think it was a dangerous business, what did you think of it? says he I
thought he was a good smart angry fellow, it was mettlesome stuff; or to that
purpose. This was the substance of our discourse: I did see some of the sheets
Printed on one side, and some on both sides, the Form lay disordered, yet not
so, but there was one corner of it yet remaining, and I having the sheet in my
hand did compare them together; and to the best of my remembrance I do remember
these very words, Execution of Judgment, and Lord have.


L* Hide. Who did he say revised the Press?


Dickenson. He seemed to confess that he had corrected it himself, for when I
urged it to him that he could not choose but know the matter of it by reading
it? truly says he, I thought he was an angry smart fellow, it was good
mettlesome stuff indeed.


Judge Keeling. The question asked by my Lord, is, whether he did confess he
revised it, or whether you did collect it from his reply?


Dickenson. Truly by that answer I guessed he corrected it.


Recorder. Did he confess that he read it?


Dickenson. I put that question to him, and to the best of my remembrance he
did not deny it.


L. Hide. To Mr. L'Estrange he confessed he read it over.


Tho. Mabb Sworn. My Lord I was with Mr. L'Estrange in this man's house, and
being there, going up, we found the Press had been lately at work, there was at
each Press a sheet lay, I took them off the Tinpin [some of the Jury understand
that term] they were just laid upon the Points, printed on one side, I gave Mr.
L'Estrange these two sheets, the same with these [shewing two sheets] some were
perfect, others imperfect; I could not find the Form a great while, I gave him
the sheet to peruse; and in the mean while I went down, and below I found the
two Forms, but broken, somewhat indeed was standing; whereof I took part in my
hand, and read in the letters; Mr. Dickenson having the sheets, he heard what I
read, and looking on the sheet found them agree.


Twyn. What were the words that you read?


Mr. Mabb. The words were Execution and Judgment, and Lord have -- There was a
back pair of stairs out of his Press room, partly between his house and his
neighbors, and in the hurry they had thrown the sheets down there, part fell
behind the door, and part at the bottom. When I questioned him how many was
done? he said five hundred, but I adjudged those I saw to be about seven
hundred and fifty; looking again over the door I espied the remainder of the
sheets about two hundred and fifty more, and I brought them together, and then
he owned there was one thousand.


L. Hide. What else do you know?


Mr. Mabb. At the Constables house, I heard him use the words, that it was
mettlesome stuff, and that no body corrected it but himself; said I, I wonder
you would offer to do it, you could not compose it but you must understand it.
Said he, It was my bad fortune to meddle with it; said I, You lost a Press but
a little while since, I wonder you would do this; he seemed to be sorrowful.


Serj. Morton. He did confess he corrected it.


Mr. Mabb. Yes my Lord.


Twyn. No my Lord I did not.


John Wickham Sworn. Upon the seventh of October. as I take it, about four a
Clock in the morning Mr. L'Estrange came to my house, being one of the Kings
Messengers, and told me I must go immediately with him to Cloth fair, and sent
me to call one Mr. Mabb by the way. I met Mr. L'Estrange near Mr. Twyns house*
between five and six a Clock, we had a Constable and went and knocked at the
door, they knocks at least half an hour before they got in; I heard some Papers
tumbling down, and heard a rattling above before they went up, but I stood at
the back door to secure any from running out that way: and at last, when they
said there were some sheets thrown into the next house, I went and looked and
there were two or three hundred, and they were wet, newly come off the Press,
that is all I can say.


Serj. Morton. Did you hear this man say that he had corrected it?


Wickham. No, but I having him in custody at my house, I asked him about it, he
said, It was a very bitter thing, that it was his unhappy fortune to meet with
it.


Jury* Did he confess he Printed it?


Wickham* Not to me.


Serj* Morton. He said, It was a Bitter Thing, and that it was his unhappy
Fortune to meet with it* make the best of tha^, compare that with the rest of
the Evidence.


William Story Sworn. Gentlemen of the Jury, Upon the seventh of October last
early in the morning, I was sent for to Mr. L'Estrange into Cloth fair, we went
to the house of this Twyn, after some time knocking, they went up stairs and
brought down several papers, I know not what they were. I went into the next
house with Mr. Wickham, and there we found two or three hundred sheets, and
brought them to Mr. L'Estrange. I asked the Prisoner at my house, whether he
could not write or read? he said, Yes; did not you use to read what you
Printed? he said, Yes; did not you know Treason when you read it? It was a fury
thing, I did not mind it much, but I should have got money by it*


Mr. Mabb. He owned he had but a very small price for the doing of it.


Mr. Joseph Williamson Sworn. That which I can say, is, That I know this
[looking upon a paper] to be my own hand writing, and to be the examination
taken of this Twyn. I took it, and he owned it after it was written.


Serj. Morton What was the substance of it?


L. Hide* What did he confess before Mr. Secretary? when he was examined.


Mr. Williamson. He said that the Copy of the Book was brought to him by one
Evans, maid to Mistress Calvert* that for the Author, being asked if he knew
him? he said he did not, and that he had seen the Copy of three sheets of the
Book; that he had Printed only two of those sheets, a thousand exemplaries of
each.


Serj. Keeling. Did he confess that?


Mr. Williamson. Yes; and further, that he had delivered them to this Evans at
the sign of the Rose in Smithfield; that he himself had corrected those sheets
he had Printed, and that he had read them after they were Printed: that for his
pains and Printing of them, he had received forty shillings in part, from this
maid at the delivery of them, at the Rose, that the maid carried away those
Exemplaries, from the Rose, and that he parted with her at the door.


Serj. Morton. I hope you observe Gentlemen; we have now done: we desire the
Prisoner may give his answer to it, and then we shall make our reply.


L. Hide. What say you? you have heard the Witnesses and what is laid to your
charge.


Twyn. I did never read a line of it in my life.


L. Hide. That Is impossible, I Will tell you: first your own man, who set part,
swears you did both Set and Print part of this Book your self; you gave him the
title to Set, you composed one part of the Book, whilst he was Composing
another part; Is it possible you conld Compose, and not read a line of it? He
tells you further wheu the first Sheet was Printed, he brought it into the
Kitchen, and laid it down, knew not of any one in the House but your self;
About an hour, or an hour and a half after, you brought it back again
Corrected, laid it down, and the hand that Corrected it, was not unlike your
hand upon other Corrections of Books Pray Brother Morton, Let the Jury have
Books, and Mr. Lee Read the Indictment, that they may see they agree.


Serj. Morton. I observed to you, there were Thirteen Treasonable Paragraphs,
you shall find them marked out in the Margent.


L Hide. You shall see there are Treasons with a Witness, see the very Title.


Mr. Lee. [Reads the Title of the Indictment] A Treatise of the Execution of
Justice; wherein is clearly proved, that the Execution of Judgment and Justice,
is as well the Peoples as the Magistrates Duty, and if the Magistrates pervert
Judgment, the People are bound by the Law of God to execute Judgment without
them and upon them.
L. Hide. That you gave to your man to set.


Mr. Lee reads, It is one of the Scarlet Sins of this Nation, that the People
suffer their Rulers, etc. -- The Particular Passages are too Impious to be
Published, and indeed too Foul to be Repeated; but in Substance. Those
mentioned in the Indictment, are as follows.

First, The Supreme Magistrate is made Accomptable to the People.

Secondly, The People are Rebelliously Incited, to take the Menage of the
Government into their own Hands

Thirdly, They are Animated to take up Arms, not only against the Person of
His Sacred Majesty; but likewise against the Royal Family.

Fourthly, They are Stirred up to a [Revolt] (in that very Term) as an Action
Honorable, and Conscientious; making Publication in the next Clause, of
Encouragement to any Town, City, or County in the Three Nations to begin the
Work.

Fifthly, The People are Labored, not only to cast off their Allegiance to the
King; but in Direct Terms to put His Sacred Majesty to Death And to the
purposes before mentioned tends the whole Scope of the Treatise.


Serj. Morton. You may judge of the rest, by this; we will not put you to any
more expense of Time, there has been sufficient Treason in that which you have
read.


L. Hide Now say what you will; but I must tell you, in those particulars that
have been compared, there is as much Villainy and Slander, as is possible for
the Devil, or man to invent: It is to destroy the King in his Person* to Rob
him of the Love and Affections of His People; to Destroy the whole Family and
all Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil: and this Read by your self, Owned,
and Caused to be Printed.


Twyn. Except it was that sheet that Mr. L'Estrange read to me when I was
taken, I never heard it before, nor read it.


L. Hide. Your man swears that you did Set and Print part of it; it is
impossible to Compose and Set, but you must Read it; nay you did Examine and
Correct the sheets; brought them up again; Mr. L'strange swears you confessed
you read it over, it was Mettlesome stuff; Mr. Dickenson says, you did not
say you read it over, but he saying to you, it was impossible you should Set it
and not Read it, You told him also It was Mettlesome Stuff; You could not
Judge it to be Mettlesome Stuff, but you must read it; There is Mr. Williamson
says that you confessed before Mr. Secretary Bennet, that you had seen three
Sheets, Printed off two Sheets, Corrected those two Sheets; and after Printed,
and delivered them; and that you had 40^, in part of Payment; Besides this,
when Mr. L'Estrange came first, you were up, (nay at two a Clock in the
morning) when they came and knocked at the Door, they heard Presses going, you
would make no answer till they called a Smith with intent to force it open:
when they came in, they found a Form brought out of the Printing*Room, and
broken all but one Corner: That taken up by a Printer, and compared with the
Lines of the Printed Sheets, and found to agree. Some of the Sheets were
Printed on one side only, the rest perfected, you threw them down Stairs, part
into your Neighbors House; Said, You were undone, when you understood Mr. L'
Estrange was there. What needed all this, but that you knew what you were
doing? And did it purposely to do mischief?


Twyn, I did never Read, or hear a line of it, but when Mr L' Estrange read it
when I was taken.


Judge Keeling, Was it printed at your House or no?


Twyn, I know not but that it might; not that I did it with my own hand.


Judge Keeling, The papers were found wet wi^h you; who was in your House?


Twyn, My two Servants.


Judge Keeling, Did any set them at work but your self? did they work of their
own heads?


Twyn, I did use to set them at work, but I did not set them on that particular
work.


L. Hide, Have you any thing else to say? God forbid but you should be heard,
but the Jury will not easily believe such denialls against so much Evidence.


Judge Keeling, Tell us to whom you carried this Copy to be Corrected?


Twyn, I know not who Corrected it.


L. Hide, If you have any thing to say, speak it, God forbid but you should
have a full hearing, say what you will?


Twyn, I say I did not read it, nor heard it, till Mr. L'Estrange Read it.


L. Hide. Have you any thing else?


Twyn. It Is possible I may upon Consideration.


L. Hide. We cannot spend all the day, I must let the Jury know they are not to
take your Testimony.


Serj. Morton I am of Council for the King; I shall reply if he will say no
more.


Judge Keeling* You have heard your Charge, this is your time to make your
Answer; if you do not speak now, you must not speak after; therefore if you
have any thing to speak in your Justification, or witnesses to call, now is
your time.


L. Hide. Let me give you this Caution, we cannot spend time in vain, we have
other business before us, and it grows late, The best Council I can give you is
this; You said at first, that You desired to be Tried in the presence of God;
You are here in the presence of Almighty God, and I would to God you would have
so much care of your Self, and do so much right to your Self, to declare the
Truth, that there may be means of mercy to you. The best you can now do toward
amends for this Wickedness you have done, is by discovering the Author of
this Villainous Book; If not, you must not expect, and indeed God forbid that
there should be any mercy toward you*


Twyn. I never knew the Author of it, nor who it was, nor whence it came, but
as I told you.


L. Hide. Then we must not trouble our selves; Did you never see the hand
before, with which this Copy was written?


Twyn. No.


L. Hide. I am very confident you would not then have been so mad, as to have
taken such a Copy; A Copy fraught with such abominable Treason, and Lies;
Abusing in the first place, the late King that is dead who was, I Will be bound
to say it, as Virtuous, Religious, Pious* Merciful, and Just a Prince as ever
Reigned, and was as Villainously and Barbarously used by his Rebellious
Subjects; Nay, you have not rested here, but have fallen upon this King, who
has been Gentle and Merciful, beyond all President; Since* He came to the
Crown, He has spared those that had forfeited their Lives, and all they had;
And he has endeavored to Oblige all the rest of His People by Mildness and
Clemency: And after all this for you to Publish so Horrid a Book; you can never
make amends, God forgive you for it.


Twyn. I never knew what was in it.


L. Hide. You of the Jury, I will say only this, that in point of Law, in the
first place, there is no doubt in the World by the Law of the Land, the
Publishing such a Book as this, is as High a Treason as can be Committed; by
this he has endeavored to take away the Life of the King, and destroy the whole
Family; and so consequently to deliver us up into the Hands of Foreigners and
Strangers; It is a great blessing that we have the Royal Line amongst us. But I
say there is no Question (and my Brothers will declare the same if you doubt
it) that this Book is as fully Treason by the Old Statute; as much the
Compassing and endeavoring the Death of the King, as possible; and he rests
not there, but he incites the People to Rebellion, to Dethrone Him, to raise
War; And the Publishing of this Book is all one and the same, as if he had
raised an Army to do this; The Proof is, that he Set part, Printed part, and
Corrected it, by his own Confession, read it over, it was mettlesome stuff;
Confessed how many Sheets he Printed, the Reward and Recompense you took notice
of it; and I presume no man among you can doubt but the VVitnesses have spoken
true, and for his Answer, you have nothing but his bare denial, and so we shall
leave it to You.


Set Simon Dover to the Bar. Dover. My Lord, I pray time till Monday morning, I
have sent away the Copy of my indictment.


L. Hide. The Sessions will be done to Night; Mr. Recorder and the rest are to
go away on Monday, and therefore we must end to night*


Dover. I beseech your Lordship I may have time till night.


L. Hide. Men Clamor and say they are hardly used, their. Trials being put
off; Are you content to lie in Goal till the next Sessions?


Dover. No my Lord, I have had enough of that, we are willing now to have it
Tried.


L. Hide. You have had a kindness done you that it i^ not laid Treason, and
therefore go on to your Trial; But because you shall not say you are surprised,
if you will not go on now, you must lie in the Goal till the next Sessions, we
cannot Bail you.


Dover. My Lord, the Indictment is full of Law, and I understand not the
Formalities of it, I desire but till four a Clock.


L. Hide. We must do it before we go to dinner, or not at all, for there is
Judgment to be given to the Goal, and all of us Judges are Commanded by the
King to attend him to night.


Dover. I am not able to plead to it.


L. Hide. Then because you shall not say, you had not all the Right imaginable,
we will dispatch the rest of the Goal to night, and Adjourn the Sessions till
Monday morning, and you shall then have a fair Trial by the help of God; you
and your Company; Nathan Brooks, and Thomas Brewster, are you all desirous to
be Tried on Monday morning?


All Three, Yes.


L. Hide. Because you shall not want Advice, or any thing else, you shall have
all the Liberty you will desire, to send for Persons, but you must be Prisoners
till then.


All three, We humbly thank you.


Then the Jury went out, and after about half an hours Consultation, they
returned to the Court and took their Places. Cl. Are you all agreed of your
verdict?


Jury* Yes.


Cl. Who shall say for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Cl. Set John Twyn to the Bar, Look upon him my Masters; how say you, is he
Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Cl. Hearken to your Verdict as the Court has Recorded it; You say that John
Twyn is Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stood indicted, and that at the
time of committing the said Treason, or any time since, he had no goods,
chattles, lands nor tenements to your knowledge, and so you say all.


Jury. Yes.


Cl. John Twyn, Thou have been arraigned for High Treason and thereunto have
pleaded Not Guilty, and for thy trial have put thy self upon God and the
Country, and the Country has found thee Guilty; what can thou now say for
thy self, why the Court should not proceed to Judgment, and thereupon Award
Execution of Death against thee according to the Law?


Twyn. I humbly beg mercy; I am a poor man, and have three small Children, I
never read a word of it.


L. Hide. I Will tell you what you shall do; Ask mercy of them that can give it;
that is of God and the King.


Twyn. I humbly beseech you to intercede with his Majesty for mercy.


Cl. of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Crier. O yes, My Lords the Kings Justices command all manmer of persons to
keep silence while Judgment is in giving, upon pain of Imprisonment.


L. Hide. John Twyn (and John ^ursmore, one convicted for clipping of money:)
Iam heartily sorry that your carriages and grievous offenses should draw me to
give that Judgment upon you that I must. It is the Law pronounces it, God
knows it is full sore against my inclination to do it, I will not trouble my
self or you with repeating what you have done, but only this in the general,
John Twyn, for you; Yours is the most grievous and Highest Treason, and the
most complicated of all wickedness that ever I knew; for you have as much as
possibly lay in you, so reproached and reviled the King, the dead King, and his
Posterity, on purpose to endeavor to root them out from off the face of the
earth* I speak it from my soul, I think we have the greatest happiness of the
world, in enjoying what we do under so gracious and good a King: yet you in the
rancour of your heart thus to abuse him! I will be so charitable to think you
are misled. There Is nothing that pretends to Religion that will avow or
justify the killing of Kings, but the Jesuit on the one side, and the Sectary
on the other; indeed it is a desperate and dangerous Doctrine, fomented by
diverse of your temper, and it is high time some be made examples for it. I shall
not spend my time in discourse to you to prepare you for death; I see a grave
Person whose office it is, and I leave it to him. Do not think of any time
here* make your peace with God, which must be done by confession, and by the
discovery of those that are guilty of the same crime with you. God have mercy
upon you; and if you so do he will have mercy upon you. But forasmuch as you
John Twyn have been indicted of High Treason, you have put your self upon God
and the Country, to try you; and the Country have found you guilty, therefore
the Judgment of the Court is, and the Court does Award.

That you be led back to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be
drawn upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you shall be hanged
by the Neck, and being alive shall be cut down, and your privy Members shall be
cutoff, your Entrails shall be taken out of your body, and you living, the same
to be burnt before your eyes: your head to be cut off, your body to be divided
into four quarters, and your head and quarters to be disposed of at the
pleasure of the Kings Majesty. And the Lord have mercy upon your soul.


Twyn* I most humbly befeeth your Lordship to remember my condition, and
intercede for me.


L. Hide. I would not intercede for my own Father in this case, if he were
alive.


Monday 22. Feb. 6.
TE Court Proclaimed. Cl. Set Simon Dover, Thomas Brewster and Nathan Brooks to
the Bar, Look to your challenge.

The same Jury sworn anew.


Cl. Set Tho. Brewster to the Bar, and the rest set by; You of the Jury look
upon the Prisoner: you shall understand that he stands indicted in London by
the name of Thomas Brewster, etc. [and here he reads the Indictment] For
causing to be Printed and selling a Book called, The Speeches, etc. Upon this
Indictment he has been arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not Guilty, and
for his, etc.Your charge is to enquire whether he be Guilty of this Sedition
and offense or Not Guilty if you find him, etc.


Mr. North. My it please your Lordship and you Gentlemen of the Jury, T. B.
stands here Indicted of a foul misdemeanor; it is for causing to be Printed,
publishing and uttering a seditious, scandalous and malicious Book; The
Indictment sets forth, That he not having, etc. [Here Mr. North opens the
Indictment] and to this Indictment he has pleaded Not Guilty; If there be
sufficient proof of the charge, you are to find him Guilty of the matter
contained in it.


Thomas Creek, George Thresher, Thomas Loft and Peter Bodvel Sworn. Mr. North.
Tho. Creek, tell my Lord and the Jury what you know concerning Brewsters, and
your Printing of a Book called The Speeches, etc. and his uttering and
publishing of it.


Creek I shall Sir; There is a mistake in the time, for it was before
Christmas, that Mr. Brewster, Mr. Calvert, and Mr. Chapman did come to me at
the Cock in Little-Brittain, and there they had some Copy of the beginning of
the Speeches of the men that suffered, that were the Kings Judges, and they
spoke to me to Print it; and I did Print part of the Book, I cannot tell you
how much, without I had the Book, and then I can tell you how much I did Print,
[The Book being showed him] If this be my Printing; I suppose it was done
afterward, another Impression, and I must not own it in that, [be was showed
one of another Impression] My Lord thus far I own, the Printers that are of the
Jury will judge, [Pointing to the Page] this is my Letter, and here I ended.


L. Hide What folio is that you ended at?


Creek. You shall see, it is 36.


Mr. North. By whose order did you Print that?


Creek. They all gave me order together.


L. Hide. They all? name them.


Creek. Mr. Calvert, Brewster and Chapman.


Mr North Did they charge you to do it privately?


Creek. With as much privacy and expedition as I could?


Mr. North. When you had Printed them, what did you do with them?


Creek. I disposed of them by their order


Mr. North. Did you Print but one Impression? or more?


Creek Yes my Lord, I did Print part of ^ second Impression.


Mr. North. That we use as Evidence, that he had uttered the first, because he
went upon a second: how many did you Print at first?


Creek. To my best remembrance, the first Impression was 3000.


L. Hide. These three employed you to Print this Book, and you Printed to the
36. folio.


Creek. Yes.


L. Hide. And who Printed the other part?


Creek I cannot say positively.


L. Hide. These three did afterward direct you to give out the sheets to such
and such Persons, Book-binders to stitch up, and dispose.


Creek. Yes.


L. Hide. The first was three thousand you say, what number did they take?


Creek. They had all; they sent for them of me as fast as I did them.


J. Keeling. Who did you send the Proofs to?


Creek They were sent for to my house.


J. Keeling. Sometimes by Calvert, sometimes his man, sometimes his maid,
sometimes by Brewster.


L. Hide. Do not you know who began where you left off?


Creek. I am not able positively to say, I do believe, and I have heard, and
spoken with them that said Mr. Dover did, but I cannot positively say it.


L. Hide. You were not by to see it done?


Creek No.


L. Hide. What grounds have you to believe that Dover Printed the rest?


Creek Grounds; truly it is so long ago, to swear positively I cannot.


L. Hide. It is but three years ago.


Creek. To the best of my remembrance, Mr. Dover in the time of Printing of it,
did meet me, and converse with me about it, but to express time or place, I
cannot.


L. Hide. Did you and he agree that he should Print the other part?


Creek No my Lord; I had nothing to do to agree it with him.


L. Hide. Did he declare to you that he Printed the other?


Creek. To the best of my memory he told me he Printed some sheets.


Mr. North. Who changed sheets with you?


Creek. Some sheets were changed at Mr. Dovers.


J. Keeling. Who paid for the Printing?


Creek. Mr. Brewster paid me some, and some Mr. Calvert paid me.


L. Hide. If you desire to ask him any questions you may.


Browster. By and by I shall, my Lord.


Dover. I desire he may tarry till I come to my trial.


Serj. Morton. Don't doubt it.


Mr. North. George Thresher, speak your knowledge to my Lord and the Jury,
whether Brewster did not bring you the Book called the The Speeches, etc. to be
Stiched, and what you did with them, tell the manner of it.


Thresher. May it please you my Lord and the Honorable Bench, it is thus; This
Book it seems was Printed, Mr. Brewer came to my house to know whether I could
fold them and stitch them in blew Paper; That night I went to several Printers,
Mr. Dover was one of them; we had several sheets from thence (I did not see
them printed) I carried them home, and went about the working them that night.


J. Keeling. How many Books were delivered to you?


Thresher. First and last, about 500.


J. Keeling. Who delivered them to you?


Thresher. Some were brought to my House.


J. Keeling. By whose Direction.


Thresher Mr. Brewster's.


J. Keeling. Did you deliver them to any Body?


Thresher. Yes, to Nathan Brooks, ready stiched.


J. Keeling. Who paid you for them?


Thresher Mr. Brewster, for them he had, and Brooks for them he had.


Mr. North. Thomas Loft, tell your Knowledge in this business.


Thomas Loft. May it please You, All that I can say is this; There was to the
Number of about, or near upon a Thousand, as I take it, Folded and Stiched in
my Masters House, one Mr. Perry, I was then his Apprentice; they were sent in
as I judge by Mr. Brewster's Order, but I cannot positively say it, my Mr.
appointed us to do them; I saw Mr. Brewster there sometimes, but I cannot
positively say that Mr. Brewster paid for the doing of them.


Mr. North. Did not your Mr. press the dispatch?


Loft. My Mr. did so, but I know not whether they conversed to that purpose.


Mr. North. Who fetched them away?


Loft. His then Apprentice did fetch some of them from our House


Mr. North. Peter Bodvell, tell my Lord, and the Jury what you know.


Bodvell. I did carry some three years ago some Bundles of Books from Mr.
Creekes House, and I think they were the Bundles of The Speeches of the Kings
Judges.


L. Hide. From whence had you them?


Bodvell. From Mr. Creekes.


Mr. North. What did you do with them? were they sold?


Bodvell I did see some of them sold in the Shop.


Mr. North VVhosold them?


Bodvell. My self, and my Mistress sometimes,


L. Hide Were they brought to the Shop to sell by his privity?


Bodvell. I do believe he knew of them.


L. Hide. By the Oath you have taken, did he send you for them to the Printers?


Bodvell. He, or my Mistress did.


L. Hide. Has he been in the Shop when they have been sold?


Bodvell. I cannot truly tell, it is three Years ago.


J. Tirrel. To whom did you pay the money that you receied for them?


Bodvell. We put it in the Box.


J. Keeling. Do not Booksellers keep Account *what Books they sell, and set
down the money?


Bodvel. Not for Pamphlets.


Mr. North. Did he not send you to the Book-binders for them when they were
stitched?


Bodvell It was by his or my Mistris's order.


J. Keeling. What was your Book*binder's Name?


Bodvell. Perry.


J. Keeling Where was this Book kept? Publicly, as other Books, or in other
Rooms?


Bodvell. In the Shop my Lord.


J. Keeling Were they Publicly to view as other Books?


Bodvell. Not so Public as other Books, but public enough, Mr. L' Estrange
knows.


L. Hide. I know you use to let your Titles of a New Book lie open upon your
Stalls, did you lay these open?


Bodvell. No my Lord, they did not do so.


L. Hide. Who was the cause they did not, did your Master direct the privacy?


Bodvell. I think he did, we had some Direction to that end.


L. Hide. Not to lay them open upon the Stall.


Bodvell. No.


L. Hide. Give the Jury some Books, and Read the Indictment, let them be
Compared.


Clerk. Reads the Indictment, First the Title; The Speeches and Prayers of some
of the Late Kings Judges, (viz*) Major General Harrison* October 13. Mr. John
Carey, October 15. Mr. Justice Cook Mr. Hugh Peter's, October 16. Mr. Thomas
Scot. Mr. Gregory Clement Col. Adrian Scroope. Col. John Jones* October 17.
Col. Daniell Axtell, and Col. Francis Hacker, October 19 1660. The times of
their Deaths, together with several Occasional Speeches, and Passages in their
Imprisonment, till they came to the place of Execution; Faithfully, and
Impartially Collected for further Satisfaction. [Mr. Cooke's Letter to a
Friend.] Folio 40. And so I D^scend to the Cause, for which I am in Bonds;
which is as good as ever it was, And I believe there is not a Saint that has
Engaged with us, but will wish at the last Day that he had Sealed to the Truth
of it with his Blood, if thereupon called; for I am satisfied, that it is the
most Noble and Glorious Cause that has been Agitated for God and Christ since
the Apostolical Times, Being for Truth, Holiness, and Righteousness, for our
Liberties, as Men* and as Christians for removing all Yoa^s and Oppressions.
(and 41.) It is such a Cause, that the Martyrs would come again from Heaven to
suffer for it if they might: I look upon it as the most High Act of Justice
that our Story can Parallel, etc.


[Not to trouble the Reader with all the Particulars mentioned in the
Indictment; Since the Rest are but more of the same in other words.] L. Hide.
What say you to this Book?


Brewster. I desire to ask Mr. Creek a few Questions; Mr. Creek, How much of
that in the Indictment did you Print?


Creek. The Jury may see if they please.


L. Hide. Truly if he says true, he says he Printed no part of that with
which you are charged, but the Title Page, he left off at folio 36. your charge
is the Title, and beginning at fol. 40.


Brewster. So that you see he Printed nothing for me that is in the Indictment.


J. Keeling. Did you Print the Title?


Creek. Yes my Lord.


L. Hide. And you Printed the rest, by His, Calverts, and Chapmans Directions.


Creek. They delivered me the Copy together to Print.


L. Hide. If you have any thing to say, speak to the Court, the Jury will hear
you.


Mr* North. Pray my Lord, give me leave to ask Creek one question? There were
two Impressions Printed, did not you Print more in one, then in the other?


Creek I am upon my Oath, to the best of my Remembrance I Printed the same
that I did before, for I had some of it standing, and so I had the same Sheets
again.


Mr. North. Had you no more?


Creek. No, I had rather less.


Brewster. That Is usual, he that Prints the First, does Print the same of the
Second.


L. Hide. He says he did so; what have you to say to the Charge?


Brewster. I conceive that part that I ordered the Printing of, is not included
in the Indictment.


L. Hide. Yes every part; He says in both Impressions he Printed to the 36.
Folio; and all the rest was Printed by your Direction.


Creek. No my Lord, I Printed to the 36 fol. by his Direction, the rest was
Printed else where.


J. Keeling. Your Indictment was This, For Causing to be Printed this Book,
called the Prayers, etc. And for selling and uttering of it; For the Evidence,
that you caused it to be Printed, he swears you directed some, and it is not
likely you would Print half, and let the other half alone; we leave that to the
Jury, for your uttering that anon.


L. Hide. There are these two particular Charges in the Indictment, that you
must answer; The First, is your causing it to be Printed; and it is not
essential, or of necessity that every particular that is in the Indictment be
proved to be done by you; You caused this Book to be Printed, with such a
Title: That he swears he did for you, then let the Jury, or any man living
Judge whether you did direct the Book to be wholly perfected, or by halfs: The
second Charge is, that you Uttered them: You delivered five hundred of these to
be stitched up, and disposed of them, so that you are in Effect both Printer
and Publisher of the whole Book.


Brewster He speaks of one part that I ordered, there is no more proof, and
that was but to the 36. page; he speaks also of some body else that was present
with me; and where they had the rest of the Copy Printed, he tells you he knows
not.


L. Hide. Have you any more to say?


Brewster Yes my Lord, Though he says, I caused that part to be Printed, yet
he does not say, I did it maliciously, or w th any design against the
Government.


L. Hide. The thing speaks it self


Brewster. Booksellers do not use to read what they sell.


L. Hide You have forgot what he Swore; You brought the Proof.


Brewster. He did not swear that, he says Mr. Calvert's Man, and sometimes
others.


L. Hide Ask him again.


Creek. I did Declare, that the proofs were sent for, and carried away and
Read, sometimes by Mr. Calvert's Man, and others, and sometimes by his
Servants, not by Himself, they were wrapped up and sent.


L. Hide. For a man to pretend he did not know, when he being Master, sends for
the proofs by his Servant; for any man to suppose this is not the Masters Act;
(nay and directing it to be done privately,) you shall never find a man Guilty;
They were sold in his Shop.


Brewster. The grand part of the Indictment lies that it was done Maliciously,
and Seditiously, and then it says Knowingly; Though it be granted I did do it,
and sell it, yet it does not follow that I did it Maliciously, and Seditiously;
I did it in my Trade, we do not use to read what we put to Print or Sell; I say
my Lord, selling of Books is our Trade, and for the bare Exercising of it,
knowing nothing of evil in it, it came out in a time too, when there were no
Licensers, or appointed rules; so that what ever was done we are not
accountable for, for we read very seldom more than the Title; that some of the
Jury knows, so that I hope I cannot be said to do it maliciously or knowingly.
I can give testimony I am no person given to sedition, but have been ready to
appear upon all occasions against it.


L. Hide. Have you any more? if you have, say it.


Brewster. My Lord, They are the sayings of dying men, commonly printed without
opposition.


L. Hide. Never.


Brewster. I can instance in many, The Bookseller only minds the getting of a
penny; That declares to the world, that as they lived such desperate lives, so
they died; so that it might show to the world, the Justice in their punishment,
and so I think it a benefit, far from Sedition; It was done so long ago too, it
was not done in private, it went commonly up and down the streets, almost as
common as a Diurnal: it is three years and a quarter ago, or thereabouts.


J. Tirrel. You speak of your behavior* have you any testimony here?


Brewster. I do expect some Neighbors; Maj. Genesis Brown knows me, Capt.
Sheldon, Capt. Colchester, and others; I can give a very good account as to my
behavior ever since.


L. Hide. Say what you will, and call your Witnesses, and make as much speed as
you can.


J. Keeling. There is another Indictment against you, and while that is trying
your Neighbors may come.


Brewster. My Lord I shall desist for the present.


Serj. Morton May it please your Lordship and you Gentlemen of the Jury; I am
of Council for the King against Tho Brewster, Bookseller; that stands here
Indicted for that he, contrary to the duty of his Allegiance which he owes to
our Sovereign Lord the King, he did cause maliciously a seditious and
scandalous Book to be printed; wherein there are diverse scandalous clauses
contained that are in disparagement of the Kings Royal Prerogative, and against
his Government, Crown and Dignity; and likewise that he has sold and uttered
the same Books in contempt of his Majesty's Laws. This is the effect of the
Indictment; it has been proved to you by four Witnesses, that for which he
stands Indicted: First, that he did cause part of the Book to be Printed;
that is clearly proved by Creek; likewise, that he has sold, and uttered those
Books in his Shop; nay he confesses that he did, and says they were sold
openly, as a Diurnal, and therefore he thinks it was lawful for him to do it;
he has gone about to make a defense of this his seditious behavior; he tells
you he did not print all the Book; it is not said that he printed such and such
a Letter of the Book, but that he caused such a Book to be printed; and it is
to be presumed, if he caused one part, he would cause the other, or otherwise
it would be a Book of maimed sense and imperfect. Gentlemen, for the uttering,
and selling of them, that himself confesses; you have heard the excuses he has
made, whether you will not find him Guilty of this crime, that I must leave to
you, and to the direction of the Court.


L. Hide. You of the Jury, you see the Indictment is for causing a libellous
and seditious Book to be printed, under such a Title, that is, The Speeches and
Prayers, etc. It is for causing this, seditiously, factiously and wickedly to
be printed: and for selling and publishing it abroad to the Kings people: For
the matter of Evidence, you have heard it; I will not repeat the particulars to
you, only something to what he has said, that you may not be misled. First, He
says it does not appear, that he did it maliciously or knowingly, there are
some things that you that are of the Jury are not to expect Evidence for, which
it is impossible to know but by the Act it self: malice is conceived in the
heart; no man knows it unless he declares it. As in Murder; I have malice to a
man, no man knows it; I meet this man, and kill him; the Law calls this malice.
If a man speak scandalous words against a man in his calling, or trade, he
lays his action, Malice, though he cannot prove it but by the words
themselves. If I say a Printer, or Stationer is an ignorant person, has no
skill in his Trade, I would not have any man to deal with him, he understands
not how to Set Letters, or the like: here is nothing of malice at all appears,
yet if you bring your Action, you must lay it, Maliciously, it is the
destroying your Trade, and you will have damages. I instance in this
particular, that you may see there is malice, supposed to a particular private
person in that slander, much more to the King, and the State. The thing it
self, in causing a Book to be printed, that is so full of scandals and lies, to
inveigle, misguide, and deceive the people, this is in construction of the Law,
Malice; though no malice appear further. The next is this; factiously,
seditiously, knowingly; This carries sedition, as well as malice. Such a
barbarous transcendent wretch, that murdered his Prince, without the least
color of Justice, to declare that he rejoiced in his bonds, and that the
Martyrs would willingly come from Heaven to suffer for it: horrid blasphemy!
all the Saints that engaged in it, to wish that they had sealed it with their
blood! what can you have more to encourage and incite the people to the killing
of Kings, and murdering their lawful Prince! This they publish, and say it was
spoken publicly, let it be upon his own soul that did it; for in case he did
it, no man knew it but those that heard it: But to publish it all over England,
(3000, of the first Impression, and a second) This is to fill all the Kings
Subjects with the justification of that horrid murder; I will be bold to say,
Not so horrid a villainy has been done upon the face of the earth, since the
crucifying of our Savior. To Print, and publish this, is Sedition. The next
thing is your Trade. I have a Calling to use, and I may justify the using of
it, so long as I use it lawfully; but that must not justify me in all manner
of wickedness against the King, and State. As if a Lawyer (I will put it in my
own Coat) pleads a man's Cause, and against the King; this is justifiable, he
ought to plead for his Client, but he must plead as becomes him; if a Lawyer in
defense of his Client will speak Sedition, do you think he is free from being
punished: so of a Printer; if a Printer prints seditious and factious Books, he
must look to himself; that is no part of his Calling, to poison the Kings
people; so though printing of a Book be lawful, he must use it as the Law
appoints him, and not to incite the people to faction: Writing of Letters, you
know it is common and lawful, but if I write Treasonable Letters, give notice
to Rise, do such and such unlawful acts, I am to be punished for these Letters:
A Printer he is a public Agent, he is to do what he is able to answer, or else
he must take what follows. He says there was no Act against bim; It is true,
you see he is not Indicted upon the Statute, but at the Common Law, for an
offense in the nature of a Libel. If I were a Printer and would compile a
Pamphlet against a man, though not in Authority, and disparage him, this is the
publishing of a Libel; and an offense for which he ought to be Indicted, and
punished by the Common Law, and he that prints that Libel against me as a
public person, or against me as Sir Robert Hide; That Printer, and he that
sets him at work must answer it, much more when against the King, and the
State. Another thing is this, he talks to you of dying men's words; if men will
be so vile to be as wicked at their deaths, as they had been in their lives;
put the Case of that man on Saturday, convicted for printing a horrible
villainous thing, if he will be so unchristian to himself, as to justify this
at his death, or to speak as bad as he had caused to be printed, is that a
Justification to publish them, because they are the words of a dying man! God
forbid; a Robber declares at the Gallows, it is for a Noble Cause, for taking a
Purse upon the highway, that it is an unjust Law to condemn to death for such
Crimes: Shall any man publish this in Print, and not be liable to be punished
for it? If any that were tried here upon Saturday, shall vrlifie the Lord
Mayor, or any of the Bench, traduce them for doing of justice, shall this go
unpunished, if a man take it up and print it? This I speak to let you see, this
is without color of Law; He pretended he did it not knowingly; I will not
repeat the Evidence, He sent for them, had them stitched, caused them to be
kept privately, (not upon the Stall) And observe, he tells you it was done long
ago; it is but three years ago, that they were as publicly sold as Diarnals,
he says: I shall repeat no more, I know you are men of understanding, and of
obedience to your King; it is high time to take notice of this dispersing of
Pamphlets, if therefore you do believe that he did cause it to be Printed, or
published it, or both, he is guilty of the Misdemeanour said in the Indictment;
(and he has a great kindness in that it is not made Capital) If you do
believe, that he did either cause it to be Printed, or Published, that is enough
to find him guilty of this Indictment.


Cl. Hearken to the other Indictment, He stands Indicted in London, etc. and
this is for causing to be Printed a certain Book, called the Phoenix, etc.
publishing the same, [the Indictment was wholly read] To this Indictment he
has pleaded, not guilty; so your Issue is to inquire whether he be guilty of
this offense or not guilty.


Mr. North, [Opened the Indictment in manner as before.]

To this he has pleaded not guilty, if the Charge of the Indictment be
sufficiently proved, you are to find him guilty.


Serj. Morton, May it please your Lordship, and you gentlemen of the Jury, here
is another Bill of Indictment preferred against Tho. Brewster, it is that
contrary to the duty of his Allegiance to his Sovereign Lord the King, and
purposely to incite the people to Sedition, and to withdraw them from their
natural Allegiance to the King, he has caused to be imprinted, maliciously,
falsely, and scandalously, a certain scandalous book entitled, The Phoenix,
etc. And this he has done to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and to withdraw
the people from their Allegiance, and to the scandal of his Majesty and
Government, he has caused this book to be Printed, uttered, and sold, and this
we take to be a great offense against the King, his Crown, and Dignity.
Gentlemen, the dispersing of Seditious Books is of great danger to the Kingdom;
false Rumors they are the main incentives that stir up the people to Sedition
and Rebellion, that raise discontentments among the people, and then presently
they are up in Arms. Dispersing seditious Books is very near a kin to raising
of Tumults, they are as like as Brother and Sister; Raising of Tumults is the
more Masculine, and Printing and Dispersing Seditious books, is the Feminine
part of every Rebellion. But we shall produce our Witnesses; We shall prove
that this Tho. Brewster caused this book to be Printed, that when it was
Printed, he did receive three hundred; that these he caused to be stiched up;
that he uttered, and sold them, part in his own Shop, and part elsewhere. It
being an offense of that great and dangerous consequence, which tends to the
disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom: I hope you will take it into your
serious consideration, and if the matter stand proved against him, you will
give him his due demerit.


Creek, Thresher, Loft, and Bodvel sworn again. Mr, North. Creek, Tell my Lord
and the Jury what you know of the printing of the book called The Phoenix.


Creek. My Lord, it was in May, that Mr. Calvert, Brewster, and Chapman brought
that book to me to Print.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. What book? name it.


Creek. The Phoenix, etc. It was printed for them three. All that I can say,
is, that Mr. Brewsters part was delivered to me by his direction.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Who paid you for printing of it?


Creek. Mr. Brewster paid for his part.


J. Keeling. How many was his part?


Creek. His part of 2000, that was 600, and odd.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. These three men joined to bear each man his share?


Creek. Yes, every man was to have his share.


J. Keeling. Did he wish you to do it with privacy?


Creek. Yes, with expedition and privacy.


Brewster. Was the Copy written, or printed?


Creek. It was all printed formerly, some in quarto, some in octavo, and might
have been bought single in any place almost.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. What do you mean by all printed formerly?


Creek. My Lord, they were in several parcels printed, there was Mr. Calamy's
Sermon, and Mr. Douglas his Sermon, and the rest.


J. Keeling. How long ago was it since they were brought to you to print?


Creek. It was in May, three years.


Brewster. Did I order you how you should print them, or Mr. Calvert? Did not
you hear him say, that they had staid two hours for me at an Alehouse to be
his Partner?


Creek. I did hear him say so.


J. Keeling. What made you so loath to be their Partner, were they two hours
persuading of you?


Creek. No, they waited two hours for him to be their Partner.


Serj. Morton. Thresher, did Brewster deliver any of those books ^o you to
stich up!


Thresher. Yes, and please you my Lord, and I had them by Mr. Brewsters order
to ^old.


Serj. Morton. How many?


Thresher. To the number of 2. or 300.


Mr. North. Did he not enjoin you privaey?


Thresher. Yes, I think he did.


J. Keeling. When they were bound, had you a Note to deliver those Books
safely to any*


Thresher. Yes, from his own hand* he desired me to go and give them to such
and such Persons, Booksellers: said I, I shall hardly remember them* he
thereupon gave me a Note of their Names to whom I should deliver them; I judge
they were to be trusted more then others.


Serj. Morton. Did you deliver them accordingly?


Thresher. Yes, I did.


L. Chapter J. Hide. How many did you deliver in that manner?


Thresher. Two dozen and more.


J. Keeling. If you will ask him any Questions, do.


Brewster. Did I give you any order to deliver them to any particular
Booksellers?


Thresher. Yes, you did, I believe Mr. Lestrange, and Mr. Williams (one of the
Jury) can remember I showed them the paper you wrote to that purpose.


Mr. Williams. I did see the Note.


Brewster. I do not remember I gave you any Order, they were all Common things
before.


J* Keeling. You may ask him what Questions you will.


Brewster. I shall ask him no more.


Mr. North. Peter Bodvel, speak what you know concerning the selling or (...)
of the book called the Phoenix, etc.


Bodvel. I never knew of the Printing of them, I never knew my Master sell any
of them, nor heard him give order for selling of them.


J. Keeling. Did you sell any of them for him?


Bodvel. I think I did sell some.


Serj. Morton. Were they in the Shop to be sold?


Bodvel. Yes, they were.


L. Chapter J. Hide. Were they in the Shop publicly, with the Title Page lying
open upon the Stall as other books do, when they are newly out*


Bodvel. We seldom did so with bound books.


J. Keeling. Where were the books found when they were seized?


Bodvel. I think they were in some of the upper Rooms.


J. Keeling. Where were they found by the Oath you have taken?


Bodvel. That Mr. Lestrange can tell better then I, I did not see him find any
of them.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. By the Oath you have taken, where was the place whence you
were to fetch them, when you were to sell them?


Bodvel. In the Hall, the Room over the Shop.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Were they put up privately?


Bodvel. They were so.


J. Keeling. What private place was that?


Bodvel. It was a hole in the wall.


J. Tirrel. By whose direction were they said there?


Bodvel. I know not, whether by his, or my Mistress.


J. Keeling. Were not some found under the bed?


Bodvel. I heard that Mr. Le^^r^nge found some of the Titles under the bed.


Serj. Mor. I think it is enough, what say you to it Friend?


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Observe this, and answer it, it appears that you and two
more, (Calvert and Chapman) did agree with Creek for Printing this book,
(several parcels drawn into one Volumn) and you were to bear each of you a
third part, and to have a third part of the books; he swears you did both pay
your part, and had your part of the books. These books were Printed before, and
so they were common enough, and therefore you must needs know what was in them.
The third full part was brought to you, and delivered by your appointment; you
gave a note how they should be disposed of; and you owned them not in public.
(your own soul told you they were not to be justified) two dozen were delivered
privately to particular persons, by your direction; lay these things together,
and now answer them; For the Indictment is that you caused such a Book to be
Printed and published.


Brewster. In the first place, the Evidence does say, that Mr. Calvert did
acknowledge when he gave him the Copy to Print, that he staid so long for me in
order to be their Partner, he that was the Collector of it together: They were
all printed before, and printed by License; for the books I never read them; we
seldom read the books we sell, being they were before Printed, and with
License sold single, (as the Gentlemen of the Jury know) I thought there was no
Crime to print them all together: It was done in an Interval when there were no
Licensers, we knew not where to go; what has been Printed formerly, we took it
for granted it might be Reprinted, till this late Act for Printing; and this
was done before this Act.


J. Keeling. Have you any more to say?


Brewster. No my Lord, I shall leave it to the Jury, but my Lord, here are now
some Neighbors to testify that I am no such person as the Indictment sets
forth, that I did Maliciously, and Seditiously, do such and such things.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. We will hear them, though I Will tell you it will not much
matter; the Law says it is Malice.


Capt. Sheldon Sworn. My Lord, all that I can say, is, he was ready at beat of
Drum upon all occasions, what he has been guilty of by Printing or otherwise, I
am a stranger to that, I know he was of civil behavior and deportment amongst
his Neighbors.


J. Keeling. It is very ill that the King has such trained Soldiers in the
Band.


Capt. Hanson, and others, offered to like purpose. L. Chapter Ju. Hide. If you
have a thousand to this purpose only, what signifies it?


J. Keeling. Are you his Captain?


Capt. Sheldon. No my Lord, Capt. Bradshaw.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. He should be casheir'd the Band; not but that he should be
charged with Arms. I Will tell you, do not mistake your self, the Testimony of
your civil Behavior, going to Church, appearing in the Trained Bands, going to
Paul's, being there at Common-Service, this is well; but you are not charged for
this, a man may do all this, and yet be a naughty man in printing abusive
books, to the misleading of the Kings Subjects. If you have any thing to say as
to that, I shall be glad to find you Innocent.


Brewster. I have no more to say.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Then you of the Jury, there are some things in this
Indictment (as in the other) necessary to be stated to you, My Brothers and I
have consulted here about it, the Indictment is for causing a Factious and
Seditious book called the Phoenix, etc. with diverse other things therein to be
Printed. But pray let them see the Book, and compare it with the Indictment.


Cl. [Reads the Indictment, and first the Title] The Phoenix, or the Solemn
League and Covenant. [Edinburg, Printed in the Year of Covenant-Breaking] A
King abusing his Power, to the overthrow of Religion, Laws, and Liberties,
which are the very Fundamentals of this Contract and Covenant, may be
controlled and opposed. And if he set himself to Overthrow all these by Arms,
then they who have Power, as the Estates of a Land, may and ought to Resist by
Arms* because he does by that Opposition break the very Bonds, and overthrow
the Essentials of this Contract and Covenant. This may serve to Justify the
proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in a Hostile way set
himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties. [The rest is
much at the same Rate, only now and then a spice of Blasphemy for the Credit of
the Holy-League [A greater Sin (is the Breach of that Scotch Covenant,
according to our Author, page 158.) then a Sin against a Commandment or
against an Ordinance, etc.]


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You of the Jury, you see the Indictment agrees with the Book;
there is a great deal of Mercy that this man has not been Indicted of Treason;
for those very particulars you have heard, are as high Treason as can be.
First, He does declare, `That the King abusing his `Power, the people may
resist and take up Arms against him; that is express Treason without any more
ado: Then he tells you what a horrid thing it is to break that Solemn League
and Covenant; justifies the raising of Arms, and Rebellion against the late
King, un-Throning, and Murdering of him. I tell you, that Solemn League and
Covenant, was a most wicked and ungodly thing; against the Law of God, and the
Law of the Land: To have such Villainous stuff to be published, it is a great
Mercy of the King, it had not been drawn higher; You see the man is so far from
acknowledging any Guilt, that he justifies the Fact.


Brewster. No my Lord, I do not Justify my self.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Yes, you do! The Printer Swears he was to go Share and Share
like; he had his part, he publishes them to some particular Friends; I say he
Justifies this. He tells you in his Defense, that it was commonly printed, that
it was done by printed Copy; and that done formerly by License; and when
things are printed by License, they do not expect or need any New, or second
License; they were commonly sold asunder, here they are only printed together:
That he says is nothing. What is this but Justifying the printing of it?
Observe, Weigh, and see what kind of Defense here is. The Title, what is it?
The Phoenix, or Solemn League and Covenant; you all know it, and rue it; When
was it printed? It was when the Wicked Rebels here could not Seduce sufficient
numbers of the Kings Subjects to support their Rebellion, and then they Invite
their Dear Brethren (as they called them) the Scots to Unite with them. The
Scots were Cunning, they would not do it till they had entered into a Covenant*
in a League, and then they consent to Unite with the Rebels here; This League
and Covenant was indeed in defense of the King* but how long? so long as he
defended them (the Presbytery and Scotch Discipline) when they had got this
Good King into their hands, they put what terms upon him they pleased; and then
were these Seditious Sermons printed. Douglas his was printed in Scotland; Was
it Licensed here? No, it was done there, and brought hither. Then for the other
Sermon, by what License was that printed? Observe the time when it was printed,
was it not to set forward Rebellion? to set up the Scotch Presbytery? And this
in 45. when they were in Arms against the King, after the King put himself upon
his defense, and was at Oxford; Do you tell me of the License of Rebels?) Then
for your Justification; Now; when the King is so happily returned, now to
publish these things a fresh to the people, that they might do the same again!
And I tell you once again* It is mercy in the King that he was not Indicted of
Treason. I shall leave it to you, you have had it fully proved.


Clark. Set Simon Dover to the Bar [and here the Indictment is read.]


Mr. North. [Opens this Indictment as the rest.]
Serj. Morton. We have but two Witnesses, and they will prove the matter
clearly; there were two Impressions of this book, we will prove he had a share
in both of them.


Creek. [Sworn again.] I delivered before what I can say.


J. Keeling. Look you, you must deliver all that evidence over again, because
it concerns another person.


Creek. I did say, and say still, that to the best of my memory, Mr. Dover did
print part of that book, and that he and I did converse about it in the time it
was doing, but I cannot swear it positively, because I cannot remember the time
when, or the place where.


Ju. Keeling. Did you change sheets with him?


Creek. With him, I cannot say, but some sheets were changed by our men.


Serj. Morton. You say you think you had some discourse with him; did not you
speak about the danger of printing it?


Creek. We talked of making an end of it.


Serj. Morton. Can you remember to what Letter you printed?


Creek. I have showed the Gentlemen of the Jury.


Ju. Keeling. Had you no discourse of the danger of it?


Creek. I thought it could not come to any thing, I did tell Sir R. Brown,
(then Lord Mayor) that if they hanged twenty more, I thought I should print
their Speeches.


J. Keeling. You knew the contents of the book?


Creek. Yes I did.


Ju. Keeling. Such men as you, the King and the Government has a great
interest in your Trade; that you should think it lawful to print what a man
says when he dies, and to scatter it abroad though never so bad, its a great
offense, I would not have it pass for so clear a thing.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. If you are of such Principles to print what you list, you are
not fit to live in a civil place, for a Printer, or Bookseller to print any
thing one against the other, is Actionable.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Do you think the Press is open to print what you list?


Creek* I did so then.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. I Will deal plainly with you; for this book, if you had had
your due, you ought both to have been drawn hanged and quartered.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. When did you give Mr. L'Estrange information of this matter?


Creek. Lately, when I was a Prisoner in Ludgate.


Mr. Royston. [One of the Jury.] I desire to ask him one Question* whether Mr.
Creek saw this book a printing at Mr. Dovers house, or no?


Creek. No I did not.


Serj. Morton. They changed sheets*


Thresher sworn. Thresher. This is all that I have to say, that the first night
that Mr. Brewster sent for me to stitch these books, it was very late before we
could get them* I went that night to Mr. Dovers, and had some of the sheets,
the rest at Mr. Creeks, I did not see him print any of them.


Serj. Morton. What quantity was there of them?


Thresher* I suppose there was two or three hundred sheets.


Mr. North. Were they not of this book?


Thresher. Yes, of the Speeches.


Mr. North. Where were they delivered?


Thresher. In the lower room, I suppose some of them were hanging upon lines
before I had them.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. What say you to it?


Dover. I desire to ask him some Questions. I do say, I never saw the man
before, I would ask whether ever he saw me before in his life?


Thresher. Not before that, I was never in his house buy that night*s by this
token I saw you, and you me; when I came for the sheets, you asked Mr. Brewster
whether he and Mr. Calvert were agreed, or else you would not deliver the
sheets.


Dover. I desire to know what time and place; I am charged in the Indictment on
a day and place.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide* That Is not very material.


Dover. He fixes nothing on me*


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. That the Jury can best tell; have you any more questions?


Dover. No my Lord.


[The Indictment and Books were Compared.] Dover. My Lord, there is no Person
swears that I Printed it, or part of it; Nothing fixed upon me.


L. C. J. Hide. The first man swears that you set it to Printing.


Creek. I do not swear it positively, I never saw him Print a sheet, it was the
report of the Town that he did it.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You printed it: for whom?


Creek. For Brewster, Calvers, and Chapman.


L. Chapter J. Hide. But you say that you and he did converse about it when it was
Printing.


Creek. I did say to the best of my memory, we did.


L. Chapter J. Hide. By the Oath you have taken, who did you change sheets with?


Creek. I cannot say, I did change any with him; I say that some sheets were
changed by my men, and they told me they had them of his men.


Dover. Where are those men that changed the sheets, which of my men were they?


J. Keeling. Look you Dover, you are indicted for causing to be Printed this
wicked Book, and for publishing and Vending of it; You are a Printer by your
Trade, as well as this man that comes against you, he says he did not see you
Print it, but he took it and believed that you Printed it; I tell you how far
that weighs; You are a Printer by Trade, and comes the other and desires the
sheets, you would not deliver them unless Mr. Brewster, and Mr. Calvert were
agreed; How come the sheets to your house, being a Printer, and yet you not
print it? Answer that,


Dover. I shall my Lord, it is no consequence at all; Admit I had these sheets,
it is no consequence at all that I printed them; For Printers and Booksellers
usually have books they did not print themselves.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Thresher, by the Oath that you have taken, did you see those
sheets hang* upon the line in his house?


Thresher. My Lord, I judged these had lately hung up, and I saw other sheets
hanging there, and I knew nothing to the contrary, but that those that hung
upon the line were the same with these.


L. Chapter J. Hide. Here are sheets upon the lines, you delivered him to sold part
of those on the lines: what would you have more plain! You would not deliver
them if they were not agreed; then they were agreed, and you delivered them.


Dover. I say this, I look upon the Witness to be altogether invalid, he is a
person of no good repute.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. A better man than you, for ought appears; you are indicted
for a foul offense, so is not he?


Dover. I am not the man you take me to be.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You shall have Evidence if you will, that you are at work at
this time, upon as bad as this.


Dover. If it be a crime, I am sorry for is.


Mr. Lestrange sworn. Mr. Lestrange. Shall I speak to the whole matter, or only
to the particular you last mentioned?


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Say your knowledge.


Mr. Lestrange. When I came to his house, which was about the middle of
October, to search, I found at that present a little Unlicenced Quaking book,
and in his pocket the Libel that was thrown up and down the Town, called,
Murder will out, ready printed.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Which was a Villainous thing and scattered at York.


Mr. L'Estrange. Since that, I was at his house to compare a Flower, which I
found in the Panther (a dangerous Pamphlet) that Flower, that is, the very same
border, I found in his house, the same mixture of Letter, great and small in
the same Case, and I took a Copy off the Press: I found over and above, this
Letter [producing the Letter] dated the 7th of February, 1663 and directed, For
my dear and loving Wife, J. Dover. Is it your Lordships pleasure, I shall read
it all?


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. If it be touching the printing of things you found, do.


Mr. L'Estrange. [Reads it] I would fai^ see my Sister Mary, therefore since
Sister Hobbs will not come, take her Order, and instead of her Name, put in
Sister Marys, it will never be Questioned here; However, do it as wisely, and
handsomely as you can, etc. [And their in a P. S.] You must either get Tom
Porter, or some very trusty Friend (possibly ^. D. may help you) to get for you
a safe and convenient Room to dry books in, as soon as possibly you can. [And
again] Let me know what you intend to do with the two sheets and half, I will
have it published when I am certain I shall be tried.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Let the Jury see now, whether you are the man you would be
thought.


Dover. I desire to know whether my name be to that letter.


Mr. L'Estrange. No it is nor.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Where did you receive or find this Letter?


Mr. L'Estrange. My Lord, I found it about his Wife.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Let the Jury judge if this come from you or no.


J. Keeling. You of the Jury, you must understand this, that what is said now,
is only upon his Reputation, not to the point in question at all; that matter
rests upon it is own bottom.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. I Will deal plainly with you, Had he not stood upon such terms,
I should not have spoke of this; but when a man will be thus bold and
confident, I thought it proper to let you see how he continues now in the Goal.


Dover. I do not vindicate my self in it, but I speak against the witness, I do
conceive that the witness does not fix any thing upon me.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Have you any thing else to say to the Indictment?


Dover. I am Indicted as a Malicious and Factions man, the witnesses says no
such thing.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You are not Indicted so, but that you have Maliciously, and
Factiously caused to be Printed such a Seditious Book, not your Person, but the
Action.


Dover. There is nothing of that proved; admit I was guilty of it, it was done
when there was no Act or Law in being touching Printing. The witnesses do not
swear positively that I did do it; one says, he did not see me, the other,
that he only believed it; that he did see some sheets upon the line, and they
were the same for ought he knew; Does not remember the time or place of our
discourse, I do not know that ever I had half an hours discourse with him in my
life: I never had any meeting with him about any such matter, nor had any
converse with him. The Title of the book says, [Faithfully and Impartially
collected for further satisfaction;] so that it cannot be interpreted
maliciously; it is a Maxim in Law, that the best interpretations are to be put
upon the words of the Indictment, in favor of the prisoner at the bar; and I
hope this Honorable Bench and the Jury will mind that; I am a Printer by
trade, what I did was for my livelihood; the Scripture says, He is worse than
an Infidel that takes not care for his Family: I speak not this to justify any
thing against his Majesty or his Government; through my ignorance I may
possibly transgress, if I have done any such thing, I am sorry for it, I hope I
shall be more careful for the future: The other part of the Indictment is for
selling of them; no man Swears that I sold one book of them; Mr. Creek says,
that some of his men told him, that he had some of those sheets from some of my
folks, but of whom he does not say: That I did meddle with them, knowing them
to be scandalous, I hope there is nothing proved of that nature; there being
then no Law, I humbly hope there was no Transgression.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Have you done?


Dover. I humbly desire your Honors and this Jury, to take notice of what I
have said.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You of the Jury, I will not spend time (it is too late) in
repeating the Evidence, you have heard the Evidence particularly, and his
answer; he does in part make the same answer with his fellows; which was, that
it is his Trade: It Is true, no doubt but he ought to maintain his Wise and
Children, by his lawful Calling; but if a Thief should tell you that he
maintained his Wife by Stealing, is that lawful? Printing books lawfully, no
man will call him to account for it; but if he prints that that is abusive to
the King and his Government, that is no part of his trade, and his trade will
not bear him out in it: He is charged for Printing and publishing of these
scandalous books, that he did it Knowingly, Maliciously, Falsely, Factiously,
and Seditiously; I told you, that although all these things be not proved, yet
if he did it, the Law calls it Malice, Faction, and Sedition; Consider the
circumstances, you see it is done in the dark; the sheets delivered at his
house, and discourse about delivery of them, he would not deliver them unless
Brewster and Calvert were agreed; I leave the Evidence to you, in this case,
pregnant strong undeniable Circumstances, are good Evidences: Though a man does
not come and tell you, he declared to him he knew what was contained in this
book, yet if there be sufficient Evidence to satisfy you in your Consciences,
that he knew what was in it, and was privy to the Printing and publishing of
it; there is enough for you to find the Indictment. You are to weigh
circumstances, as well as pregnant full proof, in cases of this nature.


Clark. Set Nathan Brooks to the Bar; You of the Jury, you shall understand
that he stands Indicted, etc. Reads the Indictment.


Mr. North, Afterward opened the Indictment.


Serj. Morton. This man, we shall only prove him guilty of stitching, and
dispersing the said books.


Thresher [Sworn] This man I have not seen these three Years.


Serj. Morton. Did he set you to work in Stitching those books?


Thresher. He brought none to me that I can remember; but by Mr. Prewsters
order I delivered about 200. or there. abouts, and carried them to his house in
St. Martins, and he took them at the Stair-foot, and paid me for stitching of
them in blew paper.


Serj. Morton. Who furnished you with blew paper?


Tresher. I went by Mr. Erensters order to a Stationer in Breadstreet, and
received some.


Brooks. I desire to know whether in those books he said he delivered me, there
were those passages in the Indictment.


Thresher. I know not; they were the Speeches and Prayers that I delivered you.


Brooks. How did you deliver them to me?


Thresher. They were Stitcht, and I tied them up with a piece of packthread,
and carried them to him; he received them himself, and came afterward to an
Alehouse, and gave me a Flagon of Beer; he knew what they were, for some being
Imperfect, he said Mr. Brewster must make them good; and Mr. Brewster gave
order, if he came for them, they should be delivered him.


Brooks. Did you know there were those passages in them?


Thresher. No not I.


Brooks. I knew only the Title of it.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Let there be what there will in it, if you knew the Title,
look you to it; have you any thing else to ask?


Brooks. No my Lord.


Henry Mortlock Sworn. Serj. Morton. Mr. Mortlock, How many of those books did
you receive of this Nathan Brooks?


Mortlock. About forty or fifty.


Serj. Morton What talk had you about receiving them?


Mortlack. I do not remember any discourse.


Serj. Morton. Where did you receive them?


Mortlock. I am not certain, whether in my shop, or no.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Were they open?


Mortlock. They were tied up.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Did you speak for them?


Mortlock. I cannot tell, he brought them to me.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. How came he to bring them to you?


Mortlock. May be I might speak for them, I paid him for them.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You and he knew what book it was?


Mortlock. I think we did.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Did you not open them? They might have been the Devil of
Edmonton, for ought you knew. Did you open them afterward, and did they appear
to be this book?


Mortlock. Yes.


Mr. L' Estrange sworn. Mr. L' Estrange. I came to the house of Nathan Brooks,
about October last, and knocking at the door, they made a difficulty to let me
in; At last seeing not how to avoid it, Brooks opened the Door; I asked him,
what he was? He told me, he was the Master of the house. By and by comes one
that lodged in the house, and throws down this book [shewing the book] in the
Kitchen, with this Expression; I Will not be hanged (says he) for never a Rogue of
you all; Do you hide your books in my Chamber? This book had the Speeches in
it, with other Schismatical Treatises. After this I searched the next house,
and there I found more difficulty to get in; but after a long stay, I saw the
second Floor in a blaze, and then with a Smiths Sledge, I endeavored to force
the door; At length, the fire was put out, and one comes down and opens the
door; I went in, and up Stairs where I found about 200. of the Prelatick
Preachers, and certain Notes of Nathan Brooks, wherein he mentions the delivery
of several of these Speeches, and other Sedicious Pamphlets. There is one
particular, wherein he records, that Thomas Brewster did in the presence of
Captain Hanson, undertake to bear his charges of imprisoment. This Nathan
Brooks having been formerly imprisoned for a crime, wherein Browster was to
bear him out.


L. Chapter J. Hide. What was it that burnt above?


Mr. L' Estrange. My Lord, they had burnt I suppose, some of the Prelatick
Preachers, (a desperate book) I found one bundle untied, and I suppose (as the
man told me after) that it was a part of that which was burnt.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You say this was in the next house to Brooks; what had
Brooks to do there, had he conveyed those books thither*


Mr. L'Estrange. The owner of the house said, he knew nothing of them; but a
man and his wife lodging in the Chamber where the fire was, said that Nathan
Brooks had delivered with his own hands to them, those parcel of books that
were there found.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You hear what he says; that one of your Guests came down,
said, he would not be hanged for never a Rogue of you all; Throws down the book
--


Brooks. What Is that tome; if a man have a book in his house, and throw it
down, and say so, does that concern me? He did not bring it out of my Chamber.


One Mercer sworn. Mercer. My Lord, [having the book in his hand] this is the
book that I did find in a Room brought up by Nathan Brooks, and I brought it
down; I had it in a Room where two boys and my sister lay. He came first and
knocked at our Chamber door; said I, Who is there? says he, A Friend, Who are
you? Brooks your Landlord, says he, pray you open the door, and lay up this
book for me. No said I, if you were my Father, or Brother, I will not receive
it, I will not meddle or make with you. After I had denied the book, he flings
it into the next Room.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. How came you by the book?


Mercer. After Mr. Lestrange had inquired there for books, I knew nothing; but
my Wife called to my Sister, and asked her if she heard Mr. Brooks in the Boom;
she said Yes, and he had left a book with her: Having notice, I went up stairs,
took the book, and brought it down presently.


Brooks. Is that the book? the very individual book that I brought up there?


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. He swears this, that you knocked, and prayed him to take in a
book; he refused it. You went up to the next Chamber, and there you left it;
and his Wife asking afterward if you had been there; his Sister said, Yes, you
had left a book, he brought it down, and this appears to be the very Individual
book, nothing can be more clear.


Mercers Wife Sworn. That morning they knocked at Brooks his door, we were a
bed, I heard a noise of Thieves; upon that I being awake, and my Husband
asleep, I waked him, and desired him to go to the Window; he asked who was
there? one said to him rise and open the Door; said my Husband I am but a
Lodger, let my Landlord open it if he will. Who is your Landlord? Mr. Brook's,
That Is the man I look for, says the other; so with that after some time Mr.
Brooks went down and opened the door. Mr. Lestrange coming up to my Husband,
says he, Are you sure there is nothing in your Rooms? There is nothing said
he. When my Husband went down, I called to my Sister; said I, Did you hear Mr.
Brooks there? Yes, said she, he has left a book here: said I, Do you know what is
in it? it may bring us all into Trouble. And my Husband having confidently
denied any such thing, fearing he might be troubled, I called him up, and told
him of it; said my Husband, I Will call up the Gentleman, and give it him, no
said I, go take the book and carry it him.

Mercers Sister Sworn. Thomazin Mercer. It is very true that that is the very
book I received from Mr. Brooks.


L. C. J. Hide. Now the individual book is brought to light.


Brooks. What was the Title of it?


T. Mercer. I know not, but there was the Speeches of the ten men that were
executed.


Brooks. Did you see that book, that very book?


T. Mercer. Yes.


One Mr. Merridale sworn. Mr. Merridale. My Lord, this very book did Mercer
bring down, told us, He would be hanged for never a Rogue of them all; did he
think to lay his books at my door? I know this is the very book, I took notice
of the Picture of Sir Hen Vane in it; and he there owned it.


Mercer. I can tell that he owned it, and said, it was brought to him to be
bound.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Here are two hundred of these books are delivered to you to
sell, fifty you deliver to another; When Mr. L' Estrange comes to search, you
open not your doors, when you see you could not stay longer, you run up to
deliver it to Mercer your guest, he would not receive it; you deliver it to his
Sister, she keeps it in her hands; when her Husband had denied books to be
there, and his Wife understanding afterward you had left it, she was afraid of
her Husband for denying it, calls him, and gives him the book, and then he
said, He would be hanged for never a Rogue of you all; throws down the book,
and that was the very book the received from you, and your self did own it and
confess it.


Brooks. As for Mr. L' Estrange, it is not so; he says, when first he knocked
at the door, I did not hear him, afterward I called out who is there, said one,
Which is Mr. Brooks? said I, here, I told them if they would be civil, I would
open the door, give me but leave to put on my Breeches; I went and opened it;
He does not swear positively they are my books. My Lord, This Mercer was a
lodger in my house; I have often desired him to pay his Rent, and since I have
been taken, I have sent several messengers; I told him I would seize his goods,
and thereupon he speaks against me maliciously. I desire you to consider, I
being only a workman, how can I be guilty of Sedition and Scandalous things? I
never printed any thing, I am only a Book-binder, that is my Trade: I hope you
will consider that, I am only a bare workman* My Lord, I desire when they go
out, that some body may stand at the door, that no body may go into the Jury.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. We will take care of that; Have you any more to say?


Brooks. No my Lord.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You of the Jury, you have heard so much of the other
Indictments of the same nature, I need not say much to this. That which he
speaks touching his Trade, I must repeat the same as before; he is not
questioned for using, but abusing of his Trade, for publishing and despersing
Sedicious and Scandalous Books, printing and publishing, but the evidence is
only for publishing. If you be satisfied that he published it, that is the
Crime; Printing alone is not enough, for if a man print a book to make a fire
on, that is no offense, it is the publishing of it which is the Crime; You have
heard the evidence, how far forth it is proved, two hundred delivered to him,
fifty by him delivered to another; this book you see his own Conscience tells
him what it was* when Mr. L'Estrange came, he would have slipped it into his
Guests Chamber, he refused it; then he carries it to another, lay your evidence
together, if you find him guilty of the publishing, it is enough.


Jury. We desire to know upon what Statute Law this Indictment is grounded?


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. Upon none, but it is an offense at common Law, I told you so
at first.


The Jury went forth, and after near an hours consultation returned to the
Court, and took their places. Cl. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. Who shall say for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Cl. Set up the Prisoners to the Bar, how say you, is Tho. Brewster guilty of
the Offense whereof he stands Indicted, for printing the Sedicious book called
The Speeches, etc. or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty of selling and uttering the said books.


Cl. What say you, is he guilty of the Offense of printing and publishing the
book called The Phoenix, etc. or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty of publishing it.


Cl. How say you, is Simon Dover guilty of the Offense for printing and
publishing The Speeches, etc. or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. How say you, is Nathan Brooks guilty of the Offense for printing and
selling the said book?


Foreman. Guilty of selling it.


Cl. Hearken to your Verdicts as the Court has Recorded them; You say, that
etc. and so you say all?


Jury* Yes.


Mr. North. My Lord, we humbly pray Sentence against the Prisoners.


L. Chapter Ju. Hide. You three, Tho. Brewster, Simon Dover, and Nathan Brooks; you
have been severally Indicted for a Heinous and great Offense; Brewster, you
have been Indicted for two several books, as full of Villainy, and Slander, and
Repreach, to the King and Government, as possibly can be: and I will tell you
all three, It is the Kings great mercy you have not been Indicted Capitally;
for every one of those books are filled with Treason, and you for Publishing of
them, by strictness of Law have for feited your Lives, and All to the King; It
is his Clemency toward you. You may see the Kings Purpose; He desires to
Reform, not to Ruin his Subjects: The Press is grown so common, and men take
the boldness to Print what ever is brought to them, let it concern whom it
will; it is high time Examples be made. 1. I must let you and all men know, by
the course of the Common Law, before this new Act was made, for a Printer, or
any other, under pretense of Printing, to Publish that which is a Reproach to
the King, to the State, to his Government, to the Church, nay, to a Particular
person, it is Punishable as a Misdemeanour. He must not say, He knew not what
was in it; that is no Answer in Law. I speak this, because I would have men
avoid this for time to come, and not think to shelter themselves under such a
Pretense. I will not spend time in discoursing of the nature of the Offense, it
has been declared already; it is so High, that truly the highest Punishment
that by Law may be justly inflicted, is due to you. But Tho Brewster, your
Offense is double; therefore the Judgment of the Court is, That

You shall pay to the King for these Offenses committed, 100. Marks; And for
you (the other two) Simon Dover, and Nathan Brooks, You shall pay either of
you, a Fine of 40 Marks to the King.

You shall, either of you, severally stand upon the Pillory, from Eleven to One
of the Clock in one place at the Exchange, and another day (the same space of
time) in Smithfield; and you shall have a Paper set over your Ha^^, declaring
your Offense, For Printing, Publishing, Scandalous,' Treasonable, and Factious
Books against the King and State.

You shall be committed til the next Jail-deliver, without Bayl, and then you
shall make an Open Confession, and Acknowledgement of you Offenses, in such
words as shall be Directed you; and afterward,

You shall remain Prisoners during the Kings Pleasure; and when you are
Discharged, you shall put in good Security, by Recognizance, your selves 400l.
a piece, and two Securities, each of you, of ^00l. a piece, not to Print or
Publish any Books, but such as shall be allowed of: And this is the Judgment
of the Court.


IN the Interval, betwixt the Condemnation and Execution of John Twyn, diverse
Applications were made to him, in order both to his Temporal and Eternal Good;
and in particular, Mr. Weldon, the Ordinary of Newgate, spent much time and
pains upon him, to convince him of that horrid Crime, for which he was to
Suffer; Particularly pressing him to a Confession both of his Offense, and of
the Author of that Treasonable Piece, for which he was to Die. His Answer was,
That it was not his Principle to betray the Au^hour; but it belonged to others:
Whereupon Mr. Ordinary demanded of him, What it was, that could prevail with
him, to undertake the Printing of it? He said, He was a Poor man, that he had
Received 40s. and the Promise of a Larger Sum, whereupon he undertook it;
but who it was that made him that Promise, he would not'discover.

Mr. Ordinary did likewise further urge him to a Confession of the Author, upon
a Confidence, that such a Discovery might save his Life. To which he Replied,
that he neither could do it, not did believe himself obliged to (...) he could;
for better (says he) one suffer, then many. Being pressed to receive the
blessed Sacrament, he returned, that he was not free to do it; He was against
receiving according to the Forms of this Church; and he hoped, he might do well
enough without it; and in this temper he continued till he came to the Place of
Execution; Where going up the Ladder, Mr. Sheriff told him, that if he had any
thing to say, he should remember the cautions he had given him.

Twyn. I suppose this appearance of people does expect that I should say
something as to the matter I come here for. It is true, I come here Condemned
as a Traitor, for printing a book, taken to be, and owned to be, and judged to
be, Scandalous and Seditious.


Sir R. Ford. And Treasonable, put that in too.


Twyn. For my own part, I can say this, I knew it not to be so, till I came to
the Bar to be Tried; I was surprised in the doing of it, both in the beginning,
and at last, I was clear and free in my own thoughts as to intend any Sedition.


Sir R. Ford. I would not willingly interrupt a dying man; I told you before
that you must not declare any thing in justification, or mitigation, of so soul
a Crime; but if you had any thing to say that was for the disburthening of your
own Conscience, or to give any good Admonitions to the people to beware of
falling into the like Crime, you should be patiently heard: but I wonder you
should go about to justify your self in this, when you did confess both to my
brother here, and my self, after Sentence, that That which was passed upon you,
was just, and deserved.


Twyn. I do not say otherwise of it, but that it was just; but as to my
ignorance of the matter of intending or imagining to foment and contrive any
such thing tending to such ends, but barely for getting a little money for my
Family; I was as clear as the Child unborn of any other design knowingly, of
any such thing, I do look upon it as a Surprizal; First, I was Surprised in
this matter, by reason of that dangerous sickness, and weakness I was in when
it was brought* I received it with my own hands, but it was wrapped up in wast
paper, and so I delivered is to my servant, he went on with it* and two or
three days after, it was taken from me by those that came to search my house,
who themselves told me they came upon information; so that it was a matter I
was surprised with when it was brought in, by reason of my sickness and
weakness, being unable to over look it: And likewise as soon as it was brought
in, the third day I was discovered in it, by some way of information; and
whether those that were the senders of it in, might not be the discoverers, I
know not; some discovery was made by by the confession of those that searched
my house they came by information, not by chance: then when they had taken me,
I did ingeniously acknowledge and confess who I had it of; and yet for all
this, the searching after those persons concerned was neglected that whole day;
they were at home, and easy to be taken, I could prove it.


Sir R. Ford. Mr. Twyn, give me leave to tell you once more, that I am heartily
sorry you have given me the occasion to interrupt you a second time; All these
things you pleaded at the Bar, and said as much as you could; the Wisdom and
Justice of the Bench did not think this to be a sufficient excuse of that
Treason you are found guilty of it; I would ask to what end this discourse
tends; tell me your end?


Twyn. My end is this, and it please your Worship, to show how ignorant and
unacquainted I was with the nature of the thing; and how far I was in my
Conscience, from intending that Treason.


Sir R. Ford. You say you were surprised, and that you knew not the Treason;
Was it not clearly and plainly (by your own servant) proved that you composed
some part of it, and printed it your self, and corrected it; You understood
English, or else you could not Correct it; if you understood English, or sense,
you could not be ignorant that it was a Horrid piece of Treason, such as no
honest man ought to see and conceal one half hour. Therefore do not justify
your self, it serves not to any purpose here, or in the world to come; if you
are not guilty of the malice, you have the more easy access to (...)
hereafter; but that will not help you here on earth; pray spend that little
time you have to some better purpose then this; if you have any thing to say
that may become a modest man to say, we are willing to hear it* if you can
remember any person that assisted you in Correcting it, or otherwise were
concerned in it, say it.


Twyn. No person assisted me, I Corrected it not, it was carried out of my
house to Correct, and brought in Corrected.


Sir. R. Ford. You shall not say that you are denied that Christian Liberty a
dying man ought to have* We are not to suffer any reflections on this business;
You had a fair trial, I say we would not deprive you your Liberty of speaking,
but do not abuse that Liberty that is given you, by spending your time
impertinently, and fruitlesly, but if you have any thing further to offer to
God, which is more for your good, go to that.


Twyn. I shall forbear to insist any further as to the Narration of that
matter, I shall be very unwilling and tender of reflecting any thing upon the
King, or the Government, or give offense to your Worships, any way.


Sir R. Ford. Nothing but that, shall offend us.


Twyn. I shall go to prayer.


Sir R. Ford. Do, do, we will join with you, and pray for you.


He continued in private Prayer on the Ladder some time. Sir R. Ford.
Executioner, do not turn him off, till he has given you a sign.


Mr. Ordinary of Newgate. Mr. Twyn, give a sign to the Executioner, when you
have done* You must not throw yourself off, you will be your own Executioner in
that.


Twyn* Executioner, when I give you the sign, by pulling you by the Shoo^, then
turn me off.


Executioner. I will* I will, the Lord bless thy poor soul.


Afterward the Executioner coming down, Mr. Twyn told him the Sign should be
by Moving his Foot. Twyn. O Lord hear the Prayer of thy poor Servant, receive
me into thy Merry* Lord in thee* I believe receive my spirit; Lord Jesus* Let
my Prayers be acceptable in thy ^ights O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer; O
Lord* I beseech thee receive me into the Arms of thy mercy, let me have an
inheritance with thee, to live with thee for ever, and then come Lord Jesus
come quickly.

Then giving the Sign, the Executioner did his Office, and being cut Down, his
Head was severed from his Body, and his body Divided into four Quarters, which
are to be Disposed of as the King shall Assign* Since which time* his Head is
placed over Ludgate, and his Quarters upon Aldersgate, and other Gates of the
City.


It will be here Convenient, to make Two Observations upon the Words of the
Prisoner.
FIrst, He says, That the Proofs were sent out of his House to be Corrected,
and brought back again Corrected, and so not Corrected by himself: Which is not
only contrary to what he formerly Owned, as was made out by several Proofs at
his Trial, concerning his own Correcting of it; but to his solemn Declaration
at the Bar, avowing that he knew nothing more of the Business then what he
There delivered: For, supposing such a Confession, the next Question would
Infallibly have been, To whom was it carried? Or, Who Corrected it? as the
readiest way to the Discovery of the Author.

Secondly, He says, That the Persons concerned, (meaning Calvert, and her
Maid) were neglected that whole day, being at Home, and easy to be taken,
which is Disproved, both by his own Servant, and Mrs. Calvert's: And likewise
proved on the other side, That if he himself would have ordered his Apprentice
to have looked after the Maid, (as he Promised, and was Directed) she had been
Secured that very morning: The Fellow meeting her in St. Bartholomews-Close,
within a quarter of an hour after his Master was carried away; not knowing that
she had any concern in the Business. As to the Mistress her self, she is at
Present under Custody.

FINIS.

