AN EXACT RELATION Of all the TRANSACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS, BETWEEN The KING of
DENMARK, AND The KING of SWEDEN, AND Their MINISTERS.

From the Treaty at Rottshild, Concluded February 26. 1657/1658.

LONDDN, Printed for Simon Miller, and are to be Sold at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

AN EXACT RELATION OF ALL THE TRANSACTIONS Betwixt the Commissioners of the
King of Denmark, and Ambassadors of the King of Sweden, since the late
Conclusion of Peace at Rottshild; And other ensuing Actions.
IT is every where sufficiently known, how in February last (by a more then
ordinary frost) not only the Rivers, but also the very Seas (wherein the
strength of the Danish Islands consist) were covered with Ice, in such a
manner, that thereby the King of Sweden, had a fair opportunity to pass with
his Army and Attillery over them, first into the Isle of Funen, and afterward
into that of Zealand: And also that thereupon, by the Authority and mediation
of the most Christian King of France, and his Highness the Lord Protector of
England, etc. and through the most serious endeavors of their Ambassadors,
betwixt the Commissioners of the Warrying Kings, a Peace most advantageous to
the King and Kingdom of Sweden, has been concluded at Rottshild, on the 26 day
of February last, and since approved and ratified by the Kings and Senators of
both Crowns, and at Coppenhaguen solemnly interchanged.

And although his Majesty the King of Denmark, according to the Tenor of the
treaty, has resigned and yielded up to his Majesty the King of Sweden, such
and so many strong and considerable Places and Havens, which in all probability
the Kingdom of Sweden could not have gotten by the Sword in many years; viz.
The excellent Provinces of Shonen, and Bleking; containing so many strong
holds, as Malmen, Landscron, Christianople, Elsingbourgh, Christianstad, etc.
As also the two most considerable Shires in Norway, to wit, the almost
invincible Fortress Bahuse, and the City of Drunthime, with all other places
that have dependency from the same: The Isle of Brenholm, whole Yempterland,
and cleared the Castle of Bremerreurde; all in conformity to the 16 Article of
the above mentioned treaty, as by the Extract sub lit. (A) here annexed is to
be seen. Hoping the King of Sweden should also, according to his promise, and
the tenor of the said Article, withdraw with his Army the first of May next
ensuing, out of such Danish Provinces, Dukedomes and Countries, as were
specified therein, and by him (during the War) seized upon; but nothing was
performed: and under various pretenses, the marching away of the Army delayed,
to the utter ruin of the Country.

His Majesty the King of Denmark, did not think, that after the ratification of
the concluded Peace, there was any thing left, which deserved a new Treaty: Yet
(to promote the execution of that, which had been already agreed upon)
condescended thereunto, admitting the Swedish Ambassadors, the Lord Steno
Bidken, and Pet. Jul. Cojet in Coppenhaguen, etc. naming them Commissioners to
treat withal. At their very first meeting, they made motion of a nearer
Aliance and Union betwixt the two Northern Crowns: but as soon as the Danish
Commissioners begun to speak of any restriction, the Swedish Abassadours not
liking that any exception should be made, deferred this Point to other
Conferences.

In the mean while the Ambassadors of Holstein, arrived at Coppenhaguen,
desiring satisfaction for their Majesty, which according to the 22 Article of
the already mentioned Treaty of Peace sub lit. (B) was to consist in Reason;
but the Swedish Ambassadors, taking presently the Duke of Holsteins party,
pretends things far beyond Reason. Notwithstanding his Majesty the King of
Denmark, by granting him the major part of the Dumcapitle of Sleswigh, and the
Lordship Swabstead, made also an end of that business, to the full satisfaction
of both their Superiors, as is more at large evidenced by the Writings made to
this purpose, and confirmed on all sides. The more haste was made for the
finishing of this business on the side of Denmark, because not only the Swedish
Ministers, but also the Ambassadors of France, and the extraordinary Envoy of
England had given iterative Assurances, that as soon as ever this Agreement,
with the said Duke was brought to an issue, that then the Army of the King of
Sweden, should presently march out of all the King of Denmarkes Territories.
Whereupon the Swedish Ambassadors also, despatch a Letter to the Chief
Admiral Wrangle, as General of the King of Swedens Army of this Tenor, That
now the Treaty betwixt the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Holstein being
ended, he was to keep himself ready with his Army to march out of the Dominions
of Denmark. Which Letter was delivered open to the King, who by an express sent
it to the said General Wrangle. No sooner was this satisfactory Treaty ended
and subscribed, but the Ambassadors of Sweden, found out new pretenses, to
delay still the marching of the Army out of the Country. The first was of the
Island of Ween, as if the same belonged not to the Isle of Zealand, but to the
Province of Shonen; and howbeit this Island was never depending from Shonen,
but ever and from times out of memory has pertained to the Isle of Zealand;
which is evident, whilst the Indwellers of the same, pay their Taxes to the
Governor of Cronenbourgh to this very day, are judged by the Laws of Zealand,
being also bondmen as the Country people of Zealand, and not free, as they of
Shonen are. The only thing the Swedish Ministers had to color their pretenses
withal, was that the said Inhabitants pleaded their Causes before the Chief
Justice of Shonen, which at their humble request, the late King Christian the
4th of everlasting memory, had given them leave to do, because the Chief
Justice of Shonen, lived but seven leagues distant from them; whereas he of
Zealand lived near twenty seven leagues, and this the King granted them only
for a a time, till other and better expedients might be devised.

Notwithstanding his Majesty of Denmark, would rather give away this Island to
the King of Sweden, as he has promised to do, then longer to see all his
Subjects sigh under the heavy burdens and oppression of the Swedish Army.

No sooner had they obtained this Island Ween, but the restitution of three
Salt-Ships, taken in the sound in the time of War, was pretented and valued
twice as much as they were worth; yet had they also in this an accomplishment
of their desires, the restitution of the Ships, with all their equipage being
given; and for the Salt, a considerable Sum of Money.

When it should now seem, that all was brought to an happy end, and that the
Swedes had nothing more to pretend, they begun anew to demand satisfaction for
the booty gotten by our men in Guinea, from the Swedish West- India Company,
during the late (duly denunciated, and elsewhere sufficiently justified) War,
pretending therefore 400000 Rixdollers; whereas it is sufficiently known, that
it cannot amount to 100000 Rixdollers. And besides, this the King of Denmark
was not bound to any further restitution, as to the Castle without the Guns,
Provision and Munition, as it was demonstrated to the Swedish Ambassadors, and
is clearly to be seen by the 14 Article of the abovementioned Treaty of Peace
sub lit. (C) But yet would his Majesty of Denmark rather give them content in
this most unreasonable demand, than to have the Swedish Army longer upon free
quarters in his Country; offering to give his, and all the Senators of the
Kingdoms bond, for the whole pretended Sum of the 400000 Rixdollers, and to
pay them as soon as possible he could; but this would not please the Swedish
Ministers; who pretended first the King should give them some Land for a pawn,
and afterward security of sufficient Merchants in Hambourgh, who were to bind
themselves, and pay the said 400000 Rixdollers within the space of one year, as
their own debt. At this his Majesty showed to the Swedish Ambassadors, that
the last of their demands was in this conjuncture of time, wholly impossible
for him to perform, since his Kingdoms (as long as the Swedish Army was in
possession of the most part of the same) could not find credit for such a
Sum: But this excuse, how true and agreerble to Reason, was not regarded by
the Swedish Ministers: wherefore his Majesty (that he might not be thought to
have omitted any thing, how hard soever, if it were but in his power to
perform) offered them as before, his and all the Senators of his Kingdoms
Obligation of the said Sum of 400000 Rixdollers, and the possession of the
Isle of Island, with the benefits thereof, till such time that the said Sum
should be paid, and the Castle of Guinea restored by the Commissioners, which
for that purpose were offered to the Swedish Ministers, who it was hoped, would
have been satisfied therewith, and in conformity of the Treaty of Peace, and
their Iterative promises, endeavored the marching away of the Army out of his
Majesty's Dominion: But the Swedish Ministers would come to no conclusion. One
of them Sir Peter Julius Cojet, departed from hence toward Holstein, promising
there to inform his King and Master how the case stood, and also to promote as
much as in him lay the marching away of the King his Masters Army, and to
return again within Fourteen Days.

Thus full satisfaction having been given even to the King of Sweden, his most
unjust and unreasonable Pretenses. All the Countries and strong places
according to the Tenor of the Treaty of Peace delivered; the Castle of
Bremerveurde restored, and thereupon the Reciprocal Evacuation of the Isle of
Funen, and the strong place of Friderighs-Odde expected; and that the more,
because the often mentioned Swedish Ambassadors had showed to the Senators of
the Kingdom of Denmark, an original Letter of the King their Master to this
purpose: As soon as Bremerveurde shall be rendered unto me, will I not only
evacuat the Isle of Tunen and Frederighs-Odde, but also withdraw with my whole
Army; which nevertheless was not his intention, as the event sufficiently
witnesses; Beginning anew to make great Complaints, that the promised 2000
Horse were not fully delivered, and that this was the reason, why he could not
yet march away with his Army; It was therefore resolved to give them
satisfaction in this particular, but the Officers by the King of Sweden,
ordained to receive so many Horses as were wanting, and chiefly Major General
Bottigher, made one difficulty after another, for not receiving them; as they
should be all Germains, and no Danes amongst them, some of the Troopers had no
Clokes, the Horse were not all of one size, Saddels and Pistols were not to
their liking; the mean Officers and the Servants of the Officers they would
not not receive into the number; pretending besides that 65 Men were wanting,
and such like complaints more they made, till at length they thouyht to have a
fit opportunity to put their dangerous design into Execution; and having a
while before received in Yutland 500, and in Holstein the yet wanting 500
Horse, a little without contradiction, we thought our selves now secured, and
in a peaceable condition, nd therefore Disbanded the most part of our Forces;
in expectation from day to day, that the so long looked for, and so often
promised Marching away of the Swedish Army should be performed; when in lieu
thereof we not only received news, that the Lands laying about Gluckstad,
Crempe, and Rensboghur, were burdened with free quarters of the Swedish
Soldiers; which Lands according to Agreement were to be spared, as the King of
Sweden, when he was lately at Gottenbourg, not only confirmed anew, but by an
especial Command charged his Lieutenant General in those parts, the
Paltsgrave of Sulchbagh so to do; Which Commands of his were in an open Letter
delivered unto our Ambassador, therewith for a while to appease or rather lull
asleep the King his Master; By these proceedings were not only the Country
People living in the said Lands in a more then ordinary manner loaded with
Soldiers, and a great many of them utterly ruined; but also the substance
whereby his Majesty's Garrisons were to subsist, was taken away from them.

And whilst we were secure and in expectation of the Swedish Ambassador Cojet
his return with ratification of all that had been concluded: The King of
Sweden with his Army embarked at Kiel, under pretense of being bound for
Pomerania, or Borussia, in a Hostile manner invades anew without any
denunciation of War, and at a time, when nothing less was looked for, this
Isle of Zealand: His Majesty's Horse dispersed up and down in the Country he
sets upon, some he forces to take service under him, and to the rest he stopped
their passage to Coppenhagnen, which place he has now Besieged, and is come so
far with his approachs, that he is not a Pistol shot from the Walls, and goes
on more and more to come nearer. He has also taken the Town called
Helsingneur, and with three batteries fires without intermission upon the
Castle of Cronenburge; but the intention is so well there as here to defend us
to the utmost.

Upon a sudden there came also a Royal Swedish Fleet before the Harbor of
this City, hindering that nothing can come out or in to the same, by the which
John Frederick Duke of Lunenbourgh and Brunswig, Brother to our Queen, with the
Ship he came in, has been taken, who being not interested in the differences of
Denmark and Sweden, ought to have been considered as a Prince of the Roman
Empire. Many other foreign ships they have also detained; and the above
mentioned Swedish Ambassador Cojet, who but lately departed from hence in
Friendship, having here received many Courtesies and good Entertainment, is now
in Person with the Fleet, from whence he has sent Letters hither to his
Colleague the Senator and Ambassador Steno Bielken, the which for gathering in
his lodging men and all kind of Arms, and casting of Bullets at Night time,
has been secured, and his men divided, and elsewhere lodged.

Let now the World judge without Passion, if these proceedings and the renewing
of this War be not quite contrary to the late agreement, and chiefly against
the first Article of the same; which contains, That henceforth between both
Kings a firm, everlasting and irrecovocable Peace was established, the
misintelligences past, and the War and Enmity laid aside, and that for the
future they should live in a steadfast Friendship and good Neighborhood
together; In such a manner, that both Kings were bound not only to promote each
others welfare as their own, but also to defend each others Kingdoms,
Countries and Subjects from injuries, as much as in them lay, which is to be
seen more at large in the said Article, sub lit. (D.) here annexed.

In conclusion, By all here before related proceedings it will appear, that
hitherto the Swedes have had no thoughts of Peace, studying nothing else but to
find out pretenses and occasions to go from Treaty of Peace so solemnly
concluded, on both sides confirmed, and by Denmark in all points performed;
not regarding that the same, fide publica, by the mediation and laborious
interposition of his most Christian Majesty, and his Highness the Lord
Protector of Engdland, etc. Ambassador and extraordinary Envoy has been
concluded, and of them subscribed and sealed; as out of the here annexed
clause, sub lit. (E.) is to be seen.

Let therefore all the World so well Friends as Foes judge, whether this new
irruption of the King of Sweden into this Island be attempted for any other
cause, or to any other end, then to subvert the government thereof and master
it, making himself thereby the more able to fall upon his other neighbors,
and so obtain the absolute dominion of the Baltic Sea, to the great prejudice
of them that have Trade and Navigation in the same. Yet do we trust in the
Lord, and the justice of our Cause, knowing our selves innocent and guiltless
before him, (who searches Hearts and Reins,) as well as before all the world,
not to have omitted or committed any thing that might be the occasion of a new
breach; hoping God Almighty will help and defend his Majesty of Denmark,
Norway, etc. with his Powerful Arm, and that his most Christian Majesty the
King of France, and his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, will not only disavow this wrongful and unjust attempt, but also in
conformity of their interposition and warrantty by their Authority or such
other means, as they shall think convenient, dispose the King of Sweden to
desist from this most unjust interprise, and to perform all the points of the
often mentioned Treaty, as well as the King of Denmark has done on his side,
and to give his Majesty for his received wrong and undeserved damages, full and
due reparation and satisfaction. Given at Coppenhaguen, 23. August Anno. 1658.

Extracts of such Articles as are mentioned in this Information out of the
Treaty of Peace Concluded betwixt the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, etc. 26 of
February, in the year 1657/1658. at Rottshield.
A. ARTIC. XVI.
TO the end, that the evacuation and interchanging of the before named
Provinces, Towns, and strong places, may be done without disorder, it has been
agreed by the consent of both Parties, on this following manner: That as soon
as the 2000 Horse (which his Majesty the King of Denmark, promises hereby to
give unto the King of Sweden) shall be delivered, the Swedish Army is presently
to march out of Zealand: Whereupon are to be delivered to the King of Sewden
his Commissioners Helsenbourgh, the 27 of Febr. Lanscron the 28, Malmeu the
first of March; then Christiansted the fourth of the same Month, and the same
day Naxchau is to be delivered to the Danish Commissioners; at the same time
the Swedish Army is to march out of Laland, Falster and Langeland: The 15 of
March is Christianople, and what is remaining in Bleking, as also Bornholm, in
case it be possible, and that wind and Wedder will permit it to be surrendered,
then Bahuse the 28 of the same Month: Further is Drunthime, Yempterland, and
Bremerveurde, as well as all other places, which his Majesty of Denmark has
gained, during this War, where, and in what place soever it be, to be
delivered and restored to the Commissioners of Swedland the first day of may,
at which time the Army of his Majesty the King of Sweden, is also to march out
of Funen, Yutland, Sleswig, Holstein, Stormar and Ditmarshen, with the
Islelands, Fortresses, Forts, and Noble-mens Houses, and to deliver up to the
Danish Commissioners the strong places of Friderighs Odd, Pinnenberg,
Halsconce, and all such others; as his Majesty the King of Sweden, during the
War, has gotten in his possession. At the same day his Majesty of Sweden, is
also to deliver up the Island Alseu, Sunderbourgh and Norebourgh to the right
owners of the same, and if any other place in the above named Kingdoms,
Provinces, Dukedomes, and Islands be taken by the one or other, it shall all be
restored and delivered to him, who formerly has been the right owner thereof,
as well as if it were specified herein.

B. ARTIC. XXII.
HIs Majesty the King of Denmark, etc. shall give to the Duke of Sleswing,
Holstein, Gottorp, etc. satisfaction according to equity, wherever the
Commissioners of both parties, to wit, of his Majesty of Denmark, and the said
Duke of Holstein, are to Treat.

C. ARTIC. XIV.
ANd whilst all the strong places, as well those that have been taken, during
the War, as all others, so by this Treaty of Peace shall be given over, are
to be delivered without Provision and Munition; it is agreed upon, that the
Country People of that Shire or Province, wherein such strong places are
situated, shall be bound to carry the Provision and Ammunition to that part of
the Sea side, where most conveniently they may be embarq't and shipped away.

D. ARTIC. I.
IN the first place, there shall be between both Kings, their Successors,
Kingdoms, Countries, Counselors, Servants, Subjects, and Inhabitants a firm
and everlasting Peace, so that henceforth all mis-intelligences, dissension,
strife, enmity, War and Hostility are to cease and end; as also what has
passed on both sides as well before, as during the War, in virtue of a general
amnesty shall be buried in Oblivion, and never at any time remembered or spoken
of, but rather shall there be a firm Amity, Confidence, Union, and true
Neighborhood established and intertain'd, so, and in such a manner, that one
the others good and welfare shall advance and promote: And that which might
prove prejudicial and hurtful to the others Person; Government, Kingdoms,
Country and Subjects, hinder, and as much as is pissible, prevent.

E. After the XXVIII. ARTICLE at the end.
FOr the better assurance, that all this, in all his Points, so as it is here
mentiond, has been by us Concluded and Agreed upon, and that on the side of
his Majesty, our most gracious King, and the Crown of Swedland, it shall be
faithfully and inviolably kept and performed, as also that the ratification
thereof, at the appointed time, shall be exhibited and delivered, is this by us
subscribed and sealed with our Signets; desiring moreover, that the
Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty, and the extraordinary Envoy of his
Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as Mediators of
this Treaty of Peace, will be pleased, for the better Confirmation and
Testification of the same, to subscribe and seal this as well as we. Given at
Rottshield Febr. 26. An. 1627/1628.

Le Chevalier de Farlon. Philip Meadow. Corfich Earl of Ulefeld. Steno Biclk.


EXcuse, Courteous Reader, if we do not answer thy expectations, in giving thee
a further account of what has passed in the siege of Coppenhaguen from the 23
of Aug. till now, how the Besiegers make use of empoisened Bullets, and other
Engines not usual amongst Christians; as also of the deplorable and unspeakable
devastation and desolation, caused by the remaining Swedish Forces, in the
Dukedom of Holstein, and the adjoining Provinces, by burning and utterly
destroying all the Cities, Towns, Villages, Noble-mens Houses of the same.
Whereby thousands of Women and Children are droven to lie in the open Fields,
and to cry for vengeance from Heaven; We hope the Lord will hear their Prayers,
and show his just Judgment upon the oppressors, when according to his Wisdom,
he shall think them ripe for punishment. Whereof we intend to give thee a full
and true Information in due time.

Farewell.

