THE EXAMINATION OF THE CAPTAINS and other OFFICERS OF THE REBELS in SUSSEX:
Late of the Lord DVNBARTON's Regiment, Before the most HONORABLE The Lords of
the Privy Council.
Licensed, according to Order.

HE that rightly weighs the Interest of our present Gracious King, in the
Hearts of Englishmen; and reflects on the Audacious and Insolent Attempt, of
so inconsiderable a handful of Murmurers and Mutineers, as the late Rebels of
the Lord Dunbarton's Regiment, in so daring an Essay, against the Peace of our
Kingdom, and the Dignity of our Sovereign Lord and Lady; must look upon their
Folly and Frenzy, as a matter of greater Wonderment, then the Impudence of
their Crime.

And as their Endeavors have been as Impotent, as the Injustice of their
Cause; so there wanted no more, than the Breath of a King to dispel so feeble a
Cloud.

After their Surrender upon Discretion, their whole Party being taken
Prisoners; the common Soldiers were brought up, and secured in Edmunton and
Islington Churches; and the Officers (whose Names are as follows) Conducted up
by a Body of Horse, for their Guard, on Wednesday Night, were Committed all
close Prisoners in Newgate.

Captains.
Lord John Morray. -- Johnson. John Auckmoaty. William Dean. -- Rutherford.
John Levingston. Mongo Morray. Alexander Gaune. Agent.
Lieutenants.
Peter Robinson. Isaac Trachall. William Morray. William Cuningham.
Ensigns.
Patience Morray. George Chain. Walter Auckmoaty. James Daton. Alexander
Tunnis. John Carr. Peter Cook.
Their Behavior since their Committment, whether through the sense of their
Guilt, or their Apprehension of the Punishment that hangs over it, has (as in
good Reason) been very Melancholy; and, though seen by none but their Keepers,
they are observed to be much dejected.

On Thursday night about eight of the Clock, four of the Captains were (under
strong Guard) carried before a select Committee of Lords of the Privy Counsel,
and continued some time before them under Examination: and on Friday about 11
in the forenoon three more Captains and the Agent, under the Custody of their
Keepers in several Coaches, were had before the Committee of the Privy Council
also; and after Examination were remanded back to their former Close
Confinement, and they all continue now in the Press Yard, in several Rooms
apart, without permission of Access to'em by any Person of what Quality soever.

It is not doubted but this Insurrection has some Farther Ground and Original
then their Bare Refusal of obeying His Majesty's Commands, in their intended
Transportment to Holland; for to the Honor of that Nation, of which that
Regiment is mostly composed, though they have been much complained of for their
Rudness, and Misdemenours in most parts, wherever they Quartered: However, they
have had the Reputation of that true Courage, which is Justly their Due. And
therefore, as it could not be any Disgust against that Vigorous Service they
must expect in the Dutch Cause, against so Formidable an Enemy as the French,
that made them mutiny; it is not to be questioned, but there has been other
Engines and Bellows at Work, amongst their Ringleaders, that blew up these
late Coals amongst them; which lies now under Inquiry.

London, Printed for William Tracy:


