An Exact RELATION Of An HONORABLE VICTORY Obtained By The PARLIAMENTS Forces
In YORKSHIRE.

As it was sent in a letter, and read in both Houses of Parliament, on
Saturday, Maii 27. 1643.

Subscribed by Sir Tho. Fairefax: Sergeant Maj. Col. Gifford. Sir Henry Fowls.
S. William Fairefax Lieu. Col. Holman. Major Layton. Major Talbot.

Wherein is Related their manner of the taking of Wakefield, where 4 pieces of
Ordinance, 27 Colors, of Foot, 3 Cornets of Horse, and 1500 Common Soldiers,
were taken Prisoners, besides Captains and Officers, a list of whose names is
here also inserted.

LONDON, May 27. Printed John Wright, dwelling in the Old-bailey. 1643.

An Exact RELATION Of An Honorable Victory, obtained by the Parliament Forces
in YORKSHIRE.
SAturday night last, the 20 of May, the Lord General gave Order for a party
of a 1000. Foot, three Companies of Dragooners, and eight Troops of Horse, to
march from the Garrisons of Leeds, Bradford, Hallifax, and Howley; Sir Thomas
Fairfax commanded in chief; the foot were commanded by Sergeant Major General
Gifford, and Sir William Fairfax, the horses were divided into two bodies,
four troops commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax, the other four troops, by Sir
Henry, Fowls. Howley was their Rendezvous where they all met on Saturday last,
about twelve a clock at night; about two next morning they marched away, and
coming to Stanley where two of the Enemies troops lay, with some Dragooneers,
that quarter was beaten up, and about one and twenty prisoners taken, and about
4 of the clock in the morning we came before Wakefield, where after some of
the horse were beaten into the Town, the foot with unspeakable courage beat
the Enemies from the hedges, which they had, lyned with Musketeers, and
assaulted it in two places, VVren-gate and North-gate, and after an hour and
half sight, we recovered one of the pieces and turned it upon them, and entered
the Town at both places at one and the same time. When the Baracado's were
opened, Sir Thomas Fai^fax with the horse fell into the Town and cleared the
streets, where Colonel Goring was taken by Lieutenant Allured, brother to
Captain Allured a Member of the House; yet in the market place there stood three
troops of horse, and Colonel Lamptons Regiment, to whom Major General Gifford
sent a Trumpet with offer of quarter if they would lay down their Arms, they
answered they scorned the motion, then he fired a piece of their own Ordinance
upon them, and the Horse fell in upon them beat them out of the Town, and
took all these Officers expressed in this enclosed list, 27 Colors of Foot, 3
Coronets of Horse, and about 1500 Common Soldiers the Enemy had in the Town
3000 Foot and Seven Troops of Horse, besides Colonel Lamptons Regiment which
came into the Town after we had entered the Town, the Enemy left behind them
4 pieces of Ordnance, with Ammunition which we brought away.

Subscribed by Sir Thomas Fairfax:
Sergeant Major Colonel Gifford.
Sir Henry Fowls:
Sir William Fairfax.
L. Colonel Hollman.
Major Layton.
Major Talbot.

Prisoners Commanders taken at Wakefield, May 21. 1643.
General Goring. Sir Thomas Bland, Lieutenant Colonel to Sir George
Wentworth. Lieutenant Col. S. George. Lieutenant Col. Mackmoyler. Sergeant
Major Car. Captain Car. Capt. Knight. Capt. Wildbore. Capt. Rudstone. Capt.
Pemberton. Captain Croft. Capt. Ledgard. Capt. La^^y. Capt. Railey. Capt.
Nuttall. Capt. Lieutenant Benson.
Sergeant Major Carnaby, and Capt. Nuttall left wounded in Wakefield, upon
their engagements to be true Prisoners.

Lieutenants.
Monckton. Thomas. VVheately. Kent. Nicholson.
Ensigns.
Squire. Masken. Ducker. Balwinson. Car. Smaythwait. Watson. Haliburton.
Vavasour. Lumpton. Stockhald. Davies. Gibson. Ballinson. Smelt. Cornet VVivell.
The six Regiments of Foot that were in Wakefield, when it was taken, were.
Sir Francis Mackworths Sir John Ramsdens Sir George VVentworths Sir Henry
Griffiths Sir Marmaduke Langdals Sir William Lamptons.
FINIS.
Upon Monday you shall hear a full Relation with a Letter intercepted of great
consequence.


