Exceeding Joyful NEVVES FROM HVLL Sent in a Letter from Sir John Hotham, and
Read in the House of COMMONS, July 15. 1642.

Wherein he Declares the manner of his taking the Lord Faulcon^r^dge and his
Son, with 4. Pieces of O^dinance, and 20. Cavaleers, who were building a Sc^nce
or half Moon near the Town of Hull, and how he sent out Sir John Meldrom with
500. men to hinder their Proceedings.

Also the Queens Majesty's Desires To the High Court of Parliament. As it was
sent in a Message from Her Royal Majesty to the House of PEERS, and read in
the Audience of both Houses.

With the Declaration and Propositions of the House of COMMONS to the LORDS.

Concerning her Royal Majesty, Presented to the House of Peers with their
Additionall Reasons, by M. John Pym Esquire, July 14.

Ordered, that this be printed and published

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



July 16. LONDON, Printed for Edward Johnson.

Exceeding joyful News from HUL.
THere was a Letter read in the House of Commons, which came from Sir J.
Hotham, importing that a half Moon being raising near the town (as conceived by
his Majesty's direction) which would have much annoyed and hindered all
provision that should have come by Sea; that he sent Sir John Meldram out with
500. men, to hinder the Proceedings therein; Upon the near approach of whom the
Pioners and Workmen ran all away, leaving the said work unperfected, which he
has demolished, and therein they took the L. Faulconbridge, 4. pieces of
Brass Ordinance, and 20. Cavaleers, desiring the Houses pleasure to be known
therein, whether they should be sent up to London, or no; which took the houses
up some time in consideration thereof, of what most expend^^st to be done.

A ROYAL MESSAGE SENT From the Queens Majesty to the House of PEERS.
THe Honorable Houses of Parliament taking into consideration the great and
weighty Affairs of the whole Kingdom Ordered, that there should a Writ speedily
issue forth for the choosing of other Parliament men, in the room of those that
were removed, and having sat some time in debate thereof, both Houses assent^d
to it.

And they have Ordered likewise, That the Justices about Wisbich in
Lincolnshire should obey their Command, which was for to view a dangerous Bank
of the Sea in those parts, and to make Report thereof to the House, that Order
might be taken for it to preserve those parts.

There was also a Message read in the House of Peers, that came from the Queens
Majesty, Desiring them that they would be pleased to admit Father Philips to
come again to the Court, and great Debate was had about it in the Lords House,
who sent a Message to the House of Commons, but they would not assent to it.

The House of Commons sent a Message to the Lords house, together with their
Reasons and Declarations also, which was presented to them by Mr. Pym, viz.

1. That there is great to doubt, least the Papists have some design upon Her
Majesty's Journey; because the House has bin informed, That diver^ of them
have sold off their Land to a good value and used other means to get ready
Money.

2. It is observed some of them have bin very diligent for gathering great
quantities of Gold.

3. It is informed, that more then an ordinary number of Papists are gone
beyond Sea already.

4. The great Number of English Fugitives beyond the Seas, who by their late
Designs and Practices are known already to be full of malice to the State, and
will no doubt seek all Opportunities of access to her Majesty, and as much as
they can labor to infuse into her such Evil Counsel, as may trouble the
peace of the Kingdom; whereof at this time there is more danger.

The reason is, because the affairs of the Kingdom are not settled, and upon
the disbanding of the Army, all places are like to abound with soldiers, and
such others, as will be apt to be provoked Tumults, and seditions, especially
in the time of the Kings absence.

5. That the House of Commons have received information of great quantity of
Jewels, Plate, and ready Money, lately packt up to be conveyed to the Queen; not
only in such a proportion, as the present occasions with due respects to Her
Majesty's Honor may seem to require, b^t a far greater quantity.

6. That as it will be a great dishonor to the State, if Her Majesty should
not be attended and furnished, sutably to Her quality; so it will be a very
heavy burden in this time of great necessity and occasions of other public
Charges, if the shall be provided in so Royal a manner, as shall be sit for
Her Majesty, and the Honor of the King and Kingdom.

7. The House of Commons have thought sit to declare, That if any thing within
the power of Parliament may give Her Majesty contentment; they are so tender of
her, both in due Respect to his most excellent Majesty, and her Self, that they
will be ready to further her satisfaction in in all thinhs; so far as may
stand with that public to which they are obliged.

A true Relation of the Proceedings in the Northern Parts.
THe poor distressed Protestants in the Northern Parts, are in a great
perplexity and fear, by reason their horses are taken away by force, the
Malignant Party committing many other Acts of Hostility.

There are also diverse Troops of Horse sent into Lincolnshire, to the great
terror of the well-affected people, who are thereby forced to stand upon their
own Defense.

The Earl Rivers likewise has the government of the Commission of Array in
Lincolnshire, which he has most cruelly executed, and has committed diverse
Persons to prison, for refusing to submit thereunto.

And the Papists in Cheshire also has in a most peremptory manner in his
Majesty's Name demanded their Arms to be again restored to them.

The Kings Majesty has also Declared to all the Northern parts of England,
that whosoever shall give him their cheerful help at this time, either with
Men, Horse, Arms, or Money, to be brought, sent, or conveyed unto him, He will
look upon it as a service never to be forgotten, which Declaration He commanded
should be sent to all his loving Subjects in Yorkshire, which they most
cheerfully assented to, promising to aid and assist him with Men, Horse, Arms,
and Money, for the peace and safety of the Kingdom.

Both Houses Voted, that it is illegal and against the Laws of the Land, for
any to appear in such a warlike manner.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D Com.


