JULY 20. 1642.

AN EXACT CORANTO From MOST PARTS OF Christendom: From July 3. to this present:
Viz. from CULLEN: LEIPSICH: NEWHERUSE: ALDENBURG: BOHEMIA: VIENNA: PRAGUE:
COLLEN: HAMBURGH.


LONDON: Printed by L.N. and I.F. for E. Husbands and I. Franck.

AN EXACT CORANTO From most parts of Christendom; From July 3. to this present.
Cullen, 3. July,
Foreign Account.
THe Imperial army lies yet about Zous and Zutchebbergh on the Rhyne, they do
not break up yet; we must fear the ruin of the country. Hatfield having
secured Angewth and Angermind, went abroad with 3000 horse to descry the
Weymarish, both Cavelries met beneath Neys, and skirmished, the Weymarish
retired, the Imperialists pursued after, but being warned by one of Zous of an
ambush of 100 firelocks to cut off their retreat, they gallopped to their
quarters again; the Spanish forces lie on the other side of the Maas, and are
shortly to return to Brabant, they desire of the Electour to renounce
Neutrality to the Hollanders; which being a thing of bad consequence, the
Electour will not condescend unto; Hatfield desires of our Magistrate, to take
in his sick Soldiers, which is denied.

Leipsich, 20. 30 June.
The Swedes play master every where, they have taken Brunne, Yagerdorf, Osden
and Ratibore, they have commanded some thousands toward Brieg, and 4000
horsemen toward the drawbridge at Vienna: At Zitlin in the Marquisate of
Brandenburgh was seen at Noonday a black cloud, in it two fighting swords, and
our of it rained much blood, and fiery sculls fell out of it to the ground,
which burned clear, and so consumed.

Newheruse, 19. 29 June.
The Swedes have ransomed Olmits at 150000 Rixdollers, and afterward by reason
that the Jesuits and Friars had persuaded the Townsmen to kill some of the
Swedes, they plundered it, and took the chief Townsmen prisoners, and made their
young men to serve; thev got in it 630 weight of gunpowder, 9000 weight of
match, some 4000 weight of lead, and 60 piece of Ordnance, which they carried
away, and guarded the City with 1000 horse, and 1000 Musketeers; they took
also Sternberg, Devetshew, Kremsier, and other places which they pillaged.

Aldenburg, 20. 30 June.
The five new leavied Regiments for the Emperor coming from Poland, are
ruinated by the Swedes; the Electour of Saxony desires Neutrality with the
Swedes; four Imperial Regiments lie in and about Newburg, whereof some under
Colonel Goldaker have driven away from Erletten and Manfeld the cattle and
sheep, the Swedish gave fire from a hill near to the Castle upon them, and
killed 100. and wounded many and sew of them escaped, Bega, Borna, and other
places even to Leipsich must contribute to the Swedes at Erfurd, into which
City they bring daily rich booties.

Bohemia, 21. June, 1. July.
At Prague was concluded at a Diet that every Citizen must contribute 16
Florens, 1 quarter of corn, 12 quarter of oats, and 10 men must maintain one
man in war. Torstenson has found in Olmits 4000 weight of lead, 1800 weight of
gunpowder, 50 pieces of Ordnance, 150 new wagons for war, 5000 suits made for
the Imperialists, 3000 new Muskets, 3000 fair horses, great store of corn and
wine; the Jesuits and Townsmen must work in the Sconces, the City Millith was
summoned by a Trumpet, who was killed at the entry of the Town, which place the
Swedes took by an assault, and burnt it.

Vienna, 22 June, 1 July.
After the taking of Olmits and Neys, the Swedes marched to Glatz a chief
passage, the Imperial Commander of it was abroad in his Coach, and taken
prisoner; Piccolomini lies at Labach, not far from Znaim in Moravia, where he
recollected 8000 horse, they expect Leopolds succor from Bohemia: In Austria
is summoned the fifteenth man, the Duke of Bavaria offreth to the Emperor 10
Millions to continue the war: Sir Thomas Roe is shortly to return home.

Prague, 25. June, 5. July.
The Swedes put Glatz hard to it, Pappenheim is come hither with 20 horsemen,
certifies, that the Swedes have taken Conigs-Gratz, without the loss of any
men, which terrify us because they aim at this City, we have here 7000
Soldiers, with the Trained Bands: Vienna is levying 4000 horsemen, Austria 5000
foot, and Hungary 5000 Hustars.

Collen, 26. June, 6. July.
The Elector of Cullen is made Execcutor in the Mother Queens last will, one is
sent to France to fetch order about Her body, a Holland Shipper was driven by a
storm with his Ship upon the Imperial shid-bridge, whereby the half bridge is
ruinated, the shipper is in hold: The French and Wey marish forces have
received 100000. Crowns to buy in Holland provision for their Army; The Spanish
Army is going back to Artois, at Dunkerke many Souleirs and Seamen runn away
because of Admiral Tromp lies so strong before it that the Spanish Fleet dares
not venture out to Sea.

From Hamburgh.
Hungary is in Rebellion against the Emperor, because the Emperor in his
Treaty of peace with the Turks, has given 70. Villages to the Turks, besides
Hungary is to contribute to the Turk 80000 ^^ckets, which they refuse to do,
saying they chose the Emperor to protect them as a free People, and not to sell
them as slaves: 2. The Emperor has taken from them 18. Protestant Churches,
and put Jesuits into them. 3, The Emperor had often promised them to call a
diet to redress their greivances which he never performed. 4. That since the
German wars he laid heavy taxations upon them, whereas that war did not
concern them, they writ also that the Emperor i^ fled to Vienna, to Tyroll
because the Peasants in upper Austria are in Rebellion, and the Prince of
Transylvania armeth himself very strongly against the Emperor, it cannot be
expected what spoil and booties the Swedes make in Moravia and Austria.

From France, Gener: Houdencourt has sent 2 millions of gold to Baccellona,
which he has taken from the Spanish in Valentia and Aragon. At Cadish in
Spain are arrived 40. Ships that came from Denmark to join with the Spanish
Ships, which will be a Fleet of 88. Ships: In Holland are arrived 9 ships from
Brasill with 4728. Chests of Sugar besides other commodities.

FINIS.

