AN EXACT RELATION OF A famous Battle fought on Monday last the tenth of
October, 1642.

BETWEEN The Dragooners sent out by the L. General under the Conduct of
Colonel Brown, and Sir William Russell and his Cavaliers.

ALSO A perfect description of the pitched Camp of His Excellency the Earl of
ESSEX now near Shrewsbury.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Tompson. October 15. 1642.

AN EXACT RELATION of a famous battle fought on Monday the tenth of October,
1642. between the Dragooneers of Colonel Brown, and Sir William Russell and
his Cavaliers.
Also an exact description of the pitched Camp of his Excellency the Earl of
Essex near Shrewsbury.
ON Monday last being the ninth day of October, his Excellency the Earl of
Essex having pitched with his forces before Shrewsbury, he commanded Colonel
Brown, Captain Bracham and Captain Moore with about six hundred Dragooners to
scout up and down for three or four miles compass, to see if they could
descry and of the adverse Forces to draw near, and also to stop the recourse
and carriage of arms and ammunition (if any should be) which according to his
Excellencies command was in every respect performed, and the said Colonel
Brown with the other Officers and his 600. Dragooners marched forth, and in
their march toward evening they received information that Sir William Russel
an arch enemy to the State, was marching to his Majesty with six troops of
horse and some foot, and that they had pitched in a meadow five miles off: the
Dragooners tarried till toward morning before they set forward, and then by
the guide of that messenger marched toward them, and by break of day came
within their centries, and soon espied the maine body of horse and foot, being
no whit discouraged, as knowing the justness of their cause, sent a messenger
to know what they were; and Sir William Russell in a reviling way bid him tell
his prick-card round-headed mule-bearing citizens, that he would new baptize
them, willing them to depart as unseen. Our men replied, they would dip them in
a new font, never to have resurrection. Whereupon a charge was beaten on both
sides, and with much courage prosecuted on both sides, until after two hours
fight our men put the Cavaliers to flight, killing fifty of them, and taking
some of them in the pursuit with little loss on our side, except some few
hurt by their powder bags blowing up. Our soldiers pursued them as fast as
they could, but because of their horses marching most part of the night, and
not well fed, they were constrained to forbear the pursuit, giving God the
glory, and singing Psalms of thanksgiving. So they marched with triumph and
joy tovvard his Excellency, where they found his soldiers in a fair
battalia, having planted his Ordnance with much discretion, and raised
bulvvarks, rampires, and diverse other meet and necessary works for the
safeguard and defense of himself and his Forces, in the best and securest way
he could devise, placing Centries and Courts of Guard most effectually, and
like a noble and expert soldier.

From Bridgnorth there is information by diverse letters, that the Lord Willough
by of Parham has joined his Forces with his Excellency the Earl of Essex, and
are in their march toward Shrewsbury, and by the way they found great
opposition at Bridgnorth (which is a town about twelve miles distant from
Shrewsbury) by Prince Robert and diverse others of the malignant Party;
whereupon there soon increased many dangers, and the inveterate malice of the
Cavaliers there burst out, and began to give out many scoffing speeches against
our soldiers, but they not brooking of such scandalous words, desired leave of
their Officers to discharge against them; but at the first they seemed somewhat
unwilling, and would not condescend thereunto until they understood the
pleasure of the Lord General; but after some consultation thereof, they fell
to it pell mell, and in the space of five hours seventy of the Cavaliers were
slain, and diverse taken prisoners, with very little loss on our party:
whereupon the enemy sounded a parley, and at the said parley it was concluded
on, that a set day should be appointed for the meeting of both Armies.

Sir William Balfoure is gone to join his Forces with the L. General, and the
Scots Commanders that proffered their service to the Parliament, are gone to his
Excellency and entered into their places.

His Excellency having encamped his Forces near Shrewsbury, caused a Parley to
be sounded before the Town, where the Malignant Party lies very strongly
entrenched: whereunto answer was made (as is credibly reported) and diverse
Questions and Propositions propounded in Ais Majesty's behalf, which were to
this effect: 1. Wherefore his Excellency should so far pursue his Royal
Majesty, as to entrench him in his own Town? 2. Whether he would give his
Majesty leave to march with his Army, for that (as they conceived) he had no
Commission to withstand him, with many other questions of main consequence.


To which answer was made, that his Excellency would lay down his life at his
Majesty's feet for a re-uniting betwixt his Majesty and his high Court of
Parliament, and that he came not with his Forces in an hostile way against his
Majesty, but in all humility and loyalty, hoping that his Highness would not
shelter any outlawed and rebellious persons, but rather deliver them up to the
justice of the law, and craving further time to determine of his Majesty's free
passage.

FINIS.

