EXCEEDING JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE NARROW SEAS, Dover, and the Irish Seas. BEING,
A true and exact Reiation of the victorious Procedings, and Renowned Exploits,
performed by the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord Admiral of
His Majesty's Navy Royal in this Expedition, MDCXLII. Since his first setting
forth till this present, Likewise a true Description of the manner of his
scouring the Seas, and all the Ports therabouts, the charlish Waves seeming
proud to bear his Famous Vessels, With the Names of every particular ship
belonging to the Navy, and the Names of the ships appointed for the Irish
Seas, with many more remarkable Passages from the Seas.

Sent from his Majesty's Royal ship called the Rainbow, May the 9. by Master
John Philips, to his Brother in Thames street.

London, Printed for John Webb, May 12. 1642.

Exceeding JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE NARROW-SEAS.
SUch is the fine Wits in this our Age (Right gentle and courteous Reader) that
nothing can pass current without Control, except it be rare in Conceit, or
excellent for Art: But this following Relation which I will describe unto thee,
although it be not set forth in Eloquent Speeches, yet it is reported for
certain and credible Tidings, amongst many men of great Estimation.

There has bin for these many years diverse ships scouting upon the Narrow
Seas, from foreign Countries with false and counterfeit Colors, and great
preparations there is made by Neighboring Princes, both by Land and Sea: so
that this Kingdom cannot be secured, unless a timely course be taken both by
Sea and Land.

But for security of this Kingdom, the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, taking it into serious consideration, gave Order to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Northumberland, Lord High Admiral of England,
forthwith to give effectual Direction, that all and every the ships belonging
to His Majesty's Navy, which are fit for service, and not already abroad to
be with all speed rigged: It was likewise Ordered, that the Earl of Warwick
should go Vice Admiral over His Majesty's Navy Royal, whose very Name makes
his Foes to tremble, even the proudest, hautiest, and most insultingst Enemy
against Great Britain.

For Warwicks Valor does their rage appease,
The Name of Warwick Scours the Narrow Seas.
He went himself in person in the Royal ship called the James and hoysted up
sail with most puissant courage toward the Narrow Seas who being past the Peer
of Dover he espied some certain ships not far distant from him. Who making
toward them, they sailed away with all speed, not daring to withstand him; so
that our greatest Enemies dares not strike Sail near Britains Coast.

Has not the Lord often delivered this Royal Kingdom of England from the
foreign Invasions of the Hostile and Bloodthirsty Spaniard, he has with his
strong Arm sent his sharp Arrows amongst them, slew and overthrew them to the
immense glory of his sacred Majesty; so likewise has noble Warwick, whose very
fight made all his foes to fly

He has scoured most part of the Narrow Seas, and has sent two of His
Majesty's ships to the Coast of Ireland, so that there cannot any Relief come
to the Rebels, without the hazarding of ships, goods, and all therein, which
makes glad the sorrowful hearts of that Kingdom, being likewise comfortable
Tidings to the Protestants in this Island.

And touching the Noble Earls discreet wisdom, in ordering and disposing of
His Majesty's Fleet, both for the security of his Majesty's Royal Person, the
quiet and content of the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

He with a prosperous Gale, plowed the vast Bosom of the Narrow Seas, the
curling waves seemed proud to bear his dancing vessels. So virtuous Honor filled
his courageous heart, and prompted him to chase the Turkish Pyrat from our
shore; Now Merchants may send forth their wealth securely, and never dread the
Robers of the Sea.

The Names of every ship belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal, in this last
Expedition, 1642
IN the James, the Right Honorable, the Earl of Warwick. Lord Admiral of His
Majesty's Navy Royal. 1. The St. George 2. The Rainbow. 3. The Reformation.
4. The Victory. 5. Henrietta Maria. 6. The Unicorn. 7. The Charles. 8. The
Vantguard. 9. The Entrance. 10. The Garland. 11. The Lion. 12. Antelope. 13.
Mary Rose. 14. Expedition, 15. The Grayhound.
Merchants Ships.
THe Martane. 2. The Sampson. 3. The Caesar. 4. The London. 5. The Unicorn. 6.
May-Flower. 7. Bonniventure. 8. Prosperous. 9. Hurclens. 10. Peragon. 11.
Hopeful Luke. 12. Golden Angel. 13. Exchange. 14 Maidenhead. 15. The
Providence. 16. The Jocelin.


All the time that he was resident upon the Narrow Seas, not one Pyrat of any
Nation was seen; wherefore he bent his course further on, and sent to the Irish
Seas the Swallow and the Bonniventure, belonging to His Majesty, and eight
Merchants ships, 1. The Discovery, 2. the Ruth, 3. the Employment. 4. the
Peter. 5. the Pennington. 6. the Fellowstip. 7. the Mary, 8. the John.

So that the Irish Seas are now very well guarded, being a means to prevent Aid
and Assistance from coming to the Rebels.

FINIS.

