An Exact RELATION Of the Apprehension, Examination, Execution and Confession,
of Thomas Bullaker, a Priest, of the Order of S. Austin.

Who for seducing his Majesty's Liege people, was drawn, hanged, and Quartered
at Iyhurne, on Wednesday the 12 of October, 1642.

Also the Examination of Mrs Margaret Powel, his Land-lady, whose Trial is
referred till the next Sessions.

Together with the Names and Facts of the other prisoners, Condemned at the
same time, who were reprieved, and who executed.

depiction of four human heads on pikes

London Printed for John Wright. 1642.

More work for the Hangman.
It Is no^ not me to conni^e ^t, o(...)gh^ly pass over the wicked and bloody
pratices of Jesuits, Popish Priests, and other of that hellish faction,
continu(...); and kept in agitation against the Church and State of England.
For as not (...) teaches every thing to affect, its own preservation, so
reason will prompt us, to cut off the serpents head that begins to fly in our
faces; Poor England li(...) fo(...)ong fostered and given way to these cursed
^^pers, who having gotten a little strength and wan^i^g only opportunity did
verily intend to have to (...)e out her Bowels, and to make this Populous (...)
flowrishing Kingdom an Acheldama or field of blood, whereof, woeful Ireland,
is at this day to to sad an example little considering, that the (...) prepared
by them for others will at last pro^^^e their own destruction according to
that of the pa^^mest. The Lord is (...) by the judgment which her ^^^teth, the
wicked is shared in the Work, of his own h^^^s Psalm. 6.16

If we do but reflect upon the miserable condition of this Kingdom, some few
years since, (before the beginning of this most blessed, and ever to b(...)
^^^^d Parliament (...)the ra^nes of government lay altogether upon the
shoulders (...) Popish Pre^^^, Papists, and other their Malignant Adherents,
and consider with what uncontrollable mirth and i^^^ty they ran on in their
designs, to over cloud this Nation with the black foggy mists of Error, and
superstition, what hauock and persecution they had made of Gods faithful
ministers; and how great a part of the Land was corrupted by their abominable
practices, it cannot be denied, but that the Rectification of these gross
abuses, was a mercy never to be forgotten and a strong encouragement to all
that fear God, to expect with patience the perfection of this good work. And
though it tarry to wait for it because it will surely come, it will not long be
delayed. Hab. 2.3.

Difference in Religion, ever was and will be the ground of al misery, and
indeed what hops can there be of peace where a Kingdom is not at one in
Religion, lamentable experience makes us now sensible of this truth; It was a
wise man's speech, what family says he; was there ever, where a difference in
Religion made not a Breach, see it in Isack and Ismaell, Jacob and Laban, Moses
and his wife Zipporah, and if so, what Concord can be expected in a whole
Kingdom, where there is much more disagreement; who were nearer kin then
Jsraell and Judah, but as soon as Altar was erected against Altar they were as
soon divided in an ireconciliable war. Simpathy in Religion is the fi^e-test
means conducing to prosperity, Exie quam horum, says the Prophet, Behold how
Good and joyful a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity. Psalm.
133, 1.

It is a principal in Nature, take away the cause and the efect will soon
cease; what has been the chief cause of our long and many miseries is
already sufficiently discovered, to every ordinary capacity, what? but the
wicked, and destructive counsels of a Popish party about his Majesty, what,
but the soul perverting doctrines of a company of Priests and Jesuits (lurking
in this City) slily whispered into the ears of silly and ignorant people, if
so, God grant that al sorts of men, both King, and Parliament, together with
all true Protestants, may renounce and extirpate these Catterpillars; and be no
longer seduced by their cunning pretenses, but thoroughly purge the floor of
this our Church, that there be no such Canaanites lest in the Land to be
thorns and pricks in the eyes of our Posterity hereafter.

And of this (God be blessed) we have already seen some good beginnings and
daily expect more; London Bridge can afford room enough for the heads of many
such Traitors, and when that is filled, we know where to make more; So let the
Enemies of God, the King and the Church perish; their Cities of refuge are now
taken away; Time was when a little man of great authority could have done them
some good, but now they have no Sanctuaries to flee to: It Is a great storm;
yet in vain do they expect shelter; for if they offer to seek it, they are
hel'd to the Gallows, and young Gregory's fingers still itch to be dividing in
this age of divisions.

Witness the Subject of this my Discourse, (a Bird of the old brood) Father
Bullater by name.

Who was as himself confessed at the time of his apprehension, a Popish
Priest, of the Order of Saint Austin: And before he removed his lodging to
Newgate, lay at a Gentlewomans house in Saint Peter's lane near Cow-Crosse;
where some observing his carriage, and knowing some that he had seduced and
others that he sought to seduce, gave information thereof to the Officers of
that Parish, who presently entered the house, discovered this subtle Fox,
attacht his person, and committed both him and his Landlady (according to their
deserts) to Newgate.

Where remaining till the last Sessions, he was first carried down to be
examined, and being asked of what quallity he was, answered; That he was a
Priest, that he had received Orders from Rome, and that he would prove it
lawful out of the Scripture: and thereupon he turned to the 100 Psalm. ver. 4.
The words are these: Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedecke. Which place he said, he would maintain was sufficient to prove
the authority of their Priesthood, being further told, he was accused of
Treason; for striving to seduce his Majesty's Liege-people, contrary to the
Statute, provided in that behalf, he answered, that if it were Treason for a
man to use his conscience, or to receive holy Orders of Priesthood from beyond
the Sea, and being proved to him by some text of Scripture, then he would
confess himself guilty of Treason, otherwise he would not. Then being
demanded whether he would plead to his Indictment or no, he answered he would
not plead as guilty of Treason, but said as before, he was a Priest, and had
received Orders at Rome, and came over with the same intent that he went, which
was to convert his Country, and this he would answer The Bench perceiving him
so peremptory in his words, it so obstinate in his opinion, that he would not
yield to be tried according to the Law yet had confessed enough to prove him
guilty of the Indictment proceeded to give judgment upon him, which was that
he should presently be carried back to the place from whence he came, and from
thence on Wednesday following be drawn on a Sledge to Tyburne, and their to
hang till his body were half dead, then to be cut down, his members and
intrailes to be burnt, and his body quartered, and they to be left to the
Cities dispose all. Which sentence was no sooner past upon him, but immediately
he fell on his knees, and with much allacrity said, Te Deum Laudamus, te
Dominum Confitemur, Which in English is, We praise thee O God, we acknowledge
thee to be the Lord, Then rising up told them, that this was it which he had
expected and desired above a 12 month. So being dismissed the Court, and
conveied back to prison. Mistress Powell his Land-lady, was next brought to
the Bar, who upon Examination was found in nothing to vary from the erroneous
opinion of this her holy Father, whether by him converted (being formerly
accounted so light, that her honestly would hardly be taken with allowance) or
seduced it makes no great matter. But she also seemed very willing to dye,
confessing that her Fact was not ignorantly committed, for she knew well enough
what man he was, and what power the Law had to away her life; If it were
known to any that she harbored him in her house, yet nevertheless she said
she could not, but do it out of conscience sake, and this was all she had to
say for her self, whereupon she likewise should have had sentence to dye, but
in regard the evidence against could not be found it was referred till the next
Sessions.

On Wednesday morning October 12 1642. about 8 of the clock the aforesaid
Thomas Bullaker Priest was drawn on a sledge from Newgate to the Gallous
expressing much cheerfulness all the way as he went, and when he came to the
place of execution; after, 2 or 3 prayers by himself in Latin, invocating of
Saints, calling upon the Virgin Mary, crossing himself upon the breast and
forehead, he was at last crossed by the Hangman who stopped his vain babbling and
his breath together* performing the test of his office with much dexterity; and
is as ready for the next as ever he was, ^^ing like one of Pharao's lean ki^e
who has no sooner devowred one, but he looks for another

The names and Facts of the Prisoners condemned this last Sessions: who were
reprieved, and who executed, on Wednesday Octo. 12 1642.
Thomas Bullaker a Priest, dramne, hanged, and quartered. Margaret Powell his
Land-lady, her trial is referred to the next Sessions. Mary Osland Felony,
reprieved by her belly. Mary Heard for Felony. Arthur Ritchison for 20 li. and
three Gold Rings. Frances Pen for the same reprieved by her belly. Thomas Grant
Alis Shermon, for the Temple Pla^e. Luke Warin Felony for 50 li. out of a
trunk. William Johnson Robery on the high way. Richard Powell for killing a
Drummers Father. Elizabeth Hughs Felony for 60 li. Sara Kerby Robbing her
master and others, reprieved by her belly. William Friend for Horse stealing.
John Pearsall for Burglary. Katherine Grengo for Felony. Sara Fawcet for
Felony.
FINIS.

