AN EXPRESS RELATION OF THE PASSAGES AND PROCEEDINGS OF HIS Majesty's Army,
Under the Command of his Excellence the Earl of NEWCASTLE, Against the Rebels,
under the Command of the Lord Fairfax and his Adherents.

Printed in the Year M.DC.XLIII.

AN EXPRESS RELATION OF THE PASSAGES AND PROCEEDINGS OF HIS MAJESTY'S ARMY
UNDER THE COMMAND of His Excellence the Earl of Newcastle, against the Rebels
under the Command of the Lord Fairfax and his Adherents.
WE marched from Pomfret toward Bradford, and in our way thither we summoned
Sir John Savile, Commander of Howley, to deliver up that House, and lay down
his Arms so unjustly taken up, who returned an uncivil Answer, and that he
would keep it maugre our Forces, whereupon we planted our Cannon against that
House, and environed it upon Wednesday the 21 of June in the afternoon, and
next morning took it by affault, and in it the said Commander in Chief, and
all his Officers, and Soldiers, about 245, some few whereof were slain, the
rest taken Prisoners; where by the unseasonablenesse of the weather we were
enforced to remain till Friday the 30th of June, from whence we marched early
toward Bradford, and when we had marched two miles or thereabouts we found a
great Body of men, a greater number of Foot than we; and almost all
Musketeers, and some twenty Troops of Horse, and had possessed a place called
Adderton moore, and taken the most advantageous places thereof, and lined
several hedges with Musketeers, and played so fiercely upon us, and that
before the whole Body of our Foot could be drawn up, and their Horse likewise
possessing a plain Field and a great Ditch betwixt us lined with Musketeers,
and keeping our Horse in a ground full of pits, that for the space of two
hours or thereabouts, we were forced to give ground though very little: but
when our Cannon was well placed, and our Foot once drawn up, within half an
hour we put their Foot on the right Wing of the Battle to retire, and
pursued them so hotly, that they presently were put into a disorderly retreat,
whereupon part of our Horse fell in upon that Wing, and the Cannon playing upon
the Body of their Horse killed many and routed them, together with our Horse
charging at that time, so we pursued them, killing and taking them to Bradford
Town end, which was more than two miles, in which Chase was slain (as is
supposed) about 500 of the Enemies, and about 1400 taken Prisoners, amongst
which many Officers, together with three Fieldpieces, and all their Ammunition
there, which was not much. We had many Soldiers hurt, two Colonels of Horse
slain, Heron and Howard, and some Officers hurt, as Colonel Throckmorton,
Colonel Carnabie, and Captain Maison, all recoverable, and not above twenty
common Soldiers slain.

That night we came before Bradford, a strong Town, and ill approaching to it,
yet we made our approaches that night, the next day we had placed our Cannon
and made places of Batteries very near the Town and Church, where they had two
Drakes upon the top of the steeple, and lined the steeple with wool-packes, yet
our Cannon dismounted their Drakes upon the top of the steeple, and battered
the steeple so as none could stay on it, where they had many Musketeers, and
so we got both the ends of the Town before Sunday night, and in the night time
Sir Thomas Fairfax Governor of the Town, his Lady, Major Gifford, and Sir
Henry Fowlis escaped out of the Town, and upon a moor was forced to charge with
their partee a partee of our Horse, where his Lady and his Corner were taken
Prisoners; but he and the other two being well horsed escaped though pursued
very near Leedes, which was above five miles: and that morning our men entered
the Town, took Prisoners, 1. Colonel Malliver. 2. Sergeant Mayor Wiltshire. 3.
Captain Mudd. 4. Captain Rogers. 5. Captain Bland. 6. Captain Oneal. 7. Captain
White. 8. Captain Smith. 9. Captain Dent. 10. Captain Stanley. 11. Captain
Feure. 12. Lieutenant Popler. 13. Lieutenant Loveday. 14. Lieutenant Moore. 15.
Lieutenant Sad. Sergeant Floyd. Sergeant Brabant. William Warden and
Nathaniel Gosse Gunners.
With all or most of the common Soldiers, which are in number 300, or
thereabouts, besides the enlarging of 200 Prisoners of ours there, and taking
of Arms, which are yet uncertain in number.

That very day within three hours after came a Captain of ours, who among
diverse other Prisoners at Leedes, finding that my Lord Fairfax and his son were
inclined to leave the Town (as they did) attended with three or four Troops of
Horse, 200 Dragooners, and 300 Foot, broke out of Prison, possessed themselves
of the Magazine, took all the Arms which were 1500 at least, eight Barrels of
Powder, and twelve Pieces of Ordnance, with a very great proportion of Match
and Ball, and so kept the Town till I sent Forces into it, besides the
enlarging of seven hundred Prisoners there. The Lord Fairfax and his Son
marched toward Selby, in which march his three hundred Foot ran away from him;
and his Forces left being discovered by our Forces at the Garrison of Cawood
were charged by them, and they fled into the Town of Selby, our Forces being
too weak for them were forced to retire, so my Lord, his son Sir Thomas, Mayor
Gifford, Sir Henry Fowlis, and Sir Thomas Mauliverer took a boat, and passed
themselves therein, and swimming their Horses over the River, and as their men
were passing over some of them were drowned with crowding the Boats, and so
they fled we conceive to Hull, or to Nottingham, but to which is not certain.

The same day news was brought us from Hallifax, that all the Forces were run
from thence, and have taken with them all our Prisoners that remained there,
and so we are possessed of that Town, as also of Denton house, my Lord Fairfax
his house, wherein there was a small Garrison, two Drakes, and two hundred men
and Arms.

FINIS.

