BUCANIERS OF AMERICA: Or, a true ACCOUNT OF THE Most remarkable Assaults
Committed of late years upon the Coasts of The West Indies. By the Bucaniers of
Iamaica and Tortuga, Both ENGLISH and FRENCH. Wherein are contained more
especially, The unparalled Exploits of Sir Henry Morgan, our English Iamaican
Hero, who sacked Puerto Velo, burnt Panama, etc. Written originally in Dutch,
by John Esquemeling, one of the Bucaniers, who was present at those Tragedies;
and thence translated into Spanish, by Alonso de Bonne-maison, Doctor of
Physic, and Practitioner at Amsterdam. Now faithfully rendered into English.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1684.

THE Translator TO THE READER.
THe present Volume, both for it is Curiosity, and Ingenuity, I dare recommend
unto the perusal of our English Nation, whose glorious Actions it contains.
What relates unto the curiosity hereof, this Piece, both of Natural and Humane
History, was no sooner published in the Dutch Original, than it was snatch t up
for the most curious Library's of Holland; it was Translated into Spanish; (two
Impressions thereof being sent into Spain in one year) it was taken notice of
by the learned Academy of Paris; and finally recommended as worthy our esteem,
by the ingenious Author of the Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious, printed here
at London about two years ago. Neither all this undeservedly, seeing it
enlarges our acquaintance of Natural History, so much prized and enquired for,
by the Learned of this present Age, with several observations not easily to be
found in other accounts already received from America: and besides, it
informs us (with huge novelty), of as great and bold attempts, in point of
Military conduct and valor, as ever were performed by mankind; without
excepting, here, eith^r Alexander the Great, or Julius Caesar, or the rest of
the Nine Worthy's of Fame. Of all which actions, as we cannot but confess our
selves to have been ignorant hitherto, (the very name of Bucaniers being, as
yet, known but unto few of the Ingenious; as their Lives, Laws, and
Conversation, are in a manner unto none) so can they not ch^se but be admired,
out of this ingenuous Author, by whosoever is curious to learn the various
revolutions of humane affairs. But, more especially, by our English Nation; as
unto whom these things more narrowly do appertain. We having here more then
half the Book filled with the unparalled, if not unimitable, adventures and
Heroic exploits of our own Countrymen, and Relations; whose undaunted, and
exemplary courage, when called upon by our King and Country, we ought to
emulate.

From whence it has proceeded, that nothing of this kind was ever, as yet,
published in England, I cannot easily determine; except, as some will say, from
some secret Ragion di Stato. Let the reason be as it will; this is certain, so
much the more we are obliged unto this present Author, who though a Stranger
unto our Nation, yet with that candor and Fidelity has recorded our Actions,
as to render the Metal of our true English Valor to be the more believed and
feared abroad, than if these things had been divulged by our selves at home.
From hence peradventure will other Nations learn, that the English People are
of their Genius more inclinable to act than to write; seeing as well they as we
have lived unacquainted with these actions of our Nation, until such time as a
foreign Author to our Country came to tell them.

Besides the merit of this Piece for its curiosity, another point of no less
esteem, is the truth and sincerity, wherewith every thing seems to be penned.
No greater ornament or dignity can be added unto History, either humane or
natural, than truth. All other embellishments, if this be failing, are of
little or no esteem; if this be delivered, are either needless or superfluous.
What concerns this requisite in our Author, his Lines do everywhere declare
the faithfulness and sincerity of his mind. He writes not by hearsay, but was
an eyewitness, as he somewhere tells you, unto all and every one of the bold
and hazardous attempts which he relates. And these he delivers with such
candor of style, such ingenuity of mind, such plainness of words, such
conciseness of periods, so much divested of Rhetorical Hyberboles, or the least
flourishes of Eloquence, so hugely void of Passion or national Reflections, as
that he strongly persuades all-along to the credit of what he says; yea,
raises the mind of the Reader to believe these things far greater than what he
has said; and having read him, leaves only this scruple or concern behind,
that you can read him no longer. In a word, such are his deserts, that some
persons peradventure would not stickle to compare him to the Father of
Historians, Philip de Comines: at least, thus much may be said, with all truth
imaginable, that he resembles that great Author in many of his excellent
qualities.

I know some persons have objected against the greatness of these prodigious
Adventures, intimating that the resistance our Bucaniers found in America, was
everywhere but small. For the Spaniards, say they, in the West Indies, are
become of late years nothing less, but rather much more degenerate than in
Europe. The continual Peace they have enjoyed in those parts, the defect of
Military Discipline, and European Soldiers for their Commanders, much
contributing hereunto. But more especially, and above all other Reasons, the
very Luxury of the Soil and Riches, the extreme heat of those Countries, and
influence of the Stars being such, as totally inclines their bodies unto an
infinite effeminacy and cowardice of minds.

Unto th^se Reasons I shall only answer in brief, This History will convince
them to be manifestly false. For as to the continual Peace here alleged, we
know that no Peace could ever be established beyond the Line, since the first
possession of the West Indies by the Spaniards, till the burning of Panama. At
that time, or few months before, Sir William Godolphin by his prudent
negotiation in quality of Ambassador for our most Gracious Monarch, did
conclude at Madrid a Peace to be observed even beyond the Line, and through the
whole extent of the Spanish Dominions in the West Indies. This transaction gave
the Spaniards new causes of complaints against our proceedings, that no sooner
a Peace had been established for those parts of America, but our Forces had
taken and burnt both Chagre, St. Catharine, and Panama. But our Reply was
convincing, That whereas eight or ten months had been allowed by Articles for
the publishing of the said Peace through all the Dominions of both Monarchies
in America, those Hostilities had been committed, not only without orders from
his Majesty of England, but also within the space of the said eight or ten
months of time. Until that time the Spanish Inhabitants of America being, as it
were, in a perpetual War with Europe, certain it is, that no Coasts nor
Kingdoms in the World have been more frequently infested nor alarmed with the
invasions of several Nations, than theirs. Thus from the very beginning of
their Conquests in America, both English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, Swedes,
Danes, Curlanders, and all other Nations that navigate the Ocean, have
frequented the West Indies, and filled them with their Robberies and Assaults.
From these occasions have they been in continual watch and ward, and kept their
Militia in constant exercise, as also their Garrisons pretty well provided and
paid; as fearing every sail they discovered at Sea, to be Pirates of one Nation
or another. But much more especially, since that Curasao, Tortuga, and Jamaica
have been inhabited by English, French, and Dutch, and bred up that Race of
Hunts-men, than which, no other ever was more desperate, nor more mortal
Enemies to the Spaniards, called Bucaniers Now shall we say, that these People,
through too long continuation of Peace, have utterly abolished the exercises of
War, having been all-along incessantly vexed with the Tumults and Alarms
thereof?

In like manner is it false, to accuse their defect of Military Discipline for
want of European Commanders. For who knows not that all places, both Military
and Civil, through those vast Dominions of the West Indies, are provided out of
Spain? And those of the Militia most commonly given unto expert Commanders
trained up from their infancy in the Wars of Europe, either in Africa, Milan,
Sicily, Naples, or Flanders, fighting against either English, French, Dutch,
Portuguese, or Moors? Yea, their very Garrisons, if you search them in those
parts, will peradventure be found to be stocked three parts to four with
Soldiers both born and bred in the Kingdom of Spain.

From these Considerations it may be inferred, what little difference ought to
be allowed betwixt the Spanish Soldiers, Inhabitants of the West Indies, and
those of Europe. And how little the Soil or Climat has influenced or caused
their Courage to degenerate toward cowardice or baseness of mind. As if the
very same Arguments, deduced from the nature of that Climate, did not equally
militate against the valor of our famous Bucaniers, and represent this to be
of as degenerate Metal as theirs.

But nothing can be more clearly evinced, than is the Valor of the American
Spaniards, either Soldiers or Officers, by the sequel of this History. What
men ever fought more desperately than the Garrison of Chagre? Their number
being 314, and of all these, only thirty remaining; of which number scarce ten
were unwounded; and among them, not one Officer found alive? Were not 600
killed upon the spot at Panama, 500 at Gibraltar, almost as many more at Puerto
del Principe, all dying with their Arms in their hands, and facing bravely the
Enemy for the defense of their Country and private Concerns? Did not those of
the Town of San Pedro both fortify themselves, lay several Ambuscades, and
lastly sell their lives as dear as ever any European Soldier could do;
Lolonois being forced to gain step by step his advance unto the Town, with huge
loss both of blood and men? Many other instances might be produced out of this
compendious Volume, of the generous resistance the Spaniards made in several
places, though Fortune favored not their Arms.

Next, as to the personal Valor of many of their Commanders, what man ever
behaved himself more briskly than the Governor of Gibraltar, than the
Governor of Puerto del Principe, both dying for the defense of their Towns;
than Don Alonso del Campo; and others? Or what Examples can easily parallel the
desperate courage of the Governor of Chagre? who, though the Palizada's were
fired, the Terraplens were sunk into the Ditch, the Breaches were entered, the
Houses all burnt about him, the whole Castle taken, his Men all killed; yet
would not admit of any quarter, but chose rather to die under his Arms, being
shot into the brain, than surrender himself as a Prisoner unto the Bucaniers.
What Lion ever fought to the last gasp more obstinately than the Governor of
Puerto Velo? who seeing the Town entered by surprizal in the night, one chief
Castle blown up into the Air, all the other Forts and Castles taken, his own
assaulted several ways, both Religious men and women placed at the front of the
Enemy to fix the Ladders against the Walls; yet spared not to kill as many of
the said Religious persons as he could. And at last, the Walls being scaled,
the Castle entered and taken, all his own men overcome by fire and sword, who
had cast down their Arms, and begged mercy from the Enemy: yet would admit of
none for his own life. Yea, with his own hands killed several of his Soldiers,
to force them to stand to their Arms, though all were lost. Yea, though his own
Wife and Daughter begged of him upon their knees that he would save his life by
craving quarter, though the Enemy desired of him the same thing; yet would
hearken to no cries nor persuasions, but they were forced to kill him,
combating with his Arms in his hands, being not otherwise able to take him
Prisoner, as they were desirous to do. Shall these men be said to be influenced
with Cowardice, who thus acted to the very last Scene of their own Tragedies?
Or shall we rather say, that they wanted not Courage, but Fortune? It being
certainly true, that he who is killed in a Battle, may be equally courageous
with him that kills. And that whosoever derogateth from the Valor of the
Spaniards in the West Indies, diminishes in like manner the Courage of the
Bucaniers, his own Countrymen, who have seemed to act beyond mortal men in
America.

Now, to say something concerning John Esquemeling, the first Author of this
History. I take him to be a Dutchman, or at least born in Flanders,
notwithstanding that the Spanish Translation represents him to be Native of
the Kingdom of France. His printing this History originally in Dutch, which
doubtless must be his native Tongue, who otherwise was but an illiterate man,
together with the very sound of his name, convincing me thereunto. True it is,
he set sail from France, and was some years at Tortuga; but neither of these
two Arguments, drawn from the History, are prevalent. For were he a Frenchman
born, how came he to learn the Dutch Language so perfectly as to prefer it to
his own? Especially that not being spoken at Tortuga nor Jamaica, where he
resided all the while.

I hope I have made this English Translation something more plain and correct,
than the Spanish. Some few notorious Faults either of the Printer or of the
Interpreter, I am sure I have redressed. But the Spanish Translator complaining
much of the intricacy of Style in the Original (as flowing from a person who,
as has been said, was no Scholar) as he was pardonable, being in great haste,
for not rendering his own Version so distinct and elaborate as he could desire;
so must I be excused from the one, that is to say, Elegancy, if I have
cautiously declined the other, I mean Confusion.

BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Author sets forth toward the Western Islands, in the Service of the
West India Company of France. They meet with an English Frigate. And arrive at
the Island of Tortuga.

WE set sail from Havre de Grace, in France, in a Ship called St. John, the
second day of May, in the year 1666. Our Vessel was equipp't with eight and
twenty Guns, twenty Mariners, and two hundred and twenty Passengers; including,
in this number, those, whom the Company sent as free Passengers, as being in
their service. Soon after we came to an anchor under the Cape of Borflor, there
to join other seven Ships of the same West India Company, which were to come
from Diep, under the Convoy of a Man of War, mounted with seven and thirty
Guns, and two hundred and fifty men. Of these Ships two were bound for Senegal,
five for the Cariby Islands, and ours for the Island of Tortuga. In the same
place there gathered unto us, about twenty sail of other Ships, that were bound
for Newfound land, with some Dutch Vessels, that were going for Nants, Rochel,
and St. Martins. So that in all we made a Fleet of thirty sail. Here we
prepared to sight, putting our selves into a convenient posture of defense, as
having notice, that four English Frigates, of threescore Guns each, did lie in
wait for us, about the Isle of Ornay. Our Admiral the Chevalier Sourdis, having
distributed, what Orders he thought convenient, we set sail from thence with a
favorable gale of wind. Presently after, some mists arising, these totally
impeded the English Frigates, from discovering our Fleet at Sea. We steered our
course, as near as we could, under the Coast of France, for fear of the Enemy.
As we sailed along, we met a Vessel of Ostend, who complained, unto our
Admiral, that a French Privateer had robbed him that very morning. This
complaint being heard, we endeavored to pursue the said Pirate; but our labor
was in vain, as not being able to overtake him.

Our Fleet, as we went along, caused no small fears and alarms, unto the
Inhabitants of the coasts of France; these judging us to be English, and that
we saught some convenient place for landing. To allay their frights, we used to
hang out our Colors; but notwithstanding they would not trust us. After this
we came to an anchor in the Bay of Conquet, in Britany, nigh unto the Isle of
Heysant; there to take in water. Having stored our selves with fresh Provisions
at this place, we prosecuted our Voyage, designing to pass by the Ras of
Fonteneau, and not expose our selves to the Sorlingues, fearing the English
Vessels, that were crusing there-abouts to meet us. This River Ras is of a
current very strong and rapid, which rolling over many Rocks, disgorgeth it
self into the Sea, on the coast of France, in the latitude of eight and forty
degrees, and ten minutes. For which reason this passage is very dangerous; all
the Rocks as yet, being not thorough ly known.

Here, I shall not omit to mention the ceremony, Baptism used by the French at
Sea.
which at this passage, and some other places, is used by the Mariners, and by
them called Baptism, although it may seem, either little to our purpose, or of no
use. The Masters Mate clothed himself with a ridiculous sort of garment, that
reached unto his feet, and on his head he put a suitable Cap, which was made
very burlesque. In his right hand he placed a naked wooden sword; and, in his
left, a pot full of ink. His face was horribly blackt with foot, and his neck
adorned with a Collar of many little pieces of wood. Being thus apparelled, he
commanded to be called before him every one of them, who never had passed that
dangerous place before. And then causing them to kneel down in his presence, he
made the sign of the Cross upon their foreheads, with ink; and gave each one a
stroke on the shoulders with his wooden sword. Mean while the standers by did
cast a Bucket of water, upon every man's head; and this was the conclusion of
the ceremony. But, that being ended, every one of the Baptized, is obliged to
give a Bottle of Brandy for his offering; placing it nigh the main Mast, and
without speaking a word; even those, who have no such liquor, being not excused
from this performance. In case the Vessel never passed that way before, the
Captain is obliged to distribute some Wine among the Mariners, and other
people, in the Ship. But, as for other gifts, which the newly baptized do
frequently offer, they are divided among the old Seamen; and, of them, they
make a Banquet, among themselves.

The Hollanders likewise do use to baptize (...)
such as never passed that way before. And not only at the passage
abovementioned, but also at the Rocks called Berlingues, nigh the coast of
Portugal, in the latitude of thirty nine degrees, and forty minutes, (as being
a passage very dangerous, especially by night, when, through the obscurity
thereof, the Rocks are not distinguishable, by reason the Land is very high,)
they use some such ceremony. But, their manner of Baptizing is much distinct
from that we have described above, performed by the French. He therefore, that
is to be baptized, is fast'ned and hoised up three times at the main yard's
end, as if he were a Criminal. If he be hoised the fourth time, in the name of
the Prince of Orange, or of the Captain of the Vessel, his honor is more than
ordinary. Thus they are dipped, every one, several times in the main Ocean. But
he that is the first dipped, has the honor of being saluted with a Gun. Such
as are not willing to fall, are bound to pay twelve pence, for their ransom: if
he be an Officer in the Ship, two shillings: and if a Passenger, according to
their pleasure. In case the Ship did never pass that way before, the Captain is
bound to give a small Runlet of Wine; which if he does not perform, the
Mariners may cut off the Stem of the Vessel. All the profit, which accrueth by
this ceremony, is kept by the Masters Mate; who after reaching their Port, does
usually lay it out in wine, which is drank amongst the ancient Seamen. Some
will say this ceremony was instituted by the Emperor Charles the Fifth;
howsoever it is not found amongst his Laws. But here I leave these customs of
the Sea; and shall return unto our Voyage.

Having passed the River Ras, we met with very good weather, until we came to
the Cape of Finis-Terrae. Here a huge Tempest of wind surprised us, and
separated our Ship from the rest, that were in our company. This storm
continued for the space of eight days: In the which time it would move
compassion to see how miserably the Passengers were tumbled to and fro, on all
sides of the Ship; insomuch, as the Mariners, in the performance of their duty,
were compelled to tread upon them every where. This uncouthsom weather being
spent, we had again the use of very favorable gales, until we came unto the
Tropic of Cancer. This Tropic is nothing else, but an imaginary circle, which
Astrologers have invented in the Heavens; and serves as a period to the
progress of the Sun toward the North Pole. It is placed in the latitude of
three and twenty degrees, and thirty minutes, under the line. Here we were
baptized the second (...) Ceremonious baptism.
time, after the same manner as before. The French do always perform this
Ceremony this Tropic; as also under the Tropic of Capricornus, toward the
South. In this part of the World, we had very favorable weather, at the which
we were infinitely gladded, by reason of our great necessity of water. For
Necessity of fresh water.
at this time, that Element already was so scarce with us, that we were stinted
unto two half pints, by man, every day.

Being about the latitude of Barbadas, we met an English Frigate, or Privateer;
who first began to give us chase. But finding himself not to exceed in
strength, did presently steer away from us. This flight gave us occasion to
pursue the said Frigate, as we did, shooting at him several Guns, of eight pound
carriage. But at length he escaped; and we returned to our course. Not long
after we came within sight of the Isle of Martinica. Our endeavors Arrival at
the Caribbe Islands.
were bent unto the coast of the Isle of St. Peter. But these were frustrated,
by reason of a storm, which took us hereabouts. Hence we resolved to steer to
the Island of Guadalupe. Yet neither this Island could we reach, by reason of
the same storm, and thus we directed our course unto the Isle of Tortuga; which
was the very same land we were bound unto. We passed along the coast of the
Isle of Punta Rica, which is extremely delicious, and agreeable to the view; as
being adorned with beautiful trees and woods, even to the tops of the
Mountains. After this, we discovered the Island Hispaniola (of which I shall
give a description in this Book) and we coasted about it, until we came unto
the Isle of Tortuga, our desired Port. Arr^l at the Isle of Tortuga.
Here we anchored the seventh day of July, in the same year; not having lost
one man in the whole Voyage. We unladed the goods, that belonged unto the
Company of the West Indies; and soon after, the Ship was sent to Call de Sac,
with some passengers.

CHAP. II.
Description of the Island of Tortuga: Of the Fruits and Plants there growing.
How the French settled there, at two several times, and cast out the Spaniards,
first Masters thereof. The Author of this Book was twice sold in the said
Island.

THe Island of Tortuga is situated on the D^scription (...) the Isle of T^a.
North side of the famous and great Island, called Hispaniola, nigh unto the
Continent thereof, and in the altitude of twenty degrees and thirty minutes.
Its just extent is threescore Leagues about. The Spaniards, who gave name unto
this Island called it so, from the shape of the land, which in some manner
resembles a great Sea Tortoise, called by them Tortuga de mar. The Country is
very mountainous, and full of Rocks, yet notwithstanding hugely thick of lofty
trees, that cease not to grow upon the hardest of those Rocks, without
partaking of a softer soil. From hence it comes, that their Roots, for the
greatest part, are seen all over, entangled among the Rocks, not unlike unto
the branching of Ivy against our Walls. That part of this Island, which
stretches toward the North, is totally disinhabited. The reason is, first,
because it has proved to be very incommodious, and unhealthy: And secondly,
for the ruggedness of the coast, that gives no access unto the shore, unless
among Rocks, almost unaccessible. For this cause it is populated only on the
Southern part, which has one only Port, that may be esteemed indifferently
good. Yet this harbor has two several entries, or channels, which afford
passage unto Ships of seventy Guns; the Port it self being without danger, and
capable, of receiving a great number of Vessels. That part which is inhabited,
is divided into four other parts; of which the first is called the Low-land, or
Low Country. This is the chiefest, among the rest, because it contains the
Port aforesaid. The Town is called Cayona, and here, do live the chiefest, and
richest Planters of the Island. The second part is called the Middle
plantation. Its Territory, or soil, is hitherto almost new, as being only known
to be good for the culture of Tobacco. The third is named Ringot. These places
are s^ituated toward the Western part of the Island. The fourth, and last, is
called The Mountain, in which place were made the first plantations, that were
cultivated upon this Island.

As to the Wood, that grows on the Island, Of the Trees, (...) grow at
Tortuga.
we have already said, that the Trees are exceeding tall, and pleasing to the
sight; whence no man will doubt, but they may be applied, unto several uses,
with great benefit. Such is the yellow Saunder, which Tree, by the inhabitants,
of this Country, is called Bois de chandel, or, in English, Candle-wood, being
it burns like a Candle, and serves them with light, while they use their
fishery in the Night. Here grows also, Lignum Sanctum, by others call-
Guaiacum. Its virtues are very well known; more especially unto them, who
observe not the sixth Commandment, and are given to all manner of impure
copulations; Physicians, drawing from hence, under several compositions, the
greatest antidote, for all Venerel discases; as also for cold, and viscous
humors. The trees, likewise, that afford Gummi Elemi, grow here in great
abundance. In like manner does Radix Chinae, or China Root: Yet this is not so
good, as that, which comes from other parts of the Western world. It is very
white, and soft; and serves for pleasant food unto the wild Bores, when as
they can find nothing else. This Island also is not deficient in Aloes, nor an
infinite number of other medicinal herbs, which may please the curiosity of
such, as are given to their contemplation. Medicinal Herbs.
Moreover, for the building of Ships, or any other sort of Architecture, here
are Wood for building.
found, in this spot of Neptune, several sorts of Timber very convenient. The
Fruits, likewise, Fruits.
which here abundantly grow, are nothing inferior, as to their quantity, or
quality, unto what the adjacent Islands produce. I shall name only some of the
most ordinary, and common. Such are Magniot, Potato's, Acajou apples, Yannas,
Bacones, Paquayes, Carosoles, Mamayns, Ananaes, and diverse other sorts; which
not to be tedious, I omit to specify. Here grow likewise in huge number, those
trees called Palmito's or Palmites, from whence is drawn a certain juice, which
serves Palmito, (...)
the inhabitants instead of Wine; and whose leaves, do cover their houses,
instead of tyles.

In this Island abounds also, with daily increase, Wild Bor^
the Wild-Bore. The Governor has prohibited the hunting of them with dogs;
fearing, least, the Island being but small, the whole race of those Animals, in
short time should be destroyed. The reason why he thought convenient, to
preserve those Wild Beasts, was that in case of any invasion of an external
enemy, the inhabitants might sustain themselves, with their food. Especially
were they once constrained to retire unto the VVoods, and Mountains. By this
means he judged, they were enabled, to maintain any sudden assault, or long
persecution. Yet this sort of Game is almost impeded by its self, by reason of
the many Rocks, and precipices which for the greatest part, are covered with
little shrubs, very Green, and thick; from whence the huntsmen have oftimes
precipitated themselves, and left us the sad experience, and grief, of many
memorable disasters.

At a certain time of the year there resorteth unto this Island of Tortuga huge
flocks of Wild-Pigeons: Great flocks of Wild Pigeons.
At which season the inhabitants feed on them very plentifully, having more
then they can consume, and leaving totally to their repose all other sorts of
Fowl, both VVild and Tame, to the intent, that in absence of the Pigeons, these
may supply their place. But as nothing in the Universe, though never so
pleasant, can be found, but what has something of bitterness joined to it, the
very symbol of this truth we see in the aforesaid Pigeons. For th^se, the
season being past wherein God has appointed them, to afford delicious food
unto those people, can scarce be touched with the tongue, they become so
extremely Lean, and bitter even to admiration. The reason of this bitterness,
is attributed unto a certain seed, which they eat about that time, even as
bitter as Gall. About the Sea shoars, every where are found great multitudes of
Crabs, belonging both to the Land, and Sea; and both sorts very big. Land-Crabs
and Sea-Crabs
These are good to feed Servants and Slaves, who find them very pleasing to the
pallat, yet withal, very hurtful to the sight. Besides which symptom, being
eaten too often, they also cause great giddiness in the head, with much
weakness of the Brain, insomuch, that very frequently they are deprived of
Sight, for the space of one quarter of an hour.

The French having established themselves in The French sent Boats toward the
West to discover other Islands.
the Isle of St. Christopher, planted there a sort of Trees, of which at
present, there possibly may be greater quantities. With the Timber of those
Trees, they made Long-boats, and Hoy's, which they sent from thence VVestward
being well manned, and victualled, to discover other Islands. These setting Sail
from St. Christopher's, came within sight of the Island of Hispaniola, where at
length they arrived with abundance of joy. Having landed, they marched into the
Country, where they found huge quantities of Cattle, such as were, Cows Bulls,
Horses, and Wild-Bores. But finding no great profit in those animals unless
they could enclose them, and knowing, likewise the Island, to be pretty well
peopled by the Spaniards, they thought it convenient to enterprise upon and
seize the Island of Tortuga. This they performed First ^try (...) (...) French
(...) Tortu^
without any difficulty, there being upon the Island no more, then ten, or
twelve Spaniards, to guard it. These few men let the French come in peaceably,
and possess the Island, for the space of six months, without any trouble. In
the mean while they passed, and repassed, with their Canows unto Hispaniola
from whence they transported many people, and at last began to plant the whole
Isle of Tortuga. The few Spaniards, remaining there perceiving the French to
increase their number daily began at last, to repine at their prosperity, and
grudge them the possession, they had freely given. Hence they gave notice unto
others, of their own Nation, their Neighbors, who sent several great Boats
well armed and manned, to dispossess the French of that Island. This expedition
succeeded according to their desires. For the new possessors seeing the great
number of Spaniards, that came against them, fled with all they had unto the
VVoods. And hence by Night, they wafted over with Canows, unto the Isle of
Hispaniola. This they more easily performed as having no Women nor Children,
with them, nor any great substance to carry away. Here they also retired into
the VVoods, both to seek themselves food, and from thence with secrecy, to give
intelligence unto others, of their own faction; as judging for certain, that
within a little while, they should be in a capacity to hinder the Spaniards,
from fortifying in Tortuga.

Mean while the Spaniards of the greater Island ceased not to seek after their
new guests the French, with intent to root them out of the VVoods, if possible,
or cause them to perish with hunger. But this their design soon failed, having
found that the French were masters both of good Guns, Powder, and Bullets. Here
therefore, the fugitives waited for a certain opportunity, wherein they knew
the Spaniards were to come, from Tortuga, with arms and great number of men,
to join with those of the greater Island for their destruction. When this
occasion proffered they in the mean while deserting the woods where they were,
returned unto Tortuga, and dispossessed the small numof The French return (...)
Tort^ga.
Spaniards, that remained at home. Having so done, they fortified themselves,
the best they could; thereby to prevent, the return of the Spaniards, in case,
they should attempt it. Moreover, they sent immediately unto the Governor of
St. Christophers, craving his They petition for a Governor to him of St.
Christophers
aid and relief; and demanding of him, to send them a Governor, the better to
be united, among themselves, and strengthened on all occasions. The Governor
of St. Christophers received their petition with expressions of much
satisfaction, and without any delay, sent unto them Monsieur le Passeur in
quality of a Governor; together with a Ship full of men, and all other things
necessary, both for their establishment and defense. No sooner had they
received this recruit, They build a Fort.
but the Governor commanded a Fortress to be built upon the top of a high
Rock; from whence he could hinder the access of any Ships or other Vessels,
that should design to enter the Port. Unto this Fort no other access could be
had, then by almost climbing through a very narrow passage, that was capable
only of receiving two persons, at once; and those not without difficulty. In
the middle of this rock was a great cavity, which now serves for a storehouse:
And besides here was great convenience for raising a battery. The Fort being
finished the Governor commanded two Guns to be mounted; which could not be
performed without huge toil and labor. As also, a house to be built, within
the Fort; and afterward, the narrow way that led unto the said Fort, to be
broken and demolished, leaving no other ascent thereunto, then by a Ladder.
Within the Fort gusheth out a plentiful Fountain of fresh Water, which
perpetually runs with a pure and Crystalline Stream; sufficient to refresh a
Garrison of a Thousand Men. Being possessed of these conveniences, and the
security these things might promise, the French began to people the Island, and
each of them to seek their living; some by the exercise of hunting, others by
planting Tobacco, and others by crusing, and robbing, upon the coasts of the
Spanish Islands; which trade is continued by them unto this day.

The Spaniards, notwithstanding, could not behold, but with jealous eyes, the
daily increase The Spaniards enter into Tortuga the second time.
of the French in Tortuga; fearing least in time they might by them, be
dispossessed also of Hispaniola. Thus taking an opportunity, (when many of the
French were abroad at Sea, and others employed in hunting) with eight hundred
Men in several Canows, they landed again in Tortuga, almost without being
perceived by the French. But finding that the Governor had cut down many
Trees, for the better discovery of an Enemy, in case of any assault; as also
that nothing of consequence could be done without great Guns, they consulted
about the fittest place for raising a Battery. This place was soon concluded,
to be the Top of a Mountain, which was in Sight; seeing that from thence alone,
they could level their Guns at the Fort, which now did lie open unto them,
since the cutting down of the Trees, by the new possessors. Hence they
resolved, to open a way, for carriage of some pieces of Ordnance to the Top.
This Mountain is somewhat high, and the upper part thereof plain, from whence
the whole Island may be viewed. The sides thereof are very rugged by reason an
huge number of unaccessible Rocks do surround it every where. So that the
ascent was very difficult, and would always have been the same, had not the
Spaniards undergone the immense Labor, and Toil of making the way
aforementioned, as I shall now relate.

The Spaniards had in their company many Slaves, and Indians, laboring Men,
whom they call Matates, or in English, half yellow Men. Unto these they gave
orders, with Iron Tools, to dig a way through the Rocks. This The Spaniards out
open a way in the Mountain.
they performed with the greatest speed imaginable. And through this way by the
help of many Ropes, and Pullies they at last, made shift to get up two Sole
Canon pieces, wherewith they made a Battery, and intended next day to batter
the Fort. Mean while the French were not ignorant of these designs. But rather
prepared themselves for a defense (while the Spaniards were busied about the
battery) sending notice every where to their companions, and requiring their
help. Thus the Hunters of the Island, all joined together, and with them all
the Pirates, who were not already too far from home. These landed by night at
Tortuga, least they should be seen by the Spaniards. And under the same
obscurity of the Night, they all together by a back way climbed Are assaulted
by the French and precipitated.
up the Mountain, where the Spaniards were posted: Which they more easily could
perform as being acquainted with those Rocks. They came thither at the very
instant, that the Spaniards, who were above, where preparing, to shoot at the
Fort, not knowing in the least of their coming. Here they set upon them, at
their backs, with such fury, as forced the greatest part to precipitate
themselves from the top to the bottom, and dash their Bodies in pieces. Few or
none escaped this attacque, for if any remained a live, they were all put to
the Sword, without giving quarter to the meanest. Some Spaniards did still keep
the bottom of the Mountain, but these hearring The rest fly, and abandon the
Isle for ever.
the Shreek's, and cries of them, that were killed, and believing some tragical
revolution to be above, fled immediately toward the Sea, despairing, through
this accident, to ever regain the Isle of Tortuga.

The Governors of this Island did always behave themselves, as proprietors,
and absolute Lords thereof until the year 1664. At which time the West India
Company of France took possession thereof, and sent thither for their
Governor, Monsieur Ogeron. These planted the Colony for themselves, by the
means of their Factors, and Servants, thinking to drive some considerable
trade, from thence, with the Spaniards, even as the Hollanders do from Curasao.
But this design did not answer their expectation. For with other Nations they
could drive no trade, by reason they could not establish any secure commerce
from the beginning with their own. Forasmuch, as at the first institution of
this Company in France, they made an agreement with the Pirates, Hunters, and
Planters, first possessours, of Tortuga, that these should buy all their
necessaries, from the said Company, taking them upon trust. And although this
agreement was put in executition, yet the Factors of the Company, soon after
found that they could not recover either Monys, or returns, from those People.
In so much, as they were constrained to bring some armed men into the Island,
in behalf of the Company, for to get in some of their payments The West Indi^
^ompany ^veth Tor^ga.
But neither this endeavor, nor any other could prevail, toward the settling
a secure trade with those of the Island. And hereupon the Company recalled
their Factors, giving them orders to sell all that was their own, in the said
Plantation, both the Servants, belonging to the Company (which were sold, some
for twenty, others for thirty, pieces of eight) as also, all other
Merchandises, and proprieties, which they had there. With this resolution all
their designs fell to the ground.

In this occasion I was also sold, as being a Servant under the said Company;
in whose The Author is sold.
service I came out of France. But my fortune was very bad. For I fell into the
hands of the most cruel Tyrant, and perfidious man, that ever was born of
Woman; who was then Governor, or rather Lieutenant General of that Island.
This Man did treat me with all the hard usages imaginable; yea with that of
hunger, with which I thought to have perished inevitably. Withal he was willing
to let me buy my freedom, and liberty; but not under the the rate of three
hundred pieces of eight, I not being Master of one, at that time in the whole
World. At last through the manifold miseries I endured, as also affliction of
mind, I was thrown into a dangerous Fit of Sickness. This misfortune, being
added to the rest of my calamities, was the cause of my happiness. For my
wicked Master, seeing my condition, began to fear, least he should lose his
moneys with my Life. Hereupon he sold me the second time, unto a Surgeon,
for the He is sold the second time.
price of seventy pieces of eight. Being in the hands of this second master, I
began, soon after to recover my health, through the good usage I received from
him, as being much more humane, and civil, then that of my first Patron. He
gave me both Clothes and very good food, and after that I had served him but
one year, he offered me my liberty; with only this condition, that I should pay
him one hundred pieces of eight, when I was in a Capacity of Wealth, so to do.
Which kind proposal of his, I could not choose but He gets (...) ^eedom
accept with infinite Joy, and gratitude of mind.

Being now at liberty, though like unto Adam, when he was first Created by the
hands of his maker, that is naked, and destitute, of all human necessaries, nor
knowing how to get my living, I determined to enter into the wicked Order of
the Pirates, or Robbers at Sea. Turns Pirat^.
Into this Society, I was received, with common consent both of the Superior,
and Vulgar sort, and among them I continued until the year 1672. Having
assisted them in all their designs, and attempts, and served them in many
notable exploits, of which hereafter, I shall give the Reader a true account, I
returned unmy own Native Country. But before I begin to relate the things
abovementioned, I shall say something, for the satisfaction of such as are
curious, of the Island Hispaniola, which lies toward the VVestern parts of
America, as also give my Reader a brief description thereof, according to my
slender ability, and experience,

CHAP. III.
Description of the great and famous Island of Hispaniola.



The very large and rich Island called Hispaniola, lies s^tuate in the
altitude of seventeen degrees, and an half. The greatest part, thereof
extends from East to West, twenty degrees, Southern latitude. The
circumference is of three hundred Leagues; the length one hundred and twenty;
its breadth almost fifty; being more or less, broad or narrow, at certain
places. I shall not need here to insert, how this Island was at first
discovered; it being known unto the World, that it was performed by the means
of Christopher Columbus, Discovered by Columbus.
in the year 1492; being sent, unto this purpose, by Ferdinand, the Catholic,
then King of Spain. From which time, unto this present, the Spaniards have been
continually possessors thereof. There be upon this Island, many very good, and
strong Cities, Towns, and Hamlets; as also it abounds in a great number of
pleasant, and delicious, Country Houses, and Plantations: All which are owing
unto the care, and industry, of the Spaniards, its inhabitants.

The chief City, and Metropolis of this Island, Qualities of the City of Santo.
Domingo.
is called Santo Domingo; being dedicated un St. Dominick, from whom it
deriveth this name. It is situated toward the South, in a place which
affords a most excellent prospect. The Country round about being embelished,
with innumerable rich plantations, as also verdant Meadows, and fruitful
Gardens; all which do produce plenty, and variety, of excellent, and pleasant
fruits, according to the nature of those Countries. The Governor of the Island
makes his residence in this City; which is as it were, the Store house of all
the other Cities, Towns and Villages; which from hence do export, and provide
themselves, with all necessaries whatsoever for human Life. And yet has it
this particularity, above many other Cities in other places, that it
entertaineth no external commerce with any other Nation then its own, the
Spaniards. The greatest part of the inhabitants are rich, and substantial
Merchants, or such as are shopkeepers, and do sell by retail.

Another City of this Island, is named San Tiago, or in English, St. James, as
being consecrated City of St. Tiago.
unto the Apostle of that Name. This is an open place, without either Walls, or
Castle; situate in the altitude of nineteen degrees of Southern latitude. The
greatest part of the inhabitants thereof are Hunters, and Planters; the
adjacent territory, and soil, being very proper for the said exercises of its
constitution. The City is surrounded with large, and delicious Fields, as much
pleasing to the view, as those of Santo Domingo: And these abound with all
sorts of Beasts, both VVild, and Tame; from whence are taken an huge number of
Skins, and Hides, that afford unto the Owners, a very considerable traffic.

Toward the Southern parts of this Island City of Nu^stra Sennora de Alta
Gracia.
is seen another City called Nuestra Sennora de Alta Gracia. The territory
hereof produces great quantities of Cacao, which occasioneth the inhabitants,
to make great store of the richest sort of Chocolat. Here grows also much
Ginger, and Tobacco; and much Tallow is prepared of the Beasts, which here
abouts are hunted.

The inhabitants of this beautiful Island of Isle of Savona.
Hispaniola, often go, and come in their Canows, unto the Isle of Savona, not
far distant from thence, where is their chief fishery; especially of Tortoises.
Hither those Fish do constantly resort in huge multitudes, at certain seasons
of the year, there to lay their eggs, burying them in the sands of the Shore.
Thus by the heat of the Sun, which in those parts is very ardent, they are
hatched, and continue the propagation of their Species. This Island of Savona
has little, or nothing that is worthy consideration, or may merit any
particular description, as being so extremely barren, by reason of its Sandy
Soil. True it is, that here grows some small quantity of Lignum Sanctum or
Guajacum; of whose use we have already said something in another place.

VVestwards of the City of Santo Domingo The Town of Aso
is also situated another great village called by the Name of El Pueblo de Aso,
or the Town of Aso. The inhabitants of this Town drive a great commerce, and
traffic, with those of another Village, which is placed in the very middle of
the Island, and is called San Iuan de Goave, or St. John of Goave. This place
is environed with a magnificent prospect Town of St. John of Goave.
of Gardens, Woods, and Meadows. Its territory extends above twenty Leagues
inlength; and grazeth an huge number of Wild Bulls, and Cows. In this village
scarce dwell any others, then Hunters, and Butchers; who flay the beasts that
are killed. These are for the most part a mungrel sort of people of several
Bloods. Some of which are born of white European people and Negros, and these
are called Mulatos. Others are born of Indians, and white people; and such are
termed Mesticos. But others are begotten of Negros, and Indians, and these also
have their peculiar Name, being called Alcatraces. Besides which sorts of
people, there be several other species, and races, both here and in other
places of the West Indies. Of whom this account may be given, that the
Spaniards love better the Negro Women, in those Western parts, or the tawny
Indian Females, than their own white European race. When as peradventure, the
Negros and Indians have greater inclinations to the white women; or those that
come near them, the tawny, then their own. From the said village are exported
yearly, vast quantities of Tallow, and Hides; they exercising no other
traffic, nor toil. For as to the Lands, in this place, they are not
cultivated, by reason of the excessive dryness of the soil. These are the
chiefest places, that the Spaniards possess, in this Island, from the Cape of
Lobos, toward St. John de Goave, unto the Cape of Samana, nigh the Sea, on the
North side; and from the Eastern part, toward the Sea, called Punta de Espada.
All the rest of the Island, is possessed by the French; who are also Planters,
and Hunters.

This Island has very good Ports for ships Convenience of Harbourt in
Hispaniola.
from the Cape of Lobos, to the Cape of Tiburon, which lies on the Western
side thereof. In this space of Land there be no less, then four Ports, which
exceed in goodness, largness, and security, even the very best of England.
Besides these, from the Cape of Tiburon, unto the Cape of Donna Maria, there be
two very excellent Ports, and from this Cape, unto the Cape of St. Nicols,
there be no less, then twelve others. Every one of these Ports, has also the
confluence of two or three good Rivers, in which are found several sorts of
Fish, very pleasing to the palate; and also in great plenty. The Country
hereabouts, is sufficiently watered, with large, and profound Rivers, and
Brooks; so that this part, of the land may easily be cultivated, without any
great fear of droughts; it being certain, that better streams are not to be
found, in any part of the World. The Sea coasts, and Shoars, are also very
pleasant; unto which the Tortoises resort, in huge numbers; there to lay their
eggs.

This Island was formerly very well peopled, on the North side thereof, with
many Towns and Villages. But these being ruined by the Hollanders, were at
last, for the greatest part deserted by the Spaniards.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Fruits, Trees, and Animals, that are found at Hispaniola:

THe spacious fields of this Island, docommonly extend themselves, to the
length of five or six leagues. The beauty whereof is so pleasing to the Eye,
that, together with the great variety of their natural productions, they
infinitely applaud, and captivate the senses of the contemplator. For here at
once, they not only, with diversity of objects recreate the sight but with many
of the same, do also please the smell, and with most contribute abundancy of
delights unto the taste. With sundry diversities also they flatter and excite
the appetite; but more especially with the multitude of Orenges, and Lemons:
Here growing both sweet Orenges and Lemons.
and sower, and those that participate of both tastes, and are only pleasantly
tartish. Besides which here abundantly grow several other sorts of the same
fruit, such as are called Citrons, Toronjas, and Limas; in English not imperly
called Crab-Lemons. True it is, that as to the Lemons, they exceed not here the
bigness of an Hens egg; which smallness distinguishes them, from those of
Spain most frequently used in these our Northern Countries. The Date Trees,
which here are seen to cover Palm Trees
the whole extent of very spacious plains, are exceedingly tall in their
proportion; which notwithstanding does not offend, but rather delight the view.
Their highth is observed to be from 150. unto 200. feet; being wholly destitute
of Branches unto the very tops. Here it is, there grows a certain pleasant
white substance not unlike unto, that of white Cabbage, from whence the
Branches, and leaves, do sprout, and in which also the seed, or Dates are
contained. Every Month, one of those branches falls to the ground, and at the
same time, another sprouteth out. But the seed ripeneth not, but once in the
year, The Dates are food extremely coveted by the Hedge-Hogs. The white
substance, growing at the top of the Tree, is used by the Spaniards, after the
same manner, for common sustenance, as Cabbage in Europe; they cutting it into
slices, and boiling it, in their Ollas, with all sorts of meat. The leaves of
this sort of Date Tree, are seven or eight foot in length, and three or four in
breadth; being very fit to cover houses withal. For they defend, from Rain,
equally with the best Tiles, though never so rudely huddl'd together. They make
use of them also to wrap up smoaked Flesh withal; and to make a certain sort of
Buckets, wherewith to carry Water; though no longer durable than the space of
six, seven, or eight days. The Cabbages of these trees, for so we may call
them, The white substance of the Palm Tree very useful.
are of a greenish color, on the out side, though inwardly very white, from
whence may be separated a sort of rind, which is very like unto parchment,
being fit to write upon, as we do upon Paper. The bodies of these Trees are of
an huge bulk or thickness, which two Men can hardly compass with their Arms.
And yet they cannot properly be termed Woody, but only three or four inches
deep, in thickness; all the rest of the internal part being very soft. Insomuch
that paring off those three, or four inches of woody substance, the remaining
part of the Body, may be sliced like unto new Cheese. They wound them three or
four foot above the Root, and making an incision, or broach in the body, from
thence gently distilleth a sort of Liquor, which in short time, by
fermentation, becomes as strong, as the richest wine, and which does easily
inebriate, Palm-Wine
if not used with Moderation. The French call this sort of Palm Trees
Frank-Palms, and they only grow, both here, and elsewhere, in saltish grounds.

Besides these Palm Trees, of which we have made mention, there be also in
Hispaniola four other species of Palms, which are distinguished by the Names of
Latanier, Palma Espinosa or Prickle-palm, Palma a chapelet or Rosary-palm,
Palma-Vinosa or Wine-Palm, The Latanier-palm Latanier-palm.
is not so tall, as the Wine-palm: Although it has almost, the same shape,
only that the leaves are very like unto the Fans our Women use. They grow
mostly in gravelly, and sandy ground, their circumference being of seven foot
more or less. The body has many prickles or thorns, of the length of half a
foot, very sharp and pungent. It produces its seed after the same manner with
that abovementioned, which likewise serves for food unto the Wild beasts.

Another sort of these Palm Trees is called Prickle-Palm as we said before, by
reason it is Prickle-palm
infinitely full of prickles, from the Root unto the very leaves thereof much
more then the precedent. With these prickles, some of the barbarous Indians use
to torment their prisoners at War, whom they take in battle. They tie them unto
atree, and then taking these thorns, they put them into little pellets of
cotton, which they dip in oil, and thus stick them in the sides of the
miserable Prisoners, as th^ck as the brizles of an hedg-hog; which of necessity
cause an incredible torment unto the Patient. Afterward, they set them on
Fire, and if the tormented Prisoner sings in the midst of his torments and
flames, he is esteemed as a valiant and courageous Soldier, who neither fears
his Enemies, nor their torments. But if on the contrary, he cries out they
esteem him but as a Poltron or Coward, and unworthy of any memory. This custom
was told me by an Indian, who said he had used his Enemies thus oftentimes. The
like cruelti^s unto these many Christians have seen, while they lived among
those barbarians. But returning unto the Prickle-palm, I shall only tell you,
that this palm tree is in this only different from the Latanier, that the
leaves are like unto those of the Frank-palm. Its seed is like unto that of the
other palm trees, being only much bigger and rounder, almost as a farthing, and
inwardly full of little kernels, which are as pleasing to the taste, as our
Wallnuts in Europe. This tree grows for the most part in the Marshes, and low
grounds of the Seacoast.

The Wine-palm, is so called from the abundance W^n-palm.
of Wine, which is gathered from hence. This palm grows in high and rocky
Mountains, not exceeding in tallness the height of forty or fifty foot: But yet
of an extraordinary shape or form. For from the root, unto the half of its
proportion, it is only three or four inches thick. But upwards something above
the two thirds of its higth, it is as big, and as thick, as an ordinary bucket
or Milk Pail. Within it is full of a certain matter, very like unto the tender
stalk of a white cabbage, which is very juicy of a liquor that is much pleasing
to the palate. This liquor after fermentation, and settling of the grounds,
reduces it self into a very good and clear wine, which is purchased with no
great industry. For having wounded the tree with an ordinary hatchet, they make
a square incision or orifice, in it, through which they bruise the said matter,
until it be capable of being squeesed out, or expressed with the hands, they
needing no other instrument, then this. With the leaves they make certain
vessels, not only to settle and purify, the aforementioned liquor, but also to
drink in. It bears its friut like unto other palms; but of a very small
shape; being not unlike unto Cherries. The taste hereof, is very good; but of
dangerous consequence unto the threat, where it causes huge and extreme pains,
that produce malignant Quinzies in them, that eat it.

The Palm a Chapelet, or Rosary-palm, was Rosary-palm
thus called both by the French, and Spaniards, because its seed is very fit to
make Rosaries or Beads, to say prayers upon, the beads being small, hard and
capable of being easily bored, for that use. This fourth species grows on the
tops of the highest Mountains and is of an excessive tallness; but withal very
strait; and adorned with very few leaves.

Here grows also in this Island a certain sort of Apricott-trees, whose fruit
equalleth in Apricot-trees
bigness, that of our ordinary Melons. The color is like unto Ashes, and the
taste, the very same with that of our Apricotts in Europe, the inward stones of
this fruit, being of the bigness of an Hens egg. On these the wild-Bores do
feed very deliciously, and fatten even to admiration.

The trees called Caremites, are very like unto our Pear Trees, whose fruits
resemble much Caremite-tree.
our Damascene plums or Pruants of Europe, being of a very pleasant and
agreeable taste, and almost as sweet as milk. This fruit is black on the
inside, and the Kernels thereof, sometimes only two in number, sometimes three,
others five; of the bigness of a Lupine. This plum affords no less pleasant
food unto the wild-Bores, then the Apricotts abovementioned, only that it is
not so commonly to be found upon the Island, nor in such quantity, as those are.

The Genipa-trees are seen every where, all Genipa-tree.
over this Island, being very like unto our Cherry-trees, although it is
branches are more dilated. The fruit, hereof, is of an ash color, of the
bigness of two fist's, which interiourly, is full of many prickles, or points,
that are involved under a thin membran, or skin; the which, if not taken away,
at the time of eating, causes great obstructions, and gripings of the belly.
Before this fruit grows Genipa-ink.
ripe, if pressed, it affords a juice, as black as ink, being fit to write
withal upon paper. But the letters disappear within the space of nine days, the
paper remaining as white, as if it never had been written upon. The wood of
this tree is very strong, solid, and hard; good to build Ships withal, seeing
it is observed, to last many years in the water, without putrefaction.

Besides these, diverse other sorts of trees, are natives unto this delicious
Island, that produce very excellent, and pleasant fruits. Of these I shallo mit
to name several, knowing there be entire volums of learned Authors, that have
both described, and searched them with greater attention, and curiosity, then
my own. Notwithstanding, I shall continue, to make mention of some few more, in
particular. Such are the Cedars; which trees, this part of the world produces,
in prodigious quantity. Cedars.
The French Nation calls them Acajou: And they find them very useful, for the
building of Ships, and Canow's. These Canows are like unto little wherry-boats,
being made of one only tree, excavated, and fitted for the Sea. They are withal
so swift, as for that very property, Canow's how they are made.
they may be called Neptunes posthorses. The Indians make these Canows without
the use of any iron instruments; by only burning the trees, at the bottom, nigh
unto the root; and afterward, governing the fire, with such industry, as
nothing is burnt more then what they would have. Some of them have hatchets,
made of flint, wherewith they scrape, or pare, off, whatsoever was burnt too
far. And, thus, by the sole instrument of fire, they know how to give them that
shape, which rendereth them capable of Navigating threescore, or fourscore
leagues, with ordinary security.

As to Medicinal productions, here is to be found the tree, that affords, the
Gum Elemi, Medicinal trees.
used in our Apothecaries Shops. Likewise Guaiacum, or Lignum Sanctum; Lignum
Aloes, or Aloe-wood, Cassia Lignea, China-roots, with several others. The tree
called Mapou, besides that it is medicinal, is also used for making of Canow's
as being very thick. Yet is it much inferior unto the Acajou, or Cedar, as
being something spongy, whereby it sucketh in Mapou.
much water, which renders it dangerous in Navigation. The tree called Acoma
has its wood very hard, and heavy, of the color of Palm. These qualities
render it very fit to make Oars for the sugar-mils. Here are also in great
quantities, Brasilete, or brasil-wood, and that which the Spaniards call
Mancanilla.

Brasil-wood is now very well known in the Provinces of Holland, and the Low
Countries. Brasil-wood.
By another name it is called, by the Spaniards, Lenna de Peje palo. It serves
only or chiefly, for dying, and what belongs to that trade. It grows
abundantly along the Sea coasts, of this Island; especially in two places
called Iacmel, and Iaquina. These are two commodious Ports or Bays; capable of
receiving Ships of the greatest bulk.

The tree called Mancanilla, or Dwarf-appletree, grows nigh unto the Sea
Shore; being Mancanlla very venomous.
naturally so low, that its branches, though never so short, do always touch
the water. It bears a fruit, something like, unto our sweet sented apples;
which notwithstanding is of a very venomous quality. For these apples being
eaten by any person, he instantly changes color, and such an huge thirst does
seize him as all the Water of the Thames cannot extinguish, he dying raving-mad
within a little while after. But what is more the Fish that eat as it often
happens, of this fruit are also poisonous. This tree affords, also a
liquor, both thick, and white; like unto the Fig Tree; which, if touched by the
hand, raises blisters, upon the skin, and these are so red in color, as if it
had been deeply scaldded, with hot water. One day, being hugely tormented with
Mosquitos or gnats, and as yet, unacquainted with the nature of this tree, I
cut a branch thereof, to serve me instead of a fan; but all my face swelled the
next day, and filled with blisters, as if it were burnt to such a degree, that
I was blind for three days.

Ycao is the name of another sort of tree, so called by the Spaniards, which
grows by Ycaos.
the sides of Rivers. This bears a certain fruit, not unlike, unto our
bullice, or damson plums. And this food is extremely coveted by the wild boar,
when at its perfect maturity; with which they fatten as much as our hogs, with
the sweetest acorn's of Spain. These trees love sandy ground: Yet are so low,
that, their branches being very large, they take up a great circumference,
almost couched upon the ground. The trees named Abelcoses bare Abelcose tree.
fruit of like color, with the Ycaos abovementioned, but of the bigness of
Melons; the seeds, or kernels, being as big as eggs. The substance of this
fruit is yellow, and of a pleasant taste; which the poorest, among the French,
do eat, instead of bread; the wild-Bore not caring at all for this fruit. These
trees grow very tall, and thick; being somewhat like unto our largest sort of
Peartrees.

As to the Insects, which this Island produces, Flies.
I shall only take notice of three sorts of Flies, which excessively torment
all human bodies; but more especially such, as never before, or but a little
while, were acquainted with these Countries. The first sort of these flies are
as big as our common horse flies in Europe. And these darting themselves upon
men's bodies, do there stick, and suck their blood, till they can no longer
fly. Their importunity obliges to make, almost, continual use of branches of
trees, wherewith to fan them away. The Spaniards in those parts call them
Mosquito's, or Gnats; but the French Mosquitos.
give them the name of Maranguines. The second Second species of Flies:
sort, of these Insects, is no bigger then a grain of sand. These make no
buzzing noise, as the precedent species does; for which reason it is less
avoidable, as being able also, through its smalness, to penetrate the finest
linen, or cloth. The Hunters are forced to anoint their faces, with
hogs-greece, thereby to defend themselves from the stings of these little
Animals. By night, in their Huts, or Cottages, they constantly, for the same
purpose burn the leaves of Tobacco, without which smoke they were not able to
rest. True it is, that in the day time, they are not very troublesome, in case
any Wind be stirring; for this, though never so little, causes them to
dissipate. The Gnats, of the third Species, exceed not the bigness of a grain
of Mustard. Third species.
Their color is Red. These sting not at all, but do bite so sharply upon the
Flesh, as to create little Ulcers therein. From whence it often comes, that
the Face swells, and is rendered hideous to the view, through this
inconvenience. These are chiefly troublesome by day, even from the beginning of
the Morning, until Sunsetting; after which time, they take up their rest, and
permit humane Bodies to do the same. The Spaniards gave these Insects the Name
of Rojados; and the French that of Calarodes.

The Insects, which the Spaniards call Cochinillas, Cochinillas.
and the English Glowworms are also to be found in these parts. These are very
like unto such, as we have in Europe, unless that they are somewhat bigger and
longer then ours. They have two little specks on their heads, which by Night
give so much light, that three or four of those Animals, being together upon a
tree, it is not discernable, at a distance from a bright shining Fire. I had on
a certain time, at once three of these Cochinillas, in my Cottage, which there
continued until past midnight, shining so brightly, that without any other
Light, I could easily read in any Book, although of never so small a print. I
attempted to bring some of these Insects into Europe, when I came from those
parts, but as soon as they came into a colder climate, they dyed by the way.
They lost also their shining, upon the change of Air even before their death.
This shining is so great, according to what I have related, that the Spaniards,
with great reason, may well call them from their luminous quality, Moscas de
fuego, that is to say; Fire-flies.

There be also in Hispaniola an excessive number of Grillones, or Crickets.
These are of an Crickets.
extraordinary magnitude, if compared unto ours; and so full of noise, that
they are ready to burst themselves with singing, if any person comes near
them. Here is no lesser number of Reptils, such as Serpents are, and others:
But by a particular providence of the Creator, Serpents, or Snakes.
these have no poison. Neither do they any other harm, then unto what fowl they
can catch. But more especially, unto Pullets, Pigeons, and others of this kind.
Oftimes these Serpents, or Snakes, are useful in houses to cleanse them of
Rats, and Mice. For with great cunning, they counterfeit their Shreeks; and
hereby both deceive and catch them at their pleasure. Having taken them, they
in no wise eat the guts of these Vermin, but only suck their blood at first.
Afterward throwing away the guts, they swallow almost entire the rest of the
body; which as it should seem, they readily digest into soft excrements, of
which they discharge their bellies. Another Fly-catchers.
sort of Reptils belonging to this Island, is called by the name of Cazadores
de Moscas, or Fly-catchers. This name was given unto this Reptil by the
Spaniards, by reason they never could experiment, it lived upon any other food
then flies. Hence itcannot be said, this creature causes any harm unto the
Inhabitants, but rather benefit; seeing it consumes by its continual exercise
of hunting the vexatious and troublesome flies.

Land-Tortoises here be also in great quantities. Land-Tortoises.
These mostly breed in mud, and feilds that are overflown with water. The
Inhabitants eat them, and testify they are very good food. But a sort of
Spiders, which is here found, is very hidcous. These are as big as Spiders.
an ordinary egg; and their feet as long as those of the biggest Sea-crabs.
Withal, they are very hairy; and have four black teeth, like unto those of a
Rabbet, both in bigness, and shape. Notwithstanding their bitings are not
venomous; although they can bite very sharp, and do use it very commonly. They
breed for the most part in the roofs of houses. This Island also is not free
from the Insect called Millepedes.
in Latin Millepes, and in Greek Scolopendria, or Many-feet: Neither is it void
of Scorpions. Yet by the providence of nature, neither the one nor the other,
bears the least suspicion of poison. For although they cease not to bite, yet
their wounds require not the application of any medicament, for their cure. And
although their bitings cause some inflammation, and swelling at the beginning;
however these Symptoms disappear of their own accord. Thus in the whole
circumference of Hispaniola, no Animal is found that produces the least harm
with its venom.

After the Insects abovementioned, I shall Cocodriles.
not omit to say something of that terrible Beast, called Cayman. This is a
certain species of Cocodrile, wherewith this Island very plentifully abounds.
Among these Caymanes, some are found to be of a corpulency, very horrible to
the sight. Certain it is, that such have been seen, as had no less then
threescore and ten foot in length, and twelve in breadth. Yet more mavelous,
then their bulk, is their Subtility of the Cayman.
cunning and subtilty, wherewith they purchase their food. Being hungry they
place themselves nigh the sides of Rivers; more especially at the Fords, where
Cattle come to drink or wade over. Here they lie without any motion, nor
stirring any part of their body, resembling an old tree fallen into the River,
only floating upon the waters, whether these will carry them. Yet they recede
not far from the bank-sides, but continually lurch in the same place, waiting
till some wild Bore, or salvage Cow comes to drink, or refresh themselves, at
that place. At which point of time, with huge activity they assault them, and
seizing on them with no less fierceness, they drag the prey into the water and
there stifle it. But what is more worthy admiration, is, that three, or four
days before the Caymanes go upon this design, they eat nothing at all. But
diving into the River they swallow one, or two hundred weight of stones, such
as they can find. With these they render themselves more heavy, then before,
and make addition unto their natural strength (which in this animal is very
great) thereby to render their assault the more terrible and secure. The prey
being thus stifled, they suffer it to lie four or five days under water
untouched. For they could not eat the least bit thereof, unless half rotten.
But when it is arrived at such a degree of putrefaction, as is most pleasing to
their palate, they devour it with great appetite and voracity. If they can lay
hold on any hides of Beasts, such as the Inhabitants oftimes place in the
feilds for drying against the Sun, they drag them into the water. Here they
leave them for some days, well laden with stones, till the hair falls off.
Then they eat them with no less appetite, then they would the animals
themselves, could they catch them. I have seen my self many times, like things
unto these I have related. But besides my own experience, many Writers of
natural things, have made entire Treatises of these Animals, describing not
only their shape, magnitude, and other qualities, but also their voracity, and
brutish inclinations; which, as I have told you, are very strange. A certain
person of good reputation and credit, A Strange Relation of a Cayman.
told me, that one day he was by the River side, washing his Baraca, or Tent,
wherein he used to lie in the feilds. As soon as he began his work, a Cayman
fastened upon the Tent, and with incredible fury, dragged it under water. The man
desirous to see if he could save his Tent, pulled on the contrary side with all
his strength, having in his mouth a Butchers knife, (wherewith as it happened
he was scraping the Canvas) to defend himself, in case of urgent necessity. The
Cayman being angry at this opposition, vaulted upon his body, out of the River,
and drew him with great celerity into the water, endeavoring with the weight
of his bulk, to stifle him under the banks. Thus finding himself in the
greatest extremity almost crushed to death by that huge and formidable Animal,
with his knife he gave the Caman several wounds in the belly, wherewith he
suddenly expired. Being thus delivered from the hands of imminent fate, he drew
the Cayman out of the water, and with the same knife opened the body, to
satisfy his own curiosity. In his stomach, he found nigh one hundred weight of
stones, each of them being almost of the bigness of his fist.

The Caymanes are ordinarily busied in hunting and catching of flies; which
they eagerly The Caymanes persecute the flies.
devour. The occasion is, because close unto their skin, they have certain
little scales, which smell with a sweet sent, something like unto Musk. This
aromatic odor is coveted by the flies, and here they come to repose
themselves and sting. Thus they both persecute each other continually, with an
incredible hatred, and antipathy. Their manner of procreating, and hatching
their young ones, is as Manner of (...) procreating of the Caymanes.
follows. They approach the sandy banks of some River, that lies exposed to the
rays of the South Sun. Among these Sands they lay their eggs, which afterward,
they cover with their feet: And here they find them hatched, and with young
generation, by the only heat of the Sun. These as soon as they are out of the
shell, by natural instinct, run unto the water. Many times those eggs are
destroyed by Birds that find them out, as they scrape among the Sands.
Hereupon, the Femals of the Caymanes, at such times, as they fear the coming of
any flocks of Birds, do ofttimes, by night, swallow these their eggs, and keep
them in their stomach, till the danger is over. And from time to time, they
bury them again in the Sand, as I have told you bringing them forth again out
of their belly, till the season is come, of being excluded the Shell. At this
time, if the Mother be nigh at hand, they run unto her and play with her as
little Whelps would do with their Dams, sporting themselves according to their
own custom. In this sort of sport, they will oftentimes run in and out of their
Mothers belly, even as Rabbets into their holes. This I have seen them do many
times, as I have spyed them at play, with their Dam, over the water, upon the
contrary banks of some River. At which time, I have often disturbed their sport
by throwing a Stone that way, causing them on a sudden, to creep into the
Mothers Bowels, for fear of some imminent danger. The manner of procreating of
those Animals, is always the same, such as I have related; and at the same time
of the year, for they neither meddle, nor make with one another The Caymanes do
not procreate but in May.
but in the month of May. They give them in this Country, the name of
Cocodriles; though in other places, of the West Indies, they go under the Name
of Caymanes.

CHAP. V.
Of all sorts of quadruped Animals, and Birds, that are found in this Island.
As also a relation of the French Bucaniers.

BEsides the Fruits, which this Island produces, whose plenty, as is held for
certain, surpasses all the Islands of America, it abounds also, very
plentifully, in all sorts of quadruped Animals. Such are Horses, Bulls, Cows,
Wild-Bores, andothers very useful unto human kind, not only for common
sustenance of Life, but also for cultivating of the ground, and the management
of a sufficient Commerce.

In this Island therefore are still remaining an huge number of Wild-Dogs.
These destroy yearly, multitudes of all sorts of Cattle. Wild-dogs.
For no sooner has a Cow brought forth her Calf, or a Mare foaled, but these
Wild-Mastives come to devour the young breed, if they find not some resistance
from keepers, and other domestic dogs. They run up and down the Woods, and
fields, commonly, in whole troops of fifty, threescore, or more together. Being
withal, so fierce, that they ofttimes will assault an entire herd of
Wild-Bores, not ceasing to persecute them, till they have at last, overcome,
and torn in pieces two, or three. One day a French Bucanier caused me to see a
strange action of this kind. Being in the Fields hunting together, we heard a
great noise of Dogs, which had surrounded a Wild-bore. Having tame dogs with
us, we left them to the Notable action of the Wild-dogs.
custody of our Servants; desirous to see the sport, if possible. Hence my
Companion, and I, each of us, climbed up into several trees; both for security
and prospect. The Wild-bore was all alone, and standing against a tree; with
his tusks endeavored to defend himself from a great number of Dogs, that had
enclosed him: Having killed with his teeth, and wounded, several of them. This
bloody fight continued about an hour; the Wild-bore, mean while, attempting
many times to escape. At last, being upon the flight, one of those Dogs,
leaping on his back, fastened upon the testicles, which at one pull, he tore in
pieces. The rest of the Dogs, perceiving the courage of their companion,
fastened likewise upon the Bore, and presently after killed him. This being
done, all of them, the first only excepted, laid themselves down upon the
ground, about the prey, and there peaceably continued till he, the first
andmost courageous of the troop, had eat as much as he could devour. When this
dog had ended his repast, and left the dead beast, all the rest fell in to take
their share; till nothing was left that they could devour. What ought we to
infer from this notable action; performed by the brutish sense of wild animals?
Only this, that even Beasts themselves are not destitute of knowledge; and that
they give us documents how to honor such as have well deserved; seeing these
being irrational animals, as they were, did reverence, and respect him, that
exposed his life to the greatest danger, in vanquishing courageously the common
enemy.

The Governor of Tortuga Mounsieur Ogeron, Persecution of the wild-dogs in
Tortuga.
understanding that the Wild-dogs killed too many of the Wild-bores, and that
the Hunters of that Island had much a do to find any, fearing least that common
sustenance of the Isle should fail, caused a great quantity of poison, to be
brought from France, therewith to destroy the Wild-Mastives. This was performed
in the year 1668, by commanding certain horses to be killed, and envenomed, and
laid open in the woods and feilds, at certain places, where mostly Wild-dogs
used to resort. This being continued for the space of six months: there were
killed an incredible number, in the said time. And yet all this industry was
not sufficient, to exterminate and destroy the race; yea, scarce to make any
diminution thereof; their number appearing to be almost as entire as before.
These Wild-dogs are easily rendered tame among people, even as tame as the
ordinary dogs, we breed in Houses. Moreover the Hunters of those parts,
whenever they find a wild-bitch, with young whelps, do commonly take away the
puppies, and bring them to their houses, where they experiment them, being
grown up, to hunt much better then other dogs.

But here the Curious Reader, may peradventure enquire, from whence or by what
accident, came so many wild-dogs into those Islands? The occasion was, that the
Spaniards having possessed themselves of these Isles, found them much peopled
with Indians. These were a barbarous sort of people, totally given to
sensuality, and a brutish custom of life, hating all manner of labor, and only
inclined to run from place to place, killing, and making war against their
Neighbors; not out of any ambition to reign, but only because they agreed not
with themselves, in some common terms of language. Hence perceiving the
dominion of the Spaniards did lay a great restriction upon their lazy and
brutish customs, they conceived an incredible odium against them, such as never
was to be reconciled. But more especially, because they saw them take
possession of their Kingdoms, and dominions. Hereupon they made against them
all the resistance, they were capable of, opposing every where their designs to
the utmost of their power. Until that the Spaniards, finding themselves to be
cruelly hated by those Indians, and no where secure from their treachery's,
resolved to extirpate, and ruin them every one. Especially seeing they could
neither tame them by the civilities of their customs, nor conquer them with the
Sword. But the Indians, it being their ancient custom to make their Woods their
chiefest places of defense, at present made these their refuge, whenever they
fled from the Spaniards that pursued them. Hereupon, those first Conquerours of
the new World, made use of dogs, to range and search the intricatest thickets
of Woods and Forests for those their implacable, and unconquerable Enemies. By
these means, they forced them, to leave their ancient refuge, and submit unto
the Sword, seeing no milder usage would serve turn. Hereupon they killed some
of them, and quartering their bodies, placed them in the highways; to the
intent, that others might take warning from such a punishment, not to incur the
like danger. But this severity proved to be of ill consquence. For instead of
frighting them and reducing their minds to a civil society, they conceived
such horror of the Spaniards, and their proceedings, that they resolved, to
detest and fly their sight, for ever. And hence the greatest part dyed in
Caves, and subterraneous places, of the Woods and Mountains. In which places, I
my self have seen many times, great numbers of human bones. The Spaniards
afterward, finding no more Indians to appear about the Woods, endeavored to
rid themselves of the great number of Dogs, they had in their houses. From
whence these Animals, finding no Masters to keep them, betook themselves unto
the Woods, and Fields, there to hunt for Food to preserve their Lives. Thus by
degrees they became unacquainted with the Houses of their ancient Masters, and
at last grew wild. This is the truest account I can give, of the multitudes of
wild-dogs, which are seen to this day in these parts.

But besides the Wild Mastives abovementioned, Wild-horses.
here are also huge numbers of Wild-Horses, to be seen every where. These run
up and down in whole herds, or flocks, all over the Island of Hispaniola. They
are but low of Stature, short bodyed, with great Heads, long Necks, and big, or
thick legs. In a word they have nothing that is handsome in all their shape.
They are seen to run up and down commonly in troops of two or three hundred
together; one of them going always before, to lead the Multitude. When they
meet any person, that travelleth through the Woods or fields, they stand still,
suffering him to approach, till he can almost touch them; and then suddenly
starting they betake themselves to flight, running away disorderly, as fast, as
they are able. The Hunters catch them with industry, only for the benefit of
their Skins. Although sometimes they preserve their flesh likewise which they
harden with Smoke; using it for provisions, when they go to Sea.

Here would be also Wild-Bulls and Cows, in Wild-Bulls and Cows.
greater number, then at present, if by continuation of hunting, their race
were not much diminished. Yet considerable profit is made even to this day, by
such as make it their business to kill them. The Wild-bulls are of a vast
corpulency, or bigness of body; and yet they do no hurt unto any person, if
they be not exasperated, but left to their own repose. The hides, which are
taken from them, are from eleven, to thirteen foot long.

The diversity of Birds, inhabiting the Air of this Island, is so great, that I
should be troublesome, as well unto the Reader as my self, if I should attempt
to Muster up their Species. Hence leaving aside the prolix Catalogue of their
multitude, I shall content my self only to mention some few of the chiefest,
Here is a certain species of Pullets, in the woods, which the Spaniards call by
the Name of Pintadas, Wood-pullets.
the which the Inhabitants find without any distinction, to be as good, as
those which are bred in houses. It is already known unto every body, that the
Parrots which we Parrots,
have in Europe, are transported, unto us, from these parts of the World. From
whence may be inferred, that seeing such a number of these talkative Birds, are
preserved among us, notwithstanding the diversity of climates, much greater
multitudes are to be found, where the Air, and temperament is natural unto
them. The Parrots make their Nests in holes of Palmito trees Parrots how they
build their Nests
which holes are before, made to their hand by other Birds. The reason is, for
as much as they are not capable of excavating any wood though never so soft, as
having their own bills too crooked, and blunt. Hence provident nature has
supplied them with the labor, and industry of another sort of small birds
called Carpinteros, or Birds called Carpinters.
Carpinters. These are no bigger then sparrows, yet notwithstanding of such
hard and piercing bills, that no iron instrument can be made more apt to
excavate any tree, though never so solid, and hard. In the holes therefore
fabricated before hand by these Birds, the Parrots get possession, and build
their Nests, as has been said.

Pigeons of all sorts, are also here, abundantly Pigeons.
provided, unto the Inhabitants, by him, that created, in the beginning, and
provided all things. For eating of them, those of this Island, observe the same
seasons, we said before, speaking of the Isle of Tortuga. Betwixt the Pigeons
of both Islands little or no difference is observable; only that these of
Hispaniola, are something fatter, and bigger, then those. Another sort of small
Birds, here are called Cabreros, or Goat-keepers. These are very like unto
others called Heronsetas, and do chiefly Cabreros.
feed upon Crabs of the Sea. In these Birds are found seven distinct bladders
of Gall, and hence their flesh is as bitter unto the taste, as Aloes. Crows or
Ravens, more troublesome unto Crows,
the Inhabitants, than useful, do here make a hideous noise, through the whole
circumference of the Island. Their ordinary food is the flesh of Wild-Dogs, or
upon the Carcasses of those Beasts, the Bucaniers kill and throw away. These
clamorous Birds do no sooner hear the report of a fowling piece, or musket, but
they gather from all sides, into whole flocks, and fill the Air and Woods, with
their unpleasant Notes. They are in nothing different from those, we see, in
Europe.

It is now high time, to speak of the French Nation, who inhabit a great part
of this Island. French Nation in these arts.
We have told, at the beginning of this Book, after what manner, they came at
first into these parts. At present therefore, we shall only describe their
manner of living, customs, and ordinary employments. The different callings or
professions, they follow, are generally, but three: Either to hunt, or plant,
or else to rove on the Sea in quality of Pirates. It is a general, and solemn
custom amongst them all, to seek out for a Comrade, or Companion, whom we may
call Partner, in their fortunes, with whom, they join the whole stock of what
they possess, toward a mutual, and reciprocal gain. This is done also by
Articles drawn, and signed on both sides; according to what has been agreed
between them. Some of these constitute their surviving companion, absolute heir
unto what is left, by the Death of the first of the two. Others, if they be
married, leave their estates unto their Wives and Children; others unto other
Relations. This being done, every one applies himself unto his calling; which
is always one of the three aforementioned.

The Hunters are again subdivided, into two several sorts. For some of these
are, only given to hunt wild-Bulls, and Cows; others only hunt Wild-Bores. The
first of these two sorts, Bucanier.
of Hunters, are called Bucaniers. These not long ago, were about the number of
six hundred upon this Island; but at present, there are not reckoned to be
above three hundred more or less. The cause has been, the great decrease of
wild Cattle, through the dominions of the French in Hispaniola; which has
appeared to be so notable, that far from getting any considerable gain, they at
present are but poor, in this exercise. When the Bucaniers go into the Woods,
to hunt for wild Bulls, and Cows, they commonly, remain there, the space of a
whole twelve month, or two years, without returning home. After the hunt is
over, and the spoil divided among them, they commonly fail unto the Isle of
Tortuga, there to provide themselves with Guns, Powder, Bullets, and small
shot, with all other necessaries, against another going out, or hunting. The
rest of their gains they spend with great liberality, giving themselves freely
unto all manner of vices, and debauchery. Among which the first is that of
drunkenness, which they exercise, for the most part, with Brandy. This they
drink as liberally, as the Spaniards do clear fountain Water. Sometimes they
buy together a Pipe of Wine; this they stave at the one end, and never cease
drinking till they have made an end of it. Thus they celebrate the Festivals of
Bacchus so long as they have any money left. Neither do they forget at the same
time the Goddess Venus; for whose beastly delights they find more women, then
they can make use of. For all the Tavern keepers and Strumpets, wait for the
coming of these lewd Bucaniers, even after the same manner, that they do at
Amsterdam, for the arrival, of the East India Fleet, at the Texel. The said
Bucaniers are hugely cruel, and tyrannical toward their Servants. Insomuch,
that commonly these had rather be Gally-slaves in the Streights, or saw
Brasilwood, in the Rasp-houses of Holland, then serve such barbarous masters.

The second sort of Hunters hunt nothing else, but Wild-bores. The flesh of
these they salt, and being thus preserved from corruption, they fell it unto
the Planters. These Hunters have also the same vicious customs of life, and are
as much addicted to all manner of debauchery, as the former. But their manner
of hunting is quite different from what is practiced in Europe. For these
Bucaniers have certain places, designed for hunting, where they live for the
space of three or four months; and sometimes, though not often, a whole year.
Such places are called Deza Boulan; and in these with only the company of five,
or six friends, who go along with them, they continue all the time
abovementioned, in mutual friendship. The first Bucainers, we spoke of many
times make an agreement with certain Planters, to furnish them with meat, all
the whole year, at a certain price. The payment hereof is often made with two
or three hundred weight of Tobacco, in the leaf. But the Planters commonly into
the bargain, furnish them likewise with a Servant; whom they send to help. Unto
the Servant they afford a sufficient quantity of all necessaries for that
purpose, especially of powder, bullets, and small shot, to hunt withal.

The Planters began to cultivate, and plant the Isle of Tortuga, in the year
1598. The first plantation was of Tobacco, the which grew to admiration; being
likewise of very good quality. Notwithstanding, by reason of the small
circumference of the Island, they were not then able to plant but little.
Especially there being many pieces of Land in that Isle, that were not fit to
produce Tobacco. They attempted likewise to make Sugar, but by reason of the
great expenses necessary to defray the charges, they could not bring it to any
effect. So that the greatest part of the Inhabitants, as we said before, betook
themselves to the exercise of hunting; and the remaining part unto that of
Piracy. At last the Hunters finding themselves scarce able to subsist, by their
first profession, began likewise to seek out lands that might be rendered fit
for culture; and in these they also planted Tobacco. The first land, that they
chose for this purpose, was Call de Sac; whose territory extends toward the
Southern part of the Island. This piece of ground they divided into several
quarters, which were called, the great Amea, Niep, Rochelois, the little Grave,
the great Grave, and the Augame. Here by little and little, they increased so
much, that at present, there are above two thousand Planters, in those fields.
At the beginning, they endured very much hardship; seeing that mean while they
were busied about their husbandry, they could not go out of the Island, to seek
provisions. This hardship was also increased by the necessity of grubbing,
cutting down, burning; and digging, whereby to extirpate the innumerable roots
of shrubs, and trees. For when the French possessed themselves of that Island,
it was wholly overgrown with Woods extremely thick; these being only inhabited
by an extraordinary number of Wild-Bores. The method they took, to clear the
ground was, to divide themselves into small companies of two or three persons
together, and these companies to separate far enough from each other, provided
with a few hatchets, and some quantity of course provision. With these things
they used to go into the Woods, and there to build Huts for their habitation,
only of a few rafters, and boughs of trees. Their first endeavor, was to root
up the shrubs, and little trees: Afterward to cut down the great ones. These
they gathered into heaps, with their branches, and then set them on Fire;
excepting the roots, which last of all, they were constrained to grub, and dig
up after the best manner, they could. The first seed, they committed to the
ground, was Beans. These in those Countries, both ripen, and dry away, in The
first fruit was Beans,
the space of six Weeks.

The second fruit, necessary unto humane life, which here they tried, was
Potatos. These come not to perfection in lesser time, then Potatos.
four, or five months. On these they most commonly make their breakfasts, every
morning. They dress them no otherwise, then boiling them in a kettle, with fair
water. Afterward they cover them with a cloth, for the space of half an hour;
by which manner of dre^ing they become as soft as boiled Chesnutts. Of the said
Potatos, also they use to make a drink, called Maiz. They cut them into small
slices, and cover them with hot water. When they are well imbibed with water,
they press them through a course cloth; and the liquor, that comes out,
although something thick, they keep in vessels, made for that purpose. Here
after settling two, or three days it begins to work; and having thrown off
its lees, is fit for drink. They use it with great delight and although the
taste hereof is somewhat sower, yet is it very pleasant, substantial, and
wholesome. The industry of this composition is owing unto the Indians, as well as
of many others, which the ingeniosity of those Barbarians caused them to
invent, both for the preservation, and pleasure of their own life.

The third fruit, the newly cultivated land afforded, Mandio^
was Mandioca, which the Indians, by another name call Cazave. This is a
certain root which they plant; but comes not to perfection till after eight,
or nine months; yea, sometimes a whole year. Being thoroughly ripe, it may be
left in the ground, the space of eleven, or twelve months, without the least
suspicion of corruption. But this time being past, the said roots must be
converted unto use, some way or another; otherwise they conceive a total
putrefaction. Of these roots of Cazave, in those Countries, is made a sort of
granulous flower or meal, extremely dry, and white, which supplieth the want of
common bread, made of wheat; whereof the fields are altogether barren in that
Island. For this purpose they have in their houses certain graters made either
of Copper or Tin, wherewith they grate the aforementioned roots, even just as
they use to do Mirick in Holland. By the by, let me tell you, Mirick is a
certain root of a very biting taste, not unlike unto strong Muststard, wherewith
they usually make sauces for some sorts of Fish. When they have grated as much
Cazave roots, as will serve turn, they put the gratings into bags, or Sacks,
made of course linen, and press out all the moisture, until they remain very
dry. Afterward they pass the gratings through a sieve, leaving them, after
sifting, very like unto sawdust. The meal being thus prepared, they lay it upon
planches of iron, which are made very hot, upon which it is converted into a
sort of Cakes very thin. These Cakes are afterward placed in the Sun, upon the
tops of houses, where they are thoroughly, and perfectly dried. And least they
should lose any part of their meal, what did not pass the sieve, is made up
into rowles, five or six inches thick. These are placed one upon another, and
left in this posture, until they begin to corrupt. Of this corrupted matter,
they make a liquor, by them called Veycou, which they find very excellent, and
certainly is not inferior unto our English beer.

Bananas are likewise another sort of fruit, of (...).
which is made another excellent liquor, which both in strength, and
pleasantness of taste, may be compared unto the best wines of Spain. But this
liquor of Bananas, as it easily causes drunkenness, in such as use it
immoderately, so does it likewise, very frequently, inflame the throat, and
produce dangerous diseases in that part. Guines agudos is also another Guines
agudos.
fruit, whereof they make drink. But this sort of liquour is not so strong, as
the precedent. Howbeit both the one, and the other, are frequently mingled with
water, thereby to quench thirst.

After they had cultivated these plantations, and filled them with all sorts of
roots, and fruts necessary for humane life, they began to plant Manner of
planting Tobacco.
Tobacco; for trading. The manner of planting this frequent commodity is, as
follows. They make certain beds of earth, in the field; no larger then of
twelve foot square. These beds they cover very well with Palmite-leaves, to the
intent, the rays of the Sun, may not touch the earth wherein Tobacco is sowed.
They water them likewise, when it does not rain, as we do our Gardens in
Europe. When it is grown about the bigness of young lettuce, they transplant it
into straight lines, which they make in other spacious fields; setting every
plant at the distance of three foot, from each other. They observe likewise,
the fittest seasons of the year for these things; which are commonly from
January, until the end of, March; these being the Months, wherein most rains do
fall in those countries. Tobacco ought to be weeded very carefully, seeing the
least root of any other Herb, coming near it, is sufficient to hinder it is
growth. When it is grown to the height of one foot and a half, or thereabouts,
they cut off the tops, thereby to hinder the stalks and leaves, from shooting
too high upwards, to the intent the whole plant may receive greater strength
from the earth, which affords unto it all it is vigor, and taste. Mean while
it ripeneth, and comes to full perfection, they prepare in their houses
certain apartments of fifty, or threescore foot in length, and thirty, or
forty, in breadth. These they fill with branches of trees, and rafters, and
upon them lay the green Tobacco to dry. When it is thoroughly dried, they strip
off the leaf from the stalks, and cause it to be rolled up by certain people,
who are employed in this work, and no other. Unto these they afford, for their
labor, the tenth part of what they make up into Rowles. This property is
peculiar Property of the Tobaccoplant.
unto Tobacco, which therefore I shall not omit, that if while it is yet in the
ground, the leaf be pulled off from the stalk, it sprouteth again, no less then
four times in one year. Here I should be glad to give an account also of the
manner of making Sugar, Indigo, and Gimbes; but seeing these things are not
planted in those parts, whereof we now speak, I have thought fit to pass them
over in silence.

The French Planters, of the Isle of Hispaniola Subjection of the planters of
Hispaniola.
have always unto this present time been subject unto the Governors of
Tortuga. Yet this obedience has not been rendered, without much reluctance, and
grudging, on their side. In the year 1664, the West- India Company of France
laid the foundations of a Colony in Tortuga; under which Colony the Planters of
Hispaniola were comprehended, and named, as subjects thereunto. This Decree
disgusted the said Planters very much; they taking it very ill to be reputed
Subjects unto a private Company of men, who had no authority to make them so.
Especially being in a Country, which belonged not unto the dominions of the
King of France. Hereupon they resolved, to work no longer, for the said
Company. And this resolution of theirs was sufficient to compel the Company to
a total dissolution of the Colony. But at last the Governor of Tortuga, who
was pretty well stock't with Planters, conceiving he could, more easily, force
them, then the West India Company, found an invention whereby to draw them unto
his obedience. He promised them he would put off their several sorts of
Merchandise, and cause such returns to be made, in lieu of their goods from
France, as they should best like. Withal, he dealt with the Merchants under
hand, that all Ships whatsoever, should come consigned unto him, and no persons
should entertain any correspondence with those Planters of Hispaniola; thinking
thereby to evite many inconveniences, and compel them through necessity, and
want of all things, to obey. By these means, he not only obtained the obedience
he designed from those people; but also that some Merchants, who had promised
to deal with them, and visit them, now and then, no longer did it.

Notwithstanding, what has been said, in the (...) arrival of the Hollanders
at Hispaniola.
year 1669, two Ships from Holland happened to arrive at the Isle of
Hispaniola, with all sorts of Merchandise, necessary in those parts. With these
Ships presently the Planters asoresaid resolved to deal, and with the Dutch
Nation for the future, thinking hereby to withdraw their obedience from the
Governor of Tortuga, and by frustrating his designs, revenge themselves of
what they had endured under his Government. Not long The Planters (...).
after the arrival of the Hollanders, the Governor of Tortuga came to visit
the Plantation of Hispaniola, in a vessel very well armed. But the Planters not
only forbid him to come a shore, but with their guns, also forced him to weigh
anchor, and retire faster then he came. Thus the Hollanders began to trade with
these people for all manner of things. But such Relations and friends as the
Governor had in Hispaniola, used all the endeavors they were capable of, to
impede the commerce. This being understood by the Planters, they sent them
word, that in case they laid not aside their artifices, for the hindrance of
the commerce, which was began with the Hollanders, they should every one
assuredly, be torn in pieces. Moreover to oblige farther the Hollanders; and
contemn the Governor, and his party, they gave greater ladings unto the two
Ships, then they could desire, with many gifts, and presents, unto the
Officers, and Mariners; whereby they sent them very well contented to their own
Country. The Hollanders came again, very punctually, according to their
promise, and found the Planters under a greater indignation then before,
against the Governor. Either because of the great satisfaction they had
already conceived of this commerce with the Dutch, or that by their means they
hoped to subsist by themselves, without any further dependence upon the French
Nation. However it was suddenly after, they set up another resolution
something more strange; then the precedent. The Tenor hereof was; that they
would go They resolve to kill the Governor.
unto the Island of Tortuga, and cut the Governor in pieces. Hereupon they
gathered together, as many Canow's as they could, and set sail from Hispaniola,
with design, not only to kill the Governor, but also to possess themselves of
the whole Island. This they thought, they could more easily perform, by reason
of all necessary assistance, which they believed would at any time, be sent
them from Holland. By which means, they were already determined in their minds,
to erect themselves into a new Commonwealth, independent of the Crown of
France. But no sooner had they began this great revolution of their little
State, when they received news of a war declared between the two Nations in
Europe. This wrought such a consternation in their minds, as caused them to
give over that enterprise, and retire without attempting any thing.

In the mean while the Governor of Tortuga The Governor or ^h aid from the
Crown of France.
sent into France, for aid toward his own security, and the reduction of those
people, unto their former obedience. This was granted him, and two men of war
were sent unto Tortuga with orders, to be at his commands. Having received such
a considerable support, he sent them very well equipped, unto the Isle of
Hispaniola. Being arrived at the place, they landed part of their forces, with
a design to force the people, to the obedience of whom they much hated in their
hearts. But the Planters seeing the arrival of those two Frigates, and not being
ignorant of their design, fled into the woods; abandoning their houses and many
of their goods, which they left behind. These were immediately rifled, and
burnt, by the French without any compassion, nor sparing the least Cottage they
found. Afterward the Governor began to relent in his anger; and let them
know, by some messengers, that in case they would return unto his obedience; he
would give ear unto some accommodation betwixt them. Hereupon the Planters, The
Planters surrender.
finding themselves destitute of all human releif, and that they could expect
no help from any side; surrendered unto the Governor upon Articles, which were
made and signed on both sides. But these were not too strictly observed; for he
commanded two of the chiefest among them to be hanged. The residue were
pardoned; and withal he gave them free leave, to trade with any Nation,
whatsoever they found most fit for their purpose. With the grant of this
liberty, they began to recultivate their Plantations, which gave them an huge
quantity of very good Tobacco; they selling yearly to the sum of twenty or
thirty, thousand rowls.

In this Country the Planters have but very few slaves. For want of which, they
themselves, and some servants they have, are constrained to do all the
drudgery. These Servants commonly oblige and bind themselves unto their
Masters, for the space of three years. But their Masters forsaking all
conscience and justice, oftentimes traffic with their bodies, as with horses
at a Fair; selling them unto other Masters, even just as they sell Negro's,
brought from the coast of Guinea. Yea, to advance this Trade, some persons
there are, who go purposely into France, (the same happens in England, and
other Countries,) Kid-nappers.
and Traveling through the Cities, Towns, and Villages, endeavor to pick up
young men, or boys, whom they transport, by making them great promises. These,
having once allured and conveyed them into the Islands, I speak of, they force
to worklike horses; the toil they impose upon them, being much harder, then
what they usually enjoin unto the Negro's, their slaves. For these they
endeavor, in some manner to preserve, as being their perpetual bondmen; but
as for their White Servants, they care not whether they live or die, seeing
they are to continue no longer then three years in their service. These
miserable kidnap't people, are frequently subject unto a certain disease, which
in those parts, is called Coma; being a total privation of all their senses.
And this distemper is judged to proceed from their hard usage, together with
the change of their native climate into that which is directly opposite.
Oftentimes it happens, that among these transported people, such are found as
are persons of good quality, and tender education. And these being of a Softer
constitution, are more suddenly surprised with the disease abovementioned, and
with several others belonging to those Countries, then those who have harder
bodies, and have been brought up to all manner of fatigue. Besides the hard
usage they endure, in their diet, apparel, and repose; many times they beat
them so cruelly, that some of them fall down dead, under the hands of their
cruel Masters. This I have often seen with my own eyes, not without great grief
and regret. Of many instances of this nature, I shall only give you the
following History, as being something more remarkable, in its circumstances.

It happened that a certain Planter of those Countries, exercised such cruelty
toward one Cruelty of a Planter toward his Servant.
of his Servants, as caused him to run away. Having absconded for some days in
the woods from the fury of his tyrannical Master, at last he was taken, and
brought back to the dominion of this wicked Pharao. No sooner had he got him
into his hands, but he commanded him to be tied unto a tree. Here he gave him
so many lashes upon his nacked back, as made his body run an entire stream of
gore blood, embruing therewith the ground about the Tree. Afterward to make
the smart of his wounds the greater, he anointed them with juice of Lemmon
mingled with salt, and pepper, being grounded small together. In this miserable
posture, he left him, tied unto the tree, for the space of four and twenty
hours. These being past, he commenced his punishment again, lashing him as
before, with so much cruelty, that the miserable wretch, under this torture,
gave up the ghost, with these dying words in his mouth: I beseech the Almighty
God, Creator of heaven and earth, that he permit the wicked Spirit, to make
thee feel as many torments, before thy death, as thou have caused me to feel
before mine. A strange thing and worthy all astonishment, and admiration!
Scarce three or four days were past, after this horrible fact, when the
Almighty Judge, who had heard the clamours of that tormented wretch, gave
permission unto the author of wickedness, suddenly to possess the body of that
barbarous and inhumane Amirricide; who tormented him unto death. Insomuch that
those tyrannical hands wherewith he had punished to death his innocent Servant,
were the tormentours of his own body. For with them after a miserable manner,
he did beat himself, and lacerate his own flesh, till he lost the very shape of
man, which nature had given him; not ceasing to howl, and cry without any rest,
either by day or night. Thus he continued to do, until he died, in that
condition of raving madness, wherein he surrendered his Ghost unto the same
spirit of darkness, who had tormented his body. Many other examples of this
kind, I could rehearse, but these not belonging unto our present discourse, I
shall therefore omit them.

The Planters that inhabit the Cariby Islands In the Cariby Islands they are
worse.
are rather worser, and more cruel unto their Servants, then the precedent. In
the Isle of Saint Christopher dwells one, whose name is Bettesa, very well
known among the Dutch Merchants, who has killed above an hundred of his
Servants, with blows and strips. The English do the same with their Servants.
And the mildest cruelty they exercise toward them, is, that when they have
served six years of their time (the years they are bound for among the English,
being seven complete) they use them with such cruel hardship, as forces them
to beg of their Masters to sell them unto others, although it be to begin
another servitude of seven years; or at least three or four. I have known many
who after this manner, served fifteen, and twenty years, before they could
obtain their freedom. Another thing The English use to sell one another for
debts.
very rigorous among that Nation, is a Law in those Islands, whereby if any man
owes unto another above five and twenty shillings, English money, in case he
cannot pay, he is liable to be sold for the space of six or eight months. I
shall not trouble the patience of my Reader, any longer with relations of this
kind, as belonging unto another subject, different from what I have proposed to
my self in this history. Whereupon I shall take my beginning, from hence, to
describe the famous actions and exploits, of the greatest Pirates, of my time,
during my residence in those parts. These I shall endeavor to relate without
the least note of passion or partiality; yea, with that candor which is
peculiar both to my mind and style. Withal certifying my Reader, I shall give
him no stories taken from others, upon trust or hearsay; but only those
enterprises, unto which I was my self an eye witness.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Origin of the most famous Pirates, of the coasts of America. A notable
exploit of Pierre le Grand.

I have told you in the precedent Chapters of this Book, after what manner I
was compelled to adventure my life, among the Pirates of America. Unto which
sort of men, I think my self obliged to give this name, for no other reason,
but that they are not maintained, or upheld in their actions, by any Sovereign
Prince. For this is certain, that the Kings of Spain, have upon several
occasions, The King of Spain complains against the Pirates.
sent, by their Ambassadors, unto the Kings of France and England, complaining
of the molestations and troubles, those Pirates did often cause upon the coasts
of America; even in the calm of Peace. Unto whose Ambassadors, it has always
been answered: That such men did not commit those acts of hostility and Piracy,
as subjects unto their Majesty's; and therefore his Catholic Majesty might
proceed against them according as he should sind fit. The King of France
besides what has been said, added unto this answer: That he had no fortress
nor Castle, upon the Isle of Hispaniola; neither did he receive one farthing of
tribute from thence. Moreover the King of England adjoined: That he had never
given any Patents, or Commissions, unto those of Jamaica, for committing any
hostility against the subjects of his Catholic Majesty. Neither did he only
give this bare answer, but also out of his Royal desire to pleasure the Court
of Spain, recalled the Governor of Iamaica, placing another in his room. All
this was not sufficient to prevent the Pirates of those parts from acting what
mischief they could to the contrary. But before I commence the relation of
their bold and insolent actions, I shall say something of their Origin, and most
common exercises; as also of the chiefest among them; and their manner of
arming, before they go out to Sea.

The first Pyrate, that was known upon the The rise of Pierre le Grand.
Island of Tortuga, was named Pierre le Grand, or Peter the Great. He was born
at the Town of Diep in Normandy. That action which rendered him famous, was his
taking of the Vice Admiral of the Spanish Flota, nigh unto the Cape of Tiburon,
upon the Western side, of the Island of Hispaniola. This bold exploit he
performed alone with one only boat; wherein he had eight and twenty persons, no
more to help him. What gave occasion unto this enterprise, was that until that
time, the Spaniards had passed, and repassed, with all security, and without
finding the least opposition, through the Channel of Bahama. So that Pierre le
Grand set out to Sea, by the Caycos, where he took this great Ship, with almost
all facility imaginable. The Spaniards they found aboard, were all set on
Shore, and the Vessel presently sent into France. The manner how this undaunted
Spirit attempted, and took, such an huge Ship, I shall give you out of the
Journal of a true, and faithful Author, in the same words, I read them. The
Boat, says he, Bold attempt of Pierre le Grand.
wherein Pierre le Grand was, with his companions had now been at Sea, a long
time, without finding any thing, according to his intent of Piracy, suitable to
make a prey. And now their provisions beginning to fail, they could keep
themselves no longer upon the Ocean; or they must of necessity starve. Being
almost reduced to despair, they espied a great Ship, belonging unto the Spanish
Flota, which had separated from the rest. This bulkey Vessel they resolved to
set upon; and take; or die in the attempt. Hereupon they made sail toward her,
with design to view her strength. And although they judged the Vessel to be far
above their forces, yet the covetousness of such a prey, and the extremity of
fortune, they were reduced unto, made them adventure upon such an enterprise.
Being now come so near that they could not escape without danger of being all
killed, the Pirates jointly made an oath unto their Captain Pierre le Grand, to
behave themselves courageously in this attempt, without the least fear or
fainting. True it is, that these Rovers had conceived an opinion, they should
find the Ship unprovided to fight; and that through this occasion they should
master her by degrees. It was in the dusk of the Evening, or soon after when
this great action was performed. But before it was begun, they gave orders unto
the Surgeon of the boat, to bore a hole in the sides thereof; to the intent
that their own Vessel sinking under them, they might be compelled to attack
more vigorously, and endeavor more hastily to run aboard the great Ship. This
was performed accordingly; and without any other arms then a Pistol in one of
their hands, and a Sword in the other, they immediately climbed up the sides of
the Ship, and ran altogether into the great Cabin; where they found the
Captain, with several of his companions, playing at Cards. Here they set a
Pistol to his breast, commanding him to deliver up the Ship unto their
obedience. The Spaniards seeing the Pirates aboard their Ship, without scarce
having seen them at Sea, cried out, 'Jesus bless us! Are these Devils, or what
are they? In the mean while, some of them took possession of the Gun room, and
seized the arms and Military affairs they found there; killing as many of the
Ship, as made any opposition. By which means the Spaniards presently were
compelled to surrender. That very day the Captain of the Ship, had been told,
by some of the Seamen, that the boat, which was in view cruzing, was a boat of
Pirates. Unto whom the Captain slighting their advice, made answer: What then?
Must I be afraid of such a pitiful thing, as that is? No, Nor though she were
a Ship as big, and as strong as mine is. As soon as Pierre le Grand had taken
this Magnisicent prize, he detained in his service, as many of the common
Seamen, as he had need of, and the rest he set on shore. This being done, he
immediately, set sail for France, carrying with him all the riches, he found in
that huge Vessel: There he continued; without ever returning unto the parts of
America.

The Planters and Hunters, of the Isle of The Inhabitants of Tortuga begin
(...) follow Piracy
Tortuga, had no sooner understood this happy event, and the rich prize those
Pirates had obtained, but they resolved to follow their example. Hereupon many
of them, left their ordinary exercises, and common imploys, and used what means
they could, to get either Boats or small Vessels, wherein to exercise Piracy.
But being not able either to purchase or build them at Tortuga, at last they
resolved to set forth in their Canows, and seek them elsewhere. With these
therefore, they cruzed at first upon Cape de Alvarez, whereabouts the Spaniards
use much to trade from one City to another, in small boats. In these they carry
Hides, Tobacco, and other commodities, unto the Port of Havana; which is the
Metropolis of that Island; and unto which the Spaniards from Europe do
frequently resort.

Here abouts it was, that those Pirates at the beginning, took a great number
of Boats, laden They take a great number of Boats.
with the aforesaid commodities. These boats they used to carry to the Isle of
Tortuga, and there sell the whole purchase unto the Ships that waited in the
Port for their return, or accidentally happened to be there. With the gains of
these prizes, they provided themselves with necessaries, wherewithal to
undertake other voyages. Some of these voyages were made toward the coast of
Campeche, and others, toward that of New-Spain. In both which places the
Spaniards at that time, did frequently exercise much commerce, and trade. Upon
those coasts, they commonly found great number of trading vessels, and many
times ships of great burden. Two of the biggest of these vessels, and two
great ships, which the Spaniards had laden with plate, in the Port of Campeche,
for to go unto Caracas, they took in less then a months time, by cruzing to and
fro. Being arrived at Tortuga with these prizes, and the whole people of the
Island, admiring their progresses, especially that within the space of two
years, the riches of the Country were much increased, the number also of
Pirates did augment so fast, that from these beginnings, The number of Pirates
increases.
within a little space of time, there were to be numbered in that small Island
and Port, above twenty ships of this sort of people. Hereupon the Spaniards not
able to bear their Robberies any longer, were constrained to put forth to Sea
two great Men of War, both for the desence of their own coasts, and to cruze
upon the enemies.

CHAP. VII.
After what manner the Pirates arm their Vessels, and how they regulate their
Voyages.

BEfore the Pirates go out to Sea, they give notice unto every one, that goes
upon How the Pirates arm their boats.
the voyage, of the day on which they ought precisely to imbarque. Intimating
also unto them, their obligation of bringing each man in particular, so many
pound of powder, and bullet, as they think necessary for that expedition. Being
all come on board, they join together in Council, concerning what p^ce they
ought first to go unto, wherein to get provisions? Especially of flesh: seeing
they scarce eat any thing else. And of this the most common Their ordinary food.
sort among them is Pork. The next food is Tortoises, which they use to salt a
little. Sometimes they resolve to rob such, or such Hog-yards; wherein the
Spaniards often have a thousand heads of Swine together. They come unto these
places in the dark of the night, and having beset the Keepers lodge, they force
him to rise, and give them as many heads as they desire; threatening withal to
kill him in case he disobeyeth their commands, or makes any noise. Yea, these
menaces are oftentimes, put in execution, without giving any quarter unto the
miserable Swine keepers, or any other person, that endeavors to hinder their
Robberies.

Having gotten provisions of flesh, sufficient for their Voyage, they return
unto their Ship. Here their allowance, twice a day, unto every one, is as much
as he can eat; without Their allowance unto every one.
either weight, or measure. Neither does the Steward of the Vessel give any
greater proportion of flesh, or any thing else unto the Captain, then unto the
meanest Mariner. The ship being well victuall'd, they call another Council, to
deliberate, toward what place they shall go, to seek their desperate fortunes?
In this Council, likewise they agree upon certain Articles, which are put in
writing, by way of bond, or obligation, the Articles they agree upon among
themselves.
which every one is bound to observe, and all of them, or the chiefest, do set
their hands unto. Herein they specify, and set down very distinctly, what sums
of Money each particular person ought to have for that voyage. The fond, of all
the payments, being the common stock, of what is gotten, by the whole
expedition; for otherwise it is the same law among these people, as with other
Pirates, no prey, no pay. In the first place, therefore they mention, how much
the Captain ought to have for his Ship. Next the salary of the Carpenter, or
Shipwright, who careen'd, mended, and rigged the Vessel. This commonly, Every
piece of eight is about 5s. Ster.
amounts unto one hundred, or an hundred and fifty pieces of eight; being
according to the agreement, more or less. Afterward for provisions and
victualling, they draw out of the same common stock, about two hundred pieces
of eight. Also a competent salary for the Chyrurgeon, and his Chest of
Medicaments, which usually is rated at two hundred, or two hundred and fifty
pieces of eight. Lastly they stipulate in writing, what recompense or reward
each one ought to have, that is either wounded, or maimed in his body,
suffering the loss of any Limb, by that voyage. Thus they order for the loss of
a right Arm, six hundred pieces of eight, or six slaves: For the loss of a left
Arm, five hundred pieces of of eight, or five slaves: For a right leg, five
hundred pieces of eight, or five slaves: For the left leg, four hundred pieces
of eight, or four slaves: For an eye, one hundred pieces of eight, or one
slave: For a Finger of the hand, the same reward, as for the eye. All which
sums of Money, as I have said before, are taken out of the capital sum, or
common stock, of what is gotten by their Piracy. For a very exact, and equal,
dividend, is made of the remainder, among them all. Yet herein they have also
regard unto qualities, and places. Thus the Captain, or chief Commander, is
allotted five, or six portions to what the ordinary Seamen have. The
Masters-Mate, only two: And other Officers proportionable to their employ.
After whom they draw equal parts from the highest, even to the lowest Mariner;
the boys not being omitted. For even these draw half a share; by reason, that
when they happen to take a better Vessel, than their own, it is the duty of the
Boys, to set fire unto the Ship or boat, wherein they are, and then retire unto
the prize, which they have taken

They observe among themselves, very good orders. For in the prizes they take,
it is severely prohibited, unto every one to usurp any They are very faithful
among themselves.
thing in particular, unto themselves. Hence all they take, is equally divided,
according to what has been said before. Yea, they make a solemn Oath to each
other, not to abscond, or conceal the least thing they find amongst the prey.
If afterward any one is found unfaithful, and that has contraven'd the said
oath, immediately he is separated, and turned out of the society. Among
themselves they are very civil and charitable to each other. Insomuch, that if
any wants what another has, with great liberality, they give it one to
another. As soon as these Pirates have taken any Prize of Ship, or Boat, the
first thing they endeavor is to set on shore the prisoners; detaining only
some few for their own help, and service. Unto whom also they give their
liberty, after the space of two or three years. They put in very frequently for
refreshment, Where they refresh themselves.
at one Island, or another. But more especially into those which lie on the
Southern side of of the Isle of Cuba. Here they careen their vessels, and in the
mean while, some of them go to hunt, others to cruze upon the Seas, in Canows,
seeking their fortune. Many times they take the poor Fishermen of Tortoises,
and carrying them to their habitations, they make them work so long, as the
Pirates are pleased.

In the several parts of America, are found Four species of Tortoises.
four distinct species of Tortoises. The first hereof, are so great, that every
one reaches to the weight of two or three thousand pound. The scales of the
species, are so soft, as that easily they may be cut with a knife. Yet these
Tortoises are not good to be eaten. The second species is of an indifferent
bigness and are green in color. The scales of these are harder then the first;
and this sort is of a very pleasant taste. The third is very little different in
size and bigness from the second; unless that it has the head something bigger.
This third species is called by the French Cavana, and is not good for food.
The fourth is named Caret, being very like unto the Tortoises we have in
Europe. This sort keeps most commonly among the Rocks, from whence they crawl
out, to seek their food, which is for the greatest part, nothing but Apples of
the Sea. Those other species, abovementioned, feed upon grass, which grows in
the water, upon the banks of the sand. These banks or shelv's for their
pleasant green, do here resemble the delightful Meadows of the United
Provinces. Their eggs are almost like unto those of the Crocodile; but without
any Their eggs.
shell, being only covered with a thin membrane, or film. They are found in
such prodigious quantities, along the sandy shores of those Countries, that
were they not frequently destroyed by birds, the Sea would infinitely abound
with Tortoises.

These Creatures have certain customary (...) they (...) them.
places, whither they repair every year, to lay their eggs. The chiefest of
these places, are the three Islands called Caymanes, situated in the altitude
of twenty degrees, and fifteen minutes, Northern latitude; being at the
distance of five and forty leagues, from the Isle of Cuba, on the Northern side
thereof.

It is a thing much deserving consideration, how the Tortoises can find out
these Islands. For the greatest part of them come from the Gulf of Honduras;
distant from thence, the whole space of one hundred and fifty leagues. Certain
it is, that many times the ships having lost their altitude, through the
darkness of the weather, have steered their course only by the noise of the
Tortoises, swimming that way, and have arrived unto those Isles. When their
season of hatching is past, they retire toward the Island of Cuba; where be
many good places that afford them food. But the mean while they are at the
Islands of Caymanes, they eat very little or nothing. When they have been about
the space of one month in the Seas of Cuba, and are grown fat, the Spaniards go
out to fish for them; they being then to be taken in such abundance, that they
provide with them sufficiently, their Cities, Towns and Villages. Their manner
of taking them is, by making with a great nail a certain kind of dart. This The
manner of fishing for Tortoises.
they fix at the end of a long stick, or pole; with which they wound the
Tortoises, as with a dagger, whenever they appear above water, to breath
fresh air.

The Inhabitants of New-Spain, and Campeche, lade their principal sorts of
Merchandises, in Ships of great bulk; and with these they exercise their
commerce to and fro. The vessels from Campeche in winter time, set out toward
Caracas, Trinity Isles, and that of Margarita. For in Summer the winds are
contrary; though very favorable to return unto Campeche; as they use to do, at
the beginning of that season. The Pirates are not ignorant of Places where
commonly the Pirates do (...).
these times; as being very dextrous in searching out all places, and
circumstances, most suitable to their designs. Hence in the places, and seasons
aforementioned, they cruze upon the said Ships, for some while. But in case
they can perform nothing, and that fortune does not favor them with some
prize, or other, after holding a Council thereupon, they commonly enterprise
things very desperate. Of these their resolutions I shall give you one instance
very remarkable. One certain Pirate, Pierre Francois.
whose name was Pierre Francois, or Peter Francis, happened to be a long time
at Sea with his boat, and six and twenty persons, waiting for the Ships that
were to return from Maracaibo toward Campeche. Not being able to find any
thing, nor get any prey, at last he resolved to direct his course to
Rancherias, which is nigh unto the River, called de la Plata, in the altitude
of twelve degrees, and a half Northern latitude. In this place lies a rich
Bank of Pearl, to the fishery whereof they yearly send from Cartagena, a Fleet
of a dozen vessels with a man of war, for their defense. Every Vessel has at
least a couple of Negros in it, who are very dextrous in diving, even to the
depth of six fathoms, within the Sea; whereabouts they find good store of
Pearls. Upon this Fleet of Vessels though small, called the Pearl Fleet; Pierre
Francois resolved to adventure; rather then go home with empty hands. They rid
at Anchor, at that time, at the mouth of the River de la Hacha; the Man of War
being scarce He goes unto the River de la Hacha, and sets upon a fleet of
Pearl-fishers.
half a league distant, from the small Ships; and the wind very calm. Having
espied them in this posture, he presently pulled down his sails, and rowed
along the coast, dissembling to be a Spanish Vessel, that came from Maracaibo,
and only passed that way. But no sooner was he come unto the Pearl bank, when
suddenly he assaulted the Vice Admiral of the said Fleet, mounted with eight
Guns, and threescore men well armed, commanding them to surrender. But the
Spaniards running to their arms, did to what they could to defend themselves,
fighting for some while; till at last He takes the Vice Admiral.
they were constrained to submit unto the Pirate. Being thus possessed of the
Vice Admiral, he resolved next to adventure with some other stratagem, upon the
Man of War; thinking thereby to get strength sufficient, to master the rest of
the Fleet. With this intent he presently And designeth against the man of War.
sunk his own Boat in the River, and putting forth the Spanish Colors, weighed
Anchor, with a little wind, which then began to stir; having with promises, and
menaces, compelled most of the Spaniards, to assist him in his design. But no
sooner did the Man of War perceive one of his Fleet to set sail, when he did so
too; fearing least, the Mariners should have any design to run away, with the
Vessel, and riches they had on board. This caused the Pirates, immediately to
give over that dangerous enterprise, as thinking themselves unable to encounter
force to force, with the said Man of War, that now came against them. Hereupon,
they attempted to get out of the River, and gain the open Seas, with the riches
they had taken; by making as much sail, as possibly the vessel would bear. This
being perceived, by the Man of War, he presently gave them chase. But the
Pirates, having laid on too much sail, and a gust of wind suddenly arising,
had their Mainmast They lose their mainmast.
blown down by the board, which disabled them from prosecuting their escape.

This unhappy event much encouraged those that were in the Man of War; they
advancing, and gaining upon the Pirates every moment. By which means at last
they were overtaken. But these not withstanding, finding themselves still with
two and twenty persons found, the rest being either killed or wounded, resolved
to defend themselves so long as it were possible. This they performed very
courageously for some while, until being BARTOLOMEW PORTUGUES. Part. 1. Page.
95.
thereunto forced by the Man of War, they were compelled to surrender. Yet was
not They surrender unto the man of War.
this done without Articles, which the Spaniards were glad to allow them, as
follows. That they should not use them as slaves, forcing them to carry or
bring stones, or employing Upon Articles.
them in other labors, for three or four years, as they commonly employ their
Negros. But that they should set them on shore, upon free land; without doing
them any harm in their bodies. Upon these Articles they delivered themselves,
with all that they had taken; which was worth only in Pearls, to the value of
above one hundred thousand pieces of eight, besides the vessel, provisions
goods, and other things. All which being pu^ together, would have made unto
this Pirate, one of the greatest prizes, he could desire. Which he had
certainly obtained, had it not been for the loss of his Mainmast, as was said
before.

Another bold attempt, not unlike unto that which I have related, nor less
remarkable; Bartholomew Portugues.
I shall also give you at present. A certain Pirate, born in Portugal, and from
the name of his Country, called Bartholomew Portugues, was cruzing in his Boat
from Iamaica (wherein he had only thirty men, and four small guns) upon the
Cape de Corriente, in the Island of Cuba. In this place he met with a great
ship, that came from Maracaibo, and Cartagena, bound for the Havana, well
provided, with twenty great guns, and threescore and ten Men, between
passengers and Mariners. This ship he presently assaulted, but found as
strongly defended by them that were on board. The The Pirate escaped the first
encounter, resolving to attacque her more vigorously then before, seeing he had
sustained no great damage hitherto. This resolution of his, he boldly
performed, renewing his assaults so often, till that after a long and dangerous
fight, he became Master of the great Vessel. The Portugues He takes a great
Spanish ship.
lost only ten men, and had four wounded, so that he had still remaining twenty
fighting men, whereas the Spaniards had double the same number. Having
possessed themselves of such a Ship, and the wind being contrary to return unto
Iamaica, they resolved to steer their course toward the Cape of Saint Antony,
(which lies on the Western side of the Isle of Cuba) there to repair
themselves, and take in fresh water, of which they had great necessity, at that
time.

Being now very near unto the Cape abovementioned, they unexpectedly met with
three great Ships, that were coming from New-Spain, and bound for the Havana.
By (...) ta^n and ^oseth his li^ty.
these as not being able to escape, they were easily retaken both Ship, and
Pirates. Thus they were all made prisoners, through the sudden change of
fortune, and found themselves poor, oppressed, and stripped of all the riches
they had purchased so little before. The Cargo of this Ship consisted in one
hundred, and twenty thousand weight of Cacao-nuts, the chiefest ingredient of
that rich liquor called Chocolate, and threescore and ten thousand pieces of
eight. Two days after this misfortune, there happened to arise an huge and
dangerous tempest, which largely separated the the Ships from one another. The
great Vessel, wherein the Pirates were, arrived at Campeche; where many
considerable Merchants came to salute, and welcome the Captain thereof. These
presently knew the Portugues Pirate, as being him who had committed innumerable
excessive insolences upon those coasts, not only infinite Murders and
Robberies, He is brought unto Camp^che.
but also lamentable incendiums, which those of Campeche, still preserved very
fresh in their memory.

Hereupon the next day after their arrival, the Magistrates of the City sent
several of their Officers, to demand and take into custody, the criminal
prisoners, from on board the ship, with intent to punish them, according to
their deserts. Yet fearing least the Captain of those Pirates should escape out
of their hands on shore (as he had formerly done, being once their prisoner in
the City before,) they judged it more convenient to leave him safely guarded on
board the Ship, for that present. In the mean while they caused a (...)
condemned to the Gallows.
Gibbet to be erected, whereupon to hang him the very next day, without any
other form of process, then to lead him from the Ship, unto the place of
punishment. The rumor of this future tragedy, was presently brought unto
Bartholomew Portugues his ears, whereby he sought all the means, he could to
escape that night. With this design he took two earthen Jars, wherein the
Spaniards usually carry wine from Spain unto the West Indies, and stopped them
very well; intending to use them for swimming, as those, who are unskilful in
that art, do calabacas, a sort of pumkins in Spain; and in other places empty
bladders. Having made this necessary preparation, he waited for the night, when
all should be at sleep; even the Centry that guarded him. But He kills his
Centry, and escapes.
seeing he could not escape his vigilance, he secretly purchased a knife, and
with the same gave him such a mortal stab, as suddenly deprived him of life,
and the possibility of making any noise. At that instant, he committed himself
to Sea, with those two earthen jarrs aforementioned, and by their help and
support, though never having learned to swim, he reached the shore. Being
arrived upon land, without any delay, he took his refuge in the Woods, where he
hid himself for three days, without daring to appear, nor eating any other food
then wild herbs.

Those of the City failed not the next day, to make a diligent search for him
in the woods, They seek after him in vain.
where they concluded him to be. This strict enquiry Portugues had the
convenience to espy from the hallow of a Tree, wherein he lay absconded. Hence
perceiving them to return without finding, what they sought for, he adventured
to sally forth toward the coasts, called del Golfo triste, forty leagues
distant from the City of Campeche. Hither he arrived within a fortnight after
his escape from He goes to the coasts of Golfo ^iste.
the Ship. In which space of time, as also afterward, he endured extreme
hunger, thirst, and fears, of falling again into the hands of the Spaniards.
For during all this journey he had no other provision with him, then a small
Calabaca, with a little water: Neither did he eat any thing else, then a few
shell fish, which he found among the Rocks, nigh the Scashore. Besides that, he
was compelled to pass as yet some Rivers, not knowing well to swim. Being in
this distress, he found an old board, which the waves had thrown upon the
shore, wherein did stick a few great nails. These he took and with no small
labor, whetted against a stone, until that he had made them capable of cutting
like unto knives, tho very imperfectly. With these, and no better instruments,
he cut down some branches of Trees, the which with twigs, and Osiers he joined
together, and made as well as he could, a boat, or rather a wafte, wherewith he
wafted over the Rivers. Thus he arrived finally at the Cape of Golfo triste, as
was said before; where he happened to find a certain Vessel of Pirates, who
were great Comrades of his own, and were lately come from Iamaica.

Unto these Pirates, he instantly related all his adversities, and misfortunes.
And withal He gets (...) (...) bo^t.
demanded of them, they would fit him with a boat, and twenty men. With which
company alone, he promised to return unto Campeche, and assault the Ship, that
was in the River, by which he had been taken, and escaped fourteen days before.
They easily granted his request, and equipped him a boat, with the said number
of Men. With this small company he set forth toward the execution of his
design; which he bravely performed eight days after he separated from his
Comrades at the Cape of Golfo triste. For being arrived at the River of
Campeche, with an undaunted courage, and without any rumor of noise, he
assaulted the Ship aforementioned. Those that were on board, were persuaded,
this was a boat from land, that came to bring contra banda goods; and hereupon
were not in any posture of defense. Thus the Pirates laying hold on this
occasion, assaulted them without any fear of ill success, and in short And
retaketh the Ship by which he was taken.
space of time, compelled the Spaniards to surrender.

Being now Masters of the Ship, they immediately weighed Anchor, and set sail,
determining to fly from the Port, least they should be pursued by other
Vessels. This they did with extremity of joy, seeing themselves possessours of
such a brave Ship. Especially Portugues, their Captain, who now by a second
turn of fortunes wheel, was become rich, and powerful again, who had been so
lately in that same Vessel, a poor miserable prisoner, and condemned to the
Gallows. With this great purchase he designed in his mind greater things; which
he might well hope to obtain, seeing he had found in the Vessel great quantity
of rich Merchandise, still remaining on board, although the plate had been
transported into the City. Thus he continued his Voyage toward Iamaica for
some days. But coming nigh unto the Isle of Pinos on the South Side of the
Island of He loses the Ship in a storm.
Cuba, fortune suddenly turned her back unto him once more, never to show him
her countenance again. For a horrible storm arising at Sea occasioned the Ship
to split against the Rocks or Banks called Iardines. Insomuch that the Vessel
was totally lost, and Portugues, with his Companions, escaped in a Canow. After
this manner he arrived at Iamaica, And escapes in a Canow.
where he remained no long time. Being only there, till he could prepare
himself to seek his fortune anew, which from that time proved always adverse
unto him.

Nothing less rare and admirable than the Roche Brasiliano.
precedent, are the Actions of another Pirate; who at present lives at
Iamaica, and who has, on sundry occasions, enterprized and atcheived, things
very strange. The place of his birth was the City of Groninghen, in the United
Provinces; but his own proper Name is not known: The Pirates, his Companions,
having only given him that of Roche Brasiliano, by reason of his long residence
in the Country of Brasil. From whence he was forced to fly, when the
Portuguises retook those Countries, from the West India Company of Amsterdam;
several Nations then inhabiting at Brasil (as English, French, Dutch, and
others) being constrained to seek new Fortunes.

This Fellow at that conjuncture of time retired unto Iamaica. Where being at a
stand how to get a livelihood, he entered himself into the Society of Pirates.
Under these, he served in quality of a private Mariner for some while. In which
degree he behaved ROCK BRASILIANO Part. 1. Page. 102.
himself so well, as made him both beloved and respected by all; as one that
deserved to be their Commander for the future. One day certain Mariners
happened to engage in a dissension with their Captain; the effect whereof Is
chosen Captain.
was that they left the Boat. Brasiliano followed the rest, and by these was
chosen for their Conductor and Leader; who also fitted him out a Boat, or small
Vessel, wherein he received the Title of Captain.

Few days were past, from his being chosen He takes a great Ship.
Captain, when he took a great Ship, that was coming from New-Spain. On board
of which he found great quantity of plate; and both one and the other, he
carried unto Iamaica. This action gave him renovvn, and caused him to be both
esteemed and feared; every one apprehending him much abroad. Howbeit, in his
domestic, and private affairs, he had no good behavior, nor government, over
himself; for in these he would oftentimes show himself either brutish, or
foolish. Many times being in drink, he would run up and down the streets,
beating or wounding whom he met; no person daring to oppose him, or make any
resistance.

Unto the Spaniards he always showed himself very barbarous, and cruel; only
out of an inveterate hatred, he had against that Nation. Of these he commanded
several to be roasted alive upon wooden spits; for no other crime, than that
they would not show him the places, or Hog-yards, where he might steal He ^seth
his Ship, and es^peth in a (...).
Swine. After many of these cruelties, it happened as he was cruzing upon the
coasts of Campeche, that a dismal tempest suddenly surprised him. This proved
to be so violent, that at last his Ship was wrackt, upon the coasts; the
Mariners only escaping with their Muskets, and some few bullets, and powder,
which were the only things they could save, of all that was in the Vessel. The
place where the Ship was lost, was precisely between Campeche, and the Golfo
triste. Here they got on shore in a Canow, and marching along the coast, with
all the speed they could, they directed their course toward Golfo triste; as
being a place where the Pirates commonly use to repair, and refresh themselves.
Being upon this Journey, and all very hungry, and thirsty, as is usual in desert
places, they were pursued Is pursued by a T^p of Spaniards.
by some Spaniards; being a whole troop of an hundred horsemen. Brasiliano no
sooner perceived this imminent danger, then he animated his companions, telling
them: We had better fellow Soldiers, choose to die under our arms sighting, as
it becomes men of courage, then surrender unto the Spaniards; who in case they
overcome us, will take away our lives with cruel torments. The Pirates were no
more then thirty in number; who notwithstanding, seeing their brave Commander
oppose himself with courage, unto the enemy, resolved to do the like. Hereupon
they faced the troop of Spaniards, and discharged their Muskets against them;
with such dexterity, as they almost killed one horseman with every shot. The
fight continued for the space of an hour, till at last the Spaniards were put
to flight, by the Pirates. They stripped the dead, and took from them Puts
(...) to flight.
what they thought most convenient for their use. But such as were not already
dead; they helped to quit the miseries of life, with the ends of their Muskets.

Having vanquished the Enemy, they all mounted on several horses, they found in
the field, and continued the Journey aforementioned; Brasiliano having lost but
two of his Companions in this bloody fight, and had two other wounded. As they
prosecuted their way, before they came unto the Port, they espied a boat from
Campeche, well manned, that rid at anchor, protecting a small number of Canows,
that were lading wood. Hereupon, they sent a detachment of six of their Men, to
watch them; and these the next morning by a wild possessed themselves of the
Canows. Having given notice unto their Companions, they went all on board, and
with no great difficulty, took also the Boat, or little Man of War, their
Convoy. Thus having rendered themselves Masters of the whole Fleet, they wanted
only provisions, which they found but very small They take a Fleet of Canows
and a (...) of War.
aboard those Vessels. But this defect was supplied by the horses, which they
instantly killed, and salted; with Salt, which, by good fortune, the
Wood-cutters had brought with them. Upon which victuals they made shift to keep
themselves, until such time, as they could purchase better.

These very same Pirates, I mean Brasiliano, and his companions, took also
another Ship, They take a Ship from New-Spain.
that was going from New-Spain unto Maracaibo; laden with diverse sorts of
Merchandise, and a very considerable number of pieces of eight, which were
designed to buy Cacao-nuts, for their lading home. All these prizes they
carried into Iamaica, where they safely arrived, and according to their custom,
wasted in a few days, in Taverns and Stews, all they had gotten, by giving
themselves to all manner of debauchery, with Strumpets, and Pirates will spend
2000, o^ 3000 (...) of eight in (...) night.
Wine. Such of these Pirates are found who will spend two or three thousand
pieces of eight, in one night, not leaving themselves peradventure a good shirt
to wear, on their backs, in the morning. Thus upon a certain time, I saw one of
them give unto a common Strumpet, five hundred pieces of eight, only that he
might see her naked. My own Master would buy, in like occasions, a whole pipe
of wine, and placing it in the street, would force every one, that passed by to
drink with him; threatening also to Pistol them, in case they would not do it.
At other times he would do the same, with Barrels of Ale, or Beer. And very
often, with both his hands, he would throw these liquors about the streets, and
wet the clothes of such as walked by, without regarding, whether he spoiled
their Apparel, or not, were they Men, or Women.

Among themselves, and to each other, these Pirates are extremely liberal, and
free. If any one of them has lost all his goods, which often happens in
their manner of life, they freely give him, and make him partaker of what they
have. In Taverns, and Alehouses, they always have great credit; but in such
houses at Iamaica, they ought not to run very deep in debt, seeing the
inhabitants of that Island, do easily sell one another for debt. Thus it
happened unto my Patron, or Master, to be sold for a debt of a Tavern, wherein
he had spent the greatest part of his money. This Man had within the space of
three months before, three thousand pieces of eight in ready cash; all which he
wasted in that short space of time, and became so poor, as I have told you.

But now to return unto our discourse, I Brasiliano goes to Sea.
must let my Reader know, that Brasiliano, after having spent all that he had
robbed, was constrained to go to Sea again, to seek his fortune once more. Thus
he set forth toward the coast of Campeche, his common place of rendezvous.
Fifteen days after his arrival there, he put himself into a Canow, with intent
to espy the Port of that City, and see if he could rob any Spanish Vessel. But
his fortune was so bad, that both he and all his Men, were taken prisoners, and
carried unto the presence of the Governor. This Man immediately, And is made
prisoner with all his men.
cast them into a dungeon, with full intention to hang them every person. And
doubtless he had performed his intent, were it not for a Stratagem, that
Brasiliano used, which proved sufficient to save their lives. He writ therefore
a Letter unto the Governor, making him believe it came from other Pirates,
that were abroad, at Sea; and withal telling him: He should have a care, how he
used those persons he had in his custody. For in case he caused them any harm,
they did Swear unto him, they would never give quarter, unto any person of the
Spanish Nation, that should fall into their hands.

Because these Pirates had been many times at Campeche, and in many other Towns
and Villages, of the West Indies, belonging to the Spanish dominions, the
Governor began to fear, what mischief they might cause by the means of their
companions abroad, in case he should punish them. Hereupon he released them out
of prison, exacting only an Oath of them, Is set at liberty, and sent into
Spain.
before hand, that they would leave their exercise of Piracy for ever. And
withal he sent them as common Mariners, or Passengers, in the Galoon's, to
Spain. They got in this Voyage all together five hundred pieces of eight;
whereby they tarried not long there, after their arrival. But providing
themselves with some few necessaries, they all returned unto Iamaica, within a
little while. From whence they set forth again to Sea, committing greater
Robberies and cruelties, then ever they had done before. But more especially,
abusing the poor Spaniards, that happened to fall into their hands, with all
sorts of cruelty imaginable.

The Spaniards perceiving they could gain nothing upon this sort of people, nor
diminish their number, which rather increased daily, resolved to diminish the
number of their Ships, wherein they exercised trading to and fro. But neither
this resolution was of any effect, or did them any good service. For the
Pirates finding not so many Ships at Sea, as before, began The Pirates begin to
make land invasions.
to gather into greater Companies, and land upon the Spanish Dominions, ruining
whole Cities, Towns, and Villages; and withal pillaging, burning, and carrying
away, as much as they could possible.

The first Pirate, who gave a beginning unto these invasions by Land, was named
Lewis Scot.
Lewis Scot, who Sacked and Pillaged the City of Campeche. He almost ruined the
Town, Robbing and destroying all he could; and after he had put it to the
ransom of an excessive sum of money, he left it. After Scot, came another
named Mansvelt.
Mansvelt, who enterprised to set footing in Granada, and penetrate with his
Piracies, even unto the South Sea. Both which things he effected, till that at
last for want of provision, he was constrained to go back. He assaulted Isle of
Saint Catherine, which was the first land he took, and upon it some few
prisoners. These showed him the way toward Cartagena, which is a principal
City, situate in the Kingdom of Nueva Granada. But the bold attempts and
actions, of John Davis, John Davis.
born at Iamaica, ought not to be forgotten in this History, as being some of
the most remarkable thereof. Especially his rare prudence and valor, wherewith
he behaved himself in the aforementioned Kingdom of Granada. This Pirate having
cruzed a long time in the Gulf of Pocatauro, upon the Ships, that were expected
from Cartagena, bound for Nicaragua, and not being able to meet any of the said
Ships, resolved at last, to land in Nicaragua, leaving his Ship concealed about
the coast.

This design he presently put in execution. He landeth in Nicaragua.
For taking fourscore men, out of fourscore and ten, which he had in all, (the
rest being left to keep the Ship) he divided them equally into three Canows.
His intent was to Rob the Churches, and rifle the Houses of the chiefest
Citizens of the aforesaid Town of Nicaragua. Thus in the obscurity of the
night, they mounted the River, which leads to that City, Rowing with Oars in
their Canows. By day they concealed themselves, and boats, under the branches
of Trees, that were upon the banks. These grow very thick, and intricate, along
the sides of the Rivers, in those Countries, as also along the Sea coast. Under
which likewise those, who remained behind, absconded their Vessel, least they
should be seen, either by Fishermen, or Indians. After this manner, they
arrived at the City the third night, where the Centry, who kept the post of the
River, thought them to be Fishermen that had been fishing in the Lake. And as
the greatest part of the Pirates are skilful in the Spanish Tongue, so he never
doubted thereof, as soon as he heard them speak. They had in their Company an
Indian, who was run away from his Master, because he would make him a slave,
after having served him a long time. This Indian They kill the Centry of the
City.
went the first on shore, and rushing at the Centry, he instantly killed him.
Being animated with this success, they entered into the City, and went directly
unto three or four Houses of the chiefest And enter it.
Citizens, where they knocked with dissimulation. These beleiving them to be
friends, opened the doors, and the Pirates suddenly possessing themselves of
the Houses, robbed all the money and plate, they could find. Neither did they
spare the They spare not the Churches.
Churches, and most sacred things, all which were pillaged and profaned,
without any respect, or veneration.

In the mean while great cries and lamentation were heard about the Town, of
some, who had escaped their hands; by which means the whole City was brought
into an uproar, and alarm. From hence the whole number of Citizens rallied
together, intending to put themselves in defense. This being perceived by the
Pirates, they, instantly, put themselves to flight, They get away with many
riches.
carrying with them all that they had robbed, and likewise some Prisoners.
These they led away; to the intent, that if any of them should happen to be
taken by the Spaniards, they might make use of them, for ransom. Thus they got
unto their Ship, and with all speed imaginable put out to Sea; forcing the
Prisoners, before they would let them go, to procure them as much flesh, as
they thought necessary, for their Voyage to Iamaica. But no sooner had they
weighed Anchor, when they saw on shore a Troop Are pursued by 500. Spaniards.
of about five hundred Spaniards, all being very well armed, at the Seaside.
Against these, they let fly several Guns, wherewith they forced them to quit
the sands, and retire toward home, with no small regret, But all in ^in.
to see those Pirates carry away so much plate of their Churches, and Houses,
tho distant at least forty leagues from the Sea.

These Pirates Robbed in this occasion, above four thousand pieces of eight in
ready money. Besides great quantity of plate uncoyned, and many Jewels. All
which was computed to be worth the sum of fifty They brought away 50000. pieces
of eight.
thousand pieces of eight, or more. With this great purchase, they arrived a
Iamaica, soon after the exploit. But as this sort of people, are never Masters
of their money, but a very little while, so were they soon constrained to seek
more, by the same means, they had used before. This adventure, caused Captain
John Davis, presently John Davis is made Admiral of the Pirates.
after his return, to be chosen Admiral of seven or eight Boats of Pirates; he
being now esteemed by common consent, an able Conductor for such enterprises as
these were. He began the exercise of this new Command by directing his Fleet
toward the coasts of the North of Cuba, there to wait for the Fleet, which was
to pass from New-Spain. But, not being able to find any thing by this design,
they determined to go toward the coasts of Florida. Being arrived there, they
landed part He ransacketh the City of Saint Augustine.
of their Men, and Sacked a small City, named Saint Augustine of Florida. The
Castle of which place, had a Garrison of two hundred Men. The which
notwithstanding, could not prevent the pillage of the City; they effecting it
without receiving the least damage from either Soldiers, or Townsmen.

Hitherto we have spoken in the first part of this Book, of the constitution of
the Islands of Hispaniola, and Tortuga, their proprieties, and Inhabitants, as
also of the fruits to be found in those Countries. In the second part of this
Work, we shall bend our discourse to describe the actions of two of the most
famous Pirates, who committed many horrible crimes, and inhuman cruelties,
against the Spanish Nation.

The End of the First Part.
FRANCIS LOLONOIS. Part. 2. Page. 1.
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART II.
CHAP. I.
Origin of Francis Lolonois, and beginning of his Robberies.

FRancis Lolonois was Native of that Territory Francis Lolonois.
in France, which is called Les Sables d' Olone. or the Sands of Olone. In his
Youth he was transported unto the Caribby Islands, in quality of a Servant or
Slave, according to the custom of France and other Countries; of which we have
already spoken in the first part of this Book. Being out of his time, when he
had obtained his Freedom, he came unto the Isle of Hispaniola. Here he placed
himself for some while among the Hunters, before he began his Robberies against
the Spaniards; whereof I shall make mention at present, until his unfortunate
Death.

At first he made two or three Voyages in quality He serves the Pirates.
of a common Mariner; wherein he behaved himself so courageously, as to deserve
the favor and esteem of the Governor of Tortuga, who was then Monsieur de la
Place. Insomuch, that this Gentleman gave him a Ship, and made him Captain
thereof, to the intent he might seek Is soon advanced to be (...) Captain.
his fortune. This Dame showed herself very favorable unto him at the
beginning: for in a short while he purchased great Riches. But withal, his
Cruelties against the Spaniards were such, as that the very fame of them made
him known through the whole Indies. For which reason the Spaniards, in his
time, whenever they were attacked by Sea, would choose rather to die or sink
fighting, than surrender; as knowing they should have no Mercy nor Quarter at
his hands. But as Fortune is seldom constant, so after some time, she turned
her back unto him. The beginning of whose Disasters was, that in a huge Storm
he lost his Ship upon the Coasts of Campeche. The men were all saved; but
coming Loses his Ship, and is wounded.
upon dry Land, the Spaniards pursued them, and killed the greatest part,
wounding also Lolonois their Captain. Not knowing how to escape, he thought to
save his life by a Stratagem. Hereupon he took several handfuls of Sand and
Escapes by a Stratagem.
mingled them with the Blood of his own Wounds, with which he besmeared his
face and other parts of his body. Then hiding himself dexterously among the
Dead, he continued there till the Spaniards had quitted the Field.

After they were gone, he retired into the He retireth unto the Woods.
Woods, and bound up his Wounds as well as he could. These being by the help of
Nature pretty well healed, he took his way to the City of Campeche, having
perfectly disguised himself in Spanish Habit. Here he spoke with certain
Slaves, unto whom he promised their liberty, in case they would obey him, and
trust in his Conduct. They accepted his Promises, and stealing one night a
Canow from one of their Masters, they went to Sea with the Pyrat. The Spaniards
in the mean while had made Prisoners several of his Companions, whom they kept
in close Dungeons in the City, while Lolonois went about the Town and saw all
that passed. These were often asked by the Spaniards, What is become of your
Captain? Unto whom they constantly answered, He was dead. With which news the
Spaniards were hugely gladded, and made great The Spaniards believe him dead.
demonstrations of joy, kindling Bonfires, and, as them that knew nothing to
the contrary, giving thanks to God Almighty for their deliverance from such a
cruel Pyrat. Lolonois having seen these Joys for his death, made haste to
escape with the Slaves abovementioned, and came safe to Tortuga, the common
place of Refuge of all sort of Wickedness, and the Seminary, as it were, of all
manner of Pirates and Thieves. Though now his Fortune was but low, yet he failed
not of means to get another Ship; which with Craft He goes to Sea again.
and Subtilty he obtained, and in it one and twenty persons. Being well
provided with Arms and other necessaries, he set forth toward the Isle of
Cuba, on the South Side whereof lies a small Village which is called de los
Cayos. The Inhabitants of this Town drive a great Trade in Tobacco, Sugar, and
Hides; and all in Boats, as not being able to make use of Ships, by reason of
the little depth of that Sea.

Lolonois was greatly persuaded he should get here some considerable Prey; but
by the good His Enterprise at the Village de los Cayos.
fortune of some Fishermen who saw him, and the mercy of the Almighty, they
escaped his tyrannical hands. For the Inhabitants of the Town of Cayos
dispatched immediately a Messenger over Land unto the Havana, complaining unto
the Governor that Lolonois was come to destroy them, with two Canows. The
Governor could very hardly be persuaded unto the truth of this story, seeing
he had received Letters from Campeche that he was dead. Notwithstanding, at the
importunity of the Petitioners he sent a Ship to their relief, with ten Guns,
and fourscore and ten Persons well armed; giving them withal this express
Command: They should not return unto his presence, without having totally
destroyed those Pirates. Unto this effect he gave them also a Negro, who might
serve them for a Hangman; his Orders being such, as They should immediately
hang every one of the said Pirates, excepting Lolonois their Captain, whom they
should bring alive unto the Havana. This Ship arrived at Cayos; of whose coming
the Pirates were advertised beforehand; and instead of flying, went to seek the
said Vessel in the River Estera, where she rid at Anchor. The Pirates
apprehended some Fishermen, and forced them, by night, to show the entry of the
Port, hoping soon to obtain a greater Vessel than their two Canows, and thereby
to mend their Fortune. They arrived, after two of the clock in the morning,
very nigh unto the Ship. And the Watch on board the Ship asking them From
whence they came, and if they had seen any Pirates abroad? They caused one of
the Prisoners to answer, They had seen no Pirates, nor any thing else. Which
answer brought them into persuasion that they were fled away, having heard of
their coming.

But they experimented very soon the contrary: For about break of day the
Pirates began to assault the Vessel on both sides with their two Canows. This
Attaque they performed with such vigor, that although the Spaniards behaved
themselves as they ought, and made as good defense as they could, shooting
against them likewise some great Guns; yet they were forced to surrender, after
being beaten by the Pirates, with Swords in hands, down under the Hatches. From
hence Lolonois commanded them to be brought up one by one, and in this order
caused their heads to be struck off. Among the rest, came His Cruelty.
up the Negro, designed to be the Pirates Executioner by the Governor of Havana.
This Fellow implored mercy at his hands very dolefully, desiring not to be
killed, and telling Lolonois he was constituted Hangman of that Ship; and that
in case he would spare him, he would tell him faithfully all that he should
desire to know. Lolonois made him confess as many things as he thought fit to
ask him; and having done, commanded him to be murdered with the rest. Thus he
cruelly and barbarously put them all to death, reserving of the whole number
only one alive; whom he sent back unto the Governor of Havana, with this
Message given him in writing: I shall never henceforward give Quarter unto any
Spaniard whatsoever: And I have great hopes I shall execute on your own person
the very same punishment I have done upon them you sent against me. Thus I have
retaliated the kindness you designed unto me and my Companions. The Governor
was much troubled to understand these sad and, withal, insolent News; which
occasioned him to swear, in the presence of many, he would never grant Quarter
unto any Pirat that should fall into his hands. But the Citizens of the Havana
desired him not to persist in the execution of that rash and rigorous Oath,
Seeing the Pirates would certainly take occasion from thence to do the same; and
they had an hundred times more opportunity of Revenge than he: That being
necessitated to get their Livelihood by Fishery, they should hereafter always
be in danger of losing their lives. By these Reasons he was persuaded to bridle
his Anger, and remit the severity of his Oath aforementioned.

Now Lolonois had got himself a good Ship, but withal very few Provisions and
People in it. Hereupon, to purchase both the one and the other, he resolved to
use his customary means of cruzing from one Port to another. Thus he did for
some while, till at last not being able to purchase any thing, He takes a Ship
of Maracaibo.
he determined to go unto the Port of Maracaibo. Here he took, by surprise, a
Ship that was laden with Plate and other Merchandise, being outward bound to
buy Cacao-nuts. With these Prizes he returned unto Tortuga; where he was
received with no small Joy by the Inhabitants, they congratulating his happy
Success, and their own private Interest. He continued not long there, but
pitched upon new designs, of equipping a whole Fleet sufficient to transport
five hundred men, with all other necessaries. With these Preparations he
resolved to go unto the Spanish Dominions, and pillage both Cities, Towns, and
Villages; and finally, take Maracaibo it self. For this purpose, he knew the
Island of Tortuga would afford him many resolute and courageous men, very fit
for such Enterprises. Besides, that he had in his service several Prisoners who
exactly were acquainted with the ways and places he designed upon.

CHAP. II.
Lolonois equippeth a Fleet, to land upon the Spanish ^slands of America, with
intent to rob, sack, and burn whatever he met.

OF this his design Lolonois gave notice unto all the Pirates, who at that
conjuncture of time were either at home or abroad. By which means he got
together, in a little while, above 400 men. Besides which, there was at that
present in the Isle of Tortuga another Pirat, whose name was Michael de Basco.
This man by his Piracy had Lolonois (...) (...) Pirat unto him.
gotten Riches sufficient to live at ease, and go no more abroad to Sea; having
withal the Office of Major of the Island. Yet seeing the great Preparations
that Lolonois made for this Expedition, he entered into a straight League of
Friendship with him, and proffered unto him, that in case he would make him his
chief Captain by Land (seeing he knew the Country very well, and all its
Avenues) he would take part in his Fortunes, and go along with him. They both
agreed upon Articles, with great joy of Lolonois, as knowing that Basco had
performed great Actions in Europe, and had gained the repute of a good
Soldier. He gave him therefore the Command he desired, and the Conduct of all
his People by Land. Thus they all embarked in eight Vessels; that of Lolonois
being the greatest, as having ten Guns of indifferent carriage.

All things being in a readiness, and the whole They set sail and come to
Bayala.
Company on board, they set sail together about the end of April, having a
considerable number of men for those parts, that is in all, six hundred and
threescore persons. They directed their course toward that part which is
called Bayala, situated on the North-side of the Island of Hispaniola. Here
they also took into their company a certain number of French Hunters, who
voluntarily offered themselves to go along with them. And here likewise they
provided themselves with Victuals and other Necessaries for that Voyage.

From hence they set sail again the last day of They sail again, and take a
Spanish Ship.
July, and steered directly toward the Eastern Cape of the Isle, called Punta
de Espada. Hereabouts they suddenly espied a Ship that was coming from Puerto
Rico, and bound for New Spain, being laden with Cacao-nuts. Lolonois, the
Admital, presently commanded the rest of the Fleet they should wait for him
nigh unto the Isle of Savona, situate on the Eastern side of Cape Punta de
Espada, forasmuch as he alone intended to go and take the said Vessel. The
Spaniards, although they had been in sight now full two hours, and knew them to
be Pirates, yet would they not fly, but rather prepared to fight; as being well
armed, and provided of all things necessary thereunto. Thus the Combat began
between Lolonois and the Spanish Vessel, which lasted three hours; and these
being past, they surrendered unto him. This Ship was mounted with sixteen Guns,
and had fifty fighting men on board. They found in her One hundred and twenty
thousand weight of Cacao, forty thousand Pieces of Eight, and Lading of the
Ship.
the value of ten thousand more in Jewels. Lolonois sent the Vessel presently
unto Tortuga to be unladed, with orders to return with the said Ship as soon as
possible unto the Isle of Savona, where he would wait for their coming. In the
mean while the rest of the Fleet, being arrived at the said Island of Savona,
met with another Spanish Vessel that was coming from Comana with Military
Provisions unto the Isle of Hispaniola; and also with Money to pay the Garrisons
of the said Island. This Vessel also they took without any resistance, though
mounted with eight Guns. Here were found seven thousand weight of Powder, great
number of Muskets, and other things of this kind, together with twelve thousand
Pieces of Eight in ready money.

These forementioned Events gave good encouragement unto the Pirates, as judging
them very good beginnings unto the business they had in hand. Especially
finding their Fleet pretty well recruited within a little while. For the first
Ship that was taken being arrived at Tortuga, the Governor ordered to be
instantly unladen, and soon after sent her back with fresh Provisions, and
other Necessaries, unto Lolonois. This Ship he chose for his own, and gave that
which he commanded, unto his Comrade Antony du Puis. Thus having received new
recruits of men, in lieu of them he had lost in taking the Prizes
abovementioned, and by sickness, he found himself in a good condition to
prosecute his Voyage. All being well animated and full of courage, they set
sail for Maracaibo, which Port is situated in the Province of Nueva Venezuela,
in the Altitude of twelve degrees and some minutes of Northern Latitude. This
Island is in length twenty leagues, and twelve in breadth. Unto this Port also
do belong the Islands of Onega and Monges. The East Side thereof is called Cape
St. Roman, and the Western side Cape of Caquibacoa. The Gulf is called by some,
the Gulf of Venezuelo; but the Pirates usually call it the Bay of Maracaibo.

At the beginning of this Gulf are two Islands, which extend for the greatest
part from East to West. That that lies toward the East is called Isla de las
Vigilia, or the Watch-Isle; because in the middle thereof is to be seen an high
Hill, upon which stands a house wherein dwells perpetually a Watchman. The
other is called Isla de la Palomas, or the Isle of Pigeons. Between these two
Islands runs a little Sea, or rather a Lake, of fresh water, being
threescore Lake of Maracaibo.
leagues in length, and thirty in breadth; which disgorgeth into the Ocean, and
dilateth it self about the two Islands aforementioned. Between them is found
the best passage for Ships, the Chanel of this passage being no broader than
the flight of a great Gun of eight pound carriage, more or less. Upon the Isle
of Pigeons stands a Castle, Castle.
to impede the entry of any Vessels; all such as will come in, being
necessitated to approach very nigh unto the Castle, by reason of two Banks of
Sand that lie on the other side, with only fourteen foot water. Many other
Banks of Sand Sand-bank.
there be also found in this Lake, as that which is called el Tablazo, or the
great Table, which is no deeper than ten foot; but this lies forty leagues
within the Lake. Others there be that have no more than six, seven, or eight
foot in depth. All of them are very dangerous, especially unto such Mariners as
are little acquainted with this Lake. On the West Side hereof is situated the
City of Situation of Maracaibo.
Maracaibo, being very pleasant to the view, by reason its Houses are built
along the shore, having delicate Prospects everywhere round about. The City
may possibly contain three or four thousand persons, the Slaves being included
in this number; all which do make a Town of a reasonable bigness. Among these
are judged to be eight hundred persons more or less, able to bear Arms, all of
them Spaniards. Here are also one Parish Church, of very good Fabric, and well
adorned; four Monasteries, and one Hospital. The City is governed by a
Deputy Governor, who is substituted here by the Governor of Caracas, as being
his Dependency. The Commerce or Trading here exercised, consists for the
greatest Commerce of Maracaibo.
part in Hides and Tobacco. The Inhabitants possess great numbers of Cattle,
and many Plantations, which extend for the space of thirty leagues within the
Country; especially on that side that looks toward the great and populous
Town of Gibraltar. At which place are gathered huge quantities of Cacao-nuts,
and all other sorts of Garden-fruits; which greatly serve for the regale and
sustenance of the Inhabitants of Maracaibo, whose Territories are much drier
than those of Gibraltar. Unto this place, those of Maracaibo send great
quantities of Flesh; they making returns in Orenges, Lemons, and several other
Fruits. For the Inhabitants of Gibraltar have great scarcity of Provisions of
Flesh, their Fields being not capable of feeding Cows nor Sheep.

Before the City of Maracaibo lies a very spacious and secure Port, wherein
may be built all The Port.
sort of Vessels; as having great convenience of Timber, which may be
transported thither at very little charge. Nigh unto the Town lies also a
small Island called Borrica, which serves them to feed great numbers of Goats.
Of which Isle of Borrica.
Cattle the Inhabitants of Maracaibo make greater use for their Skins, than for
their Flesh or Milk; they making no great account of these two, unless while
they are as yet but tender and young Kids. In the Fields about the Town are fed
some numbers of Sheep, but of a very small size. In some of the Islands that
belong unto the Lake, and in other places hereabouts, do inhabit many Savage
Indians, whom the Spaniards call Bravos, or Wild. These Indians could never
agree as Wild Indians.
yet, nor be reduced to any Accord with the Spaniards, by reason of their
brutish and untamable nature. They dwell for the most part toward the Western
side of the Lake, in little Huts that are built upon Trees which grow in the
water. The cause hereof being only to exempt themselves as much as possible
from the innumerable quantity of Mosquito's, or Gnats, that infest those parts,
and by which they are tormented night and day. Toward the East Side of the
said Lake are also to be seen whole Towns of Fishermen, who likewise are
constrained to live in Huts, built upon Trees, like unto the former. Another
reason of thus dwelling, is the frequent Inundations of Waters: for after great
Rains, the Land is often overflowed for the space of two or three leagues;
there being no less than five and twenty great Rivers that feed this Lake. The
Town of Gibraltar is also frequently drowned by these Inundations, insomuch as
the Inhabitants are constrained Inundations of Gibraltar.
to leave their houses, and retire unto their Plantations.

Gibraltar is situated at the side of the Lake, forty leagues or thereabouts
within it, and receives Its Situation.
its necessary Provisions of Flesh, as has been said, from Maracaibo. The Town
is inhabited by fifteen hundred persons, more or less; whereof four hundred may
be capable of bearing Arms. The greatest part of the Inhabitants keep open
Shops, wherein they exercise one mechanic Trade or other. All the adjacent
Fields about this Town are cultivated with numerous Plantations of Sugar and
Cacao; in which are many tall and beautiful Trees, of whose Timber Houses may
be built, and also Ships. Among these Trees are found great store of handsome
and proportionable Cedars, being seven or eight foot Cedars.
in circumference, which serve there very commonly to build Boats and Ships.
These they build after such manner as to bear one only great Sail; and such
Vessels are called Piragua's. The whole Country round about is sufficiently
furnished with Rivers and Brooks, which are very useful to the Inhabitants in
time of Drowths, they opening in that occasion many little Channels, through
which they lead the Rivolets to water their Fields and Plantations. They plant
in like manner great quantity of Tobacco, which is much esteemed in Europe;
and for its goodness, is called there, Tabaco de Sacerdotes, or Priests
Tobacco. They enjoy nigh twenty leagues of (...) (...), so called.
Jurisdiction; which is bounded and defended by very high Mountains that are
perpetually covered with Snow. On the other side of these Mountains is situated
a great City called Merida, unto which the Town of Gibraltar is subject. All
Merida.
sort of Merchandise is carried from this Town unto the aforesaid City, upon
Mules; and that but at one season of the year, by reason of the excessive Cold
endured in those high Mountains. Upon the said Mules great returns are made in
Flour of Meal, which comes from toward Peru, by the way of Estaffe.

Thus far I thought it convenient to make a short description of the aforesaid
Lake of Maracaibo, and its Situation; to the intent my Reader might the better
be enabled to comprehend what I shall say concerning what was acted by the
Pirates in this place. The History whereof, I shall presently begin.

As soon as Lolonois arrived at the Gulf of Venezuela, Arrival of Lolonois to
the Gulf.
he cast Anchor with his whole Fleet, out of sight of the Watchtower of the
Island of Vigilia, or Watch-Isle. The next day very early he set sail from
hence, with all his Ships, for the Lake of Maracaibo; where being arrived, they
cast Anchor the second time. Soon after, they landed all their men, with
design to attack, in the first place, the Castle or Fortress that commanded
the Bar, and is therefore called de la Barra. This Fort consists only of
several great Baskets of Earth placed upon a rising ground, upon which are
planted sixteen great Guns, with several other heaps of Earth round about, for
covering the men within. The Pirates having landed at the distance of a league
from this Fort, began to advance by degrees toward it. But the Governor
thereof having espied their landing, had placed an Ambuscade of some of his
men, with design to cut them off behind, while he meaned to attack them in the
front. This Ambuscade was found out by the Pirates; and hereupon getting before,
they assaulted and defeated it so entirely, that not one man could retreat unto
the Castle. This Obstacle being removed, Lolonois with all his Companions
advanced in great haste toward the Fort. And after a Fight of almost three
hours, wherein they behaved themselves with desperate Courage, such as this
sort of people use to show, they became Masters thereof, having made use They
take the Fort.
of no other Arms than their Swords and Pistols. In the mean while they were
fighting, those who were routed in the Ambuscade, not being able to get into
the Castle, retired toward the City of Maracaibo in great confusion and
disorder, crying, The Pirates will presently be here with two thousand men and
more. This City having formerly been taken by such kind of people as these
were, and sacked even to the remotest corners thereof, preserved still in its
memory a fresh Idaea of that misery. Hereupon, as soon as they heard these
dismal News, they endeavored to escape as fast as they could toward Gibraltar
in their Boats and Canows, carrying with them all the Goods and money they
could. Being come unto Gibraltar, they dispersed the rumor, that the Fortress
was taken, and that nothing had been saved, nor any persons able to escape the
fury of the Pirates.

The Castle being taken by the Pirates, as was They call the Fleet.
said before, they presently made sign unto the Ships of the Victory they had
obtained; to the end they should come farther in, without apprehension of any
danger. The rest of that day was spent in ruining and demolishing the said
Demolish the Fort.
Castle. They nailed the Guns, and burnt as much as they could not carry away:
burying also the dead, and sending on board the Fleet such as were wounded. The
next day very early in the morning, they weighed Anchor, and directed their
course all together toward the City of Maracaibo, And march to Maracaibo.
distant only six leagues, more or less, from the Fort. But the wind being
very scarce, that day they could advance but little, as being forced to expect
the flowing of the Tide. The next morning they came within sight of the Town,
and began to make preparations for landing under the protection of their own
Guns; being persuaded the Spaniards might have laid an Ambuscade among the
Trees and Woods. Thus they put their men into Canows, which for that purpose
they brought with them, and landed where they thought most convenient, shooting
They land.
in the mean while very furiously with their great Guns. Of the people that
were in the Canows, half only went on shore, the other half remained on board
the said Canows. They fired with their Guns from the Ships as fast as was (...)
sible toward the woodie part of the shore; but could see, nor were answered
by, no body. Thus they marched in good order into the Town, whose Inhabitants,
as I told you before, were all retired into the Woods, and toward Gibraltar,
The Inhabi^ retire
with their Wives, Children, and Families. Their houses they left well provided
with all sort of Victuals, such as Flour, Bread, Pork, Brandie, Wines, and good
store of Poultry. With these ^ngs the Pirates fell to banqueting, and making
good Cheer: for in four weeks before, they had (...) (...).
had no opportunity of filling their stomachs with such plenty.

They instantly possessed themselves of the best houses in the Town, and placed
Centries everywhere they thought convenient. The great Church served them for
their main Corpse du Guard. They form a Corpse du Guard.
The next day they sent a body of one hundred and sixty men to find out some of
the Inhabitants of the Town, whom they understood were hidden in the Woods not
far from thence. These returned that very night, bringing with them Make a
great (...) abroad.
twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, several Mules laden with Houshold-goods and
Merchandise, and twenty Prisoners, between men, women, and children. Some of
these Prisoners were put to the Rack, only to make them confess where they had
hidden the rest of their Goods; but they could extort very little from them.
Lolonois, who never used to make any great account of murdering, though in
cold blood, ten or twelve Spaniards, drew his Cutlass and hacked one to pieces
in the presence of all the rest, saying, Lolonois cutteth a Spaniard (...)
pieces.
If you do not confess and declare where you have hidden the rest of your
Goods, I will do the like unto all your Companions. At last, amongst these
horrible Cruelties and inhumane Threats, one was found who promised to conduct
him, and show the place where the rest of the Spaniards were hidden. But those
that were fled, having intelligence that one had discovered their lurking Holes
unto the Pirates, changed place, and buried all the remnant of their Riches
under ground; insomuch that the Pirates could not find They go out to seek more.
them out, unless some other person of their own Party should reveal them.
Besides, that the Spaniards flying from one place to another every But the
Spaniards fly.
day, and often changing Woods, were jealous even of each other; insomuch as
the Father scarce presumed to trust his own Son.

Finally, after that the Pirates had been fifteen days in Maracaibo, they
resolved to go toward Gibraltar. But the Inhabitants of this place having
received intelligence thereof beforehand, as also that they intended
afterward to go to Merida, gave notice of this design unto the Governor They
call the Governor of Merida.
thereof, who was a valiant Soldier, and had served his King in Flanders in
many Military Offices. His answer was, He would have them take no care: for he
hoped in a little while to exterminate the said Pirates. Whereupon he
transferred himself immediately unto Gibraltar, with 400 men well armed,
ordering at the same time, He comes with 400 men.
the Inhabitants of the said Town to put themselves in Arms; so that in all he
made a body of eight hundred fighting men. With the same And armeth in all 800.
speed he commanded a Battery to be raised toward the Sea; whereon he mounted
twenty Guns, covering them all with great Baskets of Earth. Another Battery
likewise he placed in another place, mounted with eight Guns. After this was
done, he barricado'd an Highway or narrow Passage unto the Town, through which
the Pirates of necessity ought to pass; opening at the same time another,
through much dirt and mud in the Wood, which was totally unknown unto the
Pirates.

The Pirates, not knowing any thing of these They come within sight of Gibraltar
Preparations, having embarked all their Prisoners and what they had robbed,
took their way toward Gibraltar. Being come within sight of the place, they
perceived the Royal Standard hanging forth, and that those of the Town had a
mind to fight, and defend their houses. Lolonois seeing this resolution, called
a Council of War to deliberate what he ought to do in such case: Propounding
withal unto his Officers and Mariners, that the difficulty of such an
Enterprise was very great, seeing the Spaniards had had so much time to put
themselves in a posture of defense, and had gotten a good body of men together,
with many Martial Provisions. But notwithstanding (said he) have a good
courage. We must The Speech of Lolonois to his Comrades
either defend our selves like good Soldiers, or lose our lives with all the
riches we have gotten. Do as I shall do, who am your Captain. At other times we
have fought with fewer men than we have in our company at present, and yet we
have overcome greater numbers than there possibly can be in this Town. The more
they are, the more glory we shall attribute unto our Fortune, and the greater
Riches we shall increase unto it. The Pirates were under this suspicion, that
all those Riches which the Inhabitants of Maracaibo had absconded, were
transported unto Gibraltar; or at least the greatest part thereof. After this
Speech, they all promised to follow him; and obey very exactly his Commands.
Unto whom Lolonois made answer, It Is well: but know ye withal, that the first
man who shall show any fear, or the least apprehension thereof, I will pistol
him with my own hands.

With this resolution they cast Anchors nigh the shore, at the distance of one
quarter of a league from the Town. The next day, before Sunrising, they were
all landed, being to the number of three hundred and fourscore men, well
provided, and armed every one with a Cutlass, and one or two Pistols; and
withal, sufficient Powder and Bullet for thirty charges. Here, upon the shore,
they all shaked hands with one another, in testimony of good courage, and began
their march, Lolonois speaking these words unto They march (...) land to
Gibraltar.
them: Come, my Brothers, follow me, and have a good courage. They followed
their way with a Guide they had provided. But he, believing he led them well,
brought them to the way which the Governor had obstructed with Barricado's.
Through this not being able to pass, they went unto the other; which was newly
made in the Wood among the Mire; unto which the Spaniards could shoot at
pleasure. Notwithstanding, the Pirates being full of courage, cut down They cut
branches of Trees to pass (...) the Mud.
multitude of branches of Trees, and threw them in the dirt upon the way, to
the end they might not stick so fast in it. In the mean while, those of
Gibraltar fired at them with their great Guns so furiously, that they could
scarce hear nor see one another, through the noise and smoke. Being now past
the Wood, they came upon firm ground, where they met with a Battery of six
Guns, which immediately the Spaniards discharged against them, all being loaded
with small Bullets (...) Spaniards (...) at them.
and pieces of Iron. After this, the Spaniards ^allying forth, set upon them
with such fury, as caused the Pirates to give way and retire; very few of them
daring to advance toward the Fort. They continued still firing against the
Pirates, of whom they had already killed and wounded many. This made them go
back to seek some other way through the middle of the Wood; but the Spaniards
having cut down many Trees to hinder the passage, they could find none, and
thus were forced to return unto that they had left. Here the Spaniards
continued to fire, as before; neither would they sally out of They continue
firing.
their Batteries to attack the Pirates any more. Hereby Lolonois and his
Companions, not being able to grimp up the Baskets of Earth, were compelled to
make use of an old Stratagem; wherewith at last they deceived and overcame the
Spaniards.

Lolonois retired suddenly with all his men, making show as if he fled.
Hereupon the Spaniards, crying out, They fly, they fly, let us follow
Stratagem of Lolonois.
them, sallied forth with great disorder, to pursue the fugitive Pirates. After
they had drawn them some distance from their Batteries, which was their only
design, they turned upon them unexpectedly with Swords in hand, and killed
above two hundred men. And thus fighting their way Wherewith he gets into
Gibraltar.
through those who remained alive, they possessed themselves of the Batteries.
The Spaniards that remained abroad, gave themselves for lost, and consequently
took their flight unto the Woods. The other part that was in the Battery of
eight Guns, surrendered themselves upon conditions of obtaining quarter for
their lives. The Pirates being now become Masters of the whole Town, pulled down
the Spanish Colors, and set up their own, taking Prisoners at the same They
pull ^own the Spanish Colors.
time as many as they could find. These they carried unto the great Church,
whither also they transferred many great Guns, wherewith they raised a Battery
to defend themselves; fearing left the Spaniards that were sled, should rally
more of their own Party, and come upon them again. But the next day, after
they were all fortified, all their fears disappeared. They gathered all the
dead, with intent to allow them They gather the dead and wounded.
burial, finding the number of above five hundred Spaniards killed; besides
those that were wounded within the Town, and those that died of their Wounds in
the Woods, where they sought for refuge. Besides which, the Pirates had in their
custody above one hundred and fifty Prisoners, and nigh five hundred Slaves,
many Women and Children.

Of their own Companions the Pirates found only forty dead, and almost as many
more wounded. Whereof the greatest part died afterward, through the
constitution of the Air, which brought Fevers and other Accidents upon them.
They put all the Spaniards that were slain, into two great Boats, and carrying
them They throw them into the Sea.
one quarter of a league within the Sea, they sank the Boats. These things
being done, they gathered all the Plate, Household Stuff, and Merchandise, And
rob all they could find.
they could rob, or thought convenient to carry away. But the Spaniards who had
any thing as yet left unto them, hid it very carefully. Soon after, the Pirates,
as if they were unsatisfied with the great Riches they had gotten, began to
seek for more Goods and Merchandise, not sparing those who lived in the Fields,
such as Hunters and Planters. They had scarce been eighteen days upon the
place, when the greatest part of the The Prisoners die for hunger.
Prisoners they had taken, died for hunger. For in the Town very few
Provisions, especially of Flesh, were to be found. Howbeit, they had some
quantity of Flour of Meal, although perhaps something less than what was
sufficient. But this the Pirates had taken into their custody to make Bread for
themselves. As to the Swine, Cows, Sheep, and Poultrie that were found upon the
place, they took them likewise for their own sustenance, without allowing any
share thereof unto the poor Prisoners. For these they only provided some small
quantity of Mules and Asses flesh, which they killed for that purpose. And
such as could not eat of that loathsome Provision, were constrained to die for
hunger, as many did, their stomachs not being accustomed to such unusual
sustenance. Only some women were found, who were allowed better Cheer by the
Pirates, because they served them in their sensual delights, unto which those
Robbers are hugely given. Among those women, some had been forced, others were
volunteers; though almost all had rather taken up that Vice, through Poverty
and Hunger, more than any other cause. Of the Prisoners many also died under
the torments they sustained, to They tortured many Prisoners.
make them confess where they had hidden their Money or Jewels. And of these,
some, because they had none nor knew of none, and others for denying what they
knew, endured such horrible deaths.

Finally, after having been in possession of the Town four entire weeks, they
sent four of the Prisoners, remaining alive, unto the Spaniards that were fled
into the Woods, demanding of them a Ransom for not burning the Town. The They
demand 10000 pieces of Eight of them that were fled.
sum hereof they constituted, ten thousand Pieces of Eight; which unless it
were sent unto them, they threatened to fire and reduce into ashes the whole
Village. For bringing in of this Money, they allowed them only the space of
two days. These being past, and the Spaniards not having been able to gather so
punctually such a sum, the Pirates began to set fire to many places of the Town.
Thus the Inhabitants perceiving the They (...) (...).
Pirates to be in earnest, begged of them to help to extinguish the fire; and
withal, promised the Ransom should be readily paid. The Pirates condescended to
their Petition, helping as much as they could to stop the progress of the fire.
Yet though they used the best endeavors they possibly could, one part of the
Town was ruined, especially the Church belonging to the Monastery, The Church
of a Monastery is burns to ashes.
which was burnt even to dust. After they had received the sum abovementioned,
they carried on board their Ships all the Riches they had robbed, together with
a great number of Slaves which had not, as yet, paid their Ransom. For all the
Prisoners had sums of Money set upon them, and the Slaves were also commanded
to be redeemed. From hence they returned to Maracaibo; They return to Maracaibo.
where being arrived, they found a general Consternation in the whole City.
Unto which they sent three or four Prisoners to tell the Governor and
Inhabitants, They should bring And demand 30000 Pieces of Eight.
them thirty thousand Pieces of Eight on board their Ships, for a Ransom of
their Houses; otherwise they should be entirely sacked anew and burnt.

Among these Debates, a certain party of Pirates came on shore to rob, and these
carried away They (...) Imag^ Bells (...) Cath^
the Images, the Pictures, and Bells of the great Church, on board the Fleet.
The Spaniards, who were sent to demand of those that were fled the sum
asorementioned, returned with orders to make some agreement with the Pirates.
This they performed, and concluded with the Pirates they would give for their
Ransom and liberty, the sum of twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, and five They
give them 20000 Pieces of Eight, and 500 Cows.
hundred Cows. The condition hereof being such, as they should commit no
farther acts of Hostility against any person, but should depart from thence
presently after payment of the money and Cattle. The one and the other being
delivered, they set sail with the whole Fleet, They depart from thence.
causing great joy unto the Inhabitants of Maracaibo to see themselves quit of
this sort of people. Notwithstanding, three days after they resumed their fears
and admiration, seeing the Pirates to appear again, and re-enter the Port they
had left with all their Ships. But these apprehensions soon vanished, by only
hearing one of the Pirates Errand, who came on shore to tell them from Lolonois,
They should send him a skilful Pilot to But return to get a Pilot.
conduct one of his greatest Ships over the dangerous Bank that lies at the
entry of the Lake. Which Petition, or rather Command, was instantly granted.

The Pirates had now been full two months in those Towns; wherein they committed
those cruel and insolent Actions we have told you of. Departing therefore from
thence, they took their They arrive at Hispaniola.
course toward the Island Hispaniola, and arrived thither in eight days,
casting Anchors in a Port called Isla de la Vaca, or Cow-Island. This Isle is
inhabited by French Bucaniers, who most commonly sell the Flesh they hunt, unto
Pirates, and others who now and then put in there with intent of victualling or
trading with them. Here they unladed the whole Cargazon of Riches they had
robbed; the usual Storehouse of the Pirates, being commonly under the shelter
of the Bucaniers. Here also they made a Dividend amongst them of all their
Prizes and Gains, according to And make a Dividend of what they had got.
that order and degree which belonged unto every one, as has been mentioned
above. Having cast up the account, and made exact calculation of all they had
purchased, they found in ready Money two hundred and threescore thousand 260000
Pieces of Eight found in ready Money.
Pieces of Eight. Whereupon this being divided, every one received to his share
in Money, and also in pieces of Silk, Linen, and other Commodities, the value
of above one hundred Pieces of Eight. Those who had been wounded in this
Expedition, received their part before all the rest; I mean, such Recompenses
as I spoke of in the first Book, for the loss of their Limbs, which many
sustained. Afterward they weighed all the Plate that was uncoined, reckoning
after the rate of ten Pieces of Eight for every Besides Jewels and P^.
pound. The Jewels were prized with much variety, either at too high, or too
low rates; being thus occasioned by their own ignorance. This being done, every
one was put to his Oath again, that he had not concealed any thing, nor
subtracted from the common stock. Hence they proceeded to the Dividend of what
shares belonged to such as were dead amongst them, either in battle or
otherwise. These shares were given to their Friends to be kept entire for them,
and to be delivered in due time unto their nearest Relations, or whosoever
should appear to be their lawful Heirs.

The whole Dividend being entirely finished, they set sail from thence for the
Isle of Tortuga. They (...) (...) (...) (...).
Here they arrived, one month after, to the great joy of most that were upon
the Island. For as to the common Pirates, in three weeks they had scarce any
money left them; having spent it all in things of little value, or at play
either of Cards or Dice. Here also arrived, not long before them, two French
Ships laden with Wine and Brandy, and other things of this kind: Whereby these
Liquors, at the arrival of the Pirates, were sold indifferent cheap. But this
lasted not long: for soon after they were enhanced extremely, a gallon of
Brandy being sold for four Pieces of Eight. The Governor of the Island bought
of The Governor bu^ the Ship of Cacao.
the Pirates the whole Cargo of the Ship laden with Cacao; giving them for that
rich Commodity, scarce the twentieth part of what it was worth. Thus they made
shift to lose and spend the Riches they had gotten, in much less time than they
were purchased by robbing. The Taverns and Stews, according to the custom of
Pirates, got the greatest part thereof: Insomuch that soon after they were
constrained to seek more, by the same unlawful means they had obtained the
precedent.

CHAP. III.
Lolonois makes new preparations to take the City of St. James de Leon. As
also that of Nicaragua, where he miserably perishes.

LOlonois had got himself very great Esteem and Repute at Tortuga, by this last
Voyage, by reason he brought them home such considerable New Preparations.
profit. And now he needed take no great care how to gather men to serve under
his Colors, seeing more came in voluntarily to proffer their service unto him,
than he could employ. Every one reposing such great confidence in his conduct
for seeking their Fortunes, that they judged it a matter of the greatest
security imaginable, to expose themselves in his company, to the hugest dangers
that might possibly occur. He resolved therefore, for a second Voyage, to go
with his Officers and Soldiers toward the They resolve to go to Nicaragua.
parts of Nicaragua, and pillage there as many Towns as he could meet.

Having published his new Preparations, he had all his men together at the time
appointed, being about the number of seven hundred, more Lolonois gathers
(...).
or less. Of these he put three hundred on board the Ship he took at Maracaibo,
and the rest in other Vessels of lesser burden, which were five more: So that
the whole number were in all six Ships. The first Port they went unto, was in
the Island of Hispaniola, to a place called Bayaha; They go to Bayaha.
where they determined to victual the Fleet, and take in Provisions. This being
done, they set sail from hence, and steered their course to a Port called
Matamana, lying on the South Side of the And from thence to Cuba.
Isle of Cuba. Their intent was to take here all the Canows they could meet;
these Coasts being frequented by an huge number of Fishermen of Tortoises, who
carry them from thence unto Havana. They took as many of the said Canows, to
the great grief of those miserable people, as they thought necessary for their
designs. For they had great necessity of these small bottoms, by reason the
Port whither they designed to go, was not of depth sufficient to bear Ships of
any burden. From hence they took their course toward the Cape called Gracias
a Dios, situate upon the Continent in the altitude of fifteen degrees, Northern
latitude; at the distance of one hundred leagues from the Island de los Pinos.
But being out at Sea, they were taken with a sad and tedious Calm; and by the
agitation of the Waves alone, were thrown into the Gulf of Honduras. Here they
labored very much to regain what they had lost, but all in vain; both the
Waters, in their course, and the Winds being contrary to their endeavors.
Besides, that the Ship wherein Lolonois was embarked, could not follow the
rest; and what was worse, they wanted already Provisions. Hereupon they were
forced to put into the first Port or Bay they could reach, to revictual their
Fleet. Thus they entered with their Canows into a River called Xagua, inhabited
by Indians, whom They enter the River Xagua, and rob the Indians.
they totally robbed and destroyed; they finding amongst their Goods great
quantity of Millet, many Hogs, and Hens. Not contented with what they had done,
they determined to remain there while the bad weather was over, and to pillage
all the Towns and Villages lying along the coast of the Gulf. Thus they passed
from one place to another, seeking, as yet, more Provisions; by They pass along
to other places.
reason they had not what they wanted for the accomplishment of their designs.
Having searched and rifled many Villages, where they found no great matter,
they came at last unto Puerto Cavallo. In this Port the Spaniards have two And
arrive at Puerto Cavallo.
several Storehouses, which serve to keep the Merchandises that are brought
from the inner parts of the Country, until the arrival of the Ships. There was
in the Port at that occasion, a Spanish Ship mounted with four and twenty Guns,
and sixteen Pedrero's, or Morterpieces. This Ship was immediately seized by the
Pirates; and They take a great Spanish Ship. They burn and ruin all they find.
then drawing nigh the shore, they landed, and burnt the two Storehouses, with
all the rest of of the houses belonging to the place. Many Inhabitants likewise
they took Prisoners, and committed upon them the most insolent and inhumane
cruelties that ever Heathens invented, putting them to the cruellest tortures
they could imagine or devise. It was the custom of Lolonois, that having
tormented any persons, and they not confessing, he would instantly cut them in
pieces with his Hanger, and pull out their Tongues; desiring to do the same, if
possible, unto every Spaniard in the World. Oftentimes it happened that some of
these miserable Prisoners, They exercise all manner of cruelty against the
Spaniards.
being forced thereunto by the Rack, would promise to discover the places where
the fugitive Spaniards lay hidden; which being not able afterward to perform,
they were put to more Enormous and cruel Deaths, than they who were dead before.

The Prisoners being all dead and annihilated (...) (...) of Lolonois Lolonois
(excepting only two, whom they reserved to show them what they desired) they
marched They march to the Town of St. Pedro.
from hence unto the Town of San Pedro, or St. Peter, distant ten or twelve
leagues from Puerto Cavallo, having in their company three hundred men, whom
Lolonois led, and leaving behind him Moses van Vin for his Lieutenant to govern
the rest in his absence. Being come three leagues upon their way, they met with
a Troop of Spaniards, who lay in Ambuscade for their coming. And m^t with an
Ambuscade of Spaniards.
These they set upon with all the courage imaginable, and at last totally
defeated; howbeit they behaved themselves very manfully at the beginning of the
Fight. But not being able to resist the fury of the Pirates, they were forced to
give way, and save themselves by flight, leaving many Pirates dead upon the
place, and wounded; as also some of their own Party maimed by the way. These
Lolonois put to death without mercy, having asked them what questions he
thought fit for his purpose.

There were still remaining some few Prisoners who were not wounded. These were
asked by Lolonois, if any more Spaniards did lie farther on in Ambuscade? Unto
whom they answered, there were. Then he commanded them to be brought before
him, one by one, and asked, if there was no other way to be found to the Town
but that? This he did, out of a design to excuse, if possible, those
Ambuscades. But they all constantly answered him, they knew none. Having asked
them all, and finding they could show him no other way, Lolonois grew
outragiously passionate; insomuch that he drew his Cutlass, and with it cut
open the breast of one of those poor Spaniards, and pulling out his heart with
his sacrilegious hands, began to bite and gnaw it with his teeth, like a
ravenous Wolf, saying unto the rest, I will serve you all alike, if you show me
not another way.

Hereupon those miserable Wretches promised to show him another way: But
withal, they told him, it was extremely difficult and laborious. Thus, to
satisfy that cruel Tyrant, they began to lead him and his Army. But finding it
not for his purpose, even as they told him, he was constrained to return unto
the former way, swearing with great choler and indignation, Mort Dieu, les
Espagnols me le payeront: By Gods death, the Spaniards shall pay me for this.

The next day he fell into another Ambuscade; the which he assaulted with such
horrible fury, They meet another Ambuscade.
that in less than an hours time, he routed the Spaniards, and killed the
greatest part of them. The Spaniards were persuaded that by these Ambuscades
they should better be able to destroy the Pirates, assaulting them by degrees;
and for this reason had posted themselves in several places. At last he met
with a third Ambuscade, where was placed a Party of Spaniards, both stronger
They meet a third.
and to greater advantage than the former. Yet notwithstanding, the Pirates, by
throwing with their hands little Firebals in great number, and continuing to do
so for some time, forced this Party, as well as the precedent, to fly. And
this with such great loss of men; as that before they could reach the Town, the
greatest part of the Spaniards were either killed or wounded. There was but one
path which led unto the Town. This path was very well barricado'd with good
defenses: And the rest of the Town round about was planted with certain Shrubs
or Trees named Raqueltes, very full of thorns, and these very sharp-pointed.
This sort of Fortification seemed stronger than the Triangles which are used in
Europe, when an Army is of necessity to pass by the place of an Enemy; it being
almost impossible for the Pirates to traverse those Shrubs. The Spaniards that
were posted behind the said defenses, seeing the Pirates come, began to shoot at
them with their great Guns. But these perceiving them ready to fire, used to
stoop down, and when the shot was made, fall upon the Defendants with
Fireballs in hands, and naked Swords, killing with these Weapons many of the
Town. Yet notwithstanding, not being able to advance any farther, they were
constrained to retire for the first time. Afterward they returned to the
attaque again, with fewer men than before; and observing not to shoot till they
were very nigh, they gave the Spaniards a charge so dexterously, that with
every shot they killed an Enemy.

The Attaque continuing thus eager on both They approach the Town.
sides till night, the Spaniards were compelled to hang forth a white Flag, in
token of Truce, and that they desired to come to a ^rly. The only Conditions
they required for delivering the Town, were, That the Pirates should give the
Inhabitants quarter for two hours. This short space Which is taken upon
Conditions.
of time they demanded, with intent to carry away and abscond as much of their
Goods and Riches as they could; as also to fly unto some other neighboring
Town. Upon the agreement of this Article they entered the Town, and continued
there the two hours abovementioned, without committing the least act of
hostility, nor causing any trouble to the Inhabitants. But no sooner that time
was past, than Lolonois ordered the Inhabitants should be followed and robbed
of all they had carried away; and not only Goods, but their Persons likewise
to be made all Prisoners. Notwithstanding, the greatest part of their
Merchandise and Goods were in such manner absconded, as the Pirates could not
find them; they meeting only a few ^hern Sacks that were filled with Anil or
(...)

Having staid at this Town some few days, and according to their usual customs
committed there They commihorrid Inso lencies and (...).
most horrid Insolences, they at last quitted the place, carrying away with
them all that they possibly could, and reducing the Town totally Burn the Town.
into ashes. Being come unto the Seaside, where they left a party of their own
Comrades, they found these had busied themselves in cruzing upon the Fishermen
that lived thereabouts, or came Go to the River of Guatimala.
that way from the River of Guatimala. In this River also was expected a Ship
that was to come from Spain. Finally, they resolved to go toward the Islands
that lie on the other side of the Gulf, there to cleanse and careen their
Vessels. But in the mean while they left two Canows before the coast, or rather
the mouth of the River of Guatimala, to the intent they should take the Ship
which, as I said before, was expected from Spain.

But their chief intention of going unto those Islands, was to seek Provisions,
as knowing the And from thence to other Islands.
Tortoises of those places are very excellent and pleasant food. As soon as
they arrived there, they divided into Troops, each party choosing a fit post for
that Fishery. Every one of them undertook to knit a Net with the Rinds of
certain Trees, called in those parts, Macoa. Of these Rinds they make also
Ropes and Cables for the service of Ships: Insomuch that no Vessel can be in
need of such things, whenever they can but find the said Trees. There be also
in those parts many places where they find Pitch; which is gathered thereabouts
in great abundance. The Pitch in great quantities.
quantity hereof is so great, that running down the Seacoasts, being melted by
the heat of the Sun, it congealeth in the water into great heaps, and
represents the shape of small Islands. This Pitch is not like unto that we
have in the Countries of Europe; but is hugely like, both in color and shape,
unto that froth of the Sea which is called by the Naturalists, Bitumen. But in
my judgment, this matter is nothing else than Wax, which stormy weather has
cast into the Sea; being part of that huge quantity which in the Which others
call Bitumen.
neighboring Territories is made by the Bees. Thus from places far distant
from the Sea, it is also brought unto the Seacoast by the Winds and rolling
Waves of great Rivers; being likewise mingled with sand, and having the smell
of black Ambar, such as is sent us from the Orient. In those parts are found
great quantities of the said Bees, who make their Honey in Trees; from whence
it happens that the Honey-combs being fixed unto the bodies of the Trees,
when Tempests arise they are torn away, and by the fury of the Winds carried
into the Sea, as has (...) say it (...) the matter of Ambar.
been said before. Some Naturalists are willing to say, that between the Honey
and the Wax is made a separation by means of the salt water; from whence
proceeds also the good Ambar. This opinion is rendered the more probable,
because the said Ambar being found and tasted, it affords the like taste as
Wax does.

But now, returning unto my discourse, I shall let you know, that the Pirates
made in those Islands all the haste to equip their Vessels they could possible,
by reason they had news the Spanish Ship was come which they expected. They
spent some time in cruzing upon the coasts of Iucatan, whereabouts inhabit many
Indians, who seek for the Ambar abovementioned in those Seas. But seeing we are
come to this place, I Indians of the coast of Jucatan.
shall here, by the by, make some short Remarks on the manner of living of
these Indians, and the divine Worship which they practice.

The Indians of the coasts of Iucatan have now been above one hundred years,
under the dominion Of their Customs and Religion.
of the Spaniards. Unto this Nation they performed all manner of Service: for
whenever any of them had need of a Slave or Servant, they sent to seek one of
these Indians to serve them as long as they pleased. By the Spaniards they were
initiated at first in the Principles of Christian Faith and Religion. Being
thus made a part of Christianity, they used to send them every Sunday and
Holiday through the whole year, a Priest to perform divine Service among them.
Afterward, for what reasons are not known, but certainly, through evil
temptations of the Father of Idolatry the Devil, they suddenly cast off
Christian Religion again, and abandoned They cast off Christian Religion.
the true divine Worship; beating withal and abusing the Priest was sent them.
This provoked the Spaniards to punish them according to their deserts; which
they did by casting many of the chiefest of these Indians into Prison. Every
one of those Barbarians had, and has still, a God to himself, whom he serves
Every one has his God.
and worshippeth. It is a thing that deserves all admiration, to consider how
they use in this particular a Child that is newly born into the world. As soon
as this is issued from the Womb Ceremonies performed with newborn Infants.
of the Mother, they carry it unto the Temple. Here they make a circle or hole,
which they fill with ashes, without mingling any thing else with them. Upon
this heap of ashes they place the Child naked, leaving it there a whole night
alone, not without great danger; no body daring to come near it. In the mean
while the Temple is open on all sides, to the intent all sorts of Beasts may
freely come in and out. The next day the Father and Relations of the Infant
return thither, to see if the tract or step of any Animal appears to be
printed in the ashes. Not finding any, they leave the Child there, until that
some Beast has approached the Infant, and left behind him the mark of his
feet. Unto this Animal, whatsoever it be, they consecrate the Creature newly
born, as unto its God; which he is bound to worship and serve all his life,
esteeming the said Beast as his Patron and Protector in all cases of danger or
necessity. They offer unto their Gods Sacrifices of Fire, wherein they burn a
certain Gum called by them Copal; whose smoke affords a very delicious smell.
When the Infant is grown up, the Parents thereof tell him and show him whom he
ought to worship, serve, and honor, as his own proper God. This being known,
he goes unto the Temple, where he makes Offerings unto the said Beast.
Afterward, if in the course of his life any one has injured him, or any evil
happens unto him, he complains thereof unto that Beast, and sacrifices
unto it for revenge. From whence many times comes, that those who have done
the injury of which he complains, are found to be bitten, killed, or
otherwise hurt by such Animals.

After this superstitious and idolatrous manner, do live those miserable and
ignorant Indians, that inhabit all the Islands of the Gulf of Honduras; as also
many of them that dwell upon the Continent of Iucatan. In the Territories of
which Country are found most excellent Ports for the safety of Ships, where
those Indians most commonly love to build their houses. These People are not
very faithful one to another; and likewise use strange Ceremonies at their
Marriages. Whenever any one pretends to marry a young Damsel, he first
applies himself unto her Father, or nearest Relation. He then examineth him
very exactly concerning the manner of cultivating their Plantations, and other
things at his pleasure. Having satisfied the Questions that were put unto him
by the Father-in-Law, he gives the young man a Bow and Arrow. With these
things he repaireth unto the young maid, and presents her with a Garland of
green Leaves, interweaved with sweet smelling Flowers. This she is obliged to
put upon her head, and lay aside that which she wore before that time; it being
the custom of the Country, that all Virgins go perpetually crowned with
Flowers. This Garland being received and put upon the head, every one of the
Relations and Friends go to advise with others, among themselves, whether that
Marriage will be useful, and of likely happiness, or not. Afterward, the
aforesaid Relations and Friends meet together at the house of the Damsels
Father, and there they drink of a certain Liquor made of Maiz, or Indian Wheat.
And here, before the whole company, the Father gives his Daughter in marriage
unto the Bridegroom. The next day the newly-married Bride comes unto her
Mother, and in her presence pulls off the Garland, and teareth it in pieces,
with great cries and bitter lamentations, according to the custom of the
Country. Many other things I could relate at large of the manner of living, and
customs of those Indians; but these I shall omit, thereby to follow my
discourse.

Our Pirates therefore had many Canows of the Indians in the Isle of Sambale,
five leagues distant from the coasts of Iucatan. In the aforesaid Island is
found great quantity of Ambar, but more especially when any storm arises from
toward the East; from whence the Waves bring many things, and very different.
Through this Sea no Vessels can pass, unless very small, the waters being too
shallow. In the Lands that are surrounded by this Sea, is found huge quantity
of Campeche-wood, and other things of this kind, that serve for the Art of
Dying; which occasioneth them to be much esteemed in Europe: And doubtless,
would be much more, in case we had the Skill and Science of the Indians; who
are so industrious, as to make a Dye or Tincture that never changes its
color, nor fades away.

After that the Pirates had been in that Gulf three entire months, they received
advice that the Spanish Ship was come. Hereupon they hastened unto the Port,
where the Ship lay at Anchor unlading the Merchandise it brought, with design
to assault her as soon as it were possible. But before this attempt, they
thought it convenient to send away some of their Boats from the mouth of the
River, to seek for a small Vessel which was expected; having notice that she
was very richly laden, the greatest part of the Cargo being Plate, Indigo, and
Cochineel. In the mean while, the people of the Ship that was in the Port had
notice given that the Pirates designed upon them. Hereupon they prepared all
things very well for the defense of the said Vessel; which was mounted with
forty two Guns, had many Arms on board, and other necessaries, together with
one hundred and thirty fighting men. Unto Lolonois all this seemed but little;
and thus he assaulted her with great courage, his own Ship carrying only
twenty two Guns, and having no more than a small S^tia or Flyboat for help. But
the Spaniards defended themselves after such manner, as they forced the Pirates
to retire. Notwithstanding, while the smoke of the Powder continued very thick,
as amidst a dark Fog or Mist, they sent four Canows very well manned, and
boarded the Ship with great agility; whereby they compelled the Spaniards to
surrender.

The Ship being taken, they found not in her (...).
what they thought, as being already almost wholly unladed. All the Treasure
they here got, consisted only in fifty bars of Iron, a small parcel of Paper,
some earthen Jarrs full of Wine, and other things of this kind; all of small
importance.

Presently after, Lolonois called a Council of the A Council called about going
to Guatimala.
whole Fleet, wherein he told them, he intended to go to Guatimala. Upon this
point they divided into several sentiments; some of them liking the Proposal
very well, and others disliking it as much. Especially a certain party of them,
who were but new in those exercises of Piracy, Diverse opinions.
and who had imagined at their setting forth from Tortuga, that Pieces of Eight
were gathered as easily as Pears from a Tree. But having found at last most
things contrary to their expectation, they quitted the Fleet, and returned from
whence they set out. Others on the contrary, affirmed they had rather die for
hunger, than return home without a great deal of money.

But the major part of the company judging the propounded Voyage little fit for
their purpose; separated from Lolonois and the rest. Among these was Ringleader
one Moses Vanclein, Many leave Lolonois.
who was Captain of the Ship taken at Puerto Cavallo. This Fellow took his
course toward Tortuga, designing to cruze to and fro in those Seas. With him
also joined another Comrade of his own, by name Pierre le Picard; who seeing
the rest to leave Lolonois, thought fit to do the same. These run-a-ways having
thus parted company, steered their course homewards, coasting along the
Continent, till they came at last unto Costa Rica. Here they landed a strong
Party of men They go to Costa Rica. And take Veraguas.
nigh unto the River of Veraguas, and marched in good order unto the Town of
the same name. This place they took and totally pillaged, notwithstanding that
the Spaniards made a strong and warlike resistance. They brought away some of
the Inhabitants as Prisoners, with all that they had robbed, which was of no
great importance. Rob the place, but find little.
The reason hereof, being the poverty of the place, which exercises no manner
of Trade than only working in the Mines, where some of the Inhabitants do
constantly attend. Yet no other persons seek for the Gold, than only Mines of
Gold.
Slaves. These they compel to dig, whether they live or die, and wash the earth
that is taken out, in the neighboring Rivers; where oftentimes they find pieces
of Gold as big as Peace. Finally, the Pirates found in this Robbery no greater
value than seven or eight pounds weight of Gold. Hereupon they returned back,
giving over the design they had, to go farther on to the Town of Nata,
situated upon the coasts of the South Sea. Hitherto they designed to march,
knowing the Inhabitants to be rich Merchants, who had their Slaves at work in
the Mines of Veraguas. But from this Enterprise they were deterred by the
multitude of Spaniards, whom they saw gather on all sides to fall upon them;
whereof they had timely advice beforehand.

Lolonois thus abandoned by his Companions, remained alone in the Gulf of
Honduras, by reason Lolonois remains.
his Ship was too great to get out at the time of the reflux of those Seas,
which the smaller Vessels could more easily do. There he sustained great want
of all sorts of Provisions: Insomuch Wants Provisions.
as they were constrained to go ashore every day, to seek wherewithal to
maintain themselves. And not finding any thing else, they were forced to kill
Monkies and other Animals, such as they could find, for their sustenance.

At last having found, in the altitude of the Cape of Gracias a Dios, certain
little Islands called de las Pertas: Here, nigh unto these Isles, his Isles de
las Pertas.
Ship fell upon a bank of sand, where it stuck so fast, as no Art could be
found to get her off into deep water again. Notwithstanding, they unladed all
the Guns, Iron, and other weighty things as much as possibly they could: but
all they could do, was to little or no effect. Hereupon they They lose their
Ship.
were necessitated to break the Ship in pieces, and with some of the Planks and
Nails build themselves a Boat, wherewith to get away from those And intend to
build a Boat.
Islands. Thus they began their work; and mean while they are employed about
it, I shall pass to describe succinctly the Isles aforementioned, and their
Inhabitants.

The Islands called de las Pertas, are inhabited by Indians, who are properly
Savages, as not having Indians of these Islands.
at any time known or conversed with any civil People. They are tall in
stature, and very nimble in running, which they perform almost as fast as
horses. At diving also in the Sea, they are very dexterous and hardy. From the
bottom of the Sea I saw them take up an Anchor that weighed six hundred pound,
by tying a Cable unto it with great dexterity, and pulling it from a Rock. They
use no other Arms than such as are made of Wood, without any Iron, unless that
some instead thereof do fix a Crocodiles tooth, which serves for a point. They
have neither Bows nor Arrows among them, as other Indians have; but their
common Weapon is a sort of Lances, that are long a fathom and a half. In these
Islands there be many Plantations surrounded Plantations.
with Woods, from whence they gather great abundance of Fruits. Such are
Potato's, Bananas, Racoven, Ananas, and many others, which the constitution of
the Soil affords. Nigh unto these Plantations they have no houses to dwell
in, as in other places of the Indies. Some are of opinion that these Indians
eat humane Whether they eat humane flesh.
flesh; which seems to be confirmed by what happened when Lolonois was there.
Two of his Companions, the one being a Frenchman, and the other a Spaniard,
went into the Woods, where having stragled up and down some while, they met
with a Troop of Indians that began to pursue them. They defended themselves as
well as they could with their Swords; but at last were forced to fly. This the
Frenchman performed with great agility; but the Spaniard being not so swift as
his Companion, was taken by those Barbarians, and heard of no more. Some days
after, they attempted to go into the Woods to see what was become of their
Companion. Unto this effect twelve Pirates set forth very well armed, amongst
whom was the Frenchman, who conducted them, and showed them the place where he
left his Companion. Here they found, nigh unto the place, that the Indians had
kindled fire; and at a small distance from thence, they found the bones of the
said Spaniard very well roasted. From hence they inferred, that they had
roasted the miserable Spaniard, of whom they found more, some pieces of flesh
ill scraped off from the bones; and one hand, which had only two fingers
remaining.

They marched farther on, seeking for Indians. They seek for Indians, and find
some.
Of these they found a great number together, who endeavored to escape, seeing
the Pirates so strong and well armed. But they overtook some of them, and
brought on board their Ships five men and four women. With these they used all
the means they could invent to make themselves be understood, and gain their
affections; giving them certain small trifles, as Knives, Beads, and the like
things. They gave them also Victuals and Drink; but nothing of either would
they taste. It was also observable, that all the while they were Prisoners on
board the Ships, they spoke not one word to each other among themselves. Thus
the Pirates seeing these poor They (...) them tri^s, and (...) t^m (...).
Indians were much afraid of them, presented them again with some small things,
and let them go. When they departed, they made signs, giving them to
understand, they would come again. But they soon forgot their Benefactors, and
were never heard nor seen more. Neither could any notice afterward be had of
these Indians, or any others, in the whole Island, after that time. Which
occasioned the Pirates to suspect that both those that were taken, and all the
rest of the Island, did all swim away by night unto some other little
neighboring Islands: Especially considering they could never set eyes on any
Indian more; neither was there ever seen any All the Indians (...).
Boat or other Vessel in the whole circumference of the Island.

In the mean while, the Pirates were very desi^s to s^ their Longboat finished,
which they were building with the timber of the Ship that (...) up^ the (...).
Yet considering their wor^ would be bu^ long, they began to cultivate some
pieces of ground. Here they sowed French Beans, which came to maturity in six
weeks time; and many other Fruits. They had good provision of Spanish Wheat,
Bananas, Racovent, and other things. With the Wheat they made Bread, and baked
it in portable Ovens, which they had brought with them to this effect. Thus
they feared not hunger in those desert places. After this manner they employed
themselves for the space of five The Pirates were here five or s^ months.
or six months. Which time being past, and the Longboat finished, they
determined to go unto the River of Nicaragua, to see if they could take some
few Canows, and herewith return unto the said Islands and fetch away their
Companions that remained behind, by reason the Boat they had built was not
capable of transporting so many men together. Hereupon, to evite any disputes
that might arise, they cast Lots among They cast Lots among themselves.
themselves, determining thereby who should go, or stay in the Island.

The Lot fell only upon one half of the people of the lost Vessel; who
embarked upon the Longboat they had built, and also the Skiff which they had
before; the other half remaining on shore. Lolonois having set sail, arrived in
few days at the mouth of the River of Nicaragua. Here suddenly his ill fortune
assailed him, which Misfortunet of Lolonoi^
of long time had been reserved for him, as a punishment due unto the multitude
of horrible Crimes, which in his licentious and wicked life he had committed.
Here he met with both Spaniards and Indians, who jointly together set upon him
and his Companions, and used them so roughly, that the greatest part of the
Pirates were killed upon the place. Lolonois, with those that remained alive,
had much ado to escape on board their Boats aforementioned. Yet notwithstanding
this great loss of men, he resolved not to Which preceded his death.
return to seek those he had left at the Isle of Pertas, without taking some
Boats, such as he looked for. Unto this effect he determined to go farther on
to the coasts of Cartagena, with design to seek for Canows. But God Almighty,
the time of his divine Justice being now already come, had appointed the
Indians of Darien to be the Instruments and Executioners thereof. These Indians
of Darien are esteemed Death of Lolonois.
as Bravo's, or wild savage Indians, by the neighboring Spaniards, who never
could reduce them to civility. Hither Lolonois came (being rather brought by
his evil Conscience that cried for punishment of his Crimes) thinking to act in
that Country his former cruelties. But the Indians within a few days after his
arrival took him Prisoner, and tore him in pieces alive, throwing his Body limb
by limb into the fire, and his Ashes into the air; to the intent no trace nor
memory might remain of such an infamous inhumane Creature. One of his
Companions gave me an exact account of the aforesaid Tragedy; affirming withal,
that he himself had escaped the same punishment, not without the greatest of
difficulties. He believed also, that many of his Comrades who were taken
Prisoners in that Rencounter And of his Companions.
by the Indians of Darien, were after the same manner as their cruel Captain,
torn in pieces, and burned alive. Thus ends the History of the life and
miserable death of that infernal Wretch Lolonois. Who full of horrid,
execrable, and enormous deeds, and also debtor to so much innocent blood, died
by cruel and butcherly hands, such as his own were in the course of his life.

Those that remained in the Island de las Pertas, How they got away who
remained behind.
waiting for the return of them who got away only to their great misfortune,
hearing no news of their Captain, nor Companions, at last embarked themselves
upon the Ship of a certain Pirat, who happened to pass that way. This Fellow
was come from Iamaica with intent to land at the Cape of Gracias a Dios; and
from hence to mount the River with his Canows, and take the City of Cartagena.
These two parcels of Pirates being now joined together, were infinitely gladded
at the presence and society of one another. Those, because they found
themselves delivered from their miseries, poverty, and necessities, wherein now
they had lived the space of ten entire months. These, because they were now
considerably strengthened, whereby to effect with greater satisfaction their
intended designs. Hereupon, as soon as they were arrived unto the aforesaid
Cape of Gracias a Dios, they all put They arrive at the Cape of Gracias a Dios.
themselves into Canows, and with these Vessels mounted the River, being in
number five hundred men; leaving only five or six persons in every Ship, to
keep them. They took no Provisions with them, as being persuaded they should
find everywhere sufficient. But these their own With intent to go to Cartagena.
hopes were found totally vain, as not being grounded in God Almighty. For he
ordained it so, that the Indians having perceived their coming, were all fled
before them, not leaving in their houses nor Plantations, which for the most
part do border upon the sides of Rivers, any thing of necessary Provisions or
Victuals. Hereby, in few days after they had quitted their Ships, they were
reduced to such necessity and hunger, as nothing could be more extreme.
Notwithstanding, the hopes they had conceived of making They endure extreme
hung^r.
their fortunes very soon, did animate them for the present. Being contented in
this affliction with a few green Herbs, such as they could gather as they went
upon the banks of the River.

Yet all this courage and vigor of mind could not last above a fortnight.
After which, their hearts, as well as their bodies, began to fail for hunger:
Insomuch as they found themselves constrained to quit the River, and betake
themselves unto the Woods, seeking out some small Villages They go to the Woods
to seek relief.
where they might find relief for their necessity. But all was in vain: For
having ranged up and down the Woods for some days, without finding the least
comfort to their hungry desires, they were forced to return again unto the
River. Where being come, they thought it convenient to descend unto the
Seacoasts where they had left their Ships, not being able to find in the
present Enterprise what they sought for. In this laborious journey they were
reduced to such extremity, Are reduced to great extremity.
that many of them devoured their own Shoes, the Sheaths of their Swords,
Knives, and other things of this kind. Being almost ravenous, and fully
desirous to meet some Indians, intending to sacrifice them unto their teeth. At
last they arrived at the coast of the Sea, where they found some comfort and
relief to their former miseries, and also means to seek more. Yet
notwithstanding, the greatest part of them perished through faintness, and
other Diseases contracted by hunger; which occasioned also the remaining part
to disperse. Till at last, by degrees, many They disperse
or most of them fell into the same Pit that Lolonois did. Of him, and of his
Companions, I have hitherto given my Reader a compendious Narrative; which now
I shall continue with the Actions and Exploits of Captain Henry Morgan. Who may
not undeservedly be called the second Lolonois; as not being unlike or
inferior unto him, either in Achievements against the Spaniards, or in
Robberies of many innocent People.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Origin and Descent of Capt. Henry Morgan. His Exploits, and a
Continuation of the most remarkable Actions of his Life.

CAptain Henry Morgan was born in the Kingdom of England, and there in the
Origin of Capt. Morgan.
Principality of Wales. His Father was a rich Yeoman or Farmer, and of good
quality in that Country, even as most who bear that name in Wales, are known to
be. Morgan being as yet young, had no inclinations to follow the Calling of his
Father; and therefore left his Country, and came toward the Seacoasts to seek
some other Employ more suitable to his humor, that aspired to something else.
There he found entertainment in a certain Port where several Ships Sr. HEN:
MORGAN Part. 2. Page. 60.
did lie at Anchor, that were bound for the Isle of Barbadas. With these Ships
he resolved to go He goes to Barbadas.
in the service of one, who, according to what is commonly practiced in those
parts by the English and other Nations, sold him as soon as he came on shore.
He served his time at Barbadas; and when he had obtained his liberty, thence
transferred himself unto the Island of Iamaica, there And thence to Jamaica.
to seek new fortunes. Here he found two Vessels of Pirates that were ready to
go to Sea. Being destitute of Employ, he put himself into one of these Ships,
with intent to follow the exercises He serves the Pirates.
of that sort of people. He learned in a little while their manner of living;
and so exactly, that having performed three or four Voyages with some profit
and good success, he agreed with some of his Comrades, who had gotten by the
same Voyages a small parcel of money, to join stocks and buy a Ship. The Vessel
being bought, they unanimously chose him to be the Captain and Commander
thereof.

With this Ship, soon after, he set forth from Iamaica to cruze upon the coasts
of Campeche; in which Voyage he had the fortune to take several Ships, with
which he returned triumphant to the same Island. Here he found at the same time
an old Pirat, named Mansvelt, (of whom Mansvelt, an old Pirat.
we have already made mention in the first part of this book) who was then
busied in equipping a considerable Fleet of Ships, with design to land upon
the Continent, and pillage whatever came in his way. Mansvelt seeing Captain
Morgan return with so many Prizes, judged him, from his actions, to be of
undaunted courage; and hereupon was moved to choose him for his Vice Admiral
Makes Morgan Vice Admiral.
in that Expedition. Thus having fitted out fifteen Ships, between great and
small, they set sail from Iamaica with five hundred men, both Walloons and
French. With this Fleet they arrived not long after at the Isle of St.
Catharine, They go to the Isle of St. Catharine.
situated nigh unto the Continent of Costa Rica, in the altitude of twelve
degrees and a half, Northern latitude, and distant thirty five leagues from the
River of Chagre, between North and South. Here they made their first descent,
landing most of their men presently after.

Being now come to try their Arms and Fortune, they in a short while forced the
Garrison And take it.
that kept the Island to surrender and deliver into their hands all the Forts
and Castles belonging thereunto. All these they instantly demolished, reserving
only one; wherein they placed one hundred men of their own Party, and all the
Slaves they had taken from the Spaniards. With the rest of their men they
marched unto another (...)
small Island nigh unto that of St. Catharine, and adjoining so near unto it,
that with a Bridge they could get over. In few days they made a Bridge, and
passed thither, conveying also over it all the pieces of Ordance which they had
taken upon the great Island. Having ruined and destroyed, with Sword and Fire,
both the Islands, leaving what Orders were necessary at the Castle
abovementioned, they put forth to Sea again, with the They put ou^ to Sea again.
Spaniards they had taken Prisoners. Yet these they set on shore, not long
after, upon the firm Land, nigh unto a place called Puerto Velo. After this,
they began to cruze upon the coasts of Costa Rica, till that finally they came
unto the River of Colla, designing to rob and pillage all the Towns they could
find in those parts, and And come to the River of Colla.
afterward to pass unto the Village of Nata, to do the same.

The President or Governor of Panama having had advice of the arrival of these
Pirates, and the Hostilities they committed everywhere, thought it his duty to
set forth to their encounter The Governor of Panama comes to meet them.
with a body of men. His coming caused the Pirates to retire suddenly with all
speed and care. Especially seeing the whole Country alarmed at their arrival,
and that their designs were known, and consequently could be of no great
effect at that present. Hereupon they returned unto the They return to St. Cath.
Isle of St. Catharine, to visit the hundred men they had left in garrison
there. The Governor of these men was a certain Frenchman named le Sieur
Simon; who behaved himself very well in that charge, mean while Mansvelt was
absent. Insomuch that he had put the great Island in a very good posture of
defense; and the little And find all things in good posture.
one he had caused to be cultivated with many fertile Plantations, which were
sufficient to revictual the whole Fleet with Provisions and Fruits, not only
for present refreshment, but also in case of a new Voyage. Mansvelt's
inclinations were very much bent to keep these two Islands Mansvelt is desirous
to (...) S. Cath.
in perpetual possession, as being very commodious, and profitably situated for
the use of the Pirates. Chiefly because they were so near unto the Spanish
Dominions, and easily to be defended against them; as I shall represent in the
third part of this History more at large, in a Copper Plate, delineated for
this purpose.

Hereupon Mansvelt determined to return unto He returns to Jamaica for
Recruits.
Iamaica, with design to send some Recruit unto the Isle of St. Catharine,
that in case of any invasion of the Spaniards, the Pirates might be provided for
a defense. As soon as he arrived, he propounded his mind and intentions unto
the Governor of that Island; but he liked not the Propositions of Mansvelt,
fearing lest by granting (...) (...) (...) him.
such things, he should displease his Master the King of England. Besides, that
giving him the men he desired, and other necessaries for that purpose, he must
of necessity diminish and weaken the Forces of that Island whereof he was
Governor. Mansvelt seeing the unwillingness of the Governor of Iamaica, and
that of his own accord he could not compass what he desired, with the same
intent and designs went unto Goes to Tortuga for the same purpose, and dies.
the Isle of Tortuga. But there, before he could accomplish his desires, or put
in execution what was intended, Death suddenly surprised him, and put a period
to his wicked life; all things hereby remaining in suspense, until the occasion
which I shall hereafter relate.

Le Sieur Simon, who remained at the Isle of St. Catharine in quality of
Governor thereof, receiving no news from Mansvelt his Admiral, was greatly
impatient, and desirous to know what might be the cause thereof. In the mean
while, Don John Perez de Guzman, being newly come to The Governor of Costa
Rica.
the government of Costa Rica, thought it no ways convenient for the interest
of the King of Spain, that that Island should remain in the hands of the
Pirates. And hereupon he equipped a considerable Fleet, which he sent unto the
said Island to retake it. But before he came to use any great violence, he writ
a Letter unto le Sieur Simon, Writes unto him of St. Catharine.
wherein he gave him to understand, if he would surrender the Island unto his
Catholic Majesty, he should be very well rewarded; but in case of refusal,
severely punished when he had forced him to do it. Le Sieur Simon seeing no
appearance or probability of being able to defend it alone, nor any emolument
that by so doing could accrue either unto him or his People; after some small
resistance, delivered up the Island into the hands of its true Lord and Master,
under the same Articles they had obtained it from the Spaniards. Few days after
the surrendry of the Island, there arrived from Iamaica an English Ship which
the Governor of the said Island had sent underhand, wherein was a good supply
of people, both men and women. The Spaniards from the Castle having espied this
Ship, put forth the English Colors, and persuaded le Sieur Simon to go on
board, and conduct the said Ship into a Port they assigned him. This he
performed immediately with dissimulation, whereby they were all made Prisoners.
A certain Spanish Enginier A Spaniard describes the retaking of St. Cath.
has published, before me, an exact Account and Relation of the retaking of
the Isle of St. Catharine by the Spaniards; which printed Paper being fallen
into my hands, I have thought it fit to be inserted here.

A true Relation and particular Account of the Victory obtained by the Arms of
his Catholic Majesty against the English Pirates, by the direction and valor
of Don John Perez de Guzman, Knight of the Order of St. James, Governor and
Captain General of Tierra Firm, and the Province of Veraguas.

THe Kingdom of Tierra Firm, which of it self is sufficiently strong to
repulse and extirpate great Fleets, but more especially the Pirates of Iamaica,
had several ways notice, under several hands, imparted to the Governor
thereof, that fourteen English Vessels did cruze upon the Coasts belonging to
his Catholic Majesty. The 14th day of July, 1665. news came unto Panama, that
the English Pirates of the said Fleet were arrived at Puerto de Naos, and had
forced the Spanish Garrison of the Isle of St. Catharine, whose Governor was
Don Estevan del Campo; and that they had possessed themselves of the said
Island, taking Prisoners the Inhabitants, and destroying all that ever they
met. Moreover, about the same time Don John Perez de Guzman received particular
information of these Robberies from the relation of some Spaniards who escaped
out of the Island, (and whom he ordered to be conveyed unto Puerto Velo) who
more distinctly told him, That the aforementioned Pirates came into the Island
the second day of May, by night, without being perceived by any body: And that
the next day, after some disputes by Arms, they had taken the Fortresses, and
made Prisoners all the Inhabitants and Soldiers, not one excepted, unless
those that by good fortune had escaped their hands. This being heard by Don
John, he called a Council of War, wherein he declared the great progress the
said Pirates had made in the Dominions of his Catholic Majesty. Here likewise
he propounded, That it was absolutely necessary to send some Forces unto the
Isle of St. Catharine, sufficient to retake it from the Pirates; the Honor and
Interest of his Majesty of Spain being very narrowly concerned herein.
Otherwise the Pirates by such Conquests might easily, in course of time, possess
themselves of all the Countries thereabouts. Unto these Reasons some were
found, who made answer, That the Pirates, as not being able to subsist in the
said Island, would of necessity consume and waste themselves, and be forced to
quit it, without any necessity of retaking it. That consequently it was not
worth the while to engage in so many expenses and troubles, as might be
foreseen this would cost. Notwithstanding these Reasons to the contrary, Don
John, as one who was an expert and valiant Soldier, gave orders that quantity
of Provisions should be conveyed unto Puerto Velo, for the use and service of
the Militia. And neither to be idle nor negligent in his Masters Affairs, he
transported himself thither, with no small danger of his life. Here he arrived
the seventh day of July, with most things necessary to the expedition in hand;
where he found in the Port a good Ship, called St. Vincent, that belonged unto
the Company of the Negro's. This Ship being of it self a strong Vessel, and
well mounted with Guns, he manned and victualled very well, and sent unto the
Isle of St. Catharine, constituting Captain Joseph Sanchez Ximenez, Major of
the City of Puerto Velo, Commander thereof. The people he carried with him were
two hundred threescore and ten Soldiers, and thirty seven Prisoners of the
same Island: Besides four and thirty Spaniards belonging to the Garrison of
Puerto Velo, nine and twenty Mulato's of Panama, twelve Indians very dexterous
at shooting with Bows and Arrows, seven expert and able Gunners, two
Lieutenants, two Pilots, one Surgeon, and one Religious man of the Order of
St. Francis, for their Chaplain.

Don John soon after gave his orders unto every one of the Officers,
instructing them how they ought to behave themselves; telling them withal, that
the Governor of Cartagena would assist and supply them with more Men, Boats,
and all things else they should find necessary for that Enterprise; to which
effect he had already written unto the said Governor. On the 24th day of the
said month, Don John commanded the Ship to weigh Anchor, and sail out of the
Port. Then seeing a fair Wind to blow, he called before him all the People
designed for that Expedition, and made them a Speech, encouraging them to fight
against the Enemies of their Country and Religion; but more especially against
those inhumane Pirates, who had heretofore committed so many horrid and cruel
actions against the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty. Withal, promising unto
every one of them most liberal Rewards; but especially unto such as should
behave themselves as they ought in the service of their King and Country. Thus
Don John bid them farewell; and immediately the Ship weighed Anchor, and set
sail under a favorable gale of Wind. The 22th of the said month they arrived
at Cartagena, and presented a Letter unto the Governor of the said City from
the noble and valiant Don John; who received it, with testimonies of great
affection unto the person of Don John, and his Majesty's service. And seeing
their resolute Courage to be conformable to his desires and expectation, he
promised them his assistance, which should be with one Frigate, one Galeon, one
Boat, and one hundred and twenty six men, the one half out of his own Garrison,
and the other half Mulato's. Thus all of them being well provided with
necessaries, they set forth from the Port of Cartagena, the second day of
August; and the 10th of the said month they arrived within sight of the Isle of
St. Catharine, toward the Western point thereof. And although the Wind was
contrary, yet they reached the Port, and came to an Anchor within it; having
lost one of their Boats, by foul weather, at the Rock called Quita signos.

The Pirates seeing our Ships come to an Anchor, gave them presently three Guns
with Bullets; the which were soon answered in the same coin. Hereupon the Major
Joseph Sanchez Ximenez sent on shore, unto the Pirates, one of his Officers, to
require them, in the name of the Catholic King his Master, to surrender the
Island, seeing they had taken it in the midst of Peace between the two Crowns
of Spain and England; and that in case they would be obstinate, he would
certainly put them all to the Sword. The Pirates made answer, That Island had
once before belonged unto the Government and Dominions of the King of England;
and that instead of surrendering it, they preferred to lose their lives.

On Friday the 13th of the said month, three Negro's, from the Enemy, came
swimming aboard our Admiral. These brought intelligence, that all the Pirates
that were upon the Island were only threescore and twelve in number; and that
they were under a great consternation, seeing such considerable Forces come
against them. With this intelligence the Spaniards resolved to land, and
advance toward the Fortresses; the which ceased not to fire as many great Guns
against them, as they possibly could; which were corresponded in the same
manner on our side, till dark night. On Sunday the 15th of the said month,
which was the day of the Assumption of our Lady, the weather being very calm
and clear, the Spaniards began to advance thus. The Ship named St. Vincent,
which rid Admiral, discharged two whole broad-sides upon the Battery called the
Conception. The Ship called St. Peter, that was Vice Admiral, discharged
likewise her Guns against the other Battery named St. James. In the mean while,
our People were landed in small Boats, directing their course toward the point
of the Battery last mentioned, and from thence they marched toward the Gate
called Cortadur^. The Lieutenant Francis de Cazeres, being desirous to view the
strength of the Enemy, with only fifteen men, was compelled to retreat in all
haste, by reason of the great Guns which played so furiously upon the place
where he stood. They shooting not only pieces of Iron and small Bullets, but
also the Organs of the Church, discharging in every shot, threescore Pipes at a
time.

Notwithstanding this heat of the Enemy, Captain Don Joseph Ramirez de Leyva,
with threescore men, made a strong Attack, wherein they fought on both sides
very desperately, till that at last he overcame, and forced the Pirates to
surrender the Fort he had taken in hand.

On the other side, Captain John Galeno, with fourscore and ten men, passed
over the Hills, to advance that way toward the Castle of St. Teresa. In the
mean while, the Major Don Joseph Sanchez Ximenez, as Commander in chief, with
the rest of his men, set forth from the Battery of St. James, passing the Port
with four Boats, and landing in despite of the Enemy. About this same time,
Captain John Galeno began to advance with the men he led unto the forementioned
Fortress. So that our men made three Attacks upon the Enemy, on three several
sides, at one and the same time, with great courage and valor. Thus the Pirates
seeing many of their men already killed, and that they could in no manner
subsist any longer, retreated toward Cortadura, where they surrendered
themselves, and likewise the whole Island, into our hands. Our People possessed
themselves of all, and set up the Spanish Colors, as soon as they had rendered
thanks to God Almighty for the Victory obtained on such a signalized day. The
number of dead were six men of the Enemies, with many wounded, and threescore
and ten Prisoners. On our side was found only one man killed, and four wounded.

There was found upon the Island eight hundred pound of Powder, two hundred and
fifty pound of small Bullets, with many other Military Provisions. Among the
Prisoners were taken also two Spaniards, who had born Arms under the English
against his Catholic Majesty. These were commanded to be shot to death the
next day by order of the Major. The 10th day of September arrived at the Isle
an English Vessel, which being seen at a great distance by the Major, he gave
order unto le Sieur Simon, who was a Frenchman, to go and visit the said Ship,
and tell them that were on board, the Island belonged still unto the English.
He performed the commands, and found in the said Ship only fourteen men, one
woman, and her daughter; who were all instantly made Prisoners.

The English Pirates were all transported unto Puerto Velo; excepting only
three, who by order of the Governor were carried to Panama, there to work in
the Castle of St. Ierom. This Fortification is an excellent piece of
Workmanship, and very strong; being raised in the middle of the Port, of
quadrangular form, and of very hard stone. Its elevation or height is of
eighty eight geometrical feet; the Walls being of fourteen, and the Curtains of
seventy five feet diameter. It was built at the expenses of several private
persons, the Governor of the City furnishing the greatest part of the money;
so that it did not cost his Majesty any sum at all.

CHAP. V.
Some account of the Island of Cuba. Capt. Morgan attempteth to preserve the
Isle of St. Catharine, as a Refuge and Nest unto Pirates; but fails of his
designs. He arriveth at and takes the Village of el Puerto del Principe.

CAptain Morgan seeing his Predecessor and Admiral Mansvelt was dead,
endeavored, Capt. Morgan attempteth to keep St. Cath.
as much as he could, and used all the means that were possible, to preserve
and keep in perpetual possession the Isle of St. Catharine, seated nigh unto
that of Cuba. His principal intent was to consecrate it as a Refuge and
Sanctuary unto the Pirates of those parts; putting it in a sufficient condition
of being a convenient Receptacle or Storehouse of their Preys and Robberies.
Unto this effect he left no stone unmoved whereby to compass his designs,
writing for the same purpose unto several Merchants that lived in Virginia and
New England, and persuading them to send him Provisions and other necessary
things, toward the putting the said Island in such a posture of defense, as it
might neither fear any external dangers, nor be moved at any suspicions of
invasion from any side, that might attempt to disquiet it. At last all his
thoughts and cares proved But fails in the design.
ineffectual, by the Spaniards retaking the said Island. Yet notwithstanding,
Captain Morgan retained his ancient courage, which instantly put him upon new
designs. Thus he equipped at first a Ship, with intention to gather an entire
He equippeth another Fleet.
Fleet, both as great and as strong as he could compass. By degrees he put the
whole matter in execution, and gave order unto every member of his Fleet, they
should meet at a certain Port of Cuba. Here he determined to call a Council,
and deliberate concerning what were best to be done, and what place first they
should fall upon. Leaving these new preparations in this condition, I shall
here give my Reader some small account of the aforementioned Isle of Cuba, in
whose Ports this expedition was hatched, seeing I omitted to do it in its
proper place.

The Island of Cuba lies from East to West, Description of the Island of Cuba.
in the altitude and situation of twenty unto three and twenty degrees,
Northern latitude; being in length one hundred and fifty German leagues, and
about forty in breadth. Its Fertility is equal unto that of the Island of
Hispaniola. Besides which, it affords many things proper for Trading and
Commerce, such as are Hides of several Beasts, particularly those that in
Europe are called Hides of Havana. On all sides it is surrounded with a great
number of small Islands, which go all together under the name of Cayos. Islands
called Cayos, the refuge of Pirates.
Of these little Islands the Pirates make great use, as of their own proper
Ports of refuge. Here most commonly they make their Meetings, and hold their
Councils, how to assault more easily the Spaniards. It is thoroughly irrigated on
all sides with the streams of plentiful and pleasant Rivers, Rivers.
whose entries do form both secure and spacious Ports. Besides many other
Harbors for Ships, which along the calm shores and coasts do adorn many parts
of this rich and beautiful Island. All which, contribute very much unto its
happiness, by facilitating the exercise of Trade; whereunto they invite both
Natives and Aliens. The chiefest of these Ports are San Tiago, Bayame, Santa
Ports.
Maria, Espiritu Santo, Trinidad, Xagoa, Cabo de Corrientes, and others; all
which are seated on the South Side of the Island. On the Northern side hereof
are found these following: La Havana, Puerto Mariano, Santa Cruz, Mata Ricos,
and Barracoa.

This Island has two principal Cities, by which Cities.
the whole Country is governed, and unto which all the Towns and Villages
thereof do give obedience. The first of these is named San Tiago, or St. James,
being seated on the South Side, and having under its jurisdiction one half of
the Island. The chief Magistrates hereof are a Bishop Government.
and a Governor, who command over the Villages and Towns belonging to the half
abovementioned. The chiefest of these are, on the Southern side, Espiritu
Santo, Puerto de el Principe, and Bayame. On the North-side it has Barracoa,
and the Town called de los Cayos. The greatest part of the Commerce driven at
the aforementioned Their Commerce with the Canaries
City of San Tiago, comes from the Canary-Islands; whither they transport
great quantity of Tobacco, Sugar, and Hides: which sorts of Merchandise are
drawn to the head-City from the subordinate Towns and Villages. In former times
this City of San Tiago was miserably sacked by the Pirates of Iamaica and
Tortuga; San Tiago sacked by Pirates.
notwithstanding that it is defended by a considerable Castle.

The City and Port de la Havana lies between the North and West Side of the
Island. This is Havana.
one of the renownedst and strongest places of all the West Indies. Its
jurisdiction extends over (...) Jurisdiction.
the other half of the Island; the chiefest places under it being Santa Cruz on
the Northern side, and la Trinidad on the South. From hence is transported huge
quantity of Tobacco; which is (...).
sent in great plenty unto New Spain and Costa Rica, even as far as the
South Sea. Besides many Ships laden with this Commodity, that are signed into
Spain, and other parts of Europe, not only in the leaf, but also in rowls.
This City is defended by three Castles, very great and strong; two of which lie
toward the Port, and Castles.
the other is seated upon a hill that commands the Town. It Is esteemed to
contain ten thousand Families, more or less; among which number of people, the
Merchants of this place trade Inhabitants.
in New Spain, Campeche, Honduras, and Horida. All the Ships that come from the
parts aforementioned, as also from Caracas, Cartagena, and Costa Rica, are
necessitated to take their Provisions in at Havana, wherewith to make their
Voyage for Spain; this being the necessary and straight Convenient Situation.
course they ought to steer for the South of Europe, and other parts. The
Plate-Fleet of Spain, which the Spaniards call Flota, being homeward bound,
touches here yearly, to take in the rest of their full Cargo, as Hides,
Tobacco, and Campechewood.

Captain Morgan had been no longer than two months in the abovementioned Ports
of the South of Cuba, when he had got together a Fleet of Capt. Morgan soon
gets a good Fleet.
twelve sail, between Ships and great Boats; wherein he had seven hundred
fighting men, part of which were English, and part French. They called a
Council; and some were of opinion, They design against Havana.
'twere convenient to assault the City of Havana, under the obscurity of the
night. Which Enterprise, they said, might easily be performed; especially if
they could but take any few of the Ecclesiastics, and make them Prisoners.
Yea, that the City might be sacked, before the Castles could put themselves in
a posture of defense. Others propounded, according to their several Diversity
of opinions.
opinions, other attempts. Notwithstanding, the former Proposal was rejected,
because many of the Pirates had been Prisoners at other times in the said City;
and these affirmed, nothing of consequence could be done, unless with fifteen
hundred men. Moreover, that with all this number of people, they ought first to
go unto the Island de los Pinos, and land them in small Boats about Matamano,
fourteen leagues distant from the aforesaid City, whereby to accomplish by
these means and order their designs.

Finally, they saw no possibility of gathering so great a Fleet; and hereupon,
with that they had, they concluded to attempt some other place. Among the rest
was found, at last, one who propounded, they should go and assault the They
pitch upon (...) Puerto del Principe.
Town of el Puerto de el Principe. This Proposition he endeavored to persuade,
by saying, he knew that place very well; and that being at a distance from the
Sea, it never was sacked by any Pirates; whereby the Inhabitants were rich, as
A^ ^ing a (...) (...).
exercising their Trade for ready money, with those of Havana, who kept here an
established The Town of Puerto del Principe taken and sacked Part 2 Page. 80.
Commerce, which consisted chiefly in Hides. This Proposal was presently
admitted by Captain Morgan, and the chiefest of his Companions. And hereupon
they gave order unto every Captain to weigh Anchor and set sail, steering their
course toward that coast that lies nearest unto el Puerto de el Principe.
Hereabouts is to be seen a Bay, named by the Spaniards, el Puerto de Santa
Maria. Being arrived at this Bay, a certain Spaniard, Port of St. Mary.
who was Prisoner on board the Fleet, swam ashore by night, and came unto the
Town of Puerto del Principe, giving account unto the Inhabitants of the design
the Pirates had against them. This he affirmed to have overheard in their
discourse, mean while they thought he did Their design betrayed.
not understand the English Tongue. The Spaniards, as soon as they received
this fortunate advice, began instantly to hide their Riches, and carry away
what Movables they could. The Governor also immediately raised all the people
of the Town, both Freemen and Slaves; and The Spaniards prepare themselves.
with part of them took a Post by which of necessity the Pirates were to pass.
He commanded likewise many Trees to be cut down and laid amidst the ways, to
hinder their passage. In like manner he placed several Ambuscades, which were
strengthened with some pieces of Cannon, Ambuscades
to play upon them on their march. He gathered in all, about eight hundred men,
of which he distributed several into the aforementioned Ambuscades, and with
the rest he begirt the Town; displaying them upon the plain of a spacious
Field, from whence they could see the coming of the Pirates at length.

Captain Morgan, with his men, being now upon the march, found the avenues and
passages unto the Town impenetrable. Hereupon they took their way through the
Wood, traversing it with great difficulty, whereby they escaped They escape the
Ambuscades.
diverse Ambuscades. Thus at last they came into the Plain aforementioned;
which, from its figure, is called by the Spaniards, la Savana, or the Sheet.
The Governor seeing them come, made a detachment of a Troop of Horse; which he
sent to charge them in the front, thinking to disperse them, and by putting
them to flight, pursue them with his main Body. But this design succeeded not
as it was intended. For the Pirates marched in very good rank and file, at the
sound of their Drums, and with flying Colors. When they came nigh unto the
Horse, they drew into the form of a Semicircle, and thus advanced toward the
Spaniards; who charged them like valiant and courageous Soldiers for some
while. But seeing that the Pirates were very dexterous at their Arms, and their
Governor, with many of their Companions, killed, they began to retreat toward
the Wood. Here they designed to save themselves with more advantage; but before
they could reach it, the greatest part of them were unfortunately killed by the
hands of the Pirates. Thus they left the Victory Many Spaniards killed.
unto these new-come Enemies, who had no considerable loss of men in this
Battle, and but very few wounded, howbeit the Skirmish continued for the space
of four hours. They entered the The Town taken.
Town, though not without great resistance of such as were within; who defended
themselves as long as was possible, thinking by their defense to hinder the
pillage. Hereupon, many seeing the Enemy within the Town, shut themselves up in
their own houses, and from thence made several shot against the Pirates. Who
perceiving the mischief of this disadvantage, presently began to threaten them,
saying, If you surrender not voluntarily, you shall soon see the Town in a
Flame, and your wives and children torn in pieces before your faces. With these
Menaces the Spaniards Entire surrendry of the Townsmen.
submitted entirely unto the discretion of the Pirates; believing they could not
continue there long, and would soon be forced to dislodge.

As soon as the Pirates had possessed themselves of the Town, they enclosed all
the Spaniards, both men, women, children, and slaves, in several Churches; and
gathered all the Goods they could find by way of pillage. Afterward they
searched the whole Country round about the Town, bringing in, day by day, many
Goods and Prisoners, with much Provision. With this they fell to banqueting
among themselves, and making great Cheer, after their customary way; without
remembering the poor Prisoners, whom they permitted to starve in the Churches
for hunger. In the mean while they ceased not to torment them daily after an
inhumane manner, thereby to make them confess where they had hid their Goods,
Moneys, and other things; though little or nothing was left them. Unto this
effect they punished also the women and little children, given them nothing to
eat; whereby the greatest part perished.

When they could find no more to rob, and that Provisions began to grow scarce,
they thought it convenient to depart, and seek new fortunes They conclude to go
away. The Town put to ransom.
in other places. Hence they intimated to the Prisoners, They should find
moneys to ransom themselves, else they should be all transported to Jamaica.
Which being done, if they did not pay a second Ransom for the Town, they would
turn every house into ashes. The Spaniards hearing these severe Menaces,
nominated among themselves four Fellow Prisoners Messengers sent to gather it.
to go and seek for the abovementioned Contributions. But the Pirates, to the
intent they should return speedily with the Ransoms prescribed, tormented
several in their presence, before they departed, with all the rigor
imaginable. After few days, the Spaniards returned from the fatigue of their
unreasonable Commissions, telling Captain Morgan, We have ran up and down, and
searched all the neighboring Woods and places we most suspected, and yet have
not been able to find any of our own Party, nor consequently any fruit of our
Embassy. But if you are pleased to have a little longer patience with us, we
shall certainly cause all that you demand, to be paid within the space of
fifteen days. Captain Morgan was contented, as it should seem, to grant them
this Petition. But not long after, there came into the Town seven or eight
Pirates, who had been ranging in the Woods and Fields, and got thereabouts some
considerable Booty. These brought among other Prisoners, a certain Negro, whom
they had taken with Letters about him. Captain Morgan having perused them,
found they Letters intercepted from San Tiago.
were from the Governor of San Tiago, being written unto some of the
Prisoners; wherein he told them, They should not make too much haste to pay any
Ransom for their Town or Persons, or any other Pretext. But on the contrary,
they should put off the Pirates as well as they could with excuses and delays;
expecting to be relieved by him within a short while, when he would certainly
come to their aid. This intelligence being heard by Captain Morgan, he
immediately gave orders, that all they had robbed should be carried on board
the Ships. And withal, he intimated to the Spaniards, that the very next day
they should pay their Ransoms; forasmuch as he would not wait one moment
longer, but reduce the whole Town to ashes, in Which cause the Pirates to
retreat.
case they failed to perform the sum he demanded.

With this intimation, Captain Morgan made no mention unto the Spaniards of the
Letters he had intercepted. Whereupon they made him answer, That it was totally
impossible for them to give such a sum of money in so short a space of time;
seeing their fellow-Townsmen were not to be found in all the Country
thereabouts. Captain Morgan knew full well their intentions; and withal,
thought it not convenient to remain there any longer time. Hence he demanded of
them only five hundred Oxen or Cows, together with sufficient Salt wherewith
to salt them. Hereunto he added only this condition, that they should carry
them on board his Ships: which they 500 Beeves granted.
promised to do. Thus he departed with all his men, taking with him only six
of the principal Prisoners, as Pledges of what he intended. The next day the
Spaniards brought the Cattle and Salt unto the Ships, and required the
Prisoners. But Captain Morgan refused to deliver them, till such time as they
had helped his men to kill and salt the Beeves. This was likewise performed in
great haste, he not caring to stay there any longer, lest he should be
surprised by the Forces that were gathering against him. Having received all on
board his Vessels, he set at liberty the Prisoners he had kept as Hostages of
his demands. Mean while these things were in agitation, there happened to arise
some dissentions between the Englishmen and the French. The occasion of their
discord was, as follows: A certain Frenchman Discord between the French and
English.
being employed in killing and salting one of the Beeves, an English Pirat came
to him and took away the Marrow-bones he had taken out of the Ox; which sort of
meat these people esteem very much. Hereupon they challenged one another. Being
come unto the place of duel, the Englishman drew his Sword treacherously
against the Frenchman, wounding him in the back, before he had put himself
into a just posture of defense; whereby he suddenly fell dead upon the place.
The other Frenchmen, desirous to revenge this base action, made an
Insurrection against the English. But Captain Morgan soon extinguished this
flame, by commanding the Criminal to be bound in Chains, and thus carried to
Iamaica; promising to them all, he would see justice done upon him. For
although it were permitted unto him to challenge his Adversary, yet was it not
lawful to kill him treacherously, as he did.

As soon as all things were in a readiness, and on board the Ships, and
likewise the Prisoners set at liberty, they sailed from thence, directing They
depart.
their course to a certain Island, where Captain Morgan intended to make a
Dividend of what they had purchased in that Voyage. Being arrived at the place
assigned, they found nigh the value of fifty thousand Pieces of Eight, both in
50000 Pieces of Eight robbed here.
money and goods. The sum being known, it caused a general resentment and
grief, to see such a small purchase; which was not sufficient to pay their
Debts at Iamaica Hereupon Captain Morgan propounded unto them, they should
think upon some other Enterprise and Pillage, before they returned home. But
the Frenchmen not being able to agree with the English, separated from their
company, leaving Captain The French separate from the English.
Morgan alone with those of his own Nation; notwithstanding all the persuasions
he used to reduce them to continue in his company. Thus they parted with all
external signs of friendship; Captain Morgan reiterating his promises unto
them, he would see justice done upon that Criminal. This he performed: for
being arrived at Iamaica, he caused him to be hanged; which was all the
satisfaction the French Pirates could expect.

CHAP. VI.
Captain Morgan resolves to attack and plunder the City of Puerto Velo. Unto
this effect he equippeth a Fleet, and, with little Expense and small Forces,
takes the said place.

SOme Nations may think, that the French having deserted Captain Morgan, the
English A new Fleet equipped.
alone could not have sufficient courage to attempt such great Actions, as
before. But Captain Morgan, who always communicated Vigor with his words,
infused such Spirits into his men, as were able to put every one of them
instantly upon new designs: They being all persuaded by his Reasons, that the
sole execution of his Orders, would be a certain means of obtaining great
Riches. This persuasion had such influence upon their minds, that with
unimitable courage they all resolved to follow him. The same likewise did a
certain Pirat of Campeche; who in An old Pirat of Campeche.
this occasion joined with Captain Morgan, to seek new fortunes under his
conduct, and greater advantages than he had found before. Thus Captain Morgan,
in a few days, gathered a Fleet of nine sail, between Ships and great Boats;
wherein he had four hundred and threescore military 460 men in all.
men.

After that all things were in a good posture of readiness, they put forth to
Sea, Captain Morgan imparting the design he had in his mind unto They s^t
forth toward Puerto Velo.
no body for that present. He only told them on several occasions, that, he
held as indubitable, he should make a good fortune by that Voyage, if strange
occurrences altered not the course of his designs. They directed their course
toward the Continent; where they arrived in few days upon the coast of Costa
Rica, with all their Fleet entire. No sooner had they discovered land, but
Captain Morgan declared his intentions to the Captains, and presently after
unto all the rest of the company. He told them, he intended in that Expedition
to plunder Puerto Velo, and that he would perform it by night, being resolved
to put the whole City to the sack, not the least corner escaping his diligence.
Moreover, to encourage them, he added, This Enterprise could not fail to
succeed well, seeing he had kept it secret in his mind, without revealing it to
any body; whereby they could not have notice of his coming. Unto this
proposition some made answer, They had not a sufficient number of men wherewith
to assault so strong and great a City. But Captain Morgan replied, If our
number is Sp^h ^f Capt. Morg.
small, our hearts are great. And the fewer persons we are, the more union and
better shares we shall have in the spoil. Hereupon, being stimulated with the
ambition of those vast Riches they promised themselves from their good success,
they unanimously concluded to venture upon that design. But now, to the intent
my Reader may better comprehend the incomparable boldness of this Exploit, it
may be necessary to say something beforehand of the City of Puerto Velo.

The City, which bears this name in America, Description of Puerto Velo.
is seated in the Province of Costa Rica, under the altitude of ten degrees
Northern latitude, at the distance of fourteen leagues from the Gulf of Darien,
and eight Westwards from the Port called Nombre de Dios. It is judged to be the
strongest place that the King of Spain possesses in all the West Indies,
excepting two, that is to say, Havana and Cartagena. Here are two Castles,
almost inexpugnable, that defend the City, being situated at the entry of the
Port; so that no Ship nor Boat can pass without permission. The Garrison
consists of three hundred Soldiers, and the Town constantly inhabited by
four hundred Families, more or less. The Merchants dwell not here, but only
reside for a while, when the Galeons come or go from Spain; by reason of the
unhealthiness of the Air, occasioned by certain Vapors that exhale from the
Mountains. Notwithstanding, their chief Warehouses are at Puerto Velo, howbeit
their Habitations be all the year long at Panama. From whence they bring the
Plate upon Mules, at such times as the Fair begins; and when the Ships,
belonging to the Company of Negro's, arrive here to sell Slaves.

Captain Morgan, who knew very well all the Avenues of this City, as also all
the neighboring Coasts, arrived in the dusk of the evening at They arrived at
Puerto de Naos.
the place called Puerto de Naos, distant ten leagues toward the West of
Puerto Velo. Being come unto this place, they mounted the River in their Ships,
as far as another Harbor called Puerto Pontin; where they came to an Anchor.
Here they put themselves immediately into Boats and Canows, leaving in the
Ships only a few men to keep them, and conduct them the next day unto the
Port. About midnight they came to a certain place called Estera longa Lemos,
where they all went on shore, and marched by land to the first Posts of the
City. They had in their company a certain Englishman, who had been formerly
And from thence at Puerto Velo.
a Prisoner in those parts, and who now served them for a Guide. Unto him and
three or four more, they gave commission to take the Centry, if possible, or
kill him upon the place. But they laid hands on him and apprehended him The
Centry taken.
with such cunning, as he had no time to give warning with his Musket, or make
any other noise. Thus they brought him, with his hands bound, unto Captain
Morgan, who asked him, How things went in the city, and what Forces they had:
with many other circumstances, which he was desirous to know. After every
question, they made him a thousand menaces to kill him, in case he declared not
the truth. Thus they began to advance toward the City, carrying always the
said Centry bound before them. Having marched about one quarter of a league,
they came unto the Castle that is nigh unto the City; which presently they
closely surrounded, so that no person could get either in or out of the said
Fortress. First Castle surrounded.


Being thus posted under the walls of the Castle, Captain Morgan commanded the
Centry, whom they had taken Prisoner, to speak unto those that were within,
charging them to surrender, and deliver themselves up to his discretion;
otherwise they should be all cut in pieces, without giving quarter to any one.
But they would hearken to none of these threats, beginning instantly to fire;
which gave notice unto the City, and this was suddenly alarmed. Yet
notwithstanding, although the Governor and Soldiers of the said Castle made
as great resistance as could be performed, they were constrained to surrender
unto the Pirates. These no sooner had taken the Castle, but they resolved to be
as good as their words, in putting the Spaniards to the Sword, thereby to
strike a terror into the rest of the City. Hereupon, having shut up all the
Soldiers and Officers, as Prisoners, into one Room, they instantly set fire
unto the Powder (whereof they found great quantity) and blew up the whole
Castle into the air, with all (...) taken and (...) up.
the Spaniards that were within. This being done, they pursued the course of
their Victory, falling upon the City, which as yet was not in order The City
entered.
to receive them. Many of the Inhabitants cast their precious Jewels and Moneys
into Wells and Cisterns, or hid them in other places under ground, to excuse,
as much as were possible, their being totally robbed. One party of the Pirates
being assigned to this purpose, ran immediately to the Cloisters, and took as
many They run to the Cloisters.
Religious men and women as they could find. The Governor of the City not
being able to rally the Citizens, through the huge confusion of the Town,
retired unto one of the Castles remaining, (...) Gover^ (...).
and from thence began to fire incessantly at the Pirates. But these were not in
the least negligent either to assault him, or defend themselves with all the
courage imaginable. Thus it was observable, that amidst the horror of the
Assault, they made very few shot in vain. For aiming with great dexterity at
the mouths of the Guns, the Spaniards were certain to lose one or two men every
time they charged each Gun anew.

The assault of this Castle where the Governor was, continued very furious on
both sides, from break of day until noon. Yea, about this The Assault
continues till noon.
time of the day, the case was very dubious which party should conquer or be
conquered. At last the Pirates perceiving they had lost many men, and as yet
advanced but little toward the gaining either this or the other Castles
remaining, thought to make use of Fireballs, which they threw with their
hands, designing, if possible, to burn the doors of the Castle. But going about
to put this in execution, the Spaniards from the Strong defense of the
Spaniards.
Walls let fall great quantity of stones, and earthen pots full of Powder, and
other combustible matter, which forced them to desist from that attempt.
Captain Morgan seeing this generous defense made by the Spaniards, began to
despair of the whole success of the Enterprise. Hereupon many saint and calm
meditations came into his mind; neither could he determine which way to turn
himself in that straitness of affairs. Being involved in th^se thoughts, he was
suddenly animated to continue the Assault, by seeing the English Colors put
forth at one of the lesser Another Castle taken.
Castles, then entered by his men. Of whom he presently after spied a Troop that
came to meet him, proclaiming Victory with loud shouts of joy. This instantly
put him upon new resolutions of making new efforts to take the rest of the
Castles that stood out against him: Especially seeing the chiefest Citizens
were fled unto them, and had conveyed thither great part of their Riches, with
all the Plate belonging to the Churches, and other things dedicated to Divine
Service.

Unto this effect therefore he ordered ten or Twelve Ladders made.
twelve Ladders to be made, in all possible haste, so broad, that three or four
men at once might as^nd by them. These being finished, he commanded all the
Religious men and women whom he had taken Prisoners, to fix them against the
walls of the Castle. Thus much he had beforehand Stratagem of Capt. Morg.
threatened the Governor to perform, in case he delivered not the Castle. But
his answer was, He would never surrender himself alive. Captain Morgan was much
persuaded that the Governor would not employ his utmost Forces, seeing
Religious women, and Ecclesiastical persons, ^us (...) (...) in the Assault.
exposed in the front of the Soldiers to the greatest dangers. Thus the
Ladders, as I have said, were put into the hands of Religious persons of both
Sexes; and these were forced, at the head of the Companies, to raise and apply
them to the Walls. But Captain Morgan was fully deceived in his judgment of
this design. For the Governor, who acted like a brave and courageous
Soldier, refused not, in performance of his duty, to use his utmost endeavors
to destroy whosoever came near the Walls. The Religious men and women ceased
not to cry unto him and beg of him by all the Saints of Heaven, he would
deliver the Castle, and hereby spare both his and their own lives. But nothing
could prevail with the obstinacy and fierceness that had possessed the
Governor's mind. Thus many of the Religious men and Nuns were killed before
they could fix the Ladders. Which at last being done, though with great loss of
the said Religious Many of them killed.
people, the Pirates mounted them in great numbers, and with no less valor;
having Fireballs in their hands, and Earthen-pots full of Powder. All which
things, being now at the The Castle taken.
top of the Walls, they kindled and cast in among the Spaniards.

This effort of the Pirates was very great: Insomuch as the Spaniards could no
longer resist nor defend the Castle, which was now entered. Hereupon they all
threw down their Arms, and craved quarter for their lives. Only the Governor
of the City would admit nor crave no The Governor would not surrender
mercy; but rather killed many of the Pirates with his own hands, and not a few
of his own Soldiers, because they did not stand to their Arms. And although
the Pirates asked him if he would have quarter, yet he constantly answered, By
no means: I had rather die as a valiant Soldier, than be hanged as a Coward.
They endeavored, as much as they could, to take him Prisoner. But he defended
himself so obstinately, as that they were forced to kill him; notwithstanding
all the cries and tears of his own Wife (...) killed.
and Daughter, who begged of him upon their knees he would demand quarter and
save his life. When the Pirates had possessed themselves of the Castle, which
was about night, they enclosed therein all the Prisoners they had taken,
placing the women and men by themselves, with some Guards upon them. All the
wounded were put into a certain apartment by it self, to the intent their own
complaints might be the cure of their diseases; for no other was afforded them.

This being done, they fell to eating and drinking, after their usual manner;
that is to say, They fall to their usual (...).
committing in both these things all manner of debauchery and excess. These two
vices were immediately followed by many insolent actions of Rape and Adultery
committed upon many very honest women, as well married as Virgins: Who being
threatened with the Sword, were constrained to submit their bodies to the
violence of those lewd and wicked men. After such manner they delivered
themselves up unto all sort of debauchery of this kind, that if there had been
found only fifty courageous men, they might easily have retaken the City, and
killed all the Pirates. The next day, having plundered all they could find, they
began to examine some of the prisoners (who had been persuaded by their
Companions to say, they were the richest of the Town) charging them severely,
to discover where they had hidden their Riches and Goods. But not being able to
extort any thing out of them, as who were not the right persons that possessed
any wealth, they at last resolved to torture They torture the Prisoners
them. This they performed with such cruelty, that many of them died upon the
Rack, or presently after. Soon after, the President of Panama had news brought
him of the pillage and ruin of Puerto Velo. This intelligence caused him to
employ all his care and industry to raise Forces, with design to pursue and
cast out the Pirates from thence. But these cared little for what extraordinary
means the President used, as having their Ships nigh at hand, and being
determined to set fire unto the City, and retreat. They had now been at Puerto
Velo fifteen days, in which space of time they had lost many of their men, both
by the unhealthiness of the Country, and the extravagant Debaucheries they had
committed.

Hereupon they prepared for a departure, carrying on Board their Ships all the
Pillage they They prepare to depart.
had gotten. But before all, they provided the Fleet with sufficient Victuals
for the Voyage. While these things were getting ready, Captain Morgan sent an
Injunction unto the Prisoners, that they should pay him a Ransom for the City,
or else he would by fire consume it to ashes, and blow up all the Castles into
the air. Withal, he commanded them to send speedily two persons to seek and
procure the sum he demanded, which amounted unto one hundred thousand Pieces of
Eight. Unto this effect, two men were sent to the President of Panama, who gave
him an account of all these Tragedies. The President having now a body of men
in a readiness, The Governor of Panama comes against them.
set forth immediately toward Puerto Velo, to encounter the Pirates before
their retreat. But these people hearing of his coming, instead of flying away,
went out to meet him at a narrow passage through which of necessity he ought to
pass. Here they placed an hundred men very well armed; the which, at the first
Encounter, put to flight a good party of those of Panama. But in vain.
This Accident obliged the President to retire for that time, as not being yet
in a posture of strength to proceed any farther. Presently after this
Rencounter, he sent a Message unto Captain Morgan, to tell him, That in case he
departed not suddenly with all his Forces from Puerto Velo, he ought to expect
no quarter for himself nor his Companions, when he should take them, as he
hoped soon to do. Captain Morgan, who feared not his threats, as knowing he had
a secure retreat in his Ships which were nigh at hand, made him answer, He
would not deliver the Castles, before he had received the Contribution-money he
had demanded. Which in case it were not paid down, he would certainly burn the
whole City, and then leave it; demolishing beforehand the Castles, and killing
the Prisoners.

The Governor of Panama perceived by this Answer, no means would serve to
mollify the hearts of the Pirates, nor reduce them to reason. Hereupon he
determined to leave them; as also those of the City, whom he came to relieve,
involved in the difficulties of making the best agreement they could with their
Enemies. Thus in few days more, the miserable Citizens gathered the
Contribution wherein they were fined, and brought the entire sum of one hundred
thousand A huge Ransom paid for the City.
Pieces of Eight unto the Pirates, for a Ransom of the cruel Captivity they were
fallen into. But the President of Panama, by these transactions, was brought
into an extreme admiration, considering that four hundred men had been able to
take such a great City, with so many strong Castles: especially seeing they had
no pieces of Cannon, nor other great Guns, wherewith to raise Batteries against
them. And what was more, knowing that the Citizens of Puerto Velo had always
great repute of being good Soldiers themselves, and who had never wanted
courage in their own defense. This astonishment was so great, that it
occasioned him, for to be satisfied herein, to send a Messenger unto Captain
Morgan, A M^ssage to Cap. Morgan.
desiring him to send him some small pattern of those Arms wherewith he had
taken with such violence so great a City. Captain Morgan received this
Messenger very kindly, and treated him with great civility. Which being done,
he gave him a Pistol and a few small Bullets of lead, to carry back unto the
President his Master, telling him withal, He desired him to accept that slender
He sends back a Pistol.
pattern of the Arms wherewith he had taken Puerto Velo, and keep them for a
twelvemonth; after which time, he promised to come to Panama and fetch them
away. The Governor of Panama returned the Present very soon unto Captain
Morgan, giving him thanks for the favor of lending him such Weapons as he
needed not, and withal sent him a Ring of Gold, with this Message, That he
desired him not to give himself the labor of coming to Panama, as he had done
to Puerto Velo; for he did certify unto him, he should not speed so well here
as he had done there.

After these transactions, Captain Morgan (having provided his Fleet with all
necessaries, and taken with him the best Guns of the Castles, nailing the rest
which he could not carry away) set sail from Puerto Velo with all his Ships.
With He departs for Cuba.
these he arrived in few days unto the Island of Cuba, where he sought out a
place wherein with all quiet and repose he might make the Dividend of the Spoil
they had gotten. They found in The Dividend made.
ready money two hundred and fifty thousand Pieces of Eight; besides all other
Merchandises, as Cloth, Linen, Silks, and other Goods. With this rich Purchase
they sailed again from thence unto their common place of Rendezvous, Iamaica.
Being arrived, they passed here some time in all sorts of Vices and Debauchery,
according to their common manner of doing, spending with huge prodigality what
others had gained with no small labor and toil.

CHAP. VII.
Captain Morgan takes the City of Maracaibo on the Coast of Nueva Venezuela.
Piracies committed in those Seas. Ruin of three Spanish Ships, that were set
forth to hinder the Robberies of the Pirates.

NOt long after the arrival of the Pirates at Iamaica, being precisely that
short time A new Expedition taken in ^d.
they needed to lavish away all the Riches abovementioned, they concluded upon
another Enterprise whereby to seek new fortunes. Unto this effect, Captain
Morgan gave orders to all the Commanders of his Ships to meet together at the
Island called de la Vaca, or Cow-Isle, seated on the South Side of the Isle of
Hispaniola; as has been mentioned above. As soon as they came to this place,
there flocked unto them great numbers of other Pirates, both French and English,
by reason the name of Captain Morgan was now rendered famous in all the
neighboring Countries, for the great Enterprises he had performed. There was
at that present at Iamaica, an English Ship newly come from New England, well
mounted with thirty six Guns. This Vessel likewise, by order of the Governor
of Iamaica, came to join with Captain Morgan to strengthen his Fleet, and give
him greater courage to attempt things of huge consequence. With this supply
Captain Morgan judged himself sufficiently strong, as having a Ship of such
port, being the greatest of his Fleet, in his Company. Notwithstanding, there
being in the same place another great Vessel that carried twenty four iron
Guns, and twelve of brass, belonging unto the French, Captain Morgan
endeavored as much as he could to join this Ship in like manner unto his own.
But the French not daring to repose any trust in the English, of whose actions
they were not a little jealous, denied absolutely to consent unto any such
thing.

The French Pirates belonging to this great Ship had accidentally met at Sea an
English Vessel: And being then under an extreme necessity of Victuals, they had
taken some provisions out of the English Ship, without paying for them, as
having peradventure no ready money on board. Only they had given them Bills of
Exchange, for Iamaica and Tortuga, to receive money there for what they had
taken. Captain Morgan having notice of this Accident, and perceiving he could
not prevail with the French Captain to follow him in that Expedition, resolved
to lay hold on this occasion, as a pretext to ruin the French, and seek his
own revenge. Hereupon he invited, with dissimulation, the French Commander and
several of his men to dine with him on board the great Ship that was come from
Iamaica, as was said before. Being come thither, he made them all Prisoners,
pretending the injury aforementioned done to the English Vessel, in taking away
some few provisions without pay.

This unjust action of Captain Morgan was soon followed by divine punishment,
as we may very rationally conceive. The manner I shall instantly relate.
Captain Morgan, presently after he had taken the French prisoners abovesaid,
called a Council to deliberate what place they should first pitch upon, in the
course of this new Expedition. At this Council it was determined to go to the
Isle of Savona; there to wait for the Flota which was then expected from Spain,
and take any of the Spanish Vessels that might chance to straggle from the
rest. This resolution being taken, they began on board the great Ship to feast
one another for joy of their new Voyage and happy Council, as they hoped it
would prove. In testimony hereof, they drank many Healths, and discharged many
Guns, as the common sign of mirth among Seamen used to be. Most of the men
being drunk, by what accident is not known, the Ship suddenly was blown up into
the air, with three hundred and fifty Englishmen, A great Ship blown up. 320
men let
besides the French prisoners abovementioned that were in the Hold. Of all
which number, there escaped only thirty men, who were in the great Cabin, at
some distance from the main force of the powder. Many more, it is thought, might
have escaped, had they not been so much overtaken with Wine.

The loss of such a great Ship brought much consternation and conflict of mind
upon the English. They knew not whom to blame; but at last the accusation was
laid upon the French The whole matter imputed to the French.
prisoners, whom they suspected to have fired the powder of the Ship wherein
they were, out of design to revenge themselves, though with the loss of their
own lives. Hereupon they sought to be revenged on the French anew, and
accumulate new accusations unto the former, whereby to seize the Ship and all
that was in it. With this design they forged another pretext against the said
Ship, by saying the French designed to commit piracy upon the English. The
grounds of this Accusation were given them by a Commission from the Governor
of Barracoa, found on board the French Vessel, wherein were these words: That
the said Governor did permit the French to trade in all Spanish Ports, etc. --
As also to cruze upon the English Pirates in what place soever they could find
them, because of the multitude of Hostilities which they had committed against
the Subjects of his Catholic Majesty, in time of Peace betwixt the two Crowns.
This Commission for Trade was interpreted by the English as an express Order to
exercise Piracy and War against them, notwithstanding it was only a bare
License for coming into the Spanish Ports; the cloak of which permission, were
those words inserted, That they should cruze upon the English. And although the
French did sufficiently expound the true sense of the said Commission, yet they
could not clear themselves unto Captain Morgan, nor his Council. But in lieu
hereof, the Ship and men were seized and sent unto Iamaica. Here they also
endeavored to obtain Justice, and the restitution of their Ship, by all the
means possible. But all was in vain: for instead of Justice, they were long
time detained in Prison, and threatened with hanging.

Eight days after the loss of the said Ship, Captain Morgan commanded the
bodies of the miserable wretches who were blown up, to be searched for, as they
floated upon the waters of the Sea. This he did, not out of any design of
affording them Christian burial, but only to obtain the spoil of their Clothes
and other Attire. And if any had golden Rings on their fingers, these were cut
off for purchase, leaving them in that condition exposed to the voracity of the
Monsters of the Sea. At last they set sail for the Isle of Savona, being the
place of their assignation. They go to the Isle of Savona.
They were in all fifteen Vessels, Captain Morgan commanding the biggest, which
carried only fourteen small Guns. The number of men belonging to this Fleet,
were nine hundred and threescore. In few days after, they arrived at the Cape
called Cabo de Lobos, on the South Side of the Isle of Hispaniola, between Cape
Tiburen and Cape Punta de Espada. From hence they could not pass, by reason of
contrary winds that continued the space of three weeks, notwithstanding all the
endeavors Captain Morgan used to get forth, leaving no means unattempted
thereunto. At the end of this time they doubled the Cape, and presently after
spied an English Vessel at a distance. Having spoken with her, they found she
came from England, and bought of her, for ready money, some Provisions they
stood in need of.

Captain Morgan proceeded in the course of his Voyage, till he came unto the
Port of Ocoa. They arrive at Ocoa.
Here he landed some of his men, sending them into the Woods to seek water, and
what Provisions they could find; the better to spare such as he had already on
board his Fleet. They killed many Beasts, and among other Animals some Horses.
But the Spaniards being not well satisfied at their hunting, attempted to lay a
Stratagem for the Pirates. Unto this purpose, they ordered Stratagem of the
Spaniards.
three or four hundred men to come from the City of Santo Domingo, not far
distant from this Port, and desired them to hunt in all the parts thereabouts
adjoining to the Sea, to the intent that if any Pirates should return, they
might find no subsistence. Within a few days the same Pirates returned, with
design to hunt. But finding nothing to kill, a party of them, being about
fifty in number, straggled farther on into the Woods. The Spaniards, who
watched all their motions, gathered a great Herd of Cows, and set two or three
men to keep them. The Pirates having spied this Herd, killed a sufficient number
thereof; and although the Spaniards could see them at a distance, yet they
would not hinder their work for the present. But as soon as they attempted to
carry them away, they set upon them with all fury imaginable, crying, Mata,
mata; that is, Kill, kill. Thus the Pirates were soon compelled to quit the
prey, and retreat toward their Ships as well as they could. This they
performed notwithstanding, in good order, retiring from time to time by
degrees; and when they had any good opportunity, discharging full Vollies of
shot upon the Spaniards. (...)
By this means the Pirates killed many of the Enemies, though with some loss on
their own side.

The rest of the Spaniards seeing what damage they had sustained, endeavored
to save themselves by flight, and carry off the dead bodies and wounded of
their Companions. The Pirates perceiving them to fly, could not content
themselves with what hurt they had already done, but pursued them speedily into
the Woods, and killed the greatest part of those that were remaining. The next
day Captain Morgan being extremely offended at what had passed, went himself
with two hundred men, into the Woods, to seek for the rest of the Spaniards.
But finding no body there, he revenged his wrath upon the houses of the poor
and miserable Rusticks that inhabit scatteringly those Fields and Woods; of
which he burnt a great number. With this he returned unto his Ships, something
more satisfied in his mind, for having done some considerable damage unto the
Enemy; which was always his most ardent desire.

The huge impatience wherewith Captain Morgan had waited now this long while
for some of his Ships, which were not yet arrived, made him resolve to set sail
without them, and steer his course for the Isle of Savona, the place he had
They go on to Savona.
always designed. Being arrived there, and not finding any of his Ships as yet
come, he was more impatient and concerned than before, as fearing their loss,
or that he must proceed without them. Notwithstanding, he waited for their
arrival some few days longer. In the mean while, having no great plenty of
Provisions, he sent a crew of one hundred and fifty men unto the Isle of
Hispaniola, to pillage some Towns that were nigh unto the City of Santo
Domingo. But the Spaniards having had intelligence of their coming, were now so
vigilant, and in such good posture of defense, as the Pirates thought it not
convenient to assault them; choosing rather to return empty-handed unto Captain
Morgan's presence, than to perish in that desperate Enterprise.

At last, Captain Morgan seeing the other Ships did not come, made a review of
his People, and found only five hundred men, more or less. The Ships that were
wanting were seven, he having only eight in his company, of which, the
greatest part were very small. Thus having hitherto resolved to cruze upon the
coasts of Caracas, and plunder all the Towns and Villages he could meet,
finding himself at present with such small Forces, he changed his resolution,
by the advice of a French Captain that belonged to his Advice of a Frenchman.
Fleet. This Frenchman had served Lolonois in like Enterprises, and was at the
taking of Maracaibo; whereby he knew all the entries, passages, forces, and
means how to put in execution the same again in the company of Captain Morgan.
Unto whom having made a full relation of all, he concluded to sack it again the
second time, as being himself persuaded, with all his men, of the facility the
Frenchman propounded. Hereupon they weighed Anchor, and steered their course
toward Curasao. Being come within sight of that Island, they landed at
another, which is nigh unto it, and is called Ruba, seated about twelve They
arri^ at Ruba.
leagues from Curasao, toward the West. This Island is defended but by a
slender Garrison, and is inhabited by Indians, who are subject to the Crown of
Spain, and speak Spanish, by reason of the Roman Catholic Religion, which is
here cultivated by some few Priests that are sent from time to time from the
neighboring Continent.

The Inhabitants of this Isle exercise a certain Commerce or Trade with the
Pirates that go and Commerce of this Island.
come this way. These buy of the Islanders Sheep, Lambs, and Kids; which they
exchange unto them for Linen, Thread, and other things of this kind. The
Country is very dry and barren, the whole substance thereof consisting in those
three things abovementioned; and in a small quantity of Wheat, which is of no
bad quality. This Isle produces a great number of venomous Insects, as Vipers,
Spiders, and others. These last are so pernicious here, that if any man is
bitten by them, he dies mad. And the manner of recovering such persons, is to
tie them very fast both hands and feet, and in this condition* to leave them
for the space of four and twenty hours, without eating or drinking the least
thing imaginable. Captain Morgan, as was said having cast Anchor before this
Island, bought of the Inhabitants many Sheep, Lambs, and also Wood, which he
needed for all his Fleet. Having been there two days, he set sail again, in the
time of the night, to the intent they might not see what course he steered.

The next day they arrived at the Sea of Maracaibo, Arrival at t^ (...) ^f M^bo.
having always great care of not being seen from Vigilia: for which reason they
anchored out of sight of the Watchtower. Night being come, they set sail again
toward the Land, and the next morning by break of day found themselves
directly over against the Bar of the Lake abovementioned. The Spaniards had
built another Fort, since the action of Lolonois; from whence they did now fire
continually against the Pirates, while they were putting their men into Boats
for to land. The Dispute continued very They land.
hot on both sides, being managed with huge courage and valor from morning
till dark night. This being come, Captain Morgan, in the obscurity thereof,
drew nigh unto the Fort. Which having examined, he found no body in it; the
Spaniards having deserted it not long before. They And take the ^tle.
left behind them a Match kindled nigh unto a train of powder, wherewith they
designed to blow up the Pirates, and the whole Fortress, as soon as they were in
it. This design had taken effect, had the Pirates failed to discover it the
space of one quarter of an hour. But Captain Morgan prevented the mischief, by
snatching away the Match with all speed, whereby he saved both his own and his
Companions lives. They found here great quantity of Powder, whereof he provided
his Fleet; and afterward demolished part of the Walls, nailing sixteen pieces
of Ordnance, which carried from twelve to four and twenty pound of Bullet. Here
they found also great number of Muskets, and other Military provisions.

The next day they commanded the Ships to enter the Bar. Among which, they
divided the Powder, Muskets, and other things they found in the Fort. These
things being done, they embarked They reimbark.
again, to continue their course toward Maracaibo. But the Waters were very
low, whereby they could not pass a certain Bank that lies at the entry of the
Lake. Hereupon they were compelled to put themselves into Canows and small
Boats, with which they arrived the next day before Maracaibo, having no other
defense And arrive at Maracaibo.
but some small pieces which they could carry in the said Boats. Being landed,
they ran immediately to the Fort called de la Barra; which they found in like
manner as the precedent, without any person in it: For all were fled before
them into the Woods, leaving also the Town without any people, unless a few
miserable poor folk, who had nothing to lose.

As soon as they had entered the Town, the Pirates searched every corner thereof,
to see if they The T^wn found empty.
could find any people that were hidden, who might offend them at unawares. Not
finding any body, every party, according as they came out of their several
Ships, chose what houses they pleased to themselves, the best they could find.
The Church was deputed for the common Corpse de Guard, where they lived after
their Military manner, committing many insolent actions. The next day after
their arrival, they sent a Troop of one hundred men to seek for the Inhabitants
and their Goods. These returned the next day following, bringing with them to
the number of thirty persons between men, women, and children; and fifty Mules
laden with several good Prisoners brought from the Fields.
Merchandise. All these miserable prisoners were put to the Rack to make them
confess where the rest of the Inhabitants were, and their Goods. Amongst other
tortures then used, one was to stretch their limbs with Cords, and at the same
Tortures here used.
time beat them with Sticks and other Instruments. Others had burning Matches
placed betwixt their fingers, which were thus burnt alive. Others had slender
Cords or Matches twisted about their heads, till their eyes bursted out of the
skull. Thus all sort of inhumane Cruelties were executed upon those innocent
people. Those who would not confess, or who had nothing to declare, died under
the hands of those tyrannical men. These Tortures and Racks continued for the
space of three whole weeks. In which time they ceased not to send out, daily,
parties of men to seek for more people to torment and rob; they never returning
home without Booty and new Riches.

Captain Morgan having now gotten by degrees into his hands about one hundred
of the chiefest Families, with all their Goods, at last resolved They intend
for Gibraltar.
to go to Gibraltar, even as Lolonois had done before. With this design he
equipped his Fleet, providing it very sufficiently with all necessary things.
He put likewise on board all the prisoners; and thus weighing Anchor, set sail
for the said place, with resolution to hazard the Battle. They had sent before
them some prisoners unto Gibraltar, to denounce unto the Inhabitants, they
should surrender: otherwise Captain Morgan would certainly put them all to the
sword, without giving quarter to any person he should find alive. Not long
after, he arrived They arrive there.
with his Fleet before Gibraltar, whose Inhabitants received him with continual
shooting of great Cannon-bullets. But the Pirates, instead of fainting hereat,
ceased not to encourage one another, saying, We must make one meal upon bitter
things, before we come to taste the sweetness of the Sugar this place affords.

The next day, very early in the morning, they They land.
landed all their men. And being guided by the Frenchman abovementioned, they
marched toward the Town, not by the common way, but crossing through the
Woods; which way the Spaniards scarce thought they would have come. For at the
beginning of their march, they made appearance as if they intended to come the
next and open way that led unto the Town, hereby the better to deceive the
Spaniards. But these remembering, as yet, full well what Hostilities Lolonois
had committed upon them but two years before, thought it not safe to expect the
second Brunt; and hereupon were all fled out of the The people all fled.
Town as fast as they could, carrying with them all their Goods and Riches, as
also all the Powder, and having nailed all the great Guns. Insomuch as the
Pirates found not one person in the whole City, excepting one only poor and
innocent man who was born a fool. This man they asked whither the Inhabitants
were fled, and where they had absconded their Goods. Unto all which Questions
and the like, he constantly made answer, I know nothing, I know nothing. But
they presently put him to the Wrack, and tortured him with Cords; which
torments forced They ^rack a poor ^ool.
him to cry out, Do not torture me any more, but come with me and I will show
you my Goods and my Riches. They were persuaded as it should seem, he was some
rich person who had disguised himself under those clothes so poor, as also that
innocent tongue. Hereupon they went along with him; and he conducted them to a
poor and miserable Cottage, wherein he had a few Earthendishes, and other
things of little or no value; and amongst these, three Pieces o^ Eight, which
he had concealed with some other Trumpery under ground. After this, they asked
him his name; and he readily made answer, My name is Don Sebastian Sanchez, and
I am Brother unto the Governor of Maracaibo. This foolish Answer, it must be
conceived, these men, though never so inhumane, took for a certain truth. For
no sooner had they heard it, but they put him again upon the Rack, lifting him
up on high with Cords, and tying huge weights unto his feet and neck. Besides
which cruel and stretching torment, they burnt him alive, applying Palm-leaves
burning unto his face. Under which miseries he He dies under the torments.
died in half an hour. After his death they cut the Cords wherewith they had
stretched him, and dragged him forth into the adjoining Woods, where they left
him without burial.

The same day they sent out a party of Pirates to seek for the Inhabitants, upon
whom they might employ their inhumane Cruelties. These brought back with them
an honest Peasant with A Peasant brought in prisoner.
two Daughters of his, whom they had taken prisoners, and whom they intended to
torture as they used to do with others, in case they showed not the places
where the Inhabitants had absconded themselves. The Peasant knew some of the
said places, and hereupon seeing himself threatened with the Rack, went with the
Pirates to show them. But the Spaniards perceiving their Enemies to range
everywhere up and down the Woods, were already fled from thence much farther
off into the thickest parts of the said Woods, where they built themselves
Huts, to preserve from the violence of the weather those few Goods they had
carried with them. The Pirates judged themselves to be deceived by the said
Peasant; and hereupon, to revenge their wrath upon him, notwithstanding all the
excuses he could make, and his humble supplications for his life, they hanged
him upon a Tree. Who is hanged.


After this, they divided into several parties, and went to search the
Plantations. For they knew the Spaniards that were absconded could not live
upon what they found in the Woods, without coming now and then to seek
provisions at their own Country-houses. Here they found a certain Slave, unto
whom they promised mountains A Slave bribed wi^ promise*
of Gold, and that they would give him his liberty by transporting him unto
Iamaica, in case he would show them the places where the Inhabitants of
Gibraltar lay hidden. This fellow conducted them unto a party of Spaniards,
whom they instantly made all Prisoners, commanding the said Slave to kill some
of them before the eyes of the rest; to the intent that by this perpetr^ted
crime, he might never be able to leave their wicked company. The Negro,
according Horrid fact!
to their orders, committed many murders and insolent actions upon the
Spaniards, and followed the unfortunate traces of the Pirates. Who after the
space of eight days, returned unto Gibraltar with many prisoners, and some
Mules laden with Riches. They examined every prisoner by himself (who were in
all about two hundred and fifty persons) where they had absconded the rest of
their Goods, and if they knew of their fellow-Townsmen. Such as would not
confess, were tormented after a most cruel and inhumane manner. Among the rest,
there happened to be a certain Portuguese, who by the information of a Negro
was reported, though falsely, to be very Cruel usage of a Portuguese.
rich. This man was commanded to produce his Riches. But his answer was, he had
no more than one hundred Pieces of Eight in the whole world, and that these had
been stolen from him two days before, by a Servant of his. Which words,
although he sealed with many Oaths and Protestations, yet they would not
believe him. But dragging him unto the Rack, without any regard unto his age,
as being threescore years old, they stretched him with Cords, breaking both his
arms behind his shoulders.

This cruelty went not alone. For he not being able or willing to make any
other declaration They put him to more torments.
than the abovesaid, they put him to another sort of torment that was worser,
and more barbarous than the precedent. They tied him with small Cords by his
two thumbs and great toes unto four stakes that were fixed in the ground at a
convenient distance, the whole weight of his body being pendent in the air upon
those Cords. Then they thrasht upon the Cords with great Sticks and all their
strength, so that the body of this miserable man was ready to perish at every
stroke, under the severity of those horrible pains. Not satisfied, as yet, with
this cruel torture, they took a stone which weighed above two hundred pound,
and laid it upon his belly, as if they intended to press him to death. At which
time they also kindled Palm-leaves, and applied the and more.
flame unto the face of this unfortunate Portuguese, burning with them the
whole skin, beard, and hair At last these cruel Tyrants seeing that neither
with these tortures nor others they could get any thing out of him, they untyed
the Cords, and carried him, being almost half dead, unto the Church, where was
their Corpse du Guard. Here they tied him anew unto one of the pillats thereof,
leaving him in that condition, without giving him either to eat or drink,
unless very sparingly, and so little as would scarce sustain life, for some
days. Four or five being past, he desired that one of the prisoners might have
the liberty to come unto him, by whose means he promised he would endeavor to
raise some money to satisfy their demands. The prisoner whom he required, was
brought unto him; and he ordered him to promise the Pirates five hundred Pieces
of Eight for his ransom. But they were both deaf and obstinate at such a small
sum, and instead of accepting it, did beat him cruelly with Cudgels, saying
unto him, Old fellow, instead of five hundred, you must say, five hundred
thousand Pieces of Eight; otherwise you shall here end your life. Finally,
after a thousand Protestations that he was but a miserable man, and kept a poor
Tavern for his living, he agreed with them for the sum of one thousand Pieces
of Eight. These he raised in few days, and having paid them unto the Pirates,
got his liberty; although so horribly maimed in his body, that it is scarce to
be believed he could supervive many weeks after.

Several other tortures besides these, were exercised upon others, which this
Portuguese endured not. Some were hanged up by the Testicles, or Many others
tortured very cruelly.
by their privy Members, and left in that condition till they fell unto the
ground, those private parts being torn from their bodies. If with this they
were minded to show themselves merciful to those wretches, thus lacerated in
the most tender parts of their bodies, their mercy was to run them through and
through with their Swords; and by this means rid them soon of their pains and
lives. Otherwise, if this were not done, they used to lie four or five days
under the agonies of death, before dying. Others were crucified by these
Whereof m^st die.
Tyrants, and with kindled Matches were burnt between the joints of their
fingers and toes. Others had their feet put into the fire, and thus were left
to be roasted alive. At last, having used both these and other Cruelties with
the White men, they began to practice the same over again with the Negro's
their Slaves; who were treated with no less inhumanity than their Masters.

Among these Slaves was found one who promised Captain Morgan to conduct him
unto a Discovery made by a Slave.
certain River belonging to the Lake, where he should find a Ship and four
Boats richly laden with Goods that belonged unto the Inhabitants of Maraicabo.
The same Slave discovered likewise the place where the Governor of Gibraltar
lay hidden, together with the greatest part of the women of the Town. But all
this he revealed, through great menaces wherewith they threatened to hang him,
in case he told not what he knew. Captain Morgan sent away presently two
hundred men in two Saeties, or great Boats, toward the River abovementioned,
to seek for what the Slave had discovered. But he himself, with two hundred and
fifty more, undertook to go and take the Governor. This Gentleman They go to
take the Governor.
was retired unto a small Island seated in the middle of the River, where he
had built a little Fort, after the best manner he could, for his defense. But
hearing that Captain Morgan came in person But he retireth.
with great Forces to seek him, he retired farther off unto the top of a
Mountain not much distant from that place; unto which there was no ascent, but
by a very narrow passage. Yea, this was so straight, that whosoever did pretend
to gain the ascent, must of necessity cause his men to pass one by one. Captain
Morgan spent two days before he could arrive at the little Island
abovementioned. From thence he designed to proceed unto the Mountain where the
Governor was posted, had he not been told of the impossibility he should find
in the ascent; not only for the narrowness of the path that led to the top,
but also because the Governor was very well provided with all sorts of
Ammunition above. Besides that, there was fallen an huge Rain, whereby all the
Baggage belonging to the Pirates, and their Powder, was wet. By this Rain also
they had lost many of their men at the passage over a River that was overflown.
Here perished likewise some women and children, and many Mules laden with Plate
and other Goods; all which they had taken in the Fields from the fugitive
Inhabitants. So that all things were in a very bad condition with Captain
Morgan, and the bodies of his men as much harrassed, as ought to be inferred
from this relation. Whereby, if the Spaniards in that juncture of time had had
but a Troop of fifty men well armed with Pikes or Spears, they might have
entirely destroyed the Pirates, without any possible resistance on their They
give over the Enterprise through bad weather.
sides. But the fears which the Spaniards had conceived from the beginning,
were so great, that only hearing the leaves on the Trees to stir, they often
fancied them to be Pirates. Finally, Captain Morgan and his People having upon
this march sometimes waded up to their middles in water for the space of half
or whole miles together, they at last escaped for the greatest part. But of the
women and children that they brought home prisoners, the major part died.

Thus 12 days after they set forth to seek theGovernour, The return (...)
Gibraltar.
they returned unto Gibraltar with a great number of prisoners. Two days after,
arrived also the two Saeties that went unto the River, bringing with them four
Boats and some prisoners. But as to the greatest part of the Merchandise that
were in the said Boats, they found them not, the Spaniards having unladed and
secured them, as having intelligence beforehand of the coming of the Pirates.
Whereupon they designed also, when the Merchandise were all taken out, to burn
the Boats. Yet the Spaniards made not so much haste as was requisite to unlade
the said Vessels, but that they left both in the Ship and A Ship and four Boats
taken.
Boats great parcels of Goods, which, they being fled from thence, the Pirates
seized, and brought thereof a considerable Booty unto Gibraltar. Thus after
they had been in possession of the place five entire weeks, and committed there
infinite number of Murders, Robberies, Rapes, and suchlike Insolences, they
concluded upon their departure. But before this could be performed, for the
last proof of their tyranny they gave orders unto some prisoners to go forth
into the Woods and Fields, and collect a Ransom for Ransom for fire demanded.
the Town; otherwise they would certainly burn every house down to the ground.
Those poor afflicted men went forth as they were sent. And after they had
searched every corner of the adjoining Fields and Woods, they returned unto
Captain Morgan, telling him, they had scarce been able to find any body. But
that unto such as they had found, they had proposed his demands; to which they
had made answer, that the Governor had prohibited them to give any Ransom for
not burning the Town. But notwithstanding any prohibition to the contrary, they
beseeched him to have a little patience, and among themselves they would
collect to the sum of five thousand Pieces of Eight. And for the 5000 Pieces of
Eight granted.
rest, they would give him some of their own Townsmen as Hostages, whom he
might carry with him to Maracaibo, till such time as he had received full
satisfaction.

Captain Morgan having now been long time They return to Maracaibo
absent from Maracaibo, and knowing the Spaniards had had sufficient time
wherein to fortify themselves, and hinder his departure out of the Lake,
granted them their Proposition abovementioned; and withal, made as much haste
as he could to set things in order for his departure. He gave liberty to all
the prisoners, having beforehand put them every one to the ransom; yet he
detained all the Slaves with him. They delivered unto him four persons that
were agreed upon for Hostages of what sums of money more he was to receive from
them: and they desired to have the Slave of whom we made mention above,
intending to punish him according to his deserts. But Captain Morgan would not
deliver him, being persuaded they would burn him alive. At last they weighed
Anchor, and set sail with all the haste they could, directing their course
toward Maracaibo. Here they arrived in four days, and found all things in the
same posture they had left them when they departed. Yet here they received
news, from the information of a poor distressed old man, who was sick, and whom
alone they found in the Town, That three Spanish Men of War were arrived at the
News of three Spanish Men of War.
entry of the Lake, and there waited for the return of the Pirates out of those
parts. Moreover, that the Castle at the entry thereof, was again put into a
good posture of defense, being well provided with great Guns and men, and all
sorts of Ammunition.

This relation of the old man could not choose They send to view them.
but cause some disturbance in the mind of Captain Morgan, who now was careful
how to get away through those narrow passages of the entry of the Lake.
Hereupon he sent one of his Boats, the swiftest he had, to view the entry, and
see if things were as they had been related. The next day the Boat came back,
confirming what was said, and assuring, they had viewed the Ships so nigh, that
they had been in great danger of the shot they had made at them. Hereunto they
added, that the biggest Ship was mounted with forty Guns, the second with
thirty, and the smallest with four and twenty. These Forces were much beyond
those of Captain Morgan; and hence they caused a general consternation in all
the Pirates, whose biggest Vessel had not above fourteen small Guns. Every one
judged Captain Morgan to despond in his mind, and be destitute of all manner of
hopes, considering the difficulty either of passing safely with his little
Fleet amidst those great Ships and the Fort, or Capt. Morg. much concerned.
that he must perish. How to escape any other way by Sea or by Land, they saw
no opportunity nor convenience. Only they could have wished that those three
Ships had rather come over the Lake to seek them at Maracaibo, than to remain
at the mouth of the Straight where they were. For at that passage they must of
necessity fear the ruin of their Fleet, which consisted only for the greatest
part of Boats.

Hereupon, being necessitated to act as well as he could, Captain Morgan
resumed new courage, A Message to the Spanish Admiral
and resolved to show himself, as yet, undaunted with these terrors. To this
intent he boldly sent a Spaniard unto the Admiral of those three Ships,
demanding of him a considerable Tribute or Ransom for not putting the City of
Maracaibo to the flame. This man (who doubtless was received by the Spaniards
with great admiration of the confidence and boldness of those Pirates) returned
two days after, bringing unto Captain Morgan a Letter from the said Admiral,
whose Contents were as follows.

Letter of Don Alonso del Campo and Espinosa, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet,
unto Captain Morgan Commander of the Pirates.
HAving understood by all our Friends and His Answer.
Neighbors, the unexpected news, that you have dared to attempt and commit
Hostilities in the Countries, Cities, Towns, and Villages belonging unto the
Dominions of his Catholic Majesty, my sovereign Lord and Master; I let you
understand by these lines, that I am come unto this place, according to my
obligation, nigh unto that Castle which you took out of the hands of a parcel
of Cowards; where I have put things into a very good posture of defense, and
mounted again the Artillery which you had nailed and dismounted. My intent is
to dispute with you your passage out of the Lake, and follow and pursue you
everywhere, to the end you may see the performance of my duty.
Notwithstanding, if you be contented to surrender with humility all that you
have taken, together with the Slaves and all other prisoners, I will let you
freely pass, without trouble or molestation; upon condition that you retire
home presently unto your own Country. But in case that you make any resistance
or opposition unthese things that I proffer unto you, I do assure you I will
command Boats to come from Caracas, wherein I will put my Troops, and coming to
Maracaibo, will cause you utterly to perish, by putting you every man to the
sword. This is my last and absolute resolution. Be prudent therefore, and do
not abuse my bounty with ingratitude. I have with me very good Soldiers, who
desire nothing more ardently, than to revenge on you and your People, all the
cruelties and base infamous actions you have committed upon the Spanish Nation
in America. Dated on board the Royal Ship named the Magdalen, lying at Anchor
at the entry of the Lake of Maracaibo, this 24th day of April, 1669.

Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa.


As soon as Captain Morgan had received this Letter, he called all his men
together in the Marketplace of Maracaibo; and after reading the They read it
in public.
Contents thereof, both in French and English, he asked their advice and
resolutions upon the whole matter, and whether they had rather surrender all
they had purchased, to obtain their liberty, than fight for it?

They answered all unanimously, They had rather fight, and spill the very last
drop of blood they had in their veins, than surrender so easily the Booty they
had gotten with so much danger of their lives. Among the rest, one was found
Advice given by one of the Pirates.
who said unto Captain Morgan, Take you care for the rest, and I will undertake
to destroy the biggest of those Ships with only twelve men. The manner shall
be, by making a Brulot or Fire-ship of that Vessel we took in the River of
Gibraltar. Which, to the intent she may not be known for a Fire-ship, we will
fill her Decks with logs of wood, standing with Hats and Montera- caps, to
deceive their sight with the representation of men. The same we will do at the
Port-holes that serve for the Guns, which shall be filled with counterfeit
Cannon. At the Stern we will hang out the English Colors, and persuade the
Enemy she is one of our best Men of War that goes to fight them. This
Proposition being heard by the Iunta, was admitted and approved Which is
approved by all
of by every one; howbeit their fears were not quite dispersed.

For notwithstanding what had been concluded there, they endeavored the next
day to see if they could come to an accommodation with Don Alonso. Unto this
effect Captain Morgan Propositions of accommodation.
sent him two persons, with these following Propositions. First, That he would
quit Maracaibo, without doing any damage to the Town, nor exacting any Ransom
for the firing thereof. Secondly, That he would set at liberty the one half of
the Slaves, and likewise all other Prisoners, without Ransom. Thirdly, That he
would send home freely the four chief Inhabitants of Gibraltar, which he had in
his custody as Hostages for the Contributions those people had promised to pay.
These Propositions from the Pirates being understood by Don Alonso, were
instantly rejected every one, as being dishonorable for him to grant. Neither
would he hear But all rejected.
any word more of any other accommodation; but sent back this Message: That in
case they surrendered not themselves voluntarily into his hands, within the
space of two days, under the Conditions which he had offered them by his
Letter, he would immediately come and force them to do it.

No sooner had Captain Morgan received this Message from Don Alonso, than he
put all things They resolve (...) fight.
in order to fight, resolving to get out of the Lake by main force, and without
surrendering any thing. In the first place, he commanded all the Slaves and
Prisoners to be tied and guarded very well. After this, they gathered all the
Pitch, Tar, and Brimstone they could find in the whole Town, therewith to
prepare the Fire-ship abovementioned. Stratagem against the Spanish Fleet.
Likewise they made several inventions of Powder and Brimstone, with great
quantity of Palm-leaves, very well ointed with Tar. They covered very well
their counterfeit Cannon, laying under every piece thereof, many pounds of
Powder. Besides which, they cut down many outworks belonging to the Ship, to
the end the Powder might exert its strength the better. Thus they broke open
also new Portholes; where, instead of Guns they placed little Drums, of which
the Negro's make use. Finally, the Decks were handsomely beset with many pieces
of wood dressed up in the shape of men with Hats, or Montera's, and likewise
armed with Swords, Muskets, and Bandeleers.

The Brulot or Fire-ship being thus sitted to their purpose, they prepared
themselves to go to They go to the Port.
the entry of the Port. All the prisoners were put into one great Boat, and in
another of the biggest they placed all the Women, Plate, Jewels, and other rich
things which they had. Into others they put all the bales of Goods and
Merchandise, and other things of greatest bulk. Each of these Boats had twelve
men on board, very well armed. The Brulot had orders to go before the rest of
the Vessels, and presently to fall foul with the great Ship. All things being
in a readiness, Captain Morgan exacted an Oath All are sworn to fight.
of all his Comrades, whereby they protested to defend themselves against the
Spaniards, even to the last drop of blood, without demanding quarter at any
rate: promising them withal, that whosoever thus behaved himself, should be
very well rewarded.

With this disposition of mind, and courageous resolution, they set sail to
seek the Spaniards, on the 30th day of April 1669. They found the Spanish Fleet
riding at Anchor in the middle of the entry of the Lake. Captain Morgan, it
being now late, and almost dark, commanded all his Vessels to come to an
Anchor; with design to They arrive about night at the Spanish Fleet.
fight from thence even all night, if they should provoke him thereunto. He
gave orders that a careful and vigilant Watch should be kept on board every
Vessel till the morning, they being almost within shot, as well as within sight
of the Enemy. The dawning of the day being come, they weighed Anchors, and set
sail again, steering their course directly toward the Spaniards; who observing
them to move, did instantly the same. The Fire-ship sailing before the rest,
fell presently upon the great Ship, and grappled to They destroy the Spanish
V^ssels.
her sides in a short while. Which by the Spaniards being perceived to be a
Fire-ship, they attempted to escape the danger by putting her off; but in vain,
and too late. For the flame suddenly seized her Timber and Tackling, and in a
short space consumed all the Stern, the forepart sinking into the Sea, whereby
she perished. The second Spanish Ship perceiving the Admiral to burn, not by
accident, but by industry of the Enemy, escaped toward the Castle, where the
Spaniards themselves caused her to sink; choosing this way of losing their Ship,
rather than to fall into the hands of those Pirates, which they held for
inevitable. The third, as having no opportunity nor time to escape, was taken
by the Pirates. The Seamen that sank the second Ship The Spanish Armada
destroyed by Captain Morgan Part. 2. Page. 13^
nigh unto the Castle, perceiving the Pirates to come toward them to take what
remains they could find of their Shipwreck, (for some part of the Bulk was
extant above water) set fire in like manner unto this Vessel, to the end the
Pirates might enjoy nothing of that spoil. The first Ship being set on fire,
some of the persons that were in her swam toward the shore. These the Pirates
would have taken up in their Boats; but they would neither ask nor admit of any
quarter, choosing rather to lose their lives, than receive them from the hands
of their Persecutors, for such reasons as I shall relate hereafter.

The Pirates were extremely gladded at this signal Victory obtained in so short
a time, and with so great inequality of Forces; whereby they conceived greater
pride in their minds than they had before. Hereupon they all presently They
attempt to take the Castle.
ran ashore, intending to take the Castle. This they found very well provided
both with men, great Cannon and Ammunition; they having no other Arms than
Muskets, and a few Fireballs in their hands. Their own Artillery they thought
incapable, for its smalness, of making any considerable breach in the Walls.
Thus they spent the rest of that day, firing at the Garrison with their Muskets,
till the dusk of the evening; at But in vain.
which time they attempted to advance nigher unto the Walls, with intent to
throw in the Fireballs. But the Spaniards resolving to sell their lives as
dear as they could, continued firing so furiously at them, as they thought it
not convenient to approach any nearer, nor persist any longer in that dispute.
Thus having experimented the obstinacy of the Enemy, and seeing thirty of their
own men already dead, and as many more wounded, they retired unto their Ships.

The Spaniards believing the Pirates would return The Spaniards prepare against
a new assault.
the next day to renew the attack, as also make use of their own Cannon against
the Castle, labored very hard all night, to put all things in order for their
coming. But more particularly they employed themselves that night in digging
down and making plain some little hills and eminent places, from whence
possibly the Castle might be offended.

But Captain Morgan intended not to come ashore again, busying himself the next
day in taking prisoners some of the men who still swam Many Spaniards taken up
swimming.
alive upon the Waters, and hoping to get part of the Riches that were lost in
the two Ships that perished. Among the rest he took a certain Pilot, who was a
stranger, and who belonged unto the lesser Ship of the two, with whom he held
much discourse, enquiring of him several things. Such questions were, What
number of people those three Ships had had in them? Whether they expected any
more Ships to come? From what Port they set forth the last time, when they came
to seek them out? His answer unto all these questions, was as follows; which
he delivered in the Spanish Tongue:

Noble Sir, be pleased to pardon and spare me, that no evil be done unto Speech
of a Pilot to Cap. Morg.
me, as being a stranger unto this Nation I have served, and I shall sincerely
inform you of all that passed till our arrival at this Lake. We were sent by
orders from the Supreme Council of State in Spain, being six Men of War well
equipped, into these Seas, with instructions to cruze upon the English Pirates,
and root them out from these parts by destroying as many of them as we could.

These Orders were given, by reason of the news brought unto the Court of Spain
of the loss and ruin of Puerto Velo, and other places. Of all which Damages
and Hostilities committed here by the English, very dismal lamentations have
oftentimes penetrated the ears both of the Catholic King and Council, unto
whom belongs the care and preservation of this new World. And although the
Spanish Court has many times by their Ambassadors sent Complaints hereof unto
the King of England; yet it has been the constant answer of his Majesty of
Great Britain, That he never gave any Letters Patent nor Commissions for the
acting any Hostility whatsoever, against the Subjects of the King of Spain.
Hereupon the Catholic King, being resolved to revenge his Subjects, and punish
these proceedings, commanded six Men of War to be equipped; which he sent into
these parts under the command of Don Augustine de Bustos, who was constituted
Admiral of the said Fleet. He commanded the biggest Ship thereof, named Na Sa
de la Soledad, mounted with eight and forty great Guns, and eight small ones:
The Vice Admiral was Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa, who commanded the second
Ship called la Concepcion, which carried forty four great Guns, and eight small
ones. Besides which Vessels, there were also four more; whereof the first was
named the Magdalen, and was mounted with thirty six great Guns, and twelve
small ones, having on board two hundred and fifty men. The second was called
St. Lewis, with twenty six great Guns, twelve small ones, and two hundred men.
The third was called la Marquesa, which carried sixteen great Guns, eight small
ones, and one hundred and fifty men. The fourth and last, Na Sa del Carmen,
with eighteen great Guns, eight small ones, and likewise one hundred and fifty
men.

We were now arrived at Cartagena, when the two greatest Ships received orders
to return into Spain, as being judged too big for cruzing upon these Coasts.
With the four Ships remaining, Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa departed from
thence toward Campeche, to seek out the English. We arrived at the Port of the
said City, where being surprised by a huge Storm that blew from the North, we
lost one of our four Ships; being that which I named in the last place among
the rest. From hence we set fail for the Isle of Hispaniola; in sight of which
we came within few days, and directed our course unto the Port of Santo
Domingo. Here we received intelligence there had passed that way a Fleet from
Iamaica, and that some men thereof having landed at a place called Alta Gracia,
the Inhabitants had taken one of them prisoner, who confessed their whole
design was to go and pillage the City of Caracas. With these news Don Alonso
instantly weighed Anchor, and set sail from thence, crossing over unto the
Continent, till we came in sight of Caracas. Here we found not the English; but
happened to meet with a Boat which certified us they were in the Lake of
Maracaibo, and that the Fleet consisted of seven small Ships and one Boat.

Upon this intelligence we arrived here; and coming nigh unto the entry of the
Lake, we shot off a Gun to demand a Pilot from the shore. Those on land
perceiving that we were Spaniards, came willingly unto us with a Pilot, and
told us that the English had taken the City of Maracaibo, and that they were at
present at the pillage of Gibraltar. Don Alonso having understood this news,
made a handsome Speech unto all his Soldiers and Mariners, encouraging them to
perform their duty, and withal promising to divide among them all they should
take from the English. After this, he gave order that the Guns which we had
taken out of the Ship that was lost, should be put into the Castle, and there
mounted for its defense, with two pieces more out of his own Ship, of eighteen
pounds port each. The Pilots conducted us into the Port, and Don Alonso
commanded the people that were on shore to come unto his presence, unto whom he
gave orders to repossess the Castle, and re-enforce it with one hundred men
more than it had before its being taken by the English. Not long after, we
received news that you were returned from Gibraltar unto Maracaibo; unto which
place Don Alonso wrote you a Letter, giving you account of his arrival and
design, and withal exhorting you to restore all that you had taken. This you
refused to do; whereupon he renewed his promises and intentions unto his
Soldiers and Seamen. And having given a very good Supper unto all his People,
he persuaded them neither to take nor give any quarter unto the English that
should fall into their hands. This was the occasion of so many being drowned,
who dared not to crave any quarter for their lives, as knowing their own
intentions of giving none. Two days before you came against us, a certain Negro
came on board Don Alonso's Ship, telling him, Sir, be pleased to have great
care of your self; for the English have prepared a Fire-ship with design to
burn your Fleet. But Don Alonso would not believe this intelligence, his answer
being, How can that be? Have they, peradventure, wit enough to build a
Fire-ship? or what Instruments have they to do it withal?

The Pilot abovementioned having related so distinctly all the aforesaid things
unto Captain The Pilot is received into service.
Morgan, was very well used by him, and after some kind proffers made unto him,
remained in his service. He discovered moreover unto Capt. Morgan, that in the
Ship which was sunk, there was a great quantity of Plate, even to the value of
forty thousand Pieces of Eight. And that this was certainly the occasion they
had oftentimes seen He makes a discovery.
the Spaniards in Boats about the said Ship. Hereupon Capt. Morgan ordered that
one of his Ships should remain there to watch all occasions of getting out of
the said Vessel what Plate they could. In the mean while he himself, with all
his Fleet, returned unto Maracaibo, where he refitted the great Ship he had
taken of the three aforementioned. They return to Maracaibo.
And now being well accommodated, he chose it for himself; giving his own
bottom to one of his Captains.

After this he sent again a Messenger unto the Ra^som for fire demand^d an^w.
Admiral, who was escaped on shore and got into the Castle, demanding of him a
Tribute or Ransom of fire for the Town of Maracaibo; which being denied, he
threatened he would entirely consume and destroy it. The Spaniards considering
how unfortunate they had been all along with those Pirates, and not knowing
after what manner to get rid of them, concluded among themselves to pay the
said Ransom, although Don Alonso would not consent unto it.

Hereupon they sent unto Captain Morgan to ask what sum he demanded. He
answered them, he would have thirty thousand Pieces of Eight, and five hundred
Beeves, to the intent his Fleet might be well victualled with flesh. This
Ransom being paid, he promised in such case he would give no farther trouble
unto the prisoners, nor cause any ruin or damage unto the Town. Finally, they
agreed with him upon the sum of twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, besides the
five (...) ^ices of Eight granted and 500 Beeves.
hundred Beeves. The Cattle the Spaniards brought in the next day, together
with one part of the money. And while the Pirates were busied in salting the
Flesh, they returned with the rest of the whole sum of twenty thousand Pieces
of Eight, for which they had agreed.

But Captain Morgan would not deliver, for that present, the prisoners, as he
had promised to do, by reason he feared the shot of the Artillery of the Castle
at his going forth of the Lake. Hereupon he told them he intended not to
deliver them, till such time as he was out of that danger; hoping by this means
to obtain a free passage. Thus he set sail with all his Fleet in quest of that
Ship which he had lest behind, to seek for the Plate of the Vessel that was
burnt. He found her upon the place, with the sum of fifteen thousand 15000
Pieces of Eight out of the wrack.
Pieces of Eight, which they had purchased out of the wrack; besides many other
pieces of Plate, as hilts of Swords, and other things of this kind. Also great
quantity of Pieces of Eight that were melted and run together by the force of
the fire of the said Ship.

Captain Morgan scarce thought himself secure, neither could he contrive how to
evite the damages the said Castle might cause unto his Fleet. Hereupon he told
the prisoners it was necessary they should agree with the Governor to open the
passage with security for his Fleet. Unto which point if he should not consent,
he would certainly hang them all up in his Ships. After this warning, the
prisoners met together to confer upon the persons they should depute unto the
said Governor Don Alonso; and they assigned some few among them for that
Embassy. These went A M^ssage to the Castle.
unto him, beseeching and supplicating the Admiral he would have compassion and
pity on those afflicted prisoners who were as yet, together with their Wives
and Children, in the hands of Captain Morgan. And that unto this effect he
would be pleased to give his word to let the whole Fleet of Pirates freely pass,
without any molestation. Forasmuch as this would be the only remedy of faving
both the lives of them that came with this Petition, as also of those who
remained behind in captivity; all being equally menaced with the Sword and
gallows, in case he granted not this humble Request. But Don Alonso gave them
for answer a sharp reprehension of their cowardice, telling them, If you had
been as loyal unto your King in hindering the entry of these Pirates, as I shall
Free passage denied.
do their going out, you had never caused these troubles neither unto your
selves, nor unto our whole Nation; which has suffered so much through your
pusillanimity. In a word, I shall never grant your Request; but shall endeavor
to maintain that respect which is due unto my King, according to my duty.

Thus the Spaniards returned unto their fellow prisoners, with much
consternation of mind, and no hopes of obtaining their Request; telling unto
Captain Morgan what answer they had received. His reply was. If Don Alonso will
not let me pass, I will find means how to do it without Reply of Capt. Morg.
him. Hereupon he began presently to make a Dividend of all the Booty they had
taken in that Voyage, fearing left he might not have an opportunity of doing it
in another place; if any Tempest should arise and separate the Ships. As also
being jealous that any of the Commanders might run away with the best part of
the Spoil; which then did lie much more in one Vessel than another. Thus they
all brought in, according to their Laws, and declared what they had; having
beforehand made an Oath not to conceal the least thing from the public. The
accounts being cast up, they found to the value The Spoil amounts to above
250000 Pieces of Eight.
of two hundred and fifty thousand Pieces of Eight in Money and Jewels, besides
the huge quantity of Merchandise and Slaves. All which Purchase was divided
unto every Ship or Boat, according to their share.

The Dividend being made, the Question still remained on foot, how they should
pass the Castle, and get out of the Lake. Unto this effect they made use of a
Stratagem, of no ill invention, which was as follows. On the day that
preceded the night wherein they determined to get Curious Stratagem to get away.
forth, they embarked many of their men in Canows, and rowed toward the shore,
as if they designed to land them. Here they concealed themselves under the
branches of Trees that hang over the coast, for a while, till they had laid
themselves down along in the Boats. Then the Canows returned unto the Ships,
with the only appearance of two or three men rowing them back, all the rest
being concealed at the bottom of the Canows. Thus much only could be perceived
from the Castle; and this action of false-landing of men, for so we may call
it, was repeated that day several times. Hereby the Spaniards were brought into
persuasion the Pirates intended to force the Castle by scaling it, as soon as
night should come. This fear caused them to place most of their great Guns on
that side which looks toward the Land, together with the main force of their
Arms, leaving the contrary side belonging to the Sea, almost destitute of
strength and defense.

Night being come, they weighed Anchor, and by the light of the Moon, without
setting sail, They weigh Anchors.
committed themselves to the ebbing Tide, which gently brought them down the
River, till they were nigh unto the Castle. Being now almost over against it,
they spread their Sails with all And get by the Castle.
the haste they could possibly make. The Spaniards perceiving them to escape,
transported with all speed their Guns from the other side of the Castle, and
began to fire very furiously at the Pirates. But these having a favorable wind,
were almost past the danger, before those of the Castle could put things into
convenient order of offense. So that the Pirates lost not many of their men, nor
received any considerable damage in their Ships. Being now out of the reach of
the Guns, Captain Morgan sent a Canow unto the Castle with some of the
prisoners; and the Governor thereof gave them a Boat that every one The
prisone sent home.
might return to his own home. Notwithstanding, he detained the Hostages he had
from Gibraltar, Excepting those of Gibraltar.
by reason, those of that Town were not as yet come to pay the rest of the
Ransom for not firing the place. Just as he departed, Captain Morgan ordered
seven great Guns with Bullets to be fired against the Castle, as it were to
take his leave of them. But they answered not so much as with a Musket Shot.

The next day after their departure, they were surprised with a great Tempest,
which forced them to cast Anchor in the depth of five or six A great Storm
takes them.
fathom water. But the Storm increased so much, that they were compelled to
weigh again, and put out to Sea, where they were in great danger of being lost.
For if on either side they should have been cast on shore, either to fall into
the hands of the Spaniards, or of the Indians, they would certainly have
obtained no mercy. At last the Tempest being spent, the Wind ceased; which
caused much content and joy in the whole Fleet.

Mean while Captain Morgan made his fortune by pillaging the Towns
abovementioned, the rest of his Companions, who separated from his Fleet Their
Companions who were left at Cape de Lo^os.
at the Cape de Lo^s for to take the Ship of which was spoken before, endured
much misery, and were very unfortunate in all their attempts. For being arrived
at the Isle of Savona, they found not Captain Morgan there, nor any one of
their Companions. Neither had they the good fortune to find a Letter which
Captain Morgan at his departure left behind him in a certain place, where in
all probability they would meet with it. Thus, not knowing what course to
steer, they at last concluded to pillage some Town or other, whereby to seek
their fortune. They were in all four hundred men, more or less; who were
divided into four Ships and one Boat. Being ready to set forth, they
constituted an Admiral among themselves, by whom they might be directed in the
whole affair. Unto this effect they chose a certain person who had behaved
himself very courageously at the taking of Puerto Velo, and whose name was
Captain Hansel. This Commander resolved to attempt the taking of the Town of
Commana, seated upon the Continent of Caracas, nigh threescore leagues from the
Westside of the Isle de la Trinidad. Being arrived there, they landed their
men, and killed some few Indians that were near unto the coast. But approaching
unto the Town, the Spaniards, having in their company many Indians, disputed
Beaten by the Spaniards.
them the entry so briskly, that with great loss, and in great confusion, they
were forced to retire toward their Ships. At last they arrived at Iamaica,
where the rest of their Companions who came with Captain Morgan, ceased not to
mock and ^ear them for their ill success at C^a, often telling them, Let us see
what money you brought from Commana, and if it be as good Silver as that which
we bring from Maracaibo.

BOOKS Printed for William Crook this Year 1684.
1. A New Survey of the present State of Europe, containing Remarks upon
several Sovereign and Republican States, with Men's Historical, Chronological,
Topographical, Hydrographical, Political, etc. By G. Pontier, Chief Prothenoter
of Rome. Englished by John Beaumount, Author of the Weekly, Memorials. In 8^
price bound 2 s. 6 d. 2. The Reports of Edward Littleton, Lord Keeper of
England. In Folio, price bound 12 s. 3. The Grecian Story, being an Historical
Poem, in Five Books in imitation of the Fairy Queen and Gondibert. To which is
annexed the Grove. By J. H. Esquire 4o price bound 4 s. 4. A Discourse about
Conscience, relating to the present Differences among us, in opposition to both
Extremes, of Popery and Fanaticism. 4o. price 6d.
BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. PART III.
CHAP. I.
Captain Morgan goes to the Isle of Hispaniola, to equipp a new Fleet, with
intent to pillage again upon the Coasts of the West Indies.

CAptain Morgan perceived now that Fortune did favor his Arms, by giving good
Success unto all his Enterprises, which occasioned him, as it is usual in
humane Affairs, to aspire unto greater things, trusting she would always be
constant unto him. Such was the burning of Panama; wherein Fortune failed not
to assist him, in like manner as she had done before, crowning the Event of his
Actions with Victory, howbeit she had led him thereunto through thousands of
Difficulties. The History hereof I shall now begin to relate, as being so much
remarkable in all its Circumstances, as peradventure nothing more deserving
Memory, may occur to be read by future Ages.

Not long after Captain Morgan arrived at Iamaica, he found many of his chief
Officers and Soldiers reduced to their former state of Indigency, through
their immoderate Vices and Debauchery. Hence they ceased not to importune him
for new Invasions and Exploits, thereby to get something Captain Morgan
designeth (...) Exp^ions.
to expend anew in Wine and Strumpets, as they had already wasted what was
purchased so little before. Captain Morgan being willing to follow Fortune
while she called him, hereupon stopped the mouths of many of the Inhabitants of
Iamaica, who were Creditors unto his Men for large sums of Money, with the
hopes and promises he gave them, of greater Atchievments than ever, by a new
Expedition he was going about. This being done, he needed not give himself much
trouble, to levy Men for this or any other Enterprise, his Name being now so
famous through all those Islands, as that alone would readily bring him in more
Men than he could well employ. He undertook therefore to equipp a new Fleet of
Ships; for which purpose he assigned the Southside of the Isle of Tortuga, as a
Place of Rendezvous. With this resolution, he writ diverse Letters He writ^th to
several Persons.
unto all the ancient and expert Pirates there inhabiting, as also to the
Governor of the said Isle, and to the Planters and Hunters of Hispaniola,
giving them to understand his Intentions, and desiring their Appearance at the
said Place, in case they intended to go with him. All these people had no
sooner understood his Designs, but they flocked unto the Place assigned in huge
numbers, Multitudes flock unto him.
with Ships, Canows, and Boats, being desirous to obey his Commands. Many who
had not the convenience of coming unto him by Sea, traversed the Woods of
Hispaniola, and with no small Difficulties arrived there by Land. Thus all were
present at the place assigned, and in a readiness, against the 24th. day of
October of 1670.

Captain Morgan was not wanting to be there according Captain Morgan arriveth
to meet them.
to his punctual custom, who came in his Ship unto the same side of the Island,
to a Port called by the French, Port Couillon, over against the Island de la
Vaca, this being the Place which he had assigned unto others. Having now
gathered the greatest part of his Fleet, he called a And calls a Council.
Council, to deliberate about the means of finding Provisions sufficient for so
many People. Here they concluded to send four Ships, and one Boat, manned with
400 Men, over to the Continent, to the intent they should rifle some
Countrey-Towns and Villages, and in these get all the Corn or Maiz they could
gather. They set Sail for the Continent, toward the River de la Hacha, They
s^d to seek Provisions.
with design to assault a small Village, called la Rancheria, where is usually
to be found the greatest quantity of Maiz, of all those Parts thereabouts. In
the mean while Captain Morgan sent another Party of his Men to hunt in the
Woods, who killed there an huge number of Beasts, and salted them: The rest of
his Companions remained in the Ships, to clean, fit, and rigg them out to Sea,
so that at the return of those who were sent abroad, all things might be in a
readiness to weigh Anchors, and follow the course of their Designs.

CHAP. II.
What happened in the River de la Hacha.

THe four Ships abovementioned, after they had set Sail from Hispaniola,
steered their They arrive at the River de la Hacha.
course till they came within sight of the River de la Hacha, where they were
suddenly overtaken with a tedious Calm. Being thus within sight of Land
becalmed for some days, the Spaniards inhabiting along the Coasts, who had
perceived them to be Enemies, had sufficient time to prepare themselves for the
Assault, at least to hide the best part of their Goods, to the end that without
any care of preserving them, they might be in a readiness to retire, when they
found themselves unable to resist the Force of the Pirates, of whose frequent
Attempts upon those Coasts, they had already learnt what they had to do in such
Cases. There was in the River at that present a good Ship, which was come from
Cartagena to lade Maiz, and was now when the Pirates came, almost ready to
depart. The Men belonging to this Ship, endeavored to escape, but not being
able to do it, both they and the Vessel fell into their hands. This was a fit
Purchase for their And take a Ship laden with Corn.
Mind, as being good part of what they came to seek for, with so much care and
toil. The next morning about break of day, they came with their Ships toward
the shore, and landed their Men, They land.
although the Spaniards made huge resistance, from a Battery which they had
raised on that side, where of necessity they were to land: but notwithstanding
The Spaniards oppose them.
what defense they could make, they were forced to retire toward a Village,
unto which the Pirates followed them. Here the Spaniards rallying again, fell
upon them with great fury, and maintained a strong Combat, which lasted till
night was come: but then perceiving they had lost great number of Men, which
was no But in vain.
smaller on the Pirates side, they retired unto Places more occult in the Woods.

The next day when the Pirates saw they were They pursue the Spaniards.
all fled, and the Town left totally empty of People, they pursued them as far
as they could possible. In this pursuit they overtook a Party of Spaniards,
whom they made all Prisoners, and exercised with most cruel Torments, to
discover where they had hid their Goods: some were Many taken and tortured.
found, who by the force of intolerable Tortures, confessed; but others who
would not do the same, were used more barbarously than the former. Thus in the
space of 15 days that they remained there, they took many Prisoners, much
Plate, and moveable Goods, with all other things they could rob, with which
Booty they resolved to return unto Hispaniola. Yet not contented with what they
had already got, they dispatched some Prisoners into the Woods, to seek for the
rest of the Inhabitants, and to demand of them a Ransom for not burning the
Town: Unto this they answered, They had no Money nor Plate, but in case they
would be satisfied with a certain quantity of Maiz, they would give as much as
they could afford. The Pirates accepted this proffer, as being more useful to
them at that occasion than ready Money, and agreed they should pay 4000 Hanegs,
4000 Hanegs of Maiz given for a Ransom.
or Bushels of Maiz. These were brought in three days after, the Spaniards
being desirous to rid themselves as soon as possible, of that inhumane sort of
People. Having laded them on board their Ships, together with all the rest of
their Purchase, they returned unto the Island of Hispaniola, to give account
They return to Hispaniola.
unto their Leader Captain Morgan, of all they had performed.

They had now been absent five entire Weeks, about the Commission
aforementioned, which long delay occasioned Captain Morgan almost to despair of
their Return, as fearing least they were fallen into the hands of the
Spaniards, especially considering that the place whereunto they went, could
easily be relieved from Cartagena, and Santa Maria, if the Inhabitants were any
thing careful to alarm the Country: on the other side he feared, lest they
should have made some great Fortune in that Voyage, and with it escaped unto
some other place. But at last seeing his Ships return, and in greater number
than they had departed, he resumed new Courage, this sight causing both in him
Great Joy for their Arrival.
and his Companions infinite joy. This was much increased, when being arrived,
they found them full laden with Maiz, whereof they stood in great need, for the
maintenance of so many people, by whose help they expected great Matters,
through the Conduct of their Commander.

After that Captain Morgan had divided the said Maiz, as also the Flesh which
the Hunters brought in, among all the Ships, according to the number of Men
that were in every Vessel, he concluded upon the departure, having viewed
beforehand every Ship, and observed their being well equipped and clean. Thus
he set Sail, and directed his course toward Cape Tiburon, where he determined
to take his measures and resolution, They depart^ to Cape Tiburon.
of what Enterprise he should take in hand. No sooner were they arrived there,
but they met with some other Ships, that came newly to join them, from Iamaica.
So that now the whole Fleet consisted of 37 Ships, wherein were 2000 ^7 Sail in
all.
fighting-Men, besides Mariners and Boys; the Admiral hereof was mounted with
22 great Guns, and 6 small ones, of Brass; the rest carried some 20, some 16,
some 18. and the smallest Vessel at least 4. besides which, they had great
quantity of Ammunition and Fireballs, with other Inventions of Powder.

Captain Morgan finding himself with such a great number of Ships, divided the
whole Fleet The Fleet divided into two Squadrons.
into two Squadrons, constituting a Vice Admiral, and other Officers and
Commanders of the second Squadron, distinctly from the former. Unto every one
of these he gave Letters Patents, or Commissions, to act all manner of
Hostility against the Spanish Nation, and take of them what Ships they could,
either abroad at Sea, or in the Harbors, in like manner as if they were open
and declared Enemies (as he termed it) of the King of England, his pretended
Master. This being done, he called all his Captains, and other Officers
together, and caused them to sign some Articles of common Agreement betwixt
them, and Articles of this Voyage.
in the Name of all. Herein it was stipulated, that he should have the
hundredth part of all that was gotten, to himself alone: That every Captain
should draw the Shares of 8 Men, for the Expenses of his Ship, besides his own:
That the Surgeon, beside his ordinary Pay, should have 200 pieces of Eight, for
his Chest of Medicaments: And every Carpenter, above his common Salary, should
draw 100 pieces of Eight. As to Recompenses and Rewards, they were regulated in
this Voyage much higher than was expressed in the first part of this Book.
Thus, for the loss of both Legs, they assigned 1500 pieces of Eight, or 15
Slaves, the Choice being left to the election of the Party. For the loss of
both Hands, 1800 pieces of Eight, or 18 Slaves. For one Leg, whether the right
or the left, 600 pieces of Eight, or 6 Slaves. For a Hand, as much as for a
Leg. And for the loss of any Eye, 100 pieces of Eight, or one Slave. Lastly,
Unto him that in any Battle should signalize himself, either by entering the
first any Castle, or taking down the Spanish Colors, and setting up the
English, they constituted 50 pieces of Eight for a Reward. In the head of these
Articles it was stipulated, that all these extraordinary Salaries, Recompenses
and Rewards, should be paid out of the first Spoil or Purchase they should
take, according as every one should then occur to be either rewarded or paid.

This Contract being signed, Captain Morgan commanded his Vice-Admirals and
Captains to put all things in order, every one in their Ships, for to go and
attempt one of three Places, either Cartagena, Panama, or Vera Cruz; but the
lot fell Three Places in Deliberation. Panama pitched upon.
upon Panama, as being believed to be the richest of all three: notwithstanding
this City being situated at such distance from the Northern Sea, as they knew
not well the Avenues and Entries necessary to approach unto it, they judged it
necessary to go beforehand to the Isle of St. Catharin, They go to take St.
Catharin.
there to find and provide themselves with some Persons, who might serve them
for Guides in this Enterprise; for in the Garrison of that Island, are commonly
employed many Banditi, and Outlaries, belonging to Panama, and the neighboring
Places, who are very expert in the knowledge of all that Country. But before
they proceeded any farther, they caused an Act to be published through the
whole Fleet, containing, that in case they met with any Spanish Vessel, the
first Captain who with his Men should enter, and take the said Ship, should
have for his Reward the 10th. part of whatsoever should be found within her.

CHAP. III.
Captain Morgan leaves the Island of Hispaniola, and goes to that of St.
Catharin, which he takes.

CAptain Morgan and his Companions weighed Anchors from the Cape of Tiburon,
the They depart from Cape Tiburon.
16th. day of December, in the year 1670. Four days after they arrived within
sight of the Isle of St. Catharin, which was now in possession of the Spaniards
again, as was said in the Second Part of this History, and unto which they
commonly banish all the Malefactors of the Spanish Dominions in the West Indies.
In this Island are found huge quantities of Pigeons at certain Seasons of the
Year; it is watered continually by four Rivulets, or Brooks, whereof two are
always dry in Summer-season. Here is no manner of Trade nor Commerce exercised
by the Inhabitants, neither do they give themselves the trouble to plant more
Fruits, than what are necessary for the sustentation of humane Life; howbeit
the Country would be sufficient to make very good Plantations of Tobacco,
which might render considerable Profit, were it cultivated for that use.

As soon as Captain Morgan came nigh unto the And arrive at St. Catharin.
Island with his Fleet, he sent before one of his best sailing Vessels, to view
the entry of the River, and see if any other Ships were there, who might hinder
him from landing; as also fearing least they should give Intelligence of his
Arrival to the Inhabitants of the Island, and they by this means prevent his
Designs.

The next day before Sunrising, all the Fleet came to an Anchor nigh unto the
Island, in a certain They come to an Anchor.
Bay called Aguada grande: upon this Bay the Spaniards had lately built a
Battery, mounted with 4 pieces of Cannon. Captain Morgan landed with 1000 Men,
more or less, and disposed them And land 1000 Men.
into Squadrons, beginning his March through the Woods, although they had no
other Guides than some few of his own Men, who had been there before, when
Mansvelt took and ransackt the Island. The same day they came unto a certain
Place, where the Governor at other times did keep his ordinary Residence: here
they found a Battery called the Platform, but no body in it, the Spaniards
having retired unto the lesser Island, which, as was said before, is so nigh
unto the great one, that a short Bridge only may conjoyn them.

This lesser Island aforesaid was so well fortified with Forts and Batteries
round about it, as might The little Island well fortisied.
seem impregnable. Hereupon, as soon as the Spaniards perceived the Pirates to
approach, they began to fire upon them so furiously, as they could advance
nothing that day, but were contented to retreat a little, and take up their
rest upon the Grassi'th' open Fields, which afforded no strange Beds to these
People, as being sufficiently used to such kind of Repose: what most afflicted
them was Hunger, having not eat the least thing that whole day. About Midnight
it began to rain so hard, as those miserable People had much ado to Hard
Weather.
resist so much hardship, the greatest part of them having no other Clothes,
than a pair of Seaman's Trowzers, or Breeches, and a Shirt, without either
Shoos, or Stockings. Thus finding themselves in great Extremity, they began to
pull down a few thatcht Houses, to make Fires withal: in a word, they were in
such condition, that 100 Men, indifferently well armed, might easily that night
have torn them all in pieces. The next morning, about break of day, the Rain
ceased, at which time they began to dry their Arms, which were entirely wet,
and proceed on their March. But not long after the Rain recommenc'd anew,
rather harder than before, as if the Yet worser.
Skies were melted into Waters, which caused them to cease from advancing
toward the Forts, from whence the Spaniards did continually fire at the
Pirates, seeing them to approach.

The Pirates were now reduced unto great Affliction, and danger of their Lives,
through the Much Hardship endured.
hardness of the Weather, their own Nakedness, and the great Hunger they
sustained. For a small relief hereof, they happened to find in the Fields an old
Horse, which was both lean, and full of Scabs and Blotches, with galled Back
and Sides. This horrid Animal they instantly killed and flayed, They eat an old
s^abby Horse.
and divided into small pieces among themselves, as far as it would reach, for
many could not obtain one morsel, which they roasted and devoured without
either Salt or Bread, more like unto ravenous Wolves than Men. The Rain as yet
ceased not to fall, and Captain Morgan perceived their Minds to relent, hearing
many of them say, they would return on board the Ships. Amongst these Fatigues
both of Mind and Body, he thought it convenient to use some sudden, and almost
unexpected Remedy: unto this effect he commanded The Spaniards summoned to
surrender.
a Canow to be rigged in all haste, and Colors of Truce to be hanged out of
it. This Canow he sent unto the Spanish Governor of the Island with this
Message: That if within a few hours he delivered not himself and all his Men
into his hands, he did by that Messenger swear unto him, and all those that
were in his company, he would most certainly put them all to the Sword, without
granting Quarter to any.

After noon the Canow returned with this Answer: That the Governor desired two
hours time, Their Answer.
to deliberate with his Officers in a full Council about that Affair, which
being past, he would give his positive Answer to the Message. The time now
being elapsed, the said Governor sent two Canows with white Colors, and two
persons, to treat with Captain Morgan; but before they landed, they demanded of
the Pirates two persons, as Hostages of their Security. These were readily The
Governor betrayeth the Island
granted by Captain Morgan, who delivered unto them two of his Captains, for a
mutual Pledge of the Security required. With this the Spaniards propounded unto
Captain Morgan, that their Governor in a full Assembly had resolved to deliver
up the Island, as not being provided with sufficient Forces, to defend it
against such an Armada, or Fleet. But withal he desired, that Captain Morgan
would be pleased to use a certain Stratagem of War, for the better saving of
his own Credit, and the Reputation of his Officers, both abroad and at home,
which should be as follows: That Captain Morgan would come with his Troops by
night, nigh unto the Bridge that joined the lesser Island unto the great one,
and there attaque the Fort of St. Ierom: That at the same time all the Ships of
his Fleet would draw nigh unto the Castle of Santa Teresa, and attaque it by
Sea, landing in the mean while some more Troops, near the Battery called of St.
Matthew: That these Troops which were newly landed, should by this means
intercept the Governor by the way, as he endeavored to pass unto St. Ierom's
Fort, and then take him Prisoner, using the Formality, as if they forced him to
deliver the said Castle; and that he would lead the English into it, under the
fraud of being his own Troops: That on one side and the other, there should be
continual firing at one another, but without Bullets, or at least into the Air,
so that no side might receive any harm by this device: That thus having
obtained two such considerable Forts, the chiefest of the Isle, he needed not
take care for the rest, which of necessity must fall by course into his hands.

These Propositions, every one, were granted Captain Morgan accepts the
Proposals.
by Captain Morgan, upon condition they should see them faithfully observed,
for otherwise they should be used with all rigor imaginable: this they
promised to do, and hereupon took their leaves, and returned, to give account
of their Negotiation unto the Governor. Presently after Captain Morgan
commanded the whole Fleet to enter the Port, and his Men to be in a readiness,
for to assault that night the Castle of St. Ierom. Thus the false Alarm or
Battle began, with incessant firing of great Guns from both the Castles,
against the Ships, but without Bullets, as was said before. Then the Pirates
landed, and assaulted by night the lesser Island, which they took, as also
possession of both the Fortresses, forcing all the Spaniards, in appearance, to
fly unto the They take possession of the Island.
Church. Before this Assault, Captain Morgan had sent word unto the Governor,
he should keep all his Men together in a Body, otherwise if the Pirates met any
straggling Spaniards in the Streets, they should certainly shoot them.

The Island being taken by this unusual Stratagem, and all things put in due
order, the Pirates began to make a new War against the Poultrey, Cattle, and all
sort of Victuals they could find. This was their whole Employ for some days,
scarce thinking of any thing else than to kill those Animals, roast, and eat,
and make good cheer, as much as they could possibly attain unto. If Wood was
wanting, they presently fell upon the Houses, and pulling them down, made Fires
with the Timber, as had been done before in the Field. The next day they numbered
all the Prisoners they had taken upon the whole Island, Number of Persons found
on the Island.
which were found to be in all 450 persons, between Men, Women, and Children,
viz. 190 Soldiers, belonging to the Garrison; 40 Inhabitants, who were married;
43 Children; 34 Slaves, belonging to the King, with 8 Children; 8 Banditi; 39
Negro's, belonging unto private persons, with 27 female-Blacks, and 34
Children. The Pirates disarmed all the Spaniards, and sent them out immediately
unto the Plantations, to seek for Provisions, leaving the Women in the Church,
there to exercise their Devotions.

Soon after they took a Review of the whole Fortresses and Arms of the whole
Island.
Island, and all the Fortresses belonging thereunto, which they found to be 9
in all, as follows. The Fort of St. Ier^m, nighest unto the Bridge, had 8
great Guns, of 12, 6, and 8 pound Carriage, together with 6 pipes of Muskets,
every pipe containing 10 Muskets. Here they found still 60 Muskets, with
sufficient quantity of Powder, and all other sorts of Ammunition. The 2d.
Fortress, called St. Matthew, had 3 Guns, of 8 pound Carriage each. The 3d. and
chiefest among all the rest, named Santa Teresa, had 20 great Guns, of 18, 12,
8 and 6 pound Carriage, with 10 pipes of Muskets, like unto those we said
before, and 90 Muskets remaining, besides all other warlike Ammunition. This
Castle was built with Stone and Mortar, with very thick Walls on all sides, and
a large Ditch round about it of 20 Foot depth, the which although it was dry,
yet was very hard to get over. Here was no Entry but through one door, which
corresponded to the middle of the Castle. Within it was a Mount or Hill, almost
unaccessible, with 4 pieces of Cannon at the top, from whence they could shoot
directly into the Port. On the Seaside this Castle was impregnable, by reason
of the Rocks which surrounded it, and the Sea beating furiously upon them. In
like manner on the side of the Land, it was so commodiously seated on a
Mountain, as there was no access unto it, but by a Path of 3 or 4 Foot broad.
The 4th. Fortress was named St. Augustine, having 3 Guns, of 8 and 6 pound
Carriage. The 5th. named la Plattaforma de la Concepcion, had only 2 Guns, of 8
pound Carriage. The 6th by Name San Salvador, had likewise no more than 2 Guns.
The 7th. being called Plattaforma de los Artilleros, had also 2 Guns. The 8th.
called Santa Cruz, had 3 Guns. The 9th. which was called St. Ioseph's Fort, had
6 Guns, of 12 and 8 pound Carriage, besides two pipes of Muskets, and
sufficient Ammunition.

In the Storehouse were found above 30000 pound of Powder, with all other
sorts of Ammunition, which were transported by the Pirates on board the Ships.
All the Guns were stopped and nailed, and the Fortresses demolished, excepting
that of St. Ierom, where the Pirates kept their Guard and Residence. Captain
Morgan enquired, if any Banditi were there from Panama, or Puerto Velo; and
hereupon three were brought before him, Three Banditi found here, or Guides for
Panama.
who pretended to be very expert in all the Avenues of those Parts. He asked
them, if they would be his Guides, and show him the securest Ways and Passages
unto Panama; which if they performed, he promised them equal shares in all they
should pillage and rob in that Expedition, and that afterward he would set
them at liberty, by transporting them unto Iamaica. These Propositions pleased
the Banditi very well, and they readily accepted his Proffers, promising to
serve him very faithfully in all he should desire; especially one of these
three, who was the greatest Rogue, Thief, and Assassin among them, and who had
deserved for his Crimes, rather to be broken alive upon the Wheel, than
punished with serving in a Garrison. This wicked Fellow had a great Ascendant
over the other two Banditi, and could domineer and command over them as he
pleased, they not daring to refuse obedience to his Orders.

Hereupon Captain Morgan commanded four Ships and one Boat, to be equipped and
provided Four Ships sent to take the Castle of Chagre.
with all things necessary, for to go and take the Castle of Chagre, seated
upon the River of that Name. Neither would he go himself with his whole Fleet,
fearing least the Spaniards should be jealous of his farther Designs upon
Panama. In these Vessels he caused to imbark 400 Men, who went to put in
execution the Orders of their chief Commander Captain Morgan, mean while he
himself remained behind in the Island of St. Catharin, with the rest of the
Fleet, expecting to hear the Success of their Arms.

CHAP. IV.
Captain Morgan takes the Castle of Chagre, with 400 Men sent unto this
purpose from the Isle of St. Catharin.

CAptain Morgan sending these four Ships and a Captain Brodely made
Vice Admiral.
Boat unto the River of Chagre, chose for Vice Admiral thereof, a certain
Person named Captain Brodely. This Man had been long time in those Quarters,
and committed many Robberies upon the Spaniards, when Mansvelt took the Isle of
St. Catharin, as was related in the 2d. Part of this History. He being
therefore well acquainted with those Coasts, was thought a fit Person for this
Exploit, his Actions likewise having rendered him famous among the Pirates, and
their Enemies the Spaniards. Captain Brodely being chosen chief Commander of
these Forces, in three days after He arriveth at Chagre.
he departed from the presence of Captain Morgan, arrived within sight of the
said Castle of Chagre, which by the Spaniards is called St. Lawrence. This
Castle is built upon a high Mountain, at the entry Situation of the Castle.
of the River, and surrounded on all sides with strong Palizada's, or wooden
Walls, being very well terra-plen'd, and filled with Earth, which renders them
as secure, as the best Walls made of Stone or Brick. The top of this Mountain
is in a manner divided into two parts, between which lies a Ditch, of the
depth of 30 Foot. The Castle it self has but one Entry, and that by a
Drawbridge, which passes over the Ditch aforementioned. On the Land-side it
has four Bastions, that of the Sea containing only two more. That part thereof
which looks toward the South, is totally unaccessible, and impossible to be
climbed, through the infinite asperity of the Mountain. The North-side is
surrounded by the River, which hereabouts runs very broad. At the foot of
the said Castle, or rather Mountain, is seated a strong Fort, with 8 great
Guns, which commands and impedeth the entry of the River. Not much lower are
to be seen two other Batteries, whereof each has 6 pieces of Cannon, to defend
likewise the mouth of the said River. At one side of the Castle are built two
great Storehouses, in which are deposited all sorts of warlike Ammunition, and
Merchandise, which are brought thither from the inner parts of the Country.
Nigh unto these Houses is a high pair of Stairs, hewed out of the Rock, which
serves to mount unto the top of the Castle. On the West Side of the said
Fortress lies a small Port, which is not above 7 or 8 Fathom deep, being very
fit for small Vessels, and of very good Anchorage. Besides this, there lies
before the Castle, at the entry of the River, a great Rock, A dangerous Rock at
the entry of the River.
scarce to be perceived above Water, unless at low Tides.

No sooner had the Spaniards perceived the Pirates to come, but they began to
fire incessantly at them with the biggest of their Guns. They came to an Anchor
in a small Port, at the distance of a League more or less from the Castle. The
next morning very early they went on shore, and marched They land.
through the Woods, to attack the Castle on that side. This March continued
until two of the Clock afternoon, before they could reach the Castle, by reason
of the Difficulties of the Way, and its Mire and Dirt. And although their
Guides served them exactly, notwithstanding they came so nigh the Castle at
first, that they lost many of their Men with the Shot from the Guns, they being
in an open Place, where nothing could cover nor defend them. This much
perplexed the Pirates in their Minds, they not knowing what to do, nor what
course to take, for on that side of necessity they must make the Assault, and
being uncovered from Head to Foot, they could not advance one step without
great danger. Besides, that the Castle, both for its Situation and Strength,
did Danger of this Enterprise.
cause them much to fear the Success of that Enterprise. But to give it over,
they dared not, least they should be reproached and scorned by their Companions.

At last, after many Doubts and Disputes among They resolve to hazard the
Assault.
themselves, they resolved to hazard the Assault and their Lives after a most
desperate manner. Thus they advanced toward the Castle, with their Swords in
one hand, and Fireballs in the other. The Spaniards defended themselves very
briskly, ceasing not to fire at them with their great Guns and Muskets
continually, crying withal, Come on, ye English Dogs, Enemies to God and our
King, let your other Companions that are behind come on too; ye shall not go to
Panama this bout. After the Pirates had made some trial to climb up the Walls,
they were forced to retreat, which they accordingly And are forced to retire.
did, resting themselves until night. This being come, they returned to the
Assault, to try, if by the help of their Fireballs they could overcome, and
pull down the Pales before the Wall. This they attempted to do, and mean while
they were about it, there happened a very remarkable Accident, which gave them
the opportunity of the Victory. One of the Pirates was wounded Strange Accident.
with an Arrow in his Back, which pierced his Body to the other side. This
instantly he pulled out with great valor at the side of his Breast; then
taking a little Cotton that he had about him, he wound it about the said Arrow,
and putting it into his Musket, he shot it back unto the Castle. But the Cotton
being kindled by the Powder, occasioned two or three Houses that were within
the Castle, as being thatched with Palm-leaves, to take Fire, which the
Spaniards perceived not so soon as was necessary. For this Fire meeting with a
parcel of Powder, blew it up, and thereby caused great Ruin, and no less
Consternation to the Spaniards, who were not able to occur unto this Accident,
as not having seen the beginning thereof.

Thus the Pirates perceiving the good effect of the Arrow, and the beginning of
the Misfortune of the Spaniards, were infinitely gladded thereat. And mean
while they were bufied in extinguishing the Fire, which caused great Confusion
in the whole Castle, having not sufficient Water wherewithal to do it, the
Pirates made use of this opportunity, They make use of the opportunity.
setting Fire likewise unto the Palizada's. Thus the Fire was seen at the same
time, in several parts about the Castle, which gave them huge Advantage against
the Spaniards. For many Breaches were made at once by the Fire among the Pales,
great heaps of Earth falling down into the Ditch. Upon these the Pirates climbed
up, and got over into the Castle, notwithstanding that some Spaniards, who were
not busied about the Fire, cast down upon them many flaming Pots, full of
combustible Matter, and odious Smells, which occasioned the loss of many of the
English.

The Spaniards, notwithstanding the great Resistance The Empalements burnt.
they made, could not hinder the Palizada's from being entirely burnt before
midnight. Mean while the Pirates ceased not to persist in their Intention, of
taking the Castle. Unto which effect, although the Fire was great, they would
creep upon the Ground, as nigh unto it as they could, and shoot amidst the
Flames, against the Spaniards they could perceive on the other side, and thus
cause many to fall dead from the Walls. When day was come, they observed all
the moveable Earth that say betwixt the Pales, to be fallen into the Ditch in
huge quantity. So that now those within the Castle, did in a manner lie equally
They lie open to one another
exposed to them without, as had been on the contrary before. Whereupon the
Pirates continued shooting very furiously against them, and killed great number
of Spaniards. For the Governor had given them Orders not to retire from those
Posts, which corresponded to the Heaps of Earth fallen into the Ditch, and
caused the Artillery to be transported unto the Breaches.

Notwithstanding the Fire within the Castle still continued, and now the Pirates
from abroad used The Pirates help to extinguish the Fire
what means they could to hinder its progress, by shooting incessantly against
it. One party of the Pirates was employed only to this purpose, and another
commanded to watch all the Motions of the Spaniards, and take all opportunities
against them. About noon the English happened to gain a Breach, which the
Governor himself defended They gain a Breach.
with 25 Soldiers. Here was performed a very courageous and warlike Resistance
by the Spaniards, both with Muskets, Pikes, Stones and Swords. Yet
notwithstanding through all these Arms the Pirates forced and fought their way,
till at last they gained the Castle. The Spaniards who remained alive, And at
last the Castle.
cast themselves down from the Castle into the Sea, choosing rather to die
precipitated by their own selves, (few or none surviving the Fall) than to ask
any Quarter for their Lives. The Governor himself retreated unto the Corpse du
Guard, before which were placed two pieces of Cannon. Here he intended still to
defend himself, neither would he demand any Quarter. But at last he was killed
with a Musket Shot, which pierced his Skull The Governor killed.
into the Brain.

The Governor being dead, and the Corpse du Guard surrendered, they found still
remaining in it alive, to the number of 30 Men, whereof scarce 30 Men only
found alive.
10 were not wounded. These informed the Pirates, that 8 or 9 of their Soldiers
had deserted their Colors, and were gone to Panama, to carry News of their
Arrival and Invasion. These 30 Men alone were remaining of 314. wherewith the
Castle was garisoned, among which number, not one Officer was found alive.
These were all made Prisoners, and compelled to tell whatsoever they knew of
their Designs and Enterprises. Among The Governor of Panama knew their coming.
other things they declared, that the Governor of Panama had notice sent him
three weeks ago from Cartagena, how that the English were equipping a Fleet at
Hispaniola, with design to come and take the said City of Panama. Moreover,
that this their Intention had been known by a person, who was run away from the
Pirates, at the River de la Hacha, where they provided their Fleet with Corn.
That, upon this News, the said Governor had sent 164 Men, to strengthen the
Garrison of that Castle, together with much Provision, and warlike Ammunition;
the ordinary Garrison whereof did only consist of 150 Men. So that in all they
made the number aforementioned, of 314 Men, being all very well armed. Besides
this they declared, that the Governor of Panama had placed several Ambuscades
all along Ambuscades on the River side.
the River of Chagre; and that he waited for their coming, in the open Fields
of Panama, with 3600 Men.

The taking of this Castle of Chagre cost the Pirates excessively dear, in
comparison to the small numbers they used to lose at other times and places.
Yea their toil and labor here, did far exceed what they sustained at the
Conquest of the Isle of St. Catharin, and its adjacent. For coming to number
their Men, they found they had lost above 100. besides those that were wounded,
whose number exceeded 70. They commanded the Spaniards that were Prisoners, to
cast all the The dead thrown down from the Castle.
dead Bodies of their own Men, down from the top of the Mountain to the
Seaside, and afterward to bury them. Such as were wounded, were carried unto
the Church, belonging to the Castle, of which they made an Hospital, and where
also they shut up the Women. Thus it was likewise turned into a place of
Prostitution, the Pirates ceasing not to defile the Bodies of those afflicted
Widows, with all manner of insolent Actions and Threats.

Captain Morgan remained not long time behind, Captain Morgan prepares for
Chagre.
at the Isle of St. Catharin, after taking the Castle of Chagre; of which he
had notice presently sent him. Yet notwithstanding, before he departed from
thence, he caused to be embarked, all the Provisions could be found, together
with great quantities of Maiz, or Indian Wheat, and Cazave; whereof, in like
manner, is made Bread in those Parts. He commanded likewise, great store of
Provisions should be transported unto the Garrison of the aforesaid Castle of
Chagre, from what Parts soever they could be gotten. At a certain place of the
Island, they cast into the Sea all the Guns belonging thereunto, with a design
to return, and leave that Island well garrisoned, unto the perpetual possession
of Pirates. Notwithstanding he ordered all the Houses and Forts to be set on
fire, excepting only the Castle of St. Teresa, which he judged to be the
strongest and securest wherein to fortify himself, at his return from Panama.
He carried with him all the Prisoners of the Island, and thus set Sail for the
River of Chagre, where he arrived He arriveth there.
in the space of 8 days. Here the Joy of the whole Fleet was so great, when
they spyed the English Colors upon the Castle, that they minded not their way
into the River, which occasioned them to loose four of theirShips at the Entry
thereof, that wherein Captain Morgan went, being one I (...) four Ships at the
entry of the River.
of the four. Yet their Fortune was so good, as to be able to save all the Men
and Goods that were in the said Vessels. Yea, the Ships likewise had been
preserved, if a strong Northerly Wind had not risen in that occasion, which
cast the Ships upon the Rock abovementioned, that lies at the Entry of the
said River.

Captain Morgan was brought into the Castle with great Acclamations of Triumph
and Joy, of all the Pirates, both of those who were within, And is received with
great joy.
and also them that were but newly come. Having understood the whole
Transactions of the Conquest, he commanded all the Prisoners to begin to work,
and repair what was necessary. Especially, in setting up new Palizada's, or
Pales, round about the Forts depending on the Castle. There were still in the
River some Spanish Vessels, called by them Chatten, which serve for the
Transportation of Merchandise up and down the said River, as also for to go to
Puerto Velo, and Nicaragua. These are commonly mounted with two great Guns of
Iron, and four other small ones of Brass. All these Vessels they seized on,
together (...) seized in the River.
with four little Ships they found there, and all the Canows. In the Castle
they left a Garrison of 500 Garrison left at Chagre.
Men, and in the Ships within the River 150 more.

A Map of the Country and City of PANAMA. Part. 3. Page. 31


These things being done, Captain Morgan departed toward Panama, at the Head
of 1200 Men. He carried very small Provisions with him, being in good hopes he
should provide himself sufficiently among the Spaniards, whom he knew to lie in
Ambuscade at several Places by the way.

CHAP. V.
Captain Morgan departs from the Castle of Chagre, at the Head of 1200 Men,
with design to take the City of Panama.

CAptain Morgan set forth from the Castle of Voyage to Panama.
Chagre, toward Panama, the 18th. day of August, in the year 1670. He had
under his Conduct 1200 Men, 5 Boats with Artillery, and 32 Canows, all which
were filled with the said People. Thus he steered his course up the River
toward Panama. That day they sailed only 6 First day thereof.
Leagues, and came to a Place called, de los Bracos. Here a party of his Men
went on shore, only to sleep some few hours, and stretch their Limbs, they
being almost crippl'd with lying too much crowded in the Boats. After they had
rested a while, they went abroad, to see if any Victuals could be found in the
neighboring Plantations. But they could find none, the Spaniards being fled,
and carrying with them all the Provisions they had. This day, being the first
of their Journey, there was amongst them such scarcity of Victuals, as the
greatest part were forced to pass with only a pipe of Tobacco, without any
other Refreshment.

The next day, very early in the morning, they continued their Journey, and came
about evening Second day.
to a Place called, Cruz de Iuan Gallego. Here they were compelled to leave
their Boats and Canows, by reason the River was very dry for want of Rain, and
the many obstacles of Trees that were fallen into it.

The Guides told them, that about two Leagues farther on, the Country would be
very good to continue the Journey by Land. Hereupon they left some Companies,
being in all 160 Men, on board the Boats, to defend them, with intent they
might serve for a place of Refuge, in case of necessity.

The next morning, being the 3d. day of their Journey, they all went ashore,
excepting those Third day.
abovementioned, who were to keep the Boats. Unto these Captain Morgan gave
very strict Orders, under great penalties, that no Man, upon any pretext
whatsoever, should dare to leave the Boats, and go ashore. This he did, fearing
least they should be surprised and cut off by any Ambuscade of Spaniards, that
might chance to lie thereabouts in the neighboring Woods, which appeared so
thick, as to seem almost impenetrable. Having this morning begun their March,
they found the ways so dirty and irksom, that Captain Morgan thought it more
convenient to transport some of the Men in Canows, (though it could not be done
without great labor) to a Place farther up the River, called Cedro bueno. Thus
they re-imbarked, and the Canows returned for the rest that were left behind.
So that about night, they found themselves all together at the said Place. The
Pirates were extremely desirous to meet any Spaniards, or Indians, hoping to
fill their Bellies with what Provisions they should take from them. For now
they were reduced almost to the very extremity of Hunger.

On the 4th. day, the greatest part of the Pirates Fourth day.
marched by Land, being led by one of the Guides. The rest went by Water,
farther up with the Canows, being conducted by another Guide, who always went
before them with two of the said Canows, to discover on both sides the River,
the Ambuscades of the Spaniards. These had also Spies, who were very dextrous,
and could at any time give notice of all Accidents, or of the Arrival of the
Pirates, six hours at least before they came to any Place. This day about noon
they found themselves nigh unto a Post, called Torna Cavallos. Here the Guide
of the Canows began to cry aloud, he perceived an Ambuscade. His Voice caused
infinite Joy unto all the Pirates, as persuading themselves they should find
some Provisions, wherewith to satiate their Hunger, which was very great. Being
come unto the Place, they found no body in it, the Spaniards who were there not
long before, being every one fled, and leaving nothing behind, unless it were a
small number of leather Bags, all empty, and a few crumbs of Bread, scattered
upon the Ground, where they had eaten. Being angry at this Misfortune, they
pulled down a few little Huts which the Spaniards had made, and afterward fell
to eating the leathern Bags, as being desirous to afford something to the
ferment of their Stomachs, which now was grown so sharp, as it did gnaw their
very Bowels, having nothing else to prey upon. Thus they made a huge Banquet
upon those Bags of Leather, which doubtless had been more grateful^ unto them,
if diverse Quarrels had not risen, concerning who should have the greatest
share. By the circumference of the Place, they conjectured 500 Spaniards, more
or less, had been there. And these, finding no Victuals, they were now
infinitely desirous to meet, intending to devour some of them, rather than
perish. Whom they would certainly in that occasion have roasted or boiled, to
satisfy their Famine, had they been able to take them.

After they had feasted themselves with those pieces of Leather, they quitted
the Place, and marched farther on, till they came about night to another Post,
called Torna Munni. Here they found another Ambuscade, but as barren and desert
as the former. They searched the neighboring Woods, but could not find the
least thing to eat. The Spaniards having been so provident, as not to leave
behind them any where the least crum of Sustenance, whereby the Pirates were now
brought to the Extremity aforementioned. Here again he was happy, that had
reserved since noon any small piece of Leather, whereof to make his Supper,
drinking after it a good draught of Water for his greatest comfort. Some
persons, who never were out of their Mothers Kitchins, may ask, how these
Pirates could eat, swallow and digest, those pieces of Leather, so hard and dry?
Unto whom I only answer, That could they once experiment, what Hunger, or
rather Famine is, they would certainly find the manner, by their own necessity,
as the Pirates did. For these first took the Leather, and sliced it in pieces.
Then did they beat it between two Stones, and rub it, often dipping it in the
Water of the River, to render it by these means supple and tender. Lastly, they
scraped off the Hair, and roasted or broyl'd it upon the Fire. And being thus
cooked, they cut it into small morsels, and eat it, helping it down with
frequent Gulps of Water, which by good Fortune they had nigh at hand.

They continued their March the 5th. day, and Fifth day.
about noon came unto a Place, called Barbacoa. Here likewise they found Traces
of another Ambuscade, but the Place totally as unprovided, as the two precedent
were. At a small distance were to be seen several Plantations, which they
searched very narrowly, but could not find any Person, Animal, or other thing,
that was capable of relieving their extreme and ravenous Hunger. Finally,
having ranged up and down, and searched long time, they found a certain Grot,
which seemed to be but lately hewn out of a Rock, in the which they found two
Sacks of Meal, Wheat, and like things, with two great Jars of Wine, and certain
Fruits, called Platanos. Captain Morgan knowing that some of his Men were now
through the extremity of Hunger, reduced almost to the extremity of their
Lives, and fearing least the major part should be brought into the same
condition, caused all that was found to be distributed, amongst them who were
in greatest necessity. Having refreshed themselves with these Victuals, they
began to march anew with greater Courage than ever. Such as could not well go
for Weakness, were put into the Canows, and those commanded to land that were
in them before. Thus they prosecuted their Journey till late at night, at which
time they came unto a Plantation, where they took up their Rest. But without
eating any thing at all; for the Spaniards, as before, had swept away all
manner of Provisions, leaving not behind them the least signs of Victuals.

On the 6th. day they continued their March, part of them by Land through the
Woods, and Sixth day.
part by Water in the Canows. Howbeit they were constrained to rest themselves
very frequently by the way, both for the Ruggedness thereof, and the extreme
Weakness they were under. Unto this they endeavored to occur, by eating some
Leaves of Trees, and green Herbs, or Grass, such as they could pick, for such
was the miserable condition they were in. This day, at noon, they arrived at a
Plantation, where they found a Barn full of Maiz. Immediately they beat down
the Doors, and fell to eating of it dry, as much as they could devour.
Afterward they distributed great quantity, giving unto every man a good
allowance thereof. Being thus provided, they prosecuted their Journey, which
having continued for the space of an hour, or thereabouts, they met with an
Ambuscade of Indians. This they no sooner had discovered, but they threw away
their Maiz, with the sudden hopes they conceived of finding all things in
abundancy. But after all this haste, they found themselves much deceived, they
meeting neither Indians, nor Victuals, nor any thing else, of what they had
imagined. They saw notwithstanding on the other side the River, a Troop of 100
Indians, more or less, who all escaped away through the agility of their Feet.
Some few Pirates there were who leapt into the River, the sooner to reach the
shore, to see if they could take any of the said Indians Prisoners. But all was
in vain; for being much more nimble at their Feet than the Pirates, they easily
baffled their Endeavors. Neither did they only baffle them, but killed also
two or three of the Pirates with their Arrows, howting at them at a distance,
and crying, Ha! perros, a la savana, a la savana. Ha! ye Dogs, go to the Plain,
go to the Plain.

This day they could advance no farther, by reason they were necessitated to
pass the River hereabouts, to continue their March on the other side. Hereupon
they took up their Repose for that night. Howbeit their Sleep was not heavy,
nor profound, for great Murmurings were heard that night in the Camp, many
complaining of Captain Morgan, and his Conduct in that Enterprise, and being
desirous to return home. On the contrary, others would rather die there, than
go back one step from what they had undertaken. But others who had greater
Courage than any of these two parties, did laugh and joke at all their
Discourses. In The mean while they had a Guide, who much comforted them, saying,
It would not now be long before they met with People, from whom they should
reap some considerable Advantage.

The 7th. day in the morning, they all made clean their Arms, and every one
discharged his Pistol, or Seventh day.
Musket, without Bullet, to examine the Security of their Firelocks. This
being done, they passed to the other side of the River in the Canows, leaving
the Post where they had rested the night before, called Santa Cruz. Thus they
proceeded on their Journey till noon, at which time they arrived at a Village
called Cruz. Being at a great distance as yet from the Place, they perceived
much Smoke to arise out of the Chimneys. The sight hereof afforded them great
Joy, and hopes of finding people in the Town, and afterward what they most
desired, which was plenty of good Cheer. Thus they went on with as much haste
as they could, making several Arguments to one another upon those external
Signs, though all like Castles built in the Air. For, said they, there is Smoke
comes out of every House, therefore they are making good. Fires, for to roast
and boil what we are to eat. With other things to this purpose.

At length they arrived there in great haste, all sweating and panting, but
found no person in the Town, nor any thing that was eatable, wherewith to
refresh themselves, unless it were good Fires to warm themselves, which they
wanted not. For the Spaniards before their departure, had every one set Fire to
his own House, excepting only the Storehouses and Stables belonging to the
King.

They had not left behind them any Beast whatsoever, either alive or dead. This
occasioned much Confusion in their Minds, they not finding the least thing to
lay hold on, unless it were some few Cats and Dogs, which they immediately
killed, and devoured with great Appetite. At last in the King's Stables they
found by good Fortune, 15 or 16 Jarrs of Peru Wine, and a leather Sack, full of
Bread. But no sooner had they began to drink of the said Wine, when they fell
sick, almost every Man. This sudden Disaster made them think that the Wine was
poisoned, which caused a new Consternation in the whole Camp, as judging
themselves now to be irrecoverably lost. But the true Reason was, their huge
want of Sustenance in that whole Voyage, and the manifold sorts of Trash which
they had eaten, upon that occasion. Their Sickness was so great that day, as
caused them to remain there till the next morning, without being able to
prosecute their Journey, as they used to do, in the afternoon. This Village is
seated in the Altitude of 9 Degrees, and 2 Minutes, Northern Latitude, being
distant from the River of Chagre, 26 Spanish Leagues, and 8 from Panama.
Moreover, this is the last Place unto which Boats or Canows can come; for which
reason they built here Storehouses, wherein to keep all sorts of Merchandise,
which from hence to and from Panama, are transported upon the Backs of Mules.

Here therefore Captain Morgan was constrained to leave his Canows, and land
all his Men, though never so weak in their Bodies. But least the Canows should
be surprised, or take up too many Men for their Defense, he resolved to send
them all back to the place where the Boats were, excepting one, which he caused
to be hidden, to the intent it might serve to carry Intelligence, according to
the exigency of Affairs. Many of the Spaniards and Indians belonging to this
Village, were fled unto the Plantations thereabouts. Hereupon Captain Morgan
gave express Orders, that none should dare to go out of the Village, except in
whole Companies of 100 together. The occasion hereof was his fear, least the
Enemies should take an Advantage upon his Men, by any sudden Assault.
Notwithstanding one party of English Soldiers, stickl'd not to contravene
these Commands, being thereunto tempted with the desire of finding Victuals.
But these were soon glad to fly into the Town again, being assaulted with great
Fury by some Spaniards and Indians, who snatch up one of the Pirates, and
carried him away Prisoner. Thus the Vigilance and Care of Captain Morgan, was
not sufficient to prevent every Accident that might happen.

On the 8th. day, in the morning, Captain Morgan sent 200 Men before the Body of
his Army, Eighth day.
to discover the Way to Panama, and see if they had laid any Ambuscades
therein. Especially considering, that the Places by which they were to pass,
were very fit for that purpose, the paths being so narrow, that only 10 or 12
persons could march in a File, and oftentimes not so many. Having marched about
the space of 10 hours, they came unto a Place called Quebrada Obscura. Here all
on a sudden 3 or 4000 Arrows were shot at them, without being able to perceive
from whence they came, or who shot them. The place from whence it was presumed
they were shot, was a high rocky Mountain, excavated from one side to the
other, wherein was a Grot that went through it, only capable of admitting one
Horse, or other Beast, laded. This multitude of Arrows caused a huge Alarm
among the Pirates, especially because they could not discover the place from
whence they were discharged. At last, seeing no more Arrows to appear, they
marched a little farther, and entered into a Wood. Here they perceived some
Indians to fly as fast as they could possible before them, to take the
Advantage of another Post, and thence observe the March of the Pirates. There
remained notwithstanding one Troop of Indians upon the place, with full design
to fight, and defend themselves. This Combat they performed with huge Courage,
till such time as their Captain fell to the Ground wounded. Who although he was
now in despair of Life, yet his Valor being greater than his Strength, would
demand no Quarter, but endeavoring to raise himself, with undaunted Mind laid
hold of his Azagaya, or Javelin, and struck at one of the Pirates. But before he
could second the Blow, he was shot to death with a Pistol. This was also the
Fate of many of his Companions, who like good and courageous Soldiers, lost
their Lives with their Captain, for the defense of their Country.

The Pirates endeavored, as much as was possible, to lay hold on some of the
Indians, and take them Prisoners. But they being infinitely swifter than the
Pirates, every one escaped, leaving 8 Pirates dead upon the place, and 10
wounded. Yea, had the Indians been more dextrous in military Affairs, they
might have defended that Passage, and not let one sole Man to pass. Within a
little while after they came to a large Campaign Field, open, and full of
variegated Meadows. From hence they could perceive at a distance before them, a
parcel of Indians, who stood on the top of a Mountain, very nigh unto the Way
by which the Pirates were to pass. They sent a Troop of 50 Men, the nimblest
they could pick out, to see if they could catch any of them, and afterward
force them to declare, whereabouts their Companions had their Mansions. But all
their Industry was in vain, for they escaped through their Nimbleness, and
presently after showed themselves in another place, hallowing unto the English,
and crying, A la Savana, a la Savana, Cornudos, Perros Ingleses: that is, To
the Plain, to the Plain, ye Cuckoids, ye English Dogs. Mean while these things
passed, the 10 Pirates that were wounded a little before, were dressed, and
plaistred up.

At this place there was a Wood, and on each side thereof a Mountain. The
Indians had possessed themselves of the one, and the Pirates took possession of
the other, that was opposite unto it. Captain Morgan was persuaded, that in the
Wood the Spaniards had placed an Ambuscade, as lying so conveniently for that
purpose. Hereupon he sent before 200 Men to search it. The Spaniards and
Indians perceiving the Pirates to descend the Mountain, did so too, as if they
designed to attack them. But being got into the Wood, out of sight of the
Pirates, they disappeared, and were seen no more, leaving the passage open unto
them.

About night there fell a great Rain, which caused the Pirates to march the
faster, and seek every where for Houses, wherein to preserve their Arms from
being wet. But the Indians had set Fire to every one thereabouts, and
transported all their Cattle unto remote places, to the end that the Pirates
finding neither Houses nor Victuals, might be constrained to return homewards.
Notwithstanding, after diligent Search, they found a few little Huts belonging
to Shepherds, but in them nothing to eat. These not being capable of holding
many Men, they placed in them out of every Company a small number, who kept the
Arms of all the rest of the Army. Those who remained in the open Field, endured
much Hardship that night, the Rain not ceasing to fall until the morning.

The next morning, about break of day, being Ninth day.
the 9th. of this tedious Journey, Captain Morgan continued his March, while
the fresh Air of the morning lasted. For the Clouds then hanging as yet over
their Heads, were much more favorable unto them, than the scorching Rays of
the Sun, by reason the Way was now more difficult and laborious, than all the
precedent. After two hours March, they discovered a Troop of about 20
Spaniards, who observed the Motions of the Pirates. They endeavored to catch
some of them, but could lay hold on none, they suddenly disappearing, and
absconding themselves in Caves among the Rocks, totally unknown to the Pirates.
At last they came to a high Mountain, which when they had ascended, they
discovered from the top thereof, the South Sea. This happy Sight, as if it were
the end of their Labors, caused infinite Joy among all the Pirates. From hence
they could descry also one Ship, and six Boats, which were set forth from
Panama, and sailed toward the Islands of Tovago and Tovagilla. Having
descended this Mountain, they came unto a Vale, in which they found great
quantity of Cattle, whereof they killed good store. Here mean while some were
employed in killing and flaying of Cows, Horses, Bulls, and chiefly Asses, of
which there was greatest number; others busied themselves in kindling of Fires,
and getting Wood wherewith to roast them. Thus cutting the Flesh of these
Animals into convenient pieces, or goblets, they threw them into the Fire, and
half carbonado'd, or roasted, they devoured them with incredible haste and
Appetite. For such was their Hunger, as they more resembled Canibals than
Europeans at this Banquet, the Blood many times running down from their Beards
unto the middle of their Bodies.

Having satisfied their Hunger with these delicious Meats, Captain Morgan
ordered them to continue the March. Here again he sent before the main Body, 50
Men, with intent to take some Prisoners, if possibly they could. For he seemed
now to be much concerned, that in 9 days time he could not meet one person, who
might inform him of the Condition and Forces of the Spaniards. About evening
they discovered a Troop of 200 Spaniards, more or less, who haloo'd unto the
Pirates, but these could not understand what they said. A little while after
they came the first time, within sight of the highest Steeple of Panama. This
Steeple they no sooner had discovered, but they began to show Signs of extreme
Joy, casting They discover the Steeple ^f Panama.
up their Hats into the Air, leaping for Mirth, and shouting, even just as if
they had already obtained the Victory, and entire accomplishment of their
Designs. All their Trumpets were sounded, and every Drum beaten, in tokens of
this universal Acclamation, and huge Alacrity of their Minds. Thus they pitched
their Camp for that They incamp nigh the City
night, with general Content of the whole Army, waiting with Impatience for the
morning, at which time they intended to attack the City. This evening there
appeared 50 Horse, who came out of the City, hearing the noise of the Drums and
Trumpets of the Pirates, to observe, as it was thought, their Motions. They came
almost within Musket Shot of the Army, being preceded by a Trumpet, that
sounded marvelously well. Those on Horseback haloo'd aloud unto the Pirates, and
threatened them, saying, Perros! nos veremos: that is, Ye Dogs! we shall meet
ye. Having made this Menace, they returned into the City, excepting only 7 or 8
Horse men, who remained hovering thereabouts, to watch what Motions the Pirates
made. Immediately after the City began to fire, and ceased not to play with
their biggest Guns, all night long against the Camp, but with little or no harm
unto the Pirates, whom they could not conveniently reach. About this time also
the 200 Spaniards, whom the Pirates had seen in the afternoon, appeared again
within sight, making resemblance as if they would block up the passages, to the
intent no Pirates might escape the hands of their Forces. But the Pirates, who
were now in a manner besieged, instead of conceiving any fear of their
Blockado's, as soon as they had placed Centries about their Camp, began every
one to open their Satchels, and without any preparation of Napkins, or Plates,
fell to eating very heartily the remaining pieces of Bulls and Horses Flesh,
which they had reserved since noon. This being done, they laid themselves down
to sleep upon the Grass, with great repose and huge satisfaction, expecting
only with Impatience for the dawnings of the next day.

On the 10th. day, betimes in the morning, they Tenth day. They (...) the
Spanish Forces.
put all their Men into convenient Order, and with Drums and Trumpets sounding,
continued their March directly toward the City. But one of the Guides desired
Captain Morgan, not to take the common Highway that led thither, fearing least
they should find in it much Resistance, and many Ambuscades. He presently took
his Advice, and chose another way that went through the Wood, although very
irksom and difficult. Thus the Spaniards perceiving the Pirates had taken
another way, which they scarce had thought on, or believed, were compelled to
leave their Stops and Batteries, and come out to meet them. The Governor of
Panama put his Forces in Order, consisting of 2 Squadrons, 4 Regiments of Foot,
and a huge number of wild Bulls, which were driven by a great number of
Indians, with some Negro's, and others, to help them.

The Pirates, being now upon their March, came unto the top of a little Hill,
from whence they had a large prospect of the City and Campaign Co^ey
underneath. Here they discovered the ^es of the people of Panama, extended in
Battle Array, which when they perceived to be so numerous, they were suddenly
surprised with great They fear the number of the Spaniards.
Fear, much doubting the Fortune of the day. Yea few or none there were but
wished themselves at home, or at least free from the obligation of that
Engagement, wherein they perceived their Lives must be so narrowly concerned.
Having been some time at a stand, in a wavering condition of Mind, they at last
reflected upon the Straits they had brought themselves into, and that now they
ought, of necessity, either to fight resolutely, or Yet resolve to hazard the
Battle.
die, for no Quarter could be expected from an Enemy, against whom they had
committed so many Cruelties on all occasions. Hereupon they encouraged one
another, and resolved either to conquer, or spend the very last drop of Blood
in their Bodies. Afterward they divided themselves into three Battallions, or
Troops, sending before them one of 200 Bucaniers, which sort of people are
infinitely dextrous at shooting with Guns. Thus the Pirates left the Hill, and
descended, marching directly toward the Spaniards, who were posted in a
spacious Field, waiting for their They march on.
coming. As soon as they drew nigh unto them, the Spaniards began to shout, and
cry, Viva el Rey! God save the King! and immediately their Horse began to move
against the Pirates. But the Field being full of Quaggs, and very soft under
foot, they could not ply to and fro, and wheel about, as they desired. The 200
Bucaniers, who went before, every one putting one Knee to the ground, gave them
a full Volley of Shot, wherewith the They engage.
Battle was instantly kindled very hot. The Spaniards defended themselves very
courageously, acting all they could possibly perform, to disorder the Pirates.
Their Foot, in like manner, endeavored to second the Horse, but were
constrained by the Pirates to separate from them. Thus finding themselves
frustrated of their Designs, they attempted to drive the Bulls against them at
their Backs, and by this means put them into Disorder. But the greatest part of
that wild Cattle ran away, being frighted with the noise of the Battle. And
some few that broke through the English Companies, did no other harm than to
tear the Colors in pieces; whereas the Bucaniers shooting them dead, left not
one to trouble them thereabouts.

The Battle having now continued for the space The Spanish Horse ruined
of two hours, at the end thereof the greatest part of the Spanish Horse was
ruined, and almost all killed. The rest fled away. Which being perceived by the
Foot, and that they could not possibly prevail, they discharged the Shot they
had in their Muskets, and throwing them on the ground, betook themselves to
Flight, every one which way The Foot put to Flight.
he could run. The Pirates could not possibly follow them, as being too much
harassed and wearied with the long Journey they had lately made. Many of them,
not being able to fly whither they desired, hid themselves for that present
among the Many hide themselves.
Shrubs of the Seaside. But very unfortunately; for most of them being found
out by the Pirates, But are found, and killed. As also many religious Men.
were instantly killed, without giving Quarter to any. Some religious Men were
brought prisoners before Captain Morgan; but he being deaf to their Cries and
Lamentations, commanded them all to be immediately pistol'd, which was
accordingly done. Soon after they brought a Captain to his presence, whom he
examined very strictly They take a Spanish Captain.
about several things; particularly, wherein consisted the Forces of those of
Panama? Unto which he answered, Their whole Strength did consist in Who
declares the whole Forces of the Enemy.
400 Horse, 24 Companies of Foot, each being of 100 Men complete, 60 Indians,
and some Negro's, who were to drive 2000 wild Bulls, and cause them to run over
the English Camp, and thus by breaking their Files, put them into a total
Disorder and Confusion. He discovered more, that in the City they had made
Trenches, and raised Batteries in several places, in all which they had placed
many Guns. And that at the entry of the Highway which led to the City, they
had built a Fort, which was mounted with 8 great Guns of Brass, and defended by
50 Men.

Captain Morgan having heard this Information, gave Orders instantly they
should march another way. But before setting forth, he made a Review of all his
Men, whereof he found both killed Many Pira^s killed in the Battle.
and wounded a considerable number, and much greater than had been believed. Of
the Spaniards were found 600 dead upon the place, besides the 600 Spaniards
killed.
wonnded, and Prisoners. The Pirates were nothing discouraged, seeing their
number so much diminished, but rather filled with greater pride than before,
perceiving what huge Advantage they had obtained against their Enemies. Thus
having rested themselves some while, they prepared to march courageously
toward the City, They march toward the City.
plighting their Oaths to one another in general, they would fight till never a
Man were left alive. With this Courage they recommenc'd their March, either to
conquer, or be conquered, carrying with them all the Prisoners.

They found much difficulty in their Approach unto the City. For within the
Town the Spaniards had placed many great Guns, at several Quarters thereof,
some of which were charged with small pieces of Iron, and others with
Musket-Bullets. With all these they saluted the Pirates, at their drawing nigh
unto the place, and gave them full and frequent Broad-sides, firing at them
incessantly. From whence it came to pass, that unavoidably they lost at every
step they advanced, They loose many Men ^'th' Assault.
great numbers of Men. But neither these manifest Dangers of their Lives, nor
the sight of so many of their own, as dropped down continually at their Sides,
could deter them from advancing farther, (...) continue to advance.
and gaining Ground every moment upon the Enemy. Thus although the Spaniards
never ceased to fire; and act the best they could for their Defense, yet
notwithstanding they were forced to deliver the City after the space of three
And take the City in three hours.
hours Combat. And the Pirates having now possessed themselves thereof, both
killed and destroyed as many, as attempted to make the least Opposition against
them. The Inhabitants had caused the best of their Goods to be transported unto
more remote and occult places. Howbeit they found within the City as yet
several Warehouses, very well stockt with all sorts of Merchandise, as well
Silks and Cloths, as Linen, and other things of considerable value. As soon as
the first Fury of their entrance into the City was over, Captain Morgan
assembled all his Men at a certain place which he assigned, and there commanded
them under very great penalties, that none of them should dare to drink or
taste any Wine. The Reason Orders not to drink Wine.
he gave for this Injunction was, because he had received private Intelligence,
that it had been all poisoned by the Spaniards. Howbeit it was the opinion of
many, he gave these prudent Orders, to prevent the Debauchery of his people,
which he foresaw would be very great at the beginning, after so much Hunger
sustained by the way. Fearing withal least the Spaniards seeing them in Wine,
should rally their Forces, and fall upon the City, and use them as inhumanely,
as they had used the Inhabitants before.

CHAP. VI.
Captain Morgan sends several Canows and Boats unto the South Sea. He sets
Fire to the City of Panama. Robberies and Cruelties committed there by the
Pirates, till their return unto the Castle of Chagre.

CAptain Morgan, as soon as he had placed Guards at several Quarters, where he
thought necessary, both within and without the City of Panama, immediately
commanded 25 Men to seize a great Boat, which had stuck in the Mud of A B^at
seized in the Port.
the Port, for want of Water at a low Tide, so that she could not put out to
Sea. The same day, about noon, he caused certain Men privately to set Fire unto
several great Edifices of the City, no The City set on Fire.
body knowing from whence the Fire proceeded, nor who were the Authors thereof,
much less what Motives persuaded Captain Morgan thereunto, which are as yet
unknown to this day. The Fire increased so fast, that before night the greatest
Almost burnt in a day.
part of the City was in a Flame. Captain Morgan endeavored to make the
Public believe, the Spaniards had been the cause thereof, which Suspicions The
Battle Between the Spaniards and the pirates or Buccaniers before the City of
PANAMA. Part* 3 Page 54
he surmised among his own people, perceiving they reflected upon him for that
Action. Many of the Spaniards, as also some of the Pirates, used all the means
possible, either to extinguish the Flame, or by blowing up of Houses with
Gunpowder, and pulling down others, to stop its progress. But all was in vain;
for in less than half an hour it consumed a whole Street. All the Houses of
this City were built with Cedar, being Houses of Cedar.
of very curious and magnificent Structure, and richly adorned within.
Especially with Hangings and Paintings, whereof part were already transported
out of the Pirates way, and another great part were consumed by the Voracity of
the Fire.

There belonged unto this City (which is also the Head of a Bishopric) eight
Monasteries, whereof seven were for Men, and one for Women; two stately
Churches, and one Hospital. The Churches and Monasteries were all richly
adorned with Altar-pieces and Paintings, huge quantity of Gold and Silver, with
other precious things; all which the Ecclesiastics had hidden and concealed.
Besides which Ornaments, here were to be seen 2000 Houses, of magnificent and
prodigious Building, as being all or the greatest part, inhabited 7000 Houses
in the City.
by Merchants of that Country, who are vastly rich. For the rest of the
Inhabitants, of lesser quality, and Tradesmen, this City contained 5000 Houses
more. Here were also great number of Stables, which served for the Horses and
Mules, that carry all the Plate, belonging as well unto the King of Spain, as
private Men, toward the Coast of the North-Sea. The neighboring Fields
belonging to this City, are all cultivated with fertile Plantations and pleasant
Gardens, which afford delicious Prospects unto the Inhabitants the whole year
long.

The Genoeses had in this City of Panama a stately House of the Genoeses.
and magnificent House, belonging to their Trade and Commerce of Negro's. This
Building likewise was commanded by Captain Morgan to be set on Fire; whereby it
was burnt to the very Ground. Besides which pile of Building, there were
consumed to the number of 200 Warehouses, and great number of Slaves, who had
hid Great destruction of the fire.
themselves therein, together with an infinite multitude of Sacks of Meal. The
Fire of all which Houses and Buildings, was seen to continue four weeks after
the day it began. The Pirates in the mean while, at least the greatest part of
them, encamped some time without the City, fearing and expecting that the
Spaniards would come and fight them anew. For it was known, they had an
incomparable number of Men more than the Pirates were. This occasioned them to
keep the Field, thereby to preserve their Forces united, which now were very
much diminished, by the losses of the precedent Battles. As also because they
had a great many wounded, all which they had put into one of the Churches which
alone remained standing, the rest being consumed by the Fire. Moreover, beside
these Decreases of their Men, Captain Morgan had sent a Convoy of 150 A Convoy
sent to Chagre.
Men unto the Castle of Chagre, to carry the News of his Victory obtained
against Panama.

They saw many times whole Troops of Spaniards, cruize to and fro in the
Campaign Fields, which gave them occasion to suspect their rallying anew. Yet
they never had the courage to attempt any thing against the Pirates. In The
afternoon of this fatal day, Captain Morgan re-entred again the City with his
Troops, to the intent every one might take up their Lodgings, which now they
could hardly find, very few Houses having escaped the Desolation of the Fire.
Soon after they fell to seeking very carefully among the Ruins and Ashes, for
Utensils of Plate, or Gold, which peradventure were not quite wasted by the
Flames. And of such things they found no small number in several places.
Especially in Wells and Cisterns, Much Riches found in the Ruins.
where the Spaniards had hid them from the covetous Search of the Pirates.

The next day Captain Morgan dispatched away two Troops of Pirates, of 150 Men
each, being all very stout Soldiers, and well armed, with Orders to seek for
the Inhabitants of Panama, who They s^d to seek the Inhabitants.
were escaped from the hands of their Enemies. These Men, having made several
Excursions up and down the Campaign Fields, Woods and Mountains, adjoining to
Panama, returned after two days time, bringing with them above 200 Prisoners,
And find 200.
between Men, Women, and Slaves. The same day returned also the Boat
abovementioned, which Captain Morgan had sent into the South Sea, bringing
with her three other Boats, which they had taken in a little while. But all
these Prizes they could willingly have given, yea although they had employed
greater labor into the bargain, for one certain Galeon, which miraculously
escaped their Industry, being very richly laden with A (...) Galeon ^apeth.
all the King's Plate, and great quantity of Riches of Gold, Pearl, Jewels, and
other most precious Goods, of all the best and richest Merchants of Panama. On
board of this Galeon were also the religious Women, belonging to the Nunnery of
the said City, who had embarked with them, all the Ornaments of their Church,
consisting in great quantity of Gold, Plate, and other things of great value.

The Strength of this Galeon was nothing considerable, as having only 7 Guns,
and 10 or 12 Small Strength of the ^id Ship
Muskets, for its whole Defense. Being on the other side very ill provided of
Victuals, and other Necessaries, with great want of fresh Water, and having no
more Sayls than the uppermost Sayls of the main Mast. This description of the
said Ship the Pirates received from certain persons, who had spoken with 7
Mariners belonging to the Galeon, at such time as they came ashore in the
Cockboat, to take in fresh Water. Hence they concluded for certain they might
easily have taken the said Vessel, had they given her Chase, and pursued her,
as they ought to do, especially considering the said Galeon could not long
subsist abroad at Sea. But they were impeded from following this vastly rich
Prize, by the lascivious Exercises wherein Their own Debauchery the cause of
this loss.
they were totally at that present involved with Women, which unto this effect
they had carried with them, and forced on board their Boat. Unto this Vice was
also joined that of Gluttony and Drunkenness, having plentifully debauched
themselves with several sorts of rich Wines, they found there ready to their
hands. So that they chose rather to satiate their Lust and Appetite, with the
things abovementioned, than to lay hold on the occasion of such an huge
Advantage. Although this only Prize would certainly have been of far greater
Value and Consequence unto them, than all they purchased at Panama, and other
Places thereabouts. The next day, repenting of their Negligence, and being
totally wearied of the Vices and Debaucheries aforesaid, they sent forth to Sea
another Boat well armed, to pursue with all They send after her.
speed imaginable the said Galeon. But their present Care and Diligence was in
vain, the Spaniards who were on board the said Ship, having received
Intelligence of the Danger they were in one or two days before, while the
Pirates were cruizing so nigh unto them, whereupon they fled unto Places more
remote and unknown to their Enemies.

Notwithstanding the Pirates found in the Ports of the Islands of Tavoga and
Tavogilla, several Boats Other B^ts taken.
that were laden with many sorts of very good Merchandise. All which they took
and brought unto Panama. Where being arrived, they made an exact Relation of
all that had passed while they were abroad, unto Captain Morgan. The Prisoners
confirmed what the Pirates had said, adding thereunto, they undoubtely knew
whereabouts the said Galeon might be at that present, but that it was very
probable they had been relieved before now from other Places. These Relations
stirred up Captain Morgan anew, to send forth all the Boats that were in the
Port of Panama, with design Four Boats more sent after the Galeon.
to seek and pursue the said Galeon, till they could find her. The Boats
aforesaid, being in all four, set Sail from Panama, and having spent 8 days in
cruizing to and fro, and searching several Ports and Creeks, they lost all
their hopes of finding But in vain.
what they so earnestly sought for. Hereupon they resolved to return unto the
Isles of Tavoga and Tavogilla. Here they found a reasonable good Ship, that was
newly come from Payta, being laden A Ship and a Boat taken.
with Cloth, Soap, Sugar and Biscuit, with 20000 pieces of Eight in ready Money.
This Vessel they instantly seized, not finding the least Resistance from any
person within her. Nigh unto the said Ship was also a Boat, whereof in like
manner they possessed themselves. Upon the Boat they laded great part of the
Merchandises they had found in the Ship, together with some Slaves they had
taken in the said Islands. With this Purchase they returned unto Panama,
something better satisfied of their Voyage, yet withal much discontented they
could not meet with the Galeon.

The Convoy which Captain Morgan had sent unto the Castle of Chagre, returned
much about The Convoy returns from Chagre
the same time, bringing with them very good News. For mean while Captain
Morgan was upon his Journey to Panama, those he had left in the Castle of
Chagre, had sent forth to Sea two Boats to exercise Piracy. These happened to
meet with a Spanish Ship, which they began to chase within A Spanish Ship taken
at Chagre.
sight of the Castle. This being perceived by the Pirates that were in the
Castle, they put forth Spanish Colors, thereby to allure and deceive the Ship
that fled before the Boats. Thus the poor Spaniards, thinking to refuge
themselves under the Castle, and the Guns thereof, by flying into the Port,
were caught in a Snare, and made Prisoners, where they thought to find Defense.
The Cargo which was found on board the said Vessel, consisted in Victuals and
Provisions, that were all eatable things. Nothing could be more opportune than
this Prize for the Castle, where they had begun already to experiment great
scarcity of things of this kind.

This good Fortune of the Garrison of Chagre, gave occasion unto Captain Morgan,
to remain longer time than he had determined at Panama. And hereupon he ordered
several new Excursions (...) Excur^s of the (...).
to be made into the whole Country, round about the City. So that mean while
the Pirates at Panama were employed in these Expeditions, those at Chagre were
busied in exercising Piracy upon the North-Sea. Captain Morgan used to send
forth daily parties of 200 Men, to make Inroads into all the Fields and
Country thereabouts, and when one party came back, another consisting Many
Riches and Prisoners brought (...).
of 200 more was ready to go forth. By this means they gathered in a short time
huge quantity of Riches, and no lesser number of prisoners. These being brought
into the City, were presently put unto the most exquisite Tortures imaginable,
to make them confess both other peoples Goods and their own. Here it happened,
that one poor and miserable Wretch, was found in the Cr^lties used at Panama.
House of a Gentleman of great Quality, who had put on, amidst that confusion
of things, a pair of Taffety Breeches, belonging to his Master, with a little
silver Key hanging at the Strings thereof. This being perceived by the Pirates,
they immediately asked him, Where was the Cabinet of the said Key? His Answer
was, He knew not what was become of it, but only that finding those Breeches in
his Master's House, he had made bold to we^ them. Not being able to extort any
other Confession out of him, they first put him upon the Rack, wherewith they
inhumanely dis-joynted his Arms. After this, they twisted a Cord about his
Forehead, which they wrung so hard, that his Eyes appeared as big as Eggs, and
were ready to fall out of his Skull. But neither with these Torments, could
they obtain any positive Answer to their Demands. Whereupon they soon after
hung him up by the Testicles, giving him infinite Blows and Stripes, mean while
he was under that intolerable pain and posture of Body. Afterward they cut off
his Nose and Ears, and singed his Face with burning Straw, till he could speak
nor lament his Misery no longer. Then loosing all Hopes of hearing any
Confession from his Mouth, they commanded a Negro to run him through with a
Lance, which put an end to his Life, and a period to their cruel and inhumane
Tortures. After this execrable manner, did many others of those miserable
Prisoners finish their days, the common Sport and Recreation of these Pirates,
being these, and other Tragedies not inferior to these.

They spared, in these their Cruelties, no Sex, nor Condition whatsoever. For
as to religious No Condition spared.
Persons and Priests, they granted them less Quarter than unto others, unless
they could produce a considerable Sum of Money, capable of being a sufficient
Ransom. Women themselves were no Unl^ss Wom^, (...) s^rved the (...)
better used, except they would condescend unto the libidinous Demands and
Concupiscency of the Pirates. For such as would not consent unto their Lust,
were treated with all the Rigor and Cruelty imaginable. Captain Morgan, their
Leader and Commander, gave them no good Example in this point. For as soon as
any beautiful Woman was brought as a Prisoner to his presence, he used all the
means he could possible, both of Rigor and Mildness, to bend them to his
lascivious will and pleasure. For a confirmation of which Assertion, I shall
here give my Reader a short History of a Lady, whose Virtue and Constancy ought
to be transmitted unto Posterity, as a memorable Example of her Sex.

Among the Prisoners that were brought by the Pirates, from the Islands of
Tavoga and Tavogilla, there was found a Gentlewoman of good Quality, History of
a Spanish Lady.
as also no less Virtue and Chastity, who was Wife unto one of the richest
Merchants of all those Countries. Her Years were but few, and her Beauty so
great, as peradventure I may doubt, whether in all Europe any could be found,
to surpass her Perfections either of Comeliness or Honesty. Her Husband, at
that present, was absent from home, being gone as far as the Kingdom of Peru,
about great Concerns of Commerce and Trade, wherein his Employments did lie.
This virtuous Lady likewise hearing, that Pirates were coming to assault the
City of Panama, had absented her self from thence in the company of other
Friends and Relations, thereby to preserve her Life, amidst the Dangers, which
the Cruelties and Tyrannies of those hard-hearted Enemies did seem to menace
unto every Citizen. But no sooner had she appeared in the presence of Captain
Morgan, when instantly she was designed for his voluptuous Pleasures and
Concupiscence. Hereupon he commanded, they should lodge her in a certain
Apartment by her self, giving her a Negra, or black Woman, to wait upon her,
and that she should be treated with all the Respect and Regale due unto her
Quality. The poor afflicted Lady did beg with multitude of Sobs and Tears, she
might be suffered to lodge among the other Prisoners, her Relations, fearing
least that unexpected Kindness of the Commander, might prove to be a Design
upon her Chastity. But Captain Morgan would by no means hearken to her
Petition, and all he commanded, in answer thereunto, was, she should be treated
with more particular care then before, and have her Victuals carried from his
own Table.

This Lady had ^ormerly heard very strange Reports concerning the Pirates,
before their arrival at Panama, intimating unto her, as if they were not Men,
but, as they said, Heretics, who did neither invoke the Blessed Trinity, nor
believe in Jesus Christ. But now she began to have better Thoughts of them then
ever before, having experimented the manifold Civilities of Captain Morgan.
Especially hearing him many times to swear by the Name of God, and of Jesus
Christ, in whom, she was persuaded, they did not believe. Neither did she now
think them to be so bad, or to have the Shapes of Beasts, as from the Relations
of several people she had oftentimes heard. For as to the Name of Robbers or
Thieves, which was commonly given them by others, she wondered not much at it,
seeing, as she said, that among all Nations of the Universe, there were to be
found some wicked Men, who naturally coveted to possess the Goods of others.
Conformable to the persuasion of this Lady, was the Opinion of another Woman,
of weak Understanding, at Panama, who used to say, before the Pirates came
thither, she desired very much, and had a great curiosity, to see one of those
Men called Pirates. For as much as her Husband had often told her, The Pirates
s^rce th^ght to be M^.
that they were not Men, like unto others, but rather irrational Beasts. This
silly Woman at last happening to see the first of them, cried out aloud,
saying, Jesus bless me! these Thieves are like unto us Spaniards.

This false Civility of Captain Morgan, wherewith he used this Lady, as a thing
very common unto such persons as pretend and cannot obtain, was soon after
changed into barbarous Cruelty. For three or four days being past, he came to
see her, and entertained her with dishonest and lascivious Huge Constancy of
the said Lady.
Discourses, opening unto her his ardent Desires, of enjoying the
accomplishment of his Lust. The virtuous Lady constantly repulsed him, with all
the Civility imaginable, and many humble and modest Expressions of her Mind.
But Captain Morgan still persisted in his disorderly Request, presenting her
withal with much Pearl, Gold, and all that he had got, that was precious and
valuable in that Voyage. But the Lady being in no manner willing to consent
thereunto, nor accept his Presents, and showing her self, in all Respects, like
unto Susannah for Constancy, he presently changed Note, and began to speak unto
her in another Tone, threatening her with a thousand Cruelties and hard Usages
at his hands. Unto all these things she gave this resolute and positive Answer,
then which no other could be extorted from her: Sir, My Life is in your hands;
but as to my Body, in relation to that which you would persuade me unto, my
Soul shall sooner be separated from it, through the Violence of your Arms, then
I shall condescend to your Request. No sooner had Captain Morgan understood
this heroic Resolution of her Mind, but he commanded her to be stripped of the
best of her Apparel, and imprisoned in a darksom and stinking Cellar. Here she
had allowed her an extreme small quantity of Meat and Drink, wherewith she had
much ado to sustain her Life for a few days.

Under this Hardship, the constant and virtuous Lady ceased not to pray daily
unto God Almighty, She is tried with great Hardship.
for constancy and patience against the Cruelties of Captain Morgan. But he
being now thoroughly convinced of her chaste Resolutions, as also desirous to
conceal the cause of her Confinement, and hard Usage, since many of the Pirates,
his Companions, did compassionate her condition, laid many false Accusations to
her charge, giving to understand, she held Intelligence with the Spaniards, and
corresponded with them by Letters, abusing thereby his former Leni^y and
Kindness. I my self was an Eyewitness unto these things here related, and
could never have judged such constancy of Mind, and virtuous Chastity, to be
found in the World, if my own Eyes and Ears had not informed me thereof. But of
this incomparable Lady, I shall say something more hereafter in its proper
place; whereupon I shall leave her at present, to continue my H^story.

Captain Morgan having now been at Panama the full space of three weeks,
commanded all things C^in M^gan prep^ (...) (...) d^part.
to be put in order for his Departure. Unto this effect, he gave Orders to
every Company of his Men, to seek out for so many Beasts of Carriage, as might
suffice to convey the whole Spoil of the City, unto the River where his Canows
lay. About this time a great Rumor was spread in the City, of a considerable
number of Pirates, who A (...) (...).
intended to leave Captain Morgan. And that by taking a Ship which was in the
Port, they determined to go and rob upon the South Sea, till they had got as
much as they thought fit, and then return homewards by the way of the
East Indies, into Europe. For which purpose, they had already gathered great
quantity of Provisions, which they had hidden in private places, with
sufficient store of Powder, Bullets, and all other sorts of Ammunition.
Likewise some great Guns, belonging to the Town, Muskets, and other things,
wherewith they designed not only to equip the said Vessel, but also to fortify
themselves, and raise Batteries in some Island or other, which might serve them
for a place of Refuge.

This Design had certainly taken effect as they intended, had not Captain
Morgan had timely Advice thereof given him by one of their Comrades. Hereupon
he instantly commanded, the Mainmast of the said Ship should be cut down and
burnt, together with all the other Boats that were in the Port. Hereby the
Intentions of all or most of his Companions, were totally frustrated. After
this, Captain Morgan sent forth many of the Spaniards, into the adjoining
Fields and Country, to seek for Money, wherewith to ransom Ransoms demanded.
not only themselves, but also all the rest of the Prisoners, as likewise the
Ecclesiastics, both Secular and Regular. Moreover he commanded all the
Artillery of the Town to be spoiled, that The Artil^ spoiled.
is to say, nailed and stopped up. At the same time he sent out a strong company
of Men, to seek for the Governor of Panama, of whom Intelligence was brought,
that he had laid several Ambuscades in the way, by which he ought to ^pass at
his Return. But those who were sent upon this Design, returned soon after,
saying, they had not found any Sign or Appearance of any such Ambuscades. For a
confirmation whereof, they brought with them some Prisoners they had taken, who
declared, how that the said Governor had had an Intention of making some
Opposition by the way, but that the Men whom he had designed to effect it, were
unwilling to undertake any such Enterprise; so that for want of Means, he could
not put his Design in execution.

On the 24th. of February, of the year 1671. Captain Morgan departed from the
City of Panama, ^ey leave Panama.
or rather from the place where the said City of Panama did stand. Of the
Spoils whereof he carried with him, 175 Beasts of Carriage, laden with 175
Beasts laden with Riches.
Silver, Gold, and other precious things, besides 600 prisoners, more or less,
between Men, Women, Children, and Slaves. That day they came unto a River, that
passes through a delicious Campagn Field, at the distance of a League from
Panama. Here Captain Morgan put all his For^es into good Order of martial
Array, in such manner, as that the prisoners were in the middle of the Camp,
surrounded on all sides with Pirates. At which present Conjuncture, nothing else
was to (...) o^ the (...).
be heard but Lamentations, Cries, Shrieks, and doleful Sighs, of so many Women
and Children, who were persuaded Captain Morgan designed to transport them all,
and carry them into his own Country for Slaves. Besides that, among all those
miserable prisoners, there was extreme Hunger and Thirst endured at that time.
Which Hardship and Misery Captain Morgan designedly caused them to sustain,
with intent to excite them more earnestly to seek for Moneys, wherewith to
ransom themselves, according to the Tax he had set upon every one. Many of the
Women begged of Captain Morgan upon their Knees, with infinite Sighs and Tears,
he would permit them to return unto Panama, there to live in company of their
dear Husbands and Children, in little Huts of Straw, which they would erect,
seeing they had no Houses, until the rebuilding of the City. But his Answer
was, He came not thither to hear Lamentations and Cries, but rather to seek
Moneys. Therefore they ought to seek out for that in the first place,
wherever it were to be had, and bring They are all put to Ransom.
it to him, otherwise he would assuredly transport them all unto such places,
whither they cared not to go.

The next day, when the March began, those lamentable Cries and Shrieks were
renewed, in so much as it would have caused compassion in the Their Cries
renewed.
hardest Heart to hear them. But Captain Morgan, as a Man little given to
Mercy, was not moved therewith in the least. They marched in the same order as
was said before; one party of the Pirates preceding in the Van, the prisoners
in the middle, and the rest of the Pirates in the Arrear-Guard, by whom the
miserable Spaniards were, at every Step, puncht and thrust in their Backs and
Sides, with the blunt end of their Arms, to make them march the faster. That
beautiful and virtuous Lady, of whom we made mention heretofore, for her
unparalled Constancy and Chastity, was led prisoner by her self, between two
Pirates who guarded her. Her Lamentations now did pierce the Skies, seeing her
self carried away into foreign Captivity, often crying unto the Pirates, and
telling them: That she had given order unto two religious persons, in whom she
had relied, to go unto a certain place, and fetch so much Money as her Ransom
did amount unto. That they had promised faithfully to do it. But having
obtained the said Money, instead of bringing it unto her, they had employed it
another way, to ransom some of their own, and particular Friends. This ill
Action of theirs was discovered by a Slave, who brought a Letter unto the said
Lady. Her Complaints, and the cause thereof, being brought unto the Ears of
Captain Morgan, he thought fit to enquire thereinto. Having found the thing to
be true, especially hearing it confirmed by the Confession of the said
religious Men, though under some frivolous Excuses, of having diverted the
Money but for a day or two, within which time they expected more Sums to repay
it, he gave Liberty unto the The Lady s^t at Liberty.
said Lady, whom otherwise he designed to transport unto Iamaica. But in the
mean while he detained the said religious Men, as prisoners in her place, using
them according to the Deserts of their incompassionate Intrigues.

As soon as Captain Morgan arrived, upon his March, at the Town called Cruz,
seated on the Banks of the River Chagre, as was mentioned before, he commanded
an Order to be published among the prisoners, that within the space of three
days, every one of them should bring in Every one to be ransomed, or transported
their Ransom, under the penalty aforementioned, of being transported unto
Iamaica. In the mean while he gave Orders, for so much Rice and Maiz to be
collected thereabouts, as was necessary for the victualling all his Ships. At
this place some of the prisoners were ransomed, but many others could not bring
in their Moneys in so short time. Hereupon he continued his Voyage, leaving the
Village on the 5th. day of March next following, and carrying with him all the
Spoil that ever he could transport. From this Village he likewise led away some
new prisoners, who were Inhabitants of the said place. So that these prisoners
were added unto those of Panama, who had not as yet paid their Ransoms, and all
transported. But the two religious Men, who had diverted the Money belonging to
the Lady, were ransomed three days after their Imprisonment, by other persons,
who had more compassion for their condition, then they had showed for hers.
About the middle of the way unto the Castle of Chagre, Captain Morgan commanded
them to be placed in due order, according to their custom, and caused every one
to be sworn, that they had reserved nor concealed nothing privately to
themselves, even not so much as the value of Sixpence. This being done,
Captain Morgan having had some Experience, that those lewd Fellows would not
much stickle to swear falsely in points of Interest, he commanded them every one
to be searched very strictly, both in their Clothes and Satchels, and every
where it might be presumed they had reserved any thing. Yea to the intent this
Order might not be ill taken by his Companions, he permitted himself to be A
strict Search for concealed Riches.
searched, even to the very soals of his Shoos. Unto this effect, by common
consent, there was assigned one out of every Company, to be the Searchers of
all the rest. The French Pirates, that went on this Expedition with Captain
Morgan, were not well satisfied with this new custom of Searching. Yet their
Number being less then that of the English, they were forced to submit unto it,
as well as the others had done before them. The Search being over, they
re-imbarked in their Canows and Boats, which attended them on the River, and
arrived at the Castle of Chagre, on the They arrive at Chagre.
9th. day of the said Month of March. Here they found all things in good order,
excepting the wounded Men, whom they had left there at the time of their
departure. For of these the greatest number were dead, through the Wounds they
had received.

From Chagre, Captain Morgan sent presently after A Boat sent to Puerto Velo.
his Arrival, a great Boat unto Puerto Velo, wherein were all the Prisoners he
had taken at the Isle of St. Catharin, demanding by them a considerable Ransom
for the Castle of Chagre, where he then was, threatening otherwise to ruin and
demolish it even to the Ground. Unto this Message, those of Puerto Velo made
Answer, They would not give one Farthing toward the Ransom of the said Castle,
and that the English might do with it as they pleased. This Answer being come,
the Dividend was made of all the Spoil they had The Dividend made.
purchased in that Voyage. Thus every Company, and every particular person
therein included, received their portion of what was gotten. Or rather, what
part thereof Captain Morgan was pleased to give them. For so it was, that the
rest of his Companions, even of his own Nation, complained But with much
Disgust on all sides.
of his Proceedings in this particular, and feared not to tell him openly to
his Face, that he had reserved the best Jewels to himself. For they judged it
impossible, that no greater share should belong unto them then 200 pieces of
Eight per capita, of so many valuable Purchases and Robberies as they had
obtained. Which small Sum they thought too little Reward for so much Labor,
and such huge and manifest Dangers, as they had so often exposed their Lives
unto. But Captain Morgan was deaf unto all these, and many other Complaints of
this kind, as having designed in his mind to cheat them of as much as he could.

At last Captain Morgan finding himself obnoxious Captain Morgan fears their
Displeasure.
to many Obloquies, and Detractions among his people, began to fear the
consequence thereof. And hereupon thinking it unsafe to remain any longer time
at Chagre, he commanded the Ordnance of the said Castle to be carried on board
his Ship. Afterward he caused the greatest part of the Walls to be demolished,
and the Edifices to be burnt, and as many other things spoiled and ruined, as
could conveniently be done in a short while. These Orders being performed, he
went And steals away very privately.
secretly on board his own Ship, without giving any notice of his Departure
unto his Companions, nor calling any Council, as he used to do. Thus he set
Sail, and put out to Sea, not bidding any body adieu, being only followed by
three or four Vessels of the whole Fleet. These were such (as the French Pirates
believed) as went Shares with Captain Morgan, toward the best and greatest
part of the Spoil, which had been concealed from them in the Dividend. The
Frenchmen could very willingly The French d^sirous of Revenge.
have revenged this Affront upon Captain Morgan, and those that followed him,
had they found themselves with sufficient Means to encounter him at Sea. But
they were destitute of most things necessary thereunto. Yea, they had much ado
to find sufficient Victuals and Provisions for their Voyage to Iamaica, he
having left them tota'ly unprovided of all things.

CHAP. VII.
Of a Voyage made by the Author, along the Coasts of Costa Rica, at his return
toward Jamaica. What happened most remarkable in the said Voyage. Some
Observations made by him at that time.

CAptain Morgan left us all in such a miserable condition, as might serve for a
lively Representation, of what Reward attends Wickedness at the latter end of
Life. From whence we ought to have learned, how to regulate and amend our
Actions for the future. However it was, our Affairs being reduced to such a
posture, every Company that was left behind, whether English, or French, were
compelled to seek what means they could to help themselves. Thus most of them
separated from each other, and several Companies took several courses, at their
return homewards. As for that Party unto which I did belong, we steered our
Voyage along the Coast of Costa Rica, where we intended to purchase some
Provisions, and careen our Vessel in some secure place or other. For the Boat
wherein we were, was now grown so foul, as to be rendered totally unfit for
Sailing. In few days we arrived at a great Port, called Boca del Toro, where
are always The (...) (...) (...) (...) d^l Toro.
to be found an huge quantity of good and eatable Tortoises. The Circumference
hereof is ten Leagues, more or less, being surrounded with little Islands,
under which Vessels may ride very secure from the violence of the Winds.

The said Islands are inhabited by Indians, who never could be subjugated by
the Spaniards, and Isl^ of wild Indians.
hence they give them the Name of Indios bravos, or wild Indians. They are
divided, according to the variety of Idioms of their Language, into several
Customs and Fashions of People, from whence arises, that they have perpetual
Wars against one another. Toward the East Side of this Port are found some of
them, who formerly did much trade with the Pirates, selling unto them the Flesh
of diverse Animals, which they hunt in their Countries, as also all sorts of
Fruits that the Land produces. The Exchange of which Commodities was
Iron-Instruments, that the Pirates brought them, Beads, and other Toys, whereof
they made great account for wearing, more then of precious Jewels, which they
knew not, nor esteemed in the least. This Commerce afterward failed, because
the Pirates committed many barbarous Inhumanities against them, killing many of
their Men on a certain occasion, and taking away their Women, to serve their
disordinate Lust. These Abuses gave sufficient cause for a perpetual cessation
of all Friendship and Commerce, between them and the Pirates.

We went ashore, with design to seek Provisions, They seek for Provisions.
our necessity being now almost extreme. But our Fortune was so bad, that we
could find nothing But find none
else then a few Eggs of Crocodiles, wherewith we were forced to content our
selves for that present. Hereupon we left those Quarters, and steered our
course Eastwards. Being upon this Tack, we met with three Boats more of our own
Companions, who had been left behind by Captain Three Boats of their own
Comrades.
Morgan. These told us, they had been able to find no Relief for the extreme
Hunger they sustained. Moreover, that Captain Morgan himself, and all his
People, were already reduced to such Misery, as he could afford them no more
Allowance then once a day, and that very short too.

We therefore hearing from these Boats, that little or no good was like to be
done, by sailing farther They depart Westwards.
Eastwards, changed our course, and steered toward the West. Here we found an
excessive quantity of Tortoises, more then we needed for the victualling our
Boats, should we be never so long without any other Flesh or Fish. Having
provided our selves with this sort of Victuals, the next thing we wanted was
fresh Water. There was enough to be had in the neighboring Islands, but we
scarce dared to land on them, by reason of the Enmity above mentioned, between
us Pirates and those Indians Notwithstanding, Necessity having no Law, we were
forced to do as we could, rather then as we desired to do. And hereupon we
resolved to go all of us together, unto one of the said Islands. Being landed,
one Party of our Men went to range in the Woods, mean while another filled the
Barrels with Water, Scarce one whole hour was past, after our People were got
ashore, when suddenly the Indians came upon us, and we heard one of our Men
cry, Arm, Arm. A^ assaulted by the Indians.
We presently took up our Arms, and began to fire at them as hot as we could.
This caused them to advance no farther, and in a short while put them to
Flight, sheltring themselves in the Woods. We pursued them some part of the
way, but not far, by reason we then esteemed rather to get in our Water, then
any other Advantages upon the Enemy. Coming back, we found two Indians Two
Indians killed.
dead upon the shore, whereof the Habiliments of one gave us to understand, he
was a Person of Quality amongst them. For he had about his Body a Girdle, or
Shash, very richly woven; and on his Face he wore a Beard of massive Gold. I
mean, a small Planch of Gold hung down at his (...) ^d a golden Beard
Lips by two Strings, (which penetrated two little Holes, made there on
purpose) that covered his Beard, or served instead thereof. His Arms were made
of Sticks of Palmite-trees, being very curiously wrought, at one end whereof,
was a kind of Hook, which seemed to be hardened with Fire. We could willingly
have had opportunity to speak with some of these Indians, to see if we could
reconcile their Minds unto us, and by this They desire to speak with the
Indians, but in vain.
means renew the former Trade with them, and obtain Provisions. But this was a
thing impossible, through the Wildness of their Persons, and Savageness of
their Minds. Notwithstanding, this Rencounter hindered us not from filling our
Barrels with Water, and carrying them aboard.

The night following we heard from the Shore, Great Cries heard from shore.
huge Cries and Shrieks among the Indians. These Lamentations caused us to
believe, because they were heard so far, they had called in much more People to
aid them against us; as also, that they lamented the Death of those two Men,
who were killed the day before. These Indians never use to These Indians never
use the Sea.
come upon the Waters of the Sea, neither have they ever given themselves to
build Canows, or any other sort of Vessels, for Navigation. Not so much as
Fisher-boats, of which Art of Fishery, they are totally ignorant. At last,
having nothing else to hope for in these Parts, we resolved to depart from
thence for Iamaica, whither we designed to go. Being set forth, we met with
contrary Winds, which caused us to make use of our Oars, and row as far as the
River of Chagre. When They return to Chagre.
we came nigh unto it, we perceived a Ship that made toward us, and began to
give us Chase. Our Apprehensions were, that it was a Ship from Are chased by a
Ship.
Cartagena, which might be sent to rebuild and retake possession of the Castle
of Chagre, now all the Pirates were departed from thence. Hereupon we set all
our Sail, and ran before the Wind, to see if we could escape, or refuge our
selves in any place. But the Vessel being much more swifter and cleaner then
ours, easily got the Wind of us, and stopped our Course. Then approaching nigh
unto us, we discovered what they were, and knew them to be our former Comrades,
in the But of their ^wn Party.
same Expedition of Panama, who were but lately set out from Chagre. Their
Design was to go unto Nombre de Dios, and from thence to Cartagena, to seek
some Purchase or other, in or about that frequented Port. But the Wind at that
present being contrary to their Intention, they concluded to go in our Company,
toward the same Place where we were before, called Boca del Toro.

This Accident and Encounter retarded our Journey, in the space of two days,
more then we could regain in a whole Fortnight. This was the occasion that
obliged us to return unto our former Station, where we remained for a few days.
From thence we directed our Course for a Place, called Boca del Dragon, there
to make Provisions of Flesh. Especially of a certain Animal, which the
Spaniards call Manentines, and the Dutch, Sea-Cows, because Sea-Cows.
the Head, Nose, and Teeth, of this Beast, are very like unto those of a Cow.
They are found commonly in such places, as under the depth of the Waters, are
very full of Grass, on which, it is thought, they do pasture. These Animals
have no Ears, and only in place of them are to be seen two little Holes, scarce
capable of receiving the little Finger of a Man. Nigh unto the Neck, they have
two Wings, under which are seated two Udders, or Breasts, much like unto the
Breasts of a Woman. The Skin is very close, and united together, resembling the
Skin of a Barbary, or Guiney-Dog. This Skin upon the Back is of the thickness
of two Fingers, which being dried, is as hard as any Whale-bone, and may serve
to make Walking-staffs withal. The Belly is in all things like unto that of a
Cow, as far as the Kidneys, or Reins. Their manner of Engendring likewise, is
the same with the usual manner of a Land-Cow, the Male of this kind being in
similitude, almost one and the same thing with a Bull. Yet notwithstanding they
conceive and breed but once. But the space of time that they go with Calf, I
could not as yet learn. These Fishes have the sense of Hearing extremely acute,
in so much as in taking them, the Fishermen ought not to make the least noise,
nor row, unless it be very slightly. For this reason they make use of certain
Instruments for Rowing, which the Indians call Pagayos, and the Spaniards name
Caneletas, with which although they row, yet is it performed without any noise
that can fright the Fish. Mean while they are busied in this Fishery, they use
not How they take them.
to speak to one another, but all is transacted by Signs. He that darteth them
with the Javelin, uses it after the same manner as when they kill Tortoises.
Howbeit, the point of the said Javelin is somewhat different, as having two
Hooks at the Extremity, and these longer then that of the other Fishery. Of
these Fishes, some are found to be of the length of 20, unto 24 Foot. Their
Flesh is very good to eat, being very like in Color unto that of a Land-Cow,
but in Taste, unto that of Pork. It contains much Fat, or Grease, the which
the Pirates use to melt, and keep in earthen Pots, to make use thereof instead
of Oil.

On a certain day, wherein we were not able to do any good at this sort of
Fishery, some of our Men went into the Woods to hunt, and others to catch other
Fish. Soon after we espied a Canow, wherein were two Indians. These no sooner
had discovered our Vessels, but they rowed back with all the speed they could
toward the Land, being unwilling to trade, or have any thing to do with us
Pirates. We followed them to the shore, but through their natural Nimbleness,
being much greater then ours, they retired into the Woods before we could
overtake them. Yea, what was more admirable, they drew on shore, and carried
Huge Strength of those Indians.
with them their Canow into the Wood, as easily as if it were made of Straw,
although it weighed above 2000 l. This we knew by the Canow it self, which we
found afterward, and had much ado to get into the Water again, although we
were in all 11 persons to pull at it.

We had at that time in our Company, a certain Pilot, who had been diverse times
in those Quarters. An Account thereof given by a Pilot.
This Man, seeing this Action of the Indians, told us, that some few years
before, a Squadron of Pirates happened to arrive at that place. Being there,
they went in Canows, to catch a certain sort of little Birds, which inhabiteth
the Seacoast, under the shade of very beautiful Trees, which here are to be
seen. Mean while they were busied at that Work, certain Indians, who were
climbed up into the Trees, to view their Actions, seeing now the Canows
underneath, leaped down into the Sea, and with huge celerity seized some of the
Canows and Pirates that kept the, both which they transported so nimbly into the
remotest parts of the Woods, as that the Prisoners could not be relieved by
their Companions. Hereupon the Admiral of the said Squadron landed presently
after with 500 Men, to seek and rescue the Men he had lost. But they saw such
an excessive number of Indians flock together to oppose them, as obliged them
to retreat with all possible diligence unto their Ships. Concluding among
themselves, that if such Forces as those could not perform any thing, toward
the recovery of their Companions, they ought to stay no longer time there.
Having heard this History, we came away from thence, fearing some Mischief
might befall us, and bringing with us the Canow aforementioned. In this we
found nothing else but a Fishing-net, though not very large, and four Arrows,
made of Palm Tree, of the length of 7 Foot each, and of the figure, or shape,
as follows.



These Arrows, we believed, to be their Arms. Arm^ of the (...) Indians.
The Canow we brought away was made of Cedar, but very roughly hewn, and
polisht, which caused us to think, that those People have no Instruments of
Iron.

We left that Place, and arrived in 24 hours unto another, called Rio de Zuera,
where we They (...) the River of Zacra.
found some few Houses belonging to the City of Cartagena. These Houses are
inhabited by Spaniards, whom we resolved to visit, not being able to find any
Tortoises, nor yet any of their Eggs. The Inhabitants were all fled from the
said Houses, The Spaniards fly away.
having left no Victuals, nor Provisions, behind them, in so much as we were
forced to content our selves with a certain Fruit, which there is called
Platano. Of these Platanos we filled our Boats, and continued our Voyage,
coasting along the shore. Our Design was to find out some Creek, or Bay,
wherein to careen our Vessel, which now was very leaky on all sides. Yea, in
such a dangerous condition, that both night and They are in great danger.
day we were constrained to employ several Men at the Pump, unto which purpose
we made use of all our Slaves. This Voyage lasted a whole Fortnight, all which
time we lay under the continual Frights of perishing every moment. At last we
arrived at a certain Port, called The Bay of Bleevelt, being so named from a
Pirat who used to resort thither, with the same Design that we did. Here one
party of our Men went into the Woods to hunt, in the mean while that another
undertook to refitt and careen our Vessel.

Our Companions who went abroad to hunt, found hereabouts Porcupines, of a huge
and monstrous Huge Por^upines.
bigness. But their chief Exercise was killing of Monkeys, and certain Birds,
called by the Monkeys and Pheasants.
Spaniards, Faisanes, or Pheasants. The Toil and Labor we had in this Employ
of Shooting, did seem, at least, unto me, to be sufficiently compensated with
the pleasure of killing the said Monkeys. For at these we usually made 15 or 16
Shot, before we could kill three or four of them. So nimbly would they escape
our Hands and Aim, even after being desperately wounded. On the other side, it
was delightful to see the Female-Monkeys Actions of the Monkeys.
carry their little ones upon their Backs, even just as the Negra's do their
Children. When any person passes under the Trees where these Monkeys are
sitting, they will commonly open their Bellies, and squirt their Excrements
upon their Heads and Clothes. Likewise, if shooting at a parcel of them, any
Monkey happens to be wounded, the rest of the Company will flock about him,
and lay their Hands upon the Wound, to hinder the Blood from issuing forth.
Others will gather Moss that grows upon the Trees, and thrust it into the
Wound, and hereby stop the Blood. At other times they will gather such or such
Herbs, and chewing them in their Mouth, apply them after the manner of a
Poultis, or Cataplasm. All which things did cause in me great Admiration,
seeing such strange Actions in those irrational Creatures, which testified the
Fidelity and Love they had for one another.

On the 9th. day, after our Arrival at that Place, our Women-Slaves being
busied in their ordinary Employments, of washing Dishes, sewing, drawing Water
out of Wells, which we had made on the shore, and the like things, we heard
great Cries of one of them, which said, she had seen a Troop of Indians appear
toward the Woods, whereby she began immediately to cry out, Indians, Indians.
We, hearing this Rumor, ran presently to our Arms, and their Relief. But,
coming unto the Wood, we found no person there, excepting two of our
Women-Slaves killed upon Two Women-Sl^s killed (...) (...) Indians.
the Place, with the shot of Arrows. In their Bodies we saw so many Arrows
sticking, as might seem they had been fixed there with particular care and
leisure. For otherwise we knew, that one of them alone was sufficient to
bereave any humane Body of Life. These Arrows were all of a rare fashion and
shape, their length being of 8 Feet, and their thickness, of a man's Thumb. At
one of the Extremities hereof, was to be seen a Hook made of Wood, and tied to
the body of the Arrow with a String. At the other end was a certain Case, or
Box, like the Case of a pair of Twizars, in the which we found certain little
Pibbles, or Stones. The Color thereof was red, and very shining, as if they
had been locked up some considerable time. All which, we believed, Arms of the
Indians.
were Arms belonging to their Captains and Leaders.



A. A Marcasite, which was tied unto the Extremity of the Arrow. B. A Hook,
tied to the same Extremity. C. The Arrow. D. The Case, at the other end.
These Arrows were all made without Instruments How they make the Arrows.
of Iron. For whatsoever the Indians make, they harden it first very
artificially with Fire, and afterward polish it with Flints.

As to the Nature of these Indians, they are extremely robust of Constitution,
strong, and nimble Their Constitution.
at their Feet. We sought them carefully up and down the Woods, but could not
find the least trace of them, neither any of their Canows, nor Floats, whereof
they make use to go out to fish. Hereupon we retired unto our Vessels, where,
having embarked all our Goods, we put off from the shore, fearing, least
finding us there, they should return in any considerable number, and,
overpowering our Forces, tear us all in pieces.

CHAP. VIII.
The Author departs toward the Cape of Gracias a Dios. Of the Commerce which
here the Pirates exercise with the Indians. His arrival at the Island de los
Pinos. And finally, his Return unto Jamaica.

THe Fear we had, more then usual, of those Indians abovementioned, by reason
of the Death of our two Women-Slaves, of which we told you in the former
Chapter, occasioned us to depart, as fast as we could, from that Place. We They
depart for Cape Gracias a Dios.
directed our Course from thence, toward the Cape of Gracias a Dios, where we
had fixed our last Hopes of finding Provisions. For thither do usually resort
many Pirates, who entertain a friendly Correspondence and Trade with the Indians
of those Parts. Being arrived at the said Cape, we hugely rejoiced, and gave
thanks unto God Almighty, for having delivered us out of so many Dangers, and
brought us unto this Place of Refuge, where we found People, who showed us
Where they find great Relief.
most cordial Friendship, and provided us with all Necessaries whatsoever.

The Custom of this Island is such, That when any Pirates arrive there, every
one has the liberty to buy unto himself an Indian Woman, at the price of a
Knife, or any old Ax, Wood-Bill, or Hatchet. They buy ^re Women for any Tri^e.
By this Contract, the Woman is obliged to remain in the Custody of the Pirat
all the time he stays there. She serves him in the mean while, and brings
him Victuals of all sorts, that the Country affords. The Pirat moreover has
liberty to go when he pleases, either to hunt, or fish, or about any other
Divertisements of his Pleasure. But withal is not to commit any Hostility, or
Depredation upon the Inhabitants, seeing the Indians bring him in all that he
stands in need of, or that he desires.

Through the frequent Converse and Familiarity Policy and Customs of the Island.
these Indians have with the Pirates, they sometimes use to go to Sea with them,
and remain among them for whole years, without returning home. From whence it
comes, that many of them can speak English, and French, and some of the Pirates
their Indian Language. They are very dextrous at darting with the Javelin,
whereby they are very useful to the Pirates, toward the victualling their
Ships, by the Fishery of Tortoises, and Manita's, a sort of Fish so called by
the Spaniards. For one of these Indians, is alone sufficient to victual a
Vessel of an 100 persons. We had among our Crew, two Pirates, who could speak
very well the Indian Language. By the Help of these Men, I was so curious as to
enquire into their Customs, Lives, and Policy, whereof I shall give you here a
brief Account.

This Island contains about 30 Leagues in Circumference, more or less. It is
governed after the form of a little Commonwealth, they having no King, nor
Sovereign Prince, among them. Neither do they entertain any Friendship, or
Correspondence, with other neighboring Islands, much less with the Spaniards.
They are in all but a small Nation, whose number exceeds not 1600 or 1700
persons. They have among them some few Negro's, who serve them in quality of
How Negro's came thither.
Slaves. These happened to arrive there, swimming after Shipwreck made upon
that Coast. For being bound for Tierra firm, in a Ship that carried them to be
sold in those Parts, they killed the Captain and Mariners, with design to
return unto their Country. But through their Ignorance in Marinery, they
stranded their Vessel hereabouts. Although, as I said before, they make but a
small Nation, yet they live divided, as it were, into two several Provinces. Of
these, the one sort employ themselves in cultivating the Ground, and making
several Plantations. But the others are Laziness of the Indians.
so lazy, as they have not Courage to build themselves Huts, much less Houses,
to dwell in. They frequent chiefly the Seacoast, wandering disorderly up and
down, without knowing, or caring so much as to cover their Bodies from the
Rains, which are very frequent in those Parts, unless it be with a few
Palm-leaves. These they put upon their Heads, and keep their Backs always
turned to the Wind that blows. They use no other Clothes then an Apron, which
being tied to their Middle, comes down so far, as to hide the shameful parts
of their Bodies. Such Aprons are made of the rinds of Trees, which they
strongly beat upon Stones, till they are softened. Of these same they make use
for Bed-cloaths, to cover themselves when they sleep. Some make to themselves
Bed-cloaths of Cotton, but these are but few in number. Their usual Arms are
nothing Their Arms.
but Azagayas, or Spears, which they make fit for their use with points of
Iron, or Teeth of Cocodriles.

They know, after some manner, that there is a God, yet they live without any
Religion, or divine Worship. Yea, as far as I can learn, they Religion.
believe not in, nor serve the Devil, as many other Nations of America do both
believe, invoke, and worship him. Hereby they are not so much tormented by him,
as other Nations are. Their ordinary Food, for the greatest part, consists in
several (...).
Fruits; such as are called Bananas, Racoves, Ananas, Potato's, Cazave; as also
Crabs, and some few Fish of other sorts, which they kill in the Sea with Darts.
As to their Drink, they are Their Drink.
something expert in making certain pleasant and delicate Liquors. The
commonest among them is called Achioc. This is made of a certain Seed of
Palm Tree, which they bruise, and afterward steep, or infuse, in hot Water,
till it be settled at the bottom. This Liquor being strained off, has a very
pleasant Taste, and is very nourishing. Many other sorts of Liquors they
prepare, which I shall omit for brevity. Only I shall say something, in short,
of that which is made of Platanos. These they knead betwixt their Hands with
hot Water, and afterward put into great Calabashes, which they fill up with
cold Water, and leave in repose for the space of eight days, during which time,
it fermenteth as well as the best sort of Wine. This Liquor they drink for
Pleasure, and as a great Regale, in so much that when these Indians invite
their Friends, or Relations, they cannot treat them better, then to give them
some of this pleasant Drink.

They are very unskilful in dressing of Victuals; and hence it is, that they
very seldom treat one Their Invitations.
another with Banquets. For this purpose, when they go, or send, to any House,
to invite others, they desire them to come and drink of their Liquors. Before
the invited persons come to their House, those that expect them, comb their
Hair very well, and anoint their Faces with Oil of Palm, mingled with a certain
black Tincture, which renders them very hideous. The Women, in like manner,
dawb their Faces with another sort of Stuff, which causes them to look as red
as Crimson. And such are the greatest Civilities they use in their Ornaments
and Attire. Afterward, h^ that inviteth the other, takes his Arms, which are
three or four Azagayas, and goes out of his Cottage the space of 3 or 400
Steps, to wait for, and receive the persons that are to come to visit him. As
soon as they draw nigh unto him, he falls down upon the Ground, lying flat on
his Face, in which posture he remains, without any Motion, as if he were
dead. Being thus prostrate before them, the invited Friends take him up, and
set him on his Feet, and thus they go all together unto the Hut. Here the
persons who are invited, use the same Ceremony, falling down on the Ground, as
the Inviter did before. But he lifts them up one by one, and giving them his
Hand, conducteth them into his Cottage, where he causes them to sit. The
Women, on these Occasions, perform few or no Ceremonies.

Being thus brought into the House, they are presented every one with a
Calabash full of the Liquor abovementioned, made of Platanos, which is very
thick, almost like unto Water Gruel, or Childrens Pap, wherein is contained
four Quarts, more or less, of the said Liquor. These they are to drink off as
well as they can, and get down at any rare. The Calabashes being emptied into
their Stomachs, the Master of the House, with many Ceremonies, goes about the
Room, and gathers his Calabashes. And this Drinking hitherto is reckoned but
for one Welcome, whereas every Invitation ought to contain several Welcoms.
Afterward, they begin to drink of the clear Liquor abovementioned, for which
they were called to this Treat. Hereunto follow many Songs, Dances, and a 1000
Caresses, to the Women that are present. In so much that oftentimes, for a
Testimony of their great Love unto them, they take their Darts, and with the
points thereof, pierce and wound their genital Parts. This Relation, I confess,
I could not believe, They pierce their Genitals.
though oftentimes it had been certified unto me, until such time as my own
Eyes were Witnesses unto these, and the like Actions. Neither only on this
Occasion do they perform this Ceremony, of piercing their Genitals, but also
when they make Love unto any Woman, intending thereby to let them understand
the greatness of their Affection and Constancy.

They use not to marry any young Maid, without Marriages.
the Consent of her Parents. Hereupon, if any one desires to take a Wife, he
is first examined by the Damsels Father, concerning several Points relating to
good Husbandry. These are most commonly; whether he can make Azagayas, Darts
for Fishing; or spin a certain Thread, which they use about their Arrows?
Having answered to Satisfaction, the Examiner calls to his Daughter, for a
little Calabash full of the Liquor abovementioned. Of this he drinks first;
then gives the Cup unto the young Man; and he finally unto the Bride, who
drinks it up; and with this only Ceremony the Marriage is made. When any one
drinks to the Health of another, the second person ought to drink up the
Liquor, which the other person has left in the Calabash. But in case of
Marriage, as was said before, it is consumed alone among them three, the Bride
obtaining the greatest part to her share.

When the Woman lies in, neither she nor her Husband observe the time, as is
customary among How the Wom^n lie in.
the Caribes. But as soon as the Woman is delivered, shegoeth instantly unto
the next River, Brook, or Fountain, and washes the newborn Creature,
swathling it up afterward in certain Rowlers, or Swathing-bands, which there
are called Cabalas. This being done, she goes about her ordinary Labor, as
before. At their Entertainments it is usual, that when the Man dies, his Wife
burieth him with all his Azagaya's, Aprons, Their Buri^.
and Jewels, that he used to wear at his Ears. Her next Obligation is, to come
every day to her Husband's Grave, bringing him Meat and Drink for a whole year
together. Their Years they reckon by the Moons, allowing 15 to every year,
which make their entire Circle, as our 12 months do ours.

Some Historians, writing of the Caribe Islands, do affirm, that this Ceremony,
of carrying Victuals to the Dead, is generally observed among them. Moreover,
that the Devil comes unto the Sepulchers, and carries away all the Meat and
Drink which is placed there. But I my self am not of this Opinion, seeing I
have oftentimes with my own Hands, taken away these Offerings, and eaten them,
instead of other Victuals. Unto this I was moved, because I knew that the
Fruits used on these Occasions, were the choicest and ripest of all others, as
also the Liquors, of the best sort, they made use of, for their greatest Regale
and Pleasure. When the Widow has Strange Custom of Widows here.
thus completed her year, she opens the Grave, and takes out all her
Husband's Bones. These she scrapeth and washes very well, and afterward
dries against the Beams of the Sun. When they are sufficiently dried, she
tyeth them all together, and puts them into a Cabala, being a certain Pouch,
or Satchel, and is obliged for another year to carry them upon her Back in the
daytime, and to sleep upon them in the night, until the year be completely
expired. This Ceremony being finished, she hangs up the Bag and Bones,
against the Post of her own Door, in case she be Mistress of any House. But
having no House of her own, she hangs them at the Door of her next Neighbor,
or Relation.

The Widows cannot marry the second time, according to the Laws or Customs of
this Nation, until the whole space of the two years abovementioned, be
completed. The Men are bound to perform no such Ceremonies toward their
Wives. But if any Pirat marries an Indian Woman, she is bound to do with him,
in all things, as if he were an Indian Man born. The Negro's that are upon this
Island, live here, in all Respects, according to the Customs of their own
Country. All these things I have thought fit to take notice of in this place,
though briefly, as judging them worthy the Curiosity of some judicious and
inquisitive persons. Now I shall continue the Account of our Voyage.

After that we had refreshed and provided our selves, as well as we could, at
the Island aforesaid, we departed from thence, and steered our Course toward
the Island de los Pinos. Here we They depart for the Island de los Pinos
arrived in 15 days, and were constrained to resit again our Vessel, which now,
the second time, was very leaky, and not fit for sailing any farther. Hereupon
we divided our selves, as before, and some went about that Work of careening
the Ship, mean while others betook themselves to Fishing. In this last we were
so successful, as to take in 6 or 7 hours, as much Fish, as would Great plenty
^f Fish.
abundantly suffice to feed a 1000 persons. We had in our Company some Indians,
from the Cape of Gracias a Dios, who were very dextrous both in Hunting and
Fishing. With the Help of these Men we killed likewise, in a short while, and
salted, an huge number of wild Cows, sufficient And C^ws.
both to satiate our hungry Appetites, and to victual our Vessel for the Sea.
These Cows were formerly brought into this Island by the Spaniards, with design
they should here multiply, and stock the Country with Cattle of this kind. We
salted, in like manner, a vast number of Tortoises, whereof in this Island huge
quantities are to be found. With these things, our former Cares and Troubles
began to dissipate, and our Minds to be so far recreated, as to forget the
Miseries we had lately endured. Hereupon, we began to call one another again by
the Name of Brothers, which was customary amongst us, but had been disused in
our Miseries, and scarce remembered without Regret.

All the time we continued here, we feasted our selves very plentifully,
without the least Fear of Enemies. For as to the Spaniards that were upon the
Island, they were here in mutual League and Friendship with us. Thus we were
only constrained to keep Watch and Ward every night, for fear of the
Crocodiles, which are here in great Many Crocodiles here.
plenty all over the Island. For these, when they are hungry, will assault any
Man whatsoever, and devour him; as it happened in this Conjuncture, unto one of
our Companions. This Man being gone into the Wood, in Company with a Negro,
they fell into a Place where a Crocodile lay concealed. The furious Animal,
with incredible A Pirat assaulted by one.
Agility, assaulted the Pirat, and fastening upon his Leg, cast him upon the
Ground, the Negro being fled, who should assist him. Yet he notwithstanding,
being a robust and courageous Man, drew forth a Knife he had then about him,
and with the same, after a dangerous Combat, overcame and killed the Crocodile.
Which having done, he himself, both tired with the Battle, and weakened with the
loss of Blood, that ran from his Wounds, lay for dead upon the Place, or at
least beside his Senses. Being found in this posture some while after by the
Negro, who returned to see what was become of his Master, he took him upon his
Back, and brought him to the Seaside, distant from thence the space of a whole
League. Here we received him into a Canow, and conveyed him on board our Ship.

After this Misfortune, none of our Men dared be so bold, as to enter the Woods
without good Company. Yea, we our selves, desirous to revenge the Disaster of
our Companion, went in Troops the next day unto the Woods, with design to find
out Crocodiles to kill. These Animals They go to seek Crocodiles.
would usually come every night to the Sides of our Ship, and make resemblance
of climbing up into the Vessel. One of these, on a certain night, we seized
with an iron Hook, but he instead of flying to the bottom, began to mount the
Ladder of the Ship, till we killed him with other Instruments. Thus after we
had remained there some considerable time, and refitted our selves with all
things necessary, we set Sail from thence for Iamaica. They arrive at ^aica.
Here we arrived within few days, after a prosperous Voyage, and found Captain
Morgan, who was got home before us, but had seen as yet none of his Companions
whom he left behind, we being the first that arrived there after him.

The said Captain at that present was very busy, Captain Morgan intends to
keep St. Catharin.
endeavoring to persuade and levy People, to transport unto the Isle of St.
Catharin, which he designed to fortify, and hold as his own, thinking to make
it a common Refuge unto all sorts of Pirates, or at least of his own Nation, as
was said before. But he was soon hindered in the prosecution But is prevented by
a new Governor.
of this Design, by the arrival of a Man of War from England. For this Vessel
brought Orders from his Majesty of Great Britain, to recall the Governor of
Iamaica from his Charge over that Island, unto the Court of England, there to
give an Account of his Proceedings and Behavior, in relation to the Pirates
whom he had maintained in those Parts, to the huge detriment of the Subjects of
the King of Spain. Unto this purpose, the said Man of War brought over also a
new Governor of Iamaica, to supply the place of the precedent. This Gentleman,
being possessed of the Government of the Island, presently after gave notice
unto all the Ports thereof, by several Boats which he sent forth to ^at intent*
of the good and entire Corresponde^ce, which his Master the King of England
design^d henceforwards to maintain, in those Western Parts of the World,
toward his Catholic Majesty, and all his Subjects, and Dominions. And that
unto this effect, for the time to come, he had received from his Sacred
Majesty, and Privy Council, strict and severe Orders, not to permit any Pirat
whatsoever, to set forth from Iamaica, to commit any Hostility, or Depredation,
upon the Spanish Nation, or Dominions, or any other People of those
neighboring Islands.

No sooner these Orders were sufficiently divulged, but the Pirates, who as yet
were abroad at All the Pirates fear him
Sea, began to fear them, in so much as they dared not return home unto the
said Island. Hereupon they kept the Seas as long as they could, and continued
to act as many Hostilities as came in their way. Not long after, the same
Pirates took and ransackt a considerable Town, seated in the Isle of Cuba,
called la Villa de los Cayos, of which we made mention in the Description of
the said Island. Here they committed again all sorts of Hostility, and inhumane
and barbarous Cruelties. But the new Governor of Iamaica behaved himself so
constant to his Duty, and the Orders he had brought from England, as that he
apprehended several of the chief Actors herein, and condemned them to S^e of
them hanged.
be hanged, which was accordingly done. From this Severity, many others still
remaining abroad, took warning, and retired unto the Isle of Tortuga, least
they should fall into his Hands. Here they joined in Society with the French
Pirates, Inhabitants of the said Island, in whose Company they continue unto
this day.

CHAP. IX.
The Relation of the Shipwreck, which Monsieur Bertram Ogeron, Governor of the
Isle of Tortuga, suffered nigh the Isles of Guadanillas. How both he and his
Companions fell into the Hands of the Spaniards. By what Arts he escaped their
Hands, and preserved his Life. The Enterprise which he undertook against Puerto
Rico, to deliver his People. The unfortunate Success of that Design.

AFter the Expedition of Panama abovementioned, the Inhabitants of the French
Islands in America, in the year 1673* (mean while the War was so fierce in
Europe between France and Holland) gathered a considerable Fleet, for to go and
possess themselves of the Islands, belonging to the States General of the
United Provinces in the West Indies. Unto this effect, their Admiral called
together, and levied all the Pirates and Volunteers, that would, by any
Inductions whatsoever, sit down under his Colors. With the same Design the
Governor of Tortuga caused to be built in that Island, a good strong Man of
War, unto which Vessel he gave the Name of Ogeron. This Ship he provided very
well with all sort of Ammunition, and manned with 500 Bucaniers, all resolute
and courageous Men, as being the Vessel he designed for his own Safety. Their
first Intention was to go and take the Isle of Curasao, belonging to the said
States of Holland. But this Design met with very ill Success, by reason of a
Shipwreck, which impeded the Course of their Voyage.

Monsieur Ogeron set Sail from the Port of Tortuga, as soon as all things were
in a readiness, with intent to join the rest of the said Fleet, and pursue the
Enterprise aforementioned. Being arrived on the West Side of the Island of St.
John de Puerto Rico, he was suddenly surprised with a violent Storm. This
increased to that degree, as caused his new Frigate to strike against the Rocks,
that Monsieur Ogeron is cast away.
neighbor upon the Islands, called Guadanillas, where the Vessel broke into a
1000 pieces. Yet being nigh unto the Land of Puerto Rico, all his Men escaped,
by saving their Lives in Boats, which they had at hand.

The next day, all being now got on shore, they were discovered by the
Spaniards, who inhabit They get ashore in Boats
the Island. These instantly took them to be French Pirates, whose intent was to
take the said Island anew, as they had done several times before. Hereupon they
alarmed the whole Country, and gathering their Forces together, marched out
to their Encounter. But they found them unprovided of all manner of Arms, and
consequently not able to make any Defense, craving And are taken by the
Spaniards.
for Mercy at their Hands, and begging Quarter for their Lives, as the Custom
is. Yet notwithstanding, the Spaniards, remembering the horrible and cruel
Actions, those Pirates had many times committed against them, would have no
Compassion on their Condition. But answering them, Ha! ye thievish Dogs, here is
no Quarter for you; they assaulted them with all Fury imaginable, and killed
the greatest part of the Company. At last, perceiving they made no Resistance,
nor had any Arms to defend themselves, they began to relent in their Cruelty,
and stay their Blows, taking Prisoners, as many as remained alive. Yet still
they would not be persuaded, but that those unfortunate People were come
thither, with Design to take again and ruinate the Island.

Hereupon they bound them with Cords, by two and two, or three and three
together, and drove them through the Woods, into the Champagne, or open Fields.
Being come thus far with them, they asked them, What was become of their
Captain and Leader? Unto these Questions they constantly made Answer, He was
drowned in the S^pwrack at Sea; although they knew full well it was false. For
Monsieur Ogeron, being unknown unto the Spaniards, behaved himself among them,
as if he were a Fool, and had no (...).
common use of Reason. Notwithstanding, the Spaniards, ^rce believing what the
Prisoners had answered, used all the means they could possibly to find him, but
could not compass their Desires. For Monsieur Ogeron kept himself very close,
to all the Features and mimical Actions, that might become any innocent Fool.
Upon this account, he was not tied as the rest of his Companions, but let
loose, to serve the Divertisement and Laughter of the common Soldiers. These
now and then would give him Scraps of Bread, and other Victuals, whereas the
rest of the Prisoners had never sufficient wherewith to satisfy their hungry
Stomachs. For as to the Allowance they had from the Spaniards, their Enemies,
it was scarce enough to preserve them alive.

It happened there was found among the French Pirates, a certain Surgeon, who
had done some remarkable A Surgeon (...).
Services unto the Spaniards. In Consideration of these Merits, he was unbound,
and set at Liberty, to go freely up and down, even as Monsieur Ogeron did. Unto
this Surgeon, Monsieur (...) p^th ^th Mons^ur Ogeron to g^t away.
Ogeron, having a fit opportunity thereunto, declared his Resolution of
hazarding his Life, to attempt an Escape, from the Cruelty and hard Usage of
those Enemies. After mature Deliberation, they both performed it, by flying
unto the Woods, with Design there to make something or other that might be
navigable, whereby to transport themselves elsewhere. Although unto this
effect, they had nor could obtain no other thing in the World, that could be
serviceable in building of Vessels, but one only Hatchet. Thus they joined
Company, and began their March toward the Woods that say nearest the
Seacoast. They fly into the Woods.
Having traveled all day long, they came about Evening unto the Seaside
almost unexpectedly. Here they found themselves without any thing to eat, nor
any secure Place wherein to rest their wearied Limbs. At last they perceived
nigh the Shore an huge quantity of Fishes, called by the Spaniards, Corlabados.
These frequently approach the Sands of the Shore, in pursuit of other little
Fishes that serve them for their Food. Of these they took as many as they
thought necessary, and by rubbing two Sticks tediously together, they kindled
Fire, wherewith they made Coals to roast them. The next day they began to cut
down and prepare Timber, wherewith to make a kind of small Boat, in which they
might pass over unto the Isle of Santa Cruz, which belongs to the French.

Mean while they were busied about their Work, they discovered, at a great
distance, a certain Canow, They ^eize a Canow, by killing two Men.
which steered directly toward the Place where they were. This occasioned in
their Minds some Fears, least they should be found, and taken again by the
Spaniards; and hereupon they retired into the Woods, till such time as they
could see from thence, and distinguish what People were in the Canow. But at
last, as their good Fortune would have it, they perceived them to be no more
then two Men, who in their Disposition and Apparel seemed to be Fishermen.
Having made this Discovery, they concluded unanimously betwixt themselves, to
hazard their Lives, and overcome them, and afterward seize the Canow. Soon
after they perceived one of them, who was a Mulato, to go with several
Calabashes hanging at his Back toward a Spring, not far distant from the
Shore, to take in fresh Water. The other, who was a Spaniard, remained behind,
waiting for his Return. Seeing them divided, they assaulted the Mulato first,
and discharging a great Blow on his Head with the Hatchet, they soon bereaved
him of Life. The Spaniard, hearing the Noise, made instantly toward the Canow,
thinking to escape. But this he could not perform so soon, without being
overtaken by the two, and there massacred by their Hands. Having now compassed
their Design, they went to seek for the Corpse of the Mulato, which they carried
on board the Canow. Their intent was to convey them into the middle of the Sea,
and there cast them over board, to be consumed by the Fish, and by this means
conceal this Fact from being known unto the Spaniards, either at a short or
long distance of time.

These things being done, they took in presently as much fresh Water as they
could, and set Sail from thence to seek some Place of Refuge. That day they
steered along the Coasts of Puerto Rico, and came unto the Cape, called by the
Spaniards, Cabo Roxo. From hence they traversed directly to the Isle of
Hispaniola, where so many of their own Comrades and Companions were to be
found. Both the Currents of the Waters and Winds were very favorable unto this
Voyage, in so much as in a few days they arrived at a Place, ^led Samana,
belonging to the said Island, where They arrive at Samana:
^ey found a Party of their own People.

Monsieur Ogeron, being landed at Samana, gave Orders unto the Surgeon, to levy
all the People, Monsieur Ogeron gathers a Fleet.
he could possible, in those Parts, mean while he departed to re-visit his
Government of Tortuga. Being arrived at the said Port, he used all his
Endeavors, to gather what Vessels and Men he could, to his Assistance. So that
within a few days he compassed a good number of both, very well equipped and
disposed to follow and execute his Designs. These were to go unto the Island of
St. John de Puerto Rico, and deliver his Fellow Prisoners, whom he had left in
the miserable condition To rescue (...) Companions.
was said before. After having embarked all the People, which the Surgeon had
levied at Samana, he made them a Speech, exhorting them to have good Courage,
and telling them, You may all expect great Spoil and Riches from this
Enterprise, and therefore let all Fear and Cowardice be set on side. On the
contrary, fill your Hearts with Courage and Valor, for thus you will find your
selves soon satisfied, of what, at present, bare Hopes do promise. Every one
relied much on these Promises of Monsieur Ogeron, and, from his words,
conceived no small Joy in their Minds. Thus they set Sail from Tortuga, They ^t
Sail
steering their Course directly for the Coasts of Puerto Rico. Being come
within sight of Land, they made use only of their lower Sayls, to the intent
they might not be discovered at so great a distance by the Spaniards, till they
came something near unto the Place where they intended to land.

The Spaniards, notwithstanding this Caution, The Spaniard^ kn^w of the Design.
had Intelligence beforehand of their coming, and were prepared for a Defense,
having posted many Troops of Horse all along the Coast, to watch the Descent of
the French Pirates. Monsieur Ogeron, perceiving their Vigilance, gave Order to
the Vessels to draw nigh unto the Shore, and shoot off many great Guns, whereby
he forced the Cavalry to retire unto Places more secure within the Woods. Here
lay concealed many Companies of Foot, who had prostrated themselves upon the
Ground. Mean while the Pirates made their Descent at leisure, and began to enter
among the Trees, s^arce (...) (...).
suspecting any Harm to be there, where the Horsemen could do no Service. But
no sooner were they fallen into this Ambuscade, when the Spaniards arose with
great Fury, and assaulted the French so courageously, that in a short while
they destroyed great part of them. And thus leaving And are overcome.
great Numbers of Dead on the Place, the rest with great difficulty escaped, by
retreating in all haste unto their Ships.

Monsieur Ogeron, although he escaped this Monsieur Ogeron escapes.
Danger, yet could willingly have perished in the Fight, rather then suffer the
Shame and Confusion, the unfortunate Success of this Enterprise was like to
bring upon his Reputation. Especially considering, that those whom he had
attempted to set at Liberty, were now cast into greater Miseries, through this
Misfortune. Hereupon they hastened to set Sail, and go back unto Tortuga, the
same way they came, with great Confusion in their Minds, much diminished in
their Number, and nothing laden with those Spoils, the Hopes whereof had
possessed their Hearts, and caused them readily to follow the Promises of
unfortunate Monsieur Ogeron. The Spaniards were very vigilant, and kept their
Posts nigh unto the Seaside, till such time as the Fleet of Pirates was totally
out of sight. In The mean while they made an end of killing such of their
Enemies, as being desperately wounded, could not escape away by Flight. In like
manner, they cut off several Limbs from the They cut off Limbs to show the
Prisoners.
dead Bodies, with design to show them unto the former Prisoners, for whose
Redemption these others had crossed the Seas.

The Fleet being departed, the Spaniards kind (...)
l^d Bon^es all over the Island, and made great Demonstrations of Joy, for the
Victory they had obtained. But the French Prisoners, who were there before, had
more Hardship showed them from that day then ever. Of their Misery and
Mis-usage, was a good Eyewitness, Jacob Binkes, Governor at that time in
America, for the States General of the United Provinces. For he happened to
arrive in that Conjuncture, at the Island of Puerto Rico, with some Men of War,
to buy Provisions, and other Necessaries, for his Fleet. His Compassion on
their Misery was such, as caused him to bring away by Stealth, five or six of
the said Prisoners, which served only to exasperate (...).
the Minds of the Spaniards. For soon after they sent the rest of the
Prisoners, unto the chief City of the Island, there to work and toil about the
Fortifications (...)
which then were making, forcing them to bring and carry Stones, and all sorts
of Materials belonging thereunto. These being finished, the Governor
transported them unto Havana, where they employed them in like manner, in
fortifying that City. Here they caused them to work ^'th' daytime, and by
night they shut them up as ^ose Prisoners, fearing least they should enterpri^e
upon the City. For of such Attempts the Spaniards had had diverse Proofs, on
other Occasions, which afforded them sufficient Cause to use them after that
manner.

Afterward at several times, wherein Ships arrived They a^ transported by
degrees (...) to Spain.
there from New Spain, they transported them by degrees into Europe, and landed
them at the City of Cadiz. But notwithstanding this Care of the Spaniards to
disperse them, they soon after met almost all together in France, and resolved
among M^ of (...) m^et (...) France.
themselves to return again unto Tortuga, with the first Opportunity should
proffer. Unto this effect, they assisted one another very lovingly, with what
Necessaries they could spare, according to every ones Condition. So that in a
short while the greatest part of those Pirates had nested themselves again at
Tortuga, their common Place of And return unto Tortuga.
Rendezvous. Here, some time after, they equipped again a new Fleet, to revenge
their former Misfortunes on the Spaniards, under the Conduct of one le Sieur
Maintenon, a Frenchman by Nation. With this Fleet he arrived at the Island de
la Trinidad, They tak^ the Island de la Trinidad.
situated between the Isle of Tabago, and the neighboring Coasts of Paria.
This Island they sacked, and afterward put to the Ransom of 10000 And put ^t to
a Ransom of 10000 pieces of Eight.
pieces of Eight. From hence they departed, with Design to take and pillage the
City of Caracas, seated over against the Island of Curasao, belonging to the
Hollanders.

CHAP. X.
A Relation of what Encounters lately happened at the Islands of Cayana and
Tabago, between the Count de Estres, Admiral of France, in America, and the
Here Jacob Binkes, Vice Admiral of the United Provinces, in the same Parts.

IT is a thing already known unto the greatest part of Europe, that the Prince
of Curland began The Prince of Curland first Possessor of Tabago.
to establish a Colony in the Island of Tabago. As also, that some while after,
his People, for want of timely Recruits from their own Country, abandoned the
said Island, leaving it to the first that should come and possess it. Thus it
fell into the Hands of the Heers Adrian, and Cornelius The ^id Island possessed
by the Dutch.
Lampsius, Natives of the City of F^issing* in the Province of Zeeland* For
being arrived at the said Island of Tabago, in the year 1654. they undertook to
fortify it, by Commands of their Sovereigns, the States General. Hereupon they
built a goodly Castle, in a convenient Situation, capable of hindering the
Assaults of any Enemies, that might enterprise upon the Island.

The Strength of this Castle was afterward sufficiently tried by Monsieur de
Estres, as I shall presently relate, after I have first told you, what happened
before at Cayana, in the year 1676. This year the States General of the United
Provinces, sent their Vice Admiral, Jacob Binkes, unto the Island of Cayana,
then in possession of the French, for to retake the said Island, and hereby
restore it unto The Isle of Cayana retaken by the Hollanders.
the Dominions of the United Provinces aforementioned. With these Orders he
set forth from Holland, on the 16th. day of March, in the said year, his Fleet
consisting of seven Men of War, one Fireship, and five other small Vessels of
less account. This Fleet arrived at Cayana the 4th. day of the Month of May
next following. Immediately after their Arrival, the Here Binkes landed 900
Men, who approaching the Castle, summoned the Governor to surrender, at their
Discretion. His Answer was, He thought of nothing less then Surrendering, but
that he and his People were resolved to defend themselves, even to the utmost
of their Endeavors. The Here Binkes having received this Answer, presently
commanded his Troops to attack the Castle on both sides at once. The Assault
was very furious. But at length, the French being few in number, and
overwhelmed with the multitude of their Enemies, surrendered both their Arms and
the Castle. In it were found 37 pieces of Cannon. The Governor, who was named
Monsieur Lesi, together with two Priest^, were sent into Holland. The Here
Binkes lost in the Combat 14 Men only, and had 72 wounded.

The King of France no sooner understood this Success, but he sent in the Month
of October following, the Count de Estres, for to retake the said The Count de
Estres sent to retake it again from the Dutch.
Island again from the Hollanders. He arrived there in the Month of December,
with a Squadron of Men of War, all very well equipped and provided. Being come
on his Voyage as far as the River called Aperovaco, he met there with a small
Vessel of Nantes, which had set forth from the said Island of Cayana but a
fortnight before. This Ship gave him Intelligence of the present state and
condition, wherein he might be certain to find the Hollanders at Cayana. They
told him, there were 300 Men in the Castle; that all about it they had fixed
strong Palizadas, or Empalements; and that within the Castle were mounted 26
pieces of Cannon.

Monsieur de Estres, being enabled with this Intelligence to take his own
Measures, proceeded (...) (...).
on his Voyage, and arrived at a Port of the said Island, three Leagues distant
from the Castle. Here he landed 800 Men, whom he divided into two several
Parties. The one he placed under the Conduct of the Count de Blinac; and the
other he gave unto Monsieur de St. Faucher. On board (...).
the Fleet he left Monsieur Gabaret, with diverse other principal Troops, which
he thought not fit or necessary to be landed. As soon as the Men were set on
shore, the Fleet weighed Anchor, and sailed very slowly toward the Castle,
mean while the Soldiers marched by Land. These could not travel otherwise then
by night, by reason of the excessive Heat of the Sun, and intolerable
Exhalations of the Earth, which here is very sulphurous, and consequently no
better then a smoaky and stinking Oven.

On the 19th. day of the said Month, the Count de Estres sent Monsieur de Lesi,
(who had been Governor He summoneth them to surrender.
of the Island, as was said before) demanding of them, to deliver the Castle
unto the Obedience of the King his Master, and unto him in his Sovereigns Name.
But those who were within, resolved not to deliver themselves up, Which they
deny to do.
but at the expense of their Lives and Blood, which Answer they sent unto
Monsieur de Estres. Hereupon the French, the following night, assaulted and
stormed the Castle on seven several sides thereof all He stormeth the Castle.
at once. The Defendants, having performed their Obligation very stoutly, and
fought with as much Valor as was possible, were at last forced to surrender.
Within the Castle were found 38 And takes it.
Persons dead, besides many others that were wounded. All the Prisoners were
transported into France, where they were used with great Hardship.

Monsieur de Estres, having put all things in good Order at the Isle of Cayana,
departed from thence (...) dep^ t^ Marti^*
for that of Martinica. Being arrived at the said Island, he was told, that the
Here Binkes was at that present at the Island of Tabago, and his Fleet lay at
Anchor in the Bay. Having received this Intelligence, Monsieur de Estres made
no long Stay there, but set Sail again, steering his Course directly for
Tabago. No sooner was he come nigh And thence to Tabago.
unto the Island, but Vice Admiral Binkes sent his Landforces, together with a
good number of Mariners, on shore, for to manage and defend the Artillery that
was there. These Forces were commanded by the Captains van der Graef, van
Dongen, and Ciavone, who labored very hard all that night in raising certain
Batteries, and filling up the Palizadas, or Empalements, of the Fortress called
Sterreschans.

Two days after the French Fleet came to an Anchor, in the Bay of Palmit, and
immediately, with the Help of 18 Boats, they landed all their Men. H^ ^and
(...) (...) Men at Tabago.
The Here Binkes, perceiving the French to appear upon the Hills, gave Orders
to burn all the Houses that were nigh unto the Castle, to the intent the French
might have no Place to shelter themselves thereabouts. On the 23d. day of
February, Monsieur de Estres sent a Drum over to the Hollanders, to demand the
Surrendry of the Fort, which was absolutely denied. In this posture of Affairs
things continued until the 3d. of March. On this And enga^ the D^ch Fleet at
the same (...).
day the French Fleet came with full Sail, and engaged the Dutch Fleet. The
Here Binkes presently encountered them, and the Dispute was very hot on both
sides. In The mean while the Landforces belonging to the French, being sheltred
by the thickness of the Woods, advanced toward the Castle, and began to storm
it very briskly, with more than ordinary Force. But were repulsed by the Dutch
with such Vigor, as caused them after three distinct Attacks to retire, with
the loss But is beaten by Land.
of above 150 Men, and 200 wounded. These they carried off, or rather dragged
away, with no small Difficulty, by reason of their disorderly Retreat.

All this while the two Fleets continued the Combat, and fought very
desperately, until that on both sides some Ships were consumed between Vulcan
and Neptune. Of this number was Monsieur de Estres his own Ship, mounted with
27 Guns of He loses his own Ship and others.
prodigious bigness, besides other Pieces of lesser Port. The Battle continued
from break of day, until the Evening. A little before which time, Monsieur de
Estres quitted the Bay, with the rest And leaves the Victory to the Dutch.
of his Ships, unto the Hollanders, excepting only two, which were stranded
under Sail, as having gone too high within the Port. Finally, the Victory
remained on the side of the Hollanders, howbeit with the loss of several of
their Ships that were burnt.

Monsieur de Estres finding himself under the Shame of the loss of this
Victory, and that he could expect no Advantage for that present, over the
Island of Tabago, set Sail from those Quarters the Monieur de Estres re^ unto
France.
13th. day of March, and arrived the 21st. day of June next following, at the
Port of Breast in France. Having given an Account of these Transactions unto his
most Christian Majesty, he was pleased to command him, to undertake again the
Enterprise And is ^nt again unto Tabago.
of Tabago. Unto this effect, he gave Orders for 8 great Men of War to be
equipped with all speed, together with 8 others of smaller account. With all
which Vessels he sent again Monsieur de Estres into America the same year. He
set Sail from the said Port of Breast, on the 3d. day of October following, and
arrived the 1st. of December, at the Island of Barbadas. Afterward having
received some Recruits from the Isle of Martinica, he sent beforehand to review
the Island of Tabago, and consider the Condition thereof. This being done, he
(...) arriveth (...).
weighed Anchors, and set Sail directly for the said Island, where he arrived
the 7th. day of the said Month of December with all his Fleet.

Immediately after his Arrival he landed 500 Men, under the Conduct of Monsieur
de Blinac, Governor of the French Islands in America. These were followed soon
after by one 1000 more. The 9th. day of the said Month, they approached within
600 Paces of a certain Post called le Cort, where they landed all the Artillery
designed for this Enterprise. (...) ^th ^n.
On the 10th. day Monsieur de Estres went in Person, to take a View of the
Castle, and demanded of the Here Binkes, by a Messenger, the Surrendry thereof,
which was generously denied. The next day the French began to advance toward
And attacketh the Castle.
the Castle, and on the 12th. of the said Month, the Dutch from within began to
fire at them with great Perseverance. The French made a beginning to their
Attack, by casting Fireballs into the Castle with main Violence. The very
third Ball that was cast in, happened to fall in the The Castle blown up by an
Accident.
Pathway that led unto the Storehouse, where the Powder and Ammunition was
kept, belonging to the Castle. In this Path was much Powder scattered up and
down, through the Negligence of those that carried it to and fro, for the
necessary Supplies of the Defendants. By this means the Powder took Fire in the
Path, and from thence ran in a moment as far as the Storehouse
abovementioned. So that suddenly both the Storehouse was blown up, and with
it, Vice Admiral Binkes himself, then Governor of the Island, and all his
Officers. Only Captain van Dongen remained alive. This Mischance being
perceived by the French, they instantly ran with And hence is taken by the
French.
500 Men, and possessed themselves of the Castle. Here they found 300 Men
alive, whom they took Prisoners, and transported into France. Monsieur de
Estres after this commanded the Castle to be demolished, together with other
Posts that might serve for any Defense, as also all the Houses standing upon
the Island. This being done, he departed from thence the twenty seventh day of
the said Month of December, and arrived again in France, after a prosperous
Voyage.

The Table.
A.
ALcatrazes, what sort of People they are. Part i. page 28 Apr^cott-tree. Pt.
i. p. 36 Acoma-tree. ib. 39 Abelcose-tree. Pt. i. p. 40 Author of this Book,
his Voyage along the Coasts of Costa Rica, at his return, from Panama, to
Jamaica. Pt. 3. p. 77. They arrive at Boca del To^o. 78. Seek Provisions, but
find none: they depart Westwards: provide themselves with Tortoises; are
assaulted by the Indians, kill two of them, whereof one had a golden Beard;
desire to speak with them, but in vain. 79, 80. They return to Chagre: and are
chased by a ship, of their own party. 81, 82. They go to the River of Zuera,
where the Spaniards fly from them. 86. Are in great danger of sinking a whole
fortnight. 87. They arrive at the Bay of Blecvelt: careen their Vessel: are
assaulted by the Indians, who kill two Women Slaves: this causes them suddenly
to depart. 90. They arrive at Cape Gracias a Dios. 91. And, find, there, great
relief. ibid. They came to the Island de los Pinos, where they careen their
Vessel again: here they victual themselves well: depart for Jamaica, and arrive
there. 100. and s^q. Adrian, and Cornelius, Lampsins, take possession of Tabago
for the Dutch. Pt. 3. p. 116 St. Augustine (a City of Florida) ransackt by John
Davis, Pirat of Jamaica. Pt. i. p. 114, 115
B.
BAptism used by the French at Sea. Part i. page 3, 6 -- by the Dutch. ib. p. 4
Brasil-wood. ib. 39 Bucani^s, their distinctions, manner of living, Vices, etc.
Pt. i. p. 59 Banana-wine, not inferior to Spanish. Pt. i. p. 66 Bartholomew
Portuguez, a famous Pirat. Pt. 1. p 95. He takes a great Spanish ship. Is
retaken, and loses his liberty. 96. Is brought unto Campeche. 97. Condemned to
the Gallows. 98. Kills his Centry, and escapes. ibid. Goes to the Golfo
triste. 99. Gett^th a Boat, there: and retaketh the Ship by which he was taken.
100, 101* He loses his Ship in a storm, and escapes in a Canow. 101, 102
Bitumen, or Pitch, in great quantities. Pt. ii. p. 42 B^a d^l Toro, a Port,
where great store of Tortoises are found. Its circumference. Pt. iii. p. 78
Boca del Dragon, another Port, on Costa Rica, where be Indians of prodigious
strength. Pt. 3. p. 84 Bay of Bleevelt, so called from a Pirat of that name.
Pt. 3. p. 87. Here are Porcupines of prodigious bigness. ibid. Binkes (Jacob)
sent from Holland, to retake Cayana from the French, an. 1676. Pt. iii. p. 117.
is engaged at Tabago, by the Count de Estres. 120 Brodely (Cap.) is made
Viceadmiral by Morgan: takes the Castle of Chagre. Pt. iii. p. 21. and seq.
C.
CRabs, both of Land, and Sea. Part i. page 13 -- Their effects, when eaten.
ibid. City of Santo Domingo. Pt. i. p. 25 -- of San Tiago. ib. 26. its
Commerce: is pillaged by Pirates. Pt. ii. p. 78 -- of Na Sa de Alta Gracia.
ibid. Crab-Lemons. Pt. i. p. 31 Caramite-tree. Pt. i. p. 36 Cedar-tree. Pt. i.
p. 37. Pt. ii. p. 16. Panama was all built with Cedar. Pt. iii. p. 55 Canows,
how they are made. ibid. 38 Cochinillas, or Glowworms. Pt. i. p. 42 Cricketts,
or Grillones. ib. 43 Cazador^s de Moscas, or Fly-catchers. Pt. i. p. 44
Cocodriles, or Caymanes, their nature, and qualities. Pt. i. p. 47. they
persecute the Flies, and wherefore. ib. 48. their manner of procreating. ib.
Many at the Island de los Pinos. Pt. iii. p. 101 Carpinter-birds. Pt. i. p. 57.
they build Nests for the Parrots. ib. Cabreros, or Goat-keepers, a Bird having
seven galls. Pt. i. p. 58 Crows, or Ravens, in great multitudes, at Hispaniola.
ib. Cazave, or Mandioca. Pt. i. p. 65. How prepared, for to make bread, and
drink. ibid. Campeche was sacked by Lewis Scot. Pt. i. 110 St. Catharin taken by
Mansvelt, and Morgan: surrendered again to the Spaniards, by le Sieur Simon: its
convenient situation: 62. and seq. A Relation of its retaking, written by a
Spanish Ingeneer. 66. Morgan endeavors to keep it, but in vain. 75. taken
again by treachery of the Governor. Pt. iii. p. 15 Cuba, its description. Pt.
ii. p. 76 Cayos Islands, the refuge of the Pirates. Pt. ii. p. 77 Castle of
Chagre, its situation: is taken, after great resistance, by help of a strange
accident. Pt. iii. p. 27 Cows of the Sea. vid. Sea-Cows. Cayos, a considerable
Town of Cuba, sacked by the Pirates: all manner of Cruelties committed there. Pt.
iii. p. 104 Curasao, an Island of the Dutch, designed upon by the French of
Tortuga in Ann. 1673. Pt. iii. p. 105 Caracas (City) designed upon by the
Pirates of Tortuga. Pt. iii. p. 115 Cayana (Island) retaken from the French by
Binkes. Pt. iii. p. 117. is taken again by the French. 119
D.
DAte-trees, their description, and several sorts. Part 1. page 31 Davis a
Pirat. vid. John.
E.
COunt de Estres his actions at Cayana, and Tabago, Ann. 1676. Part iii. page
118. and seq.
F.
Flies, how troublesome in Hispaniola. Part i. page 41. their several sorts.
ibid. They persecute continually, and are persecuted by the Caymanes, or
Crocodiles. Pt. i. p. 48 Fly-catchers. vid. Cazadores de Moscas. French-ship,
seized by Capt. Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 105
G.
GEnipa-tree. Part i. page 37 Genipa-ink. ibid. Grillones, or Cricketts. Pt. i.
p. 43 Guines agudos, whereof they make drink. Pt. i. p. 63 Gibraltar, its
Situation: Inundations: Trade. Pt. ii. p. 15 Governor of Gibraltar killed. Pt.
ii. p. Governor of Puerto del Principe killed. Pt. ii. p. 82 Governor of Puerto
Velo killed. Pt. ii. p. 98 Governor of Chagre killed. Pt. iii. p. 27 Governor
of Panama comes against Morgan: is forced to retire: sends a strange message
to Morgan: his answer. Pt. ii. p. 100. and s^q. Governor of St. Katharin
betrayeth the Island into the hands of (...) English, by a very cunning
stratagem. Pt. iii. p. 15 Governor of Jamaica recalled for maintaining the
Pirates, there: another sent: all the Pirates fear him: he hangs some of them:
Pt. iii. p. 103. and (...). Guadanillas certain little Islands, nigh St. John
de Puerto Rico. Pt. iii p. 106 Garcias a Dios (Cape) description of the
particular Customs of the Indians there. Pt. iii. p. 91
H.
HIspaniola, its description. Part i. page 24 Sir Henry Morgan, his origin. Pt.
2. p. 60. He goes to Barbadas, and, thence, to Jamaica: he serves the Pirates.
61. is made a Captain: and chosen Viceadmeral by Mansvelt: they take St.
Catharin. 62. He desires to keep it, though in vain. 75. Equippeth another
Fleet. 76. Goes to Puerto del Principe. 81. and takes it. 83. Havana the
strongest place in the West Indies: its Jurisdiction; Commerce; Castles,
Inhabitants, convenient Situation: is designed against. Pt. ii. p. 78. and seq.
Sir Henry Morgan equippeth a new Fleet. Pt. ii. p. 89. designeth upon Puerto
Velo. 90. and sacketh it, with 400 men. 98. His message to the Governor of
Panama. 102. He returns to Cuba, and finds 250000 Pieces of Eight spoil,
taken at Puerto Velo, besides Goods, and Jewels. 103. He undertaketh a new
Expedition against Maracaibo. 104. Arriveth there, and takes it: Cruelties
against the Prisoners there: he goes to Gibraltar, and takes it likewise:
other inhumane Cruelties, there, used. 114. and seq. He goes to take the
Governor of Gibraltar: hardship of their Iourny: brings home many Prisoners.
125. and seq. A Ship, and four Boats, taken. 127. He returns to Maracaibo: is
blockt up there by a Spanish Fleet: his bold message to the Admiral of the said
Fleet: Letter of the Admiral commanding him to surrender: a Treaty, on foot,
betwixt them: he destroys the said Fleet by a stratagem. 129. and seq. Sir
Henry Morgan equippeth another Fleet: writes several Letters to all the
ancient Pirates for their assistance: multitudes flock unto him: he calls a
Council: and sends to seek provisions. Pt. iii. p. 1. and seq. Four ships,
which he sent, for this purpose, arrive at the River de la Hacha: they take a
great Vessel laden with Corn: they land, defeat the Spaniards, pursue them,
torture them, take great spoil, put them to the ransom; and return. ib. 4, 5,
6. His Fleet makes 37 Sail in all, with 2000 fighting men: he divides it into
two Squadrons: Articles of this Voyage. 8. They resolve to go to Panama: but,
first, to St. Catharin, to procure Guides, for this enterprise. 10. They
arrive, and take St. Catharin, being betrayed by the Governor: great hardship
they endured, after landing: they eat; for hunger, an old seabby horse: Bravado
of Capt. Morgan, which occasioned the Spaniards to surrender: 12. and seq.
Number of persons found on the Island: Fortresses, and Arms, they found there:
they also find three Guides: Four Ships sent to Chagre: 17. and seq. Brodely
made Vice Admiral: he arriveth at Chagre: situation of the Castle: they land:
danger of this Enterprise: they resolve to give the Attack: are, at first,
forced to retire: yet, overcome, at last, by help of a very strange Accident.
21. and seq. He arriveth at Chagre, and is received with great Acclamation:
loses his own Ship, and three more, at the entry of the River: leaves in the
Castle a Garrison of 500 men, and, in the Ships, 150 more. 29, 30. He sets
forth for Panama, at the head of 1200 men, with very small Provisions, thinking
to find by the way. 31. He leaves his Boats b^hind the 3d. day, with 160 men,
to keep them: a pipe of Tobacco their best Victuals, the 1st. day of this
Journey: they feed, the 4th. day, upon Bags of Leather, which they found: some
small Provision is found the 5th. day, which is distributed among the weakest:
they eat Leaves of Trees, green Herbs, or Grass, on the 6th. At noon, they find
quantity of Maiz: great Murmurings against Captain Morgan, and his Conduct,
that night. On the 7th. day, they eat some few Cats, and Dogs, they found at
Santa Cruz; drink some Wine of Peru, and fall sick, almost every man, thinking
themselves poisoned: Captain Morgan sends back the Canows: 8 Pirates killed,
and 10 wounded, by the Indians, on the 8th. day: no Provisions found, and great
Hardship endured, that night, by Rain: they discover the South Sea, with great
joy, on the 9th. and find great number of Cattle, especially Asses, which they
kill, and devour: after noon, they come within sight of Panama, and encamp nigh
the City, at the sound of Drums, and Trumpets, to express their joy: they march
to attack the Spanish Forces on the 10th. in the morning: they fear the number
of the Enemy, yet resolve to hazard the Battle: they engage, and defeat the
Spaniards: many Pirates killed in the Battle, with 600 Spaniards: they march
toward the City: lose many in the Assault: yet, continue, to advance: and take
it in three hours: Orders, not to drink Wine. p. 31. and seq. to 53. Sir Henry
Morgan sends Boats to search the South Sea: he fireth the City of Panama, and
burns it almost in a day: great destruction of the Fire: he sends a Convoy
to Chagre: much Riches found in the Ruins: 200 of the Inhabitants brought in:
a rich Galeon escapes, their own Debauchery being the cause: they send, to
seek her: several Boats, and a Ship, taken: the Convoy returns from Chagre,
with News of a Spanish Ship taken there: Cruelties used at Panama: no Condition
spared: History of a Spanish Lady: Captain Morgan prepares to depart: A Plot
discovered: Ransoms demanded: the Artillery spoiled: they leave Panama: 175
Beasts laden with Riches: Misery of the Prisoners: all are put to Ransom: the
Spanish Lady set at liberty: they arrive at Chagre: A Dividend made: but with
much Disgust on all sides: Captain Morgan fears their displeasure, and
steals away very privately: the Fr^nch d^sirous of Revenge. p. 54. and seq.
to 76. He is still desirous to keep. St. Catharin, but is prevented by a new
Governor sent unto Jamaica. Pt. 3. p. 103.
I.
ISland of Punta Rica. Part i. Page 7 -- Tortuga. ib. p. 8 John Esqu^ling is
sold at Tortuga: Pt. i. p. 21. is sold again: ibid. (...) g^tteth his liberty:
ib. p. 22. turns Pirat. ibid. Isle of Savona. Pt. i. p. 27 Indians, what
Women they love b^st. Pt. i. p. 28 John Davis, a famous Pirat: be landeth in
Nicaragua: Pt. i. p. 111. kills the Centry, and enters the City: ib. 1^2.
spares not the Churches: gett^th away with many ^iches: is pursued by the
Spaniards: but all in vain: 113. He brough^ away 50000 pieces of Eight: is made
Admiral of the Pirates: and rans^th the City of St. Augustine. 114, 115 Indians
of Jacatan, their Cu^oms, and Religion. Pt. ii. p. 43 Islands de l^ Pertas. Pt.
ii. p. 51. Their Inhabitants, and the Customs thereof. 5^. All the Indians
disappear suddenly, and strangely. 54. The Pirates were there 6 months. 55. How
they got away, who remained bebind. 57. Miseries they endure. 58, 59 Indians of
Dari^n, not civilized. Pt. ii. p. 56. They kill Lolonois. ib. Island of St.
Catha^in. v. lit. C. Island of Cuba. v. lit. C. Islands de los Cayos. v. lit.
C. Islands of wild Indians. Pt. iii. p. 78. They use not the Sea, not so much
as ^r F^ing. 81 Indians ^t Bo^del Dragon (on Costa Rica) of prodigious strength
of body: two examples ther^f: their Arms. Pt. iii. p. 86 Indians of the Bay of
Bl^lt, their Arrows 8 feet long, of a rare fashion, and shape: the figure
thereof: they are extreme robust, and strong. Pt. iii. p. 89, 90 Indians of
Cape Gracias a Dios, much civilized: Women are bought there for (...) trifle:
Policy, and Customs, of the Island: how Negro's came thi^: laziness of those
Indians: they build (...) Houses, nor Huts, to (...) in: their Arms Religion,
Food, and D^k: their Invitations: they worship neither God, nor the D^vil: they
pierce their Gen^als in complement to the Women: their Marriages: how the Women
lie in: their (...): (...) (...) of the Was, there. Pt. iii. p. 91. and seq.
Island d^ los P^s. P^. 3. p. 100. (...) (...) ^ty of Wild Cows. ibid. (...)
(...) (...): a Pir^t (...) (...). 101 Island (...) S. (...) (...) ^to Ri^ (...)
(...) by the Pirates. Pt. 3. p. 107 Island de la Trinidad. vide Trinidad.
K.
KIdnappers. Part i. Page 74 Kidnappt People, how they fare in the Indies.
ibid. The Miseries they endure there. ibid.
L.
LAtanier-palme. Part i. Page 33 Lewis Scot, the first Pirat that made
Land-Invasions. Pt. i. p. 110. He sacked Camp^che. ibid. Lolonois, his Origin.
Pt. ii. p. 1. Is advanced to be a Captain: loses his Ship: escapes by a
Stratagem: retireth into the Woods: the Spaniards believe him dead: goes to
Sea again: his Enterprise at los Cayos: his cruelty. Pt. ii. p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
He takes a Ship of Maracaibo. 7. He equippeth a Fleet, with d^sign to land.
ibid. 8. comes to Bayala. 9. Takes a Spanish Ship: lading thereof. 10. He
arriveth at Maracaibo, and takes it. 17. and seq. He cutteth a Spaniard in
pieces. 21 Marches to Gibraltar, and takes it. 21. and s^q. The Prisoners die
for Hunger^ 27. They got 260000 pieces of Eight in ready money, besides Jewels,
and Goods. 31. They set sail for Tortuga, and soon waste all they had gotten.
32. Lolonois makes new Preparations against the Spaniards. 33. He takes a
great Spanish Ship. 36. His cruelty. 36. He marches to San Pedro: meets
several Ambuscades, defeateth them, and takes the Town. 37. and seq. He goes
to Guatimala, and thence, to other Islands. 41. Takes another great Ship. 48.
Many of his Companions leave him. 49. He remains behind: wants Provisions:
loses his Ship: and intends to build a Boat. 51. His Misfortunes, which
preceded his death: he is torn in pieces alive. 56. As also many of his
Companions. 57 Lampsins, vide Adrian. Lesi Monsieur) surrendreth Cayana to the
Dutch. Pt. 3. p. 117 Lady, vide Spanish Lady.
M.
MUlatos, what People they are. Part i. Page 28 Mestizos, what Men they are.
ibid. Mapou-tree. Pt. i. p. 38 Manza^illa, or Dwarf Apple Tree, its venomous
quality. ib. 39 Mosquitos, or Marangumes. Pt. i. p. 41 Moscas de fuego, or
Fire-flyes. Pt. i. p. 43 Mandioca, or Cazave. Pt. i. p. 65 Mansvelt, a famous
Pirat, set foot in Granada, and penetrated to the South Sea: he took St.
Catharin, etc. Pt. i. p. 110 Michel de Basco, a Pirat, joyneth with Lolonois.
Pt. ii. p. 8 Maracalbo, its situation, and description, commerce, etc. Pt. ii.
p. 11, 12, 13 Merida, its situation and commerce. Pt. ii. p. 16 Mines of Gold
in Costa Rica. Pt. ii. p. 50 Morgan. vide Sir Henry. Mansvelt chooses Morgan
his Viceadmiral: sets forth with 15 Sail, and 500 Men: takes St. Catharin:
is desirous to keep it: returns to Jamaica for Recruits: which are denied.
Pt. ii. p. 62, 64. he goes to Tortuga, for the same purpose, and dies. 65
Manentines. vide Sea-Cows. Monkeys, how hard it is to shoot them: how they cure
one another when wounded: their apish tricks. Pt. iii. p. 87 Sieur Maintenon
takes the Island de la Trinidad. Pt. iii. p. 115
N.
NEgro's, what women they love best. Part i. page 28 Nata, a Town on the
South Sea, designed upon. Pt. ii. p. 50, 63 Negro's, how they came among the
Indians of Cape Gracias a Dios. Pt. iii. p. 93 Nicaragua (City) ransackt by
John Davis. Pt. i. p. 111. and seq.
O.
MOnsieur Ogeron, Governor of Tortuga, builds a great ship, with intent, to
take Curasao from the Dutch. Part iii. page 106. is cast away, at the Islands,
called Guadanillas: they get ashore in Boats, and are taken Prisoners by the
Spaniards. Ogeron behaveth himself, as a fool; is given out for dead, by his
men; and escapes, by the help of a Surgeon, into the woods: they seize a
Canow, by killing two men: he arriveth at Tortuga, and gathers a Fleet, to
rescue his companions. The Spaniards know of these designs: the French land at
St. John de Puerto Rico: are beaten. Monsieur Ogeron escapes: the Spaniards
cut off limbs of men, to show the French Prisoners: they make Bonfires for joy:
The Here Binkes brings away six of the Prisoners: the rest sent to work at
the Havana: by degrees, are transported into Spain: most of them meet in
France: and return unto Tortuga: they take the Island de la Trinidad, and put
it to a ransom. 106. and seq. to 115.
P.
PUnta Rica Island. Part i. page 7 Palmito-trees. Pt. i. p. 11 Wine. ibid.
Pueblo de Aso. Pt. i. p. 27 Palm Trees, their description, and several sorts.
Pt. i. p. 31 Palm-wine. ibid. p. 34 Prickle-palm. ib. p. 33 Pintadas, or
Wood-pullets. Pt. 1. p. 57 Parrots in Hispaniola. ibid. How they build their
Nests. ibid. Potato-wine. Pt. i. p. 64 Planters of Hispaniola subject to the
Governors of Tortuga. Pt. i. p. 68. they rebel. ib. p. 70. resolve to kill the
Governor of Tortuga. 71. are forced to surrender to him again. ib. 73 Planters,
their cruelty toward their servants. Pt. i. p. 75. they are worser in the
Caribby Islands. Pt. i. p. 77. The English sell one another for debts. ib.
Pierre le Grand his origin. Pt. i. p. 80. bold attempt of his. ibid. Pirates
their origin at Tortuga. Pt. i. p. 83. they take many boats. ibid. and incre^se
in number. ib. 84. how they arm their boats. 85. their ordinary food, and
allowance to every one. 85, 86. Articles they agree upon among themselves. 86.
they are very faithful to each other. 88. where they recruit themselves at Sea.
89. Places, where they cruise. 92. they will spend 2000 pieces of Eight in a
night. 106 Pierre Francois, a famous Pirat. Pt. i. p. 92. He takes the
Viceadmiral of the Pearl Fleet. 92. is retaken. 95 Pirates begin to make
land-i^vasions. Pt. i. p. 110 Piraguas, what sort of shipping. Pt. ii. p. 16
Priests-tobacco so cal^ed. ibid. Pitch, or Bitumen, in huge quantities. Pt. ii.
p. 42. the Author's opinion thereof. ibid. Puerto del Principe, a rich Town,
taken, and ransackt, by Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 83. resistance they made. 82. the
Town put to ransom. 84. 50000 pieces of Eight robbed there. 88 Puerto Velo, its
des^ription, strength, situation, unhealthiness, and other qualities. Pt. ii.
p. 91. Expedition thereof performed by Morgan. 90. and seq. brave, and
obstinate, defense of the Governor. ibid. Debauchery, and Cruelty, of the
Pirates, there. 99. Religious men, and women, forced to fix the ladders against
the walls of the Castle: many of them slain. 96 Panama, its situation,
description, etc. is taken, and burnt by Captain Morgan: it contained 7000
houses, all of Cedar: house of the Genoises there: its Monasteries, Warehouses,
etc. Pt. iii. p. 54. and seq. Porcupines of prodigious, and monstrous, bigness.
Pt. iii. p. 87 Pheasants, called by the Spaniards Faysanes. ib. Pirates of
Jamaica retire unto Tortuga, and join with the French Pt. iii. p. 104. some of
them hanged by the new Governor of Jamaica. ib.
R.
ROjados, or Calarodes. Part i. page 42 Roche Brasiliano, a famous Pirat, his
origin. Pt. i. p. 102. is chosen Captain, and takes a great ship. ib. 103. he
loses his ship, and escapes in a Canow. 104. is pursued by the Spaniards;
yet, puts them to flight. 104, 105. he takes a Fleet of Canows, and a Boat
of War. Also, a Ship from New Spain. 106. he goes to Sea again. 108. is made
Prisoner with all his men. ibid. is set at liberty, and sent into Spain. 109
Rubia (Island) its situation, and commerce. Pt. ii. p. 113. Spiders of this
place very pernicious. ib. strange cure of their venom. ib. River of Zuera,
nigh Cartagena. Pt. iii. p. 86
S.
SPaniards, what Women they love best in America. Part i. p. 28 Snakes, or
Serpents, of Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 43. how useful in houses there. ibid.
Spiders ^y hideo^s in Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 44. pernicious at the Isle of
Rubia. Pt. ii. p. 113 Scorpions, not venomous, there. ib. 45 Scolopendria's, or
Millepedes, there. ib. Le Sieur Simon made Governor of St. Catharin, by
Mansvelt. Pt. ii. p. 63. He puts the said Island in good posture. 64. is
impatient, to ^ear from Mansvelt. 65. surrendreth the Island unto the
Spaniards: betrayeth an English Ship unto them. 66 Sea-Cows, their description,
nature, and qualities. How they take them Pt. iii. p. 82. and seq. Spanish
Lady, her singular constancy, and chastity. Pt. iii. p. 64 Ship (French) seized
by Morgan. Pt. ii. p. 105 Ship (English) blown up with 350 men. ib. 107
T.
TOrtuga, its description. Part i. page 8 -- is possessed by the French, lost,
and retaken. Pt. i. p. 14. and seq. is possessed by the West India Company. ib.
p. 20. they quit it again. ibid. Town of Aso. Pt. i. p. 27 -- St. John of
Goave. ib. p. 28 Tortoises of Land. Pt. 1. p. 44. of the Sea. ib. p. 27
Tobacco, how it is planted. Pt. i. p. 67. property of this plant. ibid. 68.
Tortoises, four several sorts described. Pt. i. p. 89. their eggs. 90 where
they lay them. ibid. the manner of fishing them. 91 San Tiago of Cuba, its
jurisdiction: commerce: is taken by the Pirates. Pt. ii. p. 78 Trinidad (Island)
taken by the Pirates of Tortuga, and put to a ransom. Pt. iii. p. 115 Tabago
(Island) made a Colony by the Prince of Curland. Pt. iii. p. 116. possessed by
Adrian, and Cornelius, Lampsins, in ann. 1654. for the Dutch. ibid.
V.
VEraguas, a Town in Costa Rica, pillaged by the Bucaniers. Part ii. page 50
Villa de los Cayos, a considerable Town of Cuba sacked. Pt. iii. p. 104
W.
WIld Boars preserved. Part i. page 11 Wild Pige^ns. Pt. i. p. 12 -- their
bitterness at a certain season. ib. p. 13 West India Company, of France,
possesses Tortuga. ib. p. 20. quitteth it again. ib. Wild Dogs of Hispaniola.
Pt. i. p. 50. a notable History of these. ib. 51. persecution of them in
Tortuga. ib. 52 Wild Horses in Hispaniola. Pt. i. p. 55 Wild Bulls, and Cows.
ib. p. 56 Wood-pullets, or Pintadas. Pt. i. p. 57 Wild Indians, nigh Maracaibo,
dwell upon Trees. Pt. ii. p. 14. Others, in little Islands, at Boca del Toro.
Pt. 3. p. 78
Z.
YEllow Saunder is called Candle-wood. Part i. page 10 Y^o-tree. ib. 40
FINIS.

