AN ELEGY On the DEATH of Sir EDMOND SAUNDERS, LATE Lord Chief Justice of
England, Who died the 19th of June, 1683.
IT is Decreed by Fate's unchanging Doom,
(For Fate will to no Composition come)
That ev'-ry Head must visit the Cold Tomb.
It Is Natures Universal Law, that all
To their first Principles at length must fall;
But yet we are allowed to vent our Grief
For the Deserving Dead, and seek Relief
In flowing Tears, and, as we can, Repair
The Breach that Death has made upon us here,
When Saunders died. But oh! a loss so vastly great,
That it seemed wanting only to complete
The Measure of our Sorrows, which of late
Have had so many Subjects, from sad Fate.
Brave Men apace forsake th Unworthy Earth,
Which seems now teeming with some monstrous Birth.
Sedition sings now this Great Man is gone,
But thy vain Mirth will not continue long:
For other Saunders's will the Dead succeed.
And then, most cursed Sedition, thou must bleed.
His great Example should be set to show
And teach succeeding Ages what to do.
Loyal and bold throughout his Active Life,
His Duty and his Interest never at strife;
But What the one did seriously advise
With that the other heartily complies;
And, mark the end, see how he glorious dies!
His Honors fresh and green upon his Head,
Still Live, and ever shall, though he is Dead:
Death may the Body into Ashes turn,
But his high Virtue shall outlive his Urn.
His Merit Raised him to this high Degree;
For Prince and People none more fit than He.
That understood the King's most rightful Power,
And therefore thought all Subjects justly lower.
Nor threats nor Flatteries on him prevail,
To set his Conscience wickedly to sale.
He was too Great and Good to serve a Cause
Against his Reason, Sense, and Nations Laws,
Large Knowledge always keeps its Owners tight
In worst of Times, whilst every blast does fright
Unthinking Ignorance, and shocks it quite.
Our Noble Saunders to his Parts had joined
All that might make his Generous Soul Refined.
Deep insight in the Mysteries of the Law,
From whence he did such wholesome, Counsels draw,
For all the Nations Peace, who owe to him
Both present Blessings, and the future time.
Not every day such Men as he are born,
How ought we therefore such a Loss to mourn.
Justice her self should put black Sables on.
Ye Learned of the Law, who best can tell
How much Great Saunders did the most excel
In your most noble Faculty; So hard
To be overcome, Had he not bravely dared;
Not daunted with the hardships of the way,
He urged his steady course, and gained the Day.
Bestow some Tears upon the mournful Hearse
That may atone for this unhallowed Verse.
For how can Numbers flow, with easy grace
When Sorrow has all over possessed their place.
Some better Bard shall rise in better times.
And sing thy Noble Praise in shining Lines.
Thy Name shall never dye, whilst Virtue lives
Thy Memory Eternally survives.
EPITAPH.
SAunders the Great and Just, lies here,
Who was to King and People dear;
For Knowledge in the Laws, Renowned,
With Honor due his Worth was crowned:
But, lo, he dies! there is naught can save
From Rage of the Devouring Grave.
LONDON, Printed for J. Norris, at the Kings Arms without Temple Bar. 1683.


