The Excellency of The PEN and PENCIL.
London Printed for Rich: Jones and Dorman Newman and are to be sold at their
shops at the Golden Lion and Chyrurgions Arms in Little Britain.



THE EXCELLENCY OF THE PEN and PENCIL, EXEMPLIFYING The Uses of them in the
most Exquisite and Mysterious Arts of DRAWING, ETCHING, ENGRAVING, LIMNING.
PAINTING in OIL, WASHING of Maps and Pictures.


Also the way to Cleanse any Old Painting, and Preserve the Colors.

Collected from the Writings of the ablest Masters both Ancient and Modern, as
Albert Durer, P. Lomantius, and diverse others.

Furnished with diverse Cuts in Copper, being Copied from the best Masters, and
here inserted for Examples for the Learner to Practice by.

A Work very useful for all Gentlemen, and other Ingenious Spirits, either
Artificers or others.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Ratcliff and Thomas Daniel, for Dorman Newman and
Richard Jones, and are to be sold at their shops in Little Britain, near the
Lame Hospital Gate, at the Chyrurgeons Arms, and at the Golden Lion. 1668.

To the READER.
AMong the many Operations of Mysterious Nature, the Intellectual Part of Man
has no equal: Among the multifarious Productions of Man's Understanding, the
Art of LIMNING is by none excelled; whether we consider the Grandeur of Spirit
therein expressed, or the Ingenious Delight thereby acquired. What Ray of the
Great Creator's Image is more conspicuous in the Soul of Man, than that of
Intense Desire to produce Creatures of his own? And wherein is that Inclination
so completely answered, as by Delineating the Workmanship of God in Artificial
Resemblances contrived and wrought by his proper Wit? Nor can any Satisfaction
equal what is derived from the Perfection of these Designs. Are the Proportions
exact? How strongly do they attract the Eye? Be the Shadowings accurate? How
strangely do they affect the Mind? But if the Artist has stolen so much of
Promethean Fire as to add the Excellency of Life to well-disposed Lineaments,
representing the Native Air and sprightly Gesture of the Person in vive; How
unspeakably does he gratify both?

To exercise this Faculty and comply with this Fancy in Man, is this little
Tract compiled, in Five Books.

The First lays down the Primordial Rudiments of the Art of Drawing with the
Pen and Pastils: In a due and orderly Method proposing the Description of Man's
Body in its distinct parts, presenting sundry Draughts of them in the plain
Circumferential Lines, and giving Directions for the Proper Shades, as of Naked
Bodies, so of Drapery; by Instructions and Copies so easy and intelligible,
that the meanest Capacity need not doubt to undertake the Drawing of that
Admirable Fabric, and arrive to the Perfection of this Mystery in exact
Symmetry, suitable Proportions, and enlivening Postures, if well perused and
practiced. For which purpose also certain Geometrical Rules, Definitions, and
Figures are inserted, to exemplify and adorn this Mistress of Proportion; in
the Accomplishing whereof that nothing may be defective, some succinct
Advertisements concerning Landscape are added in the Close.

Having premised these more plain and easy Fundamentals, the Second proceeds to
discover the Secret and Ingenious Skill of Etching with Aqua fortis; where the
most perspicuous and familiar Ground possible is described, and Prescriptions,
for carrying on and perfecting that Work, no less Rational annexed. And for as
much as some may perhaps take more Pleasure in, or reap more Profit from, that
of Graving; you have the Instruments most Necessary in that kind, and the
Manner of Using them most Convenient, particularly demonstrated; Together with
that abstruse Slight of transferring the Copy upon the Copper.

But because this alone may seem barely Mechanic, that which suits with the
most Gentile, and can not derogate from the most Honorable, is offered in the
Third; where the Requisits for Limning in Watercolors are deposed, the Gums
and their Waters in few words digested, the Colors particularly nominated, and
the true way to prepare and compound them specified: All which are but as so
many Degrees and Ingredients to approach and accomplish the desirable and
ultimate Design of Miniture; for the Practice whereof you are thoroughly
furnished with the Choice of the meetest Light, Position, and Implements at
hand, by the particular Description of Drawing a Face to the Life in ^ittle,
according to its duly methodized Progress at the first, second, and third
Sitting; not omitting the Ornaments thereunto perteining.

And to supply the Fading and Decay of these, the Fourth delivers Rules and
Directions for P^inting in Oil, answerable to that depth of Judgment required
in that more durable kind of Operation; naming the proper Colors, and
declaring its peculiar Vtensils, with accurate Instructions how to temper and
diversifie the former, for all Complexions and Garments, of what variety
soever; and to use the later in the Artificial Painting of a Face, the only
Exemplar prescribed, because it includes all the Art and Difficulty of this
Science.

The Fifth, and last, displays a pretty superficial Experiment; imparting what
Colors and other Necessaries are best fitted for the Washing or Coloring of
Maps and Printed Pictures: And, to help the diverse Exigencies that concern this
Affair, some Expedients put a Period to the whole Work.

Plainness and Brevity (which may procure Contempt from the Nice or Vulgar) are
sufficient to recommend this Piece to Ingenious Aspirers after any of those
Excellencies therein taught; since they have done the Art and Artist Right, in
rescuing both, from such obscure Intricacies and voluminous Impertinencies as
would discourage the one, or disparage the other: And these Muniments have so
justly prevented all Censure, that nothing can suggest the least Imputation of
Difficulty but want of Diligence, nor any one surmise it Tedious but the
Slothful.

Farewell.
A Necessary TABLE, showing the Chief Matters treated of in this Book. As,
CHAP. I. A description of all the External Parts of Man's Body. SECT. 1. Of the
Head. Page 2 SECT. 2. Of the Ear. ibid. SECT. 3. Of the Eyes. ibid. SECT. 4. Of
the Nose, Mouth, Chin, Neck, and Throat. Page 3 SECT. 5. Of the Forepart of
the Body. Page 5 SECT. 6. Of the Hinder-part of the Body. Page 6 SECT. 7. Of
the Arms. Hands, and Fingers. ib. SECT. 8. Of the Legs, Feet, and Toes. Page 8
CHAP. II. Of Actions, Gestures, Decorum, Motion, Spirit, and Grace in Pictures
rightly Resembled. SECT. 1. Of Action or Gesture. Page 9 SECT. 2. Of the
Passions or Complexions. Page 10
CHAP. III. Of Necessary Instruments appertaining to Drawing. Page 11 How to
make Pastils of several Colors. Page 12 A way to Draw an Escutcheon
Geometrically. ib. To Draw a Geometrical Oval. Page 15 Some Geometrical
Definitions. Page 16
CHAP. IV. Of the First Practice of Drawing. SECT. 1. Of Geometrical Figures.
Page 18 Five Columns of Architecture. Page 19
SECT. 2. Of the Second Practice of Drawing. page 20 SECT. 3. Of the Third
Practice. ib. SECT. 4. Of the Fourth Practice. ib.
CHAP. V. Directions for Drawing the Body of Man or Woman. SECT. 1. General
Rules for drawing the Face. Page 21 SECT. 2. To Draw a Fore-right Face. Page 22
SECT. 3. To Draw an Upright Head. ib. SECT. 4. Of the Inclining and
Fore-shortned Face. Page 23 SECT. 5. Of the Nose, Mouth, and Chin. Page 26
SECT. 5. Of Hands, both Palm, Back, and Sides; as also open and closed: and
likewise of Hands and Arms joined. Page 28 SECT. 6. Of Feet in several
Positions, both with and without Measures; as also of Feet and Legs joined
together. Page 31 SECT. 7. Of the Back, Breast, Secret members, Thighs,
Shoulders, etc. Page 34 SECT. 8. Of Whole figures from head to foot. Page 36
SECT. 9. Rules of Symmetrie or Proportion to be observed in Drawing the whole
Body of Man or Woman. Page 41 SECT. 10. The Proportion of the Body of Man. Page
46
CHAP. VI. Of Shadowing, and Rules to be observed therein. Page 47 CHAP. VII.
Of Drapery, and Rules to be observed therein. Page 45 CHAP. VIII. Of Landscape,
and Rules to be observed therein. Page 46
Of Etching and Graving, the Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of Etching with Aqua fortis. Page 48 SECT. 1. To make Mr. Hollar's
Ground, and how to Etch in Copper; and what Instruments ought to be used in the
Practice thereof. ib. SECT. 2. How to prepare your Copper. Page 49 SECT. 3. How
to lay the Ground upon the Plate. Page 50 SECT. 4. How to Transfer your design
upon the Copper. Page 51 SECT. 5. How to wall about your Plate with Wax, to lay
on your Aqua fortis, and to finish your Work. ib.
CHAP. II. Of Graving. SECT. 1. Of necessary Instruments belonging to Graving.
Page 53 1. Of your Oyl-stone. ib. 2. Of Gravers. Page 54
SECT. 2. Of several ways of Holding the Graver. Page 55 SECT. 3. The forms of
Graving-tools, as also the manner of Whetting your Graver. Page 57 SECT. 4. The
manner how to hold and handle your Graver. Page 58 SECT. 5. The manner of
holding your Hand in Graving. Page 59 SECT. 6. How to take off any Picture, or
Map-letters, etc. upon your Copper. Page 61

Of Limning in Watercolors, the Third Book.
CHAP. I. Of Necessaries belonging to Limning. Page 64 SECT. 1. Of Gum-waters
used in Limning. Page 65 Of Gum-Lake. ib. Of Gum-Armoniack. Page 66 Of Liquid
Gold or Silver. Page 67
SECT. 2. Of your Grinding-stone and Muller. ib. SECT. 3. Of Colors ib.
CHAP. II. Of Colors used in Limning, their names, and how to order them.
SECT. 1. Of the Names of Colors, and how every Color is to be prepared;
whether Grownd, Washed, or Steeped. Page 68 SECT. 2. Of those Colors that are
to be Grownd; and how to Grind them. Page 70 SECT. 3. Of those Colors that are
to be Washed, and how to Wash them. Page 71 SECT. 4. Of Colors to be Steeped.
ib. SECT. 5. Of those Colors that are to be Washed and Grownd, and how to
temper them in your Shells when you are to use them. Page 72 SECT. 6. Of
Pencils, and how to choose them. ib. SECT. 7. Of Compounded Colors. Page 74
CHAP. III. How to prepare a Table for Picture in small for Limning, to make
use of your Light, the manner of Sitting in respect of Position and Distance,
and what necessary Instruments are to lie by you when you are at work. Page 76
SECT. 1. How to prepare a Table for a Picture in Small. Page 76 SECT. 2. Of
your Light. ib. SECT. 3. Of the manner of Sitting. Page 77 SECT. 4. Of such
Necessaries as are to lie by you while you are at Work. Page 78
CHAP. IV. Of the Miniture or Limning of a Face in Watercolors. Page 80 SECT.
1. At the first Operation or Sitting. Page 81 SECT. 2. At the second Operation
or Sitting. Page 83 SECT. 3. At the third Operation or Sitting. Page 85
CHAP. V. Of Drapery, and other Ornaments belonging to a Picture in Miniture.
ib. SECT. 1. Of Drapery in Limning. Page 86 SECT. 2. Of other Ornaments in
Pictures. ib.
CHAP. VI. Of Landscape. Page 87
Of Painting in Oil, the Fourth Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Names of your Colors, and how to Grind and order them. Page
90 CHAP. II. Of your Easel, Straining-Frame, Cloth, Pallat* Pencils, and Stay.
Page 91 Names of several sorts of Pencils. Page 93
CHAP. III. How to order your Colors upon your Pallat, and how to temper
Shadows for all Complexions. ib. 1. For a Fair Complexion. Page 94. 2. For a
more Brown or Swarthy Complexion. Page 95 3. For a Tawny Complexion. ib. 4. For
an absolute Black Complexion, Page 96
CHAP. IV. What Pencils are useful for the Painting of a Face, and how to
dispose them. Page 97 CHAP. V. How to Paint a Face in Oyl-colours. Page 98
CHAP. VI. Of Garments of several Colors, and of their proper Coloring. ib.
CHAP. VII. To temper Colors for several occasions. Page 104 Of things meet to
be known. Page 105 The Discovery, how to Cleanse any Old Painting, so as to
Preserve the Colors; with Cautions to those that through Ignorance, have
instead of Cleansing, quite Defaced, or irrecoverably lost the Beauty of good
Colors in and Old piece of Painting. Page 106

Of Washing or Coloring of Maps and Printed Pictures: the Fifth Book. Page 108
CHAP. I. What things are necessary to be always ready for Washing of Maps or
Pictures. ib. SECT. 1. Of Colors for Washing. ib. Colors to be used in
Washing, which are not used in Limning. Page 109
SECT. 2. Of other Necessaries. ib. 1. Of Allum-water, how to make it. Page 112
2. How to make Size. ib. 3. How to Temper Gold to write with a Pen or Pencil.
Page 113 4. Of Pencils. Page 114

CHAP. II. Of other Colors for Washing, both Simple and Compounded. ib. 1. How
to make a Green Color of Copper Plates, ib. 2. To make a Green another way.
ib. 3. Another Green. Page 115 4. For a Light Green. ib. 5. To Shadow Greens.
ib. 6. Greens for Landskips and Rocks. ib. 7. To make a Blew. ib. 8. Of
Shadowing Blews. Page 116 9. To make a Brown. ib. 10. Spanish Brown. ib. 11.
How to make an Orange-colour. ib. 12. A Flesh-colors. Page 117 13. Colors for
the Sky. ib. 14. To make Colors for Precious Stones. ib. 15. Colors for
Landskips. Page 118 16. Colors for Buildings. Page 119 17. How to Shadow every
Color in Garments or Drapery. ib.
CHAP. III. General Rules to be observed. Page 120 What Colors sets off best
together. ib. SECT. 2. Directions for the Mixing of your Colors. Page 121

These with several other Books are Printed for, and to be sold by Dorman
Newman at the Chyrurgeons Arms in Little Britain, near the Hospital Gate.
Folio.
A Large Body of Divinity, in ten Books, wherein the Fundamentals and Grounds
of Religion are opened, all the contrary Errors refuted, and all the Scriptures
explained; with the Addition of 200 sheets. By Edward Leigh, Esquire; M. A.

Forty Sermons by the Right Reverend Father in God, Ralph Brownrig, late
Bishop of Exceter.

A Relation in form of a Journal, of the Voyage and Residence of Charles the
2d. King of Great Britain, etc. Rendered into English by Sir William Lower
Knight.

Quarto.
The Christian Man's Calling, or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the nature of it is discovered, as also the Christian directed how he
may perform it in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his particular Vocation,
his Family Direction, and his own Recreations: To be read in Families, for
their Instruction and Edification. The First Part.

The Second Part of this Treatise of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein a
Christian is directed how he may perform his Duty in the Relations of Parents,
Children, Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, in the Conditions of Prosperity
and Adversity.

The Third and last Part of the Christian Man's Calling; wherein the Christian
is directed how to make Religion his Business, in his Dealings with all men, in
the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in Good Company, in Bad Company,
in Solitariness, or when he is alone, on a Weekday from Morning to Night, in
Visiting the Sick, on a Dying bed; as also the Means how a Christian may do
this, and some motives to it. All three by George Swinnock M. A. Preacher of
the Gospel late at Great Kimbel in the County of Bucks.

The Use and Practice of Faith, or Faiths universal Usefulness and Quickening
Influence into every Kind and Degree of the Christian Life. Delivered in the
Public Lectures at Ipswitch, by the late eminent and faithful Servant of the
Lord Mr. Matthew Lawrence, Preacher of the Word to the said Town.

The virtue and value of Baptism, Catechetically propounded, as an Antidote
against all Baptism-despising Dictates. To which is added, A Sermon Preached by
the Author, the day after his coming out of the Tower. By Zach. Crofton, late
Minister of Botolph Aldgate, London.

Farewell Sermons, 4to.

Allyn' s Works.

Octavo.
God. Fearers are Gods Favorites, or an Encouragement to be good in the worst
of Times. Sermons on Mal. 4. 8. By A. Tucker, Minister of Portsmouth.

Twenty Sermons of Mr. James Nalton late Minister in Foster-lane, London.

The Christians great Interest. By W. Guthry Minister in Scotland.

The Life of Cardinal Woolsey, the famous Lord Chancellor of England, etc.
with the Remarks upon those times.

Rebukes for Sin, by Gods burning Anger, by the Burning of the City, the
Burning of the World, the Burning of the Wicked in Hell: With a Discourse of
Heart-fixedness. By Tho. Doo^itel, late Minister of Alphage, London. 12o.
Together with several other pieces of the same Author.

Heaven on Earth, or, the Best Friend in the Worst of Times: Being a Legacy to
London. By J. J. Large 8vo.

A Sermon upon the Fire, By Mr. Robert Elsborough, Minister of the Parish that
was lately St. Lawrence Pountney, London, 4to.

Fair Play on both sides, or the Surest way to Heaven: Discovered in a Dispute
between a Roman Catholic and a Protestant. By Samuel Hyeron.

A Guide to young Women and Maidens, directing them how to behave themselves in
all estates, relations, and condiditions, from their Childhood down to Old Age.
By Hannah Woolley. 8vo.

There is now extant, that much Expected Book of Mr. Jer. Buroughs, Entitled,
Gospel Remission, being the Second Part of his Book called The Evil of Sin:
Wherein is discovered, 1. The many and great Gospel Mysteries therein
contained. 2. The glorious Effects proceeding from it. 3. The great Mistakes
that are made about it. 4. The true Signs and Symptoms of it. 5. The way and
means how to obtain it. Published by the same hand, in 4to.

A Guide to the true Religion, directing to make a wise choice of that Religion
men venture their Salvation upon. By J. Clapham, M. A.

Fanatics Primmer, for the Instruction of the Little ones, in order to perfect
Reading. By Henry Adis.

The Complete Physician qualified and dignisied. By E. Maynwaring Doctor in
Physic.

OF DRAWING. The First Book.
The Introduction.
DRAWING consists of several General precepts to be learnt of every one that
is desirous to attain to Perfection therein; the practice of which requires
Observation, Discretion, and Judgment; in which, Proportions, Motions, and
Actions are with great care and diligence to be followed: And therefore he that
will attain to the perfection of this excellent Practice, it is necessary he
should not be ignorant of Mathematical Demonstration in the Rules of Geometry
and Perspective; of which in this Book you shall receive Instructions. Of all
other proportions, the Body of Man has the pre-eminence for excellency, from
which all other Arts are derived, as many of the learned have concluded; for
Vitruvius notes, that the Architect hence took the observations of his
Buildings, Man being the first pattern of all Artificial things: and Antiquity
has so graced Painting, (as being the chief Mistress of Proportion) so that
all other Artificers are called Handy-crafts or Mechanics.

CHAP. I.
A description of all the External parts of Man's Body.
SECT. I. Of the HEAD.
IN Man's body the highest part is the HEAD; the forepart is called the
Forehead; the turning of the hair, the Crown; the root of the hair above the
forehead, the Center; the parting of the hair, (especially of Women) is called
the Seam.

The Forehead contains all the space between the root of the hair before, and
the eyebrows: the Pulse is the highest part of the forehead, ending with the
hair: Metone is the swelling out in the forehead above the eyebrows: the
Temples lie betwixt the pulse, the forehead, and the ear.

SECT. II. Of the EAR.
THe EAR turns between the temples, the upper part of the cheek, and the root
of the hair; by the side of the head the lower part is called the tipp, in the
midst whereof is the hole where the sound enters in.

SECT. III. Of the EYES.
THe EYEBROWS are those thick hairs at the bottom of the forehead: the upper
eyelid is that little part which compasses the upper part of the eye: the eye
is that round ball which is contained between the upper and lower eyelids: the
black of the eye is the round spot in the midst of that little circle, by
virtue whereof we see, and is called the apple or sight of the eye: the outward
corner of the eye is next the ear, the inner is toward the nose; all the space
between the upper eyelid and the outward corner of the eye, and the whole
turning of the eye to the upper part of the cheek is called the case or hollow
of the eye.

SECT. IV. Of the NOSE, MOUTH, CHIN, NECK, and THROAT.
THe NOSE is between the cheeks, descending from betwixt the eyes, and ends
at the nostrils which hang out on each side at the bottom thereof, each whereof
has an hole or passage, whereby we smell.

The lower end of the nose which stands forward is called the top or point,
the rising in the midst the ridge or gristle; the upper Cheek is that space
between the ear, the hollow of the eye, the nose. and the lower Cheek; whereof
the part rising toward the eye, is named the ball: the lower Cheek is bounded
with the upper, the nostrils, the mouth, the chin, to the throat and the neck
under the ear: the Upper lip is that red piece of flesh above the mouth.

The MOUTH is that division between the upper and neither lips, which is red
like the other; that concavity which comes down from the bottom of the nose to
the upper lip, is the gutter of the nose.

The roof of the mouth is called the pallat; the tongue is that which moves in
the mouth; the passage between the lungs and the mouth is called the Windpipe,
through which the breath passes; the gum is that piece of flesh in which the
teeth are fastened; the four first whereof are called dividers, next unto which
on each side are the dog-teeth; the other five on each side with their roots,
are the grinders or cheek-teeth; so that the full number of Teeth is thirty two.

The CHIN or place of the beard, is the extremity beneath the lip and the end
of the face, whose beginning is the root of the hair.

The hinder part of the head under the crown is called the nape, where the
hairs grow; behind is the beginning of the neck

The THROAT is between the chin and the beginning of the body or trunk, in the
midst whereof is that rising called the throat-bone; the concavity of the neck
before, between the end of the throat and the beginning of the breast, is the
throat-pit.

The NECK is that part behind between the root of the hair and the beginning of
the backbone, which on either side is joined with the throat, and at the lower
end of the neck with the shoulders, whereof the bone in the midst is called
astragalus, or the bone that knits the neck with the shoulders; the whole trunk
or body before contains the upper fork of the stomach or breast, which begins
at the end of the throat-pit.

SECT. V. Of the FOREPART of the Body.
THe forepart of the body, as the Breasts or Papps, end with the short ribs,
and they are called the part under the papps, and in Women are called duggs,
the heads of which whence the milk is sucked out are called Nipples; the space
between the breasts or duggs at the lower fork of the breast is the chest; the
armpits are the hollows under the arms, where the hairs grow.

The Short-ribbs begin at the end of the papps, and reach to the flanks near
the belly; the Flanks begin at the end of the breast, and are called the Waste;
the upper part of the belly lies between the hollow of the breast, the waste
above, the navel, and the ribbs; the knitting of the intrails is called the
Navel.

The Paunch lies between the waste, the privities, and the flanks, and is also
called the Belly; especially in Women; where the hairs grow under the belly, is
the Privities; the hollow compass at the top is called Corona, the place which
the urine passes through is called the Hole, the two little balls that hang
under the Yard the Stones, the Privities of a Woman are called, etc.

SECT. VI. Of the HINDER-PART of the Body.
THe hinder part of the body called the Back or Chine consists of the
shoulder blade, which is the part behind the shoulders end, with part of the
chine and loins; the rest of the back reaches down along from the neck to the
beginning of the cleft of the buttocks, the loins lie between the
shoulder-blades; the ribbs and the rest of the chine to the reins or waste.

The REINS reach from the loins to the buttocks, and do properly belong to
the part below the Waste.

The BVTTOCKS are that fleshy part which serve us for sitting.

SECT. VII. Of the ARMS, HANDS, and FINGERS.
THe Arm contains the shoulder, behind which is the back, beginning between
the neck and throat, and reaches to the shoulder blade, behind which place is
properly called the Back; the part of the arm from the elbow upward, is called
the upper brawn of the arm; the Elbow is the bowing of the arm, the inside
whereof is the Joint; and at the lower part of the arm begins the Wrist, where
the arm is joined to the hand, the palm is the inside of the hand between the
wrist and the fingers, the thumb is the biggest and shortest of the fingers.

The Forefinger is next to the thumb, the middle-finger is that which stands
in the midst, and is longer then the rest; next unto this is the Ring-finger,
the Ear-finger or Little-finger is the least and last.

The Joints of the fingers are even in number, viz. three upon each, except the
thumb, which has but two.

The hinder part of the arm reaches from the end of the shoulder or arme-pit
to the elbow, where the second part of the arm begins, reaching to the
wrist-joynt.

The back of the hand reaches from the wrist to the first joints of the
fingers, and is called Pecten, the spaces between the joints are called
Internodi, which are two upon each finger, except the thumb, which has but
one; in the space between the last joint and the top of the finger is the Nail,
whose bowing is called Corona, (I mean where it touches the flesh or skin.

The whole hand begins at the wrist, and reaches to the top or extremity of
the fingers.

SECT. VIII. Of the LEGS, FEET, and TOES.
THe LEG consists of these parts; the thigh, which begins at the trunk of the
body, and ends at the knee; the hollow of the thigh is the inner side below the
privities; the knee begins at the round bone at the end of the thigh, and
reaches to the beginning of the shin-bone; the instep begins at the end of the
shin-bone, and reaches to the beginning of the toes, and is called the upper
part of the foot, the ancle is that bone which buncheth out on each side
between the instep and beginning of the heel.

The Small of the leg is the space between the end of the two calves above, and
the ancle, instep, and heel below; the Pit of the foot is the hollow under the
hill or higher bunch of the foot toward the soles.

The TOES have also joints as the fingers, though they be somewhat shorter, and
have also nails in like manner, and are otherwise called, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

The hinder part of the leg begins under the buttock, and is called the thigh,
and ends at the hinder part of the knee, called the hamme or bending; the
calves of the legs begin under the hamme, and are two upon each leg; the
outward, which ends somewhat high; and the inward, which reaches nearer to
the small of the leg, which diminishes by degrees to that part a little above
the ancle; the heel is that part of the foot which rises out backwards,
reaching from the end of the leg to the bottom of the foot, called the Sole,
which begins at the end of the heel, and reaches to the top of the toes,
containing likewise the spaces between the joints underneath orderly. Thus much
for the External parts of Man's Body; all which are deciphered in the Sculptures
following.

CHAP. II.
Of Actions, Gestures, Decorum, Motion, Spirit, and Grace in Pictures rightly
resembled.
SECT. I. Of Actions or Gestures.
THese are those that most nearly resemble the life, be it either in laughing,
grieving, sleeping, fighting, wrestling, running, leaping, and the like.

Amongst the Ancients, famous for lively motion and gesture, Leonard Vincent
deserves much, whose custom was to behold clowns, condemned persons, and did
mark the contracting of their brows, the motions of their eyes and whole
bodies; and doubtless it cannot but be very expedient for an Artist in this
kind to behold the variety of exercises, that discover various actions, where
the motion is discovered between the living and the dead, the fierce and the
gentle, the ignorant and learned, the sad and the merry.

John de Bruges was the first inventer of Oyl-painting that deserved
excellently in this particular.

SECT. II. Of the Passions or Complexions.
Man's Body is composed of the four Elements. Melancholy resembles Earth.

Phlegm the Water.

Choler the Fire.

Blood the Air; and answerable are the Gestures and Humors.

Melancholy bodies are slow, heavy, and restrained; and the consequents are
anxiety, disquietness, sadness, stubbornness, etc. in which horror and despair
will appear.

Phlegmatic bodies are simple, humble, merciful.

Sanguine bodies are temperate, modest, gracious, princely, gentle, and merry;
to whom these affections of the mind best agree, viz. love, delight, pleasure,
desire, mirth, and hope.

Choleric bodies are violent, boisterous, arrogant, bold, and fierce; to whom
these passions appertain, anger, hatred, and boldness; and accordingly the
skillful Artist expresses these motions of these several bodies, which ought
Philosophically to be understood.

Now to proceed according to our promised Method, to the Practical part; and
here first the Learner must be provided with several Instruments.

CHAP. III.
Of necessary Instruments appertaining to Drawing.
1. SAllow coals split into the forms of Pencils, which you may best have of
those that sell Charcoal ready burnt for your use; these are to be prepared by
sharpning them at the point, their use is to touch over your Draught lightly at
the first: you may know Sallow coals from others by the fineness of their grain.

2. You must also have a Feather of a Ducks wing, with which you may wipe out
at pleasure what you desire to alter in your Draught.

3. Black-lead Pencils, to go over your Draught more exactly the second time.

4. Pens made of a Ravens quill, to finish your design; which will strike a
more neat stroke then the common quill: but you must be very exact here, for
there is no altering what you do with the Pen.

5. A Rule and a pair of Compasses with three Points to take in and out; one
for Chalk, another for Black lead, or red Chalk, or any other Paste. The use of
the Compasses is required in most things you draw, which you are to use after
your outstroke is done, by trying how near your Draught and Pattern agree, and
this being only touched out in Charcoal, you may alter at pleasure.

6. Pastils made of several Colors, to draw upon colored Paper or Parchment,
the making whereof is as follows.

How to make Pastils of several colors. Take the Color that you intend to
make your Pastil and grind it dry, or rather only bruise it somewhat fine; to
your Color (whatsoever it be) add a reasonable quantity of Plaster of Paris
burnt and finely sifted, mix and incorporate the Color and Plaster together
with fair Water till it be stiff like Clay or Dough; then take it and roll it
between your hands into long pieces, about the bigness of the shank of a
Tobacco-pipe, then lay them in the Sun or Wind to dry. They being thus dried
are ready for use, being finely scraped to a very small point; and if they be
short, put them into an ordinary Goose-quill to lengthen them.

And here note, that you may by this means make Pastils of what Color you
please, either simple or compounded, if you know what ingredients and mixtures
will make such a Color as you desire; which you will understand in the third
Book, where we treat of the Mixture of Colors. And further observe, that the
Plaster of Paris is only to bind the Colors together; and therefore
according as your Color or Colors you are to make are more hard or more soft,
you must add the greater or lesser quantity of Plaster.

By this means of tempering and mixing of several Colors together, you may
make (indeed) whatsoever color you please; as all manner of Colors for the
Face or Body of Man or Woman, all kind of Greens for Landscape, for Rocks,
Skies, Sunbeams; all colors for Buildings, with their Shadows.

These Pastils are very fine and commodious for drawing upon colored paper,
and therefore I would have you,

7. Provide your self also of fine Blew paper; some light-coloured, other-some
more sad; as also with Paper of diverse other colors, which now is very common
to be sold in many places.

8. Have always in a readiness by you the Crumbs of fine Manchet or
White-bread; the use whereof is, when you have drawn any thing with Black-lead
that disliketh you, you may strew some of these Crumbs upon the defective part,
and with a linen cloth rub hard upon that place, and it will fetch out the
Black-lead, and leave the Paper or Parchment fair and white. It is also useful
when you have finished a piece, either Head, Leg, Arm, or whole Body with
Black-lead, and would trace it over with Ink to finish it, the Black-lead will
be seen in many places, being thicker then the line of your Pen; wherefore when
you have finished your Drawing with Ink, and that dry, rub it over with these
Crumbs, and it will not only take off the superfluous Black-lead, but all other
spots of your Paper.

Escutchion
An Ovall


A way to Draw an Escutcheon Geometrically.
FIrst strike a Circle at pleasure, as your occasion requires.

Then strike the Diameter as BC, then set one foot of the Compasses in B, and
strike the crooked lines DD and DD, then keeping the Compasses at the same
distance, strike the other crooked lines EE and EE, then where they do
intersect as FF, there strike the cross Diameter, then divide the upper
Semidiameter into three parts, and take two of them, there make the Cross-line,
by setting one foot of the Compasses in B, and make the crooked line GG, then
at the same distance make the crooked line HH, by setting them in C, then
strike the line II, then measure two or three of those parts, and set off
toward B and C, then set the Compasses in K, and strike the lines L L and LL,
then set the Ruler in MM and MM, and strike the lines in NN and NN, and divide
the lower Semicircle in two equal parts, then set the Compass in O, and strike
the lines PP and PP from AA, then measure from MN downwards, five of those
parts of the upper measure, then set the Compasses at N5 and N5, and strike the
lines KP and KP, and you have your desire.

To Draw a Geometrical Oval.
THis Oval is drawn by drawing two equal Circles, then set the Compasses in D,
and strike the Arch BC, and at the same distance set them in D, and strike the
Arch FE, then set them in G, and strike the Arch CF, then set them in H, and
strike the Arch BE.

Some Geometrical Definitions.
1. A Point is void of magnitude.

2. A Line is a length without breadth or thickness; and of the three kinds of
magnitudes in Geometry, viz. Length, Breadth, and Thickness, a Line is the
first.

3. The ends or bounds of a Finite-line are points; but in a circular Line, the
points motion returns to the place where it first began, and so makes the Line
infinite, and the ends or bounds undeterminate.

4. A Right-line lies equally betwixt his points.

5. A Superficies has only Length and Breadth.

6. A plain Superficies is that which lies equally between his Lines.

7. A plain Angle is the inclination, or bowing of two Lines the one to the
other, the one touching the other, and not being directly joined together: an
Angle commonly signed by three Letters, the middlemost whereof shows the
Angular point.

8. If the Lines that contain the Angle be right Lines, then it is called a
Right-lined Angle.

9. When a Right-line standing upon a Right-line, makes the Angles on either
side equal, then either of these Angles is a Right-angle, and Right-line which
stands erected, is called a Perpendicular-Line to that wherein it stands.

10. An Obtuse-angle is that which is greater then a Right-angle.

11. An Acute-angle is less then a Right-angle.

12. A Limit or Term, is the end of every thing.

13. A Figure is that which is contained under one Limit or Term, or many, viz.
a Round-line, three Right-lines, four Right-lines, five Right-lines, etc.

14. A Circle is a plain figure contained under one Line, called a
Circumference.

15. A Diameter of a Circle is a Right-line drawn by the Center thereof, and
ending at the Circumference.

16. A Semicircle is a figure contained under the Diameter, and that part of
the Circumference cut off by the Diameter.

17. A Section or portion of a Circle, is a figure contained under a
Right-line, and a part of the Circumference greater or less then a Semicircle.

18. Right-lined figures are such as are contained under Right lines.

19. Three-sided figures are such as are contained under three Right lines.

20. Four-sided figures are such as are contained under four Right lines.

21. Many-sided figures are such as have more sides then four.

22. All-three-sided figures are called Triangles.

23. Four-sided figures a Quadrater; a Square is that whose Sides are equal,
and his Angles right.

24. A Long-square is that which has right Angles, but unequal Sides.

25. A Rhombus is a figure having four equal Sides, but not right Angles.

26. A Rhomboides is a figure whose opposite Sides are equal, and whose
opposite Angles are also equal, but it has neither Sides, nor equal Angles.

27. All other figures of four sides, besides these, are called Trapez, as such
are all figures of four sides, in which is observed no equality of Sides or
Angles.

28. Parallel or equi-distant Right-lines are such, which being in one and the
same Superficies, and produced infinitely on both sides, do never in any part
concur, but still retain the same distance.

CHAP. IV.
Of the first Practice of Drawing.
SECT. I. Of Geometrical Figures.
BEing provided of all necessary Instruments for Drawing, proceed to Practice;
and first begin with plain Geometrical figures, such as the Circle, Oval,
Square, Triangle, Cone, Cylinder; all which your Rule and Compasses will help
you in: but first endeavor to draw them by hand, which with a little practice
you may attain. I have my self, by taking a Black-lead Pencil in my hand, and
holding it as I do a Pen, and resting the end of my THE:V: ORDERS OF ARCHITECT.
Tuscan. Dorica. Jonica. Corinthia. Composita.

Place this page 19

little finger upon my paper, turning the paper about with my left hand, and
have described a Circle so exact, that a pair of Compasses could not discover
an error: I say, practice the making and drawing of these by hand, for they
are all useful in one kind or other. Example.

The Circle will help you in all Orbicular forms; as, the Sun in its glory, the
Moon either full or crescent, and infinite other Circular shapes. The Oval is a
direction for the Face, for the mouth or foot of a wine or beer-glass, the
mouth of a well, etc. The Square is assistant to you in confining your Picture
you are to copy, and keeping it within bounds. The Triangle for the half-face,
as in the Figures following you will easily discern. The Cone will help you in
drawing of Flute-Colasses, now much in fashion; as also in Spire-Steeples and
tops of Towers. The Cylinder will be of good use in drawing of all manner of
Columns, Pillars and Pilasters, with their Ornaments. These (indeed) are so
useful, that hardly any thing can be effected in which they they are not
ingredient.

And now, since it falls in my way so opportunely, I will insert the sign of
the Five orders of Architecture, that you may know them when you see them
either painted, or built in Brick or Stone.

Place here the Five Columns of Architecture.

SECT. II. Of the second practice of Drawing.
HAving practiced these Figures, proceed to the drawing of Cherries, Pears,
Apples, Apricocks, Peaches, Grapes, Strawberries, Peascods, Butterflies, and
such like.

SECT. III. Of the third Practice.
IMitate Flowers, as Roses, Tulips, Carnations, etc. Also Beasts; first the
more heavy and dull, as the Elephant, the Bear, the Bull, the Goat, the Sheep,
etc. Then them more fleet and nimble, as the Stag, the Heart, the Nag, the
Unicorn, and the like. Then practice Birds, as the Eagle, the Swan, the Parrot,
the King-fisher, the Partridge, the Pheasant, and such like. Then Fishes, as
the Whale, Salmon, Herring, Pike, Carp, Thornback, Lobster, etc. Of all which
there are Books to be bought at very reasonable rates.

SECT. IV. Of the fourth Practice.
IMitate the Body and Parts of the Body of Man; in the practice whereof beware
of the common errors usually committed, as of drawing the Head too big for the
Body, and others the like; which to prevent, you have here presented to your
view the Heads, Noses, Mouths, Hands, Arms, Feet, Legs, Bodies, also whole
Figures of Men, Women, and Children in several postures, being Copies of the
best Masters extant, with Rules and directions for Drawing every particular
member of the body, and that I would have you now to practice, you having gone
sufficiently forward with the others before noted.

CHAP. V.
Directions for Drawing the Body of Man or Woman.
SECT. I General Rules for Drawing the Face.
IN Drawing the Face, observe its motion whether forward, upward, downward, or
sidewayes, by your Eye; touch lightly the features where the Eyes, Nose, Mouth,
and Chin should stand, and then go over them more perfectly. The Circle,
Squares, and Triangles that are used in a Face, serve to guide your judgment
where to place the several features.

Observe diligently the principal Muscles of a Face, these appear most in an
aged man or woman's face.

There is usually a threefold proportion observed in a Face: 1. From the top
of the Forehead to the Eyebrows: 2. From the Eyebrows to the bottom of the
Nose: 3. From thence to the bottom of the Chin; but in some the Forehead is
lower; others Noses are longer.

The Distances between the Eyes, is the length of one Eye in a full face; but
in a three-quarter, or side-face, the distance is lessened answerable.

The Nostril ought to be placed exactly against the corner of the Eye.

In a fat Face you will perceive the Cheeks swell, in a lean Face the Jaw-bones
stick out, and the Cheeks fall in.

A smiling countenance is discerned by the Mouth, when the corners of the Mouth
turn up a little.

A frowning countenance is discerned in the Forehead, Eyebrows, bending and
somewhat wrinkling about the top of the Nose, etc.

SECT. II. To draw a Fore-right Face.
MAke the form of a perfect Oval divided into three equal parts by two Lines;
in the first part place the Eyes, in the second part the Nostrils, and in third
part the Mouth.

Note, that the Eyes must be distant one from the other the length of one of
the Eyes, and that their inner corners be perfectly over the outside of the
Nostrils.

SECT. III. To draw an Vp-right Head.
WHich is made with three Lines equal every way, either upwards, downwards,
higher or lower; and that must be divided as the former into three equal parts,
as in the Example.

SECT. IV. Of the Inclining and Fore-shortned Face.
THis is plainly seen by the Lines, how they concord together, and you may with
facility draw in their proper places the Nose, Mouth, and other parts with a
little practice, and observng diligently the Examples following.



In these Forms you must be very perfect, it being a Rule that in most Faces
you may have occasion to make use of: for of all the parts of Man's body the
Face is the most diffcult. But having got the Proportions with their Measures,
you will be able (which way soever a Face turns) to form it out, whatever
proportion your Face is you are to imitate, so must your Out-stroke be formed;
whether long, round, fat, or lean.

Because presidents are most useful, I have here thought good to give you the
forms of several Eyes more at large, by which you may with more ease know the
truth of their Proportions.

As also Ears, which are exactly to be known; and then the forms of several
Noses and Mouths; all which are taken from eminent Masters, as Palma and
others. [ In the following Page.]



SECT V. Of the Nose, Mouth, and Chin.
THe Nose is the most eminent part of the Face; in which observe the
hollowness, roundness, and the Nostrils, as they appear in these several
Figures borrowed from Fiolet.

1. Describe a Semicircle downwards.

2. Make the Holes of the Nose.

3. The addition of the Nostrils.



SECT. V. Of Hands, both Palm, Back, and Sides; as also open and closed: and
likewise of Hands and Arms joined.
HAving sufficiently practiced the Drawing of Mouths and Noses, let your next
exercise be in drawing of Hands in all positions, both by measures, and
without; as also Hands and Arms joined.



SECT. VI. Of Feet in several positions, both with and without measures, as
also of Feet and Legs joined together.
BEing expert in the Drawing of Hands and Arms, proceed to the Drawing of Feet
in all postures, both with and without measures; which having attained,
exercise your self in Drawing of Legs and Feet joined together, as before you
did of Hands and Arms; that so you understanding the particulars of the whole
Body, you come with the more judgment to that great difficulty of Figures of
the whole Body of Man. To help you therein, I have set before you the easiest
and truest Rules that the best Masters of Proportions have published, with a
Discourse of their true Measures: which will be the more easy, if you
seriously weigh the foregoing Chapter, treating of all the external parts of
Man's body, for then you will have occasion to observe it; but first exercise
your self in following these examples of Feet, as also of Feet and Legs joined
together. [ See the 2. following Pages.]



SECT. VII. Of the Back, Breast, Secret members, Thighs, Shoulders, etc.
HAving sufficiently practiced the Drawing of the several Limbs of Man and
Woman, as Head, Mouth, Nose, Hands, Arms, Feet, and Legs; proceed next to the
drawing of the other parts of the Body: as the Back, Belly, Shoulders, Breast,
Secrets, and Thighs, therein following the example of this noble Master Palmas,
in the following Figure.



SECT. VIII. Of whole Figures from head to foot.
OF whole Figures I have furnished you with variety of examples; as first, of a
Child standing backward and forward, which is necessary to be first practiced,
because these are the more easy, being more plump and round then the Body of
Man, without that observation of the Muscles and other parts, which I desire
you in a methodical way to imitate often before you adventure upon the other
Figures, which are Man and Woman standing forward, and after that Man and Woman
standing backward, as also in other postures: and the same order that was at
first proposed about the Heads, Hands, and Feet, etc. by touching out every
Figure first with Charcoal, is exactly to be observed in these Figures also.



SECT. IX. Rules of Symmetrie or Proportion to be observed in Drawing the whole
Body of Man or Woman.
FOR your further help in Drawing the following Figures, take notice of these
necessary Rules: Begin at the Head, and so proceed by degree, as your pattern
directs; and be careful that your parallel Joints, Sinews, or Muscles be
directly opposite; also that the Motion of the Body be answerable one part to
another, and that the parts and limbs of the body have a due symmetrie; not a
great Arm, and a small Leg; or a small Hand, and a great Finger, etc. Let not
one part be too long for another. Of all which, you must know, that at first
you will be apt to commit many errors, but be not disheartened; proceed, and
your labor will not be lost, experience is gained by practice; be but
diligent, and you will find more ease then you could imagine: at first all
things that are attainable seem difficult; we have a good old saying, Nothing
is hard to a willing mind, and I can speak it by experience. I might spend time
to tell you many stories how to proceed to Figures clothed, etc. but if you can
draw a Naked figure well, for the order of Garments, you will be able to do
that with ease.



And now, having brought you thus far in Practice, and given you a more exact
order to proceed with so many several Examples more than larger Volumes have
produced; which you having well followed, and attained to some reasonable
measure of Proportion, you may now proceed to that which may be more
profitable, if you first practice those things that may be easily shadowed with
a Pen, and that will fit your hand for Etching with Aqua fortis, which shall be
perfectly taught in the next Chapter; wherein you have the mixture of the
Ground to Etch upon, the order how to prepare your Copper, and how to order
your Aqua fortis, what Instruments you are to use about the same, and how to
take off your design on the Plate; which is an experimental Rule practiced by
the best Etcher in England, namely Mr. W. Hollar.

SECT. X. The Proportion of the Body of Man.
FOR your further information, and to direct your judgment in Drawing of whole
Bodies, observe these following Proportions.

A Man standing, from the top of the Head to the bottom of the Feet, is eight
times the length of the Head.

The Arm hanging straight down, it reaches within a span of the Knee.

A Hand must be the length of the Face, the Hand spread abroad must cover the
Face, and no more.

Note, that in Drawing a Figure standing, you must first draw that Leg which
the Body stands firmest upon; otherwise your Figure will yield one way or
other, as it were falling.

A Man's Arms extended is the just length of the whole Body.

The like proportion is observed for Women, and therefore one example serves
for both.

The Proportion of a Child, according to our learned Author Lomantius, consists
of five lengths of the Head; according to the Figure expressed in our
Discourse, for an example to the Practitioner.

CHAP. VI.
Of Shadowing, and Rules to be observed therein.
THE out-lines of any Draught or Picture give the Symmetrie or Proportion,
which is enough to a good judgment: So the Figures before in this Book have
only the out-lines, and those are best to practice first by: I say, the
Out-lines show the Proportion to a good judgment; but the Lines and Shadows
give the lively likeness. In Shadowing therefore of any Picture you must
observe these Rules following.

RVLE I. Cast your Shadows always one way, that is, on which side you begin to
shadow your Figure, either on the right or left side, you must continue so
doing through your whole work. As in the figure of a Man, if you begin to
shadow his left Cheek, you must shadow the left side of his Neck, the left side
of his Arms, the left side of his Body, the left side of his Legs, etc.
Except the light side of the Figure be darkened by the opposition of some other
body standing between the light and it. As if three Men were standing together,
that Figure which stands in the middle must be darkened by the foremost, except
the light come between them.

RVLE II. All Shadows must grow fainter and fainter, as they are farther
removed from the opacous body from whence they issue.

RVLE III. In great Winds, where Clouds are driven to and fro several ways;
as also in Tempest at Sea, where Wave opposes Wave; here contrary shadows must
concur, as striving for superiority: here in such cases you must be sure to
supply the greatest first, and from them, according to your judgment, supply
the lesser; practice and imitation of good Copies will be your best director.

RVLE IV. All Circular bodies must have a Circular shadow, as they have a
Circular form, and as the object of light which causes shadow is Circular.

CHAP. VII.
Of Drapery, and Rules to be observed therein.
AS in Naked figures you draw the Outlines first, the like you must do in
Drapery, leaving room within for your greater and lesser folds; then draw first
your greater folds, and then break your greater folds into lesser contained
within them: the closer the Garment sits to the body, the smaller and narrower
must the folds be. Shadow your folds according to the directions of the last
Chapter; the innermost harder, and the outer more softer. As in Shadowing, so
in Drapery, good copies of Prints instruct best; yet take these general Rules
following.

RVLE I. Continue your great folds throughout your Garment, and break off your
shorter at pleasure.

RVLE II. The finer your Drapery is, the fuller and sharper must your folds be,
and the shadows the stronger, but yet sweet.

RVLE III. That part of any Garment that sits close to the body, as the Doublet
of a Man, the Breasts of a Woman, and the like, you must not fold at all; but
rather with your sweet shadow represent the part of the body that lies under
the Garment, as a Woman's Breast; with a sweet round shadow, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Landscape, and Rules to be observed therein.
Landscape is that which expresses in Picture whatsoever may be beheld upon the
Earth, within the species of Sight; which is the termination of a fair Horizon,
representing Towns, Villages, Castles, Promontaries, Mountains, Rocks, Valleys,
Ruins, Rivers, and whatsoever else the eye is capable of beholding within the
species of the Sight. To express which, and to make all things appear in
Draught or Picture according to true proportion and distance, there are several
Rules to be observed, of which take these few following.

RVLE I. In every Landscape show a fair Horizon, the Sky either clear or
overcast with Clouds, expressing the rising or setting of the Sun to issue (as
it were) from or over some Hill, or Mountain, or Rock; the Moon or Stars are
never to be expressed in a fair Landscape, but in a Night-piece, I have often
seen it, as in a piece of our Sarinus being taken by night, and in others. As
an Astronomer with his Quadrant taking the height of the Moon, and another with
his Cross staff taking the distance of certain Stars, their Man standing at a
distance with his Dark-lanthorn, to see their Degrees when they had made their
observation; these things, as taking of the Partridge with the Loo-bell, and
the like, become Night pieces very well.

RVLE II. If you express the Light of the Sun in any Landscape, be sure that
through your whole work you cast the light of your Trees, Buildings, Rocks,
Ruins, and all things else expressed within the verge thereof thitherwards.

RVLE III. Be sure in Landscape that you lessen your bodies proportionably
according to their distances, so that the farther the Landscape goes from your
eye, the fainter you must express any thing seen at distance, till at last the
Sky and the Earth seem to meet, as the Colors in a Rainbow do.

There are many excellent pieces of Landscape to be procured very easily; as
also of Landscape and Perspective intermixed, which pieces to me were ever the
most delightful of any other; and such I would advise you to practice by;
they, if they be good, being the only helps to teach you proportion of Bodies
in any position, either near or a-far off.

I might here speak further of Damasking, Antique, ^risco, Grotesco, Tracery,
and the like; but these are things that when you are expert in good Draught, as
(by diligent practice and following the Rules and Examples before delivered,) I
hope (by this time) you are, these things will come of themselves, and indeed,
no sooner heard of or seen, but done. And thus I conclude this first book of
Drawing with the Pen and Pastils, and shall now proceed to the second Book,
which teaches the Art of Etching and Graving

OF ETCHING and GRAVING. The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
Of Etching with Aqua fortis.
THere are several ways for Etching, and several Grounds of diverse colors,
used by several men, I shall deliver here only one, and that so familiar,
easy, and true, that I believe there is not a better Ground, nor a more
accurate way performing the work intended, than that which shall be here
taught; it being the only way, so many years practiced, and to this day
continued by that unparalled designer and incomparable Etcher in Aqua fortis,
Mr. Hollar; the manner of performing the whole work is as follows.

SECT. I. To make Mr. Hollar's Ground, and how to Etch in Copper, and what
Instruments ought to be used in the practice thereof.
TAke three parts of Virgins wax, one part of Asphaltum, one part of the best
Mastick; if you will, you may take away a third part of the Asphaltum, and put
instead thereof as much refined Rosin that is transparent and clear, for this
will be better to see through the Ground, to stop up what you have occasion
for. Beat your Asphaltum and Rosin together to powder, and put your Wax into a
clean Pipkin that has never been used before, and set it over a gentle fire,
and let it boil; then pour in the Asphaltum and Rosin into it, and mingle them
all together. Then take a Porenger or such like thing full of clean water, and
pour that boiling stuff when all is melted into the water, but pour not out the
dregs, then when it is cold work it up into a coal or ball; and when you are to
use it, then take a clean rag and double it, that no dregs or knots may come
through the rag, and tie it fast with a piece of thread; so is your Ground
prepared.

SECT. II. How to prepare your Copper.
YOur Copper must be well planisht, that it may lie level; and before you lay
on the Ground, take your Plate, and with a Charcoal well burnt coal it over
with very clean water; then wash it off with clean water never used before, and
set it sloping to run off; when it is dry, then scrape some Chalk fine all over
it, and with a very clean fine rag rub it over; but let not your fingers touch
upon the Plate, till you have put the Ground on, which you must lay on thus.

SECT. III. How to lay the Ground upon the Plate.
PUt into some fire-pan some small-coal or coalfire, for charcoal is too hot,
then lay down the Copper over that, so as the fire may have air; then take your
Ground, it being in a cloth as a foresaid, and rub up and down the Copper, so
as it sufficiently may cover the Plate, not too thin nor too thick; then take a
Ducks feather of the wing and smooth it as well as possibly you can all one
way, and then cross and cross until it lie well to your eye; but take heed that
your Copper be not too hot, for if it lie until the Ground smoke all the
moisture of the Ground is burnt away, and that will spoil your piece in
Etching, because the Ground will break or fly up; this done, let your Plate be
cold, then grind some White-lead with Gumwater, and note, that as much Gum as
the bigness of a Cherry-stone will serve for a piece of Whitelead as big as a
Nutmeg; but you must understand, that you must put so much water that the white
may be of convenient thickness to spread on the Copper.

Then you must have a large Pencil or small Brush, as the Painters use, of the
bigness of a Walnut, or more especially for a large Plate, and with that strike
over the Plate cross twice or thrice, till you see it smooth.

Then you must have another Brush larger then the first, but very smooth, made
of several Squirels tails, with that you may smooth gently the White, which you
could not do with the other Brush, and then let it lie till it be dry.

SECT. IV. How to transfer your design upon the Copper.
THen take your design or Copy after which you are to work, scrape on the
backside thereof some red Chalk all over, then go over that by scraping some
soft small-coal till it mingle with the chalk, then take a Hand-brush or great
Pencil that is very stiff, and rub it up and down till it be fine and even, and
so lay down the design on your Plate, and with a blunt Needle or Point draw
over the out-stroke; you must have several Needles, some bigger, and some
finer, put them into a pencil-stick of the length of a writing-pen, and on the
other end keep one Pencil to wipe away the Ground that your Needle fetches off
when you work. To blunt your Needle point you must do thus, blunt it on a
Table, or on the backside of a Copper plate, still holding the point downward,
and carry your hand circular that you keep the point round; the finest Needles
you must sharpen upon a fine Whet-stone, and still turning it betwixt your
fingers as you whet it, as the Turners do their work, to keep it round, then
after smooth it upon a Table Book leaf; and as you work you need not scratch
hard into the Copper, only so as you may see the Needle go through the Ground
to the Copper, and always when you leave your work wrap your Plate up in
paper, lest your Plate get scratches, which it will be apt to do, and the
Ground will be apt to be corrupted lying open in the air, and the moisture
drawn out of the Ground, and the same inconveniency will accrue by letting your
Ground lie too long upon your Plate before you finish, three or four months
time will eat out the moisture of the Ground, and in Etching it will seem broad
and deep, and when you think it eaten enough, you will find it to be eaten
little or nothing: in Winter time wrap your Plate in a Blanket as well as Paper
when you leave your work; if the Copper get frost, it will cause the Ground to
rise up from the Copper in the eating with the Aqua fortis.

SECT. V. How to wall about your Plate about with Wax, to lay on your Aqua
fortis, and to finish your work.
YOur Plate being prepared, your Ground laid on, and your Design transferred
upon your Plate; when you are going to Etch, then take green Wax and melt it in
some little pipkin, and with a Pencil cover round about the edges of the
Copper; first, with the hot Wax stick it round about the Plate as a wall to
keep in the Aqua fortis, that it may stick fast, let the same be of Green wax
also, which draw out into long pieces of the thickness of strong paste-board,
and as broad as a knife, then fasten it about the edges with a little stick
being broad on the end, and sharp edged, and with it thrust down the Wax to
make it stick, then if your work be fine, take of Aqua fortis the third part of
an ounce, and break it with your other water that has been used before twice
or thrice, and take at least two parts of the old to one part of the new. In
case you have no Aqua fortis formerly used, take good Wine-vinegar to mix with
your Aqua fortis, but if your work be course, you may use your three pence the
ounce Water only; and for such things as you will have fine and sweet, you must
first pour out your Aqua fortis into some earthen dish, then wash off the Aqua
fortis with clean water, and let it be dry, then melt some Candle-grease with a
little Ground, and with a Pencil cover those things you will have to lie faint,
then pour on your Aqua fortis again as often as you see need; then melt your
Ground the same way you laid it on, and with a linen rag wipe clean your
Plate, and so is your work finished.

CHAP. II.
Of GRAVING.
SECT. I. Of necessary Instruments belonging to Graving.
HE that will undertake the Art of Graving, must know how to Draw, and hatch
with a Pen; which, I doubt not, but he that has observed the former Rules can
do.

1. Of your Oyl-stone.
The first thing you are to do, is to provide a good Oyl-stone, which you may
have of those that sell several Tools for the Goldsmiths; which, let be very
smooth, not too hard nor too soft, and be sure it be without pin-holes. Now to
fit your self aright, you are to resolve what kind of Graving you will follow;
if you follow Picture or Letter work, that is a work more curious than the
Goldsmiths: Arms and Letters are upon Silver or Pewter, and accordingly your
Gravers must be shaped.

2. Of Gravers.
Goldsmiths Gravers are crooked, that they may more readily come at hollow
work, but for Copper-pictures or Letters the best Gravers are the straight,
which choose thus; Take a File and touch the edge of the Graver therewith, if
the File cut it, it is too soft and will never do you good; but if the File
will not touch it by reason of the hardness, it will serve your occasion,
although such a Graver be apt at first to break short off, after a little use
by whetting it will come to a good temper and condition, as by experience I
have found; though some ignorant of what they have writ, would puzzle you about
altering the temper.

SECT. II. The several ways of holding the Graver.
LEt the end of the haft of the Graver rest against the ball of the thumb, and
let the forefinger guide the Graver, which is done by resting steadily upon
the point of your Graver.

You must also provide a Bag of Sand to lay your Plate upon, on which you may
turn your Plate at ease every way: And note, that with your left hand you must
turn your Plate as the strokes you grave do turn, which is not easily attained
without diligent care.

You Copper plates ready polished do often come from Holland, or else you may
have them prepared by several in England; you may be directed how to have these
Plates by most Printers of Plates in London, and therefore I forbear to trouble
you or my self about directing you how to prepare Plates for your use.


SECT. III. The forms of Graving-tools, as also the manner of whetting your
Graver.
THe upper part of this figure will show two sorts of Graving-tools, the one
formed square, the other lozeng: the square Graver makes a broad and shallow
stroke, or hatch; and the lozeng makes a deep and narrower stroke. The use of
the square Graver is to make the largest strokes, and the use of the other is
to make the strokes more delicate and lively. But I prefer a Graver made of
an indifferent size betwixt both these two, which will make your strokes, or
hatches, show with more life and vigor, and yet with sufficient force,
according as you shall manage it in your working: The forms of which will
appear in the 1. and 2. figures.

The 3. figure shows you how to whet the two sides of your Graver, which is to
be done in this manner following; you must have a very good Oylstone smooth and
flat, and having powered a little Sallad-oyl thereupon, take the Graver, and
laying one side of it (that which you intend shall cut the Copper) flat upon
the stone, whet that side very flat and even; and to that purpose have an
especial care to carry your hand steadfast, and with an equal strength, placing
your forefinger very firm upon the opposite side of your Graver, to the end
that you may guide it with the more exactness: then turn the very next side of
your Graver, and whet that in the like manner, as you did the other; so that
there may be a very sharp edge for the space of an inch or better; then turning
uppermost that edge which you have so whetted, and setting the end of your
Graver obliquely upon the stone, carry your hand exactly even, to the end that
it may be whetted very flat and sloping, in the form of a lozeng, making to the
edge a sharp point, as the figure 4. shows you.

It is very necessary that you take great care in the exact whetting of your
Graver; for it is impossible that you should ever work with that neatness and
curiosity as you desire, if your Graver be not very good, and rightly whetted.

I cannot demonstrate it so plain and fully by figures, and discourse, as I
would: if you have acquaintance with an Artist in this way, you may easily
understand in a short time.

SECT. IV. The manner how to hold and handle your Graver.
THe uppermost part of this figure describes to you the form of two Gravers,
with their handles, fitted for the whetting. They that use this Art, do before
they make use of them, commonly cut away that part of the knob or bowl that is
at the end of their handles, which is upon the same line with the edge of their
Graver, to the end it may not hinder them in their graving, as the figure 2.
shows you.

For if you work upon a large\late you will find that part of your handle (if
it be not cut away) will so rest upon the copper, that it will hinder the
smooth and even carriage of your hand in making your strokes or hatches; also
it will cause your Graver to run into the copper in such sort, that you shall
not be able to manage it at your pleasure.

The 5. figure describes to you the way of holding your Graver; which is thus,
place the knob or ball of the handle of your Graver in the hollow of your hand,
and having extended your forefinger toward the point of your Graver, laying
it opposite to the edge that should cut the copper, place your other fingers on
the side of your handle, and your thumb on the other side of the Graver, in
such sort that you may guide your Graver flat and parallel with the plate; as
you may see in the figure.

And be very careful that your fingers do not interpose between the plate and
the Graver, for that will hinder you in carrying your Graver level with the
plate, so that you cannot make your strokes with that freedom and neatness,
which otherwise you may. This I think fit to give you notice of, because the
skill of holding your Graver is that which you must first perfectly learn.

SECT. V. The manner of holding your hand in Graving.
HAving described the way of holding your Graver, the next thing is to show you
how to guide your Graver upon the plate in making of your strokes, which are
straight or crooked; that you may work with the more ease and convenience, you
must have a strong round leather Cushion filled with sand or fine dust; let it
be made about half a foot broad in the diameter, and three or four inches deep;
lay this upon a table which stands fast and firm: then lay your plate upon
the cushion, as is described in the 6. figure.

When you are to make any straight strokes, hold your Graver as is directed in
the former Section; and if you will have your strokes deeper or broader in one
place than in another, in that place where you would have them deepest you must
press your hand hardest; but especially in making of a straight stroke, be
careful to hold your plate firm and steadfast upon the cushion.

And if you make any crooked or winding strokes, then hold your hand and Graver
steadfast; and as you work turn your plate against your Graver; for otherwise it
is impossible for you to make any crooked or winding stroke with that neatness
and command, which by this means you may, if you do not move your plate, and
keep your arm and elbow fixed or rested upon the table.

If as you are working your Graver happen to break often on the point, it is a
sign it is tempered too hard; to help this take a red hot charcoal, and lay the
end of your Graver upon it, and when you perceive your Graver to wax yellowish,
dip it in the water: If your Graver become blunt without breaking, it is a sign
it is nothing worth.

After you have graved part of your work, it will be necessary to scrape it
with the sharp edge of a Burnisher, carrying it along even with the plate, to
take off the roughness of the strokes; but in so doing take heed of making any
scratches in your work.

To the end you may better see that which is graven, they commonly roll up
close a piece of a black Felt or Castor, liquored over with a little Oil, and
therewith rub the places graven: And if you perceive any scratches in your
plate, rub them out with your Burnisher: and if you have graved any of your
strokes too deep, you make them appear fainter with rubbing them with your
Burnisher.

SECT. VI. How to take off any Picture, or Map-letters, etc. upon your Copper.
TAke your Plate and heat it over the fire, and having a piece of yellow Bees
wax, put into, and tied up in a fine Holland rag, try if your Plate be hot
enough to melt your Wax, if it be, lightly wipe over your plate with that wax,
until you see it be covered over with wax, but let it be but thin; if it be not
even, after it is cold you may heat it again, and with a feather lay it even,
which at first you will find a little difficult.

Now if wh^t you are to imitate be an exact copy, you must note it must stand
the contrary way in the plate, and therefore your best way will be to track it
over in every limb with a good Black-lead Pencil, especially if it be an old
picture, which having done, take an old Ivory haft of a knife, and placing your
picture exactly on your copper, the face downward, take your haft and lightly
rub over your print, and you shall perceive the perfect proportion remain upon
the wax that is upon the plate; then take a long Graver, or another piece of
steel grownd sharp, and with the point thereof go over every particular limb in
the out-stroke, and there will be no difficulty to mark out all the shadows as
you go to engrave your work, having the proportion before you.

And it will be more ready, if also you note your shadows how far they be dark,
and how far light with your black-lead, before you rub it off; but a learner
may be puzzeled at first with too many observations.

At first you will find some difficulty for carrying your hand, and for the
depth of your stroke you are to engrave; but take this experiment in your first
beginning; learn to carry your hand with such a slight, that you may end your
stroke with as light a stroke as you began it, and though you may have occasion
to have one part deeper or blacker than another, do that by degrees; and that
you may the more distinctly do it, observe your strokes that they be not too
close nor too wide: and for your more exact observation, practice by those
prints that are more loosly shadowed at first, left by imitating those dark and
more shadowed, you be at a loss where to begin or where to end; which to know,
is only got by practice: Thus for Pictures.

Now for Letters, if copies, every word and letter must be either writ with
ungumm'd Ink, or else gone over with Black-lead, and rubbed on the plate when
it is waxed, as before; but if a Map or other Mathematical Instrument, every
circle, square, or perpendicular must be drawn over as before, or else you
cannot exactly imitate the same; but if you be to cut any Face, Arms,
Instruments, or Map not to be printed, then if you black over the backside, as
you are directed for your design in Etching, that will serve your turn; only
for Etching you use a mixed ground, and for to Engrave you only use wax.

And thus, in a plain style, I have given you an account of the whole mystery
of Engraving.

OF LIMNING IN WATERCOLORS. The Third Book.
THE pr^ctice of Limning is a quality commendable in any person, and a p^actice
meet for the Noblest personage of what quality soever; I shall say no more in
the praise of it, it may speak for it self, but come immediately to show you
the manner how to perform it; therein fol^owing the Rules now practiced by the
most eminent Masters in that faculty: and first, I shall begin in this as in
the other parts of this Book, what things are to be in a readiness prepared for
the practice of it.

CHAP. I.
Of necessaries belonging to Limning.
TO the Limning in Watercolors th^re belongs sever^l thing, as Gumms of
several sorts, and Waters made of them, a Grinding-stone and Muller, several
Colors, Liquid Gold and Silver, several Sizes to lay Gold, Parchment of the
finest, as of Abortive Skins, Pencils of diverse sorts; of the making and
preparing all these in their order, and then to their use.

SECT. I. Of Gumms and Gum-waters used in Limning.
THe principal Gum is Gum-Arabick, get the best that may be, which you shall
know by the whiteness and clearness; if it be yellowish, of an Amber color, it
is naught.

To make Gum-water hereof, do thus, take a cle^n earthen Vessel, Pan, Dish, or
the like, put therein the fairest Spring Water you can procu^e, then take a
quantity of Gum- Arabic, and tie it in a fine clean Linen cloth, as in a bag,
and hang this in the middle of the water, and there let it rest till the Gum be
dissolved; if you find your water be not stiff enough of the Gum, put more Gum
into your cloth, and let that dissolve as the other did; if it be too stiff,
add more Water: of this Gum-water it is absolutely necessary you have always
by you tow sorts, one strong, the other weak; and of these two, you may make a
third at pleasure; preserve these in clean Glasses for your use.

Of GVM-LAKE.
Gum-Lake is a compounded Gum made of many ingredients, as of whites of Eggs
beaten and strained, of Honey, Gum of Ivy, strong Wort, these ingredients
mingled together will at last run like an Oil, which at last will congeal and
be hard. Trouble not your self to make it, but buy it ready made; choose it as
you do the Gum- Arabic, by the clearness, and then you need not fear it.

To make Water thereof, use it in all respects as you did your Gum- Arabic, by
tying it in a cloth and dissolving it in fair water: of this water also have of
two sorts, a weaker and a stronger.

Of GVM-ARMONIACK.
Of this Gum you may make a Water, that whatsoever you write therewith you may
lay in Gold.

The manner of making the Water is thus; take your Gum and grind it with the
juice of Garlic as fine as may be, thereunto add a few drops of weak water of
Gum- Arabic, making it of such a thickness as you may conveniently write with
it with a pen.

With this liquor write what you will, and let it dry, but not too long, for
if you do, the Gold will not stick, and if you lay on your Gold too soon, it
will drown it. When you would lay your Gold upon it being dry, do thus, get a
Gold-cushion, which you may thus make; take a piece of Calves-leather rough,
and get a board about sixinches long, and five inches broad, upon this board
lay some woollen cloth four or five times double, and over all your Leather
with the rough side outward, nailing the edges of the leather to the sides of
the board; so is your Cushion made.

Upon this Cushion lay your Gold-leaf, and with a knife that has a very sharp
edge, cut your Gold upon your Cushion into pieces, so that it may quite cover
what you have written, then breathe upon your writing, and with a piece of
white Cotton-wool (breathing upon that also) lay it upon your Gold and it will
take it off from your Cushion, which press down hard upon your Writing, and it
will there stick; then with other Cotton-wool dry, wipe away the loose Gold,
and your Writing only will remain, which when it is through dry you may
burnish with a Tooth, and it will show fair.

Of LIQVID GOLD or SILVER.
You may with Liquid Gold or Silver Draw or Write any thing with the Pen or
Pencil, as with any other liquid color; I could show you how to make it, but
to make a small quantity it is not worth the while, neither will it quit the
cost; therefore I would advise you to buy it ready prepared, which you may do
where you buy your Colors, or of some Gold-beaters, who make it of their
cuttings of the ragged edges of their Gold.

When you use it do only thus, put into your Shell a drop or two of fair water,
and with a clean Pencil tamper up so much Gold as will serve your occasion at
that time, with which Write or Draw what you will; then about two or three
hours after, the longer the better, burnish it by rubbing hard upon it with a
Dogs-tooth, and it will be pure Gold; this is the best and easiest way of
laying Gold that I know of.

SECT. II. Of your Grinding-stone and Muller.
GEt a Stone of Porphery or Serpentine, or rather a Pebble, (if you light of
one large enough) is best of any other. But in short, get as good an one as you
can, which your Marblers in London may help you to; keep this and your Muller
always very clean and free from dust.

SECT. III. Of Colors.
THere are simply six, viz. White, Black, Red, Green, Yellow, and Blew; to
which we may add browns, but they are compounded.

Of either of these there are several sorts, the names whereof, and the manner
of ordering of them shall be showed in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Of Colors used in Limning: their names, and how to order them.
SECT. I. Of the Names of Colors, and how every Color is to be prepared;
whether Grownd, Washed, or Steeped.
BLACKS. Cherry-stones burnt. Ivory burnt. Lamp-black.
WHITES. Ceruse. White-Lead.
REDS. Red-Lead. Lake.
GREENS. Bise. Pink. Sap-green. Cedar-green.
BLEWS. Indico. Vltramarine. Bise. Smalt.
YELLOWS. English Oker. Masticote.
BROWNS. Vmber. Spanish Brown. Colen's Earth.



These are the principal Colors used in Limning, I have omitted many others,
but they are such that are not fitting for this Work, which I shall speak of
when I come to teach how to Wash Maps and printed Pictures, for which use those
Colors I have omitted are only useful.

Of the Colors here mentioned, useful in Limning, they are to be used three
several ways, viz. either Washed, Grownd, or Steeped.

The Colors to be only Washed are these: Bise. Cedar. Red-Lead. Smalt.
Vltramarine. Masticote.


To be Steeped, only Sap-green.

The Colors to be Washed and Grownd, are these: Ceruse. White-Lead. Lake.
English Oker. Pink. Indico. Vmber. Colens Earth. Spanish Brown. black Ivory,
and Cherry-stone



SECT. II. Of those Colors that are to be Grownd, and how to Grind them.
I Have in the last Section told you what Colors are to be Grownd, which
Washed, and which to be Steeped; it rests now, to show you how to Grind those
Colors that are to be grownd; I shall not run over every Color particularly,
but show you how to grind one Color, which take as an example for all the rest.

For our example in grinding of Colors, let us take the original of Colors,
viz. Ceruse, or White-lead, there is little difference between them, only one
is refined, the other not.

To grind it do thus; Take a quantity thereof, or of any other Color to be
grownd, being cleansed from all manner of dirt or filth, which you must first
scrape off; then lay the Color upon your Stone, and with your Muller bruise it
a little, then put thereto fair spring water, and between your Muller and Stone
grind the Color well together with the water till the Color be very fine,
which when you find to be enough, have in a readiness a great Chalk-stone, in
which make certain troughs or surrows, into which pour your Color thus grownd,
and there let it rest till it be thorough dry, then take it out and reserve it
in papers, and those papers in boxes, for your use. This order you are to
observe in all Colors that are to be Grownd.

SECT. III. Of those Colors that are to be Washed, and how to Wash them.
AS in the Grinding of Colors I gave you an instance but in one for all the
rest, the like I shall do for those Colors which are to be Washed; I will make
my instance in Red-lead, which you are to Wash in this manner.

Put a quantity thereof into a clean earthen dish, and pour thereto fair water,
stirring the color and water together with your hand or otherwise, then let it
stand a while, and you shall see a filthy greasy scum arise and lie above the
water, with other filth; pour this water quite away, and put other clean water
to the Color, and stir it about again, pouring away the water (if foul) the
second or third time; then add more water, and stir the Color about again till
the water be thick and troubled; but yet free from filth, then gently pour this
troubled water into a second earthen dish, leaving in the first dish all the
dregs.

Into the second basin put more fair water, and with your hand stir about the
Color as before; do thus two or three times, and take (if your Color be very
foul) a third earthen dish, and add more water, and keep stirring, till at last
the water become clear, and the Color remain fine at the bottom of the dish;
pour away your water gently, and you will find some Color remaining and
sticking to the edges of the dish, which when it is dry, you may (with a
feather) strike away like flower, which reserve as the choicest and purest of
all; if in a pound of this Red-lead you have an ounce of good indeed, Prize it,
for it is troublesome to procure. The other, which is not altogether so pure,
may be serviceable for some uses, though not for all. What has been said of
this Color is to be understood of all other that are to be washed; therefor
for Washing of Colors let this suffice.

SECT. IV. Of Colors to be Steeped.
I Said (among the Colors before mentioned) there was only Sap green to be
Steeped, though in Colors to wash Maps and Prints there are many, but of
these, when we come to show how to Wash Maps, etc. To Steep your Sap green do
thus, take a quantity thereof and put it into a Shell, and fill the shell with
fair water, to which add some fine powder of Alum to raise the color; let it
thus steep twenty four hours, and you will have a very good Green.

SECT. V. Of those Colors that are Washed and Grownd, how to temper them in
your shells when you are to use them.
YOu having all Colors both Grownd and Washed by you in a readiness, when you
begin any piece you must temper them as follows, for which take one example
^or all.

Take any Color, a small quantity thereof, and put it into a clean shell,
then add thereunto a drop or two of Gum-water, and with your finger (being
clean) work it about the sides of the shell, and there let it stick till it be
dry; when the color is dry in the shell, draw your finger over it; if any
Color come off, you must add stronger Gum water to it. But, if when your
Color is dry in the shell, it glitter or shine, it is a sign there is too much
Gum in it; therefore remedy that by tempering your Color up again with fair
water only, without any Gum.

There are some Colors, as Lake, Vmber, and other hard Colors, which when
they are dry in the shell will crack, and look like parched ground in a dry
Summer; to such colors as these, when you temper them for use, add to them a
small quantity of white Sugar Candy in fine powder, which temper with your
Color and fair water with your finger in the shell till the Candy be
dissolved; and this will keep them from peeling when you have laid them on your
Work.

Note here, that these Colors following, viz. Vmber, panish- Brown, Colen-
Earth, Cherry-stone and Ivory-black are to be burnt before they be Washed or
Grownd.

To burn any of them do thus, put the Color into a Crucible, such as
Goldsmiths melt their silver in; if you will, cover the mouth thereof with
clay, and set it in a hot fire, there let it rest till it be red hot when the
Color is cold you may Grind or Wash it according to former Directions.

SECT. VI. Of Pencils, and how to choose them.
YOu are in the next place to furnish your self with Pencils of all sorts;
which how to choose do thus, take a Pencil and put the hairy end between your
lips, wetting it a little by drawing it through your lips, being moist, two or
three times; so that the Pencil being large will come to a point as small as a
hair, which if it do, it is good; but if it spread, or any extravagant hairs
stick out of the sides, they are naught; you may try them by wetting in your
mouth, and attempt to draw a line on the back of your hand.

SECT. VII. Of Compounded Colors.
OF the the six simple Colors before named, together with the Browns, many
others may be compounded for Faces of all Complexions, Garments, Landskips,
Building; for Birds, Fishes, Beasts, and what not? I will show how to compound
some, and by those you may by practice find out and invent infinite more, I
shall instance in these following. As, A Violet. A Lead-colour. Flame-colour.
Scarlet. Light-green Purple. A Bay-colour. A Murrey.


To make a Violet-colour. Indico, White, and Lake make a good Violet-colour;
you may make it lighter or darker at pleasure, as you may all other compounded
Colors.

Lead-colour. Indico and White make a Lead-colour.

Color for Flaming fire. Red-lead and Masticote, heightened with White.

Scarlet-colour. Red-lead, Lake and Vermilion, very little or no Vermilion, for
it is not good in Limning.

Light-green. Pink and Smalt, with White to make it lighter, if you require it.

A Purple-colour. Indico, Spanish- brown, and White.

A Bay-colour. Spanish- brown and White.

A Murrey-colour. Lake and White make a Murrey-colour.

Of these infinite others may be made, but I leave them to your own ingenuity
to find out, which with little practice you will soon do. The next thing you
shall be informed in, is how to prepare your Table for Limning, and fit all
things for your work, which shall be declared in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
How to prepare a Table for a Picture in small for Limning, to make choice of
your Light, the manner of Sitting in respect o^ Position and Distance, and what
necessary Instruments are to lie by you when you are at work.
WE now draw pretty near to our intended purpose, viz. Miniture or Limning to
the life in Watercolors: but

SECT. I. How to prepare a Table for a Picture in small.
GET pure fine Paste-board, such as the ordinary playing Cards are made of, you
may have of what size and thickness you please, and very finely slick'd and
glazed, at the Cardmakers: Take a piece of this Paste-board of the size you
intend your Picture, then take a piece of Parchment of the finest and whitest
you can get, which are the skins of abortives or costlings, cut a piece of this
skin of equal bigness with your Paste-board, and with thin white Starch new
made paste the Parchment to the Paste-board, with the outside of the skin
outermost; lay on your Starch very thin and even; then your Grinding-stone
being made very clean, lay the Card thereupon with the Parchment-side
downwards, and as hard as you can, rub the other side of the Paste-board with a
Boars tooth set in a stick for that purpose, when it is through dry it is fit
to work upon.

SECT. II. Of your Light.
COncerning your Light, let it be fair and large, free from being shadowed with
trees or houses, but a clear sky-light, let it be a direct light from above,
and not a traverse-light; let it be a Northerly and not a Southerly light, for
the Sun shining either upon you, your work, or the party sitting, will be very
prejudici^l; as your room must be light, so let it be also close and clean. And
observe, that you begin and end your work by the same light.

SECT. III. Of the manner of Sitting.
LEt your Desk on which you work be so situate, that when you sit before it
your left arm may be toward your light, and your right arm from it, that the
light may strike in sideling upon your Work. Thus for your own sitting.

Now for the manner of the parties sitting that is to be Drawn, it may be in
what posture he or she shall design; but let the posture be what it will, let
it not be above two yards off you at the most, and level with you; but if the
party be tall, then above.

Mark well when the party that sits moves, though never so little, for the
least motion of the body of face, if not recalled, may in short time cause you
to run into many errors.

The Face of a party being finished, let him stand and not sit to have his
posture drawn, and that at a farther distance than two yards, viz. four or five
yards.

SECT. IV. Of such necessaries as are to lie by you while you are at work.
1. YOu must have two small Sawcers or other China-dishes, in either of which
there must be pure clean Water; the one of them is to wash your Pencils in
being foul, the other to temper your Colors with when there is occasion.

2. A large, but clean, fine and dry Pencil, to cleanse your work from any kind
of dust that may by accident fall upon it: such Pencils they call Fitch-Pencils.

3. A sharp Penknife to take off hairs that may come from your Pencil, either
among your Colors or upon your Work, or to take out spots that may come to
fall upon your Card.

4. A Paper, having a hole cut therein, to lay upon your Card to cover it from
dust, and to rest your hand upon, to keep the soil and sweat of your hand from
fullying your Parchment, and also to try your Pencils on before you apply them
to your Work. Let your Sawcers of Water, your Penknife and Pencils lie all on
your right hand.

5. Have a pretty quantity of Carnation (as some call it,) or Flesh-colors,
somewhat lighter than the Complexion of the party you are to draw, tempered up
in a shell by it self with a weak Gum-water. If it be a Fair complexion,
White-lead and Red-lead mixed. If a Swarthie or Brown complexion, to your White
and Red-lead add a quantity of Masticote, or English-Oker, or both if occasion
be. But whatever the Complexion be, be sure you temper your Flesh-colors
lighter than the party; for by often working upon it you may bring it to its
true color, it being first too light; but if it be first too sad, there then
is no remedy.

6. Having prepared your Flesh-colors, take a large Shell of Mother of Pearl,
or a Horse-Mussel-Shell, which any Fisherman will help you to, and therein (as
Painters in Oil dispose their Colors upon their Pallat for their working of a
Face, so must you) place your several Shadows in this Shell in little places
one distinct from another.

Note, that in all your Shadows you must use some White, wherefore 1. lay a
good quantity of White by it self, besides what the Shadows are first tempered
with. 2. For Red for the Cheeks and Lips, temper Lake and Red-lead together,
some use Vermilion, but I like it not. 3. For your Blew Shadows, as under the
Eyes, and in Veins, etc. Indico and White, or Ultamarine and White. 4. For your
Gray, faintish Shadows, take White English-Oker and Indico, or sometimes
Masticote. 5. or Deep shadows, White, English-Oker, and Umber. 6. For
Dark-shadows in men's Faces, Lake and Pink, which make an excellent fleshy
shadow. Many other Shadows you may temper up, but these are the chief; your own
judgment, when you look upon the party to be Drawn, will best direct you, and
inform your fancy better than a thousand Words.

Thus are you absolutely prepared of all necessaries, it is now fit time to go
to work; and first we will begin with a Face.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Miniture or Limning of a Face in Watercolors.
HAving all things in a readiness, according to the directions before
delivered, upon that part of your Card where you intend the Face of your
picture to be, lay that part of the Card over with your Color that you have
before prepared, answerable to the Complexion of the party; it being well
tempered, pretty thin, with a ^encil bigger than ordinary, spread your Color
very even and thin, free from hairs or other spots, in your Pencil, over the
place where you are to make the Face of your Picture. The Ground being laid,
you may begin the Draught, the party being ready to sit. Now to the finishing
of a Face there will require three Operations or Sittings at the least. At the
first sitting you do only dead Color the Face, and this takes about two hours
time. At the second sitting you are to go over the Face more curiously,
observing whatsoever may conduce to the graces or deformities of the party to
to be Drawn, together with a sweet dispose and couching of the Colors one
within another, and this sitting will take up some four or five hours. At the
third sitting you may finish the Face, this takes up some three hours time; in
which you perfect what was before imperfect and rough, in putting the deep and
dark shadows in the Face; as in the Eyes, Eye brows hair, and Ears, which
things are the last of the Work, and not to be done till the Hair-curtain or
the backside of the Picture, as also the Drapery be wholly finished. Of these
three sittings or operations we shall make three Sections, as follows: Then
in the next Chapter show how the Drapery and other ornaments are to be
performed: then in the next Chapter something of Landscape in Miniture, or
Limning, and so conclude.

SECT. I. At the first Operation or Sitting.
YOur Ground for the general Complexion being laid, the first work at your
first sitting must be to draw the Porphile or out-lines of the Face, which you
must do with Lake and White mingled; draw it very faintly, so that if you miss
of your Proportion you may alter it with a deeper mixture of the same Color.

The proportion of the Face being drawn, add to the former color some
Red-lead, temper it to the color of the Cheeks, Lips, etc. but faintly, for
(as I said before) you cannot lighten a deep Color when you would. You must
now put in the Red shadows in their due places, as in the Cheeks, Lips, tip of
the Chin, about the Eyes, the tip of the Ears, and about the roots of the Hair.
All these Shadows must be put in, not with the flat of the Pencil, but by small
touches, after the manner of Hatching; in this manner going over the Face, you
will cover your ground with these and the following shadows. In this
Dead-colouring you need not be overcurious, but strive to imitate Nature as
near as may be, the roughness of the Colors may be mended at the second
Operation.

Having put in your Red shadows in their due places, put in next your faint
Blew shadows about the corners and balls of the Eyes, and your Grayish blew
shadows under the Eyes and about the Temples; work these sweetly and faintly
all over by degrees, heightning your shadows as the light falls; as also those
harder shadows in the dark side of the Face, under the Eyebrows, Nose, Chin,
and Neck, with some stronger touches in those places than on the light side of
the Face. Bring all your Work together to an equal roundness, and give
perfection to no particular part at this time, but view your object well, and
see how near you hit the Life, not only in seeming likeness, but in roundness
boldness of posture, coloring, and such like.

Having wrought your fainter shadows into the Red ones before laid, you may now
have a touch at the Hair, disposing of it into such curls, folds, or form as
shall best grace the picture, or please the party. You must only draw the Hair
with some color suitable to the life, fill up the empty and void places with
color, and deepen it somewhat more strongly than before in the deepest
shadowed places. And let this be your first operation.

SECT. II. At the second Operation or Sitting.
AT the second sitting let the party sit in the same place and posture as he
did at the first sitting, then observe and delineate with your Pencil those
varieties which Nature affords you; and as you did them but rudely before, you
must now with the same Colors, in the same places, by working drive and
sweeten the same Colors one into another, so that no lump of Color, or any
rough edge may appear in your whole work, and this work must be performed with
a Pencil somewhat sharper then that which you used before, so as your Shadows
may be soft and smooth.

Having made this progress in the Face, leave it for this time, and go to the
backside of your Picture; which is sometimes a piece of Landscape, but most
commonly a Curtain of blew of red Satin. If it be of blew Satin, temper as
much Bise in a shell as will cover a Card, let it be moist, but well bound with
Gum; then with a Pencil draw the Porphile or out-line of your Curtain, as also
of your Picture, then with a large Pencil lay over carefully, but thin and
aerie, the whole ground you mean to lay with Blew; then afterward again with a
large Pencil, as before, lay over the same again with a substantial body of
color; in doing of which you must be expeditious, keeping your Color always
moist, letting no one part thereof be dry till you have covered the whole.

If your Curtain be Crimson, then trace it out with Lake, and lay the ground
with a thin color, then where your strong lights and reflections fall, there
lay your lights with a thin and Waterish color, and while the ground is yet
wet, with a strong and dark color tempered reasonable thick, lay the hard and
strong shadows close by the other lights.

After you have thus laid the backside of your Picture with Blew, or Red, or
any other Color, lay your Linen with a fair White, and the Drapery likewise
flat of the color you intend it.

Then repair to the Face again, and view your object well, and see what shadows
are too light or too deep for the Curtain behind, and the Linen and Drapery
may somewhat alter the property to the eye, and make the Picture appear
otherwise than it did when there was only the color of the Parchment about it;
I say, view your object well, and endeavor to reduce each Shadow to its due
perfection: then draw the lines of the Eyelids, and shadow the entrance into
the Ear, the deepness of the Eyebrows, and those more eminent notes and marks
in the Face, and these must be done with a very curious and sharp Pencil.

The Face done thus far, go over the Hair, heightning or deepning it as it
appears in the life, casting over the ground some loose hairs, which will be
pleasing, and make the Picture stand as it were at a distance from the Curtain.

To shadow your Linen, use Black, White, a little Yellow, and less Blew; the
Black must be deepned with lvory-black, with which mix a little Lake and
Indico. And thus far have we proceeded at the second operation.

SECT. III. At the third Operation, or Sitting.
THe third and last operation of the Face will be wholly spent in giving of
strong touches where you see cause; and in observations necessary for the
rounding of the Face, which will better be seen how to perform now, than before
the Curtain, Drapery, and Linen were laid. In this last sitting observe very
diligently and exactly whatever may conduce to similitude, which is a main
thing, as Scars or Moles in the Face, etc. casts of the Eye, circumflexions or
windings of the mouth. Thus much for the third operation and finishing of the
Face.

CHAP. V.
Of Drapery, and other ornaments belonging to a Picture in Miniture.
THE Face being completely finished, and the Apparel rudely put on, let us now
come to show how to settle them in their right geers, (as the saying is,) as
also to put on such Ornaments as are usual in Pictures of this nature. And
these shall be expressed in the Sections following.

SECT. I. Of Drapery in Limning.
HAving laid a good, fat, and full Ground all over the Drapery you intend to
make; if Blew, then all over with Bise smoothly laid: the deepning must be Lake
and Indico, the lightning White, very fine, faint, and fair, and in the extreme
light places. What has been said of this Blew Drapery, the like is to be
understood of all other Colors.

It is rare to see Drapery expressed by lightning of of it with fine
shell-Gold, with which it must be hatched and washed, what a luster it gives to
well-colored Drapery, either Crimson, Green, or Blew, but much more if with
the Ground it self you mix Gold when you lay it on.

SECT. II. Of other Ornaments in Picture.
1. IF the Body you are to draw be in Armor, lay liquid Silver all over for
your ground, well dried and burnished, shadow it with Silver, Indico, and
Umber; work these shadows upon the Silver as the life directs you.

2. For Gold Armor, lay liquid Gold as you did the Silver, and shadow upon it
with Lake, English-Oker, and a little Gold.

3. For Pearls, your ground must be Indico and White; your shadows Black and
Pink.

4. For Diamonds, lay a ground of liquid Silver, deepen it with Cherrystone and
Ivory-black.

CHAP. VI.
Of LANDSCAPE.
THE bounds and limits of Landscape are inexpressible, they being as various as
fancy is copious; I will give you only some general Rules for painting of
Landscape, and so conclude this third Book.

In painting of any Landscape always begin with the Sky, the Sunbeams, or
lightest parts first; next the Yellow beams, which compose of Masticote and
White; next your Blew skies, with Smalt only. At your first coloring leave no
part of your ground uncovered, but lay your Colors smooth and even all over.
Work your Sky downwards toward your Horizon fainter and fainter, as it draws
nearer and nearer to the earth, you must work your tops of Mountains and
objects far remote, so faint that they may appear as lost in the Air: Your
lowest and nearest Ground must be of the color of the earth, of a dark
yellowish brown Green, the next lighter Green, and so successively as they lose
in their distance they must abate in their color. Make nothing that you see at
a distance perfect; as if discerning a Building to be fourteen or fifteen miles
off, I know not Church, Castle, House, or the like; so that in drawing of it
you must express no particular sign, as Bell, Portcullis, or the like; but
express it in colors as weakly and faintly as your eye judges of it. Ever in
your Landscape place light against dark, and dark against light, which is the
only way to extend the prospect far off, occasioned by opposing light to
shadow; yet so as the shadows must lose their force in proportion as they
remove from the eye, and the strongest shadow must always be nearest hand.

OF PAINTING in OIL. The Fourth Book.
PAinting in Oil is of most esteem of any other Painting, and indeed it
requires the greatest judgment in the performance, of any other kind of
Painting. I shall (according to the weakness of my ability) deliver unto you
such Rules and directions, as being well minded and practiced, may in a short
time make you a good proficient therein: Presupposing you have read the three
foregoing Books, especially the First and Third, and that you understand
Draught of any kind, and also the nature (if not the manner of working with)
Watercolors, yet at least have read the Rules there delivered concerning the
use of them, you may fall to practice the Painting in Oil; in which observe the
directions following.

CHAP. I.
Of the Names of your Colors, and how to Grind and order them.
Names of the Colors in Oil.
BLACKS. Lamp-black. Seacoal-black. Ivory-black. Charcoal-black. Earth of Colen.
WHITES. White-Lead.
GREENS. Verdigrease. Terra vert. Verditer.
BLEWS. Rise Indico. Smalt. Vltamarine.
REDS. Vermilion. Red-Lead. Lake. India Red. Ornotto.
YELLOWS. Pink. Masticote. English Oker. Orpiment. Spruse Oker.
Spanish Brown, Burnt Spruse, Vmber.


These are the chief Colors that are used in Painting in Oil, the most part of
which are to be grownd very fine upon your Stone with a Muller, with
Linseed-Oyl: some must be Burnt before they be Grownd; others must be only
tempered upon the Pallat, and not grownd at all.

The Colors to be burnt are these: Ivory, Spruse, Oker, and Vmber.

The Colors that are not to be Grownd at all, but only tempered with Oil upon
your Pallat, are these:

Lamp-black, Verditer, Vermilion, Bise, Smalt, Masticote, Orpiment, Vltamarine.

All the rest are to be Grownd upon your Stone with Linseed-Oyl; only
White-Lead, when you are to use that for Linen, you must grind it with Oil of
Walnuts, for Linseed-Oyl will make it turn yellow.

Those Colors that are to be Burnt, you must put them into a Crucible, such as
Goldsmiths melt their Silver in, cover the mouth thereof with clay, and there
let it burn red hot, when it is cold you must grind it upon your Stone with Oil.

CHAP. II.
Of your Easell, Straining-frame, Cloth, Pallat, Pencils, and Stay.
I Might here describe the form and fashion of your Easell and Pallat, but I
think I need not; for he that ever saw a Painter at work, must needs see these
two Instruments, but what they are I shall here describe.

An Easell is a frame made of wood, not much unlike a Ladder, only the sides
are flat, and full of holes on either side, to put in two pinns to set your
Work upon higher or lower at pleasure; it is broader at the bottom than at the
top, and on the backside there is a Stay, by the help of which you may set in
the middle of any room, more upright or sloping at pleasure; when you do not
use it, you may clap it together and set it behind any door, or hang it against
any wall out of the way.

A Pallat is a thin piece of wood, and is necessary to be about twelve or
fourteen inches long, and nine or ten inches broad, in form of an egg, at the
narrower end whereof is a hole made also of an oval form, about an inch and a
half in length, and an inch broad; this hole is to put in your thumb of your
left hand, upon which you must always hold it when you are at work; out of the
side of your Pallat near unto the thumb-hole is cut a notch, by the side of
which the Pencils which you hold in your left hand also may come through, by
which means you may take any of them out, or put another in at pleasure. These
Pallats ought to be very thin and light, especially at the broad end, but
toward the thumb-hole somewhat thick, yet not above half a quarter of an inch;
the best wood to make them of is Pear Tree of Walnut-tree.

A Straining-frame is nothing else but a frame made of wood; to which with
nails you must fasten your Cloth that you are to paint upon; of these Frames
you should have of several sizes, according to the bigness of your Cloths.

By your Cloth I mean Cloth primed, I could teach you how to prime it, but it
is a moiling work, and besides, it may be bought ready primed cheaper and
better than you can do it your self. Few Painters (though all can do it) prime
it themselves, but buy it ready done.

Pencils, what they are I need not tell you, but what sorts there are I will,
because I shall have occasion to call them sometimes by their names in the
Discourse following. There are of all bignesses, from a pin to the beginess of
your finger.

There are several sorts, thus called: Ducks Quill fitched. Ducks Quill
pointed. -- Bristle. Swans Quill fitched. Swans Quill pointed. -- Bristle.
Hairing, or Jewelling-Pencils. Goose Quill fitched. Goose Quill pointed. --
Bristle. Bristle Pencils; some in Quills, others in Tinn-cases* bigger than
Quills, and others in Sticks.


Your Stay or Mol-stick is nothing else but a stick of Brazeel or such like
wood that will not easily bend, about a yard in length, at one end whereof tie
a little ball of Cotton hard in a piece of Leather about the bigness of a
Chestnut; this stick when you are at work you must hold also in your left hand,
and laying the end which has the leather ball upon your cloth or frame, you
may rest your right arm upon it all the while you are at work. Thus being
furnished with all manner of Colors, and other necessaries here described, you
may begin to practice when you please; we will begin with a Face, in which
observe the directions in the following Chapters.

CHAP. III.
How to order your Colors upon your Pallat, and how to temper Shadows for all
Complexions.
DIspose your single Colors upon your Pallat in this order, laying them at a
convenient distance one from another, so that they be not apt to intermix.
First lay on your Vermilion, then Lake, then burnt Oker, India Red, Pink,
Umber, Blacks, and Smalt: lay the White next to your thumb, because it is
oftnest used, for with it you lighten all your Shadows; next to your White lay
a stiff sort of Lake: this done your Pallat is furnished with the single
Colors belonging to a Face; then for the tempering of your Shadows to all
Complexions, observe the following Directions.

1. For a Fair Complexion.
Take a little White, and twice as much Vermilion, and as much Lake, temper
these well together upon your Pallat with the flat blade of your knife; lay
aside by it self on your Pallat the greatest quantity of this to be used for
the deepest Carnation of the Face.

Put more White to that which remains, and temper that well with your knife,
and being well tempered lay some of that aside also for your lighter Carnation.

To the remainder add yet more White, and temper it upon your Pallat till you
have brought it to the lightest color of your Face.

Your Carnations being thus tempered, and orderly laid upon your Pallat,
prepare your faint Shadows. For which,

Take Smalt, and mix it with a little White, which may serve for the Eyes; lay
aside the greatest quantity, and to the rest add a little Pink, this well
tempered and laid by it self will serve for the faint greenish shadows in the
Face.

Now prepare your deep Shadows; for which take Lake, Pink, and Black, of each a
like quantity, temper all these together.

If the parties Face you are to draw, or the Picture you are to copy do
require the Shadows to be redder than what you have tempered, then add a little
more Lake; if yellower, add a little more Pink; if blewer or grayer, add a
little more Black.

This done, your Pallat is prepared with Colors for any fair Face.

2. For a more Brown or Swarthy Complexion.
Lay your single Colors on your Pallat as before, and in like manner temper
them, only amongst your White, Lake, and Vermilion, put a little quantity of
burnt Oker, to make it look somewhat Tawny.

Amongst your heightnings temper a little yellow Oker, only so much as may
just turn the Colors.

For your very faint and very deep Shadows; the same as before.

3. For a Tawny Complexion.
The general Colors must be the same as before, only the Shadows are
different, for you are to prepare them of Umber, and burnt Oker, which shadow
will fit these Complexions best; if the shadow be not Yellow enough, add more
Pink to it.

4. For an absolute Black Complexion.
Your dark Shadows must be the same as before; but for your heightnings, you
must take White, burnt Oker, Lake, and Black, put but a little White in at
first, but work it up by degrees, till you come to the lightest of all, as you
did the contrary Colors for a fair Complexion.

Here note, that the single Colors at first laid upon your Pallat being
tempered together according to the former directions, serve for shadows for all
Complexions.

Thus much concerning the disposing and ordering of your Pencils, and what
Pencils you are always to have in your hand all the while you are painting of
a Face.

CHAP. IV.
What Pencils are useful for the Painting of a Face, and how to dispose them.
EVery Pencil must have a stick of about nine inches long put into the Quill
thereof, the farther end of which stick must be cut to a point.

When you are to begin any Face or other picture, lay together two Ducks
quill-fitch-Pencils, and two Ducks-quill-pointed-Pencils, also two Goose-quill
fitched and two pointed, two Bristles both alike; one Swans-quill fitched, and
another pointed; then a larger Pencil than any of these, which no Quill will
hold, and therefore they make cases of Tinn to put them in, you must have one
of these Fitched, as also a Bristle of the same bigness.

Your Pencils being in a readiness, when you are to use them, your Pallat being
upon your thumb, you must take your Pencils in your right hand, and put the
ends of their sticks into your left hand, keeping (when you work) the hairy
ends at a distance, one from touching another, lest the Colors in them
intermingle.

Your Pallat of Colors being prepared, and your Pencils and Molstick also in a
readiness, you are to use them as is hereafter taught.

CHAP. V.
How to Paint a FACE in Oyl-Colours.
YOur Cloth being ready primed, and strained upon your Frame, take a knife, and
with the edge thereof scrape over your Cloth, lest any knots or the like should
be upon it which may disryme your Work.

Your Cloth being ready, draw forth your Easell, setting your Frame and Cloth
upon it at a convenient height, so that you sitting upon a stool, (level with
the party you draw) may have the face of the picture equal, or somewhat higher
than your own. Then set your Easell according to your light, which let be the
same as I have described in Limning, namely, a Northerly light, free from shade
of trees or houses, but let it come in on your left hand, and so cast the light
toward the right hand.

All things being now in a readiness, let the party you are to draw sit before
you in the Posture he intends to be painted, about two yards distant from you.

Then with a piece of Chalk pointed, draw the proportion of the Face upon the
Cloth, with the place of the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Ears, Hair, and whatsoever the
posture affords the Eye; here is no curiosity in this, only see that you keep
a good decorum, if you miss a good deal, the Colors will bring all to rights;
but I suppose you know already whether the design will make a Face
proportionable to the parties. And so of that no more.

Your Design being drawn in Chalk, take one of your
Swans-quill-pointed-Pencils, and some of your lightest Color, and begin with
the lightest parts in the Face, as the heightning of the Forehead, the Nose,
and the Cheek-bone of the lightest side: when you have done the lightest parts,
do the mean parts next; that is, those parts not altogether so light as the
other, as the Cheek-bone of the fore-shortning or dark side, the Chin, and over
the upper Lip; and so proceed gradually till you come to the Reddest parts of
all.

Then lay your faint Greenish shadows in convenient places, and where you see
cause to moderate harder shadows; but you must have a care you put not Green
shadows where Red are required.

Thus all your faint or light beginnings being put in, take one of your
Goose-quill-pointed-Pencils, or one of your Ducks-quill-fitched, and begin at
the Eyes to shadow with Lake, because you may easily overcome it if it should
chance to be wrong: I do not mean you should go all over the face with Lake,
but trace out these parts of the Face therewith, as the Eyes, Nose, Mouth,
Compass of the Ear, etc. This tricking or tracing out of these parts with Lake
is to be done before you lay on any Color, wipping it lightly over with a
linen rag, to prevent the overcoming of the other Colors.

Having thus put in all your Colors both light and dark, take a great
Fitch-pencil, either that in the plate, or that in the stick, and sweeten the
Colors therewith; by sweetning, is meant the going over these several Shadows
thus laid with a clean soft Pencil, which with orderly handling will drive and
intermix the Colors one into another, that they will appear as if they were
all laid on at once, and not at several times. If this great fitch'd Pencil be
too big, you may use a lesser; but note, that the bigger Pencils you use, the
sweeter and better your Work will lie; and it is as easy to handle a great
Pencil as a little one, if you use your self to it.

At your Second sitting (for this is enough at once) begin again with your
clean Pencils of such bigness as the piece you are to work upon does require.
Then the party sitting in the same position, and at the same distance as
before, the light also being the same, Observe well the party, and see what
defects you find in the Work at your first sitting, and amend them; then
heighten or deepen your Shadows according as you see occasion.

This done, take a Goose-quill Bristle and put in the Hair about the Face, and
rub in the greater Hair with the greater Bristle, and heighten it up with your
Goose-quill Pencil.

CHAP. VI.
Of Garments of several colors, and of their proper Coloring.
THE next thing I shall speak of, shall be of Drapery of Garments, and the true
and proper manner of Coloring of them. And

1. For a Red Garment.
For a light-red Garment, first dead-colour it with Vermilion, and when you
would finish it, glaze it over with Lake, and heighten it with White.

For a Scarlet. If you will have your Garment Scarlet, Vermilion it self must
be the lightest, and it must be deepned with Lake or India Red.

For a Crimson Velvet. Lay Vermilion, burnt Oker, or India Red, for the dead
color, glaze it with Lake, and touch it up with Vermilion.

A sad Red. Indian Red heightened with White.

Note, that all your deepnings should or ought to be deepned with Black, Pink,
and Lake, tempered together.

2. For Green Garments.
The best Green for holding is Bise and Pink, heighten it with Masticote, and
deepen it with Indico and Pink.

For Green Velvet. Lay the dead color of White with a little Lampblack, glaze
it with Verdigrease, deepen it with Indico and Pink, and heighten it with Pink
and White.

3. For Blew Garments.
Take Indico and White, first lay the White in its due places, and then your
mean color, namely Indico and White mixed in their due places, then deepen it
with Indico only, and when it is dry glaze it with Ultamarine, which will never
fade; you may glaze it with Smalt or Bise; but Smalt will turn Black, and Bise
will turn Green.

But if you will have a Blew Garment without glazing, lay the ground as before,
with Indico and White, heighten and deepen it with the same Colors.

4. For Yellow Garments.
For a Yellow Garment, Masticote, yellow Oker, and Umber; lay the dead color
of Masticote and White in the lightest places, Oker and White in the mean
places, and Umber in the darkest places; when it is dry glaze it with Pink.

If you would not glaze it, use only Masticote heightened with White, and
deepned in the mean shadows with Oker, and in the deep shadows with Umber.

5. For Black Garments.
Let the dead color be Lamp-black, and some Verdigrease; when that is dry, go
over it with Ivory-black and Verdigrease; before you go over it the second time
heighten it with White.

6. For Purple Garments.
Oil Smalt, tempered with Lake and WhiteLead, heighten it with White-Lead.

7. Orange Color.
Red-Lead and Lake, lay the lightest parts of all with Red-Lead and White, the
mean parts with Red-Lead alone, the deeper parts with Lake, if need require
heighten it with White.

8. Hair Color.
Umber and White for the ground, Umber and Black for the deeper shadows, Umber
and English Oker for mean shadows, for heightning White with a little English
Oker.

CHAP. VII.
To temper Colors for several occasions.
IN Landscape, variety of Colors are required; I will therefore begin with
those first.

Colors for the Sky. For the Aerie sky that seems a great way off, take
Oyl-Smalt or Bise, and temper it with Linseed-Oyl, for a Red sky use Lake and
White, and for Sunbeams or Yellow clouds appearing at Sunrising or setting,
use Masticote and White; for Clouds in a storm, or for a Night-sky use Indico
deepned with Black, and heightened with White.

Colors for Trees. For some use Lake, Umber, and White; for others Charcoal
and White, for others Umber, Black, and White, with some Green, you may add
Lake, and sometimes Vermilion among your other Colors.

Of several Greens in Landscape. For a light Green use Pink and Masticote
heightened with White.

For a sad Green, Indico and Pink heightened with Masticote.

You may make Greens of any degree whatsoever.

In Painting of Landscape I shall say nothing here, that which I have already
said in the Sixth Chapter of the Book of Limning being sufficient.

Things meet to be known.
OYL-Colours if they be not used presently, will have a skin grow over them,
and in time will quite dry up; wherefore if you have any quantity of Colors
grownd, to keep them from skinning or drying, set them in a vessel of fair
water, three or four inches under water, and they will not skin nor dry.

If your Grinding-stone be foul, grind Curriers shavings upon it, afterward
crumbs of bread, and it will fetch off the filth.

If your Pencils be foul, dip the ends of them in Oil of Turpentine, and
squeeze them between your fingers.

When you work in Oil, let a little pot of Oil stand by you, into which dip
your Pencil, and streak it by the side of the pot, and the Color will go out
that is within it, and you may use it with another Color.

The Discovery.
How to Cleanse any Old Painting, so as to preserve the Colors; with cautions
to those that through ignorance have in stead of Cleansing, quite Defaced or
irrecoverably lost the Beauty of good colors in an Old piece of Painting.

To Cleanse any old Picture in Oil.
TAke your purest white Wood-ashes you can get, and sift them very well in a
fine lawn sieve; or else some Smalt, which is as some call it Powder-blew, and
with a fine Sponge and fair water wash the Picture you intend gently over, but
be sure you have a great care of the Shadows; for by the ignorance of many
persons many good Picture has been abused; but having carefully washed it, as
before mentioned, take some of these Vernishes, of which there be several, but
some are more prejudicial than others, therefore choose those which may upon
occasion be washed off again.

As Gum-water purely strained, or pure Sizegelly, or the whites of Eggs well
beaten; all these will wash off.

Your common Vernish will vernish over any dark part of a Picture.

But your distilled Vernish is the best of all; this will not wash off.

But observe, that when you have washed the Picture, you must dry it very well
with a clean cloth very dry before you vernish it.

Diverse there be which have pretended to be well skilled or knowing in the
Cleansing of Pictures, and skill in Painting, and have undertaken the spoiling
of things they have been unworthy to understand; as with Soap, or Ashes, and a
Brush, and diverse other inventions, by their ignorance to deface and spoil
those things which otherwise might have been worth great value, and in stead of
hindering the Painter of his employment, have indeed created them new work.

OF WASHING or COLORING OF Maps, and Printed Pictures. The Fifth Book.
TO Wash Maps or Printed Pictures is nothing else but to set them out in their
proper Colors, which to perform well is a very fine thing. I have seen a
Printed Picture printed upon fine Parchment, only washed with Watercolors,
which could hardly be distinguished from a Limned piece, and there are many now
in England very excellent at it. If any ingenious spirit that delights in
Picture, and has not time or opportunity to study to be a proficient in
Painting in Oil or Limning, I would advise him to practice this, which is very
delightful and quickly attained; the manner of performing of it I shall here
in this Book teach.

CHAP. I.
What things are necessary to be always ready for Washing of Maps or Pictures.
SECT. I. Of Colors for Washing.
HHRE note, that all the Colors that are mentioned in the Second Chapter of
the Third Book concerning Limning in Watercolors, are all to be used in
Washing or Coloring of Pictures, wherefore provide your self of those Colors,
grind them, wash them, and steep and temper them according as you are directed
in that Second Chapter; I say, you must have all these Colors in a readiness;
and for Coloring of Prints some other Colors, namely these that follow, which
how to order I will anon show you.

Colors to be used in Washing, which are not used in Limning.
BLACKS. Printers Black. or, Franckford- Black, to be had of the Plate-Printers.
REDS. Vermilion. Rosset.
BLEWS. Verditure. Litmos. Flory.
YELLOWS. Gumbooge, Yellow-berries, Orpiment.



Also these;

Brazeel and Log-wood grownd, and Turnsoil.

Of these Colors above mentioned, Printers Black, Vermilion, Rosset,
Verditure, and Orpiment are to be Grownd as is taught in the second Section of
the second Chapter of the third Book, page 70. and therefore, I say, Grind them
as you are there taught.

Now for the other Colors above mentioned, they are to be ordered several
ways, as follows. And

1. Of Litmos, how to order it.
Take fine Litmos and cut it in small pieces, then lay it in steep the space of
twenty four hours at least, in a weak Water of Gum-Lake; [ The making of
Gum-Lake Water is taught before in the first Chapter of the third Book, page
66.] it will be a pure Blew Water, good to Wash withal.

2. Of Flory Blew.
Take Flory Blew and grind it with the white of an Egg, [beat the white of the
Egg with a spoon in a Porenger till it become a clear Water.]

Flory thus grownd, if you add thereto a little Rosset, it makes a light
Violet-colour.

If you mix with it both Red and White Lead, it makes a Crane-Feather-colour.

It, and Pink, Masticote, or Gum-booge make a fair Green.

3. Of Gum-booge.
Take Gum-booge and dissolve it in fair springwater, and it makes a most
beautiful and transparent Yellow.

4. Of Yellow-Berries.
Take Yellow-Berries, bruise them a little, and let them steep in Allum-water
all night, in the morning you will have a very fair Yellow to Wash withal.

5. Of Turnsoil.
Turnsoil is made of pieces of Linen cloth dyed of a kind of Violet-colour.

Take a dish and put some sharp Vinegar therein, together with your Turnsoil,
then set the dish over a gentle fire in a chafingdish till the Vinegar boil and
be colored, then take out the Turnsoil and squeeze it into the Vinegar; to
which put a little Gum- Arabic to dissolve; it is an excellent good liquor to
shadow upon any Carnation or Yellow.

6. Of Brazeel.
Take Brazeel grownd, to which put a quantity of small Beer, and as much
Vinegar, set them in a pan upon a soft fire, and there let it boil gently a
good while, then put therein some fine powder of Alum to raise the Color, as
also some Gum- Arabic to bind it; boil it so long till it taste strong on the
tongue, it makes a very transparent Red.

7. Of Log-wood.
If you boil Log-wood grownd in all respects as you did your Brazeel, it will
make a very fair transparent Purple-colour.

SECT. II. Of other necessaries.
1. Of Allum-water, how to make it.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Alum, heat it to powder, and boil it in a quart
of fair Water till it be dissolved.

With this Water wet over your Pictures that you intend to color, for it will
keep the Color from sinking into the Paper, and it will add a luster unto the
Colors, and make them show fairer; and it will make them continue longer
without fading: you must let the Paper dry of it self after you have wetted it,
before you lay on there Colors, of before you wet it again; for some Paper
will need wetting four or five times.

But if you intend to Varnish your Pictures after you have Colored them, you
must first Size them, that is, rub them over with white Starch new made with a
Brush very fine, in stead of doing them with Allum-water, he sure you size it
all over, or else the Varnish will sink through; if your Varnish be too think,
put into it so much Turpentine-oyl as will make it thinner.

2. How to make Size.
Take some Glue, and let it steep all night in water to make it the readier to
melt in the morning, then set it on a coal of fire to melt, to try whether it
be neither too stiff nor too weak, for the meanest is best; take a spoonful
thereof and set it in the air to cool, or fill a Mussel-shell of it, and let it
swim in cold water to cool the sooner; if it be too stiff, when it is cold put
more water to it, if too weak, then put more Glue to it; and when you use it
make it lukewarm.

This is to wet your Cloths in, if you intend to paste your Maps or Pictures
upon Cloth, you may use white Starch to wet your sheet, and wring it out and
strain it upon a frame, or nail it upon a wall or board, so paste your Maps or
Pictures thereon.

3. How to temper Gold to Write with a Pen or Pencil.
Take the sweepings of leaf-Gold, such as Book-binders sweep off their Books,
or leafe-Gold it self, and with stiff Gum-water, with a pretty deal of white
Salt, grind them very well together, and put it into a glass, and put a
quantity of fair water as will sufficiently cover it, to make the stiff-water
dissolve, that so the Gold may settle to the bottom, and let it stand four or
five days, then pour away the water and put clean water to it again, if you
find the Gold dirty, refresh it again the third time, then pour it away and
take clean water again, and a little Salt-Armoniack and great Salt, and put it
in a gally-pot, and stop it very close, and let it stand a week, then take it
out and put it into a a piece of sheeps-skin when the grain is taken off, tie
it up close, and hang it up that the Salt may fret from it; then take the Gold
and temper it with the white of an Egg or Gum-water: so use it with Pen or
Pencil.

4. Of Pencils.
Provide Pencils of all sorts, both pointed and fitch; a large Brush to paste
your Maps upon Cloth withal; another to Wet your Paper with Allumwater; a
third to Starch the face of your Picture withal before you color it; and a
fourth Brush to Varnish withal.

CHAP. II.
Of other Colors for Washing, both Simple and Compounded.
1. How to make a Green color of Copper Plates.
TAke any shreds of Copper and put distilled Vinegar to them, set them in a
warm place until the Vinegar become Blew, then pour out that Vinegar into
another pot well leaded and pour more Vinegar upon the Copper, letting that
stand until it be of a Blew color, then pour it into the former liquor; this
you may do so often until you have liquor enough, then let the liquor stand in
the sun or upon a slow fire till it be thick enough, and it will be a good
Green.

2. To Make a Green another way.
The best is Cedar-green, but that is dear, therefore you may take green Bise
and steep it in Vinegar, then strain it through a linen rag, then grind it
well with fair water, and put to it a little Honey, and let it be well dried,
and when you use it mix it with a little Gum-water.

3. Another Green.
Take the juice of Rue, and a little Verdigrease. and a little Saffron, and
grind them well together, and use it with a little Gum-water.

4. For light Greens.
Sap-greens, Flower de Bise, or Tawny-green, these need no grinding, only
steeped in fair water, Verditer and Ceruss mixed with a little Copper-green,
makes a good light color.

5. To shadow Greens.
Indico and Yellow-berries will do very well.

6. Greens for Landskips and Rocks.
Temper your Green with white Pink, Bise, Masticote, Smalt, or Indico, or
Ceruss.

Blew Verditer mixed with a few Yellow-berries, make another Green.

7. To make a Blew.
There is Venice-Ultamarine, but this is very dear; there are Bises of several
sorts, deeper or paler; there is Smalt and Verditer; grind any of these with
Gum-water.

8. Of shadowing Blews.
There is Indico, Litmos, or Flory, take any of these, they need no grinding,
steep them in the lees of Sope-ashes, when you use them put Gum-water to them
with discretion.

9. To make a Brown.
Take Ceruss, Red-Lead, English-Oker, and Pink.

10. Spanish Brown.
Its a dirty color, yet of great use if you burn it till it be red hot; but if
you would color any hare, horse, or dog, or the like, you must not burn it,
but to shadow Vermilion, or to lay upon any dark ground behind a Picture, or to
shadow Berries in the darkest places, or to color any wooden Post, Wainscot,
bodies of Trees, or any thing else of Wood, or any dark ground on a Picture.

11. How to make an Orange-colour.
Red-Lead is the nearest to an Orange, put a few Yellow-berries into it, makes
a good Orange.

12. A Flesh-colors.
Take of White and a little Lake, and some RedLead mixed, you may make it light
or red as you please, by adding more or less White in shadowing the Cheeks and
other places, if you would have a swarthy complexion; and to distinguish the
Man's flesh from the Woman's, mingle a little yellow Oker among your Flesh.

13. Colors for the Sky.
Light Masticote, or Yellow-berries, and White for the lowest and lightest
places; red Posset, White for the next degree; blew Bise and White for the
other; and blew Bise for the highest, for want of Bise use Verditer; these must
be worked together; you must not receive any sharpness in the edge of your
Color, and they must be so laid on, that you cannot perceive where you first
began to lay them, you must so drown them one in another.

14. To make colors for Precious stones.
Verdigrease with Varnish makes an Emerald, and with Florence Lake it makes a
Ruby, and with Ultramarine it makes a Sapphire.

15. Colors for Landskips.
For the faddest Hills use burnt Umber, for the lightest places put some Yellow
to the burnt Umber; and for the other Hills lay Copper-green thickened on the
fire, or in the Sun; for the next Hills further off, mix some Yellow-berries
with Copper-green, and let the fourth part be done with green Verditer; and the
furthest, faintest places with blew Bise, and for want of that, with blew
Verditer mingled with White for the lightest places, and shadowed with blew
Verditer in the shadows indifferent thick; the Highways do with Red-Lead and
White, and for variety use yellow Oker, and shadow it with burnt Umber, and you
may use it for sandy Rocks and Hills; the Rocks you may do with several
colors, in some places Black and White, in other places with Red-Lead and
White, and some with Blew and White, and other colors, such as you judge are
convenient, and do most resemble Rocks, and let them be pleasant colors; the
Water must be black Verditer and White, shadowed with green and with blew
Verditer; when the Banks cast a green shadow upon the Water, and when the Water
is dark in the shadows, then shadow it with a little Indico and Green thickened,
and some blew Verditer.

16. Colors for Buildings.
When you color Buildings, do it with as much variety of pleasant colors as
possible can be imagined, yet not without reason, and let discretion rule you
in mixing your Colors; in coloring of Buildings you may use sometimes White
and Black for the Wall, Conduits, or other things; for Brickhouses and others
you may use Red-Lead and White; when many Houses stand together, color them
with various colors as you can; about Buildings use sometimes Umber and White,
and sometimes Lake and White, or Red-Lead and White for variety.

17. How to Shadow every color in Garments, or Drapery.
Take this Rule, that every Color is made to shadow it self, or if you mingle
it with White for the light, and so shadow it with the same color unmingled
with White, else take off the thinnest of the color for the light, and so
shadow it with the thickest bottom of the color; if you will have your shadow
of a darker color, then the color it self is to shadow the deepest places.

CHAP. III.
General Rules to be observed.
1. SAp-green is only used to shadow other Greens, and not to be laid for a
ground in any Garment.

2. Lake must not be shadowed with any color, for it is a dark Red; but for
variety you may shadow it sometimes with Bise, or blew Verditer, which will
make it show like changeable Taffata.

3. Blew Verditer is shadowed with thin Indico.

4. Blew Bise is shadowed with Indico in the darkest colors; Yellow-berries,
the natural shadow for it is Umber, but for beauties sake it is seldom
shadowed with Umber, but with Red-Lead, the darkest touches with Spanish-Brown;
and for varieties sake its shadowed with Copper-green thick, and with blew Bise
or blew Verditer.

What Colors sets off best together.
1. Whites are very useful in all colors, and sets off Black and Blew very
well; but Blacks are not much used, but upon necessary occasions in some
things, as your judgment shall direct you.

2. Reds sets off well with Yellows.

3. Yellows sets off well with Reds, sad Blews, Greens, Browns, Purples.

4. Blews sets off well with Reds, Yellows, Whites, Browns, and Blacks; but
Blews set not off well with Greens and Purples.

5. But Greens sets off well with Purples and Reds.

SECT. II. Directions for the Mixing of your Colors.
TO mix any Color, be careful that you make it not too sad; when you mix your
Colors be careful you put not your Pencils out of one Color into another,
for it will spoil and dirty your other Colors, except you wash your Pencils
clean.

When you mix any Colors stir them well about the water, being well colored
pour it out into a Shell, and stir the rest of the Colors and mingle them
together; pour out the Color first, that you may the better know what quantity
of the sadder will serve.

FINIS.

