AN EXCELLENT INTRODUCTION TO ARCHITECTURE BEING A BOOK OF
Geometrical-Practice: Which is the First Degree of all ARTS: Wherein is
Contained Variety of Examples of that Admirable Science, Showing and Describing
the Making of several Figures in that Nature, with ^^oper Names belonging (...)
Member and Figure, and how to begin and end them after a plain and easy
Manner, it being of great use to all Artists and Workmen concerned in Building;

MORE ESPECIALLY, Surveyors, Architects, Engineers, Masons, Carpenters,
Joyners, Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Painters, Carvers, Glasiers, etc. In General
for all that are Concerned or Delight to Practice with the Rule and Compasses.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Prick at the Balls in St. Paul's Churchyard, next
Cheap Side; Where you may have that Excellent New Treatise of Architecture,
designed by John Mauclere, according to Vitruvius; And also Maps, Copy-books,
Books of Beasts, Birds, Flowers, Fruits; Likewise Italian, French and Dutch
Prints. 1679

To the READER.
GEometry is a Greek word, which in its proper signification tells us of no
other thing then Measuring of the Earth; Nevertheless, by this word we are to
understand the Principal Part of the Mathematics, which is a Science that has
for its Object Quantity continued.

A continued Quantity is that whereof all the Parts are joined together, as are
all sorts of Extensions, of Greatness, and of Dimensions.

And these Dimensions consist principally either in Lines, Angles, Superficies,
or Bodies, which are to be considered, not according to the Quality of the
Matter, but according to the Extension of the Parts.

Geometry is divided into the Theorick and the Practick. The Theorick is the
Science which causes us to conceive and demonstrate the truth of Geometrical
Propositions. And the Practick is the Art which guides the hand in its
Operation.

Geometry had its beginning amongst the Egyptians, which were compelled to
invent it, for to remedy the disorder that happened ordinarily within their
Grounds, by the overflowing of the River Nilus, which carried away all the
Bounds, and defaced all the Limitmarks of their Inheritances: and so this
Exercise, which for the time consisted only in Measuring the Lands, for to
render to every one that which belonged to him, was called the Measuring of the
Earth, or Geometry: But in process of time the Egyptians applied themselves to
more subtle Enquiries, and by degrees from an Exercise altogether Mechanical,
they brought forth this Excellent Science, which has deserved to hold one of
the chiefest ranks amongst all others.

Geometry is not only profitable, but we may say that it is altogether
necessary. It is by this, that the Astrologians do make their Observations by
it, they know the Extent of the Heavens, the Duration of Times, the Moving of
the Stars, the observation of the Seasons of the Years and Ages.

It is by this Means, that the Geographers do cause us to see, at one cast of
an Eye, the Greatness of the whole Earth, the huge Extension of the Seas, the
Divisions of Empires, Kingdoms and Provinces.

It is from this the Architects do take their just Measures, in framing of
public Buildings, as well as of particular Houses.

It is by the help of this Engineers do bring to pass all their intended
Projects, whereby they take the situation and platform of Fortifications, the
Distance of Places, and that they can at length carry their Measure through
Spaces accessible only to the sight.

Persons of Quality, whose Birth engages them to the Wars, are obliged to
apply themselves to this Science. It introduces them not only to
Fortification, which teaches them to build Bulwarks to defend strong Places,
but also to compose and set up Engines, which may overthrow them; and further
also it brings them very much knowledge and skill in the Military Art, how to
set an Army in Order for Battle, how to encamp and divide the Ground for the
quartering; and further, it teaches them to make Maps of Countries; and to
take the Platform of Towns, Forts and Castles; to Measure all kind of
Dimensions, both accessible and unaccessible, to invent Projects; and lastly,
it makes them so expert and commendable for their Wit and Inventions, as they
can be for any strength or couragiousness in them.

All those that make Profession of entering upon Designs, ought to know
something of Geometry, seeing that they cannot otherwise attain the Art of
Architecture, nor Perspective, which are two Parts absolutely depending on that
skill.

Geometry is established upon three sorts of Principles, viz Definitions,
Axioms, and Petitions.

1. The Definitions are brief Explications of the Names and Terms. 2. The
Axioms are Sentences so true, and so manifest, that it is impossible to
contradict them. 3. And the Petitions are clear and intelligible Demands,
whereof the Execution and Practice requires not any Demonstrations.
A Point.
FIrst, you must understand that a Point is a Prick made with a Pen or Compass,
which cannot be divided into parts, because it contains neither length nor
breadth in it.

A Line.
A Line is a right consecutive Imagination in length, beginning at a Point, and
has no breadth.

A Parallel.
WHen two lines are set or placed a little distance one from the other, those
two Lines, according to the Latin phrase, are called Parallel, and by some
Equidistances.

Superficies.
WHen these two Lines aforesaid are enclosed at each end with other Lines, it
is then called a Superficies, and in like sort all spaces, in what manner
soever they are closed, are called Superficies or Plains.

Perpendicular.
WHen there is a straight upright Line placed in the middle of a cross straight
line, then it is called a Perpendicular, or Catheta line, and the end of the
Crosses or straight line on both sides of the Perpendicular are called straight
Corners.

Acutus, Obtusus.
WHen a leaning or straight Line is placed upon a straight line, without
Compass or Equallity, as much as the same line bends, so much shall the
corner of the straight line be narrower below, and the other so much broader as
a right and even corner, the straight corner in Latin is called Acutus, which
signifies sharp, and the wider Obtusus, which signifies dull.

Pyramidal.
A Corner or Point called Pyramidal, and also Acutus in Latin is when two even
long straight lines meet or join together at the upper end, as the Figure
declares.

Triangle.
When such a Figure, as aforesaid, is closed together at the foot with a long
straight line; it is then called a Triangle, because it has three sharp
corners.

2. Triangle.
WHen a Triangle with two even straight lines, is closed together with a longer
line then these two are, it shall have such form as you may see in the Figure
of the third Triangle.

3. Triangle.
A Triangle which is made of three unlike lines, will also have three unlike
corners.

Quadrangle.
WHen two long and two direct downright lines are joined together at the four
corners, it is called Quadrangle with even sides or corners, but when the four
lines are all of unlike and contrary length, then it is a Quadrangle of uneven
sides, as the Figure shows.

YOu must note, that although all four cornered Figures may be called
Quadrangles; nevertheless, for that the direct four cornered Figures are called
Quadratus, for difference from them, I will name all Figures which are like
unto a Table (that is, longer then broad) Quadrangles.

WHen four even long straight lines are joined together at the corners, they
are called Quadratus; which are four cornered: when you make the two corners
thereof sharp; and the other two corners somewhat blunter, then it is called a
Rombus.

ALthough you may turn and make all the Figures aforesaid right four square:
yet the Workman may find other Figures with diverse corners, the which (as I
will hereafter show) he may make four square.

WHen a man with his compass draws a bow, and after that he draws another
bow right against it, that is called a Superficies of crooked lines, with two
like corners: and then draws a straight line from the one corner to the
other: and from one point or center where the Compass stood to the other,
another straight line; thereby you shall find the right four parts thereof.

BUt if a man draw a whole right line with his Compass, that is called a full
Circle or round Superficities, and the point in the middle is called the Center,
the utmost line is called Circumference: and if you draw a straight line
through the Center, it is called a Diameter: because it divides the Circle in
two even parts.

WHen the half Circumference is cut through the Center of the Diameter, then it
is called half a Circle: and if you make a straight line upright in the half
Circle, then that line makes two even quarters of a Circle, and divides the
Diameter also into two half Diameters.

WHen a man draws four even long lines, and joyneth them together, they make
a perfect cornered Quadratus: then if you draw a straight line from the one
corner to the other, it is called Diagonus: because it divides the four
corners into two even parts.



NOw when a Workman has seen a form of some of the most necessary
Superficies, he must proceed further, and learn to augment or diminish the
same, and to turn them into other forms: but yet in such sort, that they may
have even parts in them.

AND first, if out of the length of the Diagonus aforesaid, by the adding of
three other even long lines, he makes another four square: that four square
shall be once as great again as the first, which is to be understood in this
sort: That the four square of A. B. C. D by the Diagonus is divided into two
Triangles, and the greater four square A. D. F. E. contains four such
Triangles: but for that the two first four squares hang one within the other,
therefore for the better showing thereof, they are here once again set down
severally: whereby you may see that the Quadrate G. (as I said before)
contains two Triangles, and the Quadrate H. contains four such Triangles,
so that the proof thereof is clearly to be seen.

IF within a four square you make a Circle which touches the four sides of the
said four square, and without the said four square another Circle which
touches the corners marked A. B. C. D. Then the outmost Circle must be once as
great again as the innermost: and then if about the greatest Circle you make
another four square as C. D. E. F. then the two four squares must in like sort
be once as great again as the other. The proof whereof stands hereby marked
with the Letters K. L. for clearer understanding of the same.

BY this also the projecture or the foot of the Bases of the Tuscane Columns or
Pillars, and also the breadth of the foundation of them underneath by Vitruvius
declared, is set forth.

THe Workman must yet proceed further, and learn to know how to change a
Triangle into a Quadrangle, and also at last bring it to a right Quadrate, to
the which I will set down diverse forms. First, take a Triangle with even
corners, as A. B. C. and divide the Base, (which is the name of all lower
lines) B. C. in two even parts, and there place the Letter E. Then from the
point E. to A. draw a line, which will divide the Triangle into two even parts.
Then if you take that part which is marked A. E. C. and join it to the other
part, marked A. E. B. it will make a Quadrangle, as A. D. B. E, made of a
Triangle.

YOu may also change this Triangle in other manner, dividing the lines A. B.
and A. C. each in two like parts as F. and G. Then draw a line through D. E. as
long as the Base B. C. Then shut up the two Equidistances, corner wise: and
then the Quadrangle B. C. D. E contains so much in it as the Triangle A. B.
C. and the proof thereof is, that the two Triangles B. C. F. and G. E. C.
contain so much in them, as the two other Triangles A. F. H. and A. I. G.

A Triangle with even points, may be divided thrice into two equal parts,
dividing each side in two parts, as in the Figure P. Q. R. it is seen through
the three lines, which on either side make two great Triangles.

THe same Triangle P. Q. R. may thus be changed into a Quadrangle: divide the
side P. Q. and the side P. R. each in two equal parts, then draw a line C. T.
as long as Q. and R, and then draw a line direct downward from T. R. to close
it up: and then that Quadrangle contains as much space within it as the
Triangle aforesaid, because that the Triangle which is cut off P. S. V. is of
like greatness with the other Triangle marked V. R. T.

ANd although there is a Triangle of unequal sides, yet a man may make it a
Quadrangle, in such sort as I said before of the right Triangle: for although
the two Triangles that are cut off, and those two that are added unto it, are
not of one greatness, yet the Triangles A. F. L. and B. D. F are one as great
as the other: and again, the triangles A. G. K. and G. C. E. are also of one
greatness: so that those that are cut off, and those that are added thereunto,
are of one quantity. By these alterations aforesaid a man may easily measure
how many feet, else or roods foursquare, are contained in a three-corner'd
Superficies.

BUT it falls out, that a Triangle, (which is three cornered) superficie or
plain, must be parted cross-wise in two equal parts: then out of one of the
sides that you will cut through, you must make a right four square, as from the
side A. B. and draw therein two Diagonus from corner to corner, which will show
you the Center C. and draw one Circle through that three-corner'd part, which
you will divide, and so you shall find the two points, where you shall draw
your dividing line. He that desires any proof hereof, may take each piece, and
alter it into a Quadrangle, and after into a Quadrate, as hereafter shall be
showed, and he shall find it true.



AN Architector must also undergo other Burdens, for that he must know how to
divide a piece of ground, that no man may be hindered thereby. As for Example,
if there were a piece of ground that lay three-corner'd wise, with unequal
parts, having on the one side thereof a Well, but not in the middle: and this
ground, or three-corner'd piece of Land is to be divided into two equal parts,
in such sort, that each of them may have the use of the Well: it must be done
in this manner. I make a Triangle marked A. B. C. and the Well is marked with
G. Now divide the line B. C. with a dark line in the two equal parts as the
Letter D. shows, and then drawing a line from D. to A. then the Triangle is
divided into two equal parts: but both of them cannot yet come to the Well:
then draw another line from the Well G. to A. and from the point D. you must
set an Equidistancie against G. A. marked with E. and drawing from G. which is
the Well: the black line to the letter E it will divide the ground in two even
several parts, and each of them shall have the Well at the end of his Ground,
for that part A. B. G. E. contains in it just as many feet or roods, as that
part which is marked G. E. C.

I Showed before, how a man should make a four square Superficies once as great
again as it is, but it may fall out, that a man is to make it but half as great
again, or more or less, as he thinks good, or as occasion serves, which the
Architector is also to learn of necessity. Which to show, I set down a right
four square thing marked A. B C, D, which I will have three quarters greater:
the same three quarters I set by the side thereof, so that the same with the
Quadrate together make a Quadrangle A. E. C. G. To bring this Quadrangle into a
right Quadrate, you must lengthen the line A. E. yet a quarter longer, or from
the side of the Quadrangle E. G, and place F. there: then upon the line A. F.
make half a Circle: which line will show you the one side of the Quadrate which
you seek for: which Quadrate being made, will contain as much in it as the
Quadrangle already made And in this manner you may change all Quadrangles which
are long four cornered pieces of work, into a just and true Quadrate.

NOw to prove that which I said before, you must join the Quadrangle with the
Quadrate together, in one square Superficie, as Q. R. S. T. and from the corner
R. to the corner S. draw a Diagonus, and it is certain that that Diagonus will
make two even parts. Now Euclides says, that when a man takes any even parts
from even parts, the rest of the parts also remain alike: then take the
Triangle K. L., and the Triangle M. N. which are both alike: the right four
cornered superficie P. is of the same greatness, that the longer superficie O
is.

AGain, you may easily change a Quadrate into a Quadrangle, as long or as
narrow as you desire to have it, doing thus; Make your Quadrate A. B. C. D and
lengthen your Line A. B. and the Line B. C. Which done, then set the length of
the Quadrangle, which you desire to have upon the line A. G. Then from the
point G. draw a line alone by the corner of the Quadrate D. to the line C. F.
and there you find the shortest line of the Quadrangle: and so to the contrary
you shall by the least side of the Quadrangle find the longest also, as you
may also prove by the aforesaid Figure: for when you take away the Triangles M.
N. and O. P. which are both alike: then the two parts which are K. L. are also
alike.

AN Architector may by chance have a piece of work of diverse unequal sides come
to his hands, which he is to put ino a Quadrangular or Quadrate form, to know
what it contains, and specially when it belongs to more then one man,
whether it be Land or any other thing. For although the Architector or Surveyor
of Land could not skill of Arithmetic or Ciphering: yet this rule cannot fail
him, nor any other man that desires to find out the deceit of a Tailor. Thus,
I say then, let it be what form soever it will, I set down this hereafter
following. First then, seek the greatest Quadrate or Quadrangle that you can
take out of it: that done, seek yet another Quadrate or Quadrangle, as big as
you can take out of it, out of the rest of the said work: and if you can after
that make more Quadrates or Quadrangles out of it, I mean all with right
corners, take them out also: but if you can find no more in it, then make
Triangles also as big as ^^u can, of which Triangles (as you are taught before)
you may make Quadrangles, and let every piece severally be marked with
Characters, as in the Figure following may be seen.

LEt by Example your many cornered Figures first be marked with the great
Quadrangle with these Letters A. B. C. D. and then with a less Quadrangle, as
E. F. G. H. the rest are all Triangles. Now set the greatest Quadrangle L. in a
place by it self, and then the other marked with M. which set upon it, that the
two corners or sides may be alike: which done, lengthen the line E. F. and the
line E. G. and where they stay or touch under the great Quadrangle L. there set
an I, from this I. a Diagonal line, being drawn through the corners B. H. the
same line shall be drawn to the point: that, by the shutting of the Characters
B. M. L. D. will show you another Quadrangle, of the like quantity that the
Quadrangle M. is: so that the whole Quadrangle D. C. L. M. contains the two
aforesaid Quadrangles. Touching the Triangles, when you have changed the same
(according to your former instruction) into Quadrangles, as you may see by the
Triangle N, so may you put that Quadrangle also in the greatest Quadrangles
(for less trouble.) The great Quadrangle A. L. M. C. is once again placed above
with the small Quadrangle O. P. Q. R. set upon it, and the Diagonal line is
placed behind the greater (which is L. M. T. S both marked with N. so that the
Quadrangle A. C. S. T. contains three Quadrangles L. M. N. and as many more
as there are: you may in this sort bring them all in one Quadrangle: if there
falls out any crooked lines, the skilful Architector or Workman may almost
bring them into a square, and those Quadrangles, if need be, may also be
reduced into perfect four squares, as aforesaid.

WHen a man has a line or other things of unequal parts, and there is also
another longer line, or some other thing, which a man would also divide into
unequal parts, according to the proportion of the shorter line, then let the
shortest line be A. B. and the greatest line A. C. now it is necessary that
from the uppermost point A. you should make a corner, as A. B. and A. A. Then
take your longer line, and set it with the end C. upon B. and let the other end
rest at the hanging line A. A. then from every point of the uppermost line A.
B. let a hanging line fall upon the line A. C. so that they may be equidistant
with the line A. A. and where the said lines cut through each other, there is
the right division proportioned according to the smaller. This rule shall not
only serve the Architector for many things, as I will partly show: but will
also serve many Artificers to reduce their small works into greater.



FOr Example of the figure aforesaid, I suppose, Houses or Pieces of Land to be
of diverse wideness, which should be narrower before then behind. Which Houses
by Fire or War are so decayed, that in the forepart between C. D. there were
but some signs of division to be seen of the houses, and behind the houses
between A and B. no sign at all to be seen. Now as the misfortune was past, and
that every man desired to have his part of his inheritance, then the
Architector, as an Umpire, according to the rule aforesaid, should divide the
longest line according to the proportion of the shortest, to give every man his
own: as you may see by this Figure following.

THE Architector must have a well-proportioned Cornice, which if he would make
greater, keeping the same proportion, he may do it as he is formerly taught, as
in this Figure following is showed by the short line marked A. B. and the
longest line marked A. C.

AN Architector or Workman must likewise learn to augment and make greater a
hollowed Column, which he may also do by the two lines aforesaid, and although
the Column should be a Dorica (yet it is to be understood of all kinds of
Columns. This rule will also serve (not only for the three Figures set down)
but also for as many, as if I should show them, it would contain a whole book
of them alone, and therefore this shall suffice at this time for the Workman.

THe further that any material thing stands from our sight, so much it
seems to lessen, and diminish by means of the Air, which consumes our sight:
therefore when a man will make or place one thing above another, against any
place or wall, and would have the same thing to show above in the middle, and
beneath, as great in one part as in the other, it is convenient for him to
follow this rule, which is, for that our sight runs in circumference:
therefore a man must first choose the place, from whence he will see the same:
there placing a Center, and then draw a quarter of a Circle from your eye
upwards. Which dividing in even parts, you shall, by the lines that go out of
the Center through the Circle against the wall, find the unequal parts: the
which although upwards against the wall, they shall seem greater: yet in your
sight they will show all of one greatness. By this rule you may also measure
heights, aiding your self with the numbers.

MAny men are of opinion, that straight lines, in what manner soever they are
closed, contain as many spaces one way as another, (that is to say) if a man
had a cord of forty foot long, and should lay it diversely, in a round, long,
three cornered, four square, or five-corner'd form: but the superficies are
not of one self-same space, which may be seen by these four square Figures
following; for the first line holds on either side ten, which is forty, and
the space contains ten times ten, which is an hundred. The other line upon the
two longest sides, contains fifteen spaces, and on the shortest sides five,
making forty also: but five times fifteen make but seventy and five.

IF the Quadrate stretches further out, so that the two longer sides were
eighteen a piece, then the shortest sides must each have two to have forty
upon the line, but the space should contain but six and thirty. And hereby you
see what a perfect form may do against an imperfect. And this rule the Workman
shall use, that be may not be deceived, when he will change one form into
another.



IF a man should make three Points, (which should not stand upon a right line)
and desiring to have a circumference made, the Compass must pass along upon
each of these Points. To do it from the point one to the point two, he must
draw a line, and from the point two to the point three another: which two lines
shall each of them be divided into two equal parts, and setting the squires
half way in them, as you see it in the Figure, by that Cross it will show you
the Center, wherein you must set one foot of the Compass, and with the other
draw the Circle through all the said points.

YOu may find the Center of three points another way, without your Compass,
making a two-corner'd superficie from the one point to the other, through the
which corners two straight lines being drawn long enough downwards where they
cross one over the other, they will show you the Center of the three points.

BUt for that a Workman holds this to be a superfluous speech, and a thing of
no moment, it may be that a Workman may have a piece of a round work to do,
which he is to perfect and make full round, by this rule he may find the
Center, Circumference, and Diameter thereof, as the Figure shows.

WE find in Antiquities, and also in modern works, many Pillars or Columns,
which beneath in the joints at the-Bases are broken asunder, which is, because
their Bases were not well made according to their corners: or else, because
they are not rightly placed: so that they have more weights upon them on the
one side then on the other, whereby the Cantons break, which the Workman, by
knowledge of the lines, and help of Geometry, may prevent in this manner: that
is, he must make the pillar round underneath, and his Base hollow inward: so
that when you place the Pillar by the lead, it may presently settle it self
without any hurt. To find this roundness, you must set the one point of the
Compass upon the highest part of the pillar that is under the A. and the other
point thereof upon B. and then draw or wind it about to C. and that shall be
the roundness, making the hollowing of the Base, according to the same measure:
you may do the like with the Capital, as you may see in the Pillar by it.

IF a Workman will make a Bridge, Bow, or any other round Arched piece of
work, which is wider then a half Circle, although Masons practice this with
their lines, whereby they make such kind of works, which show well to men's
sight, yet if the Workman will follow the right Theorick and reason thereof, he
must observe the order heretofore showed. When he has the wideness of the
height, then he must make half a Circle out of the middle: after that, upon the
same Center, he must make another lesser Circle, which must be no greater then
he will make the height of the Bow, or Arch: then he must divide the greatest
Circle in equal parts, which must all be drawn with lines to the Center: then
you must hang out other Perpendiculars upon your Lead: and where the lines that
go to the Center cut through the lesser Circle, from thence you must draw the
cross lines toward the Perpendicular, and where they close together, there the
Bow or Arch which is made, shall be closed: as by the points or pricks here
under is showed.

BUt if you desire to make the Bow or Arch lower, then you must follow the
rule aforesaid, and make the innermost Circle so much less, which is to be
understood, that the more parts that you make of the greater Circle, so much
the easier you shall draw the crooked lines which you would have: from this
rule there are many others observed, as hereafter you shall see.

CAlling the former rule to mind, I devised the manner how to form and
fashion diverse kinds of vessels by the same, and I think it not amiss to set
down some of them: This only is to be marked, that as wide as you will make the
vessels within, so great you must make the inner most Circle. The rest, the
skilful Workman may mark by the Figures, that is, how the lines are drawn to
the Center, and the Parables, and out of the small Circle. The Perpendiculars
hanging, the vessels are formed: the foot and the neck may be made as the
Workman will.

BUt if you will make the body of the vessel thicker, then you must make the
half Circle so much the greater, and make the belly hanging down under it, to
touch the great Circle, by the falling of the Perpendiculars upon the cross
line, as by these Figures 3.4.5. it is showed: whereby a man by this means may
make diverse vessels, differing from mine. The necks and covers of these vessels
are within the small Circles: the other members and Ornaments are always to
be made, according to the will of the ingenious workman.



IT is an excellent thing for a man to study or practice to do any thing with
the Compass, whereby in time men may find out that which they never imagined:
as this night it happened unto me, for that seeking to find a nearer rule, to
make the form of an Egg, then Albertus Durens has set down, I found this
way to make an Antic vessel, placing the foot beneath at the foot of an Egg,
and the neck with the handles above upon the thickest part of the Egg. But
first you must frame the Egg in this manner: Make a straight cross of two
lines, and divide your cross line in ten equal parts: that is, on each side
five. Then, set the Compass upon the Center A, and with the other foot thereof,
draw in two parts, that is, to C. making half a Circle upwards. That done, set
one foot of the Compass upon the point marked B. and with the other draw in the
uttermost point C. drawing a piece of a Circle downwards toward the
Perpendicular, and doing the like on the other side, you must make a point
below. Then take the half of the half Circle above that two parts, and place it
at the undermost point of the Perpendicular upwards above O, where the Center
to close the Egg, shall stand: the rest under shall be for the foot: the neck,
without doubt, may be made two parts high, and the rest according to the
Workmans pleasure, or according to the Figure here set down.

YOu may also make another form of a Cup or vessel, after the rule aforesaid.
But from the point A. (which does show the breadth of the foot, and the wideness
of the mouth) you must make your Circle upwards from C. unto the two
Perpendiculars, where the body shall be closed up. The neck standing above it
shall be two parts high: but the rest of the Workmanship shall be made
according to the will and device of the Workman.

BY this means you may make other different kinds of Cups or vessels: but these
that follow, you must make in this so^t: you must divide your cross line in
twelve parts through the point A. making two Perpendiculars to show the foot
and the neck: then setting one foot of the Compass upon B. and the other foot
upon I. drawing a piece of a Circ^e downwards toward the Perpendicular: and
the like being done on the other side to the Figure of 2. then place your
Compass upon the point C. and touching the sides 3. and 4. then the bottom of
the vessel will be closed up: then place the Compass upon the point between I.
and A. and it will be the roundness of the vessel above: the other four parts
serve for the neck of the vessel, with the rest of the work.

A Man may make a vessel only by a Circular form, making therein a circular
cross, and dividing every line into six parts: the half-circle shall be the
belly of the vessel, and a sixth part upward for a Freese, that there may be
more place to beautify it: another part shall be the ^eg^t of the neck, and
another part the corner: and for the foot, although it be but half a part high,
it may well go a sixth part without the round: and although I have set down but
six manner of cups or vessel, yet according to the rule aforesaid, a man may
make an infinite number of vessels, and a man may alter them by their
Ornaments, whereof I say nothing that you may see the line the better.

A Man may make Oval forms in diverse fashions, but I will only set down four.
To make this first Figure, you must set two perfect Triangles one above the
other, like a Rombus, and at the joining of them together, you must draw the
lines through to 1. 2. 3. 4. and the corners A. B. C. D. shall be the four
Centers, then set one foot of the Compass upon B. and the other upon I, and
draw a line from thence to the Figure 2. After that, from the point A. and 3.
to 4. you must also draw a line: which being done, set the one end of the
Compass in the point C. and then draw a piece of a Circle from 1. to 3. and
again, the Compass being in the Center D. draw a piece of a Circle from 2. to
4. and then the form is made. You must also understand, that the nearer that
the Figures come to their Centers, so much the longer they are: and to the
contrary, the further that they are from their Centers, the rounder they are:
yet they are no perfect Circles, because they have more then one Center.

FOr the making of the second Oval you must first make three Circles, as you
see here drawing, where the four straight lines stand: the four Centers shall
be I. K. L. M. Then placing one point of the Compass in K. yon must draw a line
with the other point from the Figure of 1. to 2. Again, without altering the
Compass, you shall set the one foot of the Compass in I. and so draw a piece of
a Circle from the figure 3. to the figure 4. and that makes the Compass of the
Circle. This Figure is very like the form of an Egg.

THE third form is made by two four cornered squares, drawing Diagonen lines
in them, which shall show the two Centers G. H. and the other two corners E,
and F. Then draw a piece of a Circle from F. to the figure 1. and so to 2. Do
the like from E. to 3. and 4. which done from the points G. and H. make the two
sides from 1. to 3. and from 2. to 4. and so shut up the Ovale.

IF you will make this fourth Oval, draw a line at pleasure as A. B. then set
one foot of the Compasses at C. and strike a Circle, then remove the Compasses,
and set one foot at D and strike another Circle, then set one foot of the
Compasses at E. and close up the line from G. to H. then set one foot at F, and
close the line from ^ to K.

And although our Author says, there are four forms of Ovals; yet this last
figure is of the same form as the first, only this is easier to make.



TOuching the Circles there are many Figures which are round, and yet some have
5. 6. 7. 8, 9. and 10. corners, etc. But at this time, I will speak only of
these three principally: because they are most common.

THis Octogonus or eight points is drawn out of a right four cornered square,
drawing the Diagonus which will show you the Center: then set one foot of your
Compass upon the corners of the Quadrate, and leading the other foot through
the Center, directing your Circle toward the side of the Quadrate, there your
eight points shall stand to make it eight cornered, and although a man might
only do it by the Circle, making a cross therein, and dividing each quarter in
two, yet it will not be so well, and therefore this is a surer and more perfect
way.

THe Hexagonus, that is, the sixt-corner'd Circle, is easiest made in a Circle:
for when the Circle is made, you may divide the Circumference in six parts
equally, without stirring the Compass, and drawing the line from one Point to
another, the six corners are made,

BUt the Pentagonus that is five-corner'd, is not so easily to be made as the
others are, because it is of an uneven number of corners, notwithstanding you
may make it in this manner: when the Circle is made, then make a straight cross
therein: then divide the one half of the cross line in two parts, as it is
marked with the Figure 1. then place one foot of the Compasses at the Figure 1.
and the other foot under the Figure 2. draw downward to the Figure 3. resting
that foot, and reaching the other to the aforesaid place under 2. and you will
have the length of every side of the Pentagonus. In this Figure also you shall
find the Diagonus, that is, ten corners: for, from the Center to the Figure 3.
that shall be one side thereof, you may also make a sixteen-corner'd Figure out
of this wideness 3. 4 and place a particular line upon the point 1. And
Albertus Durens says, that the same also will serve to make a seven-corner'd
Figure.

THis figure will serve such men as are to part a Circumference into unequal
parts, how many soever they be: but not to bring the Reader into confusedness,
with making of many forms, I will only set down this divided into nine
corners, which shall serve for an example of all the rest, which is thus: Take
the quarter of the Circle, and divide it into nine parts, and four of these
parts will be the ninth part of the whole Circumference: you must also
understand the same so, if you divide a Quadrate into eleven, twelve, or
thirteen parts, etc. for that always four of these parts be the just wideness
of your parts required.

THere are many Quadrangle Proportions, but I will here set down but seven of
the principallest of them which shall best serve for the use of the Workman.

FIrst, this form is called a right four-corner'd Quadrate. THe second form
or figure in Latin, is called Sexquiquarta, that is, which is made of a
four-corner'd Quadrate, and an eighth part thereof joined unto it. THe third
Figure in Latin is called a Sexquitertia, that is, made of a four-squar'd
Quadrate, and a third part thereof joined unto it. THe fourth is called
Diagonea of the line Diagonus: which line divides the four-squar'd Quadrate
cross through the middle, which Diagonal line being touched from under to the
end thereof upwards with the Compass and so drawn, will show you the length of
the Diagonal Quadrangle: but from this proportion there can be no rule in
number well set down. THE fifth Figure is called a Sexquialtera, that is, a
four square, and half of one of the four squares added unto it. THe sixth is
called Superbitienstertias, that is, a four square, and two third parts of one
of the four squares added thereunto. THE seventh and last Figure is called
Dupla, that is, double: for it is made of two four square forms joined
together: and we find not in any Antiquities, any form that passes the two
four squares, unless it be in Galleries, Entries and other to walk in: and some
Gates, Doors and Windows have stood in their heights: but such as are wise will
not pass such lengths in Chambers or Halls.
MAny Accidents like unto this, may fall into the Workmans hand, which is, that
a man should lay a sieling of a house in a place which is fifteen foot long,
and as many foot broad, and the rafters should be but fourteen foot long, and
no more wood to be had: then in such case, the binding thereof must be made in
such sort as you see it here set down, that the rafters may serve, and this
will also be strong enough.

IT may also fall out, that a man should find a Table of ten foot long, and
three foot broad: with this Table a man would make a door of seven foot high,
and four foot wide. Now to do it a man would saw the Table long-wise in two
parts, and setting them one under another, and so they would be but six foot
high, and it should be seven: and again, if they would cut it three foot
shorter, and so make it four foot broad, then the one side shall be too much
pieced. Therefore he must do it in this sort: Take the Table of ten foot long
and three foot broad, and mark it with A. B. C. D. then saw it Diagonal-wise,
that is, from the corner C. to B. with two equal parts, then draw the one piece
there of three foot backwards toward the corner B. then the line A. F. shall
be four foot broad, and so shall the line E. D. also hold four foot broad: by
this means you shall have your door A. E. F. D. seven foot long, and four foot
broad, and you shall yet have the three-corner'd pieces marked E. B. G, and C.
F. and C. left for some other use.



IT happens many times that a Workman has an eye or round Window to make in a
Church, as in ancient times they used to make them, and he doubted of the
greatness thereof, which if he will make after the rules of Geometry, he must
first measure the breadth of the place where he will set it, and therein he must
make a half Circle: which half Circle being enclosed in a Quadrangle, then he
shall find the Center by two Diagonal lines: then he must draw two lines more,
which shall reach from the two lowermost corners above the Center, and touch
the just half of the Circle above: and where the said lines cut through the
Diagonal lines, there you must make two Perpendicular lines, which
Perpendicular lines shall show the wideness of the desired window: the list
about it may be made the sixth part of the Diameter, being round in breadth.

IF a Workman will make a gate or door in a Temple or a Church, which is to be
proportioned according to the Place, then he must take the wideness within the
Church, or else the breadth of the wall without: if the Church be small, and
have Pilasters or Pillars within it: then he may take the wideness between
them, and set the same breadth in a four square, that is, as high as broad, in
which four square the Diagonal lines, and the two other cross cutting lines
will not only show you the wideness of the door, but also the places and points
of the ornaments of the same door, as you see here in this Figure. And although
it should fall out, that you have three doors to make in a Church, and to that
end cut three holes, yet you may observe this proportion for the smallest of
them. And although (gentle Reader) the cross cutting through or dividing is
innumerable, yet for this time. lest I should be too tedious, I here end my
Geometry.





FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some Books and Prints, as are Printed for Robert Prick, and are
to be sold at his Shop in White-cross-street, and likewise at the Golden Lion
at the Corner of New-Cheapside near Bethlehem.
A New Treatise of Architecture, according to Vitruvius, Wherein is discoursed
of the five Orders of Columns, viz. The Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and
Composite. Divided into seven Chapters. Which declare their different
Proportions, Measures and proper Names, according to the Practice of the
ancient Architects, both Greeks and Romans; as also of their Parts general and
particular, necessary in the building of Temples, Churches, Palaces, Castles,
Fortresses, and all other Buildings, with their Dependents: As Gates,
Arches-Triumphant, Fountains, Sepulchers, Chimneys, Cross-bard Windows,
Portals, Platforms, and other Ornaments: serving as well for the beautifying of
Buildings in Cities, as for necessary Fortifications of them. Designed by
Julian Mauclerc Lord of Ligneron Mauclerc, Brossandiere and Remanguis.
Whereunto are added the several Measures and Proportions of the famous
Architects, Schamozzi, Palladio and Vignola: with some rules of Perspective.
The whole represented in fifty large Prints, enriched with the rarest Ornaments
of Antiquity, and Capitals of extraordinary greatness, with their Architraves,
Frieses and Cornishes proportionable.

A New Book of Architecture, wherein is represented forty Gates and Arches
Triumphant, Composed of different Inventions, according to the Five Orders of
Columns, viz. The Tuscane. Do^ick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite. By
Alexander Francine Florentine, Engineer in Ordinary to the French King: With a
Description of each Figure.

The Art of Fair Building: Represented in several Vprights of Houses, with
their Ground-plots, fitting for persons of several Qualities, Wherein is
divided each Room and Office according to their most convenient occasion, with
their Heights, Depths, Lengths, and Breadths, according to Proportion. With
Rules and Directions for the placing of Doors, Windows, Chimneys, Beds, Stairs,
and other conveniences: with their just measures for their best advantage,
both of Commodiousnes, Health, Strength and Ornament. Also a Description of the
Names and Proportions of the Members belonging to the framing of the
Timberswork, with Directions and Examples for the placing of them. By Pierre le
Muet, Architect in Ordinary to the French King, and Surveyor of his Designs and
Fortifications in the Province of Picardy.

A Book of Architecture, containing Cieling-pieces, Chimney-pieces, and several
sorts useful for Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, invented by J-Barber.

GETHINGS Redivivus: or the Pens Masterpiece. Being the last Work of that
Eminent and Accomplished Master in this Art. Containing Examples of all curious
Hands written, and now in practice England, and the Neighboring Nations: With
necessary Rules and Directions toward the attaining of Fair Writing. Also
Directions for making the best Pens, and several sorts of very good Ink, as
black, red, green, yellow and purple; and how to write with Gold and Silver,
and to polish it to make it glister. Likewise how to Etch or Engrave a Coat of
Arms, Figure or Posie, on Silver, Copper, Brass, Iron, or hardened steel. With
an Appendix, Showing the exact manner of making all sorts of Bonds, Letters of
Attorney, Releases.

Scripture-Stories in large sheets, as Adam and Eve, Abraham offering up his
son Isaac, Elisha fed by Ravens with the woman of Samaria, the Judgment of
Solomon between the two Harlots, Susanna and the two Flders, Queen Esther, etc.
and several others of the and. and New Testam.


