EXTRACTS OF SOME LETTERS From some Gentlemen of quality in his Excellencies
ARMY, Concerning the state of the Kings Army and their own.

Written to Mr. Richard Shute a Merchant in Woodstreet. December. 13. 1642.

Printed for I.B. and R. S. December. 16. 1642.

EXTRACTS out of some LETTERS Concerning The state of both Armies.
December. 13.
SIR,
WE hear of your distractions at London, but they discourage not, because we
know your ability to suppress them; let the power of your Common Council be
improved, and let the more active in this Riot be proceeded against.

For the Kings Army, we little fear them, we hear so much of their needy and
weak condition. And we believe that their own apprehensions thereof move
efficiently to this present mutinous accommodation, and we have cause to fear
not only that their faction work for it who are among you, but that of late
diverse are come from the Kings Army to London, to assist the present
commotions: Let your Courts of Guard be kept strictly, for a knot of
Cavaleerish faces were lately met toward you, who were overheard to say, If
this business do but hold on, they should lay the Roundheads low.

If the Kings Forces dare but move toward you, we shall not fail to be upon
their backs. If you continue your encouragements toward us, we shall shortly
fall on them at Reading or Oxford.

December. 12. 1642.
OUr last to you mentioned the business of Marleborough taken by the Enemy, of
which my Lord General received more particularly by one yesterday, that the
Town had in it but forty completely armed men, the Forces expected from the
Country under the Command of Sir Edward Baynton, being not yet come in to
them. That the Kings Forces were about 4000. men, which came with Grenades,
Petards, and Drakes. Notwithstanding all their preparation, the Town so
opposed them they could not fire it, but by some boys which crept into some
thatched houses, and so fired them. Which being so unexpected, amazed the
people, who hopeless with that weak force to keep the Town long, the armed
men retired, and in the evening the Enemy entered, who there committed the same
unclean, inhumane, and cruel actions to the Women there, as their fellow
devils have done in Ireland. They took above an hundred of the poor Country
men prisoners, pillaged throughout the Town, slew only two, but lost diverse of
their own, redeemed the Lord Seymers Lady, and so retreated for Oxford. Our
Forces then at Newbury, marched toward Wantage, fell upon their Rear, took
diverse prisoners, slew about forty, took also most of the pillage, they had
gotten from Marleborough.

We hear from Oxford, that the King is in great straits, the Mint quite dry;
the complaint is not the Common Soldiers only, but the Lords, and the Kings
himself, they are so much exhausted, and as full of fears as wants. They send
into all high ways and possess themselves of such droves of Beasts as they
meet withal, and sell Robin-Hoods bargains again to raise money for them. We
expect every moment to hear from our Newbury party, whereof we shall render you
an account as occasion offers.

December 11.
MY loving Friend, belike your Citizens wonder and blame us that no more is
done by our Army; assure your self the whole business of the Army is managed
by such as are both wise and faithful to the cause; and as much is done as can
be done; we do but wait for opportunities; Marleborough is taken by the Kings
party, with the loss of many of their men, and of but two of our horse, many
taken prisoners; the honest women basely abused, stripped naked and worse: ours
have taken many of theirs to the number of 30. and of five Wagons intercepted
by Colonel Goodwin; we have cause to wonder that the City should be so
unlike themselves, that when they have authority and power in their hands
should not dare to show themselves against the Malignant party, but rather
choose to let the work fall to the ground, and ruin themselves and the whole
kingdom, and engage God against them, rather then hazard the displeasure of
some great ones, enemies of God, whose breath is in their nostrills. What? will
they lose the honor, the comfort and benefit of all they have done hitherto?
will they repent of their goodness? will they rather sink under the burden,
then have some of it, at least upon their enemies shoulders? will they out of a
base cowardly spirit betray themselves, and this glorious cause into the hands
of the Enemy prodigious sottishness! I assure my self did many but know what
state the Kings Army is in, they would not so incline to accommodation. I met
with special intelligence this day from one of the Kings Army concerning their
present state: he ingenuously confessed they are in a very low case, money is
spent, powder is spent, the King is fain to sell Oxen to buy provision for
himself, their horse mightily worn out, their foot ready to mutiny every day,
their Dragooners want Boots, and many are without shoos or stockings: great
fear is upon them, because the Parliaments Army so pursues them, they
complain they can rest no where they are so hunted up and down; the spirits
of the Lords with them were much down, but the maine thing that discourage
them is the rising of the Counties. What shall we have so fair a game and
leese it for want of playing our Cards? If you would in stead of an
accommodation drive home an association of Parliament (or so many of them as
would) and City and Counties with the Lord General, the business through God
would soon be done. The Lord direct you and bless you in your endeavors and
turn all cross Passages to good. The Lord accomplish his own work in his
own way, by his own means, in his own time, and let us subscribe to his
wisdom and submit to his will; let us do our duty, go the world which way
it will, and the Lord do what he please; let us not trouble our selves about
events, not torment our selves with what is not in our power to help; if the
worst come that can come, Gods work must go on, the best is, our God lives and
reigns, and our life hangs not upon any thing under heaven, but upon him that
is above all. I rest

Windsor, December. 11. Yours in all love assurance.

FINIS.

