AN EXHORTATION Unto the Learned Divines assembled AT WESTMINSTER To set an
order touching Faith and Religion in the Church of ENGLAND.

printer's or publisher's device

In AMSTERDAM. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by John Cross
Bookseller in the Bagijne steegh near the English Church, Anno Dom 1643

AN EXHORTATION Unto the Learned Divines assembled AT WESTMINSTER To set an
order touching Faith and Religion in the Church of ENGLAND.
BEloved Friends and high learned School men, on whom both high and low, both
Rich and poor, do depend, believing that (through your great learning) you
can so judge of matters of Faith and Religion, that all what you shall judge,
approve, and allow therein, must of necessity be holden for the truth, as also,
all that you shall not judge, approve, and allow, must not be holden for the
truth.

Therefore I thought it good, and also my duty (beloved in the Lord) to put you
in mind, that in this your Synod, you follow not the order of the Church of
Rome, as to set such an order and Rule in Faith and Religion, that shall bind
and compel men, to believe your Articles of Faith and Religion, as also not to
be your own Judges therein except for your own Assembly but not for others)
as if you can not Err, and so forbid others, that agree not with you (touching
your Articles of Faith and Religion) to teach, pryut and publish their Faith
and Religion, on pain of Imprisonment, Banishment etc as the Papists,
Lutherans and other Sects do, in forceing men to their Assemblyes against
their consciences.

But Iexhort you herein, to follow the Apostles Doctrine, and order (they as
Master buylders) have set down, for a Pattern and Rule for every man to follow
and practice: so that you, nor any whosoever have Authority (though of high
degree, or learned) to set down an other order, Rule or Pattern of Faith and
Religion, for all men to follow and practice, seeing that is done already by
Christ and his Apostles, which we all ought to follow and practice, but none
other order on pain of the curse. Gal 1.8.2. Tim. 1.13. Luke 9.49.
notwithstanding, seeing there are many Assemblyes of Christians, and each
think (as you do) their own Faith and Religion to be best, you may set
orders therein for your selves. upon condition that you tolerate others, as you
ought to do, else you shall do contrary to christ's command. Math. 13.28.30.
Mark. 9.38. Luke 9.49. and so judge an other man's Servants, which you ought not
to do, as you mayread. Romans 14:4:18. it is Christ's office only, to judge in
matters of Faith and Religion, unto whom as to our only Judge, we all do stand
or fall; there fore I exhort you, not to persecute any, for their Faith and
Religion.

It may be you will say, shall we then tolerate every Sect? I say yea, you
ought to do it, if you will obey Christ, and not displease him, who forbids
you and the Magistrate to pluck up the Tares, and commands you both, to let
them grow till the harvest, that is the end of the world. Matthew. 13, 30. Here
may you see that both the Magistrate and you ought to obey Christ, who will not
have you to forbid any that teach in his name, though they be Tares and follow
not you, Mar. 9.38. Luke 9.50. If you will not have any Sects (as I also would
hinder them; if I might lawfuly do ir) I will show you a way, how to hinder
them. without breaking Christ's commands: the best way is (under correction)
that you set down a Rule, how all men may certainly know, a Sect from the true
Church and the true Church from a Sect which being done (as it can well be
done) all men that truly love their Salvation, will Separate from the Sects,
and Join them selves to the true Church: for then all men that will, may
search the Scriptures, and so easily know the true Church from the Sects.

For the better knowledge herein, all parents ought to bring up thyer Children,
to Read perfectly in the Bible, so that they may (as Christ exhorts) seareh
the scripture for the begetting and settling of their Faith: If any parents
through poverty, are not able so to bring up their Children, let free Schools
be provided, in every Town and village for that purpose, with godly teachers
therein this order being taken and ordained, the Sects will soon be hindered,
if not, yet Sects must be tolerated, seeing thereby, those Assemblyes which are
conformable, to the Pattern of Gods word, will be the better known and
approved, as you may read. 2. Cor. 11.19.

Also you shall please to understand, if you will ordain such an order, as
Christ has ordained, touching the administration of his Baptism, and his
Supper, as also touching the doctryns of God, his son and holy ghost, as
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles have taught, then no Godly persons, shall
have just cause to except against it, and so we shall be of one heart and of
one mind therein: But if you shall ordain, such an Erroneous and Tyrranical
order of doctrine and discipline, as the fathers of the Church of Rome, have
taught and ordained then all godly men shall hane just cause to except against
it, seeing we ought not to follow them, but Christ, his Prophets and Apostles,
in the doctrines of Faith and Religion: which if you please todoe, as you
ought, then shall we not be divided into so many Sects as now we are: nor then
shall the doctryns of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles be borne down and
suppressed, by the Authority, and sword of the Magistrate as now it is.
Therefore I exhort you, only to use the sword of the spirit which is the word
of god for the suppressing of Sects; but not the Magistrates sword, except
against such as use that sword (as the Papists now do) against you, as you
have done against us, for which God is so displeased, that he will not release
you, till you establish Christ's Iubile and freedom of conscience: Luke 4.18.

I pray considet if the blood of those men, you name Anabaptists, and
Brownists, and others, which your Church have bnrned, banshed and hanged, do
not cry to God for vengeame against you: seeing they suffered for Righteousness
sake, being faithful to God, in that they believed: therefore Christ says
Math. 5.10. blessed are they that suffer persecution, for Righteousness sake,
and says, the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs: and though they erred in some
things (yet seeing it was of ignorance, and not of obstinacy) that, made them
not unrighteous, nor worthy of death: you Know the Apostle says, Rom: 14.14.
though he was persuaded, that nothing is unclean in it self, yet to him that so
judges, to him it is unclean: so if a man judge some doctrynes to be Error,
though it be no Error, yet to him that so judges, it is error: if he suffer
death for that he judges to be truth, he suffers for Righteousness sake,
being truth in his judgment: therefore judge you not according to the outward
appearance, but judge Righteous judgment as Christ exhorts you for whosoever
in thee things serve christ, is acceptable to God, and is approved of Godly
men, as the Apostle teaches. Romans 14.18.

Further, I exhort you, not to study the Romish fathers any longer, but the
holy scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles only, nor yet to prove your
doctrines from Romish fathers, but from Christ, his Prophets and Apostles,
whose doctrines only establish the Conscience, being truly translated and
expounded, which may well be known, if it make no contradiction, for they teach
not contrary one another; but the Romish fathers teach not only contrary
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, but also contrary one another; and all of
them are found very ignorant in the knowledge of Gods word, and in the
exposition thereof: So that you shall do well, to ordain that no Teacher allege
any fathers, but Gods word only for proof of their doctrines; which being done,
there will be great hope to diminish the Sects, and to establish a true Church in
unity of Faith and Religion: Also I exhort you not to condemn your selves,
toward others, in the same things you allow in yourselves: namely; you will
not that the Papists be judges over you, in their own causes, so you ought not
to be judges over others in your own causes; for wherein you judge and condemn
others, and your selves do the same things, therein you shall judge and
condemn your selves, as the Apostle teaches. Romans 2.1. Also seeing you (like
the Jews) have more zeal then knowledge, touching the Keeping of the weekly
Sabbath, I desire you better to consider of the Apostles doctrine therein Romans
14.4.5. shall you not force men, to observe that Shadow, more then the other
shaddowing Sabbath? seeing the weekly Sabbath was a Shadow, so well as the
yearly Sabbaths, and now all abolished by Christ's coming: therefore condemn no
man therein, nevertheless; will you esteem one day above another, yet you
ought not to condemn others that esteem every day alike for then shall you
do contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle, Col. 2.16.17. let no man oppress,
or defraude his brother in any matter, For the Lord is an aveuger, all of such
things. 1 Thessalonians, 4.6.

Also I desire good order may be taken for the maintenance of the poor that so
no men, women nor children, be forced and dryven (through want) to beg from
door to door; verily the lord loves the poor now sowel as he did before
time, when he ordained alaw for their mayntenance as you may read in Deutr.
14.28. saying, at the end of the year, thou shall bring forth all the tithes
of thine increase the same year, and lay it up within thy gates, then the
Levite shall come because he has no inheritance with thee) and the stranger,
the fatherless, and the widows (that are poor) within thy gates, and shall
eat and be filled, that the lord thy God, may bless thee in all the work of
thine hands which thou do: Levit. 19, 10. and 23.22. and Deuteronomy. 15.9.11.

I beseech you, zealously to consider, if this Moral law of God be now
abolished through Christ's coming, if not, let it I pray you be zealously
practiced: for as the mayntenance of the Teachers and poor was then, even so
is the mayntenance of the Teachersand Poor now: Thus hopeing a Reformation (of
all Romish doctrines, Ceremonies, and Tyrannical discipline) according to the
pattern of Gods holy word: I commend you to the God of Peace, who make you
perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you, that which is
pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

I beseech you to suffer the words of exhortation, for I have written to you in
few words and in love, though not in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, yet
in plain evidence of the power and spirit of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.4.7.10. you
shall please to read. Mat. 7.22. They that love instruction, shall increase in
knowledge, but they that hate it, shall remain in Error and ignorance. Proverb.
12.1. Esaias. 2.3. and Micah. 4.2. As you would that men should do to you, so
do you to them likewise. Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.31. otherwise Christ will pronounce
you unrighteous. Written in Syon (not Babylon) the 23. of the 8 month called
October. by Mark Leonard Busher, in the 72 year of his Age a Citizen of the
Famous and Honorable City London: though above 36 years, a Pilgrim in
Holland, for the word of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ. Reve 12.17. Anno
Dom. 1643. To. style Anno Dom: Syons style. 1659.

THE END.

