THE Excellency of MONARCHY: A PANEGYRIC, Written Anno 1658. by a Learned and
truly Loyal Gentleman, for Information of the miserably misled
Commonwealths-men (falsely so called) of that deceitful Age; and now revived by
a Friend to the Author, and an Honourer of the Established Government of these
Nations.
1.
IF wanting wings one may ascend the Skies,
And Phoebus view, without an Eagles Eyes,
Then Rouse up (Muse) from thy Lethargick strains,
And (having first invoked the God of Brains)
Let the grand Subject of thy Measures be,
No Rule to England like a Monarchy.
2.
It is the Image of that Domination,
By which Jehova rules the whole Creation:
Angels nor Saints, do in his Kingdom share,
God is Sole Monarch, They but Subjects are:
Whose Laws are such, as when they did Rebel,
Sequestered not, but sent them strait to Hell.
3.
As Old as that Paternal Sovereignty
God placed in Adam, ruled his People by;
Disowned by None, but them whose Minds aspire,
And envy ONE should have what ALL desire:
For, be it a Few, or Many we live under,
Such shall repine, still, whilst not of the Number.
4.
The Ancients did a Monarchy prefer,
Made all their Gods submit to Jupiter:
And (when Affairs and Nations first began)
Princes Decrees were the only Laws of Man;
Experience will avow it, where there is Any,
One Honest Man is sooner found, than Many.
5.
The Rational Soul performs a Prince's part,
She rules the Body by Monarchick Art;
Poor Cranes, and little Bees (with shivering wings)
Observe their Leaders, and Obey their Kings:
Nature her self, disdains a Crowded Throne,
The Body's Monstrous, has more Heads than One.
6.
A Monarchy's that Politic simple State,
Consists in Unity, (inseparate,
Pure and entire) a Government that stands,
When others fall, touched but with Levelling hands:
So Natural, and with such Skill endu'd,
It makes One Body of a Multitude.
7.
In Order (wherein later things depend,
Or former) that is most perfect does attend
On Unity: But this can never be
The Pop'lar State, nor Aristocracy;
For where or All, or Many bear the sway,
Such Order to Confusion leads the way.
8.
A Monarchy more quickly does attain
The End proposed; For it is the single Brain
That ripens Council, and concealeth best
Princely Designs, it is Deeds proclaim 'em Blessed;
Whilst numerous Heads are rarely of one Mind,
Slow in their Motion, louder than the Wind.
9.
Treason, nor Fear, so suddenly divides
The United Strength that in a Crown resides;
Sedition prospers not, it seldom here
Results the Object of a Prince's Fear:
Then when an Empire, Rome was never so strong,
Nor Triumphed under other Rule so long.
10.
A Monarchy abates those Feverish Fits
Of Emulation, a Free State begets;
A Prince cannot his Reins so quickly slack,
Or throw his Burden on Another's Back:
But where so many Rulers have Command,
The Work's transferred, and tossed from hand to hand.
11.
The People, or the Nobles, to debate
The deep Concernments of a Troubled State,
Set Times and Places have assigned them, they
First meet, and then adjourn from day to day:
Whereas a Monarch, who by Nature's One,
Delib'rates always, never's off his Throne.
12.
But hold! methinks I see the Three Estates
Convened; Thrown open Prison doors and Grates,
Extinct our paltry Jealousies and Fears,
Grace offered to All, but Cavaliers
And Papists! yet with patience they abound,
In hopes of better, Now, the Wheel goes Round.
Monarchia a Monos Archon; The Rule of One Prince or Governor, without a Peer,
or the Government of One Man over Many, as in England, etc. Britannia ab initio
Mundi semper suit Regia, and Regimen illius simile ille Coelorum. Howell's
Praed. Basil.

