AN EXPOSITION OF THE Holy Ornaments AND Ceremonies WHICH THE CHURCH USES AT
MASS.

Collected from several Authors.

And now published for the common good of all Catholics, and others.

London, Printed for N. T. 1686.

HEre follows a brief Signification of the Priestly Ornaments used at Mass;
as also a short Declaration of the Ceremonies and Holy Mysteries of that Divine
Sacrifice, for Comfort and Instruction of the Church, thereby to renew in our
minds a grateful memory of those several dolorous passages of the bitter
Passion of our Divine Redeemer, who did suffer so much in satisfaction of his
Eternal Father's Justice for our Sins.

Of the Holy ORNAMENTS AND CEREMONIES Which the Church uses at MASS.
Of the Holy Altar, and what it signifies.
TO begin with the holy Altar, where the Victim for the Sacrifice of Redemption
of all the World is offered: It signifies Mount Calvary, whereon Jesus Christ
(the only Son of God, and second Person of the holy Trinity, our only Savior)
was Crucified upon a reproachful Cross. Which very word of Altar, we also find
to have relation unto Sacrifice, which must necessarily be offered to God in
that Church where his true Faith is professed. And therefore this name of Altar
is mentioned by S. Paul, Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar whereof they have not
power to eat, who serve the Tabernacle. And 1 Cor. 9.13. and S. Mar. 5.24. All
which is a warrant abundantly sufficient for us to use this Name of Altar.
Which also represents the Table whereon our Redeemer did Celebrate his Last
Supper, with his Disciples, the night before his bitter Death and Passion.

Of the Altar-Cloaths.
THe Linen for the Altar, or the Altar-cloaths, are to be very pure and white;
they representing the purity of our blessed Savior's Humanity, free from all
stain of Sin, or disordered Passion. That Linen is also to be blessed, to
signify the great Sanctity of the Life of Jesus Christ; which we must
endeavor, the best we can, to imitate.

Of the lighted Candles on the Altar.
THe lighted Candles upon he Altar, admonish us, (according to S. Luke,) to be
ready, in imitation of the wise Virgins, with the Oil of Good works in our
Lamps, of True Faith, and to expect at the pronouncing these sacred and
operative words of Consecration, the real and true substantial presence of that
our Divine and Heavenly Spouse; Mat. 5.16
who requires the light of our Good Works so to shine before Men, as thereby
they may be moved to glorify the Father who is in Heaven.

The two Candles signify the two Testaments of holy Scripture; the Old and
New. They also signify the light of Faith, revealed to the Jew and Gentile.
And they advertise us of the great splendor, both of Faith, of Good Life, and
Works, required in the Celebrating of so high and dreadful a Mystery.

Of the Cross and Crucifix.
THe Cross, or Crucifix, is the principal Ornament upon the Altar, which ought
never to be wanting at the Celebration of the Mass. It betokens our Blessed
Redeemer's Victory over Death, and is placed at the midst of the Altar, most in
view; to represent to our mind the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, which is
there chiefly to be confider'd, and piously meditated in that holy Sacrifice.

Of the Chalice.
THe Chalice does represent the Cup, wherein our B. Savior did Consecrate his
most precious Blood. Mat. 26. And it puts us in mind of his Sacred Passion; our
B. Savior himself so calling it: The Chalice of his Passion.

Of the Patten.
THe Patten serves for the use of the Consecrated Body of our Lord; as the
Chalice does for his most precious Blood. And as it covers the top of the
Chalice, it represents the stone which was rolled against the door of the holy
Sepulcher, Mark 15.

Of the Corporal.
THe white Linen Corporal, upon which is Consecrated the most precious Body
and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, does represent to us that white and pure
Syndon wherein Joseph of Arimathea involved his most sacred Corpse before it was
buried. The clean and bright purity whereof, does aptly admonish all such, as
by the holy Communion, receive, and harbor within their Breasts, this sacred,
and most precious Body of Jesus Christ, to be chaste and clean, both of Body
and Soul, and endu'd with true purity of intention.

Of the Vail.
THe Vail does cover both Patten and Chalice all round about: and it represents
to us the Handkerchief wherewith our Saviors most Divine Head was covered when
he was laid in the Sepulcher: whereof mention is made, John 20. S. Peter having
discovered it in the Sepulcher: And he there beheld the Linen lying apart, and
the Handkerchief which had been wrapped about his head.

Of the several colors which the Church uses for Ornament; and the meaning of
them.
THe Prophet Ezekiel in his 6th. chap. speaking of the splendor of the Church,
seems to place a great part of her glory in the various colors of her
beautiful Robes. Which variety of mystical colors, simbolizing with the
several virtues of the glorious Saints, does greatly adorn, and beautify this
holy Spouse; and is to us a motive, and great encouragement to imitate those
holy virtues, which by these various colors used in the Church, are so fitly
proposed to our view.

Nor was it without great reason, that God in the old Law appointed those four
different colors for the Priests and Churches Ornaments, which were; the
color bissmus, that is, a yellow color like to that of raw Silk. The second
was purpureus; the Purple color. The third was byacinthinus; that is a violet
red blew, or violet purple. The fourth was coccineus; that is, a Scarlet or
Crimson color. And as these different colors had their several mystical
meaning for the Peoples instruction; so I doubt not but the impartial Reader
will confess, no less to be contained in the meaning of these colors which the
Church, (inspired by the Holy Ghost,) has appointed to be used in the Law of
Grace, for the Ornament of Christ's Holy Church, and for the Priests Vestments
belonging to the same: as by this brief Declaration it will appear.

What the White Color used by the Church, means.
THe white color is used upon the Feasts of Angels. Confessors, and Virgins.
To represent to us the imitation of their holy Chastity and Saintly Purity. As
also upon the solemn Feasts of the Nativity of our Lord and Savior, upon the
Resurrection, Ascension, Corpus Christi, and other the chiefest Feasts of the
greated Mysteries of our Faith; which are to be celebrated in the white color
of symbolizing Joy: as testify our Saviors glorious spendor at his
Transfiguration: the two Angels in white, who denounced his Resurrection: and
the joyful white of his Saints in Heaven, Apoc. 3.4. and Apoc. cap. 4. verse. 4.

What is signified by the Red Color.
REd is the scarlet dye of our Blessed Savior's Passion, and is the proper
color for the Churches Ornaments upon the Feasts of the holy Cross, of the
Apostles, and blessed Martyrs; to show that their glorious passage from this
valley of misery to Eternal Joy, was through the Red Sea of many Tribulations,
and that their Glory was purchased with the price of their own dear blood. They
dyed their Robes in the blood of the Lamb. Apoc. 7.

What is signified by the Green Color.
THe Green color is used in the Church, from the Octave of the Epiphanie, till
Septuagesima: and from the Octave of Pentecost, till Advent exclusively:
containing the greatest part of the whole year, and is to be industriously
employed for our purchasing Heaven, which is to be got by vigorous force, well
represented by this color, the Hieroglifick of Youth and consequently
betokening this courageous and vigorous strength in virtuous Exercises, whereby
that Celestial City is to be conquered.

What the Violet Color means.
THe Violet color, is a kind of blew, and resembles the color of the Sky of
Heaven; which we must know to be fast shut against all sinners, who by their
true repentance shall not amend. And therefore this color is used in the
Church, all Lent, and Advent, the proper times allotted for the practice of the
worthy fruits of holy Penance, and satisfaction for our sins; the only unhappy
Bar of the Gate of Heaven against our Souls.

What the Black Color means.
BLack is the Mourning Standard of the Church, displayed upon her Altars, and
other Ornaments in the mournful times wherein we celebrate the Death and
Passion of our Loving Lord, and Divine Redeemer Jesus Christ. It is used also
at the Office of the Dead; thereby to testify as well a civil respect from
Nature for the present separation from our Friends; as to stir also up, and
move in us thereby a true compassion of their Souls temporal great pain in
Purgatory, for whose speedy relief we ought most heartily to pray.

Having briefly here spoke of the quality, and colors of the chief Ornaments
belonging to the Altar; I will with like brevity treat also about the Vestments
and Attire belonging to the Priest for Celebration of the holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, that high Function and supremest Divine Homage which can be done to God
by any Creature.

And therefore those Ornaments, if not very rich, at least ought to be comely
and very deceat, as well in regard of that great Reverence which is most due to
those Sacred Mysteries; as also that those Divine actions should be had in
greater veneration; and thereby more movingly represent to us Christ's bitter
Death and Passon; as I shall hereby declare by the meaning of those several
Ornaments: observing first the great Antiquity and use of those Holy Ornaments;
which well appears in England by that of S. Gregory the Great, who, above a
thousand years ago, did send into our Country, Vessels for the Altar, Relics,
Books, and Ornaments for the Priests and Clerks; as both S. Bid, and most
Hystorians do declare.

The meaning of the Sacred Ornaments which the Priest does wear in Celebrating
the Holy Mass.
What the Amice, or first Ornament the Priest puts on when he goes to
celebrate, does mean.
THe AMICE which the Priest puts over his head, does signify the Humanity of
our Lord Jesus Christ, under which lay hid and covered his most Sacred
Divinity. 2. It signifies the Linen Napkin wherewith this our merciful
Redeemer was blind-folded, and after struck upon the Face by those sacriligeous
Jews, then saying to him, Prophesy to us, Christ, who is he that struck thee?
Mat. 26.
By which outrageous injury, suffered for our sakes, he purchased Grace,
enabling us to behold him face to face, in Eternal Glory.

In putting it on, he says, put on, O Lord, the Helmet of Salvation upon my
head, that I may overcome all diabolical temptations. Amen.

Of the ALBE.
THe Albe, or long white Garment, does signify the Robe of Innocence, given us
in the Sacrament of Baptism: It represents also the white Garment which Herod
put upon our Savior, reputing him as an Idiot, when, Luke 22.
with mockery and derision he sent him back to Pilate.

The Priest putting it on, says, Make me white O Lord, and cleanse my heart;
that being whit'ned in the Blood of the Lamb, I may enjoy Eternal Gladness.
Amen.

Of the Girdle.
THe Girdle which the Priest puts about him, does signify the Cord wherewith
our Savior was bound to the Pillar, when the cruel Soldiers scourch'd him.
The two ends of the Girdle turned up; the one on the right side, and the other
on the left, do signify the two means to conserve our Chastity; which are
Fasting and Prayer, whereby we subdue the Flesh, and strengthen the Spirit, The
Priest when he puts the Girdle about him, says, Gird me O Lord, with the
Girdle of Pu^i^y, and quench in my Loins the humor of Lust, that there may
remain in me the virtue of Continency and Chastity. Amen.

Of the Maniple.
THe Maniple represents to us the Cords which bound our Savior's hands and
arms when he was dragged from place to place, and from one Judge to on other.
It is put on the left Arm (which is nearest to the heart) to declare with what
love and affection he endured all these outrageous injuries to expiate our sins.

When the Priest puts the Maniple upon his Arm, he says, Vouchsafe me, O
Lord, so to bear the Maniple of weeping and sorrow, that I may receive the
reward of my labor with Exultation. Amen.

Which Prayer also alludes to the ancient devouter times, which used this
Maniple as a Linen cloth or Handkerchief to wipe their tears, which their
fervent Piety made often to run in abundance from their eyes.

Of the Stole.
THe Stole, which the Priest puts about his Neck, does signify the Yoke of
Obedience, even unto death upon the Cross; whereunto our Lord Jesus submitted
himself for our Redemption. The Priest kisseth the Cross which is upon the
middle of it when he puts it on; to show his cheerful willingness to bear
the sweet Yoke of Christ's Cross with all patience in tribulation. He puts the
two ends overthwart his Breast in form of a Cross, representing (says S.
Bonaventure,) the Passion of Jesus Christ, which the Priest ought to have most
seriously fixed in his heart.

The Stole also does properly signify that long Rope about our Saviors Neck,
whereby those Barbarous Executioners dragged him, charged with the heavy Cross
upon his Neck and Bloody Shoulders. The two Crosses at the ends of the Stole,
hanging on either side of the Priest, do signify the Crosses whereon the Two
Thieves were Crucified by him, one on the right hand, and the other on the
left; and the Cross in the middle, represents that whereon himself was
Crucified, in the middle betwixt them both.

The Priest in putting on the Stole, says, Render me, O Lord, the Stole of
immortality, which I have lost by the prevarication of my first Parents, that,
though I approach unworthily to thy holy Mysteries, yet may I desire joys
everlasting. Amen.

Of the Vestment.
THe Vestment, represents that Purple Garment wherewith the Jews did cloth our
Lord and Savior, after that his most tender Body was all in gory Blood, with
those cruel stripes; and in scornful mockery exposed him to the Peoples view,
with a Reed in his hand, and a Crown of Thorns on his Head, saying, John 19.
Ecce Homo. Behold the Man.

This Vestment consists of two parts, which signify the twofold Charity; the
one toward God, (which is the larger) the other toward our Neighbor; Deuteronomy. 6.
we being commanded to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our
selves. The great Cross upon the back of the Vestment, is to put us in mind of
our Divine Redeemer as he went forth of Jerusalem, carrying his heavy Cross
upon his wounded Shoulders. Finally, the Priest, when he puts on the Vestment,
says, Lord, who assurest us that thy Yoke is sweet, and thy Burden light,
vouchsafe that I may so wear it, that thereby I may obtain thy boly Grace. Amen.

What the Priest thus attired, does represent to us.
THe Priest coming forth to the Sacrifice thus attired with these holy.
Ornaments, does represent our blessed Savior led forth through the streets of
Jerusalem, to his bitter Death and Passion. And by the Altar is signified,
Mount Calvary, upon which he was Crucified for our Redemption.

And it is worthy to be here noted, that who mock and scorn both at these holy
Ornaments, as likewise at the Priest for wearing them, do rightly resemble the
spiteful Jews, who most blasphemously mocked and scorned our Savior Jesus
Christ himself, in the Purple Robe and Thorny Crown, which they had put upon
him for that end.

What is represented by the Clerk carrying the Book before the Priest.
THe Clark carrying the Book before the Priest, does represent the Angel
Gabriel who brought the good tidings of our Savior becoming incarnate for our
Salvation; which is a high Office, and ought to be used by the Clark with all
devout Piety and Reverence. And, would Christians but consider the honor and
infinite great spiritual gains which are to be got by those who have the
happiness to serve their Sovereign Lord with due Re^erence and Devotion in that
near approaching Office: they would not permit, nor make it, (as they do) their
Lackeys employment, nor would they suffer their Servant to deprive them of that
honor, whereof the greatest Mortal Prince is far unworthy.

Wherefore the Missal is laid first on the right side of the Altar.
THe Clark carries the Book to the right end of the Altar, where he lays it
down shut, to be opened afterward by the Priest himself. Hereby to signify to
us how the holy Gospel was first manifest to the Jews, as is testified, Acts
13. To you it behoved us first to to speak the Word of God.

Wherefore the Book is shut when it is laid upon the Altar.
THe Book is shut, to show that all things were closed under dark shadows and
figures, until the coming of Jesus Christ, who revealed the Mys^eries of our
holy Faith to the Apostles. And so ought the Priest to Preach, to Teach, and to
lay open the Word of God and the holy Scripture to the People; as his there
laying open the Book does signify.

THe Priest in this sort adorned, and accompanied with the Clark to assist him,
having placed the Chalice upon the Altar, and opened the Book, descends to the
lowest step; where, in imitation of the humble Publican, he profoundly boweth
himself to the Crucifix, saying, Luke 18.
(at least in his heart) God be merciful to me a Sinner. And then with all
fervent Devotion, and true Reverence, he begins the most holy Sacrifice of
the Mass, in which jesus Christ, true God and Man, ^s really offered; the
memory of his Death and Passion is renewed; his Sacred Merits are thereby
applied in remission of our Sins; our Souls are replenished with many heavenly
Benedictions; and therein is given unto us the happy pledge of Future and
Eternal Glory.

And the faithful Christian assisting devoutly at this Holy Sacrifice, does
offer, together with the Priest, the self-same Victim in expiation for his
Sins, which was offered upon the Cross for the Redemption of all the World, it
being the self-same Price and Satisfaction of Application upon the Altar, as it
was of Redemption upon the Cross. And it is that clean and pure Sacrifice
foretold and promised also b the Prophet Malacky to be continually, Mal. c. 1.
and in all places offered in his Name.

All which seriously considered, Oh! with what Affection, Reverence, Purity and
Devotion ought we to assist at this Divine Sacrifice: so venerable unto Angels,
as may greatly confound our Impiety, and little true respect we bear to those
dreadful Mysteries: at which, Oh! how usually do careless Christians (to their
great reproach,) assist with less respect and Reverence, than they durst appear
in a Princes Chamber.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
The Succession of the Church and Sacraments, from Christ and his Apostles, to
the end of the World; cleared and stated according to the Ancient Doctrine of
the Greek and Latin Fathers. Price 6 d.

A short Catechism by way of Question and Answer: The Answers of which, are
taken from express words of Scripture: With some plain Inferences arising from
the said Texts concerning Succession and the Blessed Sacrament.

A brief Discourse of Confession to a Lawful Priest. Wherein is treated of the
Last Judgment. Price bound 1 s.

THE METHOD Of saying the ROSARY Of Our BLESSED LADY: As it was Ordered by Pope
^IUS the Fifth, of the Holy Order of Preachers; And as it is said in Her
Majesty's Chapel at St. JAMES's.

The Sixteenth Edition.

flower: printer's device? MRA



At London, In the Year 1686.

An ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning the following Method of saying the ROSARY.
THE Devotion of the Rosary, so called, because it is, as it were, a Chaplet of
Spiritual Roses; that is, of most sweet and devout Prayers, was first revealed
by the B. Virgin to St. Dominick, (the Father and Founder of the Holy Order of
Preachers) as a Devotion most efficacious for the obtaining all favors from
God, and averting all evils from our selves. It consists of Fifteen Pater
Noster's, and a Hundred and fifty Ave Mary's, and is divided into three Parts,
whereof each contains in it Five Decads; that is, Five Pater Noster's, and
Fifty Ave Mary's.

To each of these Decads in the following Method is assigned one of the
principal Mysteries of the Life of our Savior, or his B. Mother, as matter of
Meditation, wherein the Mind is to exercise it self while it prays, and
therefore is prefixed before the beginning of each Decad.

The Mysteries also in number Fifteen, are divided into three Parts, answerable
to the three Parts of the Rosary; that is, into Five joyful Mysteries for the
first part of the Rosary; Five Sorrowful, for the Second, and five Glorious for
the Third.

Now the use of the following Method or manner of saying the Rosary, consists
in a devout Application or Attention of the Mind to the Mystery assigned, while
the Decad is saying, and raising correspondent Affection in the Will, such as
the Devotion and necessity of each one shall suggest: For example, in the first
part, of Joy and Thanksgiving for the coming of our Redeemer, and the great
work of our Redemption. In the second, of Compassion for the suffering of our
Lord, and Contrition for our sins which were the cause of them. In the third,
of Exaltation of the Glory of our Savior, and his B. Mother, and hope through
the Merits of his Passion, and her Intercession, to be made partakers of Glory
with them.

He that shall say the Rosary with this attention of Mind, and affection of
Will, shall undoubtedly give much Glory to God, and reap much benefit to his
own Soul; which was the Intention of Pope PIUS the Fifth, (a most pious Son of
St. Dominick) in ordering; and is the endeavor at present of one of the
meanest among the Sons of so glorious a Father, in publishing the Meditations
and Prayers, as they are set down in the following Method.

The Joyful Mysteries assigned for Mundays and Thursdays through the Year, and
Sundays in Advent, and after Epiphany, till Lent.
The First Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate on this Mystery how the Angel Gabriel saluted our Blessed
Lady with the Title of Full of grace; and declared unto her the Incarnation of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Then say, Our Father, etc. once. Hail Mary, Ten times.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come; thy
will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily Bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen.

HAil Mary, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou amongst
Women; and blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God,
pray for Us Sinners, now, and in the hour of our Death.

Amen.
The Prayer.
O Holy Mary, Queen of Virgins, by the most High Mystery of the Incarnation of
thy beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by which our Salvation was so happily
begun, obtain for us by thy Intercession, light to know this so great Benefit,
which he has bestowed upon us, vouchsafing in it, to make himself our Brother,
and thee his own most beloved Mother, our Mother also.

Amen.
The Second Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us Contemplate on this Mystery how the Blessed Virgin Mary, understanding
from the Angel, that her Cousin, St. Elizabeth had conceived, went with have
into the Mountains of Judea to visit her, and remained with her three Months.

The Prayer.
O Holy Virgin, most spotless Mirror of Humility; by that exceeding Charity
which moved thee to visit thy Holy Cousin, St. Elizabeth; obtain for us by thy
Intercession, that our hearts may be so visited by thy most Holy Son; that free
from all sin, we may praise him, and give him thanks for ever.

Amen.
The Third Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us Contemplate on this Mystery, how the Blessed Virgin Mary, when the time
of her Delivery was come, brought forth our Redeemer Christ Jesus at Midnight,
and laid him in a Manger, because there was no room for him in the Innes in
Bethlehem.

The Prayer.
O Most pure Mother of God, by thy Virginal and most joyful Delivery, by which
thou gave unto the World thy only Son our Savior; we beseech thee obtain for
us (by thy Intercession) Grace to lead so pure and Holy a Life in this World,
that we may worthily sing without ceasing, both Day and Night, the Mercies of
thy Son, and his Benefits to us by thee.

Amen.
The Fourth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LET us Contemplate in this Mystery, how the most Blessed Virgin Mary, on the
day of her Purification presented the Child Jesus in the Temple, where Holy
Simeon giving thanks to God, with great Devotion received him into his arms.

The Prayer.
O Holy Virgin, most admirable Mistress and Pattern of Obedience; who did
present in the Temple, the Lord of the Temple; obtain for us by thy beloved
Son, that with holy Simeon and devout Anna, we may praise and glorisie him for
ever.

Amen.
The Fifth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LET Us Contemplate in this Mystery, how the Blessed Virgin Mary, having lost
without any fault of hers, her beloved Son in Jerusalem; she sought him for the
space of three days, and at length found him the third day in the Temple, in
the midst of the Doctors disputing with them, being of the age of twelve years.

The Prayer.
MOst blessed Virgin more than Martyr in thy suffering, and yet the comfort of
such as are afflicted; by that unspeakable Joy wherewith thy Soul was ravished
in finding thy beloved Son in the Temple, in the midst of the Doctors disputing
with them; obtain of him for us, so to seek him, and to find him in the Holy
Catholic Church that we may never be separated from him.

Amen.
Salve Regina.
HAil Holy Queen, Mother of Mercy, our Life, our Sweetness, and our Hope; to
Thee do we cry, poor banished Sons of Eve: to Thee do we send up our sighs,
mourning and weeping in this Valley of Tears: turn then most gracious Advocate,
thy Eyes of Mercy toward Us, and after this our Exile ended, show unto Us the
blessed Fruit of thy Womb, Jesus. O most clement, most pious, and most sweet
Virgin Mary.

Verse. Pray for Us Holy Mother of God.

That we may be made worthy of the Promises of Christ.

Let us pray.
HEar, O merciful God, the prayer of thy Servants, that we who meet together in
the Society of the most Holy Rosary of the B. Virgin, Mother of God, by her
Intercession, may by Thee, be delivered from the dangers that continually hang
over us.

Amen.
The Dolorous, or sorrowful Mysteries for Tuesdays and Fridays through the
Year, and the Sundays in Lent.
The First Mystery.
The Meditation.
LET us Contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus was so afflicted for Us
in the Garden of Gethsemani, that his Body was bathed in a Bloody Sweat, which
ran trickling down in great drops unto the ground. Our Father, Hail Mary, as
before.

The Prayer.
MOst Holy Virgin, more than Martyr, by that ardent Prayer, which thy beloved
Son poured forth unto his Father in the Garden, vonchsafe to intercede for us,
that our passions reduced to the obedience of Reason, we may always, and in all
things conform, and subject our selves to the Will of God.

Amen.
The Second Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us Contemplate on this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ was most cruelly
scourged in Pilate's House, the number of the Stripes they gave him, being
above five thousand. ( As it was revealed by St. Briget.)

The Prayer.
O Mother of God, overflowing Fountain of Patience, by those stripes thy only
and most beloved Son vouchsafed to suffer for us, obtain of him for us Grace,
that we may know how to mortify our rebellious senses, and cut off all
occasions of sinning, with that Sword of grief and compassion which pierced thy
most tender Soul.

Amen.
The Third Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how those cruel Ministers of Satan platted
a Crown of sharp thorns, and most cruelly pressed it on the Most Sacred Head of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prayer.
O Mother of our Eternal Prince and King of Glory, by those sharp Thorns,
wherewith his most holy Head was pierced; we beseech thee, that by thy
Intercession we may be delivered here from all motions of Pride, and in the day
of Judgment from that confusion, which our sins deserve.

Amen.
The Fourth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt Us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ, being sentenced
to die, bore with great patience the Cross, which was laid upon him for his
greater torment and ignominy.

The Prayer.
O Holy Virgin, example of patience, by the most painful carrying of the Cross,
in which thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, bore the heavy weight of our sins,
obtain for us of him by thy Intercession, courage and strength to follow his
steps, and bear our Cross after him unto the end of our life.

Amen.
The Fifth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ, being come to
Mount Calvary, was stripped of his Clothes, and his Hands and Feet most cruelly
nailed to the Cross in the presence of his most afflicted Mother.

The Prayer.
O Holy Mary, Mother of God, as the Body of thy beloved Son was for us extended
on the Cross, so may our desires be daily more and more stretched out in his
Service, and our hearts wounded with compassion of his most bitter passion. And
Thou, O most Blessed Virgin, vouchsafe to negotiate for and with us, the work
of our Salvation by thy Powerful Intercession.

Amen.
Glory be to the Father, etc.

Hail Holy Queen, etc. with the Verse and Prayer.

The Glorious Mysteries for Wednesdays, and Saturdays through the year, and
Sundays after Easter until Advent.
The First Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ triumphing
gloriously over Death, rose again the third day Immortal and Impossible.

Our Father, Hail Mary, as before.

The Prayer.
O Glorious Virgin Mary, by that unspeakable joy thou receiv'st in the
Resurrection of thy only Son, we beseech thee obtain of him for us, that our
hearts may never go astray after the false joys of this World, but may be ever
and wholly employed in the Pursuit of the only true and solid joys of Heaven.

Amen.
The Second Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt Us contemplate on this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ Forty days after
his Resurrection, ascended into Heaven, attended by Angels, in the sight of his
most Holy Mother, his Holy Apostles and Disciples, to the great admiration of
them all.

The Prayer.
O Mother of God, comfort of the afflicted; as thy beloved Son, when he
ascended into Heaven, lifted up his Hands, and blessed his Apostles; so
vouchsafe, most Holy Mother, to lift up thy pure hands to him for us, that we
may enjoy the Benefit of his Blessing and thine here on Earth, and hereafter in
Heaven.

Amen.
The Third Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt Us contemplate on this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being seated on
the right hand of God, sent (as he had promised,) the Holy Ghost upon his
Apostles, who after he was ascended, returning to Jerusalem, continued in
Prayer and Supplication with the B. Virgin Mary, expecting the performance of
his Promise.

The Prayer.
O Sacred Virgin, Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, we beseech thee, obtain by thy
Intercession, that this most sweet Comforter, whom thy beloved Son sent down
upon his Apostles, filling them thereby with spiritual joy, may teach us in
this World the true way of Salvation, and make us walk in the paths of Virtue
and good Works.

The Fourth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the Glorious Virgin twelve years after
the Resurrection of her Son, passed out of this World unto him, and was by him
assumed into Heaven, accompanied by the Holy Angels.

The Prayer.
O Most prudent Virgin, who entering into the Heavenly Palace did fill the
Holy Angels with joy, and Man with Hope; vouchsafe to intercede for us in the
hour of our Death, that free from the Illusions and Temptations of the Devil,
we may joyfully and securely pass out of this temporal state to enjoy the
happiness of Eternal Life.

Amen.
The Fifth Mystery.
The Meditation.
LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the Glorious Virgin Mary, was with
great Jubily and Exultation of the whole Court of Heaven, and particular Glory
of all the Saints crowned by her Son with the brightest Diadem of Glory.

The Prayer.
O Glorious Queen of all the Heavenly Citizens, we beseech thee accept this
Rosary, which as a Crown of Roses we offer at thy feet, and grant most gracious
Lady, that by thy Intercession our Souls may be enflamed with so ardent a
desire of seeing thee so gloriously crowned, that it may never die in us until
it shall be changed into the happy fruition of thy Blessed sight.

Amen.
Hail Holy Queen, etc.

With the Verse and Prayer, as before. And the Litany of the B. Virgin; as
follows.

The LITANIES of our Blessed Lady of Loretto.
So called, For that they are usually sung in that Sacred Church of Loretto,
upon all the Saturdays in the Year, and Feasts of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Anthem. WE fly to your Patronage (O Sacred Mother of God!) despise not our
Prayers in our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O ever glorious
and blessed Virgin.

LOrd have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ
hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven have mercy on us.
God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost,
perfecter of the Elect, have mercy on us. Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on
us. Holy Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God, Pray for us. Holy Virgin of
Virgins, Pray for us. Mother of Christ, Pray for us. Mother of Divine Grace,
Pray for us. Most pure Mother; Pray for us. Most chaste Mother, Pray for us.
Inviolated Mother, Pray for us. Entire Mother, Pray for us. Amiable Mother,
Pray for us. Admirable Mother, Pray for us. Mother of our Creator, Pray for us.
Mother of our Savior, Pray for us. Most prudent Virgin, Pray for us. Virgin to
be Venerated, Pray for us. Virgin to be praised, Pray for us. Powerful Virgin,
Pray for us. Clement Virgin, Pray for us. Faithful Virgin, Pray for us. Mirour
of Justice, Pray for us. Seat of Wisdom, Pray for us. Cause of our joy, Pray
for us. Spiritual Vessel, Pray for us. Honorable Vessel, Pray for us. Rare
Vessel of Devotion, Pray for us. Mystical Rose, Pray for us. Tower of David,
Pray for us. Tower of Ivory, Pray for us. Golden House, Pray for us. Ark of the
Covenant, Pray for us. Gate of Heaven, Pray for us. Morning Star, Pray for us.
Health of the Sick, Pray for us. Refuge of Sinners, Pray for us. Comfortress of
the afflicted, Pray for us. Help of Christians, Pray for us. Queen of Angels,
Pray for us. Queen of Patriarchs, Pray for us. Queen of Prophets, Pray for us.
Queen of Apostles, Pray for us. Queen of Martyrs, Pray for us. Queen of
Confessors, Pray for us. Queen of Virgins, Pray for us. Queen of all Saints,
Pray for us.
Lamb of God, which take away the Sins of the World, spare us O Lord.

Lamb of God which take away the Sins of the World, Graciously hear us, O
Lord.

Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the World, have mercy on us.

Anthem. We fly to your Patronage, O Sacred Mother of God: despise not our
Prayers in our necessities; but ever deliver us from all dangers, O ever
gracious and Blessed Virgin.

Verse. Pray for us Holy Mother of God.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us Pray.
WE beseech Thee, O Lord, pour forth thy Grace into our Hearts, that We, who by
the message of an Angel, have knowledge of the Incarnation of thy Son, by his
Cross and Passion, may be brought to the Glory of the Resurrection. Through the
same Christ our Lord. Amen.

Verse. The Divine help remain always with us. Resp. Amen. Verse, And may the
Souls of the faithful rest in peace.. Amen.

Prayers for the King, Queen, and Queen Dowager.
PSALM XIX.
OUR Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation: the Name of the God of Jacob
protect thee.

Send he aid to thee from the holy place: and from Sion defend he thee.

Be he mindful of all thy Sacrifice: and be thy Holocaust made fat.

Give he unto thee according to thy heart: and confirm he all thy Counsel.

We shall rejoice in thy Salvation: and in the Name of our God we shall be
magnified.

Our Lord accomplish all thy Petitions: now have I known that our Lord has
saved his Christ.

He shall hear him from his holy Heaven: the Salvation of his right hand is in
powers.

These in Chariots, and these in Horses: but we will invocate in the Name of
the Lord our God.

They are bound and have fallen: but we have risen and are set upright.

Lord, save the King, and hear us in the day that we shall invocate thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Verse. Lord, save JAMES our King.

. And hear us in the day that we shall invocate thee.

Let us pray.
WE beseech thee Almighty God, that thy Servant JAMES our King, who through thy
mercy, has undertaken the Government of the Kingdom; may likewise receive the
increase of all Virtues, wherewith being adorned, he may both avoid the
Enormity of Sin, vanquish his Enemies, and by thy Grace attain thee, who art
the Way, Truth, and Life. Through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
To be added to the last Collect at the end of Mass.
AND defend thy Servants, Innocent the Chief Bishop, James our King, Mary our
Queen, and Queen Katherine, together with our selves, and all Christian People,
from all adversity, always, and in all places: Grant Peace and Welfare in our
times, and preserve thy Church from all wickedness. Through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns God with thee, in the Unity of the Holy
Ghost for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

