Sr. HEN MORGAN
F. H. van. Houe. sculp:



THE HISTORY OF THE BUCANIERS: BEING AN Impartial Relation Of all the Battles,
Sieges, and other most Eminent Assaults committed for several years upon the
Coasts of the WEST INDIES By the Pirates of Jamaica and Tortuga.

Both English, and other Nations.

More especially the Unparalled Achievements of Sir H. M.

Made English from the Dutch Copy: Written by J. Esquemeling, one of the
Bucaniers, very much Corrected, from the Errors of the Original, by the
Relations of some English Gentlemen, that then resided in those Parts.

Den Engelseman is even Duyvil zoor even Mensch.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun i^ the Poultrey. 1684.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
COpies, with what Art and Delicacy soever they may be taken, never attain to
the Worth and Accuracy of the Original, unless the Original it self had been
drawn by an unskilful, or a partial hand, and then its failings and
imperfections may be rectified by the Copyer; but to Copy from a sophisticated
Copy, of a sorry Original, is the Devil, and this has happened in the late
Translation of the History of the Buccaniers, which being written originally in
the Dutch, with a French-mans name, for the Author cannot be thought otherwise
than counterband Ware. For the French were never found to be over-ready to
learn other Languages, and especially for one to make choice to express himself
in so harsh an one as Dutch, rather than in his Mother Tongue, is a Miracle.
Wherefore the Dutch Relation it self may reasonably be supposed to have been
jobbled up between a Frenchman and a Hollander, the first furnishing the
Matter, and the latter the Disposition and Ornaments. Now who can otherwise
think but these two would glory over, and extol their own Nations as much as
possibly they could; we having never found either Nation so over-consciencious,
but that their Historians were always ready to put the Integrity and
Impartiality due and requisite to the Title upon the stretch, rather than their
Countrymen should suffer by a plain and faithful Representation. Now a Piece
delineated by such suspicious hands, to be afterward drawn by a Spaniard, who
is no less jealous of, and zealous for the Honor of his Nation, must
infallibly have its truth and probity a little tainted. Thus we must of
necessity conclude, that a man must have abandoned his Reason, who gives entire
Credit to such a spurious Relation, and to have delivered up his Sense and
Experience as a prey to Credulity and Imposture. This the Publisher of the
following Sheets was sensible of, and therefore though he knew both the Dutch
Original and the Spanish Translation contained most excellent Remarks in point
of Natural History, with several Observations never before extant upon that
Province. He thought not fit to prosecute his Design of having them rendered
into the English Tongue, before that he had had them stand the Test of such who
had resided many years in those Parts, and, as it were, been present at, and
Eyewitnesses of those Pyratical Expeditions, and so were fully acquainted with
the Interests and Affairs of our Buccaniers; these Gentlemen were pleased to
correct, purge and reform it of many Abuses and Mistakes, wherewith this
Account was sullied by Self-interessed Pens; so as Reader, you have here the
History of the Buccaniers exposed open before you, and in a condition to
undergo the most impartial View and Scrutiny. Yes, you have it here pruned of
all those Tautologies wherewith the other Accounts are loaded, which is indeed,
as the Hollander says, Veel Spreken en niet seggen. But the merit of these
Sheets does not only consist in Abbreviation and Conciseness, but the Reader
will quickly find how much more it is to be valued than a slavish, a
superstitious draft of so Erroneous a Translation as is that of the Spanish,
which has endeavored to pourtraict the Spaniards more mild and favorable, and
the Buccaniers more cruel and barbarous than they really were. And here I
cannot forbear putting the Reader in mind of God's just Judgment upon the
Spaniards for their inhumane usage of the poor and miserable Native Indians,
and look upon our Countrymen, how horrid soever some of their Actions may have
been, as Instruments of the Divine Vengeance for the punishing those enormous
Crimes, and unparalled Barbarities committed by that Nation upon a naked,
defenseless sortof People, and whose only Crime in their Eyes was their Riches,
and so Destruction was pulled upon them by the goodness and plenty of their
Possessions. And I must needs add, that how home and real soever may be the
Accusations of our Buccaniers Inhumanity and Barbarism, yet that they are but
mere Infants, mere Novices in Cruelty, in comparison of the Spaniards; witness
all Relations of their American Conquests, which even all the Artifice of
Priestcraft, and the plausible pretense of Religion has not been able to
varnish over.

Having thus cleared this Account of all the filth and ordures, wherewith this
Account was poisoned and infected, I do not question but that I may safely
assert this Piece to be as agreeable to, and as necessary for an English
Reader, as any this Age has produced, it thoroughly acquainting us with the
Lives, Laws, and Manners of the Buccaniers, they being for the most part our
Countrymen, or at least the Bravest of them, who have distinguished themselves
in several occasions with that incredible Bravery and Gallantry, that their
Great, Bold, and Generous Exploits in point of Military Conduct and Valor, are
in no wise to be matched by any Circumstances of the Expeditions of the most
famous Conquerours of the Universe. And so far do they exceed the pitiful,
sottish Courage of a Town-Fop for aMistress, or of our common English
Highway-men, that their most sparkling, most illustrious Action seem guilty of
Pusillanimity in comparison of those of our Buccaniers; for they had not to do
with an Effeminate, Dastardly Degenerate sort of People, but with such as were
spirited by their Religion, and fought pro Diis and Focis, and were Headed by
brave Leaders, being commonly those who having performed extraordinary
Achievements in the Spanish Dominions in Europe and Africa have afterward
Employment conferred upon them in the West Indies, as a Reward for their
Services. But though the Spaniards have a sufficient stock of real Bravery, yet
they seldom miss of showing it greater in their Words than in their Actions.
Thus in the Translation into that Tongue, you find many flourishes that ought
to have been left out, but which indeed are as easy to be known as a Child is
by his Father, or as they themselves say, Cada uno es hijo de sus obrus.


And indeed we may say that both the Dutch Author and Spanish Translator were
both of a Herd in that respect, and as the Spaniard says, Oncias bobas, for do
va una van totas.


To the Honorable Sir Henry Morgan, These few Lines are Humbly Dedicated.
THat man's his Makers Image, it is said,
But what is his Makers form I never read:
If there be any likeness, it is in the Mind,
Which still Aspires, and scorns to be Confined;
Godlike Ambition! Does this only Prove,
And shows the Kindred Mankind has to Jove;
Desire of Rule taught men the Art of War,
'Twas this that caused the Blessed above to Jar:
This made the Hero! --
This Godlike fury the Ambitious Hurled,
And led the daring Man to over run the World:
So sure it is plain, that those who thus Aspire,
Have in their Souls, the most Celestial fire.
How much of Jove must then the English have,
Who Are always known to be so stout and brave?
Handfulls of men have scoured a Nation through,
Witness their Gallick Wars, and Flemish too,
And taught the vanquished War by their own overthrow.
But 'twould be mean to mention more, since Fame
Sufficiently Records the English Name:
Say but they are English Redcoats, fire a Gun,
One makes their foes to tremble, the other run;
Let the great Morgan, our famed Buccanier,
In his late Enterprise, make this appear,
Who with a handful of brave English men,
Frighted the whole America of Spain.
And when he was upon the Indian Shore,
Had he from Englands King derived his Power,
Charles had been Crowned the Indies Emperor.
Though the Poles brag of their last years Campaign,
And the French King boast of what has done to Spain.
Great Morgan's Fame shall last as long as there
Is beat of Drum, or any sound to War.
A. B.

The TABLE of the Passages mentioned in this HISTORY.
PART I.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction. CHAP. II. The Original of the American Pirates. p.
1. CHAP. III. How the Pirates Arm their Vessels, and order their Voyages. p. 4.
CHAP. IV. The Original of Francis Lolonnois, and the Progress of his Exploits.
p. 26. CHAP. V. Lolonnois sets forth a Fleet to ravage the Sea Coast Towns of
the Spanish Dominions, with strange and dismal resolutions to sack and plunder.
p. 32. CHAP. VI. He prepares to assail the City of St. James de Leon, and the
Town of Nicaragua, which proves fatal to him. p. 48. CHAP. VII. Of the Famous
Exploits, and Remarkable Actions of Capt. Henry Morgan. p. 60. CHAP. VIII.
Captain Morgan attempts to preserve the Isle of St. Catherines, but fails of
his Design; He takes Puerto del Principe. p. 64. CHAP. IX. He attacks Puerto
Velo, and takes it with little expense, and a small force. p. 71. CHAP. X. The
City of Maracaibo upon the Coast of Venezuela taken. Several Piracies committed
on those Seas. The ruin of three great Spanish Vessels, sent to prevent the
Robberies of the Pirates. p. 80.
PART II.
CHAP. I. CAptain Morgan undertakes another Expedition. p. 105. CHAP. II. His
success in the River de la Hache. p. 107. CHAP. III. The Island of St.
Catherine taken p. 112 CHAP. IV, The Castle of Chagre taken. p. 116. CHAP. V.
Captain Morgan goes to Chagre, and from thence to Panama. p. 120. CHAP. VI.
The Spaniards defeated, and the City of Panama taken. p. 128. CHAP. VII. The
City of Panama set on fire, and the effects thereof. p. 132. CHAP. VIII.
Captain Morgan returns to Chagre, and divides the Spoil. p, 139.
PART III.
CHAP. I. SOme of the Pirates return to Jamaica, with some things remarkable in
their Voyage. p. 144. CHAP. II. They arrive at the Island de los Pinos. p. 156.
CHAP. III. The French are Shipwrackt nigh the Islands of Guadinillas. p. 160.
CHAP. IV. The Isle of Cayana taken by the Dutch, and retaken by the French. p.
166. CHAP. V. The French fight with the Dutch at Tobago, but are beaten. p.
168. CHAP. VI. The French goes the second time to Tobago, and takes it. p.
171. An Appendix. A Description of Tortuga. p. 173. A Description of
Hispaniola, with an account of its Inhabitants, Towns, Villages, Fruits, Trees,
Fowls, Quadrupeds, etc. p. 176.

BUCANIERS HISTORY.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
THE Harpyiae of old were Fabled to have been a Ravenous kind of Fowl,
inhabiting a certain Island, who plundered all that came near theplaces of
their abode; but we do not read that they ranged far abroad in search of their
Prey. But here are a worse kind of Cattle, who would spare no Travel, refuse no
hazards, yea, rake Hell itself, before they would like Fools, run a bootless
Errand: Which the poor Spaniards had too sad experience of, tho, I dare swear,
they would rather have been so credulous as to have given an implicit Faith to
the Relations of Travelers (tho Licentiate Liars) than to have been at the
Charge of so costly an Experimental Knowledge, as this proved to them, as you
may see in this History. These young Sparks, I warranttye, were at first such
Jovial Blades, as could not endure the cares that usually attend Riches, and
could never sleep contentedly, so long as their Pockets were full, and
therefore resolved to rid themselves of that troublesome Guest that robs the
Miser of his nights rest, and gave themselves over to Drinking, Carousing and
Whoring, Indowments, in their account, of a Soul truly Generous. You may easily
conceive that they could not long follow this course of life, but they must
quickly sound the bottom of their Pockets; for all things have a bottom, but
the Ocean and Hell. When they had thus squandred away all their Moneys they
found, that tho it be a vile Trash, yet it is such, that without it they had as
good be out of the World, unless they could, like Chamaelions, live upon the
Air, and therefore set their wits a working to procure more, that they might
follow their former pleasures of Quaffing, and be solaced with the ravishing
Society of their Female Deities. And hearing that his most Catholic Majesty's
Subjects had store of that Catholic Medicine that could cure them of all their
Distempers, they were resolved to make bold with them for some of it in a fair
way, but if that would not do, in plain terms they had a mind to have it, right
or wrong, and if they could but come at it, they never questioned their right
to it. For they never had been great Admirers of Moral Philosophy, and had
never so much conversed in Diogenes his Tun, as that of the Tavern, accounting
all the Moral Philosophers but dull Pedants. Away they go with this resolution,
though they had not at all a like success; for Fortune, as if she had owned
some of them a spite, made them the very Opprobry of their Enemies. However,
those whom Fortune was more propitious to, sufficiently revenged the others
Quarrel. The Spaniards, you may be sure werenot very fond of their visit, and
knowing that they came for some of their Gold, they were not willing to part
with it easily, and therefore either conveyed it to strong Forts out of their
reach, or hid it in its first receptacle, the Bowels of the Earth. But they had
even as good done, as is reported of the Beavers, who when pursued by Hunters
for their stones, knowing for what they are so hunted, bite them off, which the
Hunters finding, desist their further pursuit. For they finding their Bodies,
but missing that they came for, enjoined them a severe Penance, making them
keep Fast till the Pride of their flesh was much abated. But not content with
this, they put them to as severe an Inquisition, as ever his Unholiness, or any
of his Cabinet-Council invented, to extort from them a confession of the
unrighteous Mammon. Yet further, knowing it was hard to trust them who were so
well instructed in the Art of Equivocating with Heretics, when they had got
all they could this way, they threatened to burn their Houses, and sell them for
Slaves, unless they would ransom both. When they had got all they expected, and
now made themselves men, they thought it best to be gone in time, and to return
to their Ports, whence they set forth, that they might again a little indulge
their former pleasures, never resolving to make an Idol of what they had thus
Purchased. Where in a little time, partly the Taverns, and partly their Female
Friends, like Spunges, quickly sucked up their superfluous Moneys, and then
turned them out to seek their new adventures.

But that I may not detain you longer in the Entry, I shall proceed to give you
an account of those Cannibals adventures.

ROCK. BRASILIANO.


FRANCIS LOLONOIS.


PETER FRANCIS.


BARTOLOMEW PORTUGUES.


E. H. Van Houe. Sculp.

CHAP. II. The Original of the American Pirates.
THE American Pirates or Bucaneers, are the Subject of this History; a sort of
People who cannot be said to deserve any other Title, as not being maintained
or upheld in their Actions by any Sovereign Prince. For certain it is, that
when the Kings of Spain have complained by their Ambassadors to the Kings of
England and France, of the Molestations and Robberies done upon the Spaniards,
both at Land and at Sea, by those Pirates upon the Coasts of America, even in
the Calm of Peace, it has been always answered, that such persons did not
commit those Acts of Hostility and Piracy, as Subjects to their Majesty's, and
therefore his Catholic Majesty might proceed against them as he should think
fit. The King of France also added, That he had no Fortress or Castle upon the
Island of Hispaniola, nor received any Tribute thence. It was likewise declared
by the King of England, that he had never given any Patents or Commissions to
those of Jamaica, for committing any Hostility against the Subjects of his
Catholic Majesty.

The first Pirate that was known upon the Island of Tortuga, was Peter the
Great, born at Dieppe in Normandy, who took the Vice Admiral of the Spanish
Fleet near the Cape of Tiburon, upon the Western side of Hispaniola. This
Pirate having been Cruzing at Sea for some time, without finding any thing to
answer his Expectation, at length espied a great Vessel belonging to the
Spanish Fleet, separated from the rest; and though they judg^d her to be much
above their strength, yet such was their covetousness of the Prey, that
theywere resolved to have the Ship, or die in the Attempt; to that purpose they
bored a hole in the sides of their own Boat, that their own Vessel sinking
under them, they might be compelled to attach the Enemy the more vigorously.
Thus resolved, they approached the Ship in the dark, and boarding it
immediately, with only a Pistol in one hand, and a Sword in the other, they ran
into the great Cabin, where they found the Captain, and some of his Companions
playing at Cards. The Spaniards seeing the Pirates aboard before they had
discovered them at Sea, cried out, Jesus bless us, are these Men, or Devils? In
the mean time others of the Pirates made sure of the Gun-Room and Arms therein,
killing all that made any opposition.

Peter the Great, having thus made himself Master of this famous Prize,
detained in his Service as many of the common Seamen as he had need of, and
set the rest ashore; and then with all his wealth set sail for France, where he
continued, without ever returning to America again.

The Planters and Hunters of Tortuga had no sooner understood this happy
success of those Pirates, but they resolved to follow their Example, but
wanting Boats and small Vessels, they set forth in their Canows, and began to
Cruze about Cape de Alvarez, where the Spaniards used to Trade from one City to
another with Hides and Tobacco, and other necessary Commodities.

Of these Boats laden, they took a great number, and carried their purchase to
Tortuga, where they sold it to the Ships that waited in Port for their return;
and thus with the gains of these Prizes, they provided themselves with
necessaries to undertake more considerable designs. Some of their Voyages they
made toward the Coast of Campeche, and others toward that of New Spain, where
the Spaniards at that time drove a great Trade, and where they met a great
number of Trading Vessels, and sometimes Ships of great Burden. So that in
less than a months time two great Ships which the Spaniards had laden with
Plate in the Port of Campeche, and bound for Caraca's, were by them taken and
brought into Tortuga. Which Successes so encouraged the people of the Island,
that from those small Beginnings within a little space of time there were to be
numbered in that small Island and Port above twenty Vessels of those sort of
people.

CHAP. III. How the Pirates Arm their Vessels, and Order their Voyages.
BEfore these Pirates go forth to Sea, they give notice to every one that is
engaged in the design, of the day that they are punctually to Embark, with
orders to every one in particular to provide as many pound of Powder as the
Voyage may be thought to require. Being all aboard, the first thing considered
is where to get provisions of Flesh, especially Pork: For which purpose they
readily conclude to rob such and such Hog-yards, where the Spaniards usually
keep a thousand Head of Swine together. Nor do they give any Quarter to the
Swinekeepers, if they offer to disturb or resist them in their Vocation.

Being thus furnished with provisions, they allow to every man twice a day as
much as they can eat, without weight or measure. Nor has the Captain any
proportion of Flesh, or any thing else more than the meanest Seaman.

Their next deliberation is, where to go and seek their Fortunes; and then for
the Charges, and Division of what is got by the common Stock, that is concluded
upon under Hand and Seal. First, how much the Captain is to have for his Ship;
then the Salary for the Carpenter or Shipwright that careen'd the Vessel, which
generally comes to a hundred, or a hundred and fifty pieces of Eight. For
provisions and victualling they draw out of the common Stock two hundred pieces
of Eight. The Surgeons Salary and Medicaments are rated at two hundred and
fifty pieces of Eight. Lastly, They agree in writing what recompense every one
shall have for the loss of a Limb; for the loss of a Right Arm six hundred
pieces of Eight, or six Slaves; for the loss of a Left Hand five hundred pieces
of Eight, or five Slaves; for a Right Leg five hundred pieces of Eight, or five
Slaves; for the LeftLeg four hundred pieces of Eight, or four Slaves; for an
Eye one hundred pieces of Eight, or one Slave; and for a Finger, the same.

They are very just in their Division, yet with regard to Qualities and Places,
so the Captain is allowed five or six portions to what the ordinary Seamen
have. The Masters Mate has two portions, and the other Officers proportionable
to their Employments. After whom they draw equal parts from the highest to the
lowest Mariner, the Boys not being omitted; for they also draw their half
shares; because that when they take a better Vessel then their own, it is the
Boys duty to set fire on the forsaken Ship.

They observe very good Orders one among another. For in the Prizes that they
take, no man is suffered to take any thing in particular to himself. And they
make a solemn Oath to each other, not to conceal the least thing they find
among the Purchase: so that if any one be found to have falsified that Oath, he
is turned out of the Society.

On the other side they are very civil and charitable one to another, insomuch
that if any one wants what another has, they freely part with it for the others
use.

After they have taken a Prize, the first thing they endeavor to do, is to set
the Prisoners ashore, detaining only some few for their own use, whom they also
set at liberty after two or three years service.

Sometimes they cruze a long time, but meet with nothing considerable: but then
it is that they will venture upon any desperate design, rather then return
empty. Which minds me of the Story of Peter Francis, an Arch-Pirate, who having
been a long time at Sea with his Boat, and twenty six Persons waiting for the
Ships that were to return from Maracaibo toward Campeche, and finding no
Booty, resolved to direct his course to Rancherias, near the River de la Plata,
where lies a rich Bank of Pearl, to the Fishery of which, they usually send a
dozen of Vessels from Cartagena, with a Man of War to guard them. Now this
Pearl Fleet rid at an Anchor at that time, at the mouth of the River de la
Hacha, the Man of War being scarce half a League distant from the small Ships,
the wind calm. The Pirate spying them in that posture, presently pulled down
his Sails, and rowed along the Coast, pretending to be a Spanish Vessel that
came from Maracaibo; but no sooner was he come to the Pearl Bank, but he
presently set upon the Vice Admiral of the Fleet, mounted with eight Guns, and
threescore Men well arm d, commanding them to surrender, and after a stout
Resistance of the Spaniards, took her. Being thus possessed of the
Vice Admiral, he resolved next to adventure upon the Man of War, and so to
master the rest of the Fleet. To this purpose he presently sunk his own Boat in
the River, and putting forth Spanish Colors, weighed Anchor with a little
wind, which began then to stir. But the Man of War perceiving one of his Fleet
to set Sail, weighed, and stood after the Vessel that moved, fearing lest the
Mariners might have some design to run away with the Ship and Wealth which they
had aboard. Thereupon the Pirates gave over their resolutions of Attacking the
Man of War, and attempted to get out of the River, and gain the open Sea, with
the Spoil they had got, to which purpose they made all the Sail the Vessel
would bear. But so it happens, that the Devil sometimes bears his dearest
Friends a shame, so it fell out with our Captain, for by reason that the
Pirates had laid on too much sheet, a sudden gust of wind brought their main
Mast by the Board, so that now wanting Wings, the Man of War gained upon 'em
every moment, and at length coming up with 'em, laid the hardy Pirate aboard.
Nor did the Spaniards gain an easy Victory for the resolute Rascals, loath to
let go so rich a Prize, held it fast in their Sword hands, till overpowered
with number, they were forced to surrender, though it was not done without
Articles neither, which the Spaniards were forced to allow'em, That they should
set them on shore upon free Land, without doing any harm to their Bodies. Upon
which Composition, to their great disconsolation with sorrowfnl hearts, they
parted with all they had taken, which was worth, only in Pearls, above a
hundred thousand pieces of Eight, besides the Vessel, Provision and Goods,
which being put together, would have held the brisk Boys tack in Wine and
Wenches for one half year, though they had spent like so many Caesar's.

Nor must we omit another bold Attempt much of the same nature, performed by a
certain Portuguize, a Person known by no other name, then Portugal Bartholmew,
who cruising in his Boat from Jamaica, where he had only thirty Men, and four
small Guns, upon the Cape de Corriente, in the Island of Cuba, met with a great
Ship bound for Havana, from Mara Caebo, and Cartagena, well provided with
twenty great Guns, and threescore and ten Men, Seamen and Passengers. I will
not dispute whether this Pyrate understood Latin or no, but certain it is, he
apprehended something of the Proverb, That Fortune favors the Daring. In short
he would not see any Prize go by his Mill, and so without Complements he
attached this great Ship with his few men; The first time he was repulsed; but
finding he had received no great damage, he resolved to try the to'ther,
Nothing venture, nothing have; so that after a long and obstinate Combat he
made himself Master of the great Ship with his small Vessel. For some body must
be beaten, and it seems the Pyrate would not, therefore the others must. In
this Encounter the Portugal lost ten Men, and four wounded, so that he had
twenty still safe and sound.

Having thus possessed themselves of the Ship, the next thing was what to do
with it. The wind, which is not always the Seamans Friend, nor will not blow as
men would have it, would not let 'em go to Jamaica, because it blew full
i'their Teeths, therefore they resolved to steer to Cape St. Anthony, on the
West side of the Island of Cuba, there to recruit themselves, and take in fresh
water.

But as ill luck would have it, and ill luck will rule the Roast sometimes,
being almost within sight of the Cape, they were unexpectedly met by three
great Ships coming from New-Spain, and bound for Havana. These three Ships,
there being no way to escape, and certainly he would have escaped if he could,
made Prize of the Pyrate, and rescued the Ship out of his Clutches, Nor was the
Pyrate to be blamed for not doing more then Hercules himself could do. So that
they who were Lords and Masters before, through the sudden change of Fortune,
in a moment found themselves poor, oppressed, and stripped of all their Wealth,
and disappointed of a thousand Jovial designs which they had in their heads.
Well, but what became of these poor Rats? Soon after the great Ship, wherein
they had the happiness to be stowed, arrived at Campeche, where the Merchants
coming aboard to visit the Captain of the Vessel, knew the Portuguize Pyrate,
and knew him to be one that had been the plague and vexation of those Coasts,
one that had committed more Insolences, Murders, and Robberies, then he was at
that time in a capacity to make satisfaction for. Thereupon they resolved to
hang him and his Companions fairly out of the way. To this purpose they set up
a Gibbet, with a resolution to rid him out of the way next morning, without any
other Ceremony, then only carrying him from the Ship to the Gallows; For they
did not think it requisite to stand upon the Formality of Juries to one that
was never used to trouble his Conscience with Justice and Honesty. The poor
Portugal having intelligence of this dismal Plot, he resolved not to hang if he
could help it. And therefore meditating an escape he got two empty earthen
Jarrs, wherein the Spaniards carry Wine from Spain to the West Indies, and
stopped them close, which he intended to use instead of Bladders, he fixed,
rather to trust the Sea then the Land. Then waiting for the Night, when all the
rest were asleep, with a Knife that he had got by stealth, he gave the Sentinel
that guarded him such a mortal and certain stab, that he soon discharged him of
his double diligence, and so committed himself to the Sea, and by the help of
his Jarrs soon got ashore, where he took Sanctuary in the Woods, and fed upon
wild Herbs till the heat of the pursuit was over: When the Coast was clear,
away he crept out of the Woods, and in a fortnights time, after he had measured
forty Leagues, hungry, thirsty, and full of fears, and mortifying his Body with
a kind of Lent that no way pleased, he arrived at the Cape of the Mischievous
Golphe, where he found a Vessel of Pirates, and Comerades of his own
acquaintance come from Jamaica.

To these Pirates he related his Adversities and Misfortunes, and withal
desired them to lend him a Boat and twenty Men, being resolved to return to
Campeche, and to fetch away that great Ship, wherein he had been so rudely
entertained. The Pirates heard him like Gentlemen, with Commiseration, and like
Christians, most charitably granted the poor Portugal his desire, who being
thus equipped, made all imaginable haste to execute his design, and by way of
surprise, for he was not so kind as to send word of his coming, he made himself
easily Master of the Vessel, assailing the Seamen, before they could put
themselves in a posture of Defense.

And now was the adventurous Portugal by a second turn of Fortunes Wheel brave
and wealthy again, who had been so lately in the same Vessel a poor Prisoner
condemned to the Gallows. With this great Purchase he designed greater things,
for the Ship was full of rich Merchandise, though the Plate had been carried
ashore, and thus having grasped an Empire in his hopes, away he Sailed for
Jamaica. But coming near the Island of Pino's, to the South of Cuba, Fortune
foully played the flut with him again, never to show him favor more. For a
sudden and violent storm arising at Sea, dash't the Ship against Rocks or Sands
called Jardines. The Portugal and his Men escaped in a Canow, and got at length
to Jamaica, to prepare himself for new designs.

We come now to a Dutchman, a Native of Groninghen in the Low Countries; who
was called by his own Companions Brasilano, as having spent most of his time in
Brasile; nor would he ever be known by any other name.

This Fellow was forced to retire from Brasilie, at what time the Portuguizes
retook that Plantation from the West India Company of Amsterdam; and so came to
Jamaica; where being at a plunge how to get a Livelihood, he entered himself
into the Society of the Pirates; under whom he served as a private Seaman for
some time. Among them his Courage, that ought to have been better employed,
gained him such a Reputation, if it may be so called, that he was thought fit
to be the Captain of a dissenting Faction of Mutineers, who having taken a
disgust against their old Commander, deserted his Boat, and sitted themselves
out again under the Conduct of Brasiliano.

Nor had he been out many days at Sea, before he took a great Ship coming from
New-Spain, where he found a great quantity of Plate, which he carried, Vessel
and all to Jamaica.

This Action caused him to be much esteemed at home, and feared abroad, tho as
to the Government of himself a mere Brute, as one that in his drink would kill
and slay all people he met in the Streets; and to the Spaniards barbarously
cruel, out of an inveterate hatred he had against that Nation. Which, with the
rest of his actions that follow, plainly demonstrate that he never was a Person
that studied Cases of Conscience. For he roasted several of the Spaniards alive
upon wooden Spits, because they would not show him the Hog yards, where he
might steal Swine. After he had exercised several of these Cruelties upon the
Coast of Campeche, a dismal tempest surpised him so violent, that he lost his
Ship, only the Seamen and himself escaped with their Muskets, and some Powder
and Bullet. These got ashore with much ado in their long Boat, and keeping
along the shore, marched directly with all the speed they could to Golpho
Treste, which was a place where the Rovers used to put in to refresh themselves.

In their March, sorely oppressed as they were with Hunger and Drought, almost
as merciless as themselves, they were pursued by a Troop of Spanish Horse,
consisting of about an hundred. But Brasiltano nothing terrified; cheered up
his Companions, who were no more than thirty, telling 'em it was better to die
with their Arms in their hands, than to fubmit to those from whom they could
expect nothing but Torments, and a languishing Death. Thereupon they took their
Advantage of ground, faced the Spaniards; and managed their Firearms with that
dexterity, that they took the Spaniards off their Horses, like so many Bows
from so many Cherry-trees. So that the Dons not liking their warm
entertainment, made that use of their Horses, that men do who have no mind to
be killed. The Pirates thereupon seeing themselves out of danger, stripped the
Dead, and made bold with what was most convenient for their present supply,
which done, they borrowed several Horses which were feeding in the adjoining
fields; for neither was Horse-stealing a Crime with them; neither did they care
to go afoot when they could ride. Pursuing their Journey, they spied a Boat
from Campeche, well manned, guarding certain Canows that were lading Wood. To
keep their hands therefore in ure, they resolved to have those Boats; and to
that purpose sent a Detachment of six of their Men, who as they were much
better at watching than praying, watched their opportunity so well, that by the
next morning they got possession of all the Canows, and by the help of them
presently picked up the Diminutive Man of War that lay to guard the rest.

Having thus made themselves Masters of this small prey, and being again got
upon their own Element the Water, they wanted nothing but bodily sustenance,
which rather than want, they killed their Land Horses, of which they had now no
farther need; and having quartered the Delicious Flesh, they salted it with
such Salt as the Wood-cutters had brought along with 'em for their own use;
excellent Victuals till they could get better; and better they will have ere it
be long, or they will lose their Aims.

Thus resolved, away they put to Sea with the Fagot-Fleet, and now happy Man
catch a Mackerel, which was gliding along from New Spain to Maracaibo. Have at
her then by ghess: For they knew no business that Vessel had to do at
Maracaibo; thereupon they seized her, laden with several sorts of other men's
Goods, and a considerable quantity of pieces of Eight, which without examining
whose they were, they took possession of Vessel and all, and so returned to
Jamaica, where they were joyfully received, and looked upon as Angels by the
Taverns and Baudy-houses, where they wasted in a trice, what they had been
purchasing with great Hazard and Hardship. For to their Immortal praise be it
spoken, they spared for no cost that pampered their Debauchery with Wine and
Strumpets: Insomuch that there was one whom I knew, that gave no less than 500
pieces of Eight to a common Harlot, to please his voluptuous Fancy in beholding
her as she came into the World, and was to go out of it; that is to say in the
Original, that he might have a delightful prospect of her naked Body. Another
at the same time, in his Frolicks brought a whole Pipe of Wine, caus^d it to be
brought out into the Street, and in the heat of his Courtesy, forced all that
passed by to drink with him, threatening to pistol all that refused to be
complaisant to his humor. And because he could not drink it that way fast
enough, he would with both hands lave the Liquor out of the Tub, and throw it
upon the Clothes of the Women and People as they happened to come by: Not
considering in his present generosity, that it cost him the hazard of his Life.

Nor are they less liberal one to another. For if any one of the Crew has
wasted all his Dividend, they freely supply him again as long as it lasts. And
so long they have great Credit at the Taverns and Stews; but it behooves them to
be very careful how they run very deep in Debt, in regard it is a common Custom
in Jamaica to sell one another for Debt, as it happened to one I knew, that in
less than three Months had consumed no less than three thousand pieces of Eight.

Therefore Brasilliano, having in a short time spent all his ill-gotten gains,
was constrained to undertake another Sea-ramble to recruit his Fortunes. To
this purpose he set forth again to the Coast of Campeche, which was the place
that afforded most profit. Being there arrived, he put himself into a long
Boat, for discoveries sake; but then it was that Fortune crossed the Proverb,
not always assisting the venturous. For poor Brasilliano was there taken with
all his Men, and carried before the Governor, who presently cag'd 'em up in a
Dungeon, with a design to send 'em all to Heaven in a string. Which guilty
Brasilliano, who was conscious of his deserts, well understanding, made use of
his wits to prevent. To which purpose he wrote a Letter, and sent it to the
Governor, as coming from other Pirates, in a threatening Style, That his
Donship should have a care what he did to those persons he had in his Custody,
as he tendered the good of his Countrymen, swearing withal, that if he did not
let their Friends go, they would give no Quarter to any of the Spanish Nation
that should fall into their Clutches.

This caused the Governor to put on his Castillillian Considering Cap. So that
he calling to mind the diverse and sundry mischiefs those Rovers had done upon
the Spanish Coasts, and weighing well how many they might do more, released the
Goal-Birds, binding them by Oath, to leave their Trade of Piracy for ever. And
because he understood the constitution of their Consciences, he sent them in
the next Gallys for Spain, which was to them a second Inquisition. And
therefore soon after their Arrival there, they made use of all their Wits to
get rid of that Religious Place, so that in a short time they all returned
again to Jamaica, which they liked much better than the Air of Spain, not so
agreeable with their designs. Having there recruited themselves, they quite and
clean forgot their Oaths, as if they had left 'em behind in Europe, and putting
forth to Sea again, committed greater Robberies and Piracies than before,
revenging themselves upon the Spaniards, for yoaking their Consciences with all
the Cruelties that their Rage and Fury could invent.

Thereupon the Spaniards perceiving there was no way to convert these Infidels,
nor lessen their Number, which rather daily multiplied, so that there was no
Truce to be made with these Sea-Locusts, they resolved to diminish the number
of their Ships, and to deprive these Water-Rats of the opportunity of doing
mischief, by forbearing Trade as much as it was possible. But this Spanish
project did little good, for the Pirates no sooner smelt it, but they resolved
to take another course; and gathering into greater numbers to prey upon the
Land, to leave playing at the small Game of taking Ships, and to try what they
could do upon whole Towns.

The first of these Land-Invaders was one Lewis Scot, a bold Britain, who
fack'd and pillaged Campeche it self; who after he had almost ruined the Town
destroyed all that he could, and put the Town to an excessive Ransom, forsook
it, for those that came after to take his gleanings To Scot succeeded
Mansfeildt, a hopeful Successor, who attempted to set footing in Granada, and
so extend his Piracies to the South Sea. Wherein he made a very praiseworthy
progress, till want of provisions drove him back. His first Assault was upon
the Island of St. Katherines, where he took some few Prisoners, who showed him
the way to Cartagena, one of the Chief Cities of New Granada. But now commend
me to the Renowned John Davis a Jamaican born, one that had sucked in Piracy
with his Mothers Milk, whose Exploits ought to be engraved on Pillars of Brass,
who having been cruz'd, in vain, in the Gulf of Pocatauro, and finding no
Rivation, resolved to land in Nicaragua it self.

To that purpose having found a convenient Hole to lay his Ships snug, and out
of view, he took along with him fourscore of his Crew, out of an honest design
to Rob the Churches, and Rifle the Houses of the most wealthy Citizens of
Nicaraegua. So rowing up the River in the Nightime, in the Daytime they lay
concealed among the Trees that, grow very thick in those Countries upon the
Shoars, and thus the third Night they drew near the unfortunate City, where the
Centry placed upon the Watch took them for Fishermen fishing in the Lake, but
was damnably mistaken; which he also took the rather for granted, because he
heard'em speak Spanish; a Language, which though the Pirates do not learn
Grammatically, yet are they very well versed in it, as improving the learning
for their own ends. The Sentry thus deceived, and as secure as a Thief in a
Mill, was presently seized by an Indian of the Crew, and dexterously murdered
without any noise or hubbub. Having thus laid the Sentry asleep, that they
might be in a better capacity to disturb the sleeping peoples Rest, they
entered the City, and knocking at four or five of the chief Houses in the shape
of Friends, they were no sooner let in, but they played the Devils, falling with
an incredible diligence to their Trade of Ransacking and plundering whatever
they could lay their hands on, having first made sure of the Proprietors, and
then Administering upon the Goods of the Intestate. Nor were they forgetful in
this heat of business to rifle the Churches, and sacred places according to
their first pious Intentions, -- performing all their vows according to the
form of the Indictment, Not having the fear of God before their Eyes.

By this time they who had escaped their clutches, had by their Cries and
Lamentations, put the whole Town into uprore and Alarm; so that the people
began to rally, and put themselves into a posture of defense. Which the bold
Enemy perceiving, they made all the haste they could to retire with the Booty
they had got, carrying along with 'em some Prisoners to redeem their Brethren,
if any one should happen to be taken in the pursuit. But they got all safe to
their Ship, as the Devil would have it; and well it was they were so speedy,
for they were no sooner got out to Sea, but they beheld above fivehundred well
armed Spaniards upon the shore; to whom, however they put off their Caps very
civilly, crying out, You come too late Gaffers. And so in truth they did, for
they could not with their appearing force the obstinate Rovers to restore a
doight of what they had got, and besides before they would dismiss their
Prisoners, they constrained 'em to procure their Guests as much flesh as they
thought requisite for their Voyage.

This Purchase of theirs amounted to above four thousand pieces of Eight in
ready Cash, besides a great quantity of uncoin'd Plate and Jewels, computed to
be worth about fifty thousand pieces of Eight more. Which they carried all safe
to Jamaica, where they spent it according to the Proverb, so that they were
constrained in a short time to seek out new Adventures. To which purpose C.
Davies, now more renowned among his Gang then Bacchus, that Conquered India,
was chosen Admiral of seven or eight Boats; with which he directed his course
first to the North of Cuba, but failing there, he steered toward the Coast of
Florida, where he sacked a small Town, by the name of St. Austins of Florida.
To which place, though there belonged a Castle that had in it 200 men, yet
could they not prevent the pillaging the Town. Such Sons of Thunder and
Lightning are the true Buccaneers.

CHAP. IV. The Original of Francis Lolonnois, and the Progress of his Exploits.
THis same Dragon of a Buccaneer, was born in France, at a place called Les
Sables, or the Sands of Olonne. Though had he never been born, it might have
been better for some hundreds. In his Youth he was sent to the Charibdy Islands
as a slave, where without being put to School, he learnt Roguery sufficient to
advance his Name among the wicked. Being out of his Time, he went to the
Academy of Hispaniola, where he studied for some time among the Hunters, before
he began his Exploits against the Spaniards. At first he was no more then a
Bachelor of Art, or common Mariner, but at length he was thought worthy of a
higher degree, and was made Governor of Tortuga, where Fortune favored him at
first with such a liberal success, that he gained great Riches. But after she
had thus given him her Milk, she at length kicked down the Pail. And first, in
a violent storm she cast away his Ship; at what time he and all his men were
saved, yet being come ashore, the Spaniards fell upon him, killing the greatest
part of his men, and wounding him himself; nor could he have possibly escaped,
had not his misery helped him at a dead lift. For after many inventions he
bethought himself of a project to smear his Face with sand, and his own blood,
Which when he had done, he lay down close among the dead, till the Enemy had
quitted the Field.

When they were gone, up he got, bound up his wounds as well as he could, and
so in a Spanish disguise trudged away to Campeche, where he saw the rejoycings
of the Spaniards for his supposed Death, expressed by Bonfires, and many other
tokens of Public Joy. While he stayed there, he got in with several slaves, to
whom he promised Liberty, if they would follow him; who not much liking their
present Condition, followed his directions, which was to steal him one of their
Masters Canows. Trim Tram, quoth the Proverb. These Fellows very honorably and
justly stole him one of their Masters Boats, in which, at length, by the
assistance of his Benefactors, he got aboard, and so got safe to Tortuga, the
Seminary where he had first commenced Doctor in the Art of Villainy. There in a
short time, though his Fortunes were very shallow, he got two Canows, with Men
and Arms, as Tailors furnish young Gentlemen with new Clothes, upon Credit.
Thus set up again, he directed his Course for the North-side of Cuba, where
lies a small Town, by the name of de los Cayos, the Inhabitants of which Place
drove a great Trade in Tobacco, Sugar and Hides; but all in small Boats,
because of the shallows in those parts.

There Lolonnois resolved at first to drive a small Trade, like a young
beginner. But being discovered by the Fishermen, who gave notice of his coming,
he was disappointed of his present design. For the Townsmen sent away
immediately to the Governor of Havana, giving him notice that Lolonnois was
come to destroy them with two Canows; who, though he did not believe Lolonnois
to be alive, yet at their importunity, sent them a Ship and ten Guns for their
security: Of this, Lolonnois had intelligence, but was so far from retiring out
of fear, that hearing the Ship lay at an Anchor in the River of Estera, he
resolved to Attack her, not a little enraged at something of farther
Intelligence that he had received, that the Spanish Governor had given Order to
the Captain not to return, unless he had totally destroyed the Pirates, to
which purpose he had given them a Negro to officiate the Office of a Hangman,
in the dispatch of all but Lolonnois himself, whom he ordered to be brought to
Havana, for a more splendid Execution. Therefore Lolonnois resolved, if he
could, to Triumph over the Triumphers, and to let em understand that they had
reckoned without their Host. To effect his purpose, he first seized certain
Fishermen to show him the entrance into the Port in the night time, when they
came near the Ship, the Watch called out, From whence their Vessel, and whither
they had seen any Pirates? To which, Lolonnois constrained the Fishermen to
answer, They had seen no Pirates, nor any thing like a Pirate, which lulled the
Spaniards into a persuasion that the Rovers were gone.

But the next morning by break of day, Lolonnois assailed the Vessel so
vigorously, that notwithstanding all the resistance the Spaniards could make,
they were forced to surrender their Ship, Hangman and all to the Victor, who
after he had shut 'em down under Hatches, caused the poor wretches to be
brought up one by one, to satisfy his revenge with the loss of their Heads.
Amongst the rest, the Negro Hangman appeared, who begged hard for his life,
whom Lolonnois, after he had made him confess as much as he desired to know,
sent to accompany his Masters. He reserved only one to carry the Tidings to the
Governor of Havana with a Message also in writing, telling him That he had only
retaliated the Kindness which he had intended for himself and his Friends; and
that he hoped to execute the same sentence upon his Donship, which he had
designed for his punishment. Assuring him that all the Mercy which he should
hereafter show to any Spaniard whatever that fell into his hands, should be to
give him no Quarter. On the other side the Governor fretted at his loss, foamed
at the Insolence of the Message, and swore in answer to it, That he would never
give Quarter to the Pirates. But the Spaniards, whowere sensible that the
Pirates had a hundred more opportunities of Revenge then he, desired him not to
make so rash an Oath, that would be much more to their prejudice, then that of
the Pirates, who had got a trick by their Courage and Valor, to keep out of
his power, so that upon second thoughts, he thought fit to curb his passion,
and think well of their cooler advice.

In the mean time Lolonnois gave the Governor leave to Rodomontade, while he
made merry in his Ship, which did not a little glad his heart, as being a
Vessel fit for his turn: for now he wanted nothing but more Men, and more
Provisions to visit the Governor himself. To recruit himself therefore, after
he had cruzed a while in the adjoining Seas to little or no purpose, he steered
for Maracaibo, where by a Wile (and policy sometimes goes beyond strength) he
took a Ship laden with Plate and other Merchandise, to buy Cocao Nuts: And so
satisfied for the present, he returned to Tortuga, where he was received with
no small joy by the Inhabitants, who knew it would not be long before they
should have their share. And now swelled with these Successes, he began to
meditate great Things, designing a Fleet that should carry no less then 500 Men
with necessary Provisions, believing himself to be some petty Prince, and
threatening the destruction of all the Seacost Towns of the Spanish Dominions.
Such is the hatred of those that have nothing, to those that are Masters of
Plenty.

CHAP. V. Lolonnois sets forth a Fleet to ravage the Seacoast Towns of the
Spanish Dominions, with strange and dismal Resolutions to sack and plunder.
What Cruelties the Spaniards committed in their new Conquered Countries of
America, is well known to all the world, by the Relations of their own
Countrymen, therefore though these Buccaneers cannot be excused, yet they may
be in some measure looked upon as the scourges of God for the impious
extirpations of those poor innocent Indians. Well then, Lolonnois having these
lofty designs in his head, gives notice of his Intendments to all the Pirates
far and near. And now methinks I see 'em assembled; and now methinks I hear the
great and furious Lolonnois speaking to the listening and greedy Rovers like
another Agamennon to his Greeks, Sons of Thunder, whose daring Arms are able to
pull Jupiter from his Throne, Shall we always lie hunting paltry Fisher Boats?
Have not the Spaniards Towns and Cities, where Gold and Silver, Pearls and
precious Stones lie Mountain high in Piles? -- And now methinks I hear the
Boystrous Rout interrupting him, cry out with loud Acclamations, Long live
Captain Lolonnois -- The Spaniards tear up the Bowels of our. Mother Earth for
Gold and Silver, but we will tear both from out the Spaniards bowels -- When
Lolonnois beheld this mischievous Unanimity among the Pirates, he struck while
the Iron was hot, and hastened Contributions and Preparations with all the speed
imaginable. Michael de Basco too, a famous Pirate, but one that with more
prudence had preserved what he had got, and now lived at ease, and in dignity,
as being Major of the Island, taken with the Grandeur of the Design, offered to
join with Lolonnois, upon Condition he might command the Land Forces, which
being agreed with some other Covenants (as Thieves many times far sooner cement
then honest men) a Fleet is presently got ready, and six hundred and odd
Miscreants are stowed in it; all full of Hopes, and swelled with expectation;
so that if you could have looked into their Bellies, you might have seen whole
Towns i'their Guts, for they had already swallowed all the Spanish America.

All things being in a readiness, they set Sail for Bayala, upon the North-side
of Hispaniola, where they took in a supply of French Hunters, Volunteers, and
furnished themselves with Provisions, and other Necessaries, and now there is
no man of Compassion, but would pity the poor Diego's, and Roderigoe's, to
consider the sad disaster that threatened them.

From thence they set Sail to the Eastern Cape of the Island of Punta d Espada,
where they espied a Ship coming from Porto Ricco, bound for New-Spain. The
Trojans never hoop'd so, when they landed in Italy, as the Pirates did at the
sight of that Ship, which they saw coming to offer itself as the first fruits
of their intentended Harvest. This Ship Lolonnois resolved as Admiral to take
alone, and therefore ordered the rest of the Fleet to stay for him upon the
Eastern side of the Cape de Punta d' Espada. Nor did the Spaniards refuse the
Combat, though they had had time sufficient to have gotten out of the way, as
being well armed, and well manned. But they had better have been asleep in their
Beds. For after they had toiled, and sweat, and fought for three hours
together, all to no purpose, they were at length forced to submit to the
Conqueror. This Ship was mounted with sixteen Guns, and had fifty fighting men
to defend her; but notwithstanding all that force, she was constrained to
accommodate the Victors with a hundred and twenty thousand weight of Cocao,
forty thousand pieces of Eight, and Jewels to the value of ten thousand more.
Which was all sent to be unladen at Tortuga, with orders to return to the
Island of Savona, where they should be expected at the general Rendevouze.

In the mean time the rest of the Fleet in their course to Savona, met with
another Vessel carrying from Comana, money to pay the Garrisons, to the Island
of Hispaniola; which was taken without Resistance; yielding the Victors a Ship
with eight Guns, seven thousand weight of Powder, and a great quantity of
Muskets, with other necessaries, and twelve thousand pieces of Eight to defray
Charges.

All this fell as pat as a Pudding to a Friars mouth, for now they were able to
fight the Spaniards with their own Weapons. Great encouragements to the wicked,
who are soon encouraged to do mischief; besides, that the Ship being returned
with recruits of Men from Tortuga, and their new Prize made them appear
formidable. In this splendid condition they hastened to Maracaibo. For seven
hundred men must be maintained, and because they could not maintain themselves,
therefore the Spaniards must; nor would they be charitable of themselves, and
therefore they must be made so.

This Maracaibo is seated in the Province of Nuevavene Zela, in twelve degrees,
and some few minutes of Northern Latitude. The Island is twenty Leagues long,
and twelve broad. The Gulf upon which the City stands, is called the Gulf of
Venezuela, or Bay of Maracaibo; at the mouth of which lie the two Islands of
Vigilias, or the Watch Isle, and the Isle des Polomas, or Pigeon's Isle,
between which two Islands lies the passage into the Bay. On the West Side of
this Bay stands Maracaibo, pleasant to the sight, well built along the shore,
and containing three or four thousand Persons, and among them some eight
hundred Persons able to bear Arms. There is in it one well built Parish Church,
four Monasteries, and an Hospital. The Trade of the Town consists in Hides and
Tobacco, besides, that the Inhabitants are rich in Cattle and Plantations,
affording large quantities of Cocao Nuts, and all sorts of Garden Fruits.

The Port of Maracaibo is large, and very convenient for the building of Ships,
by reason of the great quantity of Timber easily transported thither.

Gibraltar is seated upon the same Lake some forty Leagues higher up in the
Country; a large Place, consisting of about 1500 Inhabitants; of which 400 are
able to carry Arms. But the greatest part of the Inhabitants keep open Shops,
where they follow some one Mechanic Trade or other. The Country round about
it, is full of Plantations of Sugar and Cocao.

As soon then as Lolonnois was arrived with his Fleet in the Golph of
Venezuela, he came to an Anchor without ken of the Watch-Island. The next day
he set Sail for the Bay of Maracaibo, where he landed his men about a League
from the Fort, which commands the Bars, called de la Barra, which Fort is
nothing else but some few Baskets of Earth placed upon a rising ground, which
serves as a Platform for sixteen great Guns, surrounded with several heaps of
Earth to cover the Defendants. The Governor of this Fort having spied their
landing, placed an Ambush in their way, which might, perhaps, have done the
Pirates some mischief, but being discovered by them, was wholly defeated, and
cut off; according to the Proverb of harm watch, harm catch. For the Pirates
were old Birds, not to be caught with Chaff. By'r Lady that was but an ill
beginning for the poor Spaniards, that had not met such a rude company of
Boisterous Hectors never i'their lives before. Lolonnois having removed this
obstacle of an Ambush out of the way, marched directly to the Castle, which
after a contest of three hours, was taken by those fellows, that did not fight
with Spanish Gravity, but without fear or wit. Which bad success, together with
the report which the poor scrubs that escaped from the slaughter of the Ambush,
That the Pirates were coming two thousand strong, put the Inhabitants of
Maracaibo into such a disorder, they made their escape to Gibraltar with all
the speed they could, carrying the best of their goods along with 'em in their
Canows.

The Castle thus taken, the Ships weighed, and stood farther into the Bay: and
the Victors marched directly to the Town, whither the Fleet made all the have
they could to land more men. When they came to the Town, they found the People
fled, but their Houses plentifully stored with Brandy, Flower, Bread, Pork,
Wines, and good store of Poultry; upon which they made bold to fall on, like
men that had been thrashing hard a day or two before: so they fed like Misers
when they come to a Banquet Free-cost. Having thus replenished their Bodies with
corporal food, they possessed themselves of all the best Houses in the Town,
placed their Sentries, and took up the Church for their Main-Guard. For though
they got never so many Victories, they never troubled themselves with
Thanksgiving days, nor would their business permit 'em to keep one day in
seven. After which, they sent out a detachment of Men into the Woods, to find
out the Inhabitants; who returned the same night with 2000 pieces of Eight,
several Mules laden with Household Goods and Merchandise, and twenty Prisoners,
whom they put to the Rack, as their Forefathers had served the Indians before,
to make them confess the rest of their hidden Treasure; but they could get
little out of 'em. Which put Lolonnois into such a Rage, that he who made no
more of murdering Spaniards, then of killing Sprats, presently drew his
Cutlace, and cut one before the rest, as small as minced meat, threatening to
serve all the others so, if they did not reveal where the remainder of their
Treasure lay. Upon which, one there was who promised to conduct him where he
should find what he looked for: but the Discovery being timely known, the
Spaniards removed their Bodies, and buried their Wealth under ground, so that
the Pirates were forced to be contented above the Earth.

Having stayed about 15 days at Maracaibo, they resolved to visit Gibraltar,
having embarked all their Prisoners, and the wealth which they had plundered;
for the Pirates were under suspicions, that the Inhabitants of Maracaibo had
carried all their Wealth, pretended to be hidden, to that place.

The Inhabitants of Gibraltar having notice of this design of the Pirates upon
their Persons and Purses, sent to the Governor of Merida, who being an old
Flandrian Soldier, came to their assistance with 400 men, who together with the
Inhabitants, made up a body of 800 fighting Soldiers. Nor did he omit any thing
that was necessary, by raising batteries to prevent their landing, and guard
the Avenues to the Town. He stopped up the common way to the Town, and opened
another, which was all mire and dirt, and full in the teeth of a battery of
eight Guns. Of all which preparations the Pirates knew nothing, so that they
embarked for Gibraltar, as to a certain Fair. But when they came within sight
of the Town, they saw the Royal Standard hanging forth, and perceived the
people in a posture to defend themselves.

Lolonnois, whose courage Dangers rather whetted than appalled, finding the
Spaniards resolved not to part with their Lives and Estates by fair means,
resolved not to be scare-crow'd away however, but to make an Experiment what he
could do by compulsion. Thereupon he calls a Council of War to consult upon the
matter: There he gave the Officers and Seamen to understand the difficulty of
the Enterprise, in regard the Spaniards had had so much time to make provision
against their coming. However, said he, courage my heart of Oak -- Shall we
fear Men, that fear not Heaven nor Hell? No, Hell nor Death can be to us like
losing that beloved Booty that we have purchased with so much toil and labor.
Then let us not seek to preserve our Lives we value less, to lose our Gold and
Silver, which we value more. Follow then the Example of your Leader, and let
not their numbers daunt us. For it is not number, but an obstinate Resolution to
die, which signifies nothing, or overcome, and then you are Princes that does
the work. Inflamed with this Martial Harangue, they promised to follow him,
though he led them to storm the Palace of Philus the God of Riches himself.
Since then ye have promised, I expect performance to the utmost; nor shall I
spare to pistol with my own hands him that leaves both me and his own courage
in the lurch.

Thus resolved, they landed next morning by break of day, to the number of
three hundred eighty Men, well armed with Cutlaces and Pistols; at what time
the Brethren in iniquity shook hands again, like Knights of Rhodes, vowing to
live and die together. Which Ceremony performed, away they marched with the
help of a Guide whom they had provided, who leading them right, brought them to
the way that was obstructed; upon which they were forced to take the other
passage that was opened among the Woods, all mire and durty, where though the
Enemy fired at 'em with that fury, that they could neither hear nor see, yet
the undaunted Sons of Hercules, by cutting down branches of Trees, made their
passage over the Dirt and sinking Mire, and with the same boldness adventured
up to the Battery which defended the Post. Which having spit all its venom of
small shot, and pieces of Iron, the Spaniards sallied forth with that fury and
number, that they put the Pirates to a stand. Thereupon they retreated to find
out some other way, but could find none: at length after they had made two or
three Attempts more in the first place in vain, Lolonnois bethought himself of
an old stratagem that did his work. For suddenly retiring, he made a show of
flight, which the Spaniards perceiving, sallied forth in great disorder to
pursue the Fugitives. But when the Pirates had drawn the unwary Spaniards far
enough from their Batteries, they turned head of a sudden, and slew two hundred
Spaniards before a Cat could lick her Ear; and presently possessed themselves
of the Batteries, the Spaniards without, not thinking it safe to come in again,
and those that were within, believing it more convenient to surrender upon
Quarter for their Lives, than to contend any longer with such politic
swash-bucklers. The Terwagaunts thus Masters of the Town, pulld down the
Spanish, and set up their own Colors, removed the Guns from the Batteries to
the Great Church, where they fortified themselves, while others fell to taking
of prisoners. Of the Spaniards were slain above five hundred, besides those
that were wounded, and died in the Woods. Of the Pirates only forty slain, and
forty wounded, who had as good have been slain, because they all died of their
wounds. As for their own Dead, they were so kind as to give 'em decent Burial;
but for the Spaniards, they flung them into the Sea, and sent them by water to
Purgatory. Which done, they fell to their Calling; plundering, rifling,
ransacking all that they could lay their hands on. For there are no men more
methodical than Pirates, first kill, then take; which order if they should not
observe, they might chance to go without their Booty. Nor did the Pillage of
the Town serve their turns; they went and plundered all the Planters in the
Country round about. For as their Fury was irresistible, so their Avarice was
unsatiable. Whether they would have hacked and hewed so stoutly for the defense
of their Prince and Country, is the Question. But certainly Men could never
fight better than these fellows that fought for their own Interest. So that
this was to be accounted savage Fury, rather than Courage; a-lamode of Beast of
the Forest, whose wrath is not to be opposed in their hunger. Never did the
Spaniards feel better Carvers of Mans-flesh; they would take off a Man's Arm at
the shoulders, as ye cut off the Wing of a Capon; split a Spanish Mazard as
exactly as a Butcher cleaves a Calf's Head, and dissect the Thorax with more
dexterity than a Hangman when he goes to take out the Heart of a Traitor.

However, it could not be true Valor, because it wanted Generosity; for they
suffered their prisoners to starve to death, not allowing them any thing but
the flesh of Horses and Asses to seed on. Or if they were kind to any, it was
only to the Women, whom they fed somewhat better, to supply the fury of their
Venereal Extravagancies. And then for Auricular Confession, they extorted it
with that cruelty, that generally the people died under the Tortures of their
Function. For all were sinners that deserved condemnation without mercy, who
would not, or could not discover where their own or their neighbors Treasure
lay hid.

At length, after they had been in the Town four whole weeks together, acting
the part of Devils rather than Men, they sent four of their prisoners to demand
a sum of money to redeem their Town from Burning, no less than ten thousand
pieces of Eight; for the bringing in of which they allowed no longer time than
two days, knowing that delays bred danger. Which being past, and the sum not
paid, they began to enlighten the understandings of the people with the flames
of their Habitations; so that the poor Spaniards perceiving they would be
sometimes as good as their words even to their Enemies, were forced to pay the
sum demanded. However, they could not save the Church belonging to the
Monastery, which was burnt down to the ground.

From Gibraltar they returned to give a second Visit to Maracaibo, demanding
thirty thousand pieces of Eight to redeem their Town from total Destruction.
Such exact Chemists they were, that they knew how to make use of Fire, much
better than our doting Mountebanks, to extract the Philosophers Stone, and
their Aurum Potabile, where they had the power in their hands. The people
willing to do their utmost to be rid of such merciless Quacks, sent some
persons to treat with them about their Demands, which while they were doing,
another party went ashore, and fetched away the Images, Bells, and Pictures of
the Great Church. For as they were no Saints themselves, so they could endure
no Superstition in others. At length the Treaty was concluded, and Peace was
granted for that time to the poor Town of Maracaibo, for twenty thousand pieces
of Eight, and five hundred Cows; which when they had received, they set sail
with their whole Fleet to the unspeakable Joy of the Inhabitants.

From thence they steered to Hispaniola, and came to an Anchor in Cow-Island,
or Ila de la Vaca, possessed for the most part inhabited by French Buccaneers,
where they unladed their whole Cargo, and made a Dividend according to the
method already described. Their whole Booty in ready money amounted to 260000
pieces of Eight, besides uncoyn'd Plate and Jewels to a vast sum, and Linen,
Silk, and several other Commodities, which were all divided according to the
exquisite Justice among themselves, as well to those that were slain and
wounded in the Service as to the Living, not omitting peculiar Rewards for
signal Actions. But all this Mass of Wealth, the Stews and Taverns soon
devoured according to Custom, insomuch that in a short time they were
constrained to bethink themselves where to get more.

CHAP. VI. Lolonnois prepares to assail the City of St. James de Leon, and the
Town of Nicaragua, which proves fatal to to him.
THis last expedition you may be sure had won Lolonnois a high Esteem among
those Devils Incarnate. So that there was no great fear but that he might have
men enough as bad as himself, to follow such a Champion when ever he held up
his finger. For every one reposed such a confidence in his Conduct, for seeking
their Fortunes, that they thought themselves secure under his Banners.
Thereupon he published his design upon Nicaragua; which being known, he was
immediately furnished with seven hundred men, which he disposed into six Ships.
With this Fleet he steered away, and took his Provisions in at Bayaha in
Hispaniola, which done, away they Sailed to Matamana, to the South of Cuba, to
furnish themselves with the poor Fishermens Canows, which are very numerous in
those parts to serve them in shallow waters. From thence they went to Gracias a
Dios in fifteen degrees of Northern latitude, where they met with such a
tedious Calm, that by the mere motion of the waves, they were thrown into the
Gulf of Honduras, where in regard they began to want Victuals, they resolved
with their Canows to enter the River of Xagua, inhabited by the Indians, whom
they plundered and destroyed merely for the sake of their Millet, Hens and
Hogs, for they thought it no more Charity to knock the Indian: on the head,
then that they should starve for want of their usual Diet. And because they
would not be idle while the calm weather lasted, knowing that of Idleness came
no good, they resolved to keep their hands in use, by pillaging all the Towns
and Villages that lay along the Coast of that Gulf, which they did to get
Provisions for the accomplishment of their designs, without going to Market. To
which purpose, having rifled several Villages, as they took 'em in their way,
at last they came to Pucerto Cavallo, where the Spaniards had two Storehouses
for the Commodities which they bought up higher in the Country, till the
arrival of the Ships that carried them off. Their Fortune gave them a blessed
opportunity to seize a Ship mounted with 24 Guns, and sixteen Mortar-pieces, a
great addition to their strength, which they made bold with, never troubling
themselves to condemn it in their Admiralty. But for the Storehouses, they
burnt em, condemned by their Laws for being empty at that time, as they did all
the Houses in the same place for the same Crime. Several of the Inhabitants
they took Prisoners, to be the sport of their Insolence, and more then
Heathenish Cruelties, if you will allow them to be Christians; which it is
thought you may choose whether you will or no. For it was a custom of Lolonnois,
after he had tormented any persons that either would not, or could not confess,
immediately to mince 'em in pieces with his Hanger, and then pull out their
Tongues, lest their Cries should ascend to Heaven; which was a kindness he
professed to owe to all the Spaniards in the world out of his natural affection
to that Nation.

Having thus almost annihilated all their Prisoners excepting two, whom they
preserved for discoveries, they marched on to Santo Piedro, ten leagues
distant, three hundred strong, led by Lolonnois himself. By that time they had
marched three leagues, they met with an ambush of Spaniards, whom they totally
defeated with the loss of most of the party, putting the Prisoners to
tormenting deaths, without Compassion, after they had asked 'em what Questions
they thought fit for their purpose: fulfilling the Proverb, confess and be
hanged, Lolonnois found by some of their answers, that the Spaniards attended
him in other places as he was to pass forward, thinking to exhaust his force,
by fighting him in several parties. Therefore he commanded them to show him
another way; which because the poor wretches could not do, he slit open the
breast of one of his Prisoners, and pulling out his heart, gnawed it for very
vexation with his Cannibals Teeth. By which he perceived there was no other way
to the Wood; so that he was forced to proceed.

The next day he met with another party of Spaniards, which he assailed with
that desperate fury, that in less then an hours time, he sent the greatest part
to the other world. In that, appearing to be pretty honest, for he was
downright with the Spaniards, what they must trust to, if they came in his way:
so that it was their own fault if they did not beware by other men's harms. As
it happened to a third Ambuscade, both stronger, and more advantageously placed
then the former. But the Pirates threw such a number of Tewksbury Mustard-balls
among 'em, that they soon singed them out of their fastnesses, put them into
disorder, and then according to their usual custom killed and wounded the
greatest part of them before they could reach the Town. When they came near to
the Town, they found but one path to it, and that strongly barricado'd: the
other parts of the Town were surrounded with certain shrubs called Raqueltes,
full of thorns, and very sharp pointed, R. like Palisado's; behind which, the
Inhabitants plied 'em with their great Guns. But Raqueltes them no Raqueltes's;
for so soon as they saw the Enemy begin to fire, down they popp'd, till the
shot was over, then with their Cutlaces hacking down the Raqueltes, and with
hand Granado's and Pistols, falling in close with the amazed Spaniards, they
hardly missed a shot. So that the Spaniards were forced to hang out a white
Flag, and surrendered upon Condition, only to have Quarter but for two hours. In
which short space the Inhabitants carried away what they could, and fled to the
Neighboring Towns. But after the two hours were expired (for give the Devil
his due, they kept their words according to their agreement.) Lolonnois sent
Messengers of his own after them, to bring back not only their Goods, but their
Persons to boot; though however they did it, they had made a shift to save the
greatest part of their Merchandise of most value.

Having staid in this Town some few days, and got all they could scrape
together, they burnt it to ashes and hasted to the Seaside, where they found
some of their Companions that had not been idle, but had sufficiently preyed
upon the Fishermen that lived there about, or came from the River of Guatimala.
And so having done as much mischief as it was possible for them to do in these
parts, they resolved for the Islands on the other side of the Gulf, there to
cleanse and careen their Vessels, but chiefly for Provision, knowing that the
Tortoises of those places were pleasant and excellent Diet.

They had no sooner resitted their Ships, but they heard of a Ship that was
arrived from New-Spain upon the Coast where they had been plundring. Thereupon
they made have to the Port, where the Ship lay at Anchor, and was unlading the
Merchandise which it had brought thither, unhappy tidings, which made them
redouble their speed. However they could not make such have, but that they in
the Ship had notice of their coming, so that they were prepared to receive
them, being mounted with 42 Guns, and manned with a hundred and thirty fighting
Seamen, which Lolonnois looked upon as nothing. Therefore with no more then his
own Ship, that carried only twenty two Guns, and a Fly-boat, he fell upon his
prey. But the Spaniards gave him such a warm entertainment, that he was forced
to retire for a while. But that was only to return again with greater force and
stratagem together. For upon the second assault, in the midst of the thick
mist, which the Powder made, he sent four Canows well manned, who boarded the
Ship on both sides with that nimble fury, that the Spaniards were forced to
knock under board. But the Ship being taken, they found not in her what they
expected, only fifty bars of Iron, a small parcel of paper, and some earthen
Jars of Wine, which, as it vexed Lolonnois to the heart, so it plagued the rest
of the Company to the very Guts, and made a great Fraction among the Honorable
Society.

For presently after, Lolonnois called a Council of War, where after he had
given Fortune a volley of Oaths, he bid'em however not despair, promising them
Mountains of Gold at Guatimala, whither he proposed to go. Some liked his
proposal, others not. Especially the young Traders in Piracy, who were
disheartened to find that pieces of Eight were not to be gathered off the Trees
in the Spanish Dominions like Cocao Nuts. So that they quitted the Fleet, and
returned home. Only some few there were, who vowed rather to die, then return
back empty fisted, alleging they could not look their Wenches in the face
without their Pockets full of Spanish Gold.

Thus was the unfortunate Lolonnois forfaken by the major part of his Crew, and
among the rest, by Moses Vanclein, one of the chief Swash-bucklers of the whole
Gang, and Peter of Picardy, another Sea-Royster, who seeing Fortune frown on
Lolonnois, thought it high time to desert the deserted.

These two Spit-fires in their way to Tortuga, coasted along the Continent,
till they came to Veragnas, which Town they got, and after they had ransacked
every corner of it, set it on fire; but the mischief they did, was more then
the Booty they got, and they returned home to ban Fortune for her shrewish
unkindness.

As for abandoned Lolonnois, he remained in the Gulf of Honduras, cursing all
the Whores in the world for Fortunes sake, where he sustained great want of all
sorts of Provisions, so that they were forced to kill Monkeys for their
sustenance. At last coming to the Island de las Pertas, his Ship fell upon a
bank of Sand; where it stuck so fast, as if she had been nailed to the bottom
of the Sea, so that they were constrained to break the Ship in pieces, and with
the Planks, and some of the Nails, to build themselves a Boat, to get away from
that unfortunate place.

When their long Boat was finished, it was resolved they should go to the River
of Nicaragua, to seize some more Canows, to fetch away the rest of their Crew,
in regard the Boat would not hold them all, and to avoid disputes, they cast
lots which should be the Persons.

The lot fell upon Lolonnois, and one half of the rest, who in a few days
arrived at the River of Nicaragua before mentioned; but now the reward of all
his merciless Cruelties began to tumble thick upon him. For there he met with
his Matches, a numerous body of Indians and Spaniards, who entertained him so
roughly, that they slew the greatest number of his Companions, so that he, and
those that remained alive, had much ado to escape. But notwithstanding his
loss, the Devil still owing him a farther spite, he resolved not to return to
his fellows, till he had taken some Boats, such as he looked for; which made
him determine to proceed farther to the Coasts of Cartagena. In his way he
landed upon the Indians of Darien, a sort of Savages like himself, by whom, the
term of his violent Inhumanities being expired, he was taken Prisoner, and torn
limb from limb alive; after which, they threw the dismembered pieces of his
body into the fire, and scattered the ashes in the air, that no Trace or
Monument might remain, that ever any such inhumane Monster had a Being. This
you will say was notably designed by the Indians; but such is the course of the
world, that Infamy will live as well as the better sort of Fame. As it happens
now to this most ignominious Lolonnois, who as long as this History of his life
and death remains, will never be forgotten.

As for those that remained in the Island de las Pertas, waiting for the return
of those who cast Losts, and were favored by fortune to their own destruction,
they hearing no news of their Captain, nor his Companions, embarked themselves
at last in a Ship of a certain Pirate, who happened to pass that way. That
special stick of wood came from Jamaica, with an intent to land at Gracias a
Dios, and from thence to mount up the River with their Canows, with an intent
to surprise Cartagena. And now these two parcels of Brethren in wickedness
being joined together, you would not think how they sang Old Rose for joy. The
one finding themselves delivered from their misery and poverty, wherein they
had by that time wasted ten entire months; and the other because they were now
considerably strengthened for designs of greater moment, than before they could
propose to themselves.

Thereupon they all put themselves into their Canows, and so mounted up the
River to the number of five hundred Manslayers, leaving only a small Guard for
their Ships. Nor did they take any provisions along with them, believing they
should find enough provided at other peoples cost, which was never intended for
them. But these great Expectations of theirs utterly deceived them. For the
Indians having notice of their coming, had cleared the Coast all along, leaving
their Nests empty: So that they were reduced to such necessity and hunger, that
they were forced to feed upon such homely Sallads as they found growing upon
the Banks of the River, without those pleasing additions of Oil and hard Eggs.

But this Horse-diet afforded so little nourishment to their hot stomachs, that
their hearts as well as strength began to fail them. So that after they had
ranged the Woods and Villages up higher in the Country, in search of that
relief which was not to be found, they were constrained to return back to the
Sea Coasts, where they left their Ships; yet so distressed in that laborious
and tiresom march, that many of them ate their own Shoes, the Sheaths of their
Swords and Knives, and some like Rats fed upon their own clothes, eating the
covers of their nakedness, lest they should have no nakedness to cover; and
well it was they met with none of the Indians, which certainly had they so
done, they had certainly gone to pot, to atone the fury of their craving Maws.
At length they arrived at the Sea Coast, where they found some relief of their
former miseries, and means to get more; however, the greatest part of them
perished through faintness, and other diseases contracted by a tedious Famine,
which was the reason that the remaining part thought it convenient to disperse.

CHAP. VII. Of the Famous Exploits, and Remarkable Actions of Capt. H. Morgan.
WE are now to tell of Actions more humane, and more agreeable to the temper of
Men truly valiant. This person having served his Time at the Barbado's, after
he got his Liberty, transported himself to Jamaica, where he found two Vessels
of Sparks that were going to seek their Fortunes which he thought a very good
opportunity for himself to do the fame. Thereupon he got into the Society, and
in a short time learnt the Trade so exactly, that after he had made three or
four Voyages with some profit and success, he agreed with some of his Comrades
with a joint stock to buy a Ship. And such was the esteem which the rest had of
him, that they agreed to submit to him as their Captain.

With this Ship he set forth from Jamaica, with an intention to cruze upon the
Coasts of Campeche, in which Voyage he had the good fortune to take several
prizes, with which he returned triumphant to his first Port.

At his return he met with an Old Gamester, whose name was Mansfeildt, of whom
mention has already been made, who was at the same time setting out a
considerable Fleet, with a design to land upon the Continent, and make Booty of
all that came in his way. This Mansfeildt seeing C. M. return with so many
prizes, judged him to be what he was, a person of courage and conduct, and
therefore chose him for his Vice Admiral. And thus having fitted out fifteen
Ships great and small, they set sail from Jamaica with five hundred Men, part
Walloons, part French.

The first place where they landed was the Island of St. Katherines in twelve
degrees and a half of Northern Latitude, near the Continent of Costa Ricca.
There in a short time they forced the Garrison to surrender, and to deliver
into their hands all the other Forts belonging to it. All which they demolished
but only one, where they put a Garrison of their own, and all the Slaves they
had taken from the Spaniards. For it was not reasonable that they should keep
Slaves, who were now Slaves themselves. Having so done, they passed over by the
help of a Bridge, which they made in a few days into another Island close
adjoining, you may be sure by the story, to that of St. Catherines, and so
having destroyed and ruined both the Islands with Fire and Sword, after they
had left all necessary Orders with their Garrison, they put forth to Sea again,
with the Spaniards they had taken prisoners, whom they afterward set ashore
near Puerto Velo, and then fell to cruzing upon the Coast of Costa Ricca, with
a design to plunder all the Towns in those parts, and so to go forward to Nata.
But hearing that the Governor of Panama was coming on to encounter them with a
numerous Force, and seeing the whole Country alarmed, they retired with all
speed, and returned to St. Catherines, where they found that the Governor of
the Garrison had not only put the great Island into a good posture of defense,
but had advanced several Plantations in the lesfer, suffcient to revictual the
whole Fleet upon occasion, which made Mansfeildt desirous to take a Lease of
those two Islands lying so near the Spanish Dominions, without sealing
Indentures, or paying Rent, whether the Spaniards would or no; but the
Governor of Jamaica, not liking his Proposal, he went to Tortuga to see what
Assistance he could get there for the same purpose: But there Death took him in
Execution at Natures Suit, and carried him away to Goal, so that he was never
heard of more.

In the mean time, Monsieur Simon, who was left Governor of St. Catherines by
the Pirates, hearing no News of Mansfeildt, received a Summons from the
Governor of Costa Ricca, to deliver up the two Islands to his Catholic
Majesty; for he did not like him for a Neighbor by no means, promising withal,
if he would surrender them fairly without thumps and knocks, a good reward; but
Death and the Cobbler was to be his doom, if he held out to extremity. Monsieur
Simon to this returned an Answer bold enough, if words would have done it, that
he would rather die than surrender. Whereupon the Spaniards much more potent
than he, landed in spite of his teeth, and after as stout a defense as his
number could make, and the lofs of most of his Men, forced him to surrender
upon the same terms it had been delivered by the Spaniards. There was found
upon the Island eight hundred pound of Powder, two hundred and fifty l. of
small Bullets, and some other provisions of War. Soon after the Island was
taken, appeared an English Vessel, which being seen at a distance, Monsieur
Simon was sent to decoy it into the Port, as if it had been still in the
Pirates possession, which he performed, because he could not help it, with a
perfect fidelity to the loss of fourteen Men, one Woman and her Daughter, which
it seems were sent from Jamaica, to stock this new Plantation. Thus far there
was no great harm done; the King of Spain had his Mare again, and all is well.

CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan attempts to preserve the Isle of St. Catherines,
but fails of his Design. He takes Puerto del Principe.
CAptain Morgan finding that his Predecessor Mansfeildt was dead, used all his
Endeavors imaginable to preserve the Island of St. Catherines, by reason of
the convenience of its Situation to infest the Spaniards. To which purpose he
wrote to several Merchants in Virginia and New England, to send provisions and
other necessary things to secure and strengthen the Island against all hopes of
ever being retaken, together with some chaste Women for procreation. But all
these thoughts and cares were laid aside, when he heard it was surrendered back
to the Spaniards; and thereupon he put himself upon other new Designs. To which
purpose he sail^d away to the Island of Cuba, in hopes to reinforce his number
as he passed along.

Cuba is a fertile and pleasant Island, in length an hundred and fifty German
Leagues, and forty in breadth, in twenty and twenty three degrees of Northern
Latitude. It is surrounded with a great number of small Islands, by the name of
Los Caos, of which the Pirates make as great use as of their own proper Ports,
where they generally keep their Rendevouze, and hold their Councils of War,
where with most advantage to assail the Spaniards. This great Island is watered
with diverse fair and large Rivers, then Entrances in which form several
commodious Havens. Of which the most remarkable on the South side Sant Jago,
Bayame, Santa Maria, Spirito Santo, Trinidad, Xagua, and Cabo de Corrientes. To
the North, La Havana, Puerto Mariano, Santa Cruz, Mata Ricos, and Barracoa.

There are besides two Principal Cities which govern the whole Island; Sant
Jago to the South, with a Bishop and a Governor extending their Jurisdiction
over the one half of the Island; the chief Trade of the City being Tobacco,
Sugar and Hides.

The other is the City of Havana, one of the most famous and strongest places
in the West Indies, governing the other half of the Island. It is defended by
three Castles, large and strong, and contains about ten thousand Families; and
here the Plate-Fleet touches, homeward bound for Spain, to take in the rest of
their Cargo, as Hides, Tobacco, and Campeche Wood.

Captain Morgan had not been above two months in the South Ports of the Island
before he had got together a Fleet of twelve sail, and about seven hundred Men,
part English, part French. Being thus reinforced, they called a Council (for
it is good to do nothing rashly) what Enterprise to undertake. The bolder sort
were for assaulting the City of Havana it self under the shelter of the night.
But that proposal being rejected as an attempt of too great difficulty, they
concluded to pour all their Force upon Puerto del Principe, whose Inhabitants
were looked upon to be very rich, as driving a ready money Trade with Havana,
and for that the Town had never yet experienced the Courtesies of the Pirates,
being at a distance from the Sea. This being therefore resolved upon, away they
steered to the Coasts that were nearest to it, and came to an Anchor in the Bay
of Puerto de Santa Maria, where it fell out unluckily for their Design, that a
Spanish prisoner swam ashore in the night time, and gave Intelligence to the
Town of their approach; which caused the Spaniard immediately to hide their
Wealth, and carry away their moveable goods. The Governor also armed all the
people of the Town, both Freemen and Slaves, cut down the Trees, and laid
several Ambuscado's in their way.

But Captain Morgan finding the ordinary passages to the Town impassable, took
another way, cutting his passage through a Wood, and by that means escaping the
Ambuscado's, got safe to the Plain that lies before the Town called La Savana
or the Sheet. The Governor seeing his new Guests come, sent a Party of Horse
to welcome them into the Country, thinking to overrun them immediately; but the
Pirates maintained their Order so exactly, and made such a dextrous use of
their Firearms, that the poor Spaniards dropped from their Horses like rotten
Pears, with their Governor for one; which made the rest turn tail, thinking to
fly to the Woods for Refuge; but ere they could reach their Sanctuaries, they
were most of them cut off, with very little loss to their Adversaries, who now
entered the Town, where the Inhabitants defended themselves like the true Race
of the Goths and Vandals for a time. But hearing the dreadful Menaces of the
Foe, who threatened to fire the Town, and chop their Wives and Children as
small as Herbs to the Pot, if they did not presently surrender; they presently
surrendered at discretion.

Having thus got possession of the Town, they locked up all the Spaniards, with
their Wives and Children, in the several Churches, and there leaving them to
their Prayers and Devotions, they fell to their own business of plundering and
ransacking, not only the Town, but the Country round about; from whence they
brought in daily great store of goods, prisoners, and provision, with which
they made good cheer, and feasted themselves, but never remembered the poor
prisoners, who starved in the Churches for hunger. Nor did the Pirates think
they could die in a better place; besides that, their Graves were at hand; the
Women also ran the same hard fortune. From whence you may easily ghess they
were none of the handsomest.

At length finding no more to plunder, and that provisions grew scarce, they
thought it high time to break up housekeeping. However, before they went, they
laid two Taxes upon the people; the first to redeem themselves from being
transported to Jamaica, and the second to preserve the Town from being reduced
into Ashes. For this the unfortunate Spaniards earnestly begged some time,
which was generously granted: But the Pirates having after that, intercepted a
Negro with Letters from the Governor of St. Jago, exhorting them not to make
too much have to pay their Ransoms, in regard he was preparing to come to their
relief, the Captain was fain to be contented with a Present of five hundred
Beeves, and salt proportionable, to be carried aboard by themselves, since they
could not pay the Porters: and when they were aboard, the Spaniards were made
to help, kill, and salt the meat to boot.

After this, they parted from Puerto del Principe, and steered to a certain
Island, where they made a dividend of the purchase, which amounted to about
fifty thousand pieces of Eight in Money and Goods. But when they came to cast up
their Accounts, and found the smallness of the sum not enough to pay their
debts, the lean mischief they had done, not only caused great sorrow and
tribulation, but great confusion among 'em. Captain Morgan propounded to seek
out for a fatter Purchase, but the French not agreeing complacently with the
English, were for going by themselves, and seeking their own Fortunes; with
which resolution they parted company, and left Captain Morgan, not in the suds,
but alone with those of his own Nation; so that he was for the present
constrained to return to Jamaica.

CHAP. IX. Captain Morgan attacks Puerto Velo, and takes it with little
Expense, and a small Force.
YOU are not to think, because the French had forsaken the English, that
therefore the English had forsaken themselves. They that did so, were mistaken.
For such was the Bravery of Captain Morgan, that he instilled courage with his
words, and infused such spirits into his Men, that they were already eager
after new designs, out of a persuasion that the execution of his Orders, was
the only way to obtain a sufficient Booty. Of this Opinion was a certain Pirate
of Campeche, who at the same time joined with Captain Morgan, to seek for
better advantages under his Conduct, then he had met with from his own.

By this means Captain Morgan in a few days gathered together a Fleet of nine
Sail, what with Ships, and what with great Boats, manned with four hundred and
fourscore Seamen. All things being ready, they put forth to Sea, directing
their course to the Continent, and arriving safe upon the Coast of Costa Ricca.
There Captain Morgan discovered his Intentions to the rest of the Captains and
Seamen to plunder Puerto Velo, in the nightime, which he thought the more
easy to do, in regard it was impossible the Enemy could have now any notice of
their coming. Some objected, that they had not a sufficient number of men; to
which Captain Morgan replied, That what they wanted in men, they had in Hearts
and Courage; and that the fewer they were, the more and better would be their
shares. By which arguments, especially the latter, they resolved to follow
their Captain to Puerto Velo, though it stood at the bottom of Hell.

This City is seated in the Province of Costa Ricca in ten degrees of Northern
Latitude, fourteen Leagues from the Gulf of Darien, and eight from Nombre de
Dios; and is esteemed the strongest place in the West Indies, excepting Havana
and Cartagena. It is defended by two Castles seated at the mouth of the Haven,
to hinder the entrance of any Ships. The Garrison consists of three hundred
men, besides four hundred Families in the Town. And though the chief Merchants
dwell at Panama, yet their Storehouses are here, whither they bring their
wealth, to be ready against the Ships come in.

Captain Morgan knowing well all the Avenues to the City, arrived in the dusk
of the evening at Puerto Naos, ten leagues distant from Puerto Velo to the
West. From thence they Sailed up the River as far as Puerto Pontin. There they
put themselves immediately into their Boats, leaving only a few men for the
guard of their Ships, and to Sail them the next day to the Port. About midnight
they landed at a place called Estera longa Lemos, and marched from thence by
land to the first Posts of the City. To which, as soon as they approached, they
sent three or four before hand, and among the rest, an Englishman, who had been
a Prisoner in the Town formerly, to seize or kill the Sentinel They seized him
so dexterously, that he had not time to scare a Mouse, and brought him bound to
the Captain, who with many severe threats and menaces, examined him to such
particulars as he desired to know.

Being come to the Castle next the City, they presently begirt it so close,
that no man could get in or out: and by the mouth of the Centry demanded
present possession of the Castle, or else to be cut all into Rashers. But the
Spaniards being upon the defye, the Guns of the Castle began to open, like so
many Bloodhounds, which alarmed the City. However, the noble Sparks of Venus,
well knowing their business admitted no delay, and so bestirred their stumps,
that they presently constrained the Castle to surrender, and according to their
promises, put all the Spaniards to the Sword, to the end the Spaniards might
trust 'em another time. But now I remember me, they did not put 'em to the
Sword, but shut 'em up all together in a Room, and then blew 'em up every
Mothers Son, Castle and all into the Air, Which was much the better way of the
two. Then falling into the Town, which was not yet prepared for their
entertainment, they fell, some to securing the Lay Inhabitants, others to
prevent the Ecclesiastics from hiding their Treasure.

The Governor finding he was not able to rally the Citizens, retired into the
remaining Castle, and thence fired upon the Pirates that were hard at their
Devotions. Thereupon they ceased from their present employment, and turned all
their Fury upon the Castle, and the Governor who defended himself so bravely,
from break of day till Noon, that the Captain began to despair of the
Enterprise. In the midst of these doubts, finding another lesser Fort taken by
another Party, he resolved not to be braved; and therefore causing four broad
Ladders to be immediately made, he constrained the Religious People, as well
Nuns as Friars, to fix 'em to the walls; nor would it serve them to plead that
they knew not what belonged to those things. All this while the Governor
valuing his honor before the lives of the Mass-mumblers, spared none that
approached the walls. The Friars and Nuns besought him by all the Saints to
save his own, and their lives; for as Godly as they were, they loved this world
much better then the other. But neither Prayers nor Tears could prevail; so
that many an Orapro nobis was sent to Purgatory, before they could finish the
work; which being at last effected by religious hands, the ungodly mounted up
in fwarms with fireballs, and pots of Gunpowder in their hands; so that the
Spaniards no longer able to resist, flung down their Arms, and cried for
Quarter. Only the Governor would neither receive nor give: for Quarter being
offered him, he replied, he would rather die like a valiant Soldier, then be
hanged like a Coward, so that they were enforced to kill him, notwithstanding
the cries of his Wife and Daughter, who begged him upon their knees to desire
Quarter, and save his life.

Having finished this Jobb, which was a tough one, and secured all their
Prisoners, they thought it high time to go to supper; which they did in as
plentiful manner as the Country would afford: after eating, very methodically
they fell upon the Women, another recreation of Heroic toil, forcing the
unwilling, and never examining whether it were Adultery or Fornication which
they committed; which debaucheries of theirs, together with the unhealthiness
of the Country, and the stout resistance of the Governor, cost many their lives.

The news of this disaster being carried to the Governor of Panama, he prepared
for the rescue of the Town, but they cared no more for the Governor of Panama,
then they cared for a louse: having their Ships at hand, and no intention to
stay for his coming. So that after they had killed the most part of the
Inhabitants, some by starving, others by torturing them to death, for
discoveries sake; they prepared for a departure, having sent all their Pillage
aboard. Before they went, according to Custom, they set a Tax upon the City of
100000 pieces of Eight, to preserve the Town from burning, and the Castles from
being blown into the Air.

The poor people sent Commissioners to the Governor of Panama, to represent
their condition to him; who having got a body of men together, forthwith
advanced toward the Pirates. But they instead of avoiding him, went forth to
meet him, at a narrow passage through which he was of necessity to pass: and at
the first encounter put to flight the greatest part of his number. So that he
was forced to retire like Tom Ladle, as he came. However, as if his Tongue had
been sharper then his Sword, he sent a Rodomontado to the Captain, Desperately
threatening what he would do, when he had taken 'em, if he did not suddenly
depart with all his Forces. But they who had so well thrash'd his Jacket
before, laughed at his bounces, and sent him word that they continued in their
resolutions, unless the Money demanded were paid, and therefore bid him save by
his good advice what he could not defend with his Sword.

The Governor seeing that neither blows nor huffing would do any good, left the
poor people to make the best conditions they could do for themselves, so that
finding no other Remedy, they were forced to pay down the whole 100000 pieces
of Eight.

This Action of the English so astonished the Governor, that only four hundred
men should take such a great City, guarded with so many Castles, that for his
satisfaction, he sent to Captain Morgan a Messenger, to send him a Pattern of
the Arms wherewith he had performed such a desperate attempt. The Captain
having civilly treated the Messenger, gave him a Pistol, and some few Bullets
to present to the Governor, whom he desired to accept that slender pattern of
the Arms wherewith he had taken Puerto Velo, and to keep them for a twelve
month, at what time he promised to come to Panama, and fetch them away again.

The Governor having well viewed the Pistol and Bullets, and heard of the
Message which was brought him; to save the Captain a labor, sent him forthwith
his Pistol and Bullets again, thanking him for his favor, to lend him those
Arms of which he had no need. Withal, he sent him a gold Ring, with another
Message, desiring him not to give himself the trouble of coming to Panama,
where he was not like to speed so well as he had done at Puerto Velo.

After these Complements passed, Captain Morgan taking along with him the best
Guns belonging to the Castles, and nayling the rest, Sailed away for the Island
of Cuba, in search of a convenience where to divide the Spoil, which amounted
in ready Money to two hundred and fifty thousand pieces of Eight, besides Cloth,
Linen, Silks, and other sorts of Merchandise; which dividend being equally
made, away they hastened to visit their Mistresses at Jamaica, where every
Jupiter could not choose but be welcome to his Danae in a golden shower; and
all the Tavern doors stood open, as they do at London on Sundays in the
Afternoon, till like so many Graves, they had buried the Capita Mortua of
their Prodigal Pockets.

CHAP. X. The City of Maracaibo upon the Coast of Venezuela taken. Several
Piracies committed upon those Seas. The ruin of three great Spanish Vessels,
sent to prevent the Robberies of the Pirates.
IT is a strange thing to consider, that they who get with most labor, should
be so free to spend with most profuseness. Yet so it happens generally all over
the world: and such was the temper of our late Triumphers over Puerto del
Principe. However they had so providently ordered their business, that
precisely by that time their Pockets grew low, there was another design
concluded upon. To which purpose Captain Morgan gave order to all his
Commanders to rendevouze at Cow-Island, to the South of Hispaniola, where they
were no sooner arrived, but the Fame of the Commanders in chief, drew a great
number of others, as well English as French to join in the Expedition. There
was also taken up a Ship of 36 Guns, that came from New England, which was
added to therest of the Fleet. So that now they disdained any other
Enterprises, but such as were of high Importance. Which Ship being afterward
blown up by an accident, they neither took it for an ili Omen, nor did it breed
in their high flown thoughts the least despair. At length, when all things were
in a readiness, they set Sail for Savona, the appointed place of Rendevouze,
where they were to have met, in all fifteen Vessels, of which Captain Morgan
commanded the biggest, which carried no more then fourteen small Guns; but for
men, their number was to have been considerable, somewhat more then nine
hundred. Thither Captain Morgan steered with seven or eight small Vessels, and
five hundred Men, in hopes to meet the rest according to appointment. Some few
days after he arrived at the Cape Cabo de Lobos, where they were forced to
stay, by reason of contrary winds, which was an Enemy that so many Hercules's
could never have conquered. But at the three weeks end, the winds permitting,
they doubled the Cape, and proceeded on till they came to the Port of Ocoa.
There they landed some men, and sent them into the Woods to seek for water, and
what Provisions they could find; where they killed several Beasts, and among
the rest some Horses. But the Spaniards not satisfied to see their Provision
carried away without being paid for, resolved to lay a Trap for these new
Corsairs. To this purpose they sent for three or four hundred men from Santo
Domingo, not far distant, whom they ordered to drive the Fields, yet so as the
Cattle being to be seen at a distance, might be a bait to fell the Corsairs
into their Ambuscado's. Within a few days the Corsairs returned with an intent
to hunt, but finding nothing to kill, a party of fifty rambled up farther into
the Woods, and spying a great heard of Cows, with only two or three persons to
guard them, they presently fell a slaughtering the poor Cattle without mercy.
All this while the Spaniards, watching like so many Cats, let 'em alone, but as
soon as they attempted to carry any thing away; they presently fell upon the
Butchers, thinking to have dealt by them, as they did by the Cows. Thereupon
the Lions were forced to quit their Prey, and retreat toward their Ships, which
they did in such good order, sometimes retiring, and sometimes bestowing a
round Volley upon the Enemy, that the unfortunate Spaniards dropped like Acorns.
So that the rest seeing the disaster of their companions, endeavored to save
themselves by flight; but then the Corsairs turned head, and pursuing the
Fugitives, killed the greatest part of them, and then fetched away their Booty.
The next day the Admiral himself offended at the incivility of the Spaniards,
landed with two hundred men, and ranged the Woods in search of the remaining
part of those Ruffianly Spaniards, that had disturbed his Cow-killers: But
finding none, he revenged himself upon the Hovels of the miserable Rusticks
that lay scatteringly up and down in the Fields and Woods where he passed.

After this arriving at Savona, and not meeting the Ships according to
appointment, the Captain was not a little impatient; for patience is a remedy
for a mad Dog, and not for a Man. Then never blame a Man for being impatient.
Patience therefore being tired, the Captain would have steered away without
them; but provisions growing short, he thought it better to stay than go, till
he had got more provant. To which purpose he landed a hundred and fifty Men
upon the Island of Hispaniola, to borrow from some Towns near Santo Domingo;
but the Spaniards were so well provided for his coming, that his Messengers
thought it better to return empty-handed, than to venture certainty of Death
for uncertainty of Beast.

Seeing then the rest of the Ships did not come, he first made a review of his
Men, whom he found to be five hundred effective; and so with the Proverb in his
mouth, The more the merrier, etc. So he put off to Sea, but changed his
resolution of visiting the Coasts of Caracas, as he intended, where his company
would have been as welcome as Water into a Ship, and began to consider what was
next to be done. At length by the Advice of a French man, who had served
Lolonnois, it was resolved that Maracaibo should once more feel the weight of
their fury, hoping that they might have well recruited themselves in two years
time. To this purpose they steered their course toward Curasao; but leaving
that Island, they cast Anchor before another Island called Rubas, an Island
subject to the King of Spain, and inhabited by Indians, who are a kind of
Mungrel. Catholics, but such as will sell Coals to the Devil. Here the
Corfairs, according to custom, exchanged Linen, Thread, and other things of
that nature for Sheep, Lambs and Kids, not in a Piratical, but Merchantlike
manner. Having stayed there two days, he sailed away in the night time, that it
might not be known which way he steered.

The next day they arrived too soon, God wot, by two months, in the Bay of
Maracaibo, very cautious of being discovered by the Watch-Isle. The next night
they set sail again toward the Land, and the next morning by break of day they
found themselves directly over against the Bar of the Lake. For the defense of
this Bar, the Spaniards, since their last misfortune, had built a new Fort (if
Spanish Forts in the West Indies may be thought to signify any thing against
Men of Resolution) from whence they spit fire continually against the Corsairs,
while they were putting their Men into Boats to land. But they had as good have
spit Sugar-plums; for the Captain landed his Men in spite of their teeths, and
in the dark of the night drew his people close to the Castle under the Guns.
Thereupon the Spaniards perceiving that they did but waste his Catholic
Majesty's Powder and Shot to no purpose, forsook the Fort, but left the Devil
behind 'em. Here now then understand the Advantage men have of having Eyes; for
had not the Corsairs had their Eyes in their heads, in a short time they had
had neither heads nor tails. The Roguy Spaniards had lain a Train-powder and a
Match burning, with a design when the Enemy had taken possession of the Castle,
to have sent 'em all of an Embassy to the Prince of the Air. But the Match
being discovered, was presently snatched away, and so the danger was prevented.
There was found in the Castle a great quantity of Powder, which the Spaniards
found afterward was ill bestowed upon those that made such a bad use of it;
together with a great number of Muskets and other military provisions, which
proved the Spaniards to be great fools, to put Arms into mad men's hands. The
Corsairs nailed all the Ordnances, and demolished the Walls of the Fort,
wherein you will say they did wisely.

The next day the Ships were ordered to enter the Bay, where the Muskets and
Powder were divided for future mischief. Which being done, they embarked again,
and continued their course toward unfortunate Maracaibo. But the Waters being
very low, they were constrained to put themselves into their Canows and small
Boats, in which the next day they arrived before the Town, with no other
defense but such small pieces as they could carry in their Boats. Being landed,
they ran immediately to the Fort de la Barra, which they found quitted: For all
the people were fled into the Woods, leaving the Town and bare Walls at their
service, and a few miserable people who had nothing to lofe.

They were no sooner entered the Town, but they ransackt every corner of it,
partly to discover if any Ambushes were laid to entrap them, and partly to see
what goods and plunder they could find. But perceiving the Coast clear, they
took possession of the Houses, every one to their own liking, for there was
room enough and to spare, making use of the Church for their main Guard. The
next day they sent a Party of a hundred men to ransack the Woods, who returned
the next day after with several prisoners, and fifty Mules laden with
Merchandise, which gave them encouragement to send out still fresh Parties, who
never returned home without new supplies of Wealth and Booty.

Thus the Hunters having by this time got into their hands above a hundred of
the chiefest Families in the Town, with their goods, resolved to romage
Gibraltar in the same manner: For Gibraltar still suffered with Maracaibo. And
to make their Entrance more easy, they sent some of their prisoners before, to
let the Inhabitants know what they must expect, if they did not readily
surrender, which was nothing but death without mercy. However, the
Gibraltarians would not believe a tittle they said, as thinking them to be
persons of more honor than to embrue their hands in innocent blood;
nevertheless, for fear of the worst, when they saw the Enemy approach, they
were as prodigal of their Cannon-Bullets, as a Corsair of his pieces of Eight
in a Bawdy House: Which the Captain perceiving, encouraged his followers with a
pithy saying, which might have become one of the Kings of Sparta. We must make,
quoth he, one meal upon bitter things, before we come to taste the sweetness of
the Sugar which this place affords.

The next day early in the morning they landed all their men, and by the help
of their French Guide, they marched toward the Town, not the direct way, but
athwart the Woods, which way the Spaniards never expected them. Which when the
Inhabitants saw, out of a deep sense of their afflictions under Lolonnois, and
having no assurance that these their New Guests were endu'd with a grain of
more grace, than their former Benefactors, they fairly resolved not to stand to
their courtesy, but fled out of the Town with all the speed they could make,
carrying with them all their Goods and Riches, which was the main thing that
the Pirates took amiss at their hands; so that there was not a rational
creature left in the City. They left indeed a poor Changeling behind; who
though he were examined very strictly according to the Military manner, could
give no account of the Questions they asked him. And yet their Catechism was
very short, where the Inhabitants were, and where they had hid their Goods.
However, the latter seemed a very unreasonable Question to ask a fool where
wise men had hid their Goods, as if they were such fools to tell an Idiot.

The next day they sent out their Parties to hunt for the Inhabitants, who
returned with a Country Peasant, and two of his Daughters, who frightened with
the Threats of his Military Confessors, went along with the Hunters to show
them as much as he knew; but before he came, the Birds were flown, so that the
Hunters not believing but that the Peasant had abused them, notwithstanding all
the Oratory that he used to save his life, hung him up upon a Tree.

Thus disappointed, they divided themselves into several Plantations to romage
the Plantations. In their Chase they met a Negro, who being largely promised
heaps of Gold when they got Mountains, conducted them to a parcel of Spaniards,
whom they made prisoners, and so continuing the Hunt, after eight days
ransacking, they returned with many more Prisoners, and some Mules richly
laden. To these Prisoners they were very severely smart in their Examinations,
insomuch that some were catechized so rigorously, till they were past giving an
Answer, which was done more like rough Soldiers, than prudent men, or
Philosophers, because thereby the intent of the Action was lost. Only a Slave
there was, who dreading some passages which he had seen with his own Eyes,
promised to conduct the Captain to a certain River that emptied it self into
the Lake where he should find a Ship and four Boats richly laden with Goods
belonging to the Inhabitants of Maracaibo. He also discovered where the
Governor lay hid, with the greatest part of the women. Thereupon the Captain
sent two hundred and fifty men in two great Boats to take care of the Ship,
while he himself more generously with two hundred and fifty men more went to
Earth the Fox of a Governor. This Governor, like a cunning Volpone indeed,
was retired to a small Island in the middle of the River, where he had built a
little Fort as well as he could, to defend himself; but having notice, by what
unlucky accident he himself could best tell, that the Captain was coming to
ferret him out of his Coney-borough, he, as any other animal of far less sense
would have done, got out of his reach, to the top of a Hill not far off, to
which there was no ascent but one, so narrow, that it was not passable for
above one lean man at a time to clamber the ascent. The Captain spent two days
before he could come at this Island, and therefore took it the more unkindly at
the Governors hands, that he would not stay for a person that had taken so
much trouble to visit him; which made him, as it would have made any body, not
a little angry to be so disappointed, but more especially when he heard that
the Governor was got into a Castle in the Air, well provided for his defense,
where it was impossible to come at him. But a worse mischief befell him than all
this; for there had fallen a great Rain, which had wet all his Baggage, and his
provision of Powder; he also lost several of his men in passing a River that
was swelled with the showers, with several Mules laden with Plate and other
Merchandise. For the Governor had no Cranes belonging to his Airy Cockloft, to
secure the peoples Goods, as he had done their Persons; some women and children
which they had taken prisoners, were also drowned, but that was no great
matter. At length having waded up to the middle, sometimes whole, sometimes
half miles together, the greatest part of the Corsairs came safe home; but the
greatest part of the Prisoners, who were women and children, died.

Thus after twelve days Hunting they returned to Gibraltar with a great number
of prisoners. Two days after also returned the two great Boats, with four other
Boats, but the rascally covetous Spaniards, rather than accommodate Gentlemen
and strangers with what they wanted, had unladed the most considerable part of
their Wealth, and committed it to the custody of the Earth from whence it first
came. However, they were not such Curmudgeons, but that they left something
that was very well worth fetching away.

Having thus kept possession five weeks, and played whatGambols they thought
fit to play, they concluded to depart; however, not till they had set a Ransom
upon the Town. To which purpose they let go some of their prisoners to try the
Market, who after a few days brought answer that they were forbid by the
Governors to ransom their Town. They had as good have told him the Pope had
forbid 'em, and all one. Therefore as men deal by Spaniels that cannot find
their Masters lost Glove, he bids 'em go again. Thereupon, seeing there was no
way but one, they agreed to pay him down five thousand pieces of Eight, and
give him for security for the rest four of their chief Inhabitants, which upon
weighty considerations was accepted. Then he delivered all the Freemen
prisoners, having first set a Ransom upon every man's head, but he detained all
the Slaves, generously preserving the discovering Negro, whom the Spaniards
begged for earnestly: But the Captain would not part with him, left they should
offer him to Moloch in his absence. And thus having dispatched all their
business at Gibraltar, they made have back to Maracaibo, where they had
Information, that three Spanish Men of War lay at the mouth of the Lake, to
intercept them as they went back; and that the Castle at the Entrance into the
Bay was put into a good posture of Annoyance again, being well provided both
with Men and Guns. This Relation made the Captain scratch where it did not
itch; for after they had taken all this pains, it would have been a devilish
thing to have lost all their labor. Thereupon he first sent one of his Boats
to see how things stood at the mouth of the Bay, who the next day brought word,
that 'twas neither better nor worse; that they had viewed the Ships within
reach of their Guns, and that they were sure they were Ships, and not flying
Horses; of which the biggest was mounted with forty, the second with thirty,
and the least with twenty four Guns; a Force sufficient to grind their
Fisher-Boats to Mustard, which caused a great consternation among the men of
valor; for men are but men, and can do no more than they can do. Well, but
what shall they do? To wish the Ships at the Devil, was no more than to piss
upon 'em. Fight they must, or lose all. Which dismal choice that would have
mollified some men's hearts, like an Egg in Vinegar, did but enliven the
Captains courage. Therefore he resolved to fight the Spaniard first with his
own weapons, that is, with Rodomontado's. To which purpose he boldly sent a
Spaniard to the Admiral of the three Ships, demanding of him to pay the Ransom
of Maracaibo, or threatening else to reduce it to Powder, to whiten the
Spaniards Teeth.

The Envoy having delivered his Message, returned two days after with a Letter
to the Captain, giving him to understand that he was come to dispute his
passage out of the Lake, and to pursue him wherever he fled in those parts,
till he had got him into his clutches. However, if he would meekly restore what
he had taken, and calmly dismiss his prisoners, he would let him freely pass
without molestation. The Captain upon reading the Letter, was plainly convinced
in his conscience, that the conditions were too hard. However, that he might
not wholly depend upon his own Judgment, he resolved to take advice, and to
that purpose he read the Letter to his Associates, both in French and English;
which done, he desired to know how they intended to expound this hard Chapter,
either to surrender what they had purchased, or to fight for their Liberty. To
which the Soldiers all unanimously replied, They would rather lose their Blood
than their Booty, without which their blood signified nothing. At length, up
stepped one, as if he had been sent from Mahomets Paradise for their relief, who
beholding the Captain with a stern countenance. Captain, said he, take you but
care for the rest, and I my self will undertake to destroy the biggest with
only twelve men. And the way I will do it, added he, shall be by making a
Fireship of that Vessel which we took in the River of Gibraltar. Never did
Popish Saint speak such words of comfort from the Clouds, to distressed
Pilgrims in the Desert, as this Hero spoke to his Companions. The Proposal was
accepted, and entertained with joy, and the Ship was already burnt in conceit.

However to avoid that trouble, if they could avoid it, they concluded to see
whether the haughty Spaniard would come to any Accommodation or no? To which
purpose, to leave him inexcus'd, if mischief did befall him, the Captain sent
him two Ambassadors, with Propositions to quit Maracaibo without Ransom, and
to set at liberty one half of the Slaves, and all the other Prisoners, without
paying for their Heads. And 3dly, To send home the Inhabitants of Gibraltar,
which he had as Hostages for the Contributions behind. But the 40 Gun'd Admiral
rejected their Propositions with disdain, little dreaming what would be the
Issue. Threatening withal, That if they did not surrender themselves voluntarily
in two days, upon the Conditions proposed in his Letter, that he would come and
force 'em to do it.

The Captain finding the Admiral so peremptory, prepared all things in a
readiness to get out by main force. In the first place he ordered all the
Prisoners to be bound to their good behavior, and well guarded. Then they got
all the Tar and Brimstone they could find in the Town to fit up the Fire-ship.
Next they contrived several inventions, and mixtures of Tar, Powder, and
Brimstone, with which they besmeared several quantities of Palm leaves. They
stufft the Fire-ship with Hells Materials, broke open new Port-holes, where
instead of Guns, they placed several little Drums, of which the Negro's make
use. And lastly, They dressed up the Deck with several pieces of Wood, covered
with Monteros, with Muskets fixed as it were in their Arms, and hung about with
Bandileers.

The Fire-ship thus fitted, they stowed the Men-prisoners in one Boat, and the
Women and the richest part of their plunder; in others their more bulky bales
of Merchandise. All things being ready, the Captain exacted an Oath of all his
Company, whereby they swore to defend themselves to the last drop of blood:
promising withal more then ordinary shares to such as should most remarkably
signalize themselves in that days action.

Thus resolved, upon the 30 of April, 1669. They set Sail to seek the terrible
Spaniards, whom they found riding at an Anchor in the middle of the entry into
the Lake. When it grew night, they came to an Anchor, but the next morning by
break of day, they weighed again, steering their course directly to the
Spaniards, who perceiving their motion prepared to entertain em. But then the
Fire-ship Sailing before the rest, fell presently upon the great Ship, who
perceiving her to be one of the Devils Imps, a Fire-ship, did all they could to
put her by, but she had got such hold already of the unweildy Admiral with her
Iron Nails, that there was no getting loose, besides the flame had so suddenly
seized the Timber and Tackling, that all the Stern being in a moment consumed,
the Ship voluntarily sunk into the Sea to cool her self.

The second Ship seeing the Admiral already burnt, not by Accident, but by the
industry of the Enemy, dreading the same fate, escaped under the shot of the
Castle, and there very civilly sunk her themselves, to save their Enemies the
Trouble. The third having no opportunity to escape, was boarded and taken by
the Corsairs. When the first Ship was burnt, some of the Seamen swam to the
shore, whom the courteous Corsairs would have taken up, but they would neither
ask, nor admit of Quarter: which caused the Corsairs out of their generosity to
knock 'em on the head to prevent their being drowned.

The Corsairs, though it was not their customs to sing Te Deums, were not a
little glad you may be sure to have tamed their lofty Antagonist in so short a
time, which so exalted their minds, that they presently run ashore, with an
intention to take the Castle. That they found very well provided both with Men,
and great Guns, against which, they found their Muskets and Fireballs not
sufficient: and therefore perceiving that the Spaniards were resolved
obstinately to make use of their advantages, and considering there was nothing
to be got but blows, they retired to their Ships.

The next day the Captain employed his men, to try whether they could recover
any part of the Wealth that was lost in the two Ships that perished. They also
took some Prisoners that still swam alive upon the water. Among the rest there
was a Pilot, who was a Stranger, and belonged to the least of the two Ships,
with whom the Captain had much discourse about the number of men in the Ships;
from what Port they last set forth? and whether any more Ships were designed
upon that Coast? To which the Pilot gave the Captain such satisfaction, that
the Captain used him kindly, and retained him in his Service.

By this Pilot he understood that a certain Negro had given the Spanish Admiral
notice two days before the fight, that the Enemy had prepar d a Fire-ship to
burn his Fleet, but that the Admiral would not believe his Intelligence. He
also further discovered, that in the Ship which was sunk, there was above 40000
pieces of Eight, upon which, the Captain ordered one of his Ships to remain
there, and watch all opportunities of getting out of the Vessel what Plate they
could. In the mean time the Captain returned to Maracaibo, to re-fit the
Spanish Vessel which they had taken, which he then chose for himself, giving
his own to another of his Commanders. From thence he sent to the Admiral, much
more tame now, the same Message he had sent him in his Prosperity, to redeem
Maracaibo from fire, for which he demanded 30000 pieces of Eight. The Spaniards
considering how unfortunate they had been, and not knowing after this loss how
to get rid of these Masters of the Sea, at length concluded for 20000 pieces of
Eight, and 500 Beeves, for the Corsairs were always great lovers of Fiddlers
fair. However the Captain would not deliver the Prisoners, till he was clear of
the Castle Guns; and so Sailed away to the Ship which he had left behind, to
look after the Plate in the Ship that was burnt. Where he left her, there he
found her, together with fifteen thousand pieces of Eight which they had
recovered out of the Wreck; besides many other pieces of Plate, as Hilts of
Swords, and such other Toys, besides a great number of pieces of Eight that
were melted and run together, through the force of the fire.

As the Captain suspected, so it was; for the Admiral had a design to have paid
his Scores as he passed by the Guns of the Castle, which he could not avoid.
Thereupon he told the Prisoners how much it concerned them to agree with the
Governor to leave him a free passage for his Ships, to which, if he would not
agree, they must expect to be hanged every Mothers Son. The Prisoners were in a
woeful case; however to try the Governors good Nature, they deputed some of
their own to represent the condition of themselves, their Wives and Children at
the Captains disposal, and therefore besought him to let the Captain pass free,
as the only means to save their lives. But the Admiral reproaching their
Pusillanimity, denied their request, as being bound to maintain the King his
Masters Honor.

When the poor Prisoners with bleeding hearts returned the Admirals Answer, to
which all that the Captain replied was, that if the Admiral would not let him
go, he would find a means to do it without him; Thereupon he resolved to make a
present dividend of the Booty, which amounted to the value of 250000 pieces of
Eight in Money and Jewels, besides a a vast quantity of Merchandise and Slaves,
all which was divided to every Ship or Boat according to their share, as
justly, as if Astrea her self had done. And this was the rather done at that
place, for fear they might be divided by Storm, and not have an opportunity to
do it elsewhere, as also to prevent any of the Commanders from running away
with more then belonged to their parts.

But now the business was to pass the Castle, and get out of the Lake. To this
purpose they bethought themselves of a Stratagem, which was this. The day
preceding the night, that they intended to pass the straight, they cast Anchor
in view of the Castle, and then filling their Canows full of men, sent them to
the shore, where they lay concealed among the Boughs, till the men had hid
themselves, by laying themselves down in the bottom of the Boat, so that as
they returned, there appeared no more to be seen then only two or three that
rowed. This the Spaniards seeing several times repeated, assured themselves,
that the Captain intended to storm the Castle in the night time, which made the
Spaniards remove all their great Guns to the Landward, where they expected to
be most briskly assailed, leaving that Part toward the Sea naked, with little
or no defense. Which when the Captain saw had answered his ends, in the night
time, with wind and tide, and full swelled Sails, he gave the Castle the go by.
Which when the Castillians perceived, they made all the have they could to
remove their Guns again, but by that time the Captain was got almost out of
reach; so that all the shot they made, did him very little or no prejudice.

As for the rest of the Fleet which missed the Captain at Savona, they, to the
number of four hundred, endured much misery, unfortunate in all their Attempts.
However, resolving to do something, they chose among themselves one Captain
Hansell for their Admiral, who had behaved himself very Courageously at the
taking of Puerto Velo. He attempted the taking of Comona, upon the Continent of
Carucas, threescore Leagues from the West Side of the Island de la Trinidad.
There they landed their Men, and killed some few Indians straggling near the
Coast; but approaching to the Town, the Spaniards joining with the Indians,
disputed their entry so obstinately with the forcible arguments of Sword and
Musket, that they were forced to retreat to their Ships with great loss. At
last they arrived with empty Pockets at Jamaica, where they were jeered by
their more fortunate Companions, who cried to em. Let us see the money you
brought from Comona, whether it be as good silver as that which Maracaibo
affords.

THE Second Part.
CHAP. I.
SOon after Captain Morgan arrived at Jamaica, where the old trade of Cupping
and Canning, and Drabbing, and Dicing had gone so briskly forward, that both
Officers and Soldiers were reduced to their accustomed state of Indigency, that
they were very importunate for new Invasions and Exploits, to satisfy the
craving hunger that began to gnaw their Pockets. By this means the first care
of procuring men was soon over. Notice therefore being given of the Design, and
the Rendevouze appointed upon the Southside of the Island of Tortuga, the Sons
of Fortune flocked from all parts to put themselves under the Captains Conduct,
and to be in readiness also against the time appointed, which was the 24th of
October, 1670.

The Captain failed not to be punctual to his appointment, and came in his own
Ship to the Port, called Port Couillon, over against Cow-Island. There they
concluded to send four Ships, and one Boat over to the Continent, to rifle some
of the Towns and Villages, and get all the Maiz they could gather. To that
purpose they set sail for the Continent toward the River de la-Hacha, with a
design to plunder a small Village called Roncheria. Another party was sent to
hunt in the Woods, who killed a vast number of Beasts, and salted them. The
rest of the Company remained in the Ships to clean, and rigg them out to Sea.

CHAP. II. Their Success in the River de la Hacha.
AFter this the four Ships, and one Boat steered their course within sight of
the River de la Hacha. Where an unlucky Calm gave the Inhabitants time to
prepare for the Entertainment of the Sea-Hectors, or at least to hide the best
of their goods, that they might be in a better readiness to retire, when they
found themselves overmatch'd. But such was Fortunes kindness, that what they
went to seek, chopp't into their Mouths. For at the same time there happened to
be in the River a very considerable Vessel sent from Cartagena to load Maiz,
which was just ready to return as the Sea-Hectors came. This Ship they took
with a wet finger, with all the Seamen, who in vain endeavored to escape. The
next morning by break of day they drew near the shore, and landed their Men,
though the Spaniards made a stout resistance from a battery raised on that
side, where of necessity they were to land. But they were not to be repulsed by
Batteries, that were Battery proof, so that the Spaniards were forced to
retreat to a Village, whither the Sea-Hectors pursued them. There the Spaniards
rallied again, and stood to it like Sons of Priam, but finding the Sons of
Hector too hard for 'em, they were forced to betake themselves to the Woods.

The next day the Sea-Hectors perceiving the Spaniards fled, pursued as far as
possibly they could, and overtaking a Party of unfortunate Diego's, took them
all Prisoners. These they Catechized according to their wonted mercy, to
discover where they had hid their goods, which brought some that could not
endure pain so well as others, to auricular Confession. Insomuch that in 15
days, they had got several Prisoners, great store of Plate, and moveable Goods,
with other things, which they made no scruple to carry away. But not so
contented, they dispatched some of their Prisoners to barter for Ransom-mony;
to which it was answered, they had no Plate, but they would give 'em as much
Maiz as they could afford; Thereupon they conjobbl'd together for 4000 bushels
of Maiz, for sometimes they thought it as convenient to provide for the Gut, as
well as for the Pocket.

They had been now absent five whole weeks together, which made the Com. in
chief almost despair of their return, and to be in some fears lest they should
be fallen into the hands of their Friends the Spaniards. But when he saw the
Ships return, and one more then had been sent out; there was not only joy in
the chief Commanders heart, but the whole Company with their loud Acclamations
gave the Sky to understand their universal gladness, which was much augmented
when they found 'em laiden with Maiz, and so many other good things. So that
now they began to look upon themselves again as thriving men.

After this the Commander in chief divided the Maiz, and the Flesh
proportionably to every Ship, and then having taken a view of every Ship, to
see that it was in good order and trim, he steered away for Cape Tiburon, where
he met with some other Ships come from Jamaica to join their Forces in this
splendid Expedition; so that now the whole Fleet consisted of 37 Ships, manned
with 2000 fighting men, besides Seamen and Boys. And now woe be to somebody, for
great storms fall heavy. The Admiral was mounted with 22 great Guns, and six
small ones, the rest carried some 20, some 18, others 16, and the smallest at
least four. It would have made any man's heart ache that had any kindness for the
Spanish Dominions, to see such a cloud hang over their heads. And certainly it
must be a blessed time in the Infernal Regions, when Hell was so raked, and the
Devil scumm'd.

The Commander in chief finding himself furnished with such a considerable
Fleet, divided the whole into two Squadrons, appointing Officers to each
Squadron by itself. And thus you see how Irregularity itself moves upon the
hinges of Regularity.

This being done, he called all his Captains together, and caused them to sign
certain Articles of common Agreement in the name of the whole. For himself,
that he should have the hundredth part of all that was gotten, to himself
alone. That every Captain should draw the shares of eight men for the expenses
of the Ship, besides his own. That the Surgeon besides his pay, should have
200 pieces of Eight for his Chest of Medicaments; and that every Carpenter
should draw a hundred pieces of Eight, besides his common Salary. Then for
recompenses and Pensions for the maimed, they were advanced somewhat higher
then before, 1500 pieces of Eight, or 15 Slaves for the loss of both Legs. For
the loss of both Hands 1800 pieces of Eight or 18 Slaves. For one Leg 600
pieces of Eight, or 6 Slaves. For a hand, the same. For an Eye a hundred pieces
of Eight, or one Slave. For him that signalized himself in any Fight, by taking
down the Enemies Colors, and putting up their own, or entering a Fort
fore-most, 50 pieces of Eight, and that all extraordinary Salaries and Rewards
should be paid out of the first purchase that should be taken.

All things thus ordered, three places were propounded to be attacked,
Cartagena, Panama, or Santa Cruiz. But the fatal Lot fell upon Panama, as being
accounted the richest of the three. But not knowing the Avenues to it, they
thought it requisite first to take St. Katherines in their way, there to
furnish themselves with Guides, in regard there are many Outlaws in that place,
who are very expert in the knowledge of that Country.

CHAP. III. The Island of St. Catherine taken.
FRom Cape Tiburon the Fleet weighed Anchor the 16 of December. 1670. and four
days after arrived in sight of St. Catherines, at what time the Commander in
chief sent one of his nimblest Vessels to view the entry of the River, as also
if there were any Ships there to oppose his landing, or acquaint the
Inhabitants with his arrival, and thereby prevent his design.

The next morning early the whole Fleet came to an Anchor in a Bay called Augua
Grande, near unto the Island where the Spaniard had a Battery mounted with four
Pieces of Canon; Captain Morgan having landed his Men, began his March through
the Woods, having no other Guides than some of his own men who had been there
before, which conducted him to a Fort where the Governor commonly kept his
residence, but was then quite abandoned; the Spaniards having retired into the
lesser Island, which was so well fortified, that it seemed impregnable.

The Spaniards perceiving the Pirates to approach, began to fire most furiously
upon them, which made them retreat, and take up their rest upon the Grass for
that night, being sorely pinched with hunger; about midnight, to add to their
affliction, it began to Rain as if the Skys were melted, which continued till
next morning; then after two hours it recommenced again anew rather harder than
before, which caused them to cease from advancing toward the Fort whence the
Spaniards did continually fire at the Pirates, seeing them approach.

Cold, hunger and nakedness, did now reduce the Pirates to so great straits,
that an old scabb'd Horse, which they found in the fields, was acceptable to
them, which they killed, and with greediness eated. C. M. knowing how much this
tended to the prejudice of his Enterprise, and perceiving his men to talk of
venturing to their Ships, resolved upon a sudden remedy, which was this; he
caused a Canow to be rigged out in all haste, having Colors of Truce
displayed, which he sent to the Governor of the Island with this message, That
if he surrendered not himself and his men within a few hours into his hand upon
mercy, he might certainly expect to be put to the Sword, without Quarters to
any; the Governor terrified with such big words, desires two hours to
deliberate, which Captain M. granted; a little after the said Governor sent
two Canows, with white Colors, and two Persons to treat with him; the
substance of their Commission was, that the Governor had resolved to surrender
the Island to C. M. not being sufficiently provided to defend it, desiring only
that (to save his credit) he would be pleased to use the formality of a
Stratagem of War, the method of which the Governor himself proposed to him; C.
M. agreed to every one of these Propositions, whereupon the Messengers taking
their leave, returned to give an account of their Negotiations to the Governor.

Presently after C. M. commanded his whole Fleet immediately to enter the Port,
and his men on shore to be in readiness to assault the Castle of St. Jerome; the
Castle taking the Alarm, as was contrived betwixt the Governor and C. M.
began to fire furiously at the Ships, but without Bullets, as was before
agreed; then the Pirates landed, assaulting the lesser Island which they took,
with both the Fortresses, forcing the Spaniards in appearance to flee into the
Church for Sanctuary. The Island being taken by this pretended Stratagem, the
Soldiers made it their only care to satiate their empty stomachs with the best
Victuals they could find; next day they numbered their prisoners, which were
found to be four hundred and fifty persons in all, whereof one hundred and
ninety were Soldiers belonging to the Garrison; next they took a view of the
whole Island, with its Fortresses, which they found to be nine in all, viz. the
Forts of St. Jerome, St. Matthew, Santa Teresa, St. Augustine, la Plattaforma de
la conceptione, St. Salvador, Plattaforma de Las Artilleros, Santa Cruz; and
lastly St. Joseph's Fort, all which were indifferently provided with Arms and
Ammunition, some of them having twenty great Guns; also in their Storehouse
were found above thirty thousand pound of Powder, all the Guns were stopped and
nailed, the Fortresses also demolished, only St. Jerome the Pirates saved to
keep their Garrisons in.

Captain Morgan enquired if any Bandits were there from Panama, or Puerto Velo;
three being found, were brought before him, who being examined, pretended
exactly to know all the Avenues of those parts; he asked if they would guide
him to Panama, which if they did, they should have an equal share of what
should be pillaged in that expedition; they readily accepted his proffers,
promising all obedience to his commands.

CHAP. IV. The Castle of Chagre taken.
CAp. Mor. having so promising an occasion, thought it not fit to neglect it,
whereupon he gave orders that four Ships and one Boat should be provided with
all necessaries for taking the Castle of Chagre, seated upon a River of that
name; in these Ships he puts 400 men under the command of one Captain Brodely,
whose actions of this nature had rendered him famous formerly in those Coasts,
this Brodely having received his orders, puts to Sea, and within three days
arrives within sight of the said Castle.

This Castle is seated upon a high Mountain, having many advantages both from
art and nature, for its strength being fortified on all sides with strong
Palisado's, on the Land side it has four strong Bastions, and two toward the
Sea, the South Side is unaccessible, by reason of the asperity of the Mountain;
the North-side also is encompassed with the broad River; at the foot of the
Mountain is a strong Fort which commands the entry of the River, with several
other singular advantages of a well fortified place.

The Pirates came to an Anchor about a League from the Castle, which the
Spaniards perceiving, began to fire briskly at them with the biggest of their
Guns; next morning they landed, and marched through a Wood, resolving to attack
the Castle on that side, but the difficulties they met with in their march, as
also the Spaniards constant firing from the Castle, made them much to fear the
success of that enterprise (for on that side of necessity they must make the
assault) however, they resolved rather to hazard all, then give it over.

Whereupon they advanced toward the Castle with their Swords in one hand, and
Fireballs in the other; but the Spaniards received them with so much
briskness, that after they attempted to scale the walls, they were forced to
retreat, and rest themselves until night; then they returned again to the
Assault, and attempted with their Fireballs to pull down the Pales before the
wall; while they were thus disputing the matter with great resolution on both
sides, a very remarkable accident happened, which put the Victory in the
Pirates hands, for one of them being shot with an Arrow quite through the body,
he with courage pulled it out at the side of his breast, and wound a little
cotton about the head of it, and putting it in his Musket, shot it back again
into the Castle, the cotton being kindled by the Powder, set fire to 2 or 3
thatched houses that were within the Castle, which not being timely taken
notice of, blew up some barrels of Powder, which put the Spaniards into great
consternation, not knowing how the fire came, as also not having sufficient
water to extinguish it.

The Pirates seeing so favorable an opportunity, made use of it, setting fire
unto the Palizadoes, which gave them great advantage, many breaches having
thereby been made among the Pales, which made the earth fall in great heaps
into the Ditch, upon which they climbed up, and got over unto the Castle,
notwithstanding of much opposition; for they threw down flaming Pots full of
combustible matter, by which several were killed.

The fire thus consuming the Palisado,'s the Pirates prosecuted their intention
of being Masters of the Castle, when day appeared, they saw the earth fallen
down from the Palisado's to the Ditch, which put them on even ground with them
that were within.

The Pirates seeing the fire thus to rage, thought it their interest (being in
hopes to be Masters of all) to extinguish it, for this end they appointed some
of their number to do what they could to extinguish it by constant shooting at
it, while the rest managed the Assault; about noon the Pirates gained a breach,
which the Governor himself manfully defended with 25 men; here was hot work
with Muskets, Swords, Pikes and Stones, notwithstanding the Pirates forced
their way through all difficulties, till at last they were Masters of the
Castle; the Spaniards who were alive, threw themselves headlong into the Sea,
disdaining to ask Quarters for their lives, the Governor retreated unto the
Corp du Guard, where he intended to defend himself, but at last was killed by a
Musket shot.

All the men that were found alive, were but 30, whereof 20 were wounded, and
this was all that survived of 314, wherewith the Castle was Garrisoned, them
they made Prisoners, compelling them to tell what they knew of their
interprises; the Pirates also had a great loss of their men here, for when they
came to number them, they found they lost an 100, besides 70 that were wounded.

CHAP. V. Captain Morgan comes to Chagre, and goes from thence to Panama.
THE Pirates having fully possessed themselves of the Castle of Chagre, presently
acquainted Captain Morgan with it, by a Messenger, who thereupon resolved in
all have to go thither himself in Person; for this end he caused all the
Provision that could be found to be embarked for the use of Chagre, so having
set fire to all the Houses and Forts there, except the Castle of St. Terresa;
and carrying all the Prisoners with him, he set Sail for the River Chagre,
where he arrived upon the eight day from St. Katherine.

The Fleet were so overcome with Joy, seeing the English Colors upon the
Castle, that not minding the entry to the River, they lost four Ships (the Ship
wherein the Captain himself was, being one) yet they saved all the men, and
most of the Goods; the Captain being with great solemnity brought to the
Castle, he commanded all the Prisoners to be set to work for repairing of the
breaches about the Castle: then they seized upon all the Ships and Canows
belonging to the Spaniards, and having put a Garrison of 500 men in the Castle,
and 150 more in the Ships within the River, he departed toward Panama, the
18th of August, 1670. taking no victuals in his Ships, hoping to be furnished
by the Spaniards.

The first day they only failed 6 Leagues, and came to a place called de Los
Braccos; here they went on shore to search for Victuals, but nothing could be
had, the Spaniards being fled, so that some were forced to dine upon a Pipe of
Tobacco.

The next day continuing their Journey, they came to a place called Cruz de
Juan Calego, here they were forced to leave their Canows, the River being dried
for want of Rain; but their Guides told them that about two Leagues farther
they they might continue their Journey by land; hereupon leaving some Companies
aboard to defend the Boats, the next morning, being the third day, they all
went on shore, but they found the way so deep and dirty, that Captain Morgan
thought it fit to transport his men in Canows to a place further up the River,
called Cedro Bueno; which accordingly he did.

The fourth day the greatest part of the Pirates marched by land to discover
the Ambuscadoes of the Spaniards, being extremely pinched with hunger. About
noon their Guide cried aloud he had found an Ambuscado; this made the Pirates
rejoice, hoping there to find some Provision, but coming to the place, found
that all were fled, which disappointment vexed them grievously; there nothing
could be found but a few leathern bags, all empty, but their hunger was such,
that they fell greedily to eating the leather.

Having dispatched this tough feast, and gone a little further, they found
another Ambuscado, but as barren as the former, but some of them were so
provident as to reserve some pieces of the leather upon which they dined, of
this they made their Supper.

The fifth day they marched to a place called Barbacoa, but as empty as any of
the former, yet having ranged along, they found two sacks of Meal, with two
Jars of Wine, and some fruits called Platanos this treasure Captain Morgan
caused to be equally distributed amongst them who were in greatest necessity,
which refreshed them, so that they marched now with greater courage than ever,
till night. Continuing their march thus, part of them by land through the
Woods, and part by water in the Canows, upon the sixth day at noon they came to
a Plantation, where they found a Barn full of Maiz; they fell to eating of it
dry, till they could eat no more; then they distributed it in great quantities
among themselves, and so continued their Journey, but a little further
discovering an Ambuscado of Indians, whereupon they threw away their Maiz,
hoping there to find plenty of all things, but they found themselves much
deceived, for all were fled; only on the other side the water they discovered
about an 100 Indians in a company, who like Roes run through the Woods till
they were out of sight, but some of the Pirates endeavoring to catch them,
were killed by their Arrows; not only so, but they houted at them at a
distance, crying, ha Perros a la Savana, a la Savana, ha ye Dogs, go to the
Plain, go to the Plain, but night coming on, they took up their rest in the
Plain, where sleep was not much minded, some beginning to murmur, blaming the
Captains bad Conduct, others continuing still resolute; one of their Guides
also gave them encouragement, telling them that a short time would bring them
where there was somewhat to be reaped.

Next morning being the seventh day, they all made clean their Arms, fixing
their firelocks; which done, and marching till noon, they discovered much
smoke arising at a great distance from them, thither they marched with all
possible speed, promising to themselves plenty of good cheer, but when they
arrived at the place, found themselves miserably disappointed, for the
Spaniards had set fire every man to his House, carrying all things that were
eatable with them, excepting some Dogs and Cats, which the Pirates were glad to
feed upon.

Yet after a narrow search, they found in the Kings Stables 16 Jarrs of Peru
Wine, with a Sack full of Bread, which they no sooner drank of, but they fell
sick every man; this made them presently apprehend the Wine had been poisoned,
so they gave up themselves all for dead men, which made them take up their rest
there for that night: this place is 26 Spanish Leagues from Panama, as also the
last place unto which the Boats or Canows can come; which forced Captain Morgan
to leave his Canows, and land all his men, though never so weak, but the Canows
he sent back again to the place where the Boats were, except one, which he
caused to be hidden for carrying of Intelligence, as his affairs required.

Upon the eighth day in the morning Captain Morgan sent 200 men before, to
discover what Ambuscado's were laid in the way to Panama; so having marched
about ten hours to a place called Quebradda Obscura, here they were welcomed
with a shower of 3 or 4 thousand Arrows, not knowing whence they came, or who
shot them, this put them in a great surprisal, especially not knowing whence
they came, but marching a little further, they perceived some Indians fleeing
as fast as they could before them, to take the advantage of another post;
notwithstanding there remained a whole troop upon the place, designing to fight
the Pirates; which they did with great courage, until their Captain fell, who,
although he despaired of life, yet would he ask no Quarters, but endeavoring
to raise himself, with undaunted courage laid hold of a Javelin, but was
presently shot dead with a Pistol.

Here eight Pirates were killed, and ten wounded, the slain they buried, and so
went on a little further, where they discovered a parcel of Indians at a
distance, standing upon the top of a Mountain very nigh unto the way by which
they were to pass; they sent 50 of their number to see if they could catch any
of them, that they might get intelligence from them, but all in vain, for they
betook themselves to their heels, and presently after showed themselves at
another place, crying, Ala Savana cornudos Peros Engleses, i.e. to the Plain ye
Cuckolds, ye English Dogs; at the place there was a Wood, wherein Captain
Morgan suspected the Spaniards had placed an Ambuscado, whereupon he sent 200
men to search it; the Spaniards and Indians observing the Pirates to descend
the Mountain, did so too, seeming as if they intended to Attack them, but being
got once into the Wood, they disappeared, and were seen no more.

Night coming on, there fell a great rain, which caused the Pirates march the
faster, and seek for shelter to preserve their Arms, but none could be found,
for that the Spaniards had set all on fire, only they found some little Hutts
for Shepherds, which not being capable to hold them all, they put in them a
small number of every company, to keep the arms of the rest, and thus they
continued till morning.

Morning being come, they put forward while the fresh air of the morning
lasted; after two hours march they discovered a company of twenty Spaniards, of
which they endeavored to catch some, but could lay hold of none, they suddenly
disappearing. At length they came to the top of a high Mountain, whence they
discovered the South Sea, at which they greatly rejoiced; having descended the
Mountain, they came to a valley, in which were great numbers of Cattle; here
now begins a most bloody Massacre amongst these Animals, some killing, another
flaying, a third making of fires to roast them, tho very little roasting served
them, resembling rather Canibals eating their raw flesh, then Englishmen.

CHAP. VI. The Spaniards defeated, and the City of Panama taken.
THE Pirates having thus satisfied their hunger, they marched forward. C. M.
being much vexed, that for nine days time he could get no information of the
condition of his Enemies, sent out 50 men to take (if possible) some Prisoners,
to be informed by them, but could catch none.

Within a few hours they came within sight of the Steeple of Panama, which they
no sooner saw, but they shouted for joy, as if the Victory were already put
into their hands. Thus they pitched their Camp for that night high to the City,
waiting with much impatience for the dawning of the day, when they intended to
attack the City.

The noise of their Drums and Trumpets put the City into an Alarm, who
thereupon sent out fifty Horse to observe their motion: Mean while they began
to play furiously upon them with their great Guns from the Walls, but with
little or no harm to the Pirates, whom they could not conveniently reach. There
appeared also to them a Body of two hundred Spaniards, at a little distance,
who looked as if they intended to block up all the Passages, so that none of
the Pirates could escape; but they no ways regarding these menaces, opened
every man his Satchel, and began to examine what he had left at noon; and
having supped as well as they could, laid themselves down upon the Grass, and
slept till morning. The day no sooner began to appear, but they draw to Arms,
and being drawn up in very good order, marched directly toward the City, but C.
M. being advised by one of the Guides not to keep the highway, for fear of
Ambuscadoes, chose another way that led through the Wood; the Spaniards seeing
the Pirates take another way than they expected, were forced to leave their
Posts, and come out to meet them.

The Spanish Forces consisted of two Squadrons, four Regiments of Foot, and a
great many wild Bulls driven by Indians and Negroes for their help; which when
the Pirates perceived from the top of an Hill, they were much terrified at
their number, and feared the success very much; but reflecting upon their
present straits, and that now of necessity they must either conquer, or die,
being out of hope to get Quarters from an Enemy whom they had so incensed, they
began to encourage one another to stand to the very last man, rather than now
to yield; so they divided themselves into three Battalions, having sent one of
two hundred Buccaniers before them: Thus they descended the Hill toward their
Enemy, who had taken the advantage of the ground already; as soon as they
approached them, the Spaniards gave a shout, crying, Viva el Rei, God save the
King; presently after the Horse began to move; the two hundred Buccaniers,
every one putting one knee to the ground, fired full in their face: Thus the
work begins fiercely on both sides. The Spaniards acted very gallantly, both
Horse and Foot, but the Pirates having got betwixt the Horse and the Foot,
forced them to separate much to their prejudice; next they essayed to disorder
the Pirates, by driving the wild Cattle among their Ranks; but most of them ran
away, being frighted with the noise of the Battle, others were shot dead by the
Buccaniers.

The Spanish Horse began at length to lose their ground, most of them being
killed, which the Foot perceiving, threw down their Arms, and betook them to
their heels; the Pirates being overwearied, were not able to follow, so that
they not being able to flee to the Woods for shelter, hid themselves among the
Shrubs, but upon search they were all found and put to death. Some Priests were
also brought before C.M. who were all served with the same sauce. They took
also a Captain, and carried him before him; him he spared, and made him give a
particular account of the Forces of the City; which he did.

His Relation made C. M. alter his resolution, so that he ordered they should
march another way. Thus having rested their weary bones a little, they began
courageously to march toward the City with full resolution either to conquer,
or be conquered; but they met with great difficulties in their approaching the
City, by reason of the Spanish Cannon firing incessantly at them, which
occasioned greatloss of their men; notwithstanding they resolutely advanced, no
ways deterred by so imminent danger; so that after three hours hot dispute,
wherein the Spaniards did indeed play the men, they were forced to yield upon
mercy.

The Pirates now being Masters of the City, cut them all off that offered in
the least to oppose them: They found not so much Riches here as they expected,
the best of them having before been transported to some remoter place for
security. Captain Morgan having assembled all his men together, when the fury
was over, gave them order, that under the greatest penalties they should taste
no Wine, being privately informed the Spaniards had poisoned it.

CHAP. VII. The City of Panama set on fire, and the Effects thereof.
ALL things being thus put in subjection to the Pirates, and their Guards being
set at several quarters of the City, promising to themselves no less than a
Paradise there for a while; They were suddenly Alarmed by a Fire, which
appeared in several places of the City, none knowing how it came; but the wiser
sort suspected deeply that C. M. was the Author of it, though upon what
motives, or for what end he did it, none could guess. All means possible were
used by the Spaniards, and some of the Pirates also, for quenching of it, but
in vain, for in less then half an hour almost a whole Street was turned to
ashes.

The Houses were all built with Cedar of a magnificent structure, and richly
adorned within, although the best of the Furniture was conveyed away before
from the Pirates: here were also eight Monasteries, wherein there was great
Riches, which the Monks secured from hazard before the taking of the City.

The loss which the Spaniards sustained here was infinite, for besides 7000
dwelling Houses, there were also 200 rich Warehouses burnt, together with many
Negroes that had hid themselves there, also a stately House of the Genoeses,
belonging to their Trade. This fire continued the space of four weeks before it
was quite extinguished.

The Pirates for the most part lodged without the City, and there kept guard,
fearing the Spaniards would rally, and to keep their Forces (now much weakened)
together, for they knew the Spaniards had a far greater number of men then they
had, whom they saw several times in whole Troops cruize too and fro in the
Field, but durst not hazard a Battle; when the Pirates saw no appearance of
hazard from the Spaniard, they re-entred the City, and fell to seeking among
the Ruins for Plate and Gold, of which they found great quantities hid in
Wells and Cisterns, and other such places.

Soon after Captain Morgan sent out 300 men in two Troops, to search for the
Inhabitants that were fled, who after two days returned, bringing with them 200
Prisoners, men and women; this day also came in a Boat, which was sent into the
South Sea to search, bringing with her three other Boats; but had missed one
Gallion much better then all the three, being laden with the Kings Plate, and
other Riches, both Gold, Pearl, Jewels, and other most precious goods; but it
being badly provided both of Arms and Victuals, might easily have been taken,
had not the Pirates been otherwise taken up with Drinking and Whoring, till she
was got out of their reach, yet the next day they sent after her with all
speed, but in vain, she having got to some remote shore unknown to them; but
though they missed the Gallion, yet in searching for it, they found several
other Boats laden with costly merchandise, which they seized upon, and brought
to Panama.

Where being arrived, they gave an account of their Adventures to Captain
Morgan, who when he heard of the rich Prize that had escaped (some of the
Prisoners putting him in hope to retrieve her) immediately commanded all the
Boats that were in the Port with all have to pursue her, which they did for the
space of eight days, but to no purpose; so returning home by the Isles of
Tavoga, and Tavogilla, they found a Vessel laden with Cloth, Sugar, Soap, and
Biscuit, with 20000 pieces of Eight in money, which they seized without the
least opposition, together also with a Boat that lay nigh unto this Ship, into
which they put part of the Goods that were in the Ship, with some Slaves found
upon the Island, with this purchase they returned to Panama, yet much
unsatisfied that the Gallion escaped.

While Captain Morgan was thus busy at Panama, those at Chagre were not idle;
for they sent out two Boats to follow their employment, which happened to meet
with a Spanish Ship laden with Victuals, and other Provisions, her they began
to chase within sight of the Castle, which they in the Castle perceiving,
instantly hung out a Spanish Flag, the poor Spaniard seeing this, thought all
was right, so that they run in their Ship just under their Cannon, where they
were presently caught and made Prisoners.

This encouraged C. M. to stay the longer at Panama, where he caused several
excursions to be made, sending forth daily Parties of 200 men, and as one Party
came back, another of the same number were sent out, by which means he gathered
a great deal of Riches; upon a day they happened to find a fellow in a
Gentleman's House, who had put on a pair of Taffety Breeches belonging to his
Master, with a silver Key hanging at its strings, they put this wretch to
exquisite Torments, to make him confess where the Cabinet was to which the Key
belonged.

Yea, certain it is, they were most cruel to all ranks, even the Religious
Persons were forced to buy their lives with their Money, the Women also were
little better used, especially by practicing upon their Chastity, their Captain
showing them no good example in this, an instance whereof was a Gentlewoman
brought from Tavoga, and Tavogilla, she was Wife to a rich Merchant who at that
time was in Peru about the concerns of his Trade. No sooner was this Lady
brought before him, than he designed her for his base pleasure, giving orders
she should be lodged in an apartment by her self, with a Negro to attend her;
but this civility soon discovered itself to be for a base end, for soon after
he came to her Chamber, where he communicated unto her his ardent desire of
accomplishing his lust, she with all civility imaginable denied him, upon which
he presented her with Pearl and Gold, and other precious things, but with as
little success; hereupon, presently altering his note, he commanded her to be
stripped of her clothes, and put her in a dark stinking Cellar, allowing her no
more Victuals then might keep her from starving; but he finding that this
cruelty might render him odious even to the Pirates themselves, forges an
Accusation against her, as if she kept correspondence with his Enemy the
Spaniard, pretending this to be the reason of her being so dealt with, yet in a
short time she was allowed the same liberty with the rest.

About this time there was a Plot discovered in the City, of a considerable
number of Pirates (who wearied of Captain Morgans service) resolved to desert
him, and that by taking one of the Ships which were in the Port; resolving to
follow their old Trade a while by themselves, and then to return home to
Europe; for this end they gathered great store of Provision, which they hid in
some private place, also some great Guns belonging to the Town, with other
necessaries suitable to their design.

Certainly their design had taken effect, had not one of their own Comrades
betrayed them, by discovering the whole to Captain Morgan; who presently caused
the Mast of their Ship to be cut down, and burnt, together with all the other
Boats that were in the Harbor, after this he sent out many of the Spaniards to
the adjoining Country to seek for money to redeem themselves, and others their
Companions, as well Ecclesiastics as Laics, he caused likewise all the
Cannons of the Town to be nailed, and stopped up.

CHAP. VIII. Captain Morgan returns to Chagre, and divides the Spoil.
CAptain Morgan being now weary of Panama, resolved to leave it, therefore he
commanded that all things should be put in order for his departure, but having
notice that the Governor of Panama had laid several Ambuscado's in his way, he
sent out a strong Party to search for him, who soon after returned, and assured
him there was no appearance of any such thing, for proof of which, they brought
with them some Prisoners, who confessed that indeed the Governor did intend to
lay Ambuscado's for him in his return, but that he could not put his design in
execution, because such as he designed to effect it, would not undertake it, so
the design was laid aside.

Upon the 24th of February, 1671. the Pirates left the City of Panama, or
rather the place where it did stand; having laden 175 Beasts of Carriage, with
Silver, Gold, and other precious Spoils, also carried with them 600 Prisoners;
having marched a League from Panama, Captain Morgan drew up his men in Battle
Array, in such a form, as that the Prisoners were in the midst surrounded with
Pirates on all sides, here nothing could be heard but shrieks and Cries of
these poor Creatures, terrified with the thought of being transported, as also
being sorely pinched with extreme hunger and thirst; which Captain Morgan made
them suffer of purpose, that they might with more earnestness seek for Money for
their Ransom; many of them begged with tears, upon their knees, that he would
suffer them to go back to Panama again; but he replied that his business there
was to get Money, and not to hear their cries and lamentations.

But the forced Lady had some more respect put upon her then the rest, being
led by her self betwixt two Pirates. But when she saw that she was like to be
carried Captive to a strange land, she was exceedingly disordered, piercing the
skies with her lamentations, also protesting to the Pirates that she had
ordered two religious Persons in whom she confided to go to such a place, where
they should find so much money as her Ransom would amount unto, but instead of
bringing it to her, they employed it some other way, which Captain Morgan
hearing, enquired further into it, and finding it to be a truth, immediately
released the Lady, but detained the Priests as Prisoners in her place, withal
using them according to the demerits of their inhumane intreagues.

The Pirates being come to a Town called Cruz, seated upon the River Charge, it
was ordered, that within three days every prisoner should bring in their
Ransom, otherwise to be transported to Jamaica, whereupon some paid their
Ransom here, and were set at Liberty, others who could procure no money, were
detained; from hence they marched upon the fifth of March, carrying away all
the spoil of the place, and also some prisoners whom C. M. added to those of
Panama, that paid not their Ransom, and caused them all to be transported,
excepting their religious men, who had cheated the Lady of her Ransom; they
were ransomed three days after the imprisonment by some who pitied their case
more than they did hers.

Now these Gentlemen that were formerly so strict in examining of others for
their goods, begin to set up the same Discipline amongst themselves; for about
half way to Chagre C. M. caused every one in the company to be sworn that they
had concealed nothing of their purchase; which they willingly did, not standing
much upon such a trifle as an Oath; but he knowing by experience what
conscience men of that profession were Masters of, commanded every man to be
searched, even to the very soles of their shoes; but that this Order might not
be ill taken, he agreed that he himself should be searched first, which was
accordingly done, then by mutual consent there was one chosen out of every
Company to search the rest; some were not well pleased with this invention, yet
were forced to submit, not being able to resist. This being done, they
reimbarked for Chagre upon the ninth of March, where they found all things in
good order, except the wounded men, whom they left there, most of which died of
their wounds.

Having arrived at the Castle of Chagre, C. M. sent to Puerto Velo, demanding a
considerable Ransom for the said Castle, threatening otherwise to raze it to the
ground, to which they of Puerto Velo answered, that he might do with it as he
pleased; as for them, they would not give one farthing for its Ransom; which
Answer, though it did vex him, yet he could not help it at that time.

But now being out of all hopes of getting any more by that Voyage, they come
next to divide the Spoil, which when done, many complained they were wronged,
judging Captain Morgan an unfit divisor, being one that always loved to be his
own Carver, which made their proportion the smaller, for notwithstanding of
their many dangerous Adventures, and rich Prizes, their share of the dividend
came to no more then 200 pieces of Eight per man; this unhandsome dealing did
very much exasperate them against him, which he perceiving, began to fear the
effects of it, therefore thinking it not safe for him to tarry any longer
there, he commanded the Ordnance of the Castle to be carried aboard his Ship,
then he ordered as much of the walls and edifices to be ruined, as the
shortness of the time could permit; after which, he went secretly on board his
own Ship, not acquainting any of his Companions with his departure, being only
followed with three or four Vessels of the whole Fleet, which some suspected to
have shared with him in the best and greatest part of the Spoil; some of the
discontented would willingly be revenged upon him, had they not found
themselves too weak, and ill provided even for their intended Voyage to
Jamaica, as you shall hear in the sequel.

THE Third Part.
CHAP. I. Some of the Pirates return to Jamaica, with some things remarkable in
their Voyage.
CAptain Morgan having thus left his Associates at Chagre, they were indeed a
lively Portraiture of what attends wickedness in the end, being brought very
low for want, they resolved every man to seek by what means to help himself.

The party of which we are to speak, they steered their course along the Coast
of Costa Rica, intending, if possible, to purchase some Provision, and to
careen their Ship in some secure place, within few days they came to a Port
called Boca del Toro, where they found abundance of eatable Tortoises. The
circumference of the place is about 10 Leagues, being surrounded with little
Islands.

The Inhabitants of these Islands are wild Indians, who could never be brought
under the Spanish Yoke: This people are divided, according to the variety of
Idioms of their Language, into several customs and fashions, which occasions
much contention and wars amongst them; some of them kept Commerce with the
Pirates a long time, giving them a part of the best food, or other Commodities
the Country affords, in exchange for some Iron Instruments, Beads, or other
Toys, which among them were in greater esteem then the preciousest Jewels; but
at length they found the Pirates a little too hard for them to deal with,
whereupon they gave over any further Trading with them.

Here they went ashore for provision, but to little purpose, nothing being to
be had except a few Crocodiles Eggs; wherefore they steered Eastward, where
they met with three Boats more of their companions, who were left at Chagre;
they told them that their condition was low for hunger, and that C. M. himself
was brought to that pass, that he could afford his men no more allowance than
once a day; they hearing this, changed their course, and steered Westward,
where in a short time they found abundance of Tortoise, so that nothing now was
wanting to them but fresh Water. This also they knew was to be had in the
neighboring Islands, but thought it unsafe for them to go on shore, because of
the Envy betwixt the Inhabitants and the Pirates; however, as need makes naked
men run, so thirst made them rather hazard their lives, than want Water any
longer; whereupon they resolved to land all in one Island, which they did; but
while some went to range in the Woods, and others to fill their Barrels,
suddenly the Indians came upon them; upon which they presently flee to their
Arms, and began briskly to fire at them, which made them advance no further,
but run away with speed; the Pirates not pursuing them, esteeming their Water
more precious than any thing they could promise themselves from that attempt;
but as they returned back, they found two Indians dead upon the shore; one of
which they understood to be a Person of Quality by his habit, which was very
costly: Among other things, he wore on his face a planch of massive Gold, which
hung down at his Chin, either to cover his Beard, or instead of one.

After the Pirates were gone on board, they heard a hideous noise from the
shore, which put them in fear that the Indians had called in their Neighbors
to their aid against them; but their fears were groundless, for this kind of
Indians never goes to Sea, neither give they themselves to build any Vessels
for Navigation, not so much as a Fisher-Boat.

The Pirates having no further hopes of purchasing any thing thereabout, they
resolve for Jamaica; being set forth, the Wind blew contrary, which caused them
to make use of their Oars, till they came nigh the River Chagre; here they
spyed a Ship making toward them, as if she intended to board them; they
apprehending her to belong to Cartagena, thought she was come to reckon with
them for bypast scores; whereupon hoising all their Sails, they ran before the
Wind, hoping to escape, or at least to take shelter somewhere; but the other
easily getting the Wind of them, stopped their course; yet when she came nigher,
they discovered them to be their former Comrades, now in the same case with
them. This Encounter retarded their Voyage the space of two days, which obliged
them to return to their former station; thence they sailed to a place called
Boca dele Dragon, to make provision for their Voyage.

Here they found a Creature whom the Spaniards call Manentines, the Duck, a
Sea-Cow, because headed like a Cow. They are commonly found in such places
under Water, as are full of grass, on which it is supposed they feed, they have
no Ears, but in their place, two little holes scarce capable to contain a Bean,
nigh unto the neck they have two wings, under which are two udders much like
unto the breasts of a Woman, the skin of their back is two inches thick, their
belly is every way like a Cows, their manner of ingendring being also the same;
they hear so well, that the Fishermen in taking them, must not make the least
noise, not so much as to speak to one another, but must do all by signs.

But the Pirates could do no good at this kind of fishing, therefore some went
to the Woods to hunt, while others went to catch some other kind of Fish, which
they were not long about before they saw two Indians in a Canow upon the Water,
who no sooner saw them, but went on shore, carrying the Canow betwixt them, as
if it were so much Straw; their nimbleness carried them away from the Pirates,
so that though they had the Canow with them to impede their motion, yet they
ran as if they had not an ounce weight to burden them.

The Pirates having left that place in four and twenty hours, arrived at Rio de
Zuera, where they found some houses belonging to Cartagena, inhabited by the
Spaniards, these the Pirates resolved to visit, but found nothing but an empty
Habitation, all the Inhabitants being fled with their goods, which forced them
to rest satisfied with a certain Fruit, which there is called Platano, of which
they filled their Boats, and continued their Voyage, designing to find out some
Creek to careen their Ship in, which was become very leaky; at length they came
to a place called the Bay of Bleevelt, where one Party fell to careening of the
Vessel, while the other went to the Woods for Hunting.

Those who went a Hunting, found a great store of Porcupines of a huge bigness,
also some Pheasants; but their best sport was in shooting at the Monkeys, being
of such nimbleness, that they could hardly kill one of them, but did cost them
fifteen or sixteen shots: Of these Monkeys there were an infinite number in
this place, where it was pleasant to see the Female dodge along with their
little ones upon their backs, just as the Negroes do their Children; if any
pass under the Trees where they sit, they will commonly squirt their excrements
upon their heads and clothes: Also if any of them chance to be wounded, the
rest will flock about it, and lay their hand upon the wound to stop the blood;
others will gather Moss that grows upon the Trees, and thrust it into the
wound; yea it is said, that some of them will gather some Herbs, and having
chewed them after the manner of a Cataplasm, will apply them to the wound.

Some days after the coming to that place, some of their Women-slaves being at
work in the field nigh to a Wood, were heard to cry out, Indians, Indians, the
Pirates immediately ran to their Arms, but when they came to the place, found
no body there but only two of the foresaid Slaves dead upon the place, having
in their bodies an incredible number of Arrows It seems indeed the Indians
intended that they should not be put long to endure the pain of their wounds;
for one of their Arrows were enough to kill an Elephant, being Eight feet in
length, and bigger than a man's thumb.

As to the constitution of this people, they are very strong of body, but when
their strength fails them, they have recourse to their heels; to them they are
exceedingly beholden sometimes, in their greatest extremity, which made the
Pirates bestow much of their sweat in vain in pursuing them.

The Pirates thought it not safe for them to stay any longer in that place,
left they should be served in the same sort as their Slaves were, whereupon
leaving it with all the haste they could make, they directed their course
toward the Cape of Gratias a Dios, where they had fixed their last and only
hope of being supplied with Provision; neither did they hope in vain, for being
arrived there, the people showed them much kindness, supplying their wants, and
providing them with all necessaries, but above all, the Women exceeded in
kindness, to make themselves go off the better, it being the custom of the
Island, that when Pirates arrive there, every one has the liberty to buy
himself an Indian Woman for a knife, or some such trifle; who is obliged to
remain in his custody all the time of his staying there, providing him also
with all sorts of victuals the Country affords.

The Inhabitants are very dextrous at darting with the Javelin, whereby they
are very useful to the Pirates for victualling of their Ships with Fishes, one
of them being able to provide for a Vessel of an hundred persons, with no other
Instrument than his Javelin. Their Customs, Lives and Policy, are worth the
mentioning, whereof a word briefly.

The circumference of the Island is about thirty Leagues, the number of the
Inhabitants exceeds not 1600. or 1700. yet they live divided in two distinct
Provinces, one of which are laborious in cultivating the ground, but the other
are so lazy, that they rather lie in the broad fields night and day, than be at
the pains to build themselves Huts, much less Houses to dwell in; all their
clothes is an Apron, which being tied to their middle, comes down so far as to
hide the most shameful parts of their body; their weapons are Spears only
pointed either with Iron, or with the teeth of a Crocodile.

As for their Religion, the dimensions of it is easily taken up, yet if they
have but little of it, they pretend to as little; they have some notions of a
Deity; yea, they are beyond many other Nations in America, for they serve not
the Devil as they do. They commonly feed upon fruits, such as Bananas,
Ratioves, Ananas, Potatos, Cozave, and a certain kind of Fish, which they kill
with their Darts. They are more curious in their drink, being very expert in
making some very pleasant Liquors; of which, that which is made of the Platanos
is the best; they have another drink called Achioc, which is their commonest
drink; it has a most pleasant taste, and is very nourishing.

This people are very kind to one another, but the way of expressing their
kindness, I confess, is peculiar to themselves; for when one of them invites
his friends to his Hut, when he expects their coming, he anoints his face with
a kind of black Tincture, which makes him look as like a Devil as a Man; in
this pickle he takes his Arms, and goes about two hundred paces from the
Cottage, where he attends the coming of his Guests; as soon as they draw nigh
unto him, he falls upon his face to the ground, where he lies as dead until
the invited friends set him upon his feet; then they go all together into the
Cottage, where they perform the same Ceremony, falling upon their faces; but he
takes them by the hand, and lifting them up one by one, causes them to sit
down in order; then goes the Platanos drink about in whole Bouls, and after it
their other Liquors; then they fall to singing and dancing, Men and Women
together, till the Feast be ended.

The constitution of their Conscience in point of Marriage, is very good, for
they marry no Maid without the consent of her Father, the Lover being by him
first examined about several points of Husbandry; if he answer satisfyingly,
her Father calls the Daughter, and causes her to bring a Calabash full of
the foresaid Liquor, whereof he himself drinks first, then the young Man, and
lastly the Maid, and without more ado the Marriage is made; they have indeed an
odd way of expressing their love to these Maids; for sometimes to give a proof
of their affection, they pierce and wound their Genitals with the point of a
Dart, which how they relish this testimony of love I know not; but I doubt much
if our Women in England would thank their Sweethearts for such tokens. As to
their lying in, they have no superstitious observing of months, but as soon as
the Woman is delivered, she goes straight to the next River or Fountain, where
she washes the new born creature from head to foot, then snatching it up, she
brings it home, and goes about her labor as before.

When the Husband dies, here the Wife takes care to bury him with all his
Azagayas or Weapons and Jewels which he wore at his Ears, being also obliged to
come every day for a whole year to his Grave with Meat and drink. Some write
that this custom of carrying meat to the Graves, is observed in all the
Caribbees Islands, which they think the Devil comes and carries away; but the
truth is, the Pirates most commonly save him a labor in this, as in many other
things laid in his name; for knowing that the best of their Fruits, as also of
their Liquors, are brought hither; they wait their opportunity, and take all
away, and let the poor dead man provide for himself or fast.

The Widow having thus completed her year, she opens the Grave, and takes
out her Husbands bones, which she carefully washes, drying them in the Sun;
this being done, she puts them all in a Satchel, this Satchel for a whole year
she is bound to carry all day upon her back, and at night to lie upon it: When
this is performed, she hangs up the Satchel at the door of her house till she
marry the second time.

CHAP. II. They arrive at the Island de los Pinos.
THE Pirates having provided themselves as well as they could at Gratias a
Dios, they loosed thence, steering their course toward the Island de los
Pinos, where they arrived in fifteen days; finding the Vessel unfit to sail
further by reason of its leakiness, they were forced here to refit her, which
one party undertook to do, while the other was employed in fishing, in which
they had admirable success, so that in seven hours time they took as much Fish
as would for once feed a thousand men. They had also in their company some
Indians, who were very dextrous at hunting, they provided abundance of wild
Cows. This plenty made the Pirates begin to forget their former misery, calling
one another Brother, which kindly expressions their former misery had brought
to disuse among them.

Here they lived very securely, apprehending no danger from any creature but
the Crocodile, of which there are vast numbers upon this Island; these
creatures when hungry, will assault any man, which one of the Pirates by
experience found a truth. This Pirate going into the Wood, having a Negro with
him, they lighted upon a place where a Crocodile lay hid, the furious monster
with incredible fierceness assaults the Pirate, and fastening his teeth in his
leg, threw him to the ground; the Pirate finding himself put to it, and being
a strong fellow, recovers his feet; then the combat begins afresh, at length
he draws a Knife out of his pocket, with which, with great difficulty, he
overcame the Crocodile, and killed it; he himself, what with weariness and loss
of blood together, lay also as dead upon the place; the Negro, who fled when
the Crocodile appeared, returns now to see what became of him, and finding him
in this condition, took him upon his back, and carried him to the Sea side,
where his Fellow-Pirates received him into a Canow, and conveyed him on
Shipboard. This mischance scarr'd them so as none of them durst look near the
Wood without a Guard, yet afterward being desirous to revenge their fellows
misfortune, went in whole Troops to search for Crocodiles in the Woods; but
they needed not go so far, for usually they would come in the nightime to the
very side of their Ship, and seem as if they would climb up their Ladder, one
of which they seized upon a night, with an Iron hook, who instead of seeking to
the bottom, began to mount the Ladder of the Ship, which put the Pirates in a
terrible fright, but at length, (with some others of their Instruments) they
overcame it.

Having refitted themselves with all necessaries at de los Pinos, they set sail
for Jamaica, where they found their old Leader in mischief C. M. without so
much as one of his old Train with him; he had now a new project in his head of
going to the Isle of St. Katherine, to fortify it, and to make it a common
receptacle of Pirates of all sorts, intending to Reign as sole Prince over them.

But as he that reckons before his Host, reckons sometimes twice, so it fell
out with him; for while he was using all means to persuade people to transport
themselves thither, a Man of War from England arrived at Jamaica, who brought
Orders from His Majesty to the Governor to appear at the Court of England
there to answer to such Articles as were presented by the Spanish Ambassador
against him, for maintaining of Pirates in those parts, to the great loss of
the King of Spains Subjects.

This man of War also brought over a new Governor to Jamaica, who when he
entered upon his Office, sent about to all the Coasts of Jamaica, acquainting
them, that his Majesty intended to maintain an entire Friendship with the
Catholic King, willing all his Subjects in Jamaica so to carry toward the
said Kings Subjects upon all occasions, as there may be no ground upon their
side of any misunderstanding betwixt the two Crowns, also that he had strict
orders not to permit any Pirate whatsoever to set forth from Jamaica, to commit
any hostility or depredation upon the Spaniards.

This was heavy tidings to the Pirates, for now in appearance their Trade will
decay; some of them had intelligence of it while at Sea, which frighted them
so, as they durst not look near Jamaica, however the Boys resolved to make
their lives as comfortable as they could, knowing that hanging was the worst
that could be expected, and as good (thought they) to be hanged for 20 faults,
as for 19; therefore they resolved to be doing upon all hazard, so they
ransackt a considerable Town in the Isle of Cuba, committing all kind of
hostility upon that place, and using the Inhabitants very cruelly, but they
knew not how near they were to the scores end, for shortly after by the
vigilance of the present Governor, the most considerable among them were
apprehended and hanged; the rest not willing to undergo so severe a censure, if
they could help it, retired to the Isle of Tortuga, where they joined with some
Frenchmen of the same Profession, with whom they hitherto remain, resolving if
they can to avoid the English halters at Jamaica, till they have wrought some
better for them.

CHAP. III. The French are Shipwrackt nigh the Isles of Guadinillas.
THE Pirates being arrived at Tortuga, are presently employed by the Governor,
for about this time, anno 1673. the war being hot in Europe, betwixt the French
and the Dutch, the French in America resolved to possess themselves of the
Isles belonging to the States there, whereupon, getting to the number of 500
Pirates, they put them all into one Ship, under the Governor of Tortuga,
intending first to take the Isle of Curasao, then to go on as they were
encouraged; but this Ship loosing from Tortuga, with a resolution to join with
the rest of the Fleet, was surprised with a violent storm, which increased so
upon her, that at length she ran full upon a rock, which split her all to
pieces, yet being near land, all the men were saved.

They were no sooner come on shore but they were discovered by the Spaniards of
Puerto Vico (for so was the place called) who taking them to be French Pirates,
gathered together, and marched out against them, yet though finding them
without Arms, and crying for Quarters, they ran upon them with unmanly fury,
and killed most of them, the rest they took, and carried awaywith them; by the
way they asked them where their Captain was, they answered, that he was drowned
in the Shipwreck; though yet he was one of the Prisoners, but he behaved
himself so, that the Spaniards took him to be a mere fool, for he kept himself
so close to all the actions of a fool, that they did not much notice him, but
permitted him to go loose among the rest of the Prisoners, together with a
French Surgeon, who had formerly obliged some of the Spaniards, and obtained
the same favor.

Monsieur Ogeron (for so was he called) having an opportunity, told the Surgeon
he resolved to attempt an escape, if possible; after consultation, they both
(getting out by night) fled into a Wood, intending there to make up something
that might serve instead of a boat to transport them, but without any
instrument in the world fit for that purpose, except an Hatchet; however they
began to cut down such Trees as they thought fit for their purpose; but while
they are thus busied at their work, one of them at a great distance discovers a
Canow upon the water, steering directly toward them, this frighted them
somewhat at first, not knowing but they were Spaniards coming to take them,
which made them retire a little, but at last they perceived them to be but two
men, who seemed to be Fishers, whereupon they resolved upon all hazards to
seize the Canow, which with small difficulty they did, one of them coming out a
little way from the Sea side for fresh water, they knocked down with the
Hatchet, the other thinking to escape, made toward the Canow, but was
intercepted, and served with the same sauce; then having taken in a little
fresh water, they set Sail for Samana, an Island belonging to Hispaniola, where
they found some of their own Countrymen.

From thence Monsieur Ogeron went for Tortuga, whereof he was Governor, and in
a short time gathered a considerable Fleet, being resolved either to deliver
his fellow prisoners out of the hands of the cruel Spaniards, or to die in the
quarrel, having embarked his men, he made an elegant speech, exhorting them to
acquit themselves valiantly in so honorable a design, using many forcible
arguments to that effect; they upon the other hand promised to stand by him to
the last drop of their blood; thus they set Sail for Puerto Vico, where they
soon arrived.

Being come within sight of the land, they lowr'd their main Sails, that the
Spaniards might not discover them at a distance; but they having previous
intelligence of their coming, posted several Troops of Horse along the Coast;
which Ogeron perceiving, caused to shoot off some of his great Guns, which
forced them to retire into the Woods, leaving several Companies of Foot in
Ambush among the Trees.

The French thinking the Fields now clear, began to land very securely,
dreading no harm, but they were scarcely all on shore, when falling into this
Ambuscade, the Spaniards most furiously assaulted them, cutting them down in
great numbers, so that with much ado they escaped into their Ships, leaving the
most and best part of their men dead upon the place. The Spaniards having made
an end of killing such as they found half dead already, cut off several of
their Legs and Arms, to present them to the Prisoners, for whose sake this
enterprise was undertaken.

This misfortune added to the affliction of the poor Prisoners, for the
Spaniards use them now with more cruelty then ever. Which Jacob Binks, the
Dutch Governor in America (being there with some men of War to buy Provision)
pitied, insomuch, that at his departure he privately conveyed away six of them,
which enraged the Spaniards so against the rest, that they presently sent them
to the chief City of the Island, there to work their daily tasks with the
slaves; from thence they transported them to Havana, where they were employed
in the same manner as formerly, causing them to work all day, and at night they
shut them up in close Prisons, fearing they might escape, as they had good
reason to do, if they knew how, afterward they transported them in small
numbers into Spain, where having procured their ransom, they were set at
liberty, and shortly after had the fortune to meet all in France.

But their own Country yielding them no such pleasure, especially in the way of
their Trade, as America did, they all resolve to lay hold upon the first
opportunity of returning thither again; for this end they assisted one another
the best way they could, so that in a short time most of the Pirates opened
shop again at Tortuga, their common place of Rendevouze.

Having once again nested themselves at Tortuga, they resolve, if possible; to
revenge their former misfortunes upon the Spaniards; whereupon they rigged out
a new Fleet under the command of one Le sieur Maintenon, a Frenchman; and set
Sail for the Island de la Trinidad, which they Attacked, and in short time
became Masters of it; not long after they sacked it, putting it to the ransom of
10000 pieces of Eight.

CHAP. IV. The Isle of Cayana taken by the Dutch, and re-taken by the French.
HAving hitherto traced the Buccaniers in their various excursions, and
rambles, it may not be amiss now a little to view some transactions that past
betwixt the French and the Dutch about this time in America.

In the year 1676, the States General sent their Vice Admiral, Jacob Binks to
the Island of Cayana, to re-take it from the French, who had wrongfully possessed
it; he set out upon the 16th of March, with seven Men of War, one Fire-ship,
and five Galliots, he arrived at Cayana the fourth of May following, having
come to the Port, he immediately landed 900 men, who approaching the Castle,
summoned it to be rendered upon no other terms then discretion, the Governor
answered he intended no such thing, but intended to defend it to the utmost;
whereupon Binks presently ordered his Troops to attack it on both sides; the
Assault was very furious, both Parties acting most gallantly, the Dutch most
courageously advancing, the French with no less courage defending, till at
length being but few in number, and overcome with the multitude of their
Enemies, they were forced to surrender upon the terms that were first offered.
In the Castle were found 37 pieces of Cannon, with some Ammunition and
Provision. The Governor called Monsieur Lesi, together with two Priests, were
sent into Holland. 14 men were all that Binks lost in the Assault.

The French King understanding this disaster, sent the Count de Estres with a
Squadron of Men of War to re-take the Island, who having Sailed as far as the
River Capero Vaco, was by a Ship of Nantes (who had been lately upon the place)
informed of the present state of the Island, whereby he was enabled to take his
own measures as he thought fit; arriving at the Island within three Leagues of
the Castle, he landed 800 men, dividing them in two parties, of whom he placed
one under the Conduct of the Count de Blinac, the other under Monsieur de
Elfanther, leaving Monsieur Gabaret with several Troops on board, with
direction to Sail toward the Castle, the rest marching thither by land.

Coming near the place, the Count de Estres sent a Messenger to the Castle,
demanding in the name of his Master it should be surrendered into his hands, but
they fromwithin answered, that they would not render an inch of ground within
the Castle, but at the expense of their dearest blood: whereupon the French
Assaulted the Castle next night in seven places at once; here was begun a very
stout Combat on both sides, the Victory for a long time hovering over their
heads, till at last she favoring the French, forced the Dutch to render,
though not without much blood on both sides. Within the Castle were found 38
persons dead, and many others wounded, yet the loss of the French was far
greater, though they thought fit to conceal it.

CHAP. V. The French Fight with the Dutch at Tobago, but are beaten.
THis Island of Tobago was first inhabited by the Prince of Curland, who
established a Colony there, who a while after, for want of necessary
provisions, deserted it, upon which it fell into the hands of some Zealanders,
who by the command of the States General, fortified it for their use, having
built a stately Castle thereon for its further strength.

But now the French having taken Cayana, and ordered their business there,
their next project is to take Tobago, whereupon De Estres setting sail from
Cayana toward Cardinia, he was informed that Here Binks with his whole Fleet
lay at Tobago; this no ways retarded, but rather hastened his motion thither,
where having the advantage of Wind and Weather, he soon arrived; Binks being
informed of his arrival, sent his Landforces, with some of his Mariners on
shore, to put all things in order for a Siege.

Within two days the French came to an Anchor hard by the Island, where they
immediately landed all their men, which when Binks perceived, he gave present
Orders to demolish all the Houses about the Castle, that the French might not
take the advantage of sheltering themselves in them. The next day Monsieur de
Estres sent a Drum to demand the Hollanders to surrender the Fort, which was
scornfully denied.

The French seeing the Dutch so resolute, and fearing that an assault would
tend nothing to their honor or advantage, kept close within their Trenches,
till the third of March. This fatal day to the French being come, they hoised
up their Sails, and with their whole Fleet engaged the Dutch in the Bay, where
was begun a most bloody Combat; mean while the French who were on shore
advanced resolutely toward the Castle, and began to storm it very briskly; but
the Dutch from within handled them so warmly, as they were forced after three
several Attacks to retire with the loss of 150 men, and 200 wounded, which with
great difficulty they carried off.

While the French and Dutch thus entertain one another by Land, the two Fleets
continue their Combat most desperately, sinking and killing one another. Thus
they continued from morning till night; when Monsieur de Estres lest both the
Bay and the Victory to the Hollanders; in this Engagement he lost several brave
Ships, among the rest the Ship wherein he himself was, being mounted with
twenty seven Guns of a huge bigness, besides several other smaller ones, was
unfortunately sunk.

CHAP. VI. The French goes the second time to Tobago, and takes it.
THE shame which Monsieur de Estres conceived by this Defeat (as also finding
himself unable at this time to recover his reputation) made him depart thence
upon the 18th of March, steering his course homeward, where he arrived upon the
21th of June thereafter.

But the French King understanding this shameful foil, commands the same
Monsieur de Estres once more to undertake the Enterprise, for repairing his own
and his Countries credit, whereupon he ordered Eight great Men of War to be
rigged out in all haste, with Eight other smaller Ships, wherewith de Estres
setting Sail upon the third of October, steered his course directly toward
Tobago, where he arrived the seventh of December following, and immediately
landed 1500 men, with which they approach within Eight furlongs of the Castle.

De Estres went himself in person to view the Castle, and sent a Messenger to
Here Binks, demanding it to be surrendered to his Master the King of France,
which he gallantly refused to do upon any terms; whereupon the next day the
French began to advance toward the Castle; the Dutch firing resolutely at them
from within, the French began the assault by casting of Fireballs into the
Castle, one of which happened to fall in the way that led to the
Magazine-house, where there was a great deal of Powder scattered through the
negligence of those that had the care of it, which immediately took fire, and
ran as far as the Magazine, where all blew up together by this fatal blow.
Binks himself, and all his Officers, except one Captain, perished. The French
seeing so fair an opportunity put in their hands, which otherwise they were not
like to do, possessed themselves of the Castle, where they found 300 men alive,
whom they afterward transported to France.

Thus mere chance put the Victory in their hands, which if it had not so
happened, they had probably succeeded as badly at this time as formerly.

An Appendix, Containing a Description of Tortuga and Hispaniola, the Residence
of the Pirates.
HAving already given you some Account of the Buccaniers, I come now to say
somewhat (by way of description) of the places of their abode; for having said
so much of the Birds, I hope I shall be excused, if I say something of the Nest
also. The common receptacle of these Squires being, Tortuga and Hispaniola, I
shall briefly describe them in their order.

1. Tortuga, that spot of Neptune, unto which these Water-padders the
Buccaniers has been beholden for shelter in their extremity, is situated nigh
the Continent of Hispaniola, upon the North side thereof, in the Latitude of
twenty degrees thirty nine minutes; its circumference is sixty eagues, called
Tortuga, because in shape it somewhat resembles a Sea Tortoise. This Country
is full of Rocks, yet abounding with lofty Trees, which grow upon the hardest
of these Rocks, twisting their roots about them, not unlike the branching of
Ivy against our Walls. The Northern parts are therefore totally uninhabited;
the South side which is inhabited, has only one Port, which has two several
Entries affording passage unto Ships of seventy Guns.

The habitable parts of it are divided into four quarters, the first called the
Low Country, because it is nearest the Sea; its chief and only City is Cayona,
where the richest Planters of the Island have their abode; the second is called
the Middle Plantation, found good only for the culture of Tobacco; the third is
called Ringot, not so good as any of the former; the fourth called the Mountain
where the first Plantations were made.

Its Trees might be very useful, being exceeding tall and straight, especially
the yellow Saunder, which the Inhabitants call Lignum de Chandel; here grows
also LignumGuaiacum, to whose virtue many do owe the present use of their
Noses; Physicians extracting from it a Sovereign Antidote against the Pox; also
Gummi Elemi, and China Roots; it also abounds with Aloes, with many other
medicinal Herbs.

Its ordinary fruits are Magniot, Potato's, Acajow-Apples, with many others,
which for brevity I omit: Here also grow those Trees called Palmitos, from
which the Inhabitants draw a certain Juice, which serves them for Wine.

Here also is to be found a huge multitude of wild Boars inhabiting the Rocks
and Mountains, which the Inhabitants are forbidden to hunt with Dogs, being
reserved for cases of necessity, as sudden Invasion, or the like, that they may
serve them for food if they be put to flee to the Mountains.

There resorteth hither huge flocks of wild Pigeons at a certain season of the
year, during which season the Inhabitants feed very plentifully upon them; but,
which is observable, when this season is over, they become so lean and bitter,
that none can taste them. Upon the Sea Coasts are to be found multitudes of Sea
and Land Crabs, with which the Inhabitants feed their Servants and Slaves, but
eat not of them themselves, but in cases of necessity, because they are hurtful
to the sight.

This Island being first discovered by the Spaniards, and possessed, was
afterward taken from them by the French, and retaken again by the Spaniards.
This Contest lasted a considerable time, till at length the French prevailed,
and rooted out the Spaniards, making themselves sole Masters of the Island,
which they retain to this day.

A Description of Hispaniola.
THis famous Island made known at first to the World by the means of
Christopher Columbus, in the year 1492. who was sent for that end by the then
King of Spain, is situate in the Latitude of seventeen degrees and a half; its
circumference is three hundred leagues, its length a hundred and fifty, its
breadth in some places sixty, in others but thirty; it was called Hispaniola
first by Columbus, but now is frequently called St. Domingo, from the chief
City of it so called.

The City of St. Domingo being chief, is as it were the Storehouse of all the
other Cities, Towns and Villages, which from hence provide themselves with all
their necessaries; it entertaineth no Commerce with the Merchants of any other
Nation than its own the Spaniards; the greatest part of its Inhabitants being
also rich and substantial Merchants.

The next is St. Tiago, an open place, without either Walls or Castle; most of
the Inhabitants are Hunters and Planters, the adjacent Fields being very proper
for that use. There is also another City called Nuestra Sennora de Alta Gratia,
where there is the best Chocolate that that Country affords.

Westward of St. Domingo is a great Village called El Pueblo de-aso, the
Inhabitants thereof drive a great Trade with another called San Juan de Goave,
which is environed with Gardens, Woods and Meadows; its Inhabitants are mostly
Hunters and Butchers; they are a Mungrel sort of people, Mulatos Misticos and
Alcatraces; the first are such as are begotten betwixt White people and
Negroes; the second between Whites and Indians; and the third between Negroes
and Indians. These are the chief places possessed by the Spaniards in this
Island, the rest being all possessed by the French.

There belongs to it Eighteen Ports for Shipping, four of which are short of
none in England; the Country about the Coast is watered with many excellent
Rivers and Brooks, which makes it exceeding pleasant.

Of the Fruits and Trees of Hispaniola.
AMong the varieties of Fruits that this Island yields, its Oranges and
Lemons, both sweet and sour, are most pleasant. It Is true, the Lemons exceeds
not an Hens Egg, but this is abundantly compensate by their deliciousness.

There are abundance of Palm Trees found here, some of which are two hundred
foot high, having no branches but what are upon the very top; every month one
of these branches falls off, and at the same time another sprouteth out; the
leaves of this Tree are seven or eight foot in length, and three or four in
breadth, with which they cover their houses instead of Tyles: Also they make
Buckets of them to carry their Water in. The body of the Tree is so big, that
two men can scarcely grasp it in the middle; yet the heart of it is so soft,
that if two or three Inches be pared off its outside, the rest may be sliced
like new Cheese. The Inhabitants have a way of extracting an excellent Drink
from this Tree; for wounding it a little above the Root, they from thence
distill a sort of Liquor which in short time by fermentation becomes as strong
as the richest Wine.

There are also in this Island beside this Palm, four other sorts, the Latanier
Palm, the Prickle Palm, the Rosarick Palm, and the Wine Palm; the Latanier Palm
is almost like the Wine Palm, only it is shorter, its leaves are somewhat like
Women's Fans, the body is full of prickles, of the length of half a foot; the
Prickle Palm is so full of prickles, from the Root to the top, that there is
scarce a fingers-breadth free, with which some of the Indians use to torment
their prisoners: First, tying them to a Tree, and then taking these thorns,
they put them into little pellets of Cotton, which they dip in Oil, and thus
stick them in the poor prisoners sides, as thick as the bristles of an
Hedgehog, then they set them on fire, which if he patiently endure, he is
accounted valiant, otherwise not. The Rosarick Palm has this name both from the
French and Spaniards, because its seed is very fit to make Rosaries or Beads to
say Prayers upon. I will not here ask for a Quo Warranto of this practice, but
I am sure, if there be any virtue in these Berries, the wild Boars are devouter
than any of them, whose constant food they are. This Tree is exceeding tall and
straight. The Wine Palm grows in Rocky Mountains, and is of an extraordinary
shape; for from the Root, to the half of its proportion, it exceeds not three
Inches about; but about the two thirds of its height, it is as big as an
ordinary Bucket, where it is full of a Juicy Liquor, which being squeezed out,
and fermented, becomes a very good Wine; they make Vessels of its leaves, not
only to purify the said Liquor, but also to drink it.

It also produces certain Apricock Trees, whose fruit resembles our Melons,
differing nothing in taste from our Apricocks; their stones are bigger than a
Hens Egg; the wild Boars are exceedingly fattened with this fruit.

The Genips, a Tree, is very common here; it is most like to our Cherry-tree;
its fruit is of the bigness of two fists, of an Ash color; before it ripens,
it has a Juice as black as Ink, and fit to be written with, but disappears
within nine days; leaving the Paper as white as before.

Here also is the Tree called Caremites, very like our Pear Trees, whose fruits
are not unlike our Damascene Plums, but black on the inside; its kernels are
but three in number at most, of the bigness of a Lupine; upon this fruit also
the wild Boars feed much.

I must not omit the prodigious number of stately Cedars that grows here, which
are much used in building Ships and Canows, but because the Reader may not know
what kind of a thing a Canow is, though often spoken of in this Book, I shall
therefore in few words describe it: A Canow is like a little Wherry-boat made
of one only Tree, without the help of any other Instrument but fire only, which
they set to the root of the Tree, governing it with such industry, as nothing
is burnt but that that they would have, thus by this only Instrument they put
it into such a form, as makes it capable to Sail three or fourscore Leagues
without hazard.

Here is also Brazile wood in great quantities, it grows along the
Seacoasts, especially in two places, Jackmel and Jaquina, two commodious Ports
of the Island, also the Tree called Mancanilla, or the Dwarf Apple, is found
here, whose Fruit is of a most venomous quality, for being eaten by any Person,
immediately he changes color, and is taken with such a thirst, that no water
can quench, and within a little dies perfectly mad. Yea, if a Fish eat of it
(as sometimes they do) it is poisonous.

There is another sort of Tree growing by the Rivers side, which bears a
certain kind of Fruit, not unlike our Bullice, also another Tree called
Abelcoses, whose Fruit is of the like color, but of the bigness of Melons, the
kernels being as big as Eggs; this Fruit some French of the poorest fort serve
themselves with instead of bread.

Of the Insects of Hispaniola.
AND as to their Flies I shall only speak of three sorts of them that are very
troublesome Neighbors, especially to Strangers. The first are called
Mosquittoes, or Gnatts, they are as big as our common Horse-flies, when they
light upon a man's body, they stick there till they have sucked so much of his
blood, that they cannot fly, which causes People to make use of the branches
of Trees to fan them away. The second sort is no bigger than a grain of sand,
yet exceeding troublesome, and that because of their smallness they can
penetrate the finest linen, as also they make no humming noise as the other
kinds do, whereby they are less avoidable. The third sort are about the bigness
of our Fleas, and of the same color, they sting not at all, but yet bite so
bitterly, as to cause little Ulcers upon the flesh, especially the face, which
makes it swell, so as to render it fearful to look on, they vex people only by
day, for when the Sun sets, they go to their rest, and are not heard of till
next morning.

They have here another Insect, called by the Spaniards, Cochinillas, in
English, Glowworms, much like ours in England, only they are somewhat bigger
and longer, but they have one quality which differenceth them from all other
living Animals, for they have two little specks in their foreheads, which by
night give so much light, that four or five of them together, will make one at
a distance think it is a burning Candle, yea, they shine so bright, that if one
has but three of them by him in the darkest night, he may read any print,
though never so small.

Here also they are much molested with Grillones or Crickets of an
extraordinary bigness in respect of ours, if any Person come near them, they
make so much noise, that they are ready to burst.

There is likewise a multitude of Reptiles, such as Serpents, Snakes, and the
like, but bound up by the Providence of the Almighty, from being hurtful to any
other Creatures but Fowls, and the like; yea, they keep them in their Houses
for destroying of Rats and Mice, for they cunningly counterfeit the chirps of
these Creatures, and thereby catch them. They have also another kind of
Reptile, called Cazadores de Mostas, or Fly-catchers, as harmless as the
former, for they live upon no other food then Flies, and their continual labor
is to consume these vexatious Creatures. They have also a multitude of land
Tortoises, upon which the Inhabitants commonly feed, and are by them accounted
very good food.

But there are found in this Island a sort of Spider which is most hideous to
behold, they are as big as an Egg, and have feet as long as a Sea-Crab, full of
hair, having also four black Teeth like a Rabbet, with which they commonly bite
very sharply, yet their bites are not venomous. There are also some Scorpions
to be found here; yet by experience are found to be no ways venomous, for
although they do bite, yet the wounds they make are as easily cured as those
that the most innocent instrument makes.

But of all the Insects here found, the most famous is the Cayman, which is a
kind of a Crocodile, of these some are most terrible to behold, because of
their bigness, some of them being threescore and ten foot in length, and twelve
in breadth; their cunning also wherewith they purchase their food, is very
remarkable, for placing themselves at the sides of Rivers, especially where
their Cattle comes to drink, there they lie like an old Tree without any motion
in the least, floating upon the water till they see their Prey, then they with
extraordinary fierceness assault it, whether it be Cow or Horse, and dragging
it into the water, stifle it; but what is yet more strange, before they go upon
such expeditions, they swallow about two hundred weight of Stones, thereby to
make themselves the more heavy for stifling of the Prey, having thus secured
their Prey, they keep it five or six days under water, as not loving to eat it
till it be half rotten, in like manner, if they can lay hold on any hides of
Beasts in the field, they drag them to the water, and having kept them there,
till they putrify somewhat, then they eat them.

One passage worth the noticing, of the sagacity of this Creature, I shall
relate, a Spaniard being one day by the River side washing his Net, he no
sooner began his work, but a Cayman takes hold of the Tent, pulling it with
great violence to the bottom; the man not willing to lose his Tent, if he could
help it, pulled with all his strength; the Cayman seeing this, with incredible
fury vaulted out of the water, and taking hold of the Spaniard, pulled him into
the water, endeavoring with his weight to stifle him, but he chanced to have a
knife in his hand, wherewith he scrap't his Tent, with this knife, giving the
Cayman several wounds in the belly, at length killed him.

Their manner of procreating is this, they find out some sandy bank exposed to
the Sun, where they lay their Eggs, and cover them with their feet, and so
leave them to be hatched with the heat of the Sun; when the young ones are out
of the shell, if the Mother be near at hand, they run to her, sporting
themselves with her, like as Pigs do with their Dame; in this sort of sport
they will oftentimes run in and out of their Mothers belly, as Rabbets into
their holes, and if any chance to come by while they are thus at their pastime,
and throw a stone at them to fright them, then are they sure to make her belly
their Sanctuary.

Of the Quadruped Animals that are to be found in Hispaniola.
THey are much molested with wild Dogs, who are great Enemies to their Cattle,
destroying them in great numbers; they are seen in Woods, and Fields to the
number of three or fourscore together, they are so fierce, that they dare
assault a whole herd of wild Bores, not leaving them, till they have killed two
or three of them; he that draws the first blood in this Action, has so much
respect put upon him by the rest, that when the Bore is killed, all of them lie
down upon the grass until he has eaten as much as he can devour, then they fall
in for their share, and eat up what remains.

The Governor of Tortuga, understanding that these wild Dogs destroyed too many
of the Bores, caused great quantities of Poison to be brought from France to
destroy them; he caused also some old Horses to be killed, and having with this
Poison invenomed the flesh, laid them in the Fields and Woods where the Dogs
used to resort, this he did for the space of half a year, in which time there
was an incredible number of them destroyed, yet not so many as to make their
number seem less, for after all this Industry, they did not seem fewer by one
then they were before.

These Dogs were brought to this Island at first by the Spaniards, for they
finding the Indians to make the Woods their shelter whenever they were pursued,
resolved if possible, they should not be secure there; whereupon they sent over
to Spain for Dogs, which were sent to them in vast numbers, with them they
would search for, and find out an Indian in the most solitary and intricate
thickets, whereby they forced them to leave their old Sanctuaries, and to
submit to a most cruel Sword; yea, so cruel were these Spaniards to them, that
they conceived such horror of them and their proceedings, that to avoid them,
they betook themselves to Caves and Dens, where they died in great numbers; the
Spaniards now finding the Indians almost quite rooted out of the Land,
bethought themselves how to dispatch their Dogs also, but this they found not
so easy a task, for the Mastives betook themselves to the Woods and Fields,
there to hunt for their Prey, till at length they became unacquainted with
their former Masters, and so at length quite wild.

In this Island also are wild Horses running up and down the Island in whole
herds; they are very ill shaped, being of low stature, short bodied, long
neck'd. The Hunters catch them only for the advantage they make by their skins,
but their wild Cows are much diminished by the constant practice of the
Hunters, yet they make considerable profit of them until this day.

Of the Birds that are here found.
THE Parrot is a Bird that is known in most places, but owes its original to
these parts of the World only, especially in Hispaniola there are very many of
them; they build their Nests in holes of Palmitotrees, which holes, another
small Bird called Carpintero, with great industry does make, God and Nature
having so provided for the Parrot, as not capable of it self to excavate any
Wood, by reason of the bluntness and crookedness of its Bill.

Pigeons of all sorts are also to be found here, where the Inhabitants observe
the same season of eating them with those of Tortuga; little or no difference
being found betwixt the Pigeons of the two Islands, only these of Hispaniola
are somewhat bigger, and fatter than the other. They have another small Bird
here which they call Cabrerus, or Goat-keeper, who feeds for the most part upon
Crabbs of the Sea; in this Bird are found seven distinct Gall Bladders, which
makes their flesh so bitter and unsavory, that none can taste it.

Crows and Ravens are to be found here in great numbers, but they make such a
hideous noise through the whole Island, that they are more troublesome than
useful to the Inhabitants; their ordinary food are wild Dogs, which the
Buccaniers kill with their Guns, wherewith they are so well acquainted, that
they no sooner hear the report of a Fowling-piece in any part of the Island,
but they gather from all quarters to that place, expecting there somewhat to
feed upon.

The Manner of Planting Tobacco.
THE Planters began to cultivate this Island in the year 1598. that which they
planted first was Tobacco, which prospered admirably, and was also very good,
although at first they could plant but little, by reason of the small
circumference of the Island, yet were they so much encouraged by their success,
that they began to seek out in other places Land fit for this purpose; the
first Land they made choice of for this end, was Call de Sac, lying upon the
South of this Island, where by degrees they brought it to such perfection, that
now there are above two thousand Planters in those Fields.

The manner of planting this (so much used) Herb, is, they make certain Beds of
Earth in the Fields, about twelve foot square, wherein they sow their
Tobaccoseed, covering it over with Palmito leaves, to defend it from the
scorching heat of the Sun; when it grows to any bigness, they transplant it,
setting every Plant at the distance of three foot from each other, observing
always the fittest season for doing of it, which is from January till the
beginning of April, then they very carefully weed it; for the least Root of any
other Herb will stifle it: When it is grown to the height of one foot, they lop
off the tops, thereby to hinder the stalks from shooting too much, and that the
Plant may receive greater strength from the Earth: When it is fully ripe, they
prepare apartments in their houses, which they fill with branches of Trees and
Rafters, and upon them they lay their Tobacco to dry; when it is well dried,
they strip off the leaves from the stalks, and make it up into Rolls, having
people employed in this work, and no other, to whom they give a tenth part for
their labor.

I might here have given an account of the manner of making Sugar, Indigo and
Gimbes; but since these are none of the Commodities of this place, I purposely
omit them.

FINIS.

