AN EXPOSITION ON THAT Most Excellent Prayer IN THE LITURGY OF THE Church of
ENGLAND CALLED The LITANY.

Wherein All or Most of the Exceptions that have been made against It, are
fully answered.

London, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, School.

AN EXPOSITION ON THE LITANY.
LITANY is a Word of a Greek Original, which signifies Supplication or Prayer;
so that The Litany is as much as, The Supplication or The Prayer, deservedly so
called by way of Eminency; as the Best of Humane Composition. It begins with a
most Solemn and Devout Address made to the Three several Persons in the Holy
Trinity distinctly, and then to them All conjoyntly as three Hypostases of One
and the same God, One and the same Fountain of all Goodness and Mercy, whence
Miserable Sinners must hope to obtain Forgiveness. But to wave that (as being
Foreign to my present Design to discourse of that most glorious and
incomprehensible Mystery) and consider the Subject Matter of the Prayer it
self; which is so Comprehensive as to leave out very little, and so Pithy and
Expressive as to have little redundant or superfluous. The Matter is double;
Deprecation of Evil, and Petition for Good; both urged with most potent and
proper Arguments as we shall see.

1. Deprecation of Evil, whether incumbent, or imminent; or probable to betide
us. And that is either of Sin or Suffering.

1. The Evil of Sin, and that is also Twofold, past or future. First, Sin
past, whether committed by our selves or by those that went before us; the
Guilt whereof may not be expiated or deprecated sufficiently till the third and
fourth Generation according to the Second Commandment; and that is done in
these words. Remember not, Lord, our Offenses, nor the Offenses of our
Forefathers, neither take thou Vengeance of our Sins: Spare us, good Lord,
spare thy People -- and be not angry with us for ever. And this Supplication is
grounded upon this strong Argument; that we are redeemed by the most precious
Blood of the Son of God. And so we do in effect say, Let the Blood of our Lord
Christ speak better things for us than the Blood of Abel; let not our Sins nor
the Sins of our Progenitors cry louder to Heaven for Vengeance than the
Sufferings of the Son of God for Forgiveness. Redeemed by his most precious
Blood; so precious, that it is the Cause, for which God is not angry with us
for ever; and for which we may hope he will not keep his Anger any longer, he
will not Remember our Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Forefathers. This
Supplication is not only agreeable to, but in a manner taken out of the Holy
Scripture. O remember not against us former Iniquities, Psa
-- or (as in the Margent) the Iniquities of them that were before us. Be not
Wroth very sore, O Lord, Isa
neither remember Iniquity for ever: Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all
thy People. And here upon this occasion I shall take leave once for all to tell
the Reader, that those Men do not argue with Understanding, that say our
Liturgy is a Translation of the Popish Mass Book; for neither is that true as
to the Whole, nor the Argument cogent as to the Parts.

1. It is not true as to the Whole; for many things are added, as this
Supplication, and others to be mentioned afterward; and more omitted, as to
give one notorious Instance; After the Invocations of the three several Persons
and then the whole Trinity, they intersert I know not how many Ora pro Nobis's
or Invocations of Saints and Angels; as thus, Holy Mary, Holy Mother of God,
Holy Virgin of Virgins, Holy Michael, Holy Gabriel, Holy Raphael, pray for us.
All ye Holy Angels and Archangels of God, All ye holy Orders of blessed
Spirits, All ye holy Patriarchs and Prophets, pray for us. All ye holy Apostles
and Evangelists, All ye holy Disciples of our Lord and Innocents, All ye holy
Martyrs, Holy Confessors, Holy Monks and Eremites, Holy Virgins, pray ye for
us. These are general; but besides, the Apostles and Evangelists are all
particularly invoked, and other He and She-Saints, together with several of
their Companions, whereof S. Vrsula had no less than eleven thousand. 1 Cor.
14. Chap. 15, etc.
Surely, They prayed neither with the Spirit, nor with Understanding, that by
such Invocations derogated from our Lord's Intercession, and attributed
Omniscience and Omnipresence (incommunicable Attributes of God) to so many
Saints, whereof several were far from being Holy, and some so far as never to
have had a Being, but in their Legends and Bead-Rolls. God be thanked, that
gave our first Reformers so much Understanding, and so much of his Spirit,
wherewith as with a Refiner's Fire they severed the Gold from the Dross; and
gave unto God the things that were God's.

2. Secondly, For those things that are translated out of the Mass Book, they
are none of them Popish, nor ever the more so for being used by them that owned
the Pope's Authority. It Is a Popish Argument to say, Where was your Litany or
Liturgy before that Translation? It is just like that of the Papists, Where was
your Religion before Luther? The same Answer will therefore serve both; Our
Religion and Liturgy were before Luther, but much corrupted and polluted and
disguised at and before his time; but a thousand or twelve hundred Years before
that, they were what they are now restored to, Pure and Genuine; without Mask
or Paint, without Idolatry or Superstition. It is as much as if one should ask
a Nobleman, whose Ancestors for several Generations had been so great Spend
thrifts as to bring a vast Patrimony to a small Annuity, and left him to seek
his Fortune, and he through his own Virtue and Prince's Favor should be
restored to the Place and Honor due to his Ancientry: If an Upstart Malepert
Gentleman should ask him, Where was his Nobility before such a late King; He
would answer, My Nobility was before the Conqueror, etc. Before Luther, before
that Translation, they ask; We answer, before Constantine, before Pope
Eleutherius, in the Councils and Writings of the Fathers for the first five
hundred Years, in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; what we have in
our Liturgy, Articles, and Homilies, was fetched from thence, and to them we
make our Appeals.

Having interposed thus much, I now go on; our Church teaches us to deprecate

2. Sin future, as the great Evil and Mischief, together with the Causes and
Effects thereof; First, the Causes, the Crasts and Assaults of the Devil; --
for the Devil is both a sly Serpent and a roaring Lion; where Force will not
do, there he uses Fraud, and when his Fraud is detected, he flies to main
Force; but he is dangerous both ways, and therefore to be feared, shunned, and
deprecated. Secondly, the Effects; the first and immediate Effect is the Wrath
of God; the last and utmost is everlasting Damnation. And surely we ought ever
to fear that that is Everlasting, and never think our selves too secure from
the Danger of it, nor past Praying against it; the greatest Degree of Assurance
attainable in this World, can rise no higher than that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
10.12, etc.
Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. But here I would fain know with
what Spirit or with what Sense they Pray this Prayer -- From the Assaults of
the Devil, thy Wrath, and everlasting Damnation, Good Lord, deliver us, that
can so often, and so boldly say, the Devil take, and God damn either themselves
or others. I say, with what Spirit or Sense do they Pray, that contradict
themselves so desperately; and make the Throne of Grace a Refuge of Lies? When
the Disciples would have fetched Fire from Heaven, our Lord tells them, Ye know
not what manner of Spirit ye are of; of what manner of Spirit, think ye, then
are they that would fetch Fire from Hell; and say,

Flectere sinequeo Superos Acheront a movebo; call both God and the Devil to be
Executioners of their Wrath? The next Supplication, is to be delivered from
those Spiritual Wickednesses, those Filthinesses of the Spirit, which have less
of Infamy but more of Malice belonging to them. viz. From all Blindness of
Heart, from Pride, Vainglory and Hypocrisy; from Envy, Hatred, and Malice,
and all Incharitableness: Wherein we pray God to deliver us from not merely the
outward Assaults, but the inward Possession of the Devil. For these are the
very things that constitute the Essence of a Devil, and the main things that he
endeavors to plant and propagate in us, as being his very Likeness and Image.
We pray not against Blindness of Eyes, Lib. 4. c. 25.
but of Heart. Socrates tells us what Antonius the Monk said to that great
Scholar and Writer I will not say, but Dictator of Writings, Didymus that was
blind; Let not the loss of your bodily Eyes trouble you; for you are deprived
of such Eyes as the Flies and Gnats can see with; but rejoice that you have
those Eyes, wherewith the Angels see, and by which God himself is discerned,
and his Light comprehended. So I may say on the other hand; Pray not so much
against the loss of bodily Sight, which is common to us with Worms and Flies,
but against Blindness of Heart, which will make us see no more than the Devil,
and with which the Devil labors to lead us Captive. So the Apostle tells us,
the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not; 2 Cor.
4.4, etc.
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them: and from such Blindness, Good Lord, deliver us.

The Second thing here prayed against is Pride, another Ingredient of the
Devilish Nature: Not a Novice, 1 Timothy 3.6, etc.
lest being lifted up with Pride, he sall into the Condemnation of the Devil.
The next is Vainglory, (a branch, or outward token of Pride) and akin to it
is Hypocrisy; for they both pretend to something more than they are owners of.
As the Devil told our Savior, when from an exceeding high Mountain he showed
him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, Matt. 4.8, 9.
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. When
(vainglorious Dissembler as he was) he had not one foot of Land to give; and
certainly whoever belie and ostentate themselves, in pretense of being what
they are not, are of their Father the Devil, according to what is said in the
Revelation, Chap. 2.9 Chap. 3.9
I know the Blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the
Synagogue of Satan. Next follows, -- From Envy, Hatred, and Malice, and all
Incharitableness; for these are three, and there are other branches of that
bitter Root, which are all constituent of a Devil, and make the Fiend so black
as he is. Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath, neither give place to the
Devil; When Wrath rests and settles into Malice, then the Devil takes place in
the Heart, and the Spirit of God is grieved; as you may see in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, the fourth Chapter, 26, 27, 30, 31 Verses, compared together;
and these are all contrary to the Fruits of the Spirit mentioned in the
Galatians, for they are Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Meekness, Temperance. I have been thus particular in this Branch of the Litany,
because I have long observed these two things. First, That Men in their Prayers
have commonly passed by these Sins, when they have long insisted upon the
Confession and Exaggeration of other less Malign. Secondly, That Men in common
Conversation seldom express their dislike against them as against others, that
are more Scandalous, because more obvious to the Eyes of the World; which
whether it proceed from a secret Indulging of those Sins, or a gross Mistake in
thinking them more Pardonable than others, or because it is more easy or usual
to gild and varnish over those Spiritual Lusts with specious Names and Titles
of Virtue; as to call Pride Magnanimity, Revenge Sense of Honor, Envy
Emulation, and the like, I will not inquire: And upon this Score I the more
value our Litany; and shall only observe this farther as to this Branch of it,
that the Primer of Salisbury has not Pride, Hypocrisy, Envy mentioned in it.
The next Branch has respect to the Lusts of the Flesh; -- From Fornication and
all other deadly Sin; -- that is, from all deliberate, willful, presumptuous
Sin; for it is Willfulness, Presumption, Deliberation, that makes Sin Deadly or
Unpardonable without special Repentance; whereas Sins of Surprise and
Incogitancy, which Tertullian calls Quotidianae incursionis, and are so
frequent, that we can scarce know when we commit them, for those God is pleased
to accept of a more general Repentance* Wherefore it is a groundless Jealousy,
that makes this Objection against this Prayer; that it favors the Popish
Distinction between Venial and Mortal Sins. And let me tell the Reader farther,
[from all other deadly Sin] is not in the foresaid Primer; and upon search it
will be found that Fornication is a very Venial Sin with them, that coined this
Distinction, and in a Priest more pardonable than honest and honorable Wedlock.

2. Then we come to deprecate the Evils of Suffering or Punishment; which are
of two sorts, such as concern our selves, and such as touch the Public. First,
Such as may do us a Mischief in particular, instancing in those that endanger
our Lives; as (1.) Lightning and Tempest; from which there is no flying nor
hiding, no arming nor fencing; that which does often set Houses and Barns on
Fire, and sometimes destroys Men in a Moment. (2.) The Plague of Pestilence;
from which we have great reason to beg Deliverance, if we call to mind how that
Becsom swept away near an hundred thousand in our Capital City in one Summer,
1665.
and many Thousands besides in other Parts of the Kingdom, in that, and the
Year following. (3.) From Famine; a Judgment (God be thanked) not heard of in
our Land, and yet to be feared, if we call to mind the several Famines we find
threatened and inflicted upon the two Fruitfulest Countries in the World, the
Land of Canaan and Egypt. (4.) From Battle, that is, not only from proclaimed
Wars and open Hostilities, but from all sudden Frayes, Quarrels and Duels,
which never end well. (5.) From Murder, that is, from Suffering as well as
Committing of it. From all violent Death, and especially (6.) that which is
Sudden. From which last, it is not only Lawful (whatever private Fancies have
suggested to the contrary) but very behoveful to pray to God to deliver us, as
that which may snatch us away, before we are prepared either to leave this
World, or go to a Better. The Frequency and Fearfulness of Earthquakes gave the
first occasion to this Prayer against Sudden Death (as a Reverend and Learned
Person tells us; Dr. Hakewill 's Apology, etc. Lib. 2. S. 4
) and I question not if Earth quakes were as Frequent and Fearful now, as they
were in those days, the Objectors would be as ready to Pray the same as any
other. But though this sort of Calamity be more rare in this than in some other
Countries, and less Dreadful in later than in former Ages, (so that this
Petition (at least as to us) may seem less needful upon that account) yet how
many are the Casualties and Dangers we are continually exposed to, that may put
a sudden period to our Lives? Which, to beg the Divine Protection to be
preserved and delivered from, the Judicious Mr. Falkner looks upon as the most
proper and direct sense of this Petition; Libert as Ecclesiastica. p. 150, 152.
and let that Man alone (says he) who judges this unfit, condemn and reject
this Petition against Sudden Death.

But because this Petition (as the same Author says) has been much excepted
against, it may not be amiss to return a more full Answer to it. Although then
we ought not to have ever the worse Opinion of any, whom God is pleased to take
away on a sudden; as the Chapter of York in the Time of King Henry the First,
An. 1109.
who would not permit Gerard their Archbishop, who died suddenly, to be buried
in the Church, though he had been a Benefactor to it, but in the Church Porch;
Although Mr. Brightman prayed for a sudden Death, and had the Death he desired;
wherein perhaps he was singular; for (as the forecited excellent Author (says)
to die as Josiah or Uzzah did, Libertas Ecclesiastica. p. 151.
is not desirable to the most holy and pious Men, who according to the Example
of Jacob, David, and our blessed Savior himself, by their holy Instructions at
the time of their Death, may become useful for the bettering of the Lives of
them who survive. Again, Though, since we know not the Date of our Lives, it
should be our constant care and endeavor, whether we die suddenly, or
gradually and deliberately, to die preparedly; like the good and faithful
Servant, that knowing not when his Lord should come, stands upon his Watch, and
is ready at every hour of the Night; Though we are not so much concerned to
pray that our Deaths may be fore-warned, as that they may be fore-arm'd; and
therefore pray that we may so stand upon our guard, as not to be surprised; and
so stand to our Arms, as not to be vanquished; yet notwithstanding all this, I
question not, but it may become any good Man to pray to be delivered from
sudden Death. Our merciful Lord in his Prophecy of the sad Desolation that was
coming upon the Nation of the Jews, whereof he gave many most significant
fore-tokens, Matt. 24.36.
and yet declared, that of that day and hour no Man Knew, no not the Angels in
Heaven, but his Father only; Matt. 24.20.
in that Prophecy advises them, saying, Pray that your flight be not in the
Winter, neither on the Sabbath Day: In the Winter, when they could not easily
fly; and on the Sabbath, when many through a scrupulous Superstition would not
fly; and does therein advise them to pray, that that sad time might not
overtake them unawares. For the same reason Prayer against the Surprise of a
sudden Death is very advisable; that so Men may be fore-arm'd against the
Stroke, when it does come; that so their Houses, which they are to leave, may
be set in better Order, (for some cannot be persuaded to make their Wills till
extreme Sickness; or if made, Men may always have a desire and occasion, and
yet not always an Opportunity to alter them; and so something of Consequence
may be left unwill'd, that may create Trouble to Executors, Heirs, Legatees,
etc.) and that they may be better prepared for that House or State whither they
are going; lest when they are called, they may be found not doing their
Master's Work, and so fall short of their Wages. The most prepared Soldier had
rather fight a pitched Battle, than upon an hasty Alarm. The best furnished
Housekeeper would take it more kindly to have some notice of his Friend's
coming beforehand, than to be put upon a sudden Hurry. So the most wary
Walker, the most wakeful Watcher, would gladly some Harbinger of the King of
Terrors, some kindly Sickness, or sensible Declension of Strength would give
him warning to settle his outward Concerns, make his Peace with all the World,
and leave Peace amongst his Relations, pay his Debts here below, and get a
Release of all above Sealed and assured to him. I pass on

2dly. To such Evils as may affect the Public, and that either State or
Church. The State may suffer either by Sedition or privy Conspiracy, -- the
former disturbs the Peace and Health of the Body, the latter aims at the Life
of the Head; for the Preservation whereof, we are all bound daily to pray, and
against all those things that have any Tendency toward their Ruin, be they
open or secret; more or less intended. Sedition is one step to Rebellion, and
privy Conspiracy another. We pray therefore that the Cockatrice may be crushed
in the Egg, the monstrous Bastard stifled in the Cradle, all Tendencies that
way may be stopped in their first Motions. And then for the Evils, that may
injure the Church, False Doctrine, Heresy and Schism; in the Deprecation of
them our Church disowns all Pretense to Infallibility; praying against that
which may befall it, or the purest Church in the World. And here let me
observe, that the forementioned Primer has not this Branch in it, viz. From
all Sedition, privy Conspiracy and Rebellion; from all False Doctrine, Heresy
and Schism; -- The Church of Rome being a great Patroness of Sedition, privy
Conspiracy and Rebellion; and so high a Pretender to Infallibility, that False
Doctrine, Heresy and Schism are whatever she please to call so. And therefore
in her Mouth, and the Mouths of all her Children, all that own the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, yea, all that teach contrary to Her are
Heretics and Schismatics. Heresy strikes at the Doctrine, and Schism at the
Discipline of the Church; the former is like a Disease which taints the Blood,
and poisons the Seat of Life; the latter is like a Wound, which lets out the
Blood, and if not well looked to may turn to a Gangraena; and both are so
dangerous, that we cannot too often pray against them, and all the Steps and
Tendencies thereto, even that that is but False Doctrine or simple Error;
which persisted in and pursued to its utmost Consequences, may turn to Heresy,
and occasion Schism: And, Lastly, against the inward Causes of them and the
other things that are so Mischievous to the State, to wit, Hardness of Heart,
and Contempt of God's Word and Commandment. Obstinacy is a great Ingredient of
Heresy, and Stubbornness of Rebellion; these two are Synonimous to one another
in 1 Samuel 15.23. and these all spring from the Contempt of God's Word and
Commandments, which are the Test of Truth, and Rule of Obedience. And so much
for the things prayed against.

In the two next Branches we have those potent Arguments wherewith the
foregoing Supplications are urged: By the Mystery of the Holy Incarnation; by
thy Holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation; --
In all which there is no Swearing nor Conjuring, as some weak Persons sondly
object; as if the Preposition, By, could not be used in any other way or Sense.
But what think they of St. Paul, when he says, I beseech you therefore,
Brethren, Romans 12.1.
by the Mercies of God; -- that is, as ye hope to partake of or be Saved by the
Mercies of God. It is a Form of vehement Obsecration, Exhortation, or
Contestation. So again, We beseech you, Brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.
by the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto
him; that is, as ye hope for the Coming of our Lord at the last Day, and our
Meeting him at that time (of which he had spoken in the former Epistle) and
such Forms are usual among all Writers and Speakers, when a thing is earnestly
desired. Chap. 4.15, 17.
And so we may account for all the Particulars abovenamed.

By the Mystery of the Holy Incarnation, Good Lord deliver us. As if it had
been said, O Lord, to what end did thou contrive that great Mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifested in the Flesh? Why did thou that was it in the Form of God,
Phil. 2.6, 7.
and thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, take upon thee the Likeness
of Sinful Man? Was it not to save thy People from their Sins? Matt. 1.21.
From the Power as well as the Punishment of Sin? From the Crafts and Assaults
of the Devil, from the Wrath of God, and from Everlasting Damnation.

By thy Circumcision; -- Thou, O Lord, that was it made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4, 5.
was it made under the Law, to redeem us that were under the Law, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons; therefore thou sheddest thy first Blood at thy
Circumcision, and thy last upon the Cross, to redeem us from the Curse of the
Law; Gal. 3.13. 2 Cor. 5.21.
thou was it made Sin for us, and a Curse for us.

By thy Baptism, -- wherein thou was it so Solemnly owned and proclaimed to be
the Son of God; and whereby thou did Sanctify Water to the Mystical Washing
away of Sin, Office of Baptism.
and making us Children of God.

By thy Fasting; Collect. 1st Sunday in Lent.
-- Thou who for our sake did fast forty days and forty nights, to deliver us
from the Surfeit we took by eating the Forbidden Fruit, and to prepare thy self
against that great Temptation, wherein thou overcamest the Crafts, as after in
thine Agony the Assaults of the Devil. -- By that threefold Temptation, which
thou underwent'st, and wherein thou overcamest the great Enemy of Mankind at
all his three Weapons, wherewith he worsted Man at first, the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, Good Lord, deliver us from
the Deceits of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

By thine Agony and Bloody Sweat; -- O Lord, the Devil then set upon thee like
a roaring Lion, and all the Powers of Darkness were let loose upon thee, and
thou then offered'st up Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and Tears
unto him that was able to save thee from Death, Heb. 5.7.
and was it heard and delivered from that thou feared'st, (so may we understand
that place) Good Lord, deliver us from all our Fears: O Lord, in that thy self
have suffered being tempted, Heb. 2.18
thou art able to succor them that are tempted.

By thy Cross and Passion; -- that is, by thy Passion upon the Cross; or, by
thy Cross; that is, The manner of his Death, he was made a Curse for us; but by
his Shedding his Blood thereon he took away the Curse, and made full Expiation
and Atonement.

By thy precious Death and Burial; -- Upon the Shedding of so much innocent and
precious Blood, Death must needs follow; and it need not be counted any
Tautology to add it to Passion, since we have not words enough to express what
our Lord Suffered. And let not any think it was all one to us, whether our Lord
was buried or no, merely to quarrel with this Prayer; for they must also
quarrel with the Apostle's Creed, that has in that short Sum^n of our
Christian Faith this, and all the foregoing Particulars distinctly, thus, He
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, Dead and Buried. Our Lord's
Burial, with the choice Circumstances of it, strongly prove the Reality of his
Death and Resurrection. And St. Paul looks upon it as so considerable a
Passage, as to particularise it, and repeat it as part of the Christian Cabbala
delivered to him at first. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that Christ
died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried; yea,
and to resemble the Spiritual part of Baptism thereunto. Romans 6.4
Therefore we are buried (says he) with him by Baptism into Death. And again,
Col. 2.12.
Buried with him in Baptism. Next follow, after all these Instances of our
Lord's Mysterious Humiliation, those of his Exaltation, his glorious
Resurrection and Ascension. Our Lord, by his Resurrection, has given the
greatest Evidence and Assurance of our Immortality and Resurrection; and that
he not only died but overcame Death, and mastered him that had had the power of
Death, that is, the Devil; Heb. 2.14
and to show that he was to die no more, he left this Stage of Mortality, and
made that glorious Ascension, whereof enough cannot be said. And when he
ascended on high, he led Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4 8.
and gave Gifts to Men, by his Mission of the Holy Ghost; which was the last
Remarkable in the great Mystery of Godliness; signifying the effectual Means
made use of for the Publication and Application of the Doctrine of the Gospel
for the Benefit of all Mankind. And now pray what Arguments more strong and
proper, and likely to prevail with our Lord, than these that are fetched from
all the signal Passages and Particularities of his wonderful Undertaking,
wherein he so much denied himself, and obliged us; and for the effectuating
whereof, and making them Saving to us, he now sits at the right Hand of God,
for ever to make Intercession for us? What do we more therein, than Pray to our
Savior to Save us by those Means and Methods, which he himself has managed
and directed? Nay, do not they mean the same thing in effect, that say, Save
us, Lord, for thy Name's sake, for Jesus Christ his sake? Doubtless we all
desire that so great Contrivances and Undertakings of Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, that so much Cost and Pains may become Effectual and Saving to us, in
all those Ends and Purposes for which they were intended.

And now, Lastly, because there are some Critical Times, wherein we shall stand
in need of Salvation and Deliverance; if these are expressed, they will
heighten our Devotion, and make this part of the Prayer still more complete.
There are, I say, four Critical Times; First, The Time of our Tribulation; and
this we pray rather to be delivered in than from; because it is very often the
Portion of them that will live Godly in this World, 2 Timothy 3.12.
to suffer Persecution, according as the Apostle tells us. This is a Time,
wherein the Devil is most busy with and against us, and uses both his Crafts
and Assaults; and therefore we need more special Assistance. Secondly, The Time
of our Wealth; -- We do not pray for Wealth; but to be delivered from the
Cares, and Snares, and Temptations, which it brings along with it: And in this
Time the World and the Flesh use their Deceits against us, and so often
prevail, that our Table becomes a Snare to us, and our Friends become
Flatterers; our Honey turns to Poison, and fair Weather does us more harm than
foul. In this time we stand least upon our guard, and are easily surprised; and
therefore we pray to God to make us Watchful, and to watch over us himself, and
deliver us from the Dangers of it. Thirdly, The Hour of Death, -- in which and
not from it we desire to be delivered: For at this Hour the World and the Flesh
leave us; but then the Devil sets on us a-fresh, and would make us, if he
could, despair of Deliverance, and think our Sins are too great and too many to
be forgiven; he would fain make us let go our hold of our Savior, and then he
knows we shall drop into his Bottomless Pit. Wherefore in the Visitation of the
Sick, we are taught to pray, O Lord, Save thy Servant; which puts his Trust
in thee. Send him Help from thy Holy Place; And evermore mightily defend him.
Let the Enemy have no advantage of him; nor the Wicked approach to hurt him. Be
unto him, O Lord, a strong Tower from the face of his Enemy. And afterward,
Defend him from the Danger of the Enemy, -- Renew in him whatsoever has been
decayed by the Fraud and Malice of the Devil. Fourthly, -- In the Day of
Judgment: And that is a Critical Day indeed, wherein, it may be, the Devil may
be as ready to accuse us to God, as he did Job; but he can then do us no harm;
there will then need no Accuser but our own Consciences, and he that shall be
our Judge, who now desires to be our Savior, and that he may prove so to the
last Day we Pray, beyond which there will be no danger, nor need of any more
Deprecation. And so we have gone over the first Part of the Litany, Deprecation.

I proceed to the other Part; which is Petition for good things, and this is
double, Intercession for others, and Prayer for our selves.

1. Intercession; (...), required by the Apostle; 1 Timothy 2.1
and insinuated by the Plural Number used in our Lord's Prayer, and here. As
feeling Members of that Mystical Body whereof our Lord Jesus Christ is the
glorious Head, we pray for the Holy Catholic Church; called Catholic and
Universal ever since the Apostle's days, and in their Creed, because
comprehending all Nations in the World as well as Jews, or rather, as the World
now goes, Comprehensive. For our Lord said, Go, teach all Nations, etc. and all
Nations were taught and baptized in the Faith of Jesus Christ and the Holy
Trinity; called Holy, not from intrinsic Holiness; for the Kingdom of Heaven
is like to a Field that has in it both Wheat and Tares; like to a Net, Matt.
13.24.47.
which being cast into the Sea, gathers of every kind, both good Fish and
bad; but from a Relative and Faederal Holiness, such as was that of the Jews,
and from the Profession of a most Holy Faith. For this we pray, that it may be
ruled and governed in the right way; the forecited Primer has not in the right
way, for the Church of Rome thinks it can never be in the wrong, never prove
Heretical or Apostatical: But we that know the Church Militant is made up of
Men, that are frail and fallible, and often err in Judgment, and oftener in
Practice, we pray it may be kept in the right way; and the good Lord keep that
Part of it in the right way, that is in it, and restore that that is out.

Then we come to our particular Church, and pray, first, for Him that is
Supreme Governor of it, Supreme Ordinary or Governor of it on Earth, and so
our Lord Jesus Christ's Vicegerent, and truly that which the Pope pretends to
be over the whole Catholic Church. And (1.) We pray for Spiritual good things,
that God would be pleased to keep our Gracious King, and strengthen Him in the
true Worshipping of God, and in Righteousness and Holiness of Life; and rule
his Heart in the Faith, Fear and Love of God; and that he may evermore have
Affiance in him, and ever seek his Honor and Glory. He that considers how
prone of old the Kings of Israel and Judah were to Idolatry, and how many Kings
of the Earth at this day Worship the Image of the Beast, and are governed in
Religious Matters by the Imperious Dictates of an Apostate Church; or, to look
nearer home, that reflects upon the doleful Instance of the late King's
embracing the Romish Religion, the mischievous Effects whereof who knows
whether ever these Kingdoms may out-grow? I say, He that considers all this,
will think it was at first and still is very fit to pray for the keeping and
strengthening our King in the true Worship of God. And in what follows, We pray
that He may own God for his Sovereign, by making the Honor and Glory of God
his ultimate end, and his Trust and Affiance in God (and not in Man) the
Foundation of all he does. And then we pray for Temporal Blessings; namely,
That God would be his Defender and Keeper ( defend and keep him, whom he has
appointed to defend and keep us) and in order to that, give him the Victory
over all his Enemies; whether homebred or foreign. And then (as is most
natural) We pray for the whole Royal Family; desiring that they may prosper and
be multiplied. And surely this is far more explicit and particular than that of
the so often cited Primer, Vt Regi nostro and Principibus nostris Pacem and
veram Concordiam atque Victoriam donare digneris. After this we pray for all
Bishops, Priests and Deacons (the three Orders of Clergy in the Primitive
Church) that God would enlighten them with true Knowledge and Understanding of
his Word, and that both by their Preaching and Living they may set it forth,
and show it accordingly. And this is according to the Instruction of St. Paul
to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16.
Take heed unto thy self, and to thy Doctrine; -- that they may be as John
Baptist was, John 5.35.
a burning and a shining Light; teach as well by their Examples as by their
Instructions. Then (what is not in that Primer) that it would please him to
endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with Grace, Wisdom, and
Understanding; To bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them Grace to execute
Justice, and to maintain Truth. Which in the Prayer for the Militant Church is
thus expressed; -- Grant unto his whole Council, and to all that are put in
Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister Justice, to
the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the Maintenance of thy true
Religion and Virtue. -- And then follow several Prayers (which are not in that
Primer) which for brevity sake, and because they are so plain and easy to be
understood, I will pass over, and take more special notice of those that are
Prayers of Charity.

That it would please God to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived. Humanum est errare, humanius condonare. Though we hope
and think we are in the Right, and none have yet convinced us to the contrary,
yet (as before) we pretend not to be Infallible; and therefore as being liable
to Error our selves, we pray for the Erroneous, that they may be brought into
the way of Truth. And then for our Morals, we are as prone to Errors of Life as
Doctrine, and therefore pray that they that stand may be strengthened, and
others that are wavering and tottering may be helped and comforted, and kept
from falling, and they that are already fallen may be raised up; and because
the Devil, that occasioned the Fall of our first Parents, lies like a Serpent
in our Way, and an Adder in our Paths, to bite and trip up our heels, we Pray
that God would tread him under our feet; according to the Assurance St. Paul
gives us in those very words, And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under
your feet shortly. And the first Gospel, Romans 16.20.
-- It shall bruise thy head, Genesis 3.15
and thou shall bruise his heel.

Then we come to Pray for all that are in Danger, Necessity, and Tribulation;
and not content with so general a Supplication, we reckon up in eight or nine
Particulars those that labor under or are most liable to Dangers and Troubles.
As, first, All that travel by Land or by Water; -- the Dangers of the former,
in being bewildred and benighted, invaded by Robbers, and wild Beasts, far from
help and home, who cannot tell? And for the latter, David tells us as
Emphatically, as if he had gone some East India Voyage; when he only crossed
Jordan, Psalm. 107.23.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great Waters: Psalm.
107.24.
These see the Works of the Lord, Psalm. 107.25.
and his Wonders in the Deep. For he commands, and raises the stormy Wind,
which lifts up the Waves thereof. Psalm. 107.26.
They mount up to the Heaven, they go down again to the Depths, their Soul is
melted because of trouble. Psalm. 107.27.
They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken Man, and are at their wits
end. Psalm. 107.28.
Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their
Distresses. Psalm. 107.29.
He makes the Storm a Calm, so that the Waves thereof are still. Then are they
glad, Psalm. 107.30.
because they be quiet; so he brings them to their desired Haven. Here some
will interpose and say, In praying for all that travel by Land or by Sea, we
pray for Robbers and Pirates, Rebels and Traitors, them that delight in War,
and whose Feet are swift to shed Blood. I answer with the ingenious Falkner, He
is properly a Traveller (and doubtless is here meant) who goes upon his
allowable or ordinary Occasions. Libertas Ecclesiastica, p. 153.
If the meanest Man in the Country should hear of an Act of Parliament, for
securing the safe Passage of all Travelers, he would never thence conclude,
that they intended to provide for the Safety of Robbers, High-way-men and
Traitors, who are the great Disturbers of Safety. I add, No Prayer can well be
devised, but some such small Exception may be made against it; all Men are
presumed to be Honest and Loyal, and so we may pray for them; yea, we ought to
pray, that they may be Honest. There is no reason that Honest and Loyal Men
should be shut out of our Prayers for the sake of them that are not so. We may
pray for the Safety of a sinking Ship, though there be a Jonas in it; as our
Lord prayed for his Disciples, though there were a Judas among them.

Secondly, All Women laboring of Child, -- and so laboring under the Curse of
Eve, Genesis 3.16
when God said, I will greatly multiply thy Sorrow and thy Conception: It
Sorrow thou shall bring forth Children. And we know the Scripture to express a
very great and sudden Distress, compares it to the Pangs and Throws of a Woman
in Travel; for the Safe Deliverance from which, as our Church has appointed a
particular Thanksgiving after, so here a general Prayer before.

Thirdly, All Sick Persons. -- And this includes a vast Number; all that labor
with Chronical Diseases, as the grinding Pain of the Stone, the racking Auguish
of the Gout, and such torturing Ails as none can conceive but they that have
felt; with Critical Diseases, as all Fevers and Pestilences, which threaten
speedy Death; especially these last, that lock up from the kind and comfortable
Visits of Friends and Neighbors; These ought especially to be remembered.

Fourthly, Young Children. -- How many thousand Dangers are these poor Lambs
obnoxious to; from within and from without; how hard is it to know their Ail,
how hard to help them; and when they come to use their Feet, how ready are they
to carry them into the Fire and the Water, to trip at every Stick and Straw;
how ready are they to play on the hole of the Asp, and sport on the Brink of
the Pit; how near Danger must they always be, that are afraid of none, and
unable to help themselves out of any. There is doubtless a special Providence
watches over young Children, that so few miscarry; and doubtless most watchful
over them that are recommended to his Care by the Prayers of the Church and
their Parents.

Fifthly, -- Show thy Pity upon all Prisoners and Captives. -- What all, some
will say, old Goal birds, Felons, and Traitors? Although the Prayer chiefly
means Prisoners for Debt, and Captives in War, (and so we may understand the
Prayer of Asaph, Let the Sighing of the Prisoner come before thee, Psalm. 79.11.
according to the greatness of thy Power: Preserve thou those that are
appointed to die. And that in another Psalm, Psalm. 102.19, 20.
He has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary; from Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth: To hear the Groaning of the Prisoner, to loose those that are
appointed to Death; or the Children of Death.) Yet it will take in also the
most Notorious Malefactors, that need the more Pity, by how much they less pity
themselves; and we shall do well to Pray for the Thief on the Cross, the
Murderer at the Goal-house, that God would make them Penitent, and accept of
their Repentance; break the Stony Heart, and not despise the broken.

Sixthly and Seventhly, -- Defend and provide for the Fatherless Children and
Widows; and all that are Desolate and Oppressed. Provide for the Desolate, and
defend the Oppressed. And surely we ought to Pray for those who are God's
Special Care, so Special, that he intitles himself therefrom in the sixty
eight Psalm; where God is represented riding in triumphant Majesty, and one
would have expected a Proclamation of such Titles, as King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, etc. but instead thereof we hear, A Father of the Fatherless, Ver. 5,
6.
and a Judge of the Widows is God in his holy Habitation. God sets the
Solitary in Families: He brings out those which are bound with Chains. The
Widow has lost the Guide of her Youth, and the Staff of her Age; and the
Fatherless the best Friend he can have upon Earth; and therefore we pray that
God would be to them Friend, and Father, and Husband.

And now that we may not leave any sort of Men out of our Prayers; it follows,
That it would please thee to have Mercy upon all Men. All Men? What Reprobates?
Apostates? those that have sinned the Sin unto Death? Who are Reprobates, etc.
we know not; but we know St. Paul exhorts that Supplications, Prayers, 1 Timothy
2.1
Intercessions -- be made for all Men. 1 Timothy 2.3.
Giving this reason, For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior: 1 Timothy 2.4.
Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the
Truth. I know how many Distinctions are made to restrain the All in these
places; which if they will hold good there, they will also hold good in this
Prayer; and then one of any Persuasion may join with us in it.

But there is one fort of Men, for whom the Heart of Man has little list to
pray; to wit, Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers: Now to prevent the tacit
Exception, our Church has added a Prayer for them, that God would forgive
them, and turn their Hearts. I say added, for neither it nor any of the
forementioned Charitable Prayers (except for the Poor and Captives) are in that
Primer.

Thus have I given a plain Account of this incomparable Prayer, our solemn
Litany; which is not obscure in it self, but yet has been much misunderstood;
and therefore I have labored to beget a right understanding of the same. And
if what I have said, be not sufficient to remove the Prejudices and
Prepossessions of those, who under a Pretense of Praying by the Spirit, have
taught the People to despise both this, and all other Set Forms of Prayer; yet
I hope at least it may not prove altogether unuseful to such Devout Members of
our Church (for whose sake it was chiefly intended) that are desirous both to
know what it is they pray for in every part and parcel of it, and heartily to
pray for the same.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Brief Exposition on the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments. To
which is added the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. And late
Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. This on the Creed never before Published.

Advice to young Persons, relating both to Faith and Practice. Contained in
some plain directions how to Demean themselves. Together with some few motives
to the Observation of what is here recommended. in Octavo. Price 4 d.

Family Religion: or the Exercise of Prayer and Devotion in private Families.
By the late Reverend Dr. Pain, late Minister of White-Chappel. In 24es. Price
2 d.

A Method of daily Devotion, A Method of Devotion for the Lords Day. Likewise
several small Books against Debauchery, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing and
Swearing, etc. All by Dr. Ascheton. In 24es. Price 2 d Each, and something
Cheaper to them that give away Numbers.


