Exceeding welcome News FROM IRELAND. Being the Copy of a Letter sent from
Dundalke to Mr. Dudley Norton Esquire, Inhabitant at Nanptwich, and now
resident in LONDON. Wherein is declared in what condition the Kingdom of
Ireland is at this present. Which true information what victories have been
obtained against the Rebels in several parts of that Kingdom, By The Earl of
Ormond. Sir Henry Titchburne. Sir Chrstopher Loftus. Sir Richard Greenvill.
Captain Bartlet. Colonel Vavasor.
With others that are the chief Commanders of the Army for that service.

Published for the satisfaction of all those that desire true information of
the proceedings in that Kingdom, by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. September. 2. 1642.

VVelcome News FROM IRELAND.
HAving received true information from you of the proceedings between the King
and Parliament in England; in requital I have thought it necessary to inform
you how the case stands with us in Ireland. For the Rebels they increase daily,
like Hydra's heads; one is no sooner cut off, but there arise three in his
place; but God be thanked they want Arms to furnish them; by which means
(though their Forces are very considerable) they are not invincible; for
several assaults have been made against them, upon great odds on their side;
yet so great is Gods mercy toward us, that notwithstanding their numbers, our
handful have still the victory, coming off with little loss, they being
killed by thousands. For our soldiers, though their habits are poor, yet they
have good hearts, for they weigh neither danger nor death, but upon all
occasions are forwarder to fall on then their Commanders are to have them.

For example, the Earl of Ormond with 5000. Foot and 800. Horse fought with
15000 Rebels near Kilkenni, where the Rebels are encamped, killing at least
3000. with the loss of 60. Foot and 20. Horse.

Sir Henry Titchbourne before Dundalke fought with Rorum Maguiers (brother to
the Lo: Maguiers now prisoner in the Tower) having but three Regiments of Foot
and two Troops of Horse, Maguiers having above a thousand Rebels: in which
fight Sir Henry Titchbourne behaved himself so valiantly, that had not
Maguiers bestirred himself very nimbly, he had accompanied his brother: for his
valiant followers showed him a fair pair of heels, and left him to fight it
out by himself; which he seeing, followed their example, and ran away for
company.

In this battle there were killed near 2000. Rebels, 20. Prisoners taken,
which were hanged like Rebels as they were. Sir Christopher Loftus. has
cleared the Coast of Galway, it having long time been besieged by the Rebels;
but being often times worsted by the English Forces, and gauled by the often
issuing out of the Citizens, they were forced to steal away by night. But Sir
Christopher Loftus having discovered them, fell upon them on the morrow as they
marched toward a wood that was near adjoining, thinking there to secure
themselves; but seeing themselves intercepted, they fronted the English, who
gave them a sour welcome. The English were straight seconded by the Citizens
of Galway, at whose arrival the Rebels began to be amazed, and in a confused
manner ran into disordor: In which confusion they were cut off so fast that
they found the place too hot for their company. Wherefore instead of fighting,
they took themselves to running, leaving the english and the Citizens of
Galway to congratulate their happy victory.

Captain Gibs was lately hard beset at Garmaston being opposed by Oneale the
great rebel, whose forces were 18000. foot, and 3000. horse. Cap. Gibs having
been abroad relieving several Castles besieged by the Rebels; and upon his
retreat he made Garmaston his quarters intending to stay there a day or two to
refresh his men, and to give them time to mend their clothes which were very
bad: But Philome Oneale having inteligence that there was a small company of
English in Garmaston under the command of Cap. Gibs, marched through the wood
privately, stealing upon the Town, but being discovered by the English,
certain notice was immediately given to Captain Gibs, who sent immediately to
Captain Bartlet, who was then in Limricke Castle, desiring him to send him some
present aid, otherwise he and his men had been lost. Philome Oneale having
surprised him in his quarters, nevertheless, Garmaston having a little Castle
in it, he had planted to small field pieces which he would intercept him some
small time, likewise placing his men to his best advantage, to offend him and
secure himself.

This being done as soon as Pwilome Oneale came within shot of the Town, he
caused his men to give a general shoute, which Oneale hearing feared some
treachery, whereupon he made a stand, all this while Captain Gibs stood not
still, for his field pieces and other small shot with the drums made such a
confused melody, that the Rebels were almost amazed, fearing that they had
been almost betrayed to death, they not conceiving any other cause of joy
could be at such a time so vehemently expressed.

Thus both parties continued shooting for the space of two hours.

Captain Gibs his men shooting at a full body, did do great execution amongst
them, but the rebels shooting at random scarce frighted the English.

At length Captain Bartlet with 500. foot and 3. troops of horse, marched
through the wood for the more privacie, and before they were aware clapped just
upon the rear of the Rebels, which Oneale seeing; caused his men to wheel
about, and to front Captain Bartlet, who having the advantage of the hill,
fronted them both (knowing his men to be of an approved courage) and gave them
a hot charge with musket bullet. In the mean time Captain Gibs drew out his
men and planted them just at the bottom of the hill, shooting very fast, so
that between them they caused them to retreat, discharging on the flank.
Which they having done, being clear of both the parties of English, they very
fairly marched away with speed, with the loss of 500. men. In this Skirmish
Captain Gibs was shot through the arm with a musket bullet, and lost near
100. men

Sir Richard Greenwel fought with Mac-mahaun near Munster. Mac-mahaun being
plundering certain villages having 3000. fooote, and 500. horse; but Sir
Richard Grenevill having not alliegiance went up to the rescue of the
Inhabitants, where after 5. hours fight Macmahanone having strengthened
himself with a Castle whereon he had planted three field pieces, but after so
much time spent to decide the difference, the English pressed so hard upon
them, so that they fled out of the Town leaving their Ordnance for Sir Richard
Grenevill to carry home with him, their have being such that they were either
too hot or too heavy.

Colonel Vavasor obtained a Castle from the Lord Plunket, wherein was great
store of Amunitio, where he slew 50. Rebels, and took the Lady Plunket
prisoner, with her two sons which were sent to Dublin.

These are the chief of our proceedings in Ireland, pray let me at the next
return be informed what has passed between the King and Parliament since
your last letter, and in return I shall gratify you with the like courtesy
from hence. So I rest

Your friend to be commanded, Patrick Kilborne.
Dundalke, Aug. 26. 1642.
FINIS.

