The expert Gardener: OR, A Treatise containing certain necessary, secret, and
ordinary knowledge, in Grafting and Gardening; with diverse proper new Plots for
the Garden. Also sundry expert directions to know the time and season when to
sow and replant all manner of Seeds. With diverse remedies to destroy Snailes,
Canker-wormes, Moths, Garden-Fleas, Earth-wormes, Moles, and other Vermin.
Faithfully collected out of sundry Dutch and French Authors.

LONDON, Printed by William Hunt. 1654.

Certain common Instructions how the Stumpe must be chosen whereupon you will
graffe or plant.
EVery diligent Householder who will plant, should use thereto a convenient
place, to the end, that the wild beast chaw not, nor pair the plants; or if
they be young, wholly eat in pieces; which to avoid, is needful to be in a
town or closed Orchard, where there is not too much shadow, but a sweet ground
well muckt, tilled and turned.

Every Plant will have four things.
First moistness, so that the seeds or stumpe be moist or green.

Secondly, a convenient place, which has such earth as will lightly be rubbed
to powder, and that Sun may come to it; for where there is filthy lome, a lean
ground, or sandy, dry, burnt, or salt ground, there is nothing good to be
planted, to have any continuance; nevertheless where the ground is lean, there
you must give more dung; in a fat ground not so much. Take heed the ground be
not too moist nor too dry; and muck the trees with hogs dung.

Thirdly, a mediate water or nourishing moistness, therefore be those Orchards
best which are situated between two waters; for those that are placed by a
water side, remain still young and fruitful, and have commonly the bark
smoother and thinner than the others. And those trees are more fruitful then
others which are planted in a valley, or in the lower part of a deep hill; for
from those hills may come to them nourishment and moistness, and the ground
which is so situated is very fruitful. But he that cannot get for his trees
such a ground, must with all diligence seek to bring to his trees a little
spring or pond, of which the trees may sometimes find some reviving, and if you
may not have any of those, and have a garden who by it self is naught, the
trees will grow with thick roots, which hinders the growing of them, and
dries them at length.

Fourthly, the air is required, which must be agreeable to them, and of
complexion to bear; for there be some trees that do prosper in all aires, to
wit, apple, and pear, cherry and plum-trees. Some will have a cold air, to
wit, chesnut-trees; and some a very warm air, as the palm and pepper trees:
therefore they be rare with us. That plant which has these four things shall
prosper: and if they want one or more of these four things, they will decay and
their prospering perish.

At what time trees ought to be planted and set.
ALL kind of trees may be planted, transported, and cut in March, but it is
better to turn them in October, for then the frost hurts them not so much as
at other times; for learned men say, that in dry Towns and warm Countries they
plant in October or November, and that in moist Towns and cold valleys, they
plant in February or March: in none other time may you plant or graffe. When
you will plant or set again wild stumps, if there be any thing broken at the
root, cut it off. Every plant must be set two soot one from another, or at the
least one foot, especially when they should bear strong fruits: likewise when
thou will set strong seeds, as nuts, almonds and peaches. When a man will plant
two stumps, so must they be of two year old, except the vine.

These things you must understand of those plants or stumps which are planted
with roots.

How the stumps and plants must be prepared and dressed, which you will plant.
THe plant or sprout you must cut round about, so that you leave the very end
of it, and put it then into a hole, but if the stump be great, cut it clean
off, and then put only the undermost part into a hole, long or short as you
will; but if you find two stumps grown together, you may cut the lesser away.
And above all things, you must take heed that the sprout grow upright, and if
it will not, you must constrain it, and tie it to a stick.

Here follow certain instructions how the trees must be kept, and how you must
labor them.
SOme trees will have a far ground, as Fig trees and Mulberrie trees, and
some lean ground, but all trees be in that point equal, that they will have
in the top dry ground, and in the bottom moist earth.

2. In Harvest you must uncover the roots of the trees so deep, that they may
partly be seen, and lay dung upon them, which dung must be dissolved of rain
in the ground, that it may come to the roots, which mucking gives good
increase to the roots.

3. If the ground wherein the trees stand be too sandy, then mix among it
fair and new lome; and if it be too lomy, then mix amongst it sand in place
of mucke, the which you must not only do hard by the tree, but also four or
five foot off from it round about the tree, according as the tree is in
bigness, or that the roots are large and great.

Such diligence, gives to the trees great help, for their nourishment and
strength is thereby renewed. Hereafter you shall understand, whereby to know
the fruitful soil.

4. In the fat ground, the stumps whereupon you will graff, must be left long,
but in lean ground short.

5. The plants of trees from their youth, till three years must not be cut nor
shred, but they may be transported, and if they be too weak you may prick
sticks next unto them.

6. Diligent regard must be taken, that no sprouts spring out of the stump,
which might take the nourishment from the tree sprouts, and those boughs which
spring from the root of the tree at the first planting.

7. When thou perceivest the young trees to wax weak, then uncover the roots
and put other fresh ground to them.

8. If the ground be neither too soft nor too hard, then may you choose all kind
of stumps in February for to plant, when the green juice is dispersed in the
bark; but when the ground is too hard, then the swet holes or pores of the root
do remain closed and stopped, so that they cannot draw to them their
nourishment, such hardness of the ground or earth hinders the air and
moistness which comes from beneath upward, for it cannot be pierced of the
soft sprouts, with the small heat which is beneath, therefore you must come to
help them with a spade, for with a plough you will never come to an end,
because of the root.

9. There is great diligence to be taken for preserving of the trees, when they
begin to grow great, to scrape from the bark all rudeness which is done, when
you take from them all superfluity and sprouts which come out of the tree. You
may cut them in February.

10. It is good for the trees to muck them often, and moderatively to water
their roots.

Also to cleave the roots, and lay stones into them, to the end they may revive
again of the dryness which they have suffered, or of the barrenness of the
ground, or when the young planted trees for the great heat will perish. Also
when immoderate heat is, then you must help them with turning of the ground,
and with watering, but the water wherewith you should water them, must not be
altogether fresh nor cold, or newly drawn out of the spring, but out of a
ditch, pond, or well, or any other foul ditch water, or with spring water,
which has stood long in the Sun, or put a little dung in the water, and stir
it once or twice well about, and the water will be fat wherewith water your
trees. You may also keep them with shadows and straw from the heat: or else
put (in great heat) fat green herbs at the stump, tempred with loame: some
anoint the stumpe (toward the South or Midday) with chalk, some with oil, or
with any other ointment that cools.

11. When you would transpose a plant, or have wild stumps dug out to plant
again, then mark the part which standoth toward the South of Midday, and put
it so again when you graffe it.

How to keep plants, stumps, or trees, from the wild beasts, that they hurt
them not.
WHere the path of the beast is free and remediless, there must be put poles,
and with thorns the same young trees must be enclosed.

That the Deeres spoil them not.
TAke the piss of a Decre and anoint the Tree therewith.

That the Hares do not hurt them.
SPet in thy hand, and anoint the sprouts therewith, and no Hare will hurt them.

Here follow some instructions of graffing.
depiction of the cutting of a tree for grafting

FIrst, you must know that imping, graffing, and setting, is all one thing.

The imping sprouts must be young and new, with great bodies and many eyes: for
where many and great buds be, that is a token, that is of a strong fruit.

2. The imping sprouts must be broken off at the Sun rising, although that
those of the other side broken off grow likewise: yet those of the other side
are most natural and temperate of heat: Some country clownes believe, that if
you in cutting the sprouts turn them upside down, that they will never grow
right, but be crooked.

3. All graffing and imping is done by putting one into another by a fast
binding, that the little sprout may spread his boughs to the stump or tree,
wherein it is graffed, that so it may become one tree.

4. Over-young imps (which are so weak that they will break before they be put
into the earth, or into the stump) are naught, and therefore they may not be
imped or set.

5. When you impe upon a house or fruit tree, the fruit will be far better: But
if you cut of a Garden tree a branch, and imp it into one of his own sprouts,
it will bring forth fruit of another taste, form, and big esse; for imping
makes all the diversities in pears, apples, and other fruits.

6. It is far better to impe low in the stump, than in the top in the high
branches: yet nevertheless if you will make of wild apple trees garden trees,
you may impe them upon the top.

7. In great trees which have a great bark, it is not so good to impe, for they
take not to them so easily the veins of the roots which grow out of the young
sprouts, because of their hardness, and especially when the imping sprouts are
too weak. Wherefore they which graffe trees must seek small and young stumps,
where in they find much liquor and little hardness, and which may endure the
binding.

8. It is best imping or graffing when the liquor is in the bark, if you have a
great tree upon the which you would impe and has many branches, you may out
them all off, and impe into the stumps all kind of boughs, such as you please;
but if the tree be over-old, so that her boughs be ranckled, and her
moistness consumed, then cut the tree clean off, and let the stump ^d a whole
year; afterward take the sprouts which are sprung out of that stumpe, and
graffe them, and cast the others away. Such a stump is like to bear, and
therefore nourish as many sprouts as you please: but if it be a wild stump,
graft garden sprouts upon it.

9. If you graffe a sprout or bough upon a Hawthorne tree, that same bough will
grow great, and the stump will remain small, therefore he that will impe upon
such a tree, see he cut it off by the root, then will the imped sprout and the
stumpe grow all of one thickness: but you must have still regard that you impe
kind upon kind, as apples upon apples, pears upon pears: for he that
graffeth strange upon strange, as pears upon apples, and apples on pears, and
such like, although it be done often for pleasures sake, yet will it not last;
for the natural nourishment is so, that it will hardly nourish a strange kind
of fruit.

10. The tree which is graffed in February, in his fruits grow no worms nor
maggots.

11. When the imping sprouts begin to prosper, and will not grow straight and
level, then you must constrain them perforce, that they may grow orderly.
Furthermore you must have a care to keep the prospering sprouts well with
sticks from the wind, if they stand any thing high, and especially when they
have stood a year or two, and where they are pricked in the stump, it is most
needful, as shall after appear. And because there be many and diverse ways to
graffe, and know how wild stumps and trees are to be made garden trees, we
thought it good to set some of them here down.

Diverse fashions and ways of graffing there be.
HE that will extraordinarily graffe all manner of trees, he must know, that
the more one tree is liker another, the better it will prosper.

The first sort of graffing is, when the sprout is pricked between the bark and
the wood of the stump; which must be done in May or April, when the bark may
easily be loosed from the tree, and is done after this sort.

First take a stump or tree, and cut him off with a sharp Saw, knife or such
like instrument, where he is smoothest and clearest, and full of juice, and
polish the place with the bark of the same tree which was cut off. Afterwardty
the stump with a piece of bark, and then prick a hole between the bark of the
tree with a prick of bone, elderwood or Iron, so that it cleave not, and then
put in the place of the prick the sprout, which you must have broken off a
plain and even tree, of a good kind, and one year old, which you shall know by
this; every branch has rinckled knots like the joint of a man's finger, cut it
at one side under the knot, so that you touch not the heart of the tree, and at
the other side you must softly loose the bark, that the sproat may join very
close to the stump, then pull out the prick, and take the sprout, and turn the
green bark to the bark of the stumpe, so that it may stand straight.

The sprout may be four or five fingers, or eight at the most, high above the
stump.

Of this sort of imping, you may see two, three, or more, according to the
bigness of the stump, or as he can bear, provided always that they stand at
the least the length of a finger one from another.

Afterward tie it fast (with bark) together, and put over it good muck, and tie
over it a cloth, that no rain or air may come between it and hurt it. This
sort of imping is commonly used in stumps, which are great and old trees, whose
bark is thick and strong, as apple trees, pear trees, cherry-trees, and
willow trees, on which are imped oftentimes apples, also on fig trees, and
chestnut trees.

Such grafting is also done in high stumps, and branches, which be great, but
they must be well kept from the wind, that it do not break them.

After this sort you may graft many sorts and kinds of pears upon one tree, but
if you bring pears upon apples, or apples upon pears stumps, it will not last
long, as before is said.

The first way of grafting prospers best, and has a good continuance, there
be many other sorts of grafting, as follows.

Another way of grafting is, when the stumps are cloven, and the sprouts
afterward are put in, the which do as follows.
TAke a young tree which is scant of the bigness of a finger, and cut it smooth
and even, and cleave it in the midst then take the sprout which you will impe,
and cut it three square, and at the one side leave the bark uncut, and then
turn the same bark outward at the stump; and tie it fast as I have taught,
that the wind nor rain hurt him not.

Otherwise.
When the stump is uncovered and clean burnisht at the soft place, then tie him
fast, that he cleave no further than to the length of your sprout, which you
must graffe upon him, and then leave the prick in it, then make your sprout
pointed like a prick, so that the middle be not touched, then put it into the
cleft, having cleansed the hole first with the point of a knife, so that one
bark may touch the other, and outward one wood another, to the end, the
moisture may have the more easier his course, then pull out the prick, and
that which remains open and bare between the cleft and the sprout, that bind
well every where with the bark of the tree, or with hard pressing with a little
sand, or with dung of an Ox, or with wax, or with a linen cloth washed in
wax, that no rain, wind or worms may hurt it. This helps much to keep the
moistness in, which comes from the root, that it cannot break out, but
nourishes the better the new plant; but when the stumps are great, they be
cleaved after two ways. The first is, that you cut or cleave the tree with a
knife at one side only, even to the heart, and that you graft into it but one
sprout. The other is, that you cleave it all over, and that you prick or graft
on every side one sprout, or one alone, and leave the other side without.

When the stump is but a little bigger, then the sprout must necessarily be
cloven in two, and you must graft but one sprout into it, as is said in the
beginning.

This cleaving may be done in February, March, and April, then it is good to
cut them before they be green, for to keep them the better under the ground,
in cold or moist places.

The third way of grafting.
THis sort of grafting is very subtle, witty, and ready; and is done as
follows.

Go to a smooth apple or pear tree, in April, when the trees get liquor, and
seek a branch which has green eyes, and see that the same be less than your
little finger, and tear it from the tree, and where you see that the green
sprouts will come off, there cut them off wholly, and cleanse the middle
thereof, that the little red at the wood may turn about, and draw it not off,
until you come unto another good pear or apple tree, and seek there another
branch of the same bigness that the other was, and cut it off, and take from
it, likewise the red, as far as you will put them again, and look where the
branches join, that they may well sit together upon the top, and tie the same
place gently and well with a little bark, behind and before, that the water
may not hurt them: in the first year it brings forth leaves and branches, in
the second flowers, which you may break off, for the sprout is yet too tender,
so that it may bear no fruit, and in the third year it brings flowers and
fruit, and by this means you may graft diverse kinds of pears and apples upon
one tree. I have likewise set such sprouts upon wild stumps, and they have
prospered.

The fourth way of grafting is,
HOw buds are transported and bound upon another tree, like as a plaster is
tied to a man's body: this sort of grafting, is called in Latin Emplastrum. We
read of such a sort of grafting which is called in Latin Abducellum, and it is
much like unto this sort, wherefore we will only speak of it, being done after
this sort.

When you see upon a great fruitful bough, a bud which will prosper without
doubt, and would feign plant it upon another tree, take a sharp knife, and
lift the bark up two fingers breadth, that the bud be not hurt, then go to
another tree, upon the which you will graft, and put into a convenient place, a
like hole into the bark, and put the same bud with the bark into it, and tie it
with dung (or with a clout that has lien in a dunghill) over the cut, that it
may be kept from the outward damage of weather, and for an especial
nourishment and keeping of the inner juice: then cut off the branches round
about it, that the mother may the better nourish the new son; within twenty
days after take away the band, so that you see that the strange bud has
prospered, and joined himself with the tree. This may be done in March, when
the bark comes easily from the tree. Also in April, May, and June, and yet
she prospers both before and after a time, when you may conveniently find
such buds.

This sort of planting prospers best in a willow tree or such like, which is
pierced through, and is done after this sort.

The fifth way.
When you pierce a willow stick with a sharp piercer, see that between every
hole, be left the space of one foot, and prick therein branches a little
scraped, and put the stick into a ditch, so that the branches stand upright,
one part of the stick remaining over the earth; and with in a year after take
it out of the ditch, and cut the stick asunder, so find you the branches full
of roots, and put every one into a hole in the ground, and it is fit the holes
were stopped with lome, or with wax.

Some do take in March a fresh Beech tree, which is of a man's thickness, and
pierce him overthwart with maine and great holes and small holes, till unto the
lowermost bark, or quite through: then take sprouts or boughs, which be as
big and small, that they may fit into the holes; and when you will put them
into the Beech stump, you must scrape the uppermost bark off, until the
green, and no further: then the bough must remain into the Beech, the sprouts
must stand a foot, or somewhat less asunder, then keep your Beech stumps with
the sprouts in a fresh ground, and skant a foot deep, you must first maime the
sprouts, that they may not flourish; then the next March ensuing, dig it out
with the sprouts, and cut it asunder with a saw, and every block which is cut
off with its branch, you must set in a fresh ground, and so they will bring
forth the fruit the same year.

The sixth Way.
This way teaches how to graffe, that they may bring forth fruit the first
year, which do as follows.

Pare an old stumpe of what kind soever it be, the uppermost bark, till to the
lower green bark, a span long or somewhat less, which do in Harvest in the
wane of the Moon, and anoint it with Ox dung and earth, and tie it with bark,
and after in March when trees are transposed from one place to another then cut
the same branch from the tree, and put it into the ground, and it will bring
fruit the same year. I have seen that one has pricked sticks on Alballow eve,
in the earth, and has pulled them out again upon Christmas eve, and put
boughs in the holes, and they have prospered and come out.

The seventh.
Pierce the top of a stump, which is not over small, and draw a bark through
it, and maime it with a knife, as far as it stands on the top, and in eight
days after, pour water upon it, that the top of the stump may close. This must
be done in harvest, and in the March following cut it off from the tree, and
bruise the top, and put it with the same earth in other ground.

The eighth Way.
Will you graffe a tree that the fruit be without stones. Take a sprout and
graff it into a great stump, with the thicker and lower part of the sprout,
then take the upper or thinner end of the sprout, and cut it also fit to be
graffed, and turn it downward, and graffe it into the said stump; and when
the sprout of both sides prospers, cut it in the midst asunder, so that which
is grown right upward with the tree, the fruit of it has stones, but that
which was the top of the sprout that grows contrary, brings forth fruit
without stones. And if so be the turned sprout prosper, you must break off the
other, to the end, that the turned sprour do not perish, which you may try
after this sort; for oftentimes it comes and prospers, and many times it is
perished and spoiled.

How Cherries are to be graffed, that they may come without stones.
WIll you make that Cherries grow without stones? pare a little Cherry tree at
one year old at the stump, and cleave it asunder from the top to the root,
which do in May, and make an Iron fit to draw the heart or marow from both
sides of the tree; then tie it fast together, and anoint it with Ox dung or
lome, and within a year after, when it is grown and healed, go to another
little tree which is of the same kind, and which has not yet brought fruit,
and graffe that same on the little tree, so shall that same tree bring his
fruit without stones.

How a Vine is to be planted upon a Cherry tree.
PLant a Vine tree next unto a Cherry tree, and when it grows high, then
pierce a hole into the Cherry tree right above it, that the hole be no bigger
than the Vine is thick, and pare the upper bark of the Vine branch till unto
the green, so far as it must go through the tree, and look well to it that
the branch of the Vine be not bruised, and well anointed. You must not suffer
any sprouts to come out of the Vine from the ground up, but unto the tree only,
that which comes out of the other side, let that same grow and bring fruit.
Then the next March following if the Vine prosper and grow fast into the tree,
then cut the Vine from the tree off, and anoint the place with diligence, and
it will bring fruit.

How a grape of a Vine may be brought into a glass.
WIll you make that a grape grow into a narrow glass? take the glass before
the grape cast her blood, or while she is little, and put her into the glass,
and she will ripen in the glass.

To graffe Medlers on a Pear tree.
IF you graffe the branch of a Medler upon a Pear tree, the Medlers will be
sweet and durable, so that you may keep them longer than otherwise.

How apples or other fruit may be made red.
If you will graft upon a wild stump, put the sprouts in Pikes blood, and then
graft them, and the fruit will be red.

Otherwise.
Take an apple branch, and graft it upon an alder stump, and the apples will be
red. Likewise if you graft them upon cherry trees.

Of the Quince tree.
THe Quince tree comes not of any grafting, but you must pluck him out by
the roots, and plant him again into a good ground or earth.

Otherwise.
The Quince tree requires a dry and sweet ground, and he prospers therein.

How to make that Quinces become great.
TAke a branch of a Quince tree when it has cast his blood where a Quince
grows at, and put it into a pot, and set it into the ground, and let the
Quince grow in it, and it will be very great.

And if you will show some cunning therewith, cause to be made a pot which has
a man's face in the bottom of it, or any other picture whatsoever, and when the
quinces have blossomed, then bow the branch, and put the Quince into the pot.
and she will grow very big, in the shape of a man, which may also be done in
Pompons, Mellons, Cucumbers, and other earthly fruits.

The conclusion of graffing.
OVT of all the forewritten causes (gentle reader) is evidently shown, that
although every planting or grafting be better from like to like, and from kind
to kind, yet nevertheless it agrees also with contrary kinds, as now is said
wherefore he that will exercise and use the same, and try diverse kinds, he may
see and make many wonders.

What joy and fruit comes of trees.
The first fruit.
THe first is, that you plant diverse and many kinds: for every householder who
has care to his nourishment, with all diligence causes oftentimes, such trees
to be brought from foreign Countries.

The second.
The second is, when the trees be planted and sat orderly and pleasantly, they
give no small pleasure to a man, therefore every one should cut his trees
orderly, and he that cannot, should procure other men to do it, which know how
to do it.

The third is of well smelling and spiced fruit.
Cleave a tree asunder, or a branch of a fruitful tree, to the heart or pith,
and cut a piece out of it, and put therein poundred spices, or what spice
soever you will, or what color you will desire, and tie a bark hard about it,
and anoint it with lome and Ox dung, and the fruit will get both the savor
and color according to the spice you have put in it.

How sour fruits be made sweet.
WHich tree bears sour fruits, in the same pierce a hole a foot or somewhat
less above the root, and fill that with honey, and stop the hole with a
haw-thorne branch, and the fruit will be sweet.

How trees ought to be kept when they wax old.
WHen trees lose their strength and virtue for age, and the branches break off
for the weight of the fruit, or when they wax barren for lack of moisture, that
they bear not fruit every year, but scant every other or third year, you must
cut some of his heavy branches, which he can little nourish, which is done to
the end he might keep some moistness to himself for his nourishment, or else
the moistness would go all into his branches.

Whereby you may mark whether you must give them, or take away from them
branches, according to their nourishment, and as the earth where she stands
can abide, that is, you must leave them so much as will nourish them, and no
more, which if you do not, the trees will bring so little fruit, that your
labor will not be recompensed.

Which cutting of trees may be done from the beginning of November till to the
end of March, in warm countries. But it is more natural to be done from the
time that the leaves fall, till the time that they begin to grow green again,
except where the frost is very great and sharp.

How trees must be kept from diverse sicknesses, and first how to keep them from
the Canker.
WHen the Canker comes in any tree, he becomes barren and dry, for it
mounteth from the stumps into the top, and when it takes a pear or apple
tree, the bark will be black and barren thereabouts, which must be cut off with
a knife, to the fresh wood, and then the place must be anointed with Ox dung,
and tied with bark, so that neither wind nor rain may hurt it.

Against worms which must be driven out of the tree.
IT happens oftentimes, that the superfluities of moistness in the trees
breaks out like as sometimes to a man or beast between the flesh and skin:
and when that begins to rot, worms grow out of it, which takes his strength
away: wherefore mark,

When the bark of a tree at any time swells, cut it presently open that the
poison may run out, and if you find already worms in it, draw them out with
a little Iron hook.

How the worms are to be killed, if they be already grown into the tree.
IF you will kill the worms which grow in the tree, take Pepper, Laurel, and
Incense, and mingle all well together with good wine, and pierce a hole into
the tree downward, to the pith or heart of the tree, and pour this mixture
into it, and stop it with a hawthorne, and the worms will dye.

Otherwise.
Take afhes or dust and mingle it with sallet oil, anoint the trees therewith,
and the worms will dye.

Otherwise.
Take powdered Incense when you graffe, and bring it between the bark of the
stump, which you will graffe, and no worms will eat the fruit.

When a tree in many places becomes changeable because of worms, or
superfluous humors, Cleave the tree at some end from the top of the stump to
the earth, that all the foul liquors may come out and dry. Also when a tree
becomes sick because of evil humors or fault of ground, so that (...)
becomes worme-eaten, or brings no fruit, take the earth away from the root,
and put other sweeter in the place, and pierce a great hole in the stump, and
put therein a pin of Oak, and it helps.

A remedy against Caterpillars.
ALL kind of Caterpillars which eat the green, and blossoms of the tree, do
hurt them very much, so that thereafter may come no fruit.

Therefore their eggs which lie hidden, as it were in a cobwebbe, must
diligently be searched, and burned from the boughs, before they bring forth
other Caterpillars, which do in December, January, and February.

Some were wont to break them off, and tread them with their feet, but
therewith they be not wholly killed. The fire consumes all things, and
therefore it is best to burn them.

Against the Pismires or Ants, when they will hurt the young trees.
CVT the leaves off which are eaten or poisoned of the Ants or Pismires, and
where there is any thing made unclean in the top of the tree, of those little
worms, that rub inpieces with your hands, that it may not stain the other
leaves, and that the young sprouts may grow up without any hinderance.

How to keep the Pismires from the trees.
FIrst make a juice of an herb, called Portabaca, and mix it with vinegar, and
sprinkle the stump therewith, or anoint the stumpe with wine dregs. Some take a
little weak pitch, but very thin, that it may not hurt the tree.

Another Instruction.
Take a little bundle of cotton, wool, flax, or towe, and lay it about the
stump, and tie likewise a bundle above, about the stump, and draw it out a
little, and the Pismires can do no hurt: or put about the stump bird-lime.

In what time of the harvest the fruit must be gathered.
THe Fruits are not altogether at one time gathered, for they are not ripe all
at once, as some pears which show the ripeness by the color, those should be
gathered in Summer, and if you let them stand too long, they will not last.

Pears which are ripe in harvest, those may be gathered in October, when the
weather is clear and dry: in harvest in the increase of the Moon, Fruits may
be gathered.

A short Instruction very profitable and necessary for all those that delight
in Gardening, to know the times and seasons when it is good to sow and replant
all manner of seeds.
CAbbages must be sown in February, March, or April, at the waning of the
Moon, and replanted also in the decrease thereof. Cabbage, Lettuce, in
February, March, or July, in an old Moon. Onyons and Leeks must be sown in
February or March, at the waning of the Moon. Beets must be sown in February,
or March, in a full moon. Coleworts white and green in February, or March, in
an old moon, it is good to replant them. Parsneps must be sown in February,
April or June, also in an old moon. Radish must be sown in February, March, or
June, in a new moon. Pompions must be sown in February, March, or June, also in
a new moon. Cucumbers and Mellons must be sown in February, March or June, in
an old moon. Spinach must be sown in February or March, in an old moon.
Parsley must be sown in February or March, in a full moon. Fennel and
Annisseed must be sown in February or March, in a full moon. White Cycory
must be sown in February, March, July or August, in a full moon. Carduus
Benedictus must be sown in February, March or May, when the moon is old.
Basil must be sown in March, when the moon is old. Purslane must be sown in
February or March, in a new moon. Margeram, Violets and Time, must be sown in
February, March or April, in a new moon. Floure-gentle, Rosemary and
Lavender, must be sown in February or April, in a new moon. Rocket and
Garden cresses, must be sown in Fepruary in a new moon. Savell must be sown
in February or Match, in a new moon. Saffron must be sown in March, when the
moon is old. Coriander and Borage must be sown in February or March, in a new
moon. Hartshorne and Samphire must be sown in February, March or April, when
the moon is old. Gilly-flowers, Harts-ease, and Wall-flowers must be sown in
March or April, when the moon is old. Cardons and Artochokes must be sown in
April or March when the moon is old. Chickweed must be sown in February or
March, in the full of the moon. Burnet must be sown in February or March, when
the moon is old. Double Marigolds must be sown in February or March, in a new
moon. Isop and Savorie must be sown in March, when the moon is old. White
Poppy must be sown in February or March, in a new moon. Palma Christi must
be sown in February, in a new moon. Sparages and Sperage is to be sown in
February, when the moon is old. Larks foot must be sown in February, when the
moon is old.
Note that at all times and seasons, Lettuce, Radish, Spinach and Paseneps may
be sown.

Note also, from cold are to be kept Coleworts, Cabbage, Lettuce, Basil,
Cardons, Artochokes, and Colefloures.

Worthy remedies and secrets availing against the stroying of Snailes,
Cankerwormes, the long bodied Moths, Garden-fleas, Earth-wormes, and Moles.
AFricanus, singular among the Greek writers of husbandry, reports, that
Garden-plants and roots may well be purged and rid of the harmefull worms, if
their dens or deep holes be smoaked, the wind aiding, with the dung of the
Cow or Ox burned.

That worthy Pliny in his first book of Histories writes, that if the Owner
or Gardener sprinckleth the pure mother of the oil Olive, without any salt in
it, does also drive the worms away, and defend the Plants and Herbs from being
gnawne of them. And if they shall cleave to the roots of the plants, through
malice or breeding of the dung, yet this weedeth them clean away. The plants or
herbs will not after be gnawne or harmed by Garden-fleas, if with the natural
remedy, as with the herb Rocket, the Gardener shall bestow his beds in many
places.

The Coleworts and all pot herbs are greatly defended from the gnawing of the
Garden-fleas, by Radish growing among them. The eager or sharp vinegar does
also prevail, tempered with the juice of Henbane, and sprinkled on the garden
fleas. To these, the water in which the herb Nigella Romana shall be steeped
for a night, and sprinkled on the plants, as the Greek Pamphilus reports,
does alike prevail against the garden fleas.

Paladius Rutilius reports, that the noisome vermin or creeping things will
not breed of the Pot-herbes, if the Gardener shall before the committing to the
earth, dry all the seeds in the skin of the Tortoise, or sow the herb Mint in
many places of the Garden, especially among the Coleworts. The bitter Fitch and
Rocket (as I before uttered) bestowed among the pot herbs, so that the seeds be
sown in the first quarter of the Moon, do greatly avail us. Also the Canker
and Palmer worms, which in many places work great injury both to the Gardens
and vines, may the owner or Gardener drive away with the fig tree ashes
sprinkled on them and the herbs.

There be some which sprinckle the plants and herbs made with the lee of the
fig tree ashes, but it destroys the worms, to strew (as experience reports)
the ashes alone on them.

There be others which rather will to plant or sow that big onyon, named in
Latin Scilla or Squilla here and there in beds, or hang them in sundry places
of the Garden.

Others also will to six River Cresses with nails in many places of the
garden, which if they shall yet withstand or contend with all these remedies,
then may the Gardener apply to exercise this devise, in taking the Ox or Cow
urine, and the mother of oil Olive, which after the well mixing together, and
heating over the fire, the same be stirred about until it be hot, and when
through cold, this mixture shall be sprinkled on the pot herbs and trees, does
marvellously prevail, as the skillful Anatolius of experience reports.

The worthy Paladias Rutilius reports, that if the owner or Gardener burn
great bundles of the Garlic blades (without heads) dried, through all the
allies of the Garden, and unto these the dung of Backs added, that the savor
of the smoke (by the help of the wind) may be driven to many places,
especially to those where they most abound and swarm, and the Gardener shall
see so speedy a destruction, as is to be wondered at.

The worthy Pliny of great knowledge, reports that these may be driven from
the pot-herbes, if the bitter Fitch seeds be mixed and sown together with them,
or the branches of the trees, Crevises hanged up by the horns in many places,
does like prevail. These also are letted-from increasing, yea, they in heaps
presently gathered are destroyed, as the Greeks report of observation, if the
Gardener by taking certain Palmer or Canker-wormes out of the Garden next
joining, shall sees them in water with Dill, and the same being through cold,
shall sprinckle on the herbs and trees, that the mixture may wet and soke
through the nests, even unto the young ones, cleaving together, that they may
taste thereof, will speedily dispatch them. But in this doing, the Gardener
must be very wary, and have an attentive eye, that none of the mixture fall on
his face or hands.

Besides these, the owner or Gardener may use this remedy certain, and easily
prepared, if about the big arms of trees, or stumps of the herbs, he kindle
and burn the stronger lime and brimstone together. Or if the owner make a
smoke with the Mushromes, growing under the Nut tree, or burn the hoofs of
Goats, or the gum Galbanum, or else make a smoke with the Hearts horn, the
wind aiding, by blowing toward them.

The husbandmen and gardeners in our turn have found out this easy practice,
being now common every where: which is on this wise, that when these
after-showres of rain are cropen into the warm sun, or into places standing
against the Sun, early in the morning shake either their fruits and leaves of
the pot-herbes, or the boughs of the trees, for these being yet stiff,
through the cold of the night, are procured of the same, the lighter and sooner
to fall, nor able after to recover up again, so that the Palmer worms thus
lying on the ground, are then in a readiness to be killed of the Gardener.

If the owner mind to destroy any other creeping things noyous to herbs and
trees, (which Paladius and Rutilius name, both herb and Leek-wasters) then let
him hearken to this invention and devise of the Greek Dyophanes, who wills to
purchase the maw of a Wether sheep new killed, and the same as yet full of his
excrementall filth, which lightly cover with the earth in the same place, where
these most haunt in the Garden, and after two days shall the Gardener find
there, that the mothes with long bodies, and other creeping things will be
gathered in diverse companies to the place right over it, which the owner shall
either remove and carry further, or dig and bury very deep in the same place,
that they may not after arise and come forth, which when the Gardener shall
have exercised the same but twice or thrice, he shall utterly extinguish, and
quite destroy all the kinds of creeping things that anoy and spoil the Garden
plants.

The husbandmen in Flanders arm the stocks, and compass the bigger arms of
their trees, with wisps of straw handsomely made and fastened or bound about,
by which the Palmer worms are constrained to creep up to the tops of the
trees, and there staid, so that, (as it were by snares and engines laid) these
in the end are driven away, or thus in their way begun, are speedily or soon
after procured to turn back again; As unto the remedies of the Snailes
particularly belongs. These may the Gardener likewise chase from the kitchen
herbs, if he either sprinckle the new mother of the oil olive, or soot of the
chimney on the herbs, as if he bestowed the bitter sitch in beds among them,
which also availes against other noisome worms, and creeping things, as I before
uttered, that if the Gardener would possess a green and delectable Garden,
let him then sprinckle diligently all the quarters, beds, and borders of the
Garden, with the mixture of water and powder of Fennigreeke tempered together,
or set upright in the middle of the Garden, the whole bare head without the
flesh of the unchaste Ass, as I before wrote.

Excellent inventions and helps against the Garden-Moles.
THe skillful Paxanus has left in writing, that if the Gardener should make
hollow a big nut, or bore a hollow hole into some sound piece of wood being
narrow, in filling the one or the other with Rosin, Pitch, Chafe and
Brimstone, of each so much as shall suffice to the filling of the Nut, or
hollow hole in the wood, which thus prepared in a readiness, stop every where
with diligence, all the goings forth, and breathing holes of the Mole, that by
those the fuming smoke in no manner may issue out, yet so handle the matter,
that one mouth and hole be only left open, and the same so large, that well
the nut or vessel kindled within, may be laid within the mouth of it, whereby
it may take the wind of the one side, which may so send in the savor both of
the rosin and brimstone into the hollow tomb, or resting place of the Mole; by
the same practice so worke-manly handled, by filling the holes with the smoke,
shall the owner or Gardener either drive quite away all the Moles in the
ground, or find them in a short time dead.

There be some that take the white Neesewort, or the rind of Cynocrambes
beaten and farced, and with Barley meal and eggs finely tempered together, they
make both Cakes and Pasties wrought with wine and milk, and those they lay with
in the Moles den or hole.

Albertus of worthy memory reports, that if the owner or Gardener closes or
diligently stops the mouths of the Moleholes, with the garlic, onyon, or
leek, it shall either drive the Moles away; or kill them through the strong
savor stinking or breathing into them.

Many there be, that to drive away these harmfull Moles, do bring up young
Cats in their Garden ground, and make tame Weasels, to the end, that either of
these through the hunting of them, may so drive away this pestiferous anoyance,
being taught to watch at their strait passages, and mouths of the holes coming
forth.

Others there be also, which diligently fill and stop up their holes with the
red Okare or Ruddell, and juice of the wild Cucumber, or sow the seeds of Palma
Christi, being a kind of Satyrion, in beds, through which they will not after
cast up, nor tarry thereabout.

But some exercise this easy practice, in taking a live Mole, and burning the
powder of brimstone about him, being in a deep earthen pot, through which he is
procured to cry, all others in the mean time as they report, are moved to
resort thither.

There are some besides, which lay silk snares at the mouth of their holes.

To the simple Husbandmen may this easy practice of no cost suffice, in
setting down into the earth, a stiff rod or green branch of the Elder tree.

FINIS.
depiction of the grafting of trees, with diagram of a garden tree plot

depiction of various tools for gardening and grafting

diagram of a borderless knot or garden plot with lines A Direction to set or
lay your lines or thread to make or draw a simple Knot, without a border.
Your must leave your Lines as they be first set, until your Knot be
altogether finished or done.



diagram of a borderless knot or garden plot with lines The Manner or Ordering
to set the thread or line upon another manner of Knot.


diagram of a borderless knot or garden plot with lines A Direction to fasten
your Lines to make another manner of Knot.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines A plain Knot without
Lines.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines A plain Knot without
Lines.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another plain Knot
without Lines.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram of a plain knot or garden plot without lines Another.


diagram showing a method for fastening lines to draw a knot or garden plot A
Direction to fasten Cords or Lines to draw a Knot with a Border; as also to
make a Border of Beds parted in the midst.


diagram of a bordered knot or garden plot A Direction of the Cords fastened
upon the Border, with a Knot in the midst.


diagram of a bordered knot or garden plot A Border with a Knot in the midst
thereof.


diagram of a bordered and divided knot or garden plot A Border or Knot divided
or parted, containing five small Knots.


diagram of a bordered and divided knot or garden plot The form of the Lines
set upon the Knot, whose Squares or Beds are parted.


diagram of a bordered and divided knot or garden plot A Border of Beds or
Squares parted; and the midst thereof.


diagram of a maze garden plot A Maze.


diagram of a garden tree plot with lake


