MEMENTO MORI

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY On the DEATH of that late Incomparable POET ROBERT WILD D.D. Who
departed this Life August the 12th 1679.
AH! who can hold! that all men silent are,
When our great loss in him's beyond compare:
He was the only Modern Man that Writ
Rhyme and good solid Sense; not flashy Wit:
He was jocose and serious: No man could
Write so well to please men and yet so good.
His Aim and great Design was by his Verse
To bring to life the unwieldy Universe,
If possible: He coveted to win
More Souls to God, than the Us'rer Bags of Sin.
His Preaching, when he first was National,
Was sound and learned, and well pleased all;
And since restrained he did continue still,
Gravely advising men against all ill
And persevering in his work, God's will
To make known to his people, whom he deemed,
Himself yet bound to succor, though it seemed
To some as if he thereby disesteem'd
Humane Authority.
But let such Dons, as thought him thus affected,
Read all his Poems, which, though now rejected,
Do plainly show no man more Loyal was;
Nor more bewrayed the Cheats of the Good Old Cause,
Than he, whose business was still to prevent
Their cursed and unnatural intent
Against their then Supreme and Natural Lord,
In whose Blood afterward their hands they gored:
Ah! how much he this fatal Act deplored!
None more rejoiced at our now Kings returning,
Thgugh he got by it, as London did by Burning.
He bore his Losses cheerfully, for that
He knew his Duty to his King, and what
He could not turn with the change of the times for; Not
That he was prejudiced against Government,
But always was thereto obedient,
As knowing 'twas of God for good to's sent.
His Works do illustrate his Worth,
And his true Genius to the World set forth;
That him to praise, who 'th such an Advocate
Were to diminish, not sup'rerogate.
I dare not speak more of him, having said
What does but lessen him, and take from the dead,
Which is the extremest piece of Cruelty
That e're was done by any man but me:
But since this work was by none undertaken,
That by his loss the World could better waken:
First I herein my Zeal for him express,
Though in a poor, sordid, and homely dress.
The Saints cannot add to the Glory above,
Nor set it out to the full, yet Divine Love
Accepts their Services, and them repays
With an Eternal Crown of radiant Bays,
More glorious far than the Suns high-noon Rays.
Then the World hereby has Intelligence
Of 's Fate, which brings them to a deeper sense
Of Judgments that are nigh, and may them urge,
Themselves in true Repentance to immerge,
Whereby impendent Judgments may be stayed,
If not removed; wherein the Lord us aid
To do 't sincerely.
And more I deemed it my Duty, since none
Their Love to him in Elegy had shown,
My self to sit down, and to write him one.
This charges the ungrateful men of the Town,
Who to be thought Wits by his Works are grown,
Now to lie still, and not their Debts to own.
I Will say no more but this, now he is gone,
I do despair of ever finding one
So mixed with Fancy and sound Judgment, as
He our now much lamented Poet was.
His EPITAPH.
HERE lies that learned, witty, grave, wise Wild,
Who served his God, King, Country, from a Child:
He bogled not in Times great alteration,
But still was true, without Equivocation,
To the Kingly Government of the English Nation.
He was a Loyal Presbyter, and this
A Wonder almost past our credit is.
FINIS

