THE EXECUTION OF Henry Berry, Who was Executed at TYBURN On Friday the 28. of
this Instant February, 1678.

For assisting in the murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, late of St. Martins in the
Fields.

WITH An Account of his Deportment in Newgate, and at the place of Execution,
with several other remarkable Circumstances.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1679.

THE EXECUTION OF Mr. HENRY BERRY AT TYBURN.
STill does unexpiated Murder cry, and Justice is not satisfied; Offended
Heaven is displeased when its rebellious Creatures dare so barbarously misuse
the Image of their Creator, and without a Cause inhumanely to violate their
proper kind, though far more noble in Degree and Order: The stamps of Justice
and of Mercy, fixed in the deep Center of a braver Soul, might sure have awed
their Cruelties, and turned their Bloody Hands from that polluted Sin, lest
ghastly horror, when too late for a retreat, should seize upon their drooping
Spirits; all clothed with ignominious shame, and drive them headlong to the
place from whence their wicked Counsels were at first derived: For this
Gygantick Crime o're-tops the Cedars, whose tall Branches sweep the Clouds; nay
more, the Stars and that Immortal Throne, to which the Souls beneath the Altar
cry for Vengeance to be heaped upon the shedders of their guiltless blood, from
which had they the VVings of Eagles, or should take the Mornings dawn they
could not fly; from which, if Hills would cleave, and gloomy Caves retain, or
sollid Rocks enclose, they could not hide: Its Bolts are sure, and levelled
Vengeance never aims amiss: The Almighty God is just in all his wise decrees,
and turns the malice of pernicious men upon themselves; pulls off the Masks
that veiled their black Designs, and lays them open to the World; most plain
and undisguised, whose horrid forms may make all Christians start, whose tender
Consciences look pale at the approach of monstrous sin, foul Treasons,
Massacres, and whatsoever such Diabolick Wits can tune in dreadful Notes,
thereby to make their Hellish Harmony complete, and string the discordant
numbers of contagious pride, disdain and envy, mixed with pious ^hews to blind
the Vu^gar Eyes, and gain their fond Applause for the promotion of their
desperate rage, but seldom does it long escape unpunished, as may in this more
plainly be exposed to the considerate thoughts of all impartial men. Thus Henry
Rerry, (seduced by the impious but crafty persuasions of those Assassinators,
and chief Plagues of Christendom, who, like Egyptian Locusts, where they come
destroy the Virtues that adorn the Souls of men, and in their stead infuse
prepostrous Poisons) was prevailed upon to desile himself with innocent Blood;
in order unto which he the said Henry Berry, with several others, two of which
already have received their just rewards for their notorious. Crimes, the
horrid Fact was for murdering Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, a Justice, (but at their
hands no Justice found) the Circumstances are so amply known I need not much
enlarge; but yet, to satisfy the curious Reader, I will insert the Heads of
some particulars. On Saturday, the 12th of October 1678. Sir Edmund was watched
from his House, by some of the murderous Crew, and the remaining part of that
day dogged about from place to place where e're he went, but when Night
approached (the fittest time to act such cruel deeds) as he returned homewards
through the Strand, when he came to the Watergate of Somerset House (by some
of them who stood there for that purpose) was entreated to come in, and part,
by his Authority, a certain Fray; a Counterfeit to trap his life which was
before designed, where he, by much persuasions, entered never to return alive;
these barbarous men thus having got their Prey secure, more ravinous than
Tigers, taking their opportunity, twisted a Handkerchief about his Neck (...)
cast and pulled him down behind the (...) not dreaming of such cruelties) and
violently strangled him, regardless of Justice or of Mercy.

But in short time their cruel darings came to light, though acted in the
darkest shade, for which they apprehended were by Justice, ordered to the
County Goal of Newgate, from whence they were brought to Westminster, where
they upon a fair Trial were found guilty of this horrid murder, and received
Sentence to return to the place from whence they came, and from thence to the
place of Execution, there to suffer for their Crimes, as in that case the Law
has provided, the which on Friday the 21th. of February, two of them, viz.
Green and Hill, fell before offended Justice, and this day being Friday the
28th. of the same Instant, Henry Berry aforesaid was executed likewise; there
being a number of Constables and Watchmen warned to guard him to the aforesaid
place, the Keepers and the Sheriffs men likewise officiated their ordinary
places, the prisoner being seated in the Cart about nine or ten of the Clock;
his countenance was much dejected, pale, and of a meagre hue, to what it
heretofore had been; for he was by Nature of a Sanguine complexion, Corpulent
and o^ a merry temper heretofore: But such a Fate would surely change a braver
soul than his: In the Prison, whilst he there remained, he demeaned himself
orderly, especially after the time of his Condemnation, shevving very frequent
tokens of Contrition and Sorrovv for his great Offenses which he had committed.

He was drawn in a Cart with two light-coloured Horses: his Habit
indifferently composed and moderate; all the way he was drawn, with erected
Countenance, often lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, which drevv pity
from the beholders. When he arrived at the place of Execution, after he had
made a Speech to those that were present, and prepared himself for his unhappy
end, the Ca^t was drawn away betvveen eleven and twelve of the Clock, and
he, after he had hanged the limited time expressed by the Law, was cut down
and buried.

FINIS.

