AN EXCELLENT AND VERY Precious Exercise of a very devout and penitent soul
Passionatly affected to the solace of souls abandoned in the flames of
PURGATORY.

Augmented with the Dolors of the B. Virg. and the Prayers of the holy sindon
to deliver a soul out of Purgatory.

Printed at Bruges by Laurence Doppesii. 1689.

AN ADVISE.
Dear souls it is a most profitable and precious exercise, to take pity of
those lanquishing souls who are in those incomparable flames; to give Alms, to
fast, to warch, to pray to do pennances for them, is very good: but a bove all
to offer for them, to that most amiable and pitiful Jesus his own most
cruel and excessive sufferances, is fare more profitable: seeing that the
meritts of Jesus are incomparable: and that if your good works have any kind of
meritt it is but by there means it has bin revealed to the glorious S.
Gertrude that prayers made in the name, and through the amorous and dolorous
sufferances of the son of God, are most powerful most excellent and most
dear to the devines Majesty.

Here follows prayers to be said every one on there proper day, as is
appointed, for the abandoned souls in the rigorous flames of Purgatory.

FOR SUNDAY.
Oblation of the most principal dolorous which Jesus suffered in the Garden
and his Agonys there.
1, I offer unto thee o sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, all the
mortal suffrances of thy cruel passion the ignominious death of the Cross,
the most excessive dolorous sheeding of thy most precious blood, which thou so
amorously did poor, out for our salvation.

2. I offer to thee o sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory all those great
and piercing tertours, which ceased on thee in that mournful Garden; where all
the indignityes and martirdomes which thou were to suffer the days following,
were represented unto thee in then extremityes, the which made thee to tremble
and wax pale with fear.

3. I offer unto thee o sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, that
incomparable sadness, which thou did feel through the apprehension of a
death so Eminent so shameful, and so inhumane; so much, that little wanted,
that the excess of that excessive sorrow, did not make thee to dye; as thou thy
self did testify to thy dear Apostles by those doleful and lanquishing
words. My soul is sorrowful even unto death.

4. I offer unto thee o sweet Jesus for thee souls in Purgatory, those great
abasings then when in the extremity of thy anguishes, going to pray to thy
father thou did cast thy self on thy knees and with thy face against the
earth; both out of reverence and also through, being appressed and overwhelmd
with sorrows.

5. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
constant and tender prayer; which thou made, with and never heard of
clamours; beseeching thy father, that he would be pleased to take from thee
that chalice of bitterness yett neither would thou this unless he would it so
sayedest thou unto him. Not my will o my father be done but thine.

6. I offer unto thee most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that lively
and burning charity, when being even plunged in a sea of bitterness yet did
thou not leave to visit thy Apostles, exhorting them to watch, to pray and to
be ware that they let not themselves fall into temptation.

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus, for the souls of Purgatory, that
comfort which was given thee by the Angel; when thy afficted soul, was even
on the point rye trough the excess of that unsupportable sadness upon the
lively apprehension of. so enormious torments; and of the ingratitudes and
unthankfullnes of the most part of the world.

8. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, that
trough combatt which was between the fes hand and the Spirit; which caused the
to feel the very agonies of death but the spirit prevailed over the senses
trough power of the love which thou bear to us.

9. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, that
exemplar perseverance which thou had in thy prayer where with thy face on
the earth overwhelmed with dolours and agonies thou ceasest not to pray,
without being heard willing in this that thy most blessed senses should be
deprived of all solace.

10. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus, for the souls in Purgatory, that
precious blood which through the violence of thau interior dolor did
sweat in abundance, that thy garments were imbrued in blood, and the earth
moistened.

11. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, those
lively and most peireing doulours, which thy pitiful mother did feell at the
words which venerable Simeon did say unto her, when she presented thee in thee
Temple that the sword of sorrow should pierce her heart.

FOR MONDAY.
Oblation of the pains which Jesus suffered, affter he was taken until he was
brought to the house of Annas.
1. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, that
amourous promptitude of spirit, when to testisy how nothing could force thee to
dye, bur the only love which thou did bear tous; thou wentest thy self
though yett all covered with blood to cast thy self, and as it were abandon
thy self over unto the fury of thy greatest enemies; saying unto them whom
seek ye.

2. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the soul in Purgatory, the
extreme displeasure which thou had of the infamous perfidiousnes of Judas,
who with ahart most cruelly covetous, sold thee for thirty pence and betrayed
thee with a traterous kiss displeasure so great, that it was even one of the
greatest that could be.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, all those
furious and inhumane oppressions which thou did feel then when assaulted by
a great number of villains, and enraged souldyers thou were taken, and bond:
but so cruelly, that it is not possible for our senses to comprehent it, and
much less for Any tongue to express it.

4. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
patience which no pen is able to set forth; and which thou made to appear
amidest so many blows of fists of staffes and of Holberts which those savage
executioners gave thee; both on the head, on the shoulders, and not content,
did most cruelly tetore the hairs from thy head.

5. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, all those
interior acts to wit of love of sufferance, and of resignation offering all
inholocaust, most pleasing to God thy father, in satisfaction for our enormious
sins.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus forte souls of Purgatory, all those
sharp doulours which transperced thy heart: then when in the midst of those
cruel executioners and of all thy mortal blows thou did behold the self
abandened of all thy Apostlos, for it is said then all the Disciple farsakieg
him, fledd away.

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, all those
bloody wolfes did unto thee dragging thee with cruel hands out the Garnen;
leading thee to the house of Annas, continually trampling the under there feet,
always strinking, and injuring thee, foreing thee to go on a pace; thy sacred
feet all bruised and torn in pieces.

8. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory those
incomparable distresses which thou did suffer when thou did est pais the
Torrent Cedron; which teose bloody men; made thee alone to pass. But with all
the violences and indignityes which were possible one drawing thy on one side,
and others haling thee on the other side, as well by the Chains which bound
thee in most pitiful sort, both thy arms and hands; as by those which
leaded, and cruelly tormented, thy sacred neck.

9. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
extreme contempt which thou did suffer standing upright with thy hands
bound, and thy face bent down to the carth, before that unworthy high priest,
who with a furious regard did questiou thee as if thou had bin one of thee
greatest rackhels of the world.

10. J offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory that
infamous and rude blow on the face which was giveu thee with the armed hand of
a bloody base fellow but with such force and roughnes, that thy sacred laws
all bruised sprung forth blood in great bundance.

11. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, the
tears the sighs of thy most dolorous mother the impressions which tortured
her soul when she knew that men more cruel then tigers, had like as thou
had bin one madd or frantic bound thee with cords and laden thee with Iron
Chains and all sorts of indignityes.

FOR TVESDAY.
Oblation of the doulours which Jesus suffered in the house of Caiphas the
night of is passion.
1. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory that
infamy unsupportable to al noble hearts and which thon did recerve then, when
thon were led louden with Chains more then any galley slave unto the house of
Caiphas where thou weert beheld with eyes most furiously incensed, of all thoso
infamous Magistrates when lie wolfes their sting thy most precious blood were
there assembled to attend thy comeing.

2. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory all those
false and horrible testimonys which were brought forth to take away thy honor
and thy life, but nothing could be proved because those liars were not agrecing
in themselves.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for thet souls in Purgatory that
great and profund silence which thou did keap, never opening thy most lacred
mouth to speah one sole word to defend thy self against those dake
calumniations, which they cast on thee, but did allways remain like the
peaceable and innocent lamb. in the hand of hearers.

4. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory the pain
which nas caused unto thee by those arrogant conjurements of that proud
Caiphas, to wit if thou were the Son of God, to which with all humility and
truth not to loose the respect which thou owe to thy father, thou did
answer, that in effect thou weert so, and that at the latter days, thou
sholdest come in that quality, and full of Majesty to Judge the world.

5. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory those most
injurious affronts which thou receavest, then when those rebellious spirits
having heard an answer, both so veritable and so high whereas they ought to have
adored thee, they condemned thee as a infamous blaspheamor culpable, and worthy
of a thous and deaths.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
enraged fury, with which those more then half devils after that innocent
answer of thine did set upon thee giving thee blows with there fists, and
spurves with there feet, some tearing of the hair from thy head, and pulling
of thy beard, some in one way some in an otger, injuryng thee thou never so
much as uttring one word of complaint.

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
reproach the most injurious the horror of all the angels which thou did
suffer; then when out of rage and envy bat race of devils, did most dreadfully
cast on thy divine and adorable face, there most infamous and filthy spittings;
af if they could not find a place more infamons to spitt on then on thee the
beauty of Angels o Jesus.

8. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus, for the souls of Purgatory that
other indignity which never was seen before, and which thou did suffer with
a most amorous constancy which blames and condemns the faint hartedness of the
world then when those unmercifull tormenters with an infamous base clowt, bound
thy eyes and striking thee with their fists and armed hands both on thy face,
and head; ceased not to cry out most fierely; Prophecy to us o Christ, who
strikes thee.

9. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the soul in Purgatory, that
extreme displeasure, and trouble which thou receavedst at the three denialls
of Peter thy Apostle; who swore (though forswearing himself) that he had never
known thee: yett did thou not leave notwithstanding to look on him with a
compassionat loving eye which caused him with horror to acknowledge his crime;
for which he extramly grieved all the days of his life.

10. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, all
those horride affronts which thou sustained all the rest of that pitiful
night: for affter that thou were abandoned and put into the hands of those
cruel murderers, they never ceased to lay on thee and that with horror blows
with their fists, spurns whit their feet, filthy spittings and injurious
words and most horrible blasphemies.

11. I offer to thee o most sweet Jesus, for the souls in Purgatory those most
extreme resentments which thy most dolorous Mother had; behoulding on the one
side the weakness of thy Apostles and on the other the enraged fury of people
incensed to give thee athousand affronts and as many pains and sufferings.

FOR VVENESDAY.
Oblation of the first torments which Jesus did suffer in the morning on the
day of his passion.
1. I offer unto the o most sweet Jesus forth souls of Purgatory the pain
which was caused unto thee by those three accusations as infamous as false;
which the Princes of the Jews did lay to thy charge in the presence of Pilate:
to wit that were a seducer of the world; that thou had forbidden to pay
tribute to caesar and thou did vaunt thy self, to be kind of the Jews.

2. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory thot most
profund humility letting thy self be lead as one without might or prower, all
appressed with chains and laden with dirt through the streets to be presented
to herod unto whose demands for Good reasons, thou said not one word where upon
that proud king took occasion to hold thee in contempt and to scorn and
deride thee o Jesus.

3. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
great disdain and horrible contempt which that wicked king made of thy person
ever adorable, whom he caused to be cast on thy sacred schoulders, a white
roabe; but most base, torn, and filthy. Proper for the clothing of a fool;
and also like such and one were thou made the mock and scoff of both king and
the whole court.

4. I offer unto thee o mostsweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all those
infamous beatings and scoffs, which all those people spitting in thy face,
seeing the great contempt Herod had made of thy person making thee be led back
like a man without sense or feeling to thee president Pilate; where during that
sad and painful way, thou were a new laden, both with stones and mire.

5. J offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the soul in Purgatory, all those
frightfull cries which those cruel sacrilegous men did make, demanding that
thou should be crucified, and the thief and murder Barrabas set at
liberty; crucifige, crucifige did they cry with most devilish fury.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all thee
stepps which thou did make when trailed to the place of malefactors, there
to be most cruelly rent and torn in pieces from the sol of the foot to the
crown of the head, by rodds, by chains, by the sinews of oxen and the hands
of most hellish butchers, o Jesus

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
great bashfullness, and the excessive dolor which thou diddst feel; when they
stripped thee of thy garments, and set thee naked before all the people, where
they bound the to a dreadful pillar so cruelly as that thy precious hands, did
cleave and spring forth blood.

8. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all those
horrid strokes of whipps and scourges, which those cruel hangmen like
barbarous tirants. did forge with strength of arm, and even till they wear
breathless, more fleshed theu dogs on their pray, discharged like hail stones
over all the parts of thy most precious and venerable body; which in a moment
was seen, all covered over, both with blood and wounds.

9. I offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all those
dolorous and brussed wounds, which seemed a horror to be all as one wound so
much were thou all over covered and pitifully treated, that thy wounds were
laid and heaped one upon an other o Jesus.

10. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory the
unsuppoortable excess of that dreadful Barbariousnes, then when unbound from
the Pillar thou did fall down into thy own blood, where those sacrilegious
men, more cruel then Tyres, did kiek and spurn thee with their feet; dropp of
thy blood; did lay on furyously new blows on those parts which the Pillar had a
little defended.

11. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, the
langours of thy most amiable Mother then when with eyes half open, and head
half bowed dowe, she beheld thee so barbarosly crowned, and so inhumanly rent,
and totne in piecs; that thou resemblest rather a mass or lump of fleash all
covered with blood, then like a man.

FOR THVRSDAY.
Oblation of all the doulours which Jesus suffered in his crowning with thorns.
1. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory all those
dolorous and painful faintings, which thou did feel then, when they made
thee walk in hasty paces when not withstanding through excess of a mortal
feeblenes thou scarce could go one stepp, through the court of the palace
there to be tormented most tiranically, in a fastion never more heard of, or
seen.

2. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
offront which no heart less patient then thine could have suffered then, when on
thy all toren shoulders (not less royal) they cast trough a most disdainful
contempt, a base thridbare torn and filty piece of purple.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
mortal felony, which might make both heaven and earth tremble through horror,
and the whole world weep through sorrow, when those cruel men (now even become
devils) did set, and drive in with armed fists and great stroks of stafes, a
crown of throns on thy head.

4. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory al those
most precious dropps of blood, which rann down here and there, from thy most
venerable and sacred head peirced and peirced through again on high and below
on the side and every where: thou notwithstanding all this like a most
peaceable and mourning turtle, under those mortal thorns, did not cease,
o amiable and little beloved Jesus, in our consideration to exercise interior
acts of fortitude, of love, and of patience.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
excessive submission which thou made appear then when not to refuse to bear
all the royal dressings; which Barbarousnes it self could invent; thou did
take into thy hand for septer an infamous Reed, the mark of inconstancy.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, the
extreme abasment which in this particular thou made of thy person in that
having under thy power, the Septers, and crowns, and all the estates of the
world, thou would choose for thy self, a reed, and thorns, for scepter and
crown; mark of thy greatness the most unfortunatt and unhappy estate.

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory that
incomparable patience, which thou had at the mockeryes of those hellish
people, who not content thus to have discharged, all the uttermost of there
Barbarous Tyranny, neyer ceased but scornfully putting out there toungs, and
treating thee rudely, cried out by a horrible mocquery: all hayle king of the
Jews.

8. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory that blush
hand bashfullnes and the sorrow which thou did feel then when the president
made thee to be lead in that sad aquipage most shamefully by the Chain wayed
down thy neck, to present thee before thy people; where lifting up one of the
skirts of that infamous robe and making thee turn to one side and the other;
said to all the behoulders, lo the man.

9. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatore the pain
which thou did feel and which cannot well be expressed, then when thou
did hear those unsensible hearts, like heated bulls and incensed Elephants
at the sight of thy most precious blood, to ery most fiercly, not willin not
able any longer to endure endure thee Toll; Toll: Crucifige, Crucifige.

10. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, those
mortal blows which would have shaken the strongest constancy, and which thou
did feel then when to satisfy to an enraged fury of abandoned souls, thar
perfidious and hellish President, would that thou should dye, and also of a
death which could not have bin invented but amoughst those dieulish spiritts.

11. J offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that long
and lanqiushing martyrdom which thy most afflicted mother did suffer then when
following the streets, she beheld thee to faint, and fall under the weight of
thy Cross, and at the same instant, all trembling and staggering, drawn up by
the Chains, and cords. Set upon thy feet; leaving all the stones, dyed with
thy precious blood.

FOR FRIDAY.
Oblation of the dolours which Jesus suffered in carrying his Cross to mount
Calvary.
1. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus, for the souls of Purgatory, all
those bonfyers of joy and rejoycement, which to thee could not be other then
most cruel hells, which those possesed souls did make, when they beheld thee
in their hott and furious pursuits, and torments of the Cross.

2. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the soul in Purgatory, those
black and bloody brusings which that infamous Cross most frightfully weighty,
did cause thee; when it was as rudely, as unmercifully, cast on thy shoulders,
all torn and discovered even to the bones.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory all those
excesses which were caused unto thee, by the execrable inhumanity of those
detestable wretches drawing thee to the place of torment, one haling thee on
one side, and others on the other side; striking thee with great blows of
stoffs, hastening thee to walk on a pace all dying with envy and impatience, to
see thee on the Cross.

4. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of purgatory, those
fine mortal falls which thou had under the weight of that unsupportable
burden under which thy sacred members trembled through weakness, through the
excess of the torment and all thy blessed body was so cruelly bruised and over
weighed that scarce could thou take breath.

5. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in purgatory, that
great and peaceble mildnes, which thou diddst show at those unworty and
injurious proceedings of all those desperate madd people, who to over whelme
thee with despite and opprobry, did drive thee out of the gates of their city,
did make thee march, in the midst of two infamous thieves as if thou had
bin the chief of them, or a creature unworthy of their company.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory, those
languour, those faintings and those deaths, which thou did feel; not any
more able to stand on thy feet, and much less any farther to carry that heavy
Cross; where upon they were forced nor through pity, but rather through an
excess of cruelty, for fear least thou should dye before thou wearr nailed
there on to take it of thy shouldets, and lay it with great force upon those of
gimon Cereneus: not ceasing never the less, to drive thee on forwards a pace,
with great blows of cudgells.

7. I offer unto thee o wost sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory that
drinck which those cruel men did offer thee to drinck then when all trembling
and out of breath, thou were arriyed on the height of that stinckinh
mounttaine, for fear least a mortal fainting should come to end their
execrable rage: yett would thou not take it; not willing that any part of
thy body should feel any solace in the midst of the extremity of these thy
last sufferreances.

8. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory those
incomparable torments, which thou diddst feel; then when as unworthyly, as
furiously they pulled of there garments, glwed with the congealed blood to thy
bruised and wounded fleash, which did a new open those wounds wherewith thou
were all over covered and perticularily in that of thy head by the rude moving
of the thorns, which were most deeply pierced there into.

9. I offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, the
infinirt meritts of that constant and fervent prayer, which thou made in that
manner naked, trewbling both through cold, and feebleness, and kneeling on the
ground; before that thou were so pitifully: streached forth on the venerable
Altar of the holy cross beseeching God thy father to accept of that bloody
sacrifice in favor of poor miserable humane nature.

10. J offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
mortal and uttermost cruel butehery such as the sun since the first day of
itts creation never did give light unto nor ever shall give light unto the
like, then when thy most sacred hands and thy adorable feet were pierced
thorough, (o horror) and fastened with great and rough nails, to that
mornefull wood.

11. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for souls of Purgatory those
languisking and dolours usuportable to any other which those a morous and
compassion at bowels of so dear a Mother did feel, then when she beheld her
self in thy person fastened on the Cross: the same dolours which thou did
feel during the time of that Barbarous buchery the same felt she, in her
feet, in her hands and all other parts of her body.

FOR SATURDAY.
Oblation of the dolours which Jesus. suffered hanging alive on the Cross.
1. I offer unto the o most sweet Jesus for the souls of Purgatory that which
thou did feel through all the parts of thy dying body, then when with great
have and without any pity, those men cruelly savage did lift up, and let full
from on high the Cross into the hole prepared, which caused that the thorns
hitting against the wood entered deeper into thy head and all thy wounds wear a
new opened and bled a fresh

2. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that most
cruel and most sencible marterdome which thou suffered the three last hours
which thou remained liveing and inhumanly nailed and fastened on that infamous
wood, where thy sacred bopy, all thy blood exhausted, was only sustained with
three cruel and Barbarous nails which without pity pierced through thy hands
and feett.

3. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
extreme torment which thy amorous bowalls felt then when hanging so on the
Cross the high priest with the seribes and and Phareeses ceased nor to vomitt
forth and utter a thousand horrible blassphemies a against thy goodness and
omnipotent power; without knowing never the less ho wit had on mercifully
abandoned thee in this last extremity and infameus torment.

4. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in purgatory that
miracle of love which ravished and astonished the hearts even, of men the most
Barbarous, then when most amorously forgetting those terrible and horrid
trearings of that bloody barborisme thou prayed with all loving tenderness thy
heavenly father forgive them for they know not what they do.

5. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
excessive burning thirst which extremely tormented thy blessed and precious
bowels so much as it forced thee most pitifully to cry out out, J thirst,
when those barbarous men to refresh thee, presented thee with viniger cruel
enemy to wounds which spilling all about because the sponge was with rude
violence heaved up unto thee could not but cause thee extreme pain and
dolours.

6. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all those
last amorous, languishing and dying words which thou pronounted like unto the
rest when those last pangs began to cease upon thee saying my God, my God why
have thou forsaken me, my father into thy hands J commed my spirit, and so
thou gave up the Ghost.

7. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory that most
crucell and extreme martyrdom, which never has had or ever shall have itts
like and which thy puisant hand had not hindered it, would have violently
drawn forth the soul of that incomparable mother through the excess of those
unspeakable sufferances, not being able te suffer with out dying to see thee so
nailed and hoysed up in the air, with thy face pale and black, thy cheeks
sunck in, thy lips bluish, and thy head bent dowe, render up thy Ghost
amidest thousand and thousinds mortal wounds, into the hands of thy father.

8. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, all those
dear and amorous kisses which with pierced heart thy dolorous mother gave thee
affer they had token thee down from the crossed, and that they had laid thee in
her arms now kisting one wound theu an other admiring the cruellty of men.

9. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, those
extreme displeasures, and that insupportable pain which is known to thee
alone which that mother who never had her like in sufferrances did feel, when
they took thee out of her armss, and that they took thee from her sight
cavering thee with a white linning laying thee and shutting thee fast up in a
sad sepulcher.

10. J offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the soul in Purgatory, the tear
and sighs the griefs which she had, the strife which she made to leave that
mountain and to return into Jerusalem: all the pawses, all the turnnings back
of her head which she made, toward the place of thy suffering whilst she went
on her way and before she entered into the town.

11. I offer unto thee o most sweet Jesus for the souls in Purgatory, that
perpetual remembrance which thy most holy and blessed morher had, all the rest
of hor languishing and dying life, of the whipps, of the chains, of the
thorns, of the nails, and of all those other murdering instruments which had
as uniustly as inhumanly robbed thee from her dear and compassionat eyes.

A Prayer to besayed at the end of the Prayers of each day,
o Sweet Jesus, o Jesus, o dear and loving Jesus, o sweet Virgin, o Virgin, o
Doleful Virgin: take pity and shen mercy in favor of all those long and
mortal sufferances, to the souls abandoned to the rigorous flames of
Purgatory.

THE PRAYER of the Sindon to deliver a Soul out of Purgatory.
O lord God who in the holy Sindon in which thy most sacred Body taken down
from the Cross was enwrapped by Joseph have left unto us the marks of thy
Passion grant unto us merifully that by thy death and burial we may arrive to
the Glory of thy Resurection who lives and Rain, with God world without end.
Amen.

BY adding this Prayer of the sindon every day to the other Prayers you may
every day gain a Soul out of Purgatory: and who have lesasure and devoton to
it may add this Prayer to every particular point in each day and so gain dayle
Eleaven Souls out of Purgatory.

You may apply eanh, or all to any particular Soul or Soulas as you please.


