AN ELEGY On the Death of that Eminent Minister of the Gospel MR. NATHANIEL
PARTRIDGE, Who Exchanged Mortality for Immortality, Aug. 6. (84.
Weep Sion weep thy precious Pillars fall
A Prince in thee is fallen this Funeral.
While Cater-pillers stand and strut about,
Yea fly aloft making an Hideous Rout:
Those painted Butter-flyes blast all thy Greens,
On all thy Synagogues venting their Spleens.
Twice had the Hawks upon this Partridge seizd,
And with their Talons him severely teezd.
Long did he lie in Newgate where he was
A blessing Rich to Dying Prisoners, as
He took that Season when condemnd they lay
In Irons, and on Execution Day,
Ashamed he was not of their bonds or Fetter,
To save their Souls and make their Deaths the better.
To Foreign and Domestic he was blessed,
His piercing Counsel pierced the Polish breast;
That Barbarously murderd 'Squier Thinn,
Made penitent while the Jayl was both their Inn:
To sundry Natives was this Man of God,
In Prison useful, teaching by the Rod.
Which then did justly lash, yet whipd them home,
(As was the Prodigal, in Sacred Tome)
Through this man's wise improvement from the word,
Thus in converting work he served the Lord
In Prison also, where Gods word's not bound,
As he had done when Free walking his round.
Thus like to Paul the Aged, who while Free,
Had many converts Jews and Gentiles, He
Had his Onesimus begot in Bonds,
So Partridge both while free and when Absconds,
Raises up Seed to Christ his Elder Brother,
Gentle and Simple, both come, one and other,
In at his Daily call, none could withstand,
The powerful charms of his so Heavenly Hand;
A Spiritual Father He became to many,
God sealed his Ministry as much as any.
His work God gave him in this World's now finished,
Though through Cordoliums, yet not Diminished
Shall be his wages in a better World,
Where none by Frights, by Fears, by Tears are Urld.
At the Blazing Star he blazed out and Burnd,
To New Jerusalem till Old-Street turned;
Let all His Hearers now with Sion weep,
Repent of sin, least you go down to the Deep,
Remember how this man of God did shake,
The Tree of Life until his sides did Ache,
That Golden Apples might drop down from it,
For you to gather and not wast one bite,
But feed your Souls with all to lasting bliss,
And the narrow way that leads to Life not miss.
Your Sheephard's gone, the Sheep must follow after,
From the Vale of Tears to the place of joy and laughter.
He his Hosannahs had on Earth in prayer:
But now in praise his Hallelujahs are.
Sounding aloud among the Heavenly quire,
Far sweeter than the Swan at his expire.
Or any Earthly Partridge, mounting Lark,
Shines as the Moon above the Dogs that Bark
But cannot bite this pubble Partridge, how
Pubble with grace was he, with glory now,
His Vessel's filled top full this Gospel Starr,
Shines in an higher Orb, than others far.
Quaint in his Preaching, holy in his Life,
Vrim and Thummim made a lovely strife
Which should Exceed in him, Elijahs gone,
By the Spirits Residue, Elisha shone
With doubled Gifts, oh that survivers may!
Stop up this Gap in Divine Judgments way.
EPITAPH.
Here Lies a {HI}Divine Partridge{/HI} who did Fly,
Not low as the {HI}Common{/HI} do, but {HI}Eagles{/HI} High.
Now is He flown above the Reach of All
The {HI}Hawks{/HI} and {HI}Harpyes{/HI} that make many Fall.
London, Printed by J. How, and sold by John Pattman, at the Pope's Head, in
Moor-fields, 1684. 161.


