BUCANIERS OF AMERICA.

The Second Volume.

CONTAINING The Dangerous Voyage and Bold Attempts of Captain Bartholomew
Sharp, and others; performed upon the Coasts of the South Sea, for the space of
two years, etc.

From the Original Journal of the said Voyage.

WRITTEN By Mr. BASIL RINGROSE, Gent. Who was all along present at those
Transactions.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE general Applause wherewith the History of the Bucaniers has been
rececived, could have no other effects, than easily to persuade the Pulisher of
that Piece, to undertake the Second Volume thereof. Especially considering that
the same points which deserved the Credit and Commendation of the first, did
seem to subsist for the like esteem and reception of the second. These were the
fidelity of the Relations both here and there published, the Authors having
been not only Eyewitnesses, but also Actors in the transactions they report:
the candor and sincerity of the Style; the variety and pleasantness of these
Voyages, the greatness of the Attempts here related, the unparalled, and
undaunted Courage of the Bucaniers, the strangeness of their performances, the
novelty of their Exploits; and withal, the glory and grandeur of Valor, which
here is seen to be inherent to our English Nation, and as pregnant of great
Actions in the present, as in the former Ages. Unto which points may be added,
in this Second Volume, for its recommendation, the grand discovery of a new
passage into the South Sea, beyond the Streights of Ferdinando de Magallanes
and le Maire, through an open and in no-wise dangerous Ocean, without those
formidable perils both from Rocks, Currents, and Shoals, which hitherto have
rendered the two passages aforementioned, altogether unaccessible to Trading; a
Navigation performed by Captain Sharp and his Companions, many degrees beyond
what Sir Francis Drake, Jacob le Maire, Noord, or Magallanes himself, who first
Circumnavigated the World, ever reached unto in their Sailings. This Discovery
alone, as hugely beneficial to Mankind, so may it seem sufficient of it self to
recommend this present piece unto the public, even as extremely necessary to
all such as Navigate the Ocean; and no less delightful unto those persons whose
Studys are directed to the search of Nature, to the Arts of Mathematick or
Navigation. Besides which point, both of Art, Curiosity, and Usefulness, we
have given unto us here, by Mr. Ringrose, an exact account of many places in
the South Sea; the very Draughts and Maps of many Ports, Islands, Bays, Gulfs,
Points, and Coasts, hitherto unknown to the greatest part of Europe; their
appearance at Sea; their soundings, landings, and bearings; together with what
variety of Winds and Weather, of Currents and Calms, and other Observations the
Bucaniers experimented in those parts. All which things, as they manifest unto
us the inquisitiveness of the Author, so ought we highly to applaud his
Curiosity and Genius, who all along the course of this Voyage, not only fought
with his Sword in the most desperate Engagements and Battles of the Bucaniers
against the Spaniards, but with his Pen gave us a true account of those
Transactions; and with his Pensil has delineated unto us the very Scenes of
those Tragedies. Thus we find him totally employed toward our information and
instruction at home, while he endured the greatest fatigues and hardship
abroad: at the same time making Quadrants at Sea, that others sat idle and
murmuring upon the Decks; at the same time shipwrackt, and almost naked, and
starving upon a desert Island, and yet describing, even more exactly than the
Spaniards themselves, the Gulf of Ballona, otherwise called of San Miguel,
where he was cast away. These things, I say, as they are not undeserving of the
highest praise and commendation in this ingenious Gentleman Mr. Ringrose their
Author, so shall the Curioso's of Nature and Posterity it self be his eternal
debtors for their acquaintance with these writings.

Some imperfect account of these transactions, both short and in many things
defective, I gave the last year unto the public, at the end of the second
Impression of the History of the Bucaniers. But such as that Relation was, I
had no better then to give; neither had I then seen the present Journal of Mr.
Ringrose; and that same account being received from the hands of some of the
Bucaniers themselves at Wapping, it was esteemed fit, both by me and others, to
be published at that time. But as the Author of those Papers mistrusting both
his own memory and sufficiency, remitteth himself in that Narrative unto the
Journal of Mr. Ringrose, and desires by this alone to be corrected, or
supplied either in what he was mistaken or deficient; so now this Diary being
published, I hope I have vindicated my self from any fault in History, having
brought these papers to light, by which those others were beforehand both
acknowledged and desired to be amended.

As to any other Journal of this Voyage, I shall not concern my self in the
least with their veracity, nor meddle with their Relations; knowing, that if
any other person did take it, that no person in the Voyage was so able as Mr.
Ringrose. Yet I know that diverse Narratives, in many points differing from one
another, have at several times been made public of one and the same Battle,
one and the same Siege, Voyage, Journey, or other transaction. And indeed all
humane Affairs, wheresoever reported by several persons, though all were
present at the same times and places of their circumvolution, are necessarily
subject to some diversity in the rehearsal; one person observing, omitting,
contracting, dilating, understanding, or mistaking, one particular point or
part of any transaction more than another.

Having premised thus much, I shall here only declare, that what here is
asserted, shall be supported by Mr. Ringrose himself, when ever he returns
into England; yea, and owned for truth by Captain Bartholomew Sharp, as the
chiefest actor in these Affairs, as soon as he comes home again: and if any
other person can show unto the World any Journal of the same Voyage more
complete, more exact, more elaborate, more curious, and informing, than Mr.
Ringrose has done, he shall deserve the Laurel for me.

The case being thus stated concerning the present Narrative or Journal, I hope
no person for the future will asperse or misconster the sincerity of my
Intentions, in relation to the public. This I speak under that due resentment
I ought to have, for being traduced, the last year, by some persons, who being
transported with too much passion and partiality, would have no body else to be
an admirer of the person and valorous Actions of Sir Henry Morgan, or the rest
of the Bucaniers, but themselves. As if to publish a Translation of the
unparalled Exploits of that Jamaican Hero; to give him this commendable
title; to say, that both he and his Companions had acted beyond mortal men in
America; to compare them to Alexander, Julius Caesar, and the Nine Worthies of
Fame; to propose them unto our English Nation, as the truest patterns of
undaunted and exemplary Courage, that ever it produced, were to disparage the
Conduct of Sir Henry Morgan and his Companions; as if all this were intended
only to diminish the glory of his Actions, and eclipse the splendor of his
and their valorous Triumphs. Methinks, if Envy reaches thus far, with the same
reason, or unjust measure, those persons may say, that to publish this present
Journal, is to divulge nothing else than a Satyr against Captain Sharp; and
that Mr. Ringrose who everywhere admireth his Conduct, and extolleth his
Actions unto the Sky's, yea and was present himself, and concerned in the same
Affairs, did mean nothing else than to traduce both his own and Captain Sharps
name, as infamous unto Posterity. For my part, I judge my self so far distant
from blemishing in the least, or disparaging Sir Henry Morgan, or his Heroic
Actions; that I believe I have showed my self to be the greatest admirer of his
personal Valor, and Conduct: yea, I think that I have done more, toward the
advantage, both of the Honor, and Credit of that great Commander, by
soliciting and publishing that Translation, than all the Authors of our English
Nation besides. And I could unfeignedly wish, that these persons who pretend to
be so passionate for Sir Henry Morgan, and his huge Deserts, as to Misinterpret
the sincere respects and service, I have endeavored to perform unto his
Merits, would outdo what I have already done in this particular, and give us
either a more full, exact, and true account of his Exploits, or the best
Panegyric of his Prowess, that ever was Written; and then experiment whether I
did not readily embrace the Printing such a thing at my own cost and charge,
and rather render them ten thousand thanks for his Commendations, than carp at
their Actions for Penning, or Printing the (...).

^or what if the French or Dutch Author (...) the History of the Bucaniers, did
mistake himself in two or three points, relating to Sir Henry Morgan? Must,
therefore the Publisher be blamed for faithfully Printing, what was most
faithfully Translated? Must the Saddle be set upon the wrong Horse, and the
faults of the Author, be imputed unto the Printer? Thus if Mr. Ringrose should
happen to commit any mistake in these present Papers, that blame should be
presently mine; and happy should be all Authors, if so readily their errors
could be discharged upon the Publishers. Besides, what Authors can there be
found so accurate in all things, as not to be subject now and then to some
little lapses of their Pen? Were it so in John Esquemeling; as he ought to be
pardoned for any small peccadillo not wittingly nor willingly committed,
concerning what he relates of Sir Henry Morgan, so am I hitherto persuaded,
that he never designed to offend that great person, or falsely traduce his
memory, in the least. My Argument is: because he himself had the hand of a
private Bucanier in those Affairs, he himself was a Sharer in those Bootys, an
Actor in those Enterprises, and could no more blame Sir Henry Morgan for
leading unto those Attempts, than blemish himself for following unto them.
Another Reason, even more prevalent, is, that he all along speaks more
honorably of Sir Henry Morgan, than of any other Commander of the Bucaniers,
though they were his own Countrymen, either Francis Lolonois, or Roche
Brasiliano, whereof the one was a Dutch man, and the other was born in France.
So that to say, that he represents the English Bucaniers, as the worst of
men, is plainly to forget, that he relates ten times greater villainies of his
own Nation and Country People; and that the partiality they accuse him of, if
any such can be found in that Author, is rather bent against the French and
other Nations, than the English. Does he in any place of his History, lay all
the faults and cruelties of the English Bucaniers upon Sir Henry Morgan? Or do
we believe that if committed without order, as in most Armies many things are so
done, the General or Commander in Chief, ought to be accountable for them? Or
if those things were performed by order, that the Spaniards had not deserved
them at the hands of the Bucaniers?

Ay, but he mistaketh the Pedigree of Sir Henry Morgan. Truly, a great fault,
and unpardonable in John Esquemeling, a Forreigner to our Nation, and an
illiterate Bucanier, that he should not be better read in our English History.
So did he also mistake his very name, calling him Captain John Morgan, for
Henry; but that that fault was rectified in the Translation. As if every
private Soldier ought to be thoroughly acquainted with the Christian name of
his General, and know whether he was Baptized John, or Thomas, Richard, or
William! Now what dishonor can it be reputed, unto the merits of Sir Henry
Morgan to be misrepresented by John Esquemeling, for the Son of a Rich Yeoman
in Wales, whenas at the same time he says, that he was of good quality in that
Country, even as most who bear that name in Wales are known to be? Does not all
our English Nation know the Family of the Morgans to be one of the Ancientest,
and best Qualified in all Wales, or England; and that to be descended of a rich
Yeoman of the same Family, is as great an hounour, and as honorable a
Pedigree, as any private Gentleman needs to pretend unto?

But then Sir Henry Morgan did not burn Panama. And what disgrace were it, to
that worthy person, if he had set fire unto it, for those reasons he knew best
himself? Certainly no greater dishonor than to take and plunder the said City.
Thus are these persons so far transported with passion toward Sir Henry
Morgan, as to bereave him of the glory of his greatest Actions, whether true or
false. For whether he fired the Town or not, (for that Question I shall not
make mine) this I am sure, that it was constantly so reported, and believed
here in England, viz. that the English had set fire unto it; that unto this day
the Bucaniers do believe it to be so; and consequence unto this belief Mr.
Ringrose, in these Papers says plainly in some place or other, that Panama was
once burnt by Sir Henry Morgan; that the Spaniards themselves never believed
nor reported this Fact otherwise, neither will they easily be persuaded to the
contrary unto this very day, as I am credibly informed by those persons who
lived in Spain at the same time that the news of the taking of Panama was
brought into Spain, and who have been resident there for these many years
since. For what concerns, what is now Published, that the Governor of Panama
fired the Town himself, is rather believed by the Spaniards to be a sham of the
Governors making, thereby to save his own Bacon, against whom they rail as the
greatest Coward that ever was, for deserting the Town, and flying to the
Mountains, at the approach of the English. How then, say they, could he fire it
himself, or give orders to have it fired, when we know he was upon the Spur,
thirty or forty Miles distant from thence? Had he done it, he would have set
fire unto every House, before he had left the Town, and not so many Hours after
the English were in possession of the place, and he at such a distance from it.
Thus both the English Nation, and the Spanish having agreed, to give the honor
of this Action either truly or falsely, unto Sir Henry Morgan, I cannot but
admire that those who pretend to be the greatest admirers of his merits, should
endeavor to divest him of it.

What concerns two or three points more, relating to Sir Henry Morgan in the
History of the Bucaniers, I shall not undertake to Apologize for John
Esquemeling, in case he has misrepresented them. All that I shall say, is
this, that that worthy person is not the first General or Chief Commander,
whose Actions have been misconstrued or misunderstood by the common Soldiers,
and consequently ill represented by them at home. Neither is any thing in this
World more subject to glosses, and false representations, than the Heroic
Actions of great men, by their Servants, or inferiors. If this be the case of
John Esquemeling, and that he was Male-contented whith his Fortune at Panama,
what is that to me? What fault was that of mine? In The mean while, why have not
these persons, so zealous of the honor of Sir Henry Morgan, given us the true
Journal of his huge Exploits, but rather suffer his famous Actions to lie
dormient for so many years in England, at the same time that other Nations have
Pubshed them abroad? And then why must I be blamed by these persons, his
admirers, for doing for the renown of Sir Henry Morgan what I could, if I could
not do so much, as I would willingly have done?

READER, Correct these two places thus*
PAge 1. Line 21. for plundered once, read taken once. p. 33. l. 14. blot out,
by him.

BUCANIERS OF AMERICA. The Second Volume. PART IV.
Containing the dangerous Voyage, and bold Assaults of Captain Bartholomew
Sharp, and others, performed in the South Sea, for the space of two years, etc.
CHAP. I. Captain Coxon, Sawkins, Sharp, and others, set forth in a Fleet
toward the Province of Darien, upon the Continent of America. Their designs to
pillage and plunder in those parts. Number of their Ships, and strength of
their Forces by Sea and Land.
AT a place called Boca del Toro, The place where they met together.
was the general Rendezvous of the Fleet, which lately had taken and sacked
Puerto Velo the second time; that rich place having been plundered once before,
under the Conduct of Sir Henry Morgan, as is related in the History of the
Bucaniers. At this place also were two other Vessels; the one belonging unto
Captain Peter Harris, and the other unto Captain Richard Sawkins; both
Englishmen and Privateers. Here therefore a report was made unto the Fleet, of
a Peace concluded between the Spaniards and the Indians of the Land of Darien,
who for the most part wage incessant Wars against one another. Also, that since
the conclusion of the said Peace, they had been already tried, and found very
faithful unto Captain Bournano, a French Commander, in an attempt on a certain
place called Chepo, nigh the South Sea. Further, that the Indians had promised
to conduct him unto a great and very rich place, named Tocamora: upon which he
had likewise promised them to return in three Months time with more Ships and
Men. Hereupon we all agreed to go visit the said place, and thus dispersed our
selves into several Coves, They (...) for Tocamora.
(by the Spaniards called Cuevas, or hollow creeks under the Coasts) there to
careen and fit our Vessels for that purpose. In this place Boca del Toro, we
found plenty of fat Tortoises; the pleasantest meat in the world. When we had
refitted our Vessels, we met at an Island, called by us, the Water-key; and
this was then our strength, as follows.

Tuns. Guns. Men. Captain Coxon in a Ship of 80 8 97 Captain Harris in another
of 150 25 107 Captain Bournano 90 6 86 Captain Sawkins 16 1 35 Captain Sharp 25
2 40 Captain Cook 35 00 43 Captain Alleston 18 00 24 Captain Row 20 00 25
Captain Macket 14 00 20

^hey set sail and (...) at the Zamblas.
We sailed from thence March the 23. 1679. and in our way touched at the Islands
called Zamblas. These are certain Islands reaching eight Leagues in extent, and
lying fourteen Leagues Westward of the River of Darien. Being here at an
Anchor, many of the Indians, both men and women, came to see us. Some brought
Plantans, others other Fruits, and Venison, to exchange with us for Beads,
Needles, Knives, or any trifling bauble whereof they stand in need. But what
they most chiefly covet are Axes and Hatchets to sell Timber withal. The men
here go naked, Habit of the Indians of those Isles.
as having only a sharp and hollow tip, made either of Gold, Silver, or Bark,
into which they thrust their Privy Members; the which tip they fasten with a
string about their middle. They wear as an ornament in their Noses, a golden or
silver Plate, in shape like unto a Half Moon; which when they drink, they hold
up with one hand, mean while they lift the cup with the other. They paint
themselves sometimes with streaks of black; as the women do in like manner,
with red. These have in their Noses a pretty thick ring of Gold or Silver; and
for clothing, they cover themselves with a Blanket. They are generally well
featured women: among whom I saw several fairer than the fairest of Europe,
with Hair like unto the finest flax. Of these it is reported, they can see far
better in the dark, than in the light.

These Indians misliked our design for Tocamora, They change their design of
Tocamora for another.
and dissuaded us from it, asserting it would prove too tedious a march, and
the way so mountainous, and uninhabited, that it would be extreme difficult to
get Provisions for our men. Withal, they proffered to guide us undiscryed,
within few Leagues of the City of Panama, in case we were pleased to go
thither; where we could not choose but know our selves, we should not fail of
making a good Voyage. Upon these, and other reasons which they gave us, we
concluded to desist from the Journey of Tocamora, and to proceed to Panama.
Having taken up these Resolutions, Captain Bournano and Captain Row's Vessels
separated from us, as being all French, and not willing to go to Panama, they
declaring themselves generally against a long march by Land. Thus we left them
at the Zamblas. From thence an Indian Captain, or chief Commander, They go to
the Golden Island
named Andraeas, conducted us to another Island, called by the English, the
Golden Island* situated something to the westward of the mouth of the great
River of Darien. At this Island we met, being in all seven Sail, on the third
of April, 1680.

Here at the Golden Island, the Indians gave us notice of a Town called Sancta
Maria, (...) set forth for Sancta Maria.
situate on a great River, which bears the same name, and which runs into
the South Sea, by the Gulf of San Miguel. That in the Town was kept a Garrison
of four hundred Soldiers; and that from this place much Gold was carried to
Panama, which was gathered from the Mountains thereabouts. That in case we
should not find sufficient purchase there, we might from thence proceed by Sea
to Panama, where we could not easily fail of our designs. This motion of the
Indians we liked so well, ^
that we landed three hundred and thirty one men, on April the 5th 1680.
leaving Captain Alleston, and Mackett, with a party of Seamen, to guard our
Ships in our absence; with which we intended to return home.

Their Provision and Colors
These men that were landed, had each of them three or four Cakes of Bread,
(called by the English Dough-boy's) for their provision of Victuals; and as for
drink, the Rivers afforded them enough. At that time of our Landing, Captain
Sharp was very faint and weak, as having had a great ^it of sickness lately,
which he had scarcely recovered. Our several Companies that marched, were
distinguished as follows. First, Captain Bartholomew Sharp with his Company
had a red Flag, with a bunch of white and green Ribbons. The second Division
led by Captain Richard Sawkins, with his men had a red Flag striped with
yellow. The third and fourth, which were led by Captain Peter Harris, had two
green Flags, his Company being divided into two several Divisions. The fifth
and sixth, which being led by Captain John Coxon, who had some of Alleston's
and Macketts men joined unto his, made two Divisions or Companies, had each of
them a red Flag. The seventh was led by Captain Edmond Cook with red Colors
striped with yellow, with a Hand and Sword for his devise. All, or most of
them, were Armed with Fuzee, Pistol, and Hanger.

CHAP. II. They march toward the Town of Santa Maria with design to take it.
The Indian King of Darien meets them by the way. Difficulties of this March,
with other occurrences till they arrive at the place.
BEing landed on the Coast of Darien, First days march.
and divided into Companies, as was mentioned in the preceding Chapter, we
began our march toward Santa Maria, the Indians serving us for guides in that
unknown Country. Thus we marched at first through a small skirt of a wood, and
then over a bay almost a League in length. After that, we went two Leagues
directly up a woody valley, where we saw here and there an old Plantation, and
had a very good path to march in. There we came to the side of a River, which
in most places was dry, and built us Houses, or rather Huts to lodge in.

Unto this place came unto us another Indian, An Indian Commander joyneth them.
who was a chief Commander, and a man of great parts, named Captain Antonio.
This Indian Officer encouraged us very much to undertake the Journey of Santa
Maria, and promised to be our Leader; saying, he would go along with us now,
but that his Child lay very sick. However, he was assured, it would dye by next
day; and then he would most certainly follow and overtake us. Withal, he
desired we would not lie in the grass, for fear of monstrous Adders, which are
very frequent in those places. Breaking some of the stones that lay in the
River, we found them shine with sparks of Gold. These stones are driven down
from the neighboring Mountains in time of floods. Four of their number return
back.
This day four of our men tired, and returned back unto the Ships. So we
remained in all 327 men, with six Indians to conduct us. That night some
showers of rain fell.

^
The next day of our march we mounted a very steep hill, and on the other side,
at the foot thereof, we rested on the bank of a River, which Captain Andraeas
told us, did run into the South Sea; being the same River on which the Town of
Santa Maria was situated. Hence we continued our march until noon, and then
ascended another Mountain extremely higher than the former. Here we ran much
danger oftentimes, and in many places, the Mountain being so perpendicular, and
the path so narrow, that but one man at a time could pass. We arrived by the
dark of the evening to the other side of the Mountain, and lodged again by the
side of the same River, having marched that day, according to our reckoning,
about eighteen miles. This night likewise some rain did fall.

^
The next morning, being April the 7th, we marched all along the River
aforementioned, crossing it often, almost at every half mile, sometimes up to
the knees, and at other times up to the middle, in a very swift current. About
noon we came to a place, where we found some Indian houses. Th^se were very
large and neat: the sides were built wi^h Cabbage-trees, and the roofs of wild
Canes, being, over them, (...) Darien
thatcht with Palmito Royal, but far more neater than ^urs at Jamaica. They had
many divisions into rooms, though no ascent by s^airs into Chambers. At this
place were four of these houses together, that is, within a stones throw one of
another, each of them having a large Plantane walk before it. At the distance
of half a mile from this place, lived the King or chief Captain of these
Indians of Darien, who came to visit us in Royal Robes, with his Queen and
Family. ^
His Crown was made of small white (...)* which were curiously woven, having no
other top than its lining, which was red silk. Round about the middle of it was
a thin plate of gold, more than two inches broad, ^
la^ed behind; from whence did stick two or three Ostrich feathers. About this
pla^e went also a row of golden beads, which were bigger than ordinary pease;
underneath which the red lining of the Crown was seen. In his nose he wore a
large plate of gold, in form of an half Moon; and in each ear a great golden
ring, nigh four inches in diameter, with a round thin plate of Gold of the same
breadth, having a small hole in the center, and by that hanging to the ring. He
was covered with a thin white cotton robe, reaching unto the small of his legs,
and round its bottom a fringe of the same three inches deep. So that by the
length of this Robe, our sight was impeded, that we could see no higher than
his naked Ankles. In his hand he had a long bright Lance, as sharp as any
knife. With him he had three Sons, each of them having a white Robe, and their
Lances in their hands, but standing bare-headed before him; as also were eight
or nine persons more of his Retinue, or Guard. His Queen wore a red Blanket,
Attire of the Queen.
which was closely girt about her wast: and another that came loosely over her
head and shoulders, like unto our old fashion striped hangings. She had a young
Child in her arms, and two Daughters walked by her, both Mariageable, with
their faces almost covered with stripes or streaks of red, and about their Neck
and Arms, almost laden with small Beads of several colors. These Indian women
of the Province of Darien, are generally very free, airy, and brisk; yet withal
very modest, and cautious in their Husbands presence, of whose jealousy they
stand in fear. With these Indians we made an exchange, or had a truck, as it is
called, for Knives, Pins, Needles, or any other such like trifles; but in our
dealing with them we found them to be very cunning. Here we rested our selves
for the space of one day; and withal, chose Captain Sawkins to lead the
Forlorn, unto whom, for that purpose, we gave the choice of Fourscore men. The
King ordered us each man to have three Plantans, with Sugarcanes to suck, by
way of a Present. But when these were consumed, if we would not truck we must
have starved; for the King himself did not refuse to deal for his Plantans.
This sort of Fruit is first reduced to mash, then laid between leaves of the
same tree, and so used with water; after which preparation they call it
Miscelaw.

Fourth days march.
On April the Ninth we continued our march along the banks of the River
abovementioned, finding in our way here and there a House. The owners of the
said Houses would most commonly stand at the door, and give, as we passed by,
to every one of us, either a ripe Plantane, or some sweet Cazave-root. Some of
them would count us by dropping a grain of Corn for each man that passed before
them; for they know no greater number, nor can tell no farther then Twenty.
That night we arrived at three great Indian Houses, where we took up our
Lodgings, the weather being clear and serene all night.

^
The next day Captain Sharp, Captain Coxon, and Captain Cook, with about
threescore and ten of our men, embarked themselves in fourteen Canoas upon the
River, to glide down the stream. Among this number I did also embark; and we
had in our company our Indian Captain Andraeas, of whom mention was made above;
and two Indians more in each Canoa, to Pilot or guide us down the River. But if
it was so that we were tired in traveling by Land before, certainly we were in
a worser condition now in our Canoas. For at the distance of almost every
stones cast, we were constrained to quit, and get out of our Boats, and hale
them over either Sands or Rocks: at other times over Trees that lay cross and
filled up the River, so that they hindered our Navigation; yea, several times
over the very points of Land it self. That night we built our selves Huts to
shelter in upon the River side, and rested our wearied Limbs until next morning.

^
This being come, we prosecuted our Journey all day long with the same fatigue
and toil, as we had done the day before. At night came a Tygre and looked on us
for some while, but we dared not to fire at the Animal, fearing we should be
descryed by the sound of our Fuzees: the Spaniards, as we were told, not being
at much distance from that place.

But the next day, which was April the Twelfth, Seventh day^ march.
our pain and labor was rather doubled than diminished; not only for the
difficulties of the way, which was intolerable, but chiefly for the absence of
our main body of men, from whom we had parted the day before. For now hearing
no news of them, we grew extremely jealous of the Indians and their Councels,
suspecting it a design of those people thus to divide our Forces, and then
cutting us off, betray us unto the Spaniards our implacable Enemies. That night
we rested our selves by building of Huts, as we had done, and has been
mentioned before.

On Tuesday morning, the next ensuing day, Eighth days march.
we continued our Navigation down the River, and arrived at a beachy point of
Land; at which place another Arm joyneth the same River. Here, as we
understood, the Indians of Darien did usually Rendezvous, whenever they drew
up in a Body, with intention to fight their ancient Enemies the Spaniards. Here
also we made a hault, or stayed for the rest of our Forces and Company, the
Indians having now sent to seek them, as being themselves not a little
concerned at our dissatisfaction and jealousies. In the afternoon our
Companions came up with us, and were hugely glad to see us, they having been in
no less fear for us, than we had been at the same time for them. We continued
and rested there that night also, with design to fit our Arms for action, which
now, as we were told, was nigh at hand.

We departed from thence early the next morning, Ninth days march.
which was the last day of our march, being in all now, the number of
threescore and eight Canoa's, wherein were embarked 327 of us Englishmen, and
50 Indians, who served us for Guides. Unto the point abovementioned, the
Indians had hitherto guided our Canoas with long Poles or sticks; but now we
made our selves Oars and Paddles to row withal, and thereby make what speed we
could. Thus we rowed with all have imaginable, and upon the River happened to
meet two or three Indian Canoas that were laded with Plantans. They arrive at
Santa Maria.
About midnight we arrived and landed at the distance of half a mile, more or
less, from the Town of Santa Maria, whither our march was all along intended.
The place where we landed was deeply muddy, insomuch, that we were constrained
to lay our paddles on the mud to wade upon, and withal, lift our selves up by
the boughs of the trees, to support our Bodies from sinking. Afterward we were
forced to cut our way through the woods for some space, where we took up our
Lodgings for that night, for fear of being discovered by the Enemy, unto whom
we were so nigh.

CHAP. III. They take the Town of Santa Maria with no loss of Men, and but
small purchase of what they sought for. Description of the Place, Country, and
River adjacent. They resolve to go and plunder the second time the City of
Panama.
THe next morning, which was Thursday April the Fifteenth, (...) the Town and
Fort.
about break of day, we heard from the Town a small Arm discharged, and after
that a Drum beating a travailler. With this we were roused from our sleep, and
taking up our Arms, we put our selves in order and marched toward the Town. As
soon as we came out of the Woods into the open ground, we were descryed by the
Spaniards, who had received beforehand intelligence of our coming, and were
prepared to receive us, having already conveyed away all their Treasure of
Gold, and sent it to Panama. They ran immediately into a large Palizada Fort,
having each Pale or Post twelve foot high, and began to fire very briskly at us
as we came. But our Vanguard ran up unto the place, and pulling down two or
three of their Palizadas, They take the place.
entered the Fort incontinently, and made themselves Masters thereof. In this
Action there were not fifty of our men that came up before the Fort was taken;
and on our side only two were wounded, and not one killed. Notwithstanding
within the place were found two hundred and threescore men, besides which
number, two hundred others were said to be absent, being gone up into the
Country unto the Mines to fetch down Gold, or rather to convey away what was
already in the Town. This golden Treasure comes down another branch of this
River unto Santa Maria, from the neighboring Mountains, where are thought to
be the richest Mines of the Indies, or, at least, of all these parts of the
Western World. Of the Spaniards we killed in the assault twenty six, and
wounded to the number of sixteen more. But their Governor, their Priest, and
all, or most of their chief men, made their escape by flight.

Having taken the Fort, Description of the Town.
we expected to find here a considerable Town belonging unto it. But it proved
to be only some wild houses made of Cane, the place being chiefly a Garrison
designed to keep the Indians in subjection, who bare a mortal hatred, and are
often apt to rebel against the Spaniards. But as bad a place as it was, our
fortune was much worse. For we came only three days too late, or else we had
met with three hundred weight of Gold, They miss of their design^.
which was carried thence to Panama in a Bark, that is sent from thence twice
or thrice every year, to fetch what Gold is brought to Santa Maria from the
Mountains. This River, called by the name of the Town, is hereabouts twice as
broad as the River of Thames is at London, and flows above threescore miles
upwards, rising to the height of two fathom and a half at the Town it self. As
soon as we had taken the place, the Indians who belonged to our company, and
had served us for Guides, came up unto the Town. For mean while they heard the
noise of the Guns, they were in a great consternation, and dared not approach
the Palizadas, but had hidden themselves closely in a small hollow ground,
insomuch that the bullets, while we were fighting flew over their heads.

^
Here we found and redeemed the eldest Daughter of the King of Darien, of whom
we made mention above. She had, as it should seem, been forced away from her
Fathers house by one of the Garrison, (which Rape had hugely incensed him
against the Spaniards) and was with Child by him. After the Fight the Indians
destroyed as many more of the Spaniards, as we had done in the assault, by
taking them into the adjoining Woods, and there stabbing them to death with
their Lances. But so soon as we understood this their barbarous cruelty, we
hindered them from taking any more out of the Fort, where we confined them every
one Prisoners. Captain Sawkins with a small party of ten more, ^
put himself into a Canoa, and went down the River, to pursue and stop, if it
were possible, those that had escaped, who were the chiefest of the Town and
Garrison. But now our great expectations of making an huge purchase of Gold at
this place being totally vanished, we were unwilling to come so far for
nothing, or go back empty-handed; especially, considering what vast riches were
to be had at no great distance from thence. Hereupon, we resolved to go for
Panama, which place if we could take, we were assured we should get Treasure
enough, to satisfy our hungry appetite of Gold and Riches, that City being the
receptacle of all the Plate, Jewels, and Gold that is dug out of the Mines
of all Potost and Peru. Unto this effect therefore, and to please the humors
of some of our company, we made choice of Captain Coxon to be our General, or
Commander in chief. ^
Before our departure, we sent back what small booty we had taken here by some
prisoners, and these under the charge of twelve of our men to convey it unto
the Ships.

(...) Panama.
Thus we prepared to go forward on that dangerous enterprise of Panama. But the
Indians who had conducted us having gotten from us what Knives, Sizars, Axes,
Needles, and Beads they could obtain, would not stay any longer, but all, or
the greatest part of them returned to their home. ^
Which notwithstanding, the King himself, Captain Andraeas, Captain Antonio,
the Kings Son, The chiefest remain.
called by the Spaniards, Bonete de Oro, or King Golden-cap, as also his
Kinsman, would not be persuaded by their falling off to leave us, but resolved
to go to Panama, out of the desire they had to see that place taken and sacked.
Yea, the King promised, if there should be occasion, to join fifty thousand men
unto our Forces. Besides which promises, we had also another encouragement very
considerable to undertake this journey. For the Spaniard who had forced away
the Kings Daughter, as was mentioned above, fearing lest we should leave him to
the mercy of the Indians, who would have had but little on him, having showed
themselves so cruel unto the rest of his Companions, for the safety of his life
had promised to lead us, not only into the Town, but even to the very
bedchamber door of the Governor of Panama, and that we should take him by the
hand, and seize both him and the whole City, before we should be discovered by
the Spaniards, either before or after our arrival.

CHAP. IV. The Bucaniers leave the Town of Santa Maria, and proceed by Sea to
take Panama. Extreme difficulties, with sundry accidents and dangers of that
Voyage.
HAving been in possession of the Town of Santa Maria, Their departure from
Santa Maria.
only the space of two days, we departed from thence on Saturday April the 17th
1680. We embarked all in Thirty five Canoas, and a Periagua, which we had taken
here lying at anchor before the Town. Thus we sailed, or rather rowed down the
River, in quest of the South Sea, upon which Panama is seated, toward the Gulf
of Belona, whereat we were to disembogue into that Ocean. Our prisoners, the
Spaniards, begged very earnestly they might be permitted to go with us, and not
be left abandoned unto the mercy of the Indians, who would show them no savor,
and whose cruelty they so much feared. But we had much ado to find sufficient
number of boats for our selves, the Indians that left us, had taken with them,
either by consent or stealth, so many Canoas. Yet notwithstanding they found
soon after either Bark Logs, or old Canoas, and by that means shifted so well
for their lives, as to come along with us. Before our departure we burnt both
the Fort, (...) the (...).
the Church, and the Town, which was done at the request of the King, he being
extremely incensed against it.

Misfortunes of the Author.
Among these Canoas, it was my misfortune to have one that was very heavy, and
consequently sluggish. By this means we were left behind the rest a little way,
our number being only four men, besides my self, that were embarked therein. As
the Tide fell, it left several shoals of sand naked; and hence, we not knowing
of the true Channel, amongst such variety of streams, happened to steer within a
shoal, above two mile, before we perceived our error. Hereupon, we were forced
to lie by until high water came; for to row in such heavy boats as those are
against the Tide, is a thing totally impossible. As soon as the Tide began to
turn, we rowed away in prosecution of our Voyage, and withal, made what have we
could, but all our endeavors were in vain, for we neither could find, nor
overtake our Companions. Thus about ten of the clock at night, the Tide being
low water, we stuck up an Oar in the River, and slept by turns in our Canoa,
several showers of rain falling all the night long, with which we were
thoroughly pierced to the skin.

But the next morning, no sooner day was come, when we rowed away down the
River, ^
as before, in pursuit of our people. Having gone about the space of two
Leagues, we were so fortunate as to overtake them. For they had lain that night
at an Indian Hut, or Embarcadero, that is to say, landing place, and had been
filling of water till then in the morning. Being arrived at the place, they told
us, that we must not omit to fill our Jars there with water, otherwise we
should meet with none in the space of six days time. Hereupon we went every one
of us the distance of a quarter of a mile from the Embarcadero, unto a little
Pond, to fill our water in Calabazas, making withal what have we could back
unto our Canoa. But when we returned, we found not one of our men, they all
being departed, and already got out of sight. Such is the procedure of these
wild men, that they care not in the least whom they loose of their company, or
leave behind. We were now more troubled in our minds than before, fearing lest
we should fall into the same misfortune we had so lately overcome.

Hereupon we rowed after them, as fast as we possibly could, but all in vain.
For here are found such huge numbe^s of Islands, greater and lesser, as also
Keys about the mouth of the River, that it was not difficult for us, who were
unacquainted with the River, to loose our selves a second time amongst them.
Yet notwithstanding, though with much trouble and toil, we found at last that
mouth of the River, that is called by the Spaniards, Boca chica, or the Little
mouth. But as it happened, it was now young flood, and the stream ran very
violent against us. So that though we were not above a stones cast, from the
said mouth, and this was within a League broad, yet we could not by any means
come near it. Hence we were forced to put ashore, which we did accordingly,
until the time of high water. We haled our Canoa close by the bushes, and when
we got out, we fastened our Rope unto a Tree, which the Tide had almost covered,
for it flows here nigh four fathom deep.

As soon as the Tide began to turn, we rowed away from thence unto an Island,
He is in great dangers in the Gulf.
distant about a League and an half from the mouth of the River, in the Gulf of
San Miguel. Here in the Gulf it went very hard with us, whenever any wave
dashed against the sides of our Canoa, for it was nigh twenty foot in length,
and yet not quite one foot and a half in breadth where it was at the broadest.
So that we had just room enough to sit down in her, and a little water would
easily have both filled and overwhelmed us. At the Island aforesaid, we took up
our resting place for that night, though for the loss of our company, and the
great dangers we were in, the sorrowfullest night that until then, I ever
experimented in my whole life. For it rained impetuously all night long,
insomuch that we were wet from head to foot, and had not one dry thread about
us; neither through the violence of the rain, were we able to keep any fire
burning wherewith to warm or dry us. The Tide ebbeth here a good half mile from
the mark of high water, and leaves bare wonderful high, and sharp pointed
rocks. We passed this heavy and tedious night without one sole minute of sleep,
being all very sorrowful to see our selves so far and remote from the rest of
our companions, as also totally destitute of all humane comfort. For a vast Sea
surrounded us on the one side, and the mighty power of our Enemies the
Spaniards on the other. Neither could we descry at any hand the least thing to
relieve us, all that we could see being the wide sea, high Mountains and Rocks;
mean while our selves were confined to an Egg-shell, instead of a Boat, without
so much as a few clothes to defend us from the injuries of the weather. For at
that time none of us had a shoe to our feet. We searched the whole Key, to see
if we could find any water, but found none.

CHAP. V. Shipwreck of Mr. Ringrose the Author of this Narrative. He is taken
by the Spaniards, and miraculously by them preserved. Several other accidents
and disasters which befell him after the loss of his Companions till he found
them again. Description of the Gulf of Vallona.
ON Monday April the Nineteenth, at break of day, we halled our Canoa into the
water again, They put out to Sea again in the Canoa.
and departing from the Island aforementioned: both wet and cold, as we were,
we rowed away toward the Punta de San Lorenzo, or Point St. Lawrence. In our
way we met with several Islands which lie straggling thereabouts. But now we
were again so hard put to it, by the smalness of our vessel, and being in an
open sea, that it was become the work of one man, yea sometimes of two, to cast
out the water, which came in on all sides of our Canoa. After struggling for
some while with these difficulties, as we came near unto one of those Islands,
a Sea came and overturned our Boat, And are cast away.
by which means we were all forced to swim for our lives. But we soon got unto
the Shore, and to the same place our Canoa came tumbling after us. Our Arms
were very fast lashed unto the inside of the Boat, and our Locks as well cased
and waxed down as was possible; so were also our Catouche Boxes and
powder-horns. But all our Bread and fresh water was utterly spoiled and lost.

Our Canoa being tumbled on shore by the force of the waves, our first business
was to take out and clear our Arms. Another shipwreck.
This we had scarcely done, but we saw another Canoa run the same misfortune at
a little distance to Leeward of us, amongst a great number of Rocks that
bounded the Island. The persons that were cast away proved to be six Spaniards
of the Garrison of Santa Maria, who had found an old Canoa, and had followed us
to escape the cruelty of the Indians. They presently came unto us, and made us
a fire; which being done, we got our meat and broyled it on the coals, and all
of us eat amicably together. But we stood in great need of water, or any other
drink to our Victuals, not knowing in the least where to get any. Our Canoa was
thrown up by the waves to the edge of the water, and there was no great fear of
its splitting, as being full six inches in thickness on the sides thereof. But
that in which the Spaniards came, split it self against the Rocks, as being old
and slender, into an hundred pieces. Though we were thus shipwrackt and driven
ashore, as I have related, yet otherwise, and at other times, is this Gulf of
San Miguel a mere Mill-pond for smoothness of water.

My company was now altogether for returning, and to proceed no farther, They
consult about their affair.
but rather for living amongst the Indians, in case they could not reach the
Ships we had left behind us in the Northern Sea. But with much ado I prevailed
with them to go forward at least one day longer, and in case we found not our
people the next day, that then I would be willing to do any thing which they
should think fit. Thus we spent two or three hours of the day in consulting
about our affairs, and withal keeping a man to watch and look out on all sides,
for fear of any surprizal by the Indians, or other Enemies. About the time that
we were come to a conclusion in our debates, our watchman by chance spyed an
Indian; who, as soon as he saw us, ran into the woods. I sent immediately two
of my company after him, who overtook him, and found that he was one of our
friendly Indians. Thus he carried them unto a place not far distant from
thence, where seven more of his company were, with a great Canoa which they had
brought with them. They came unto the place where I was with the rest of my
company, and seemed to be glad to meet us on that Island. I asked them by signs
for the main body of our Company; and they gave me to understand, that in case
we would go with them in their Canoa, which was much bigger than ours, we
should be up with the Party by the next morning. This news, as may easily be
supposed, not a little rejoiced our hearts.

Presently after this friendly invitation, The Author saves the lives of the
Spaniards.
they asked who the other six men were, whom they saw in our company, for they
easily perceived us not to be all of one and the same coat and lingua. We told
them they were Wankers, which is the name they commonly give unto the Spaniards
in their own Language. Their next question was, if they should kill those
Spaniards? but I answered them, No, by no means, I would not consent to have it
done. With which answer they seemed to be satisfied for that present. But a
little while after, my back being turned, my company thinking that they should
oblige thereby the Indians, beckned unto them to kill the Spaniards. With this,
the poor Creatures perceiving the danger that threatened them, made a sad shreek
and outcry, and I came time enough to save all their lives. But withal, I was
forced to give way and consent, they should have one of them, for to make him
their slave. Hereupon I gave the Canoa that I came in unto the five Spaniards
remaining, and bid them get away and shift for their lives, lest those cruel
Indians should not keep their word, and they run again the same danger they had
so lately escaped. Having sent them away, mean while I rested my self, here I
took a Survey of this Gulf, and the mouth of the River, the which I finished
the same day, and do here present unto the view of the Reader.

A Description of Laguna or Gulf of Ballona.


But now, thanks be to God, They put to sea again, and are made prisoners.
joining company with those Indians, we were got into a very large Canoa, the
which for its bigness, was better able to carry twenty men, than our own that
we had brought to carry five. The Indians had also fitted a very good Sail unto
the said Canoa; so that having now a fresh and strong gale of wind, we set sail
from thence, and made therewith brave way, to the infinite joy and comfort of
our hearts, seeing our selves so well accommodated, and so happily rid of the
miseries we but lately had endured. We had now a smooth and easy passage,
after such tedious and laboursome pains as we had sustained in coming so far
since we left Santa Maria. Under the point of St. Lawrence, mentioned above, is
a very great ripling of the Sea, occasioned by a strong current which runs
hereabouts, and which oftentimes almost filled our Boat with its dashes, as we
sailed. This evening, after our departure from the Island where we were cast
away, it rained vehemently for several hours, and the night proved to be very
dark. About nine of the clock that night we descryed two fires on the shore of
the Continent, over against us. These fires were no sooner perceived by the
Indians of our Canoa, but they began to shout for joy, and cry out, Captain
Antonio, Captain Andraeas, the names of their Indian Captains and Leaders; and
to affirm, they were assured those fires were made by their Companions. Hence
they made for the shore toward those fires, as fast as they could drive. But
so soon as our Canoa came amongst the breakers, nigh the shore, out came from
the Woods above threescore Spaniards with Clubs and other Arms, and laying hold
on our Canoa on both sides thereof, halled it out of the water quite dry. So
that by this means we were all suddenly taken and made their prisoners. I laid
hold of my Gun, thinking to make some defense for my self, but all was in vain;
for they as suddenly seized me between four or five of them, and hindered me
from action. In The mean while our Indians leaped over board, and got away very
nimbly into the Woods; my Companions standing amazed at what had happened, and
the manner of our surprizal. I asked them presently if any of them could speak
either French or English: but they answered, No. Hereupon, as well as I could,
I discoursed to some of them, who were more intelligent than the rest, in
Latin, and by degrees came to understand their condition. These were Spaniards
who had been turned here ashore by our English party, who left them upon this
Coast, left by carrying them nearer unto Panama, any of them should make their
escape, and discover our march toward that City. They had me presently after I
was taken into a small Hut which they had built, covered with boughs, and made
there great shouts for joy, because they had taken us; designing in their minds
to use us very severely for coming into those parts, and especially for taking
and plundering their Town of Santa Maria. But mean while the Captain of those
Spaniards was examining me, in came the poor Spaniard that was come along with
us, and reported how kind I had been to him, and the rest of his Companions, by
saving their Lives from the cruelty of the Indians.

They ^re ci^il^y treated and ^et at liberty.
The Captain having heard him, arose from his seat immediately and embraced me,
saying, that we Englishmen were very friendly Enemies, and good people, but
that the Indians were very Rogues, and a treacherous Nation. Withal, he desired
me to sit down by him, and to eat part of such Victuals as our Companions had
left them when they were turned ashore. Then he told me, that for the kindness
I had showed unto his Countrymen, he gave us all our Lives and Liberties, which
otherwise he would certainly have taken from us. And though he could scarcely
be persuaded in his mind to spare the Indians lives, yet for my sake he did
pardon them all, and I should have them with me, in case I could find them.
Thus he bid me likewise take my Canoa, and go in Gods name, saying withal, he
wished us as fortunate as we were generous. Hereupon I took my leave of him,
after some little stay, though he invited me to tarry all night with him. I
searched out, and at last found my Indians, who for fear had hid themselves in
the bushes adjoining to the neighboring woods, where they lay concealed.
Having found them, the Captain led me very civilly down unto the Canoa, and
bidding my Companions and the Indians get in after me; as they at first halled
us ashore, so now again they pushed us off to Sea, by a sudden and strange
vicissitude of fortune. All that night it rained very hard, as was mentioned
above; neither durst we put any more ashore at any place, it being all along
such, as by Mariners is commonly called an Iron Coast.

The next morning being come, we sailed, and padled, They overtake the rest of
the Fleet.
or rowed, till about ten of the clock. At which time we espied a Canoa making
toward us with all speed imaginable. Being come up with us, and in view, it
proved to be of our own English Company, who mistaking our Canoa for a Spanish
Periagua, was coming in all have to attack us. We were infinitely gladded to
meet them, and they presently conducted us to the rest of our Company, who were
at that instant coming from a deep Bay, which lay behind a high point of Rocks,
where they had lain at Anchor all that night and morning. We were all mutually
rejoiced to see one another again, they having given both me and my Companions
for lost.

CHAP. VI. The Bucaniers prosecute their Voyage, till they come within sight of
Panama. They take several Barks and Prisoners by the way. Are descryed by the
Spaniards before their arrival. They order the Indians to kill the Prisoners.
FRom the place where we rejoyned our English Forces, They arrive at Farol de
Plantanos.
we all made our way toward a high hammock of Land, as it appeared at a
distance, but was nothing else then an Island seven Leagues distant from the
Bay aforementioned. On the highest part of this Island the Spaniards keep a
watch, or Look-out, (for so it is termed by the Seamen) for fear of Pirates,
or other Enemies. That evening we arrived at the Island, and being landed, went
up a very steep place, till we came to a little Hut where the watchman lodged.
We took by surprizal the old man who watched in the place, but happened to see us
not, till we were got into his Plantane walk before the Lodge. He told us in
his examination, that we were not as yet descryed by the Spaniards of Panama,
or any others that he knew; which relation of the old fellow much encouraged us
to go forwards with our design of surprising that rich City. This place, if I
took its name rightly, is called Farol de Plantanos, or in English,
Plantane-watch.

The Bucaniers take a Bark of Panama.
Here, not long before it was dark that evening, a certain Bark came to an
anchor at the outward side of the Island, which instantly was descryed by us.
Hereupon, we speedily Manned out two Canoas, who went under the shore and
surprised the said Boat. Having examined the persons that were on board, we
found she had been absent the space of eight days from Panama, and had landed
Soldiers at a point of Land not far distant from this Island, with intention to
fight and curb certain Indians and Negroes, who had done much hurt in the
Country thereabouts. The Bark being taken, most of our men endeavored to get
into her, but more especially those who had the lesser Canoas. Thus there
embarked thereon to the number of one hundred thirty and seven of our company,
together with that Sea-Artist, and valiant Commander, Captain Bartholomew
Sharp. With him went also on board Captain Cook, whom we mentioned at the
beginning of this History. The remaining part of that night we lay at the Key
of the said Island, expecting to prosecute our Voyage the next day.

They take another Bark.
Morning being come, I changed my Canoa and embarked my self on another, which
though it was something lesser than the former, yet was furnished with better
company. Departing from the Island, we rowed all day long over shoal water, at
the distance of about a League from land, having sometimes not above four foot
water, and white ground. In the afternoon we descryed a Bark at sea, and
instantly gave her chase. But the Canoa wherein was Captain Harris happened to
come up the first with her, who after a sharp dispute took her. Being taken, we
put on board the said Bark thirty men. But the wind would not suffer the other
Bark in chacing to come up with us. This pursuit of the Vessel did so far
hinder us in our Voyage, and divide us asunder, that night coming on presently
after, we lost one another, and could no longer keep in a body together.
Hereupon we laid our Canoa ashore, to take up our rest for that night, at the
distance of two miles, more or less, from high water mark, and about four
Leagues to Leeward of the Island of Chepillo, unto which place our course was
then directed.

The next morning, They arrive at the Isle of Chepillo.
as soon as the water began to float us, we rowed away for the forementioned
Island Chepillo, where by assignation our general Rendezvous was to be. In our
way as we went, we espied another Bark under sail, as we had done the day
before. Capt. Coxons Canoa was now the first that came up with this vessel. But
a young breese freshning at that instant, she got away from him after the first
onset, killing in the said Canoa one Mr. Bull, and wounding two others. We
presently conjectured that this Bark would get before us unto Panama, and give
intelligence of our coming unto those of the Town; all which happened as we had
foreseen. It was that day two of the clock in the afternoon, before all our
Canoas could come together, and join one another as it was assigned at
Chepillo. They take 1^ prisoners.
We took at that Island fourteen prisoners, between Negros and Mulatos; also
great store of Plantans, and good water, together with two fat hogs. But now
believing that ere this we had been already descryed at Panama, by the Bark
aforementioned, we resolved among our selves to wast no time, but to hasten
away from the said Island, to the intent we might at least be able to surprise
and take their Shipping, and by that means make our selves masters of those
Seas, in case we could not get the Town, which now we judged almost impossible
to be done. At Chepillo we took also a Periagua, which we found at anchor
before the Island, ^
and presently we put some men on board her. Our stay here was only of few
hours; so that about four of the clock in the evening, which now was coming on,
we r^wed away from thence, designing to reach Panama before the next morning;
unto which place we had now only seven Leagues to go, it being no farther
distant from Chepillo. But before we departed from the said Island, it was
judged convenient by our Commanders, for certain reasons, which I could not
dive into, to rid their hands of the prisoners which we had taken. (...)
Indians t^ (...).
And hereupon orders were given unto our Indians, who they knew would perform
them very willingly, to fight, or rather to murder and slay the said Prisoners
upon the shore, and that in the view of the whole Fleet. This they instantly
went about to do, being glad of this opportunity to revenge their hatred
against their enemies, though in cold blood. But the prisoners, although they
had no Arms wherewith to defend themselves, forced their way through those
barbarous Indians, in spite of their Lances, Bows, and Arrows, and got into
the Woods of the Island, one only man of them being killed. We rowed all night
long, though many showers of rain ceased not to fall.

CHAP. VII. They arrive within sight of Panama. Are encountered by Three small
men of War. They fight them with only sixty eight men, and utterly defeat them,
taking two of the said Vessels. Description of that bloody fight. They take
several Ships at the Isle of Perico before Panama.
THe next morning, They come within sight of Panama.
which was on April the 23. 1680. that day being dedicated unto St. George, our
Patron of England, we came before Sunrise within view of the City of Panama,
which makes a pleasant show unto the Vessels that are at sea from off the
shore. Soon after we saw also the Ships belonging to the said City, which lay
at Anchor at an Island called Perico, distant only two Leagues from Panama. On
the aforesaid Island are to be seen several Storehouses which are built there,
to receive the Goods delivered out of the Ships. At that present there rid at
Anchor at Perico five great ships, and three pretty big Barks, called Barcos de
la Armadilla, or little men of War; the word Armadilla signifying a Little
Fleet. Are descryed by the Armadilla.
These had been suddenly Manned out, with design to fight us, and prevent any
farther attempts we should make upon the City, or Coasts of those Seas. As soon
as they espied us, they instantly weighed Anchor, and got under sail, coming
directly to meet us, whom they expected very shortly, according to the
intelligence they had received of our coming. Our two. Periaguas being heavy,
could not row so fast as we that were in the Canoas, and hence we were got
pretty far before them. In our five Canoas (for so many we were now in company)
we had only thirty six men, and these but in a very unfit condition to fight,
as being tired with so much rowing, and so few in number, in comparison of the
enemy that came against us. ^
They sailed toward us directly before the wind, insomuch that we feared lest
they should run us down before it. Hereupon we rowed up into the winds eye, as
the Seamen term it, and got close to windward of them. Mean while we were doing
this, our lesser Periagua came up with us, in which were thirty two more of our
Company. So that we were in all sixty eight men that were engaged in the fight
of that day; ^
the King himself being one of our number, who was in the Periagua
aforementioned. In the vessel that was Admiral of these three small men of war,
were fourscore and six Biscayners, who have the repute of being the best
Mariners, and also the best Soldiers amongst the Spaniards. ^
These were all Volunteers, who came designedly to show their Valor, under the
Command of Don Jacinto de Barahona, who was High Admiral of those Seas. In the
second were seventy seven Negro's, who were commanded by an old and stout
Spaniard, Native of Andalusia in Spain, named Don Francisco de Peralta. In the
third and last were sixty five Mestizos, or Mulato's, or Tawnymores, Commanded
by Don Diego de Carabaxal. So that in all they made the number of two hundred
twenty and eight men. The Commanders had strict orders given them, and their
resolutions were to give quarters to none of the Pirates or Bucaniers. But such
bloody Commands as these seldom or never do happen to prosper.

The Canoa of Captain Sawkins, and also that wherein I was, ^
were much to Leeward of the rest. So that the ship of Don Diego de Carabaxal
came between us two, and fired presently on me to Windward, and on him to
Leeward, wounding with these broad sides, four men in his Canoa, and one in
that I was in. But he paid so dear for his passage between us, that he was not
very quick in coming about again and making the same way. For we killed with
our first volly of shot, several of his men dead upon the decks. Thus we also
got to Windward, as the rest were before. At this time the Admiral of the
Armadilla, or Little Fleet, came up with us suddenly, scarce giving us time to
charge, and thinking to pass by us all with as little or less damage, as the
first of his Ships had done. But as it happened, it fell out much worse with him,
for we were so fortunate, as to kill the man at the Helm. So that his Ship ran
into the wind, and her Sails lay a back, as is usually said in Marinery. By
this means we had time to come all up under his stern, and firing continually
into his Vessel, we killed as many as came to the Helm. Besides which
slaughter, we cut asunder his main sheet and brace with our shot. At this time
the third vessel, in which Captain Peralta was, was coming up to the aid of
their General. Hereupon Captain Sawkins, who had changed his Canoa, and was
gone into the Periagua, left the Admiral to us four Canoas, (for his own was
quite disabled) and met the said Peralta. Between him and Captain Sawkins the
dispute, or fight, was very hot, lying board on board together, and both giving
and receiving death unto each other as fast as they could charge. In the mean
while that we were thus engaged, the first ship tackt about, and came up to
relieve the Admiral. But we perceiving that, and foreseeing how hard it would
go with us, if we should be beaten from the Admirals stern, determined to
prevent his design. Hereupon two of our Canoas, to wit, Captain Springers and
my own, stood off to meet him. He made up directly toward the Admiral, who
stood upon the quarter deck, waving unto him with a Handkerchief so to do But
we engaged him so closely, in the middle of his way, that had he not given us
the Helm, One of them put to flight*
and made away from us, we had certainly been on board him. We killed so many
of the men, that the vessel had scarce men enough left alive, or unwounded, to
carry her off. Yet the wind now blowing fresh, they made shift to get away from
us, and hereby save their lives.

The Vessel which was to relieve the Admiral being thus put to slight, we came
about again upon the Admiral, They take the Admiral.
and all together gave a loud hallow, which was answered by our men in the
Periagua, though at a distance from us. At that time we came so close under the
stern of the Admiral, that we wedged up the Rudder; and withal, killed both the
Admiral himself, and the chief Pilot of his ship; so that now they were almost
quite disabled and dis-heartned likewise, The Admiral and chief Pilot killed.
seeing what a bloody Massacre we had made among them with our shot. Hereupon,
two thirds of their men being killed, and many others wounded, they cried for
Quarter, which had several times been offered unto them, and as stoutly denied
until then. Captain Coxon entered on board the Admiral, and took with him
Captain Harris, who had been shot through both his Legs, as he boldly
adventured up along the side of the ship. ^
This vessel being thus taken, we put on board her also all the rest of our
wounded men, and instantly manned two of our Canoas to go and aid Captain
Sawkins, who now had been three times beaten from on board Peralta, such
valiant defense had he made. And indeed, to give our Enemies their due, no men
in the world did ever act more bravely than these Spaniards.

^
Thus coming up close under Peralta's side, we gave him a full volley of shot,
and expected to have the like return from him again. But on a sudden we saw
his men blown up that were abast the Mast; some of them falling on the deck,
and others into the Sea. This disaster was no sooner perceived by their valiant
Captain Peralta, but he leaped over board, and in spite of all our shot, got
several of them into the ship again; though he was much burnt in both his hands
himself. But as one misfortune seldom comes alone, mean while he was
recovering these men to reinforce his ship withal, and renew the fight, another
Jar of powder took fire forward, and blew up several others upon the
Fore-castle. Among this smoke, and under the opportunity thereof, Captain
Sawkins laid them on board, and took the ship. Soon after they were taken, I
went on board Captain Peralta, to see what condition they were in. And indeed,
such a miserable sight I never saw in my life. For not one man there was found,
but was either killed, desperately wounded, or horribly burnt with Powder.
Insomuch, that their black skins were turned white in several places, the
powder having torn it from their flesh and bones. Having compassionated their
misery, Horrible spectacle of the wounded.
I went afterward on board the Admiral, to observe likewise the condition of
his Ship and men. Here I saw what did merely astonish me, and will scarcely be
believed by others than our selves who saw it. There were found on board this
ship but twenty five men alive, whose number before the fight had been
fourscore and six, as was said above. So that threescore and one, out of so
small a number, were destroyed in the Battle. But what is more, of these twenty
five men, only eight were able to bear Arms, all the rest being desperately
wounded, and by their wounds totally disabled to make any resistance, or defend
themselves. Their blood ran down the decks in whole streams, and not scarce one
place in the ship was found that was free from blood.

Having possessed our selves of these two Armadilla vessels, or Little men of
War, They take the Ships in the Harbor.
Captain Sawkins asked the prisoners, how many Men there might be on board the
greatest ship that we could see from thence, lying in the Harbor of the Island
of Perico abovementioned, as also in the others that were something smaller.
Captain Peralta hearing these questions, dissuaded him as much as he could from
attempting them; saying, that in the biggest alone there were Three hundred and
fifty men, and that he would find the rest too well provided for defense
against his small number. But one of his men, who lay a dying upon the deck,
contradicted him as he was speaking, and told Captain Sawkins, there was not
one man on board any of those ships that were in view; for they had all been
taken out of them to fight us in these three vessels called the Armadilla, or
Little Fleet. Unto this relation we gave credit, as proceeding from a dying
man; and steering our course unto the Island, we went on board them, and found,
as he had said, not one person there. The biggest ship of these, which was
called La Santissima Trinidad, or the Blessed Trinity, they had set on fire,
made a hole in her, and loosened her fore-sail. But we quenched the fire with
all speed, and stopped the leak. This being done, we put our wounded men on board
her, and thus constituted her for that present to be our Hospital.

What men they lost in the ^ight.
Having surveyed our own loss and damages, we found that eighteen of our men had
been killed in the fight, and twenty two were wounded. These three Captains
against whom we fought, were esteemed by the Spaniards to be the valiantest in
all the South Seas. Neither was this reputation undeservedly conferred upon
them, as may easily be inferred from the relation we have given of this bloody
Engagement. As the third ship was running away from the fight, she met with two
more that were coming out to their assistance; but withal, gave them so little
encouragement, that they returned back, and dared not engage us. We began the
Fight about half an hour after Sunrise, and by noon had finished the Battle,
and quite overcome them. Capt. Peralta, mean while he was our Prisoner, would
often break out into admirations of our Valor, and say, surely, We Englishmen
were the valiantest men in the whole world, who designed always to fight open,
whilst all other Nations invented all the ways imaginable to barricade
themselves, and fight as close as they could. And yet notwithstanding, we
killed more of our Enemies than they of us.

Captain Harris dies.
Two days after our Engagement, we buried Captain Peter Harris, a brave and
stout Soldier, and a valiant Englishman, born in the County of Kent; whose
death we very much lamented. He dyed of the wounds he received in the Battle,
and besides him, only one man more; all the rest of our wounded men recovered.
Being now come before Panama, I here enquired of Don Francisco de Peralta, our
Prisoner, many things concerning the state and condition of this City, and the
Neighboring Country; and he satisfied me in manner following.

CHAP. VIII. Description of the State and Condition of Panama, and the parts
adjacent. What Vessels they took while they blocked up the said Port. Captain
Coxon with seventy more returns home. Sawkins is chosen in chief.
THe famous City of Panama is situate in the latitude of nine degrees North. It
stands in a deep Bay, Present state of Panama.
belonging to the South Sea. It is in form round, excepting only that part
where it runs along the Seaside. Formerly it stood four miles more Easterly,
when it was taken by Sir Henry Morgan, as is related in the History of the
Bucaniers. But by him then being burnt, and three times more since that time by
casualty, they removed it to the place where it now stands. Yet
notwithstanding, some poor people there are still inhabiting at the old Town,
and the Cathedral Church is still kept there, the beautiful building whereof
makes a fair show at a distance, like unto that of St. Paul's at London. This
new City, of which I now speak, is much bigger than the old one was, and is
built for the most part of brick, the rest being built of stone, and tiled. As
for the Churches belonging thereunto, they are not as yet finished. These are
eight in number, whereof the chiefest is called Santa Maria. The extent of the
City comprehends better than a mile and a half in length, and above a mile in
breadth. The Houses for the most part are three stories in height. It is well
walled round about, with two Gates belonging thereunto, excepting only where a
Creek comes into the City, the which at high water lets in Barks, to
furnish the Inhabitants with all sorts of Provisions and other Necessaries.
Here are always Three hundred of the Kings Soldiers to Garrison the City;
besides which number, their Militia of all colors, are one thousand one
hundred. But at the time that we arrived there, most of their Soldiers were
out of Town; insomuch, that our coming put the rest into great consternation,
they having had but one nights notice of our being in those Seas* Hence we were
induced to believe, that had we gone ashore, instead of fighting their ships,
we had certainly rendered our selves masters of the place; especially
considering, that all their chief men were on board the Ad^iral; I mean, such
as were undoubtedly the best Soldiers. Round about the City, for the space of
seven Leagues, more or less, all the adjacent Country is Savana, as they call
it in the Spanish Language, that is to say, plain and level ground, as smooth
as a sheet; for this is the signification of the word Savana. Only here and
there is to be seen a small spot of woody Land; and every where this level
ground is full of Vacadas, or Beef Stantions, where whole droves of Cows and
Oxen are kept, which serve as well as so many Look-outs, or Watch-Towers, to
descry if an Enemy is approaching by land. The ground whereon the City
stands, is very damp and moist, which renders the place but of bad repute
for the concern of health. The water is also very full of worms, and these are
much prejudicial to shipping; which is the cause that the Kings Ships lie
always at Lima, the Capital City of Peru, unless when they come down to Panama
to bring the Kings Plate; which is only at such times, as the Fleet of Galeones
comes from Old Spain to fetch and convey it thither. Here in one night after
our arrival, we found Worms of three quarters of an inch in length, both in our
Bed-cloaths and other Apparel.

Number of (...) Panama.
At the Island of Perico abovementioned, we seized in all five ships. Of
these, the first and biggest was named, as was said before, the Trinidad, and
was a great ship, of the burden of four hundred Tuns. ^
Her lading consisted of Wine, Sugar, Sweetmeats, (whereof the Spaniards in
those hot Countries make infinite use) Skins, and Soap. The second ship was of
about Three hundred Tuns burden, and not above half laded with bars of Iron,
which is one of the richest Commodities that are brought into the South Sea.
This vessel we burned with the lading in her, because the Spaniards pretended
not to want that Commodity, and therefore would not redeem it. The third was
laden with Sugar, being of the burden of one hundred and fourscore Tuns, more
or less. This vessel was given to be under the Command of Captain Cook. The
fourth was an old ship of sixty Tuns burden, which was laden with slower of
Meal. This ship we likewise burnt with her lading; esteeming both bottom and
Cargo, at that time, to be useless unto us. The fifth was a ship of Fifty Tuns,
the which, with a Periagua, Captain Coxon took along with him when he left us.

Within two or three days after our arrival at Panama, Captain Coxon mutineth,
and returns home.
Captain Coxon being much dissatisfied with some reflections which had been
made upon him by our company, determined to leave us, and return back to our
ships in the Northern Seas, by the same way he came thither. Unto this effect,
he persuaded several of our company, who sided most with him, and had had the
chiefest hand in his Election, to fall off from us, and bear him company in his
journey, or march over-land. The main cause of those reflections, was the
backwardness in the last Engagement with the Armadilla; concerning which point,
some sticked not to defame, or brand him, with the note of Cowardice. He drew
off with him, to the number of threescore and ten of our men, who all returned
back with him in the Ship and Periagua abovementioned, toward the mouth of
the River of Santa Maria. In his company also went back the Indian King,
Captain Antonio, and Don Andraeas, who being old, desired to be excused from
staying any longer with us. However, the King desired we would not be less
vigourous in annoying their enemy and ours, the Spaniards, than if he were
personally present with us. And to the intent we might see how faithfully he
did intend to deal with us, he at the same time recommended both his Son and
Nephew unto the care of Captain Sawkins* Captain Sawkins ch^sen.
who was now our newly chosen General, or Commander in chief, in the absence of
Captain Sharp. The two Armadilla Ships which we took in the Engagement we burnt
also, saving no other thing of them both, but their Rigg^ng* and Sails With
them also we burnt a small Bark, which came into the Port laden with Fowls and
Poultry*

On Sunday, which was April the 25th, Captain Sharp with his Bark and Company
came in and joined us again. ^
H^s absence was occasioned by want of water, which forced him to bear up to
the Kings Islands. Being there, he found a new Bark, (...) taken.
which he presently took, and burnt his old one. This vessel did sail
excellently well. Within a day or two after the arrival of Captain Sharp, came
in likewise the people of Captain Harris, who were still absent. These had also
taken another Bark, (...) Bark taken.
and cut down the Masts of their old one by the board, and thus without Masts
or Sails turned away the Prisoners they had taken in her. The next day we took
in like manner another Bark, A third Bark taken.
which arrived from Nata, being laden with Fowls, as before. In this Bark we
turned away all the meanest of the Prisoners we had on board us.

They go to the Isl. of Tavoga.
Having continued before Panama for the space of ten days, being employed in the
affairs aforementioned, on May the second we weighed from the Island of
Perico, and stood off to another Island, distant two Leagues farther from
thence, called Tavoga. On this Island stands a Town which bears the same
name, and consists of a hundred houses, more or less. The people of the Town
were all sled, seeing our vessels to arrive. Mean while we were here, some of
our men being drunk on shore, happened to set ^ire unto one of the Houses, the
which consumed twelve houses more before any could get ashore to quench it.
Unto this Island came several Spanish Merchants from Panama, and sold us what
Commodities we needed, buying also of us much of the goods we had taken in
their own vessels. They gave us likewise two hundred pieces of Eight for each
Negro we could spare them of such as were our prisoners. From this Island we
could easily see all the Vessels that went out, or came into the Port of
Panama; and here we took likewise several Barks that were laden with Fowls.

Eight days after our arrival at Tavoga, we took a ship that was coming from
Truxillo, and bound for Panama. A good Prize taken.
In this vessel we found two thousand Jars of Wine, fifty Jars of Gunpowder,
and fifty one thousand pieces of Eight. This money had been sent from that
City, to pay the Soldiers belonging to the Garrison of Panama. From the said
Prize we had information given us, that there was another ship coming from Lima
with one hundred thousand pieces of Eight more; which ship was to sail ten or
twelve days after them, and which they said could not be long before she
arrived at Panama. Within two days after this intelligence, Another Pri^e.
we took also another ship laden with Flower from Truxillo, belonging unto
certain Indians, Inhabitants of the same place, or thereabouts. This Prize
confirmed what the first had told us of that rich ship, and said, as the others
had done before, that she would be there in the space of eight or ten days.

Mean while we lay at Tavoga, the President, that is to say, the Governor of
Panama, A message from the President of Panama.
sent a Message by some Merchants unto us, to know what we came for into those
parts? Unto this Message Captain Sawkins made answer, That we came to assist
the King of Darien, who was the true Lord of Panama, and all the Country
thereabouts. The answer unto it.
And that since we were come so far, it was no reason but that we should have
some satisfaction. So that if he pleased to send us five hundred pieces of
Eight for each man, and one thousand for each Commander, and not any farther to
annoy the Indians, but suffer them to use their own power and liberty, as
became the true and natural Lords of the Country, that then we would desist
from all farther Hostilities, and go away peaceably; otherwise that we should
stay there, and get what we could, causing unto them what damage was possible.
By the Merchants also that went and came to Panama, we understood, there lived
then us Bishop of Panama, one who had been formerly Bishop of Santa Martha, and
who was Prisoner unto Captain Sawkins, when he took the said place about four
or five years past. The Captain having received this intelligence, sent two
loaves of Sugar unto the Bishop as a present. On the next day the Merchant who
carried them, returning to Tavoga, brought unto the Captain a golden ring for a
retaliation of said present. And withal, he brought a message to Captain
Sawkins from the President abovementioned, to know farther of him, since we
were Englishmen, from whom we had our Commission, and to whom he ought to
complain for the damages we had already done them? Unto this Message Captain
Sawkins sent back for an answer, That as yet all his company were not come
together; but that when they were come up we would come and visit him at
Panama, and bring our Commissions on the muzzles of our Guns, at which time he
should read them as plain as the flame of Gunpowder could make them.

(...) go to the (...) of Otoque.
At this Island of Tavoga, Captain Sawkins would sain have stayed longer, to
wait for the rich Ship abovementioned, that was coming from Peru; but our men
were so importunate for fresh Victuals, that no reason could rule them, nor
their own interest persuade them to any thing that might conduce unto this
purpose. Hereupon, on May the 15th we weighed Anchor, and sailed from thence
unto the Island of Otoque. Being arrived there, we lay by it, mean while our
Boat went ashore, and fetched off Fowls, and Hogs, and other things necessary
for sustenance. Here at Otoque I finished a draught, comprehending from point
Garachine, unto the Bay of Panama, etc. Of this I may dare to affirm, that it
is in general more correct and true, than any the Spaniards have themselves.
For which cause I have here inserted it, for the satisfaction of those that are
curious in such things.

From Otoque we sailed to the Island of Cayboa, And thence to Cayboa.
which is a place very famous for the fishery of Pearl thereabouts; and is at
the distance of eight Leagues from another place called Puebla Nueba, on the
Main. In our way to this Island, we lost two of our Barks, the one whereof had
fifteen men in her, and the other seven. Being arrived, we cast anchor at the
said Island.

The Bay of Panama and Gulf of Ballona


CHAP. IX. Captain Sawkins, chief Commander of the Bucaniers, is killed before
Puebla Nueba. They are repulsed from the said place. Captain Sharp chosen to be
their Leader. Many more of their company leave them, and return home over land.
MEan while we lay at Anchor before Cayboa, They land on the Continent.
our two chiefest Commanders, Captain Sawkins and Captain Sharp, taking with
them to the number of threescore men, more or less, went in the Ship of Captain
Cook unto the mouth of the River where Puebla Nueba is situated. The day of
this action, as I find it quoted in my Journal, was May 22. 1680. When they
came unto the Rivers mouth, they put themselves into Canoas, and were piloted
up the River toward the Town by a Negroe, who was one of our Prisoners. I was
chosen to be concerned in this action, but happened not to land, being commanded
to remain in Captain Cooks ship, while they went up to assault the Town. But
here at Puebla Nueba, the Inhabitants were too well provided for the reception
of our party. For at the distance of a mile below the Town, they had cut down
great Trees, and laid them cross the River, with design to hinder the ascent of
any Boats. In like manner on shore before the Town it self, they had raised
three strong breast-works, and made other things for their defense. Here
therefore Captain Sawkins running up to the breast-works, at the head of a few
men, was killed; a man who was as valiant and courageous as any could be,
Captain Sawkins killed.
and likewise next unto Captain Sharp, the best beloved of all our company, or
the most part thereof. Neither was this love undeserved by him; for we ought
justly to attribute unto him the greatest honor we gained in our Engagement
before Panama, with the Spanish Armadilla, or Little Fleet. Especially,
considering that as has been said above, Captain Sharp was by accident absent
at the time of that great and bloody fight.

We that remained behind on board the Ship of Captain Cook, Some a^count of the
River of Puebla Nueba.
carried her within the mouth of the River of Puebla Nueba, and entered close by
the East shore, which here is crowned with a round hill. Here within two stones
cast of shore, we had four fathom water. Within the Point opens a very fine
and large River, which falls from a sandy Bay, at a small distance from
thence. But as we were getting in, being strangers unto the place, we
unwittingly ran our ship on ground, nigh unto a Rock which lies on the
westward shore: for the true Channel of the said River is nearer to the East
than West shore. With Captain Sawkins, in the unfortunate assault of this
place, there dyed two men more, and three were wounded in the Retreat, which
they performed unto the Canoas in pretty good order. In their way down the
River, Captain Sharp took a Ship, (...) taken and (...).
whose lading consisted of Indigo, Otto, Manteca, or Butter and Pitch; and
likewise burnt two vessels more, as being of no value. With this he returned on
board our ships, being much troubled in his mind, and grieved for the loss of
so bold and brave a partner in his Adventures, as Sawkins had constantly showed
himself to be. His death was much lamented, and occasioned another party of our
men to mutiny, and leave us returning over land, as Captain Coxon and his
company had done before.

Three days after the death of Captain Sawkins, Captain Sharp, Sharp chosen.
who was now Commander in chief, gave the ship which he had taken in the River
of Puebla Nueba, and which was of the burden of one hundred Tuns, more or
less, unto Captain Cook, to Command and Sail in. Ordering withal, that the old
vessel which he had, should go with those men that designed to leave us; their
Mutiny, and our Distraction being now grown very high. Hereupon Captain Sharp
coming on board La Trinidad, the greatest of our ships, asked our men in full
Council, who of them were willing to go or stay, and prosecute the design
Captain Sawkins had undertaken, which was to remain in the South Sea, and there
to make a complete Voyage; after which, he intended to go home round about
America, through the Straights of Magallanes. He added withal, that he did not
as yet fear, or doubt in the least, but to make each man who should stay with
him, worth one thousand pound, by the fruits he hoped to reap of that Voyage.
All those who had remained after the departure of Captain Coxon, for love of
Captain Sawkins, and only to be in his company, and under his Conduct, thinking
thereby to make their fortunes, would stay no longer, but pressed to depart.
Among this number I acknowledge my self to have been one, Many leave them.
as being totally desirous in my mind, to quit those hazardous adventures, and
return homewards in company of those who were now going to leave us. Yet being
much afraid and averse to trust my self among wild Indians any farther, I chose
rather to stay, though unwilling, and venture on that long and dangerous
Voyage. Besides which danger of the Indians, I considered that the Rains were
now already up, and it would be hard passing so many Gullies, which of
necessity would then be full of water, and consequently create more than one
single peril unto the undertakers of that Journey. Yet notwithstanding, sixty
three men of our company were resolved to encounter all these hardships, and to
depart from us. Hereunto they took their leave of us, and returned homewards,
taking with them the Indian Kings Son, and the rest of the Indians for their
guides overland. They had, as was said above, the ship wherein Captain Cook
sailed to carry them: and out of our Provision as much as would serve for
treble their number.

Thus on the last day of May they departed, A small account of the Isle of
Cayboa.
leaving us employed about taking in water, and cutting down wood, at the
Island of Cayboa aforementioned, where this mutiny happened. Here we caught very
good Tortoise, and Red Deer. We killed also Alligators of a very large size,
some of them being above twenty foot in length. But we could not find but that
they were very fearful of a Man, and would fly from us very hastily when we
hunted them. This Island lies S. S. E. from the mouth of the River
abovementioned. On the South-East side of the Island is a shoal, or spit of
sand, which stretches it self the space of a quarter of a League into the Sea.
Here therefore, just within this shoal, we anchored in the depth of fourteen
fathom water. The Island on this side thereof makes two great Bays, in the
first of which we watered, at a certain pond not distant above the cast of a
stone up from the Bay. In this pond, as I was washing my self, and standing
under a Manzanilla-tree, a small shower of rain happened to fall on the tree, and
from thence dropped on my skin. These drops caused me to break out all over my
body into red spots, of which I was not well for the space of a week after.
Here I eat very large Oysters, ^
the biggest that ever ^eat in my life; insomuch, that I was forced to cut them
into four pieces; each quarter of them being a good mouthful.

Three days after the departure of the Mutineers, Captain Sharp ordered us to
burn the ship that hitherto had sailed in, only out of design to make use of
the Iron-work belonging to said Vessel. Withal, we put all the Flour that was
her lading into the last Prize, taken in the River of Puebla Nova; (...)
against Captain Cook.
and Captain Cook, as was said before, was ordered to command her. But the men
belonging to his company would not sail any longer under his command. Hereupon,
he quitted his vessel and came on board our Admiral, the great Ship
abovementioned, called La Trinidad, determining to rule over such unruly
company no longer. In his place was put one, ^
whose name was John Cox, an Inhabitant of New England, who forced Kindred, as
was thought, upon Captain Sharp, out of old acquaintance, in this conjuncture
of time, only to advance himself. Thus he was made, as it were, Vice Admiral
unto Captain Sharp. The next day three of our Prisoners, viz. an Indian, who
was Captain of a ship, and two Mulatos, ran away from us, and made their escape.

After this it was thought convenient to send Captain Peralta prisoner in the
Admiral, Captain Peralta removed.
on board the Ship of Mr. Cox. This was done, to the intent he might not hinder
the endeavors of Captain Juan, who was Commander of the Money-ship we took, as
was mentioned at the Island of Tavoga. For this man had now promised to do
great things for us, by Piloting and conducting us unto several places of great
Riches. But more especially to Guayaquil, where he said we might lay down our
Silver, and lade our vessels with Gold. This design was undertaken by Captain
Sawkins, and had not the head-strongness of his men brought him to the Island
of Cayboa, where he lost his life, he had certainly effected it before now.
That night we had such thunder and lightning, Great thunder.
as I never had heard before in all my life. Our Prisoners told us, that in
these parts it very often causes great damages both by Sea and Land. And my
opinion gave me to believe, that our Mainmast received some damage in this
occasion. The rainy season being now entered, the wind for the most part was at
N. W. though not without some calms.

CHAP. X. They depart from the Island of Cayboa unto the Isle of Gorgona, where
they Careen their Vessels. Description of this Isle. They resolve to go and
plunder Arica, leaving their design of Guayaquil.
HAving got in all things necessary for Navigation, They set sail from Cayboa.
we were now in a readiness to depart, on Sunday June the 6th 1680. That day we
had some rain fell, which now was very frequent in all places. About five of
the clock in the evening we set sail from the Island of Cayboa, with a small
breez, the wind being at S. S. W. Our course was E. S. by E and S. E. having
all night a very small, or little wind. The same calmness of weather continued
all the next day; insomuch, that we lay and drove only as the current horsed us
to N. W.

Little better then a calm we had also the third day of our Navigation. Mean
while a current drove us to the Westward. About Sunrising we descryed Quicara,
which at that time bore N.W. by W. from us; at the distance of five Leagues*
more or less. With the rising of the Sun an easy gale of wind sprung up, so
that at noon we had altered our bearing, which was then N. by E. being six
Leagues distant, and appearing thus, as is underneath demonstrated.

QVICARA Lat. 7 Degrees. 40. N.


These are two several Islands, whereof the least is to the Southward of the
other. Quicara (...).
The Land is a low table Land: these Islands being more than three Leagues in
length. About six of the clock that evening, we were nigh ten Leagues distant
W.S.W. from them. Much like unto the former weather we had the fourth day of
our Sailing, with little wind in the forenoon, and rather less than more in the
afternoon. I judged about the middle of the day, we were at the distance of
twenty Leagues S. S. W. from the said Islands.

Thursday June the Tenth, we had very small and variable winds. This day I
reckoned that we had made hitherto a S. by E. way, and a S. by W. from our
departure; being driven by a current, according to the observation I made, into
the Latitude of six degrees and thirty minutes.

This day we saw much Tortoise floating upon the Sea. Much Tortoise and other
fish.
Hereupon, we hoisted out our Boat, and came to one of them, who offered not to
stir until she was struck; and even then not to sink to the bottom, but rather
to swim away. The sea hereabouts is very full of several sorts of Fish, as
Dolphins, Bonitos, Albicores, Mullets, and Old Wives, etc. which came swimming
about our ship in whole shoals. The next day, which was Friday, we had likewise
very little wind; which was no more than we had all Thursday night, with some
showers of rain. That day we had an observation, which was six degrees. N.
latitude. In the evening a fresh wind came up at S. W. our course being S. S.
E. On Saturday we had in like manner, about seven in the morning, a fresh
breeze at South. So we stood W. S. W. with cloudy weather, and several showers
of rain. This day our Spanish prisoners informed us, we must not expect any
settled wind, Inconstancy of win^^.
until we came within the Latitude of three degrees. For all along the Western
shore of these seas, there is little wind; which is the cause that those ships
that go from Acapulco unto the Islands called de las Philippinas, do coast
along the shore of California, How the Spaniards go to Philippinas*
until they get into the height of forty five degrees; yea sometimes of fifty
degrees latitude. As the wind varyed, so we tacked several times, thereby to
make the best of our way that was possible to the Southward.

As our Prisoners had informed us, Great calm.
so we found it by experience. For on the next day, which was Sunday June the
13th, we had very little wind, and most commonly none, for the space of twenty
four hours. (...) we tried the current of the sea, and found it very strong to
the Eastward. The same day we had much rain, and in the afternoon a small
breeze at West, and West South West, but mostly at West. Yet notwithstanding
all this calmness of weather, the next day in the morning very early, by a
sudden gale of wind which arose, we made shift to split our main top-^ail. We
had all the night before, and that day, continual and incessant showers of
rain, and made a S. W. and by south way; seeing all along as we went a
multitude of Dolphins, Bonitos, and several other sorts of fish floating upon
those Seas, whereof in the afternoon we caught many, the weather being now
changed from stormy to calm again; ^
insomuch that we could fish as we sailed along, or rather as we lay tumbling
in the calm.

^
Tuesday June the 15th, the morning continued calm, as the day before; and this
day also we saw multitudes of fish of several sorts, whereof we caught some for
our Table as we were wont to do. By an observation which was made this day, we
found our selves to be now in the latitude of four degrees and twenty one
minutes. At this time the course of our Navigation, ^
and our whole design was to go and careen our Vessels at the Islands commonly
called by the Spaniards, de los Galapagos, that is to say, of the Tortoises,
being so denominated from the infinite number of those Animals swarming and
breeding thereabouts. These Islands are situated under the Aequinoctial Line,
at the distance of a hundred Leagues more or less from the main Continent of
America, in the South Sea. In the afternoon of this day we had a small breeze
to push us forwards.

June the 16th being Wednesday, we made our way this day, Great rains all (...).
and for the four and twenty hours last past, E.S. E. with much rain, which
ceased not to fall, as in all this Voyage, since our departure from Cayboa.
This day likewise we caught several Dolphins, and other sorts of fish. But in
the evening we had again a fresh breeze at S. by W. our course being, as was
just now said, E. S. E.

^
The next day, which was June the 17th, about five in the morning we descryed
Land, which appeared all along to be very low, and likewise full of Creeks and
Bays. We instantly asked our Pilot what Land that was before us? But he
replied, he knew it not. Hereupon, being doubtful of our condition, we called
Mr. Cox on board us, who brought Captain Peralta with him. This Gentleman being
asked, presently told us, the Land we saw was the Land of Barbacoa, being
almost a wild Country all over. Withal, he informed us, that to Leeward of us,
at the distance of ten Leagues, or thereabouts, did lie an Island called by the
name of Gorgona; the which Island, he said, The Island of Gorgona, and i^s
qualities.
the Spaniards did shun, and very seldom come nigh unto, by reason of the
incessant and continual rains there falling; scarce one day in the year being
dry at that place. Captain Sharp having heard this information of Captain
Peralta, judged the said Island might be the fittest place for our company to
careen at; considering, that if the Spaniards did not frequent it, They resolve
to careen there.
we might in all probability lie there undiscryed, and our Enemies the
Spaniards, in the mean time might think, that we were gone out of those Seas.
At this time it was, that I seriously repented my staying in the South Seas,
and that I did not return homewards in company of them that went before us. For
I knew, and could easily perceive, that by these delays the Spaniards would
gain time, and be able to send advice of our coming to every Port all along the
Coast, so that we should be prevented in all, or most of our attempts and
designs wheresoever we came. But those of our company, who had got money by the
former Prizes of this Voyage, overswayed the others who had lost all their
booty at gaming. Thus we bore away for the Island aforesaid of Gorgona, and at
the distance of six Leagues and an half, at S.W. I observed it to make the
appearance following.

GORGONA. Lat. 1.00. N.


On the main Land over against this Island of Gorgona, we were told by our
prisoners, A pla^e where Gol^ is gathered.
that up a great Laguna, or Lake, is seated an Indian Town, where they have
great quantity of sand grains of Gold. Moreover, that five days journey up a
River, belonging to the said Laguna, do dwell four Spanish Superintendents, who
have each of them the charge of overseeing fifty or sixty Indians, who are
employed in gathering that Gold which slippeth from the chief Collectors, or
finders thereof These are at least threescore and ten, or fourscore Spaniards,
with a great number of slaves belonging unto them, who dwell higher up then
these four Superintendents, at the distance of twenty five or thirty days
Journey on the said River. That once every year, at a certain season, there
comes a vessel from Lima, the Capital City of Peru, to fetch the Gold that
here is gathered; and withal, to bring unto these people such Necessaries as
they want. By Land it is nothing less than six weeks travel from thence to Lima.

The main Land to windward of this Island is very low, and full of Rivers. All
along the Coast it raineth most desperately. The Island is distant from the
Continent ^^ly the space of four Leagues. Mean while we lay at it, I took the
whole circumference thereof, which is according to what is here underneath
described.

Isla. de la Gorgona or Capt: Sharpes Isle


Captain Sharp gave unto this Island the name of Sharps Isle, by reason we
careened at this place. We anchored on the South side of the Island, at the
mouth of a very ^ine River, which there disgorgeth it self into the Sea. There
belong unto this Island about thirty Rivers and Rivolets, all which fall from
the Rocks on the several sides of the Island. The whole circumference thereof
is about three L^agues and an half round, being all high and mountainous land,
excepting only on that side where we cast Anchor. Here therefore we moored our
ship in the depth of eighteen or twenty fathom water, and began to unrig the
vessel. But we were four or five days space before we could get our Sails dry, ^
so as to be able to take them from the yards, there falling a shower of rain
almost every hour of the day and night. The main Land to the East of the
Island, and so stretching Northward, is extreme high and towering, and withal
perpetually clouded, excepting only at the rising of the Sun, at which time the
tops of those hills are clear. From the South side of this Island where we
Ankored, as was said above, we could see the low-land of the main; at least a
point thereof which lies nearest unto the Island. The appearance it makes, is
as it were of Trees growing out of the water.

Friday July the second, as we were heaving down our ship, our Mainmast happened
to crack. Hereupon our Carpenters were constrained to cut out large fishes, and
fish it, as the usual terms of that art do name the thing.

On the next day after the mischance of our Mainmast, we killed a Snake which
had fourteen inches in circumference, A (...) Snake.
and was eleven foot in length. About the distance of a League from this
Island, runs a ledge of Rocks, over which the water continually breaks;
the ledge being about two miles, more or less, in length. Had we ancho^'d but
half a mile more Northerly, we had rid in much smoother water; for here where
we were, the wind came ^n upon us in violent gusts. Mean while we were there,
from June the thirtie^h, to July the third, we had dry weather, which was
esteemed as a rarity by the Spaniards our prisoners. And every day we saw
Whales and Grampusses, Whales and Grampuss^^ at Gorgona.
who would often come and drive under our ship. We fired at them several times,
but our Bullets rebounded from their bodies. Our choice and best provisions
here, were Indian Conies, Monkeys, Snakes, Oysters, Cunks, Periwinkles, and a
few small Turtle, with some other sorts of good fish. Here in like manner we
caught a Sloth, A Sloth taken.
a beast well deserving that name, given it by the Spaniards, by whom it is
called Pereza, from the Latin word Pigritia.

At this Island dyed Josephe Gabriel, a Spaniard, Death of a Spanish prisoner.
born in Chile, who was to have been our Pilot unto Panama. He was the same man
who had stolen and married the Indian Kings Daughter, as was mentioned above.
He had all along been very true and faithful unto us, in discovering several
Plots and Conspiracies of our prisoners, either to get away or destroy us. His
death was occasioned by a Calenture, or Malignant Fever, which killed him
after three days sickness, having lain two days senceless. During the time of
our stay at this Island, we lengthned our top-sail-yards, and got up top
gallant masts; we made two stay-sails, and refitted our ship very well. But we
wanted Provisions extremely, as having nothing considerable of any sort, but
flower and water. Being almost ready to depart, Captain Sharp our Commander,
gave us to understand, They change resolution.
he had changed his resolution concerning the design of going to Guayaquil, for
he thought it would be in vain to go thither, considering, that in all this
time we must of necessity be descried before now. Yet notwithstanding he
himself before had persuaded us to stay. Being very doubtful among our selves
what course we should take, a certain old man, who had long time sailed among
the Spaniards, told us, he could carry us to a place called Arica. Unto which
Town, he said, all the Plate was brought down from Potosi, Chuquisaca, and
several other places within the Land, They d^sign for Arica.
where it was d^gged out of the Mountains and Mines. And that he doubted not,
but that we might get there of purchase at least two thousand pound every man.
For all the Plate of the South Sea lay there as it were in store; being
deposited at the said place, until such time as the ships did fetch it away.
Being moved with these reasons, and having deliberated thereupon, we resolved
in the end to go unto the said place. At this Island of Gorgona
aforementioned, we likewise took down our Round-house coach, and all the high
carved work belonging to the stern of the ship. For when we took her from the
Spaniards before Panama, she was high as any Third-Rate ship in England.

CHAP. XI. The Bucaniers depart from the Isle of Gorgona, with design to
plunder Arica. They loose one another by the way. They touch at the Isle of
Plate, or Drakes Isle, where they meet again. Description of this Isle. Some
Memoirs of Sir Francis Drake. An account of this Voyage, and the Coasts all
along. They sail as far in a fort-night, as the Spaniards usually do in three
months.
(...) Gorgona.
ON Sunday July the 25th, in the afternoon, all things being now in a readiness
for our departure, we set sail, and stood away from the Island of Gorgona, or
Sharps I^^e, with a small breez which served us at N. W. But as the S^n went
down that day, so our breez dyed away by degrees. Yet already we could begin to
experiment, that our ship sailed much better, since the taking down her round
house, and the other alterations which we made in (...).

The next day about two of the clock in the morning, we had a land breez to
help us, which lasted for the space of six hours, more or less. So that at noon
we found our selves to be five Leagues and a half distant to the South West
from Gorgona. This day the Spaniards our prisoners, told us, in common
discourse, A deep Coast.
that in most part of this low-land Coast, they find threescore fathom water.
In the afternoon we had from land a very strong breez: mean while we continued
making short trips off and in. That night we had much rain for the greatest
part of the night, which occasioned the next morning, being the third day of
our Navigation, to be very cloudy until ten of the clock. About that hour it
cleared up, and then we saw the Island of Gorgona at E. N. E. being distant
about twelve Leagues more or less from us. We had the wind all this day at S.W.
where it continued, seldom varying above two points of the Compass to the
Westwards. Night being come, about ten of the clock, Captain Sharp ordered me
to speak unto Captain Cox, and bid him go about and stand off from the shore,
for he feared least Cox should come too nigh unto it. But he replied, he knew
well, that he might stand in until two of the clock. They loose one another.
The next day very early in the morning, we saw him not, the morning being
cloudy and stark calm. Yet notwithstanding at eight of the clock it cleared up,
and neither then could we see him. From hence we concluded, and so it proved,
that we had lost him in the obscurity of the night, through his obstinacy in
standing in too long, and not coming about when we spoke unto him. Thus our
Admirals ship was left alone, and we had not the company of Captain Cox any
longer in this Voyage, till we arrived at the Isle of Plate, where we had the
good fortune to find him again, as shall be mentioned hereafter. The weather
being clear this morning, we could see Gorgona, at the distance of at least
fifteen or sixteen Leagues to the E. N. E. All this day it continued calm, till
about four in the afternoon, at which time we had a W. S. W. wind, which
continued to blow all that night.

(...) del Gall^.
Thursday July the 29th 1680. This day the wind continued pretty fresh all day
long. About four in the afternoon we came within sight of the Island del Gallo,
which I guessed to be nigh twenty eight Leagues distant from that of Gorgona,
the place of our departure S. W. It is about nine Leagues distant to East from
the Main. So that the Island with the Main Land S.W. from it appears thus.

GALLO. Lat. 2.12. N.


All this day the weather continued clear, and the wind W. S. W.

The next day being July the 30th, the wind blew very fresh and brisk;
insomuch, that we were in some fear for the heads of our low Masts, as being
very sensible that they were but weak. About three or four in the afternoon, we
saw another Island, six or seven Leagues distant from Gallo, called Gorgonilla.
^
At E. by S. from us it made the appearance which I have here adjoined. All the
Main-Land hereabouts lies very low and flat, and is in very many places
overflown and drowned every high water.

GORGONILLA.


On Saturday July the thirty first in the morning, the Island del Gallo, at
E.N.E. being distant about eight Leagues, gave us this appearance.

GALLO, Another Prospect thereof.


The point of Mangroves is a low and level point, running out S. S. W. This
day, and the night before it, we lost by our computation three Leagues of our
way. They loose wa^*
Which I believe happened, by reason we stood out too far from the Land, as
having stood off all night long.

August the first, which was Sunday, we had a very fresh wind at W. S. W. This
was joined also with several small showers of rain which fell that day. In the
mean while we got pretty well to windward with it, by making small trips to and
fro; which we performed most commonly, by standing in three glasses, and as
many out.

The next day, August the second in the morning, Land of San Tiago.
we came up unto the high-land of San Tiago, where begins the high-land of
this Coast. We kept at the distance of ten Leagues from it, and making
continual short trips, as was mentioned before. The next day likewise we
continued to do the same. But the weather was cloudy, and for the most part
full of rain.

Wednesday August the fourth, Land of San Matteo.
we continued still turning in the winds eye, as we had done for two days
before. This day in the afternoon we discovered three Hills at E. N. E. of our
ship. These Hills make the Land of San Matteo, which gives this following
appearance.

San MATTEO.


Cape St. Francis.
All the Coast along hereabouts is high land. That evening also we saw the Cape
of San Francisco. At first this Cape appeared like unto two several Islands.
But two hours after, at the distance of twelve Leagues, at S. by W. it looked
thus.

Cape of San FRANCISCO.


Thursday August the fifth, we being then about the Cape, it looked very like
unto Beachy-head in England. It is full of white Cliffs on all sides. The land
turns off here to the Eastward of the South, and makes a large and deep Bay,
the circumference whereof is full of pleasant Hills. In the bite of the Bay are
two high and rocky Islands, the which represent exactly two ships with their
Sails full. We were now come out of the rainy Countries, into a pleasant and
fair Region, where we had for the most part a clear sky, and dry weather. Only
now and then we could here find a small mist, which soon would vanish away. In
the mean while, every night a great dew used to fall, which supplied the defect
of rain.

The two next days following, we continued plying to windward with fair
weather, nothing else remarkable happening in them which might deserve any notice
to be taken thereof.

On Sunday August the eighth, we came close under a wild and mountainous
Country. This day likewise we saw Cape Passao, Cabo Passao.
at the distance of ten Leagues more or less to windward of us. Ever since we
came on this side Mangrove point, we observed a windward Current did run all
along as we sailed. Under shore the Land is full of white Cliffs and Groves;
lower toward the pitch of the Cape.

The next day we had both a fair day, and a fresh wind to help us on our
Voyage. We observed that Cape Passao makes three points, between which are two
Bays. The Leeward-most of the two, is of the length of three Leagues, and the
other of four. Adjoining to the Bays is seen a pleasant valley. Our prisoners
informed us, that Northward of these Capes live certain Indians, who sell Maiz,
and other Provisions to any ships that happen to come in there. The Cape it
self is a continued Cliff, covered with several sorts of shrubs and low bushes.
Under these Cliffs lies a sandy Bay of the depth of forty feet. The Spaniards
say, that the wind is always here between the S.S.W. and W.S.W. The Cape
represents with much likelyness the brow of an Alligator or Cayman. At South
Cape Passao appears thus.

Cape PASSAO. Lat. 1.30. S.


Tuesday August the Tenth. This morning the sky was so thick and hasey, that we
could not see the high-land; though it were just before us, and not altogether
two Leagues distant from us. But as soon as it cleared up, we stood in toward
the Land, until we came within a mile of the shore. Here having sounded, we
found seven fathom and a half water, under which was a light and clayey ground.
The Coast all along is very mountainous, and likewise full of high and towering
Cliffs. When we sounded, the Tide was almost at low water. Here it ebbeth and
flows nigh four fathom perpendicular. From this Cape the land runs along
S. E. for the space of three or four Leagues, with huge high-land Cliffs, like
unto those of Callis over against England. Being past this Cape, high-land
South from us, is Cape St. Lawrence.

August the 11th, we found our selves N. N. W. from Monte de Christo, Monte de
Christo.
being a very high and round hill. From thence to windward is seen a very
pleasant Country, with spots here and there of woody land; which causes the
Country all over to look like so many enclosures of ripe Corn fields. To
Leeward of the said Hill, the Land is all high and hilly, with white Cliffs at
the seaside. The Coast runs S. W. till it reaches unto a point of Land,
within which is the Port of Manta, as it is called. This Port of Manta, Port of
Manta
is nothing else than a settlement of Spaniards and Indians together, where
ships that want Provisions do call in, and are furnished with several
necessaries. About six or seven Leagues to windward of this Port is Cape St.
Lawrence, butting out into the Sea, being in form like unto the top of a
Church. Monte de Christo gives this appearance at Sea.

Monte de CHRISTO. Lat. 50. S.


The Cape rises higher and higher from the Port of Manta. Water-Snakes and
(...)
As we sailed along we saw multitudes of Grampusses every day; as also
Water-Snakes of diverse colors. Both the Spaniards, and Indians too are very
fearful of these Snakes, as believing there is no cure for their bitings. At
the distance of eight Leagues, or thereabouts, to Leeward of Cape St. Laurence,
it appears thus.

Cape St. LAVRENCE. Lat. 55. S.


This day before night we came within sight of Manta. Here we saw the Houses of
the Town belonging to the Port, which were not above twenty or thirty Indian
houses, lying under the windward and the Mount. We were not willing to be
descryed by the Inhabitants of the said place, and hereupon we stood off to sea
again.

On Thursday August the 12th, in the morning, we saw the Island of Plate at S.
W. at the distance of five Leagues more or less. It appeared unto us to be an
even land. Isle of Palte.
Having made this Island, we resolved to go thither and resit our rigging, and
get some Goats which there run wild up and down the Country. For as was said
before, at this time we had no other provision than flour and water. The Island
it self is indifferent high land, and off at sea, looks thus, as is here
described.

Isle of PLATE. Lat. 2.42. S.


But the high-land of Cape Passao, of which we have spoken before, Cape Passao.
at the distance of fifteen Leagues to North, gives in several hamocks this
appearance.

High-land of Cape PASSAO.


C. St. Lawrence.
The Land of Cape Lorenzo is all white Cliffs; the head of the Cape running N.
and S. This day several great Whales came up to us, and dived under our ship.
One of these Whales followed our ship, from two in the afternoon till dark
night.

(...) Captain Cox, (...).
The next morning very early, about six of the clock, we came under the
aforesaid Isle of Plate, and here unexpectedly, to our great joy, we found at
anchor the ship of Captain Cox, with his whole company, whom we had lost at sea
for the space of a whole fortnight before. We found they had reached this
Island, and had been there at an anchor four days before us, being now just
ready to depart from th^nce. About seven we came to an anchor, and then the
other vessel sent us a live Tortoise, and a Goat, to feast upon that day;
telling us withal, of great store of Tortoise to be found ashore upon the Bays;
and of much fish to be caught hereabouts. Description of the Isle of Plate
The Island is very steep on all sides; insomuch, that there is no landing, but
only on the N. E. side thereof; where is a Gully, nigh unto which we anchored
in twelve fathom water. Here at the distance of a furlong, or little more from
the shore, as you go to land, you will see on the left side hill a Cross still
standing, being there erected in former times. No Trees are to be found on the
whole Island, but only low shrubs, on which the Goats feed; which Cattle is
here very numerous. The shore is bold and hard; neither is there any water to
be found upon it, excepting only on the S. W. side of the Island, where
likewise it cannot be come at, as lying so much enclosed by the Rocks, and too
great a Sea hindering the approach unto it in boats.

This Island received it is name from Sir Francis Drake, Sir Fr. Drake,
and his famous Actions. For here it is reported by tradition, that he made the
dividend, or sharing of that vast quantity of Plate, which he took in the
Armada of this Sea, distributing it unto each man of his company by whole
bowls full. The Spaniards affirm unto this day, he took at that time twelve
score Tuns of Plate, and sixteen Bowls of Coined Money a man; his number being
then forty five men in all. Insomuch, that they were forced to heave much of it
over board, because his ship could not carry it all. Hence was this Island
called by the Spaniards themselves the Isle of Plate, from this great Dividend,
and by us Drakes Isle.

All along as we sailed, Spanish Pilot^ their ignorance.
we found the Spanish Pilots to be very ignorant of the Coasts. But they plead
thus much for their ignorance, that the Merchants their employers, either of
Mexico, Lima, Panama, or other parts, will not entrust one penny worth of Goods
on that man's Vessel that corketh her, for fear lest she should miscarry. Here
our Prisoners told us likewise, that in the time of Oliver Cromwell, or the
Commonwealth of England, A ship with money sent to King Cha^^^ the Second*
a certain ship was fitted out of Lima, with seventy brass Guns, having on
board her no less th^n thirty Millions of Dollers, or pieces of Eight. All
which vast sum of money was given by the Merchants of Lima, and sent as a
Present unto our gracious King or rather his Father) who now reigns, to
supply him in his Exile and distress. But that this great and rich ship was
lost by keeping the shore along in the Bay of Manta abovementioned, or
thereabouts. What truth there may be in this History, I cannot easily tell. At
least, it seems to me as scarce deserving any credit.

^
At this Island we took out of Mr. Cox's ship the old Moor, (for of that Nation
he was) who pretended he would be our Pilot unto Arica. This was done, lest we
should have the misfortune of loosing the company of Cox's vessel, as we had
done before, our ship being the biggest in burden, and having the greatest
number of men. Captain Peralta admired oftentimes that we were gotten so far to
windward in so little space of time; whereas they had been, he said, many times
three or four months in reaching to this distance from our departure. But their
long and tedious Voyages, he added, were occasioned by their keeping at too
great a distance from the shore. Moreover, he told us, that had we gone unto
the Islands of Galapagos, as we were once determined to do, we had met in that
Voyage with many Calms, and such Currents, that many ships have by them been
lost, and never heard of to this day. This Island of Plate is about two Leagues
in length, and very full of both deep and dangerous Bays, as also such as we
call Gully's in these parts. The circumference and description of the said
Island is exactly thus.

S^. Fran: Drakes Isle or Isla de la Plata


Great number of Tortoises and G^ats.
We caught at this Island, and salted good number of Goats and Tortoises. One
man standing here on a little Bay, in one day turned seventeen Tortoises;
besides which number our Mosquito strikers brought us in several more. Captain
Sharp our Commander showed himself very ingenious in striking them, he
performing it as well as the Tortoise strikers themselves. For these creatures
here are so little fearful, that they offer not to sink from the fishermen, but
lie still until such time as they are struck. But we experimented that the
Tortoises on this side, were not so large nor so sweet unto the taste, as those
on the North side of the Island. Of Goats we have taken, killed, and salted
above a hundred in a day, and that without any labor. In the mean while we
stayed here, we made a square main top-sail yard. We cut also six foot of our
bolt-sprit, and three foot more of our head. Most of the time that we remained
here, we had hasey weather. Only now and then the Sun would happen to break
out, and then to shine so hot, that it burnt the skin of the necks of several
of our men. As for me, my lips were burnt in such manner, that they were not
well in a whole week after.

CHAP. XII. Captain Sharp and his company depart from the Isle of Plate, in
prosecution of their Voyage toward Arica. They take two Spanish Vessels by the
way, and learn intelligence from the enemy. Eight of their company destroyed at
the Isle of Gallo. Tediousness of this Voyage, and great hardship they endured.
Description of the Coast all along, and their sailings.
HAving taken in at the Isle of Plate, They depart from the Isle of Plate.
what Provisions and other Necessaries we could get, we set sail from thence on
Tuesday the 17th of August, 1680. in prosecution of our Voyage and designs
abovementioned, to take and plunder the vastly rich Town of Arica. This day we
sailed so well, and the same we did several others afterward, that we were
forced to lie by several times, besides reising our topsails, to keep our
other ship company, least we should loose her again.

The next morning about break of day, They outsail the other Vessel.
we found our selves to be at the distance of seven or eight Leagues to the
Westward of the Island from whence we departed, standing W. by S. with a S. by
W. wind. About noon that day we had laid the land. After dinner the wind came
at S.S.W. at which time we were forced to stay more than once for the other
vessel belonging to our company.

On the following day we continued in like manner a west course all the day
long. Sometimes this day the wind would change, but then in a quarter of an
hour it would return to S.S. W. again as before. Hereabouts where we now were,
we observed great riplings of the Sea.

August the twentieth, yesterday in the afternoon about six of the clock, we
stood in S. E. But all night and all this day, we had very small winds. We
found still that we gained very much of the small ship, which did not a little
both perplex and hinder us in our course. ^


The next day likewise we stood in S. E. by S. though with very little wind,
which sometimes varyed, as was mentioned above. That day I finished two
Quadrants; each of which were two foot and a half radius. ^
Here we had in like manner, as has been mentioned on other days of our
sailings, very many Dolphins, and other sorts of fish swimming about our ship.

On the morning following we saw again the Island of Plate at NE. of our ship,
giving us this appearance at that distance of Prospect.

Isle of PLATE.


The same day at the distance of six Leagues more or (...) from the said
Island, we saw another Island, called (...)* ^
Th^s (...) lies close in by the Main-land. In the (...) we observed it to
bare E. N. E. from us. Our (...) by S. and had the wind at SW. by S. This (...)
we found that our lesser ship was full a great hindrance to our sailing, as
being forced to lie by, and stay for her two or three hours every day. We
experimented likewise, that the farther from shore we were, the less wind we
had all along; and that under the shore we were always sure of a (...) gale,
though not so favorable unto us as we could wish it to be. Hitherto we had
used to stand (...) forty Leagues, and yet notwithstanding, in the s^a^e of six
days, we had not got above ten Leagues on our voyage, from the place of our
departure.

August the twenty third, this day the wind was S. W. by S. and S. S. W. In the
morning we stood off. The Island Solango, at N.E. by N. appears thus:

Isle of SOLANGO.


At S. by W. and about six Leagues distance from us, Point St. Helen.
we descryed a long and even hill. I took it to be an Island, and conjectured
it might be at least eight Leagues distant from the Continent. But afterward
we found it was a point of Land joining unto the Main, and is called Point St.
Helena, being continued by a piece of Land which lies low, and in several
places is almost drowned from the sight; so that it cannot be seen at two
Leagues distance. In this low-land the Spaniards have convenience for making
Pitch, Tar, Salt, and some other things, for which purpose they have several
houses here, and a Friar, who serves them as their Chaplain. From the Island
of Solango, unto this place, are reckoned eleven leagues, more or less. The
Land is hereabouts indifferent high, and is likewise full of Bays. We had this
day very little wind to help us in our Voyage, excepting what blasts came now
and then in snatches. These sometimes would prove pretty fair unto us, and
allow us for some little while a South course. But our chiefest course was S.E.
by S. The point of St. Helen at South half East, and about six Leagues
distance, gives exactly this appearance as follows.

Punta de Santa HELENA.


Here we found no great current of the Sea to move any way. At the Isle of
Plata, before described, the Sea ebbeth and sloweth nigh thirteen foot
perpendicular. About four Leagues to Leeward of this Point is a deep Bay,
having a Key at the mouth of it, which takes up the better part of its
wideness. In the deepest part of the Bay on shore, we saw a great smoke, which
was at a Village belonging to the Bay; unto which place the people were removed
from the Point abovementioned. This afternoon we had a small Westerly wind,
our course being S. S. W. Hereabouts it is all along a very bold shore. At
three of the clock after noon, we tackt about to clear our selves of the Point.
^ark ^^gs.
Being now a little way without the Point, we espied a sail, which we conceived
to be a Bark. Hereupon, we hoisted out our Canoa, and sent in pursuit of her,
which made directly for the shore. But the sail proved to be nothing else, then
a pair of Bark-Logs, which arriving on shore, the men spread their sail on the
sand of the Bay to dry. At the same time there came down upon the shore an
Indian on horseback, who hallowed unto our Canoa, which had followed the Logs.
But our men fearing to discover who we were, in case they went too near the
shore, l^^t the design and returned back unto us. In these parts the Indians
have no Canoas, ^
nor any wood indeed that may be thought fit to make them of. Had we been
descryed by these poor people, they would in all probability have been very
fearful of us. But they offered not to stir, which gave us to understand, they
knew us not. We could perceive from the ship a great path leading unto the
Hills. So that we believed this place to be a look-out, or watch-place, for the
security of Guayaquil. Between four and five we doubled the point, and then we
descryed the Point Chandy, at the distance of six Leagues S. S. E. from this
point. At first sight it seemed like unto a long Island, but withal, lower then
that of St. Helena.

Tuesday August the 24th, Cox's vessel taken in a Tow.
this day at noon we took the other ship wherein Captain Cox sailed into a Tow,
she being every day a greater hinderance than before unto our Voyage. Thus
about three in the afternoon we lost sight of land, in standing over for Cape
Blanco. Here we found a strong current to move unto the S. W. The wind was at
S.W. by S. our course being S. by E. At the upper end of this Gulf, which is
framed by the two Capes aforementioned, stands the City of Guayaquil,
Guayaquil.
being a very rich place, and the Embarcadero, or Seaport unto the great City
of Quito. Unto this place likewise, many of the Merchants of Lima do usually
send the Money they design for Old Spain in Barks, and by that means save the
Custom that otherwise they should pay unto the King by carrying it on board of
the Fleet. Hither comes much Gold from Quito, and very good and strong
broad-cloath, together with Images for the use of the Churches, and several
other things of considerable value. But more especially Cacao-nut, whereof
Chocolate is made, Cacao-nut ^he best sort.
which is supposed here to be the best in the whole Universe. The Town of
Guayaquil consists of about one hundred and fifty great houses, and twice as
many little ones. This was the Town unto which Captain Sawkins intended to make
his Voyage, as was mentioned above. When ships of greater burden come into
this Gulf, they anchor without Lapina, and then put their lading into lesser
Vessels to carry it unto the Town. Toward the evening of this day, a small
breez sprung up, varying from point to point. After which, about nine of the
clock at night we tacked about, and stood off to Sea, W. by N.

A (...) taken.
As soon as we had tackt, we happened to espy a Sail N.N.E. from us. Hereupon, we
instantly cast off our other Vessel, which we had in a Tow, and stood round
about after them. We came very near unto the vessel before they saw us, by
reason of the darkness of the night. As soon as they espied us, they
immediately clapped on a wind, and sailed very well before us; insomuch, that it
was a pretty while before we could come up with them, and within call. We
halled them in Spanish, by means of an Indian prisoner, and commanded them to
lower their topsails. They answered, they would soon make us to lower our own.
Hereupon, we fired several Guns at them, and they as thick at us again with
their Harquibusses. Thus they fought us for the space of half an hour, or more,
and would have done it longer, had we not killed the man at the Helm; after
whom, none of the rest dared to be so hardy as to take his place. With another
of our shot we cut in pieces and disabled their main-top halliards. Hereupon,
they cried out for Quarter, which we gave them, and entered their ship. Being
possessed of the Vessel, we found in her five and thirty men: of which number
twenty four were Natives of Old Spain. They had one and thirty fire arms on
board the ship for their defense. They had not fought us, as they declared
afterward, but only out of a bravado, having promised on shore so to do, in
case they met us at Sea. The Captain of this Vessel was a person of Quality,
and his Brother, since the death of Don Jacinto de Barahona, killed by us in
the Engagement before Panama, was now made Admiral of the Sea Armada. With him
we took also in this Bark, five or six other persons of Quality. They did us in
this fight, though short, very great damage in our Rigging, by cutting it in
pieces. Besides which, they wounded two of our men. And a third man was wounded
by the negligence of one of our own men, occasioned by a Pistol which went off
unadvisedly. About eleven of the clock this night we stood off to the West.

The next morning about break of day, What information they had from the Prize.
we hoisted out our Canoa, and went aboard the Bark which we had taken the
night before. We transported on board our own ship more of the Prisoners taken
in the said vessel, and began to examine them, to learn what intelligence we
could from them. The Captain of the vessel, who was a very civil and meek
Gentleman, satisfied our desires in this point very exactly, saying unto us:
Gentlemen, I am now your prisoner at War by the overruling providence of
fortune; and moreover, am very well satisfied that no money whatsoever can
procure my ransom, at least for the present at your hands. Hence I am
persuaded, it is not my interest to tell you a Lie; which if I do, I desire you
to punish me as severely as you shall think fit. We heard of your taking and
destroying our Armadilla, and other ships at Panama, about six weeks after that
Engagement, by two several Barks which arrived here from thence. But they could
not inform us whether you designed to come any farther to the Southward; but
rather, desired we would send them speedily all the help by Sea that we could.
Hereupon, we sent the noise and rumor of your being in these Seas, by land
unto Lima, desiring they would expedite what succors they could send to join
with ours. We had at that time in our Harbor two or three great ships, but all
of them very unfit to sail. For this reason, at Lima, the Viceroy of Peru
pressed three great Merchant ships, into the biggest of which he put Fourteen
brass guns; into the second, Ten; and in the other Six. Unto these he added two
Barks, and put seven hundred and fifty Soldiers on board them all. Of this
number of men they landed eightscore at Point St. Helena; all the rest being
carried down to Panama, with design to fight you there. Besides these Forces,
two other men of War, bigger than the aforementioned, are still lying at Lima,
and fitting out there in all speed to follow and pursue you. One of these men
of war is equipped with thirty six brass guns, and the other with thirty. These
ships, beside their complement of seamen, have four hundred Soldiers added
unto them by the Viceroy. Another man of war belonging to this number, and
lesser than the aforementioned, is called the Patache. This ship consists of
twenty four guns, and was sent to Arica to fetch the Kings Plate from thence.
But the Viceroy having received intelligence of your exploits at Panama, sent
for this ship back from thence with such have, that they came away and left the
Money behind them. Hence the Patache now lies at the Port of Callao, ready to
sail on the first occasion, or news of your arrival thereabouts: they having
for this purpose sent unto all parts very strict orders to keep a good look-out
on all sides, and all places along the Coasts. Since this, from Manta they sent
us word, that they had seen two Ships at sea pass by that place. And from the
Goat Key also we heard, that the Indians had seen you, and that they were
assured, one of your vessels was the ship called la Trinidad, which you had
taken before Panama, as being a ship very well known in these Seas. From hence
we concluded that your design was to ply, and make your Voyage thereabouts. Now
this Bark wherein you took us prisoners being bound for Panama, the Governor
of Guayaquil sent us out before her departure, if possible to discover you.
Which if we did, we were to run the Bark on shore and get away, or else to
fight you with these Soldiers and fire arms that you see. As soon as we heard
of your being in these Seas, we built two Forts, the one of six Guns, and the
other of four, for the defense of the Town. At the last Muster taken in the
Town of Guayaquil, we had there eight hundred and fifty men, of all colors;
but when we came out, we left only two hundred men that were actually under
Arms. Thus ended the Relation of that worthy Gentleman. About noon that day we
unrigged the Bark which we had taken, and after so doing sunk her. Then we
stood S.S.E. and afterward S. by W. and S.S.W. That evening we saw Point St.
Helena at North half East, at the distance of nine Leagues more or less.

The next day, being August the 26th, in the morning we stood S. ^
That day we cried out all our pillage, and found that it amounted unto 3276
Pieces of Eight, which was accordingly divided by shares amongst us. We also
punished a Friar, Their cruelty toward a Friar.
who was Chaplain to the Bark aforementioned, and shot him upon the deck,
casting him overboard before he was dead. Such cruelties though I abhorred very
much in my heart, yet here was I forced to hold my tongue and contradict them
not, as having not authority to oversway them. About ten of the clock this
morning we saw Land again, and the Pilot said we were sixteen Leagues to
leeward of Cabo Blanco. Hereupon we stood off and in, close under the shore;
the which all appeared to be barren land.

The morning following we had very little wind; Eight of their men destroyed at
Gallo.
so that we advanced but slowly all that day. To windward of us we could
perceive the Continent to be all high land, being whitish clay, full of white
Cliffts. This morning in common discourse, our Prisoners confessed unto us, and
acknowledged the destruction of one of our little Barks, which we lost in our
way to the Island of Cayboa. They stood away, as it appeared by their
information, for the Goat-key, thinking to find us there, as having heard
Captain Sawkins say, that he would go thither. On their way they happened to fall
in with the Island of Gallo, and understanding its weakness by their Indian
Pilot, they ventured on shore, and took the place, carrying away three white
women in their company. But after a small time of Cruising, they returned again
to the aforesaid Island, where they stayed the space of two or three days:
after which time they went out to sea again. Within three or four days they
came to a little Key four Leagues distant from this Isle. But mean while they
had been out and in thus several times, one of their prisoners made his escape
unto the Main, and brought off from thence fifty men with firearms. These
placing themselves in Ambuscade, at the first volly of their shot, they killed
six of the seven men that belonged unto the Bark. The other man that was left
took quarter of the enemy; and he it was that discovered unto them our design
upon the Town of Guayaquil. By an observation which we made this day, we found
our selves to be in the latitude of 3 d. 50. S. An Embargo laid.
At this time our prisoners told us, there was an Embargo laid on all the
Spanish ships, commanding them not to stir out of the Ports, for fear of their
falling into our hands at Sea.

Saturday August the 28th, this morning we took out all the water, They (...)
Captain Cox's (...).
and most part of the flower that was in Captain Cox's vessel. The people in
like manner came on board our ship. Having done this, we made a hole in the
vessel, and left her to sink, with a small old Canoa at her stern. To Leeward
of Manta, a League from shore, in eighteen fathom water, there runs a great
current outward. About eleven in the forenoon we weighed Anchor, with a wind
at W.N. W. turning it out. Our number now in all being reckoned, we found our
selves to be one hundred and forty men, two boys, and fifty five prisoners,
being all now in one and the same bottom. Their whole number.
This day we got six or seven Leagues in the winds eye.

All the day following we had a very strong S. S. W. wind; The first place
settled in these Seas.
insomuch, that we were forced to sail with two riffs in our main-top sail, and
one also in our fore-top sail. Here Captain Peralta told us, that the first
place which the Spaniards settled in these parts, after Panama, was Tumbes, a
place that now was to Leeward of us, in this Gulf where we now were. A strange
story
That there a Priest went ashore with a Cross in his hand, while ten thousand
Indians stood gazing at him. Being landed on the strand, there came out of the
woods two Lions; that he laid the Cross gently on their backs, and they
instantly fell down and worshipped it: and moreover, that two Tigres following
them, did the same; whereby these Animals gave unto the Indians to understand
the excellency of the Christian Religion, which they soon after embraced. About
four in the evening we came abreast the Cape, which is the highest part of all.
The Land hereabouts appears to be barren and rock^y. ^aho Blanco.
At three Leagues distance East from us, the Cape showed thus:

Cape BLANCO.


Were it not for a windward Current which runs under the shore hereabouts,
it were totally impossible for any ships to get about this Cape; there being
such a great current to Leeward in the offing. In the last Bark which we took,
of which we spoke in this Chapter, we made Prisoner one Nicolas Moreno, a
Spaniard by Nation, and who was esteemed to be a very good Pilot of the South
Sea. This man did not cease continually to praise our ship for her sailing, and
especially for the alterations we had made in her. As we went along, we
observed many Bays to lie between this Cape and Point Parina, of which we shall
soon make mention hereafter.

In the night the wind came about to S. S.E. and we had a very stiff gale of
it. Point Parina.
So that by break of day the next morning, we found our selves to be about five
Leagues distance to windward of the Cape before mentioned. The Land hereabouts
makes three or four several Bays, and grows lower and lower, by how much the
nigher we come unto Punta Parina. This Point shows it self at first sight
thereof like unto two Islands. Between four and five of the clock that evening,
we were West from the said Point.

The next day likewise, being the last day of August, the wind still continued
S. S. E. as it had done the whole day before. This day we thought it convenient
to stand farther out to sea, for fear of being descryed at Paita, Paita.
which now was not very far distant fromus. The morning proved to be hasey. But
about eleven we espied a Sail, which stood then just as we did, E. by S. Coming
nearer unto it, by degrees we found her to be nothing else than a pair of
Bark-logs under a sail, which were going that way. Our Pilot advised us not to
meddle with those Logs, nor mind them in the least, ^
for it was very doubtful whether we should be able to come up with them or
not; and then by giving chase unto them, we should easily be descryed and known
to be the English Pirates, as they called us. These Bark-logs sail excellently
well for the most part, and some of them are of such a bigness, that they will
carry two hundred and fifty packs of Meal from the Valleys unto Panama, without
wetting any of it. This day by an observation made, we found our selves to be
in four degrees fifty five Latitude South. Point Parina at N.E. by E. and at
the distance of six Leagues more or less, gives this following appearance.

Punta PARINA.


At the same time la Silla de Paita bore from us S.E. by E. being distant only
seven or eight Leagues. It had the form of a high Mountain, and appeared thus
unto us.

La Silla de PAITA.


The Town of Paita it self is situated in a deep Bay, about two Leagues to
Leeward of this Hill. It serves for an Embarcadero, or Port Town, unto another
great place which is distant from thence about thirteen Leagues higher in the
Country, and is called Piura, being seated in a very barren Country. Piura.


On Wednesday the first of September, our course was S. by W. The midnight
before this day we had a land-wind that sprung up. In the afternoon La Silla de
Paita, at the distance of seven Leagues, at E. by N. appears thus.

La Silla de PAITA.


All along hereabouts is nothing but barren land, as was said before.
Hereabouts likewise for three or four days last past, we observed along the
Coasts many Seals.

That night as we sailed, we saw something that appeared unto us to be as it
were a light. And the next morning we espied a sail, A Pri^e (...).
from whence we judged the light had come. The vessel was at the distance of
six Leagues from us, in the winds eye, and thereupon we gave her chase. She
stood to windward as we did. This day we had an observation, which gave us the
Lat. 5 d. 30 S. At night we were about four Leagues to Leeward of her; but so
great a Mist fell, that we suddenly lost sight of her. At this time the
weather was as cold with us as in England in November. Every time we went about
with our ship, the other did the like. ^
Our Pilot told us, that this ship set forth from Guayaquil eleven days before
they were taken. And that she was laden with Rigging, Woollen, and Cotton
Cloth, and other Manufactures made at Quito. Moreover, that he had heard that
they had spent a Mast, and had put into Paita to resit it.

The night following; they showed us several lights through their negligence,
which they ought not to have done, for by that means we steered directly after
them. The next morning she was more than three Leagues in the winds eye distant
from us. Had they suspected us, it could not be doubted, but they would have
made away toward the Land; but they seemed not to fly nor stir for our chase.
The Land here all along is level, and not very high. The weather was hasey, so
that about eleven of the clock that morning we lost sight of her. At this time
we had been for the space of a whole week, ^
at an allowance of only two draughts of water each day, so scarce were
Provisions with us. That afternoon we saw the vessel again, and at night we
were not full two Leagues distant from her, and not more than half a League to
Leeward. We made short trips all the night long.

On Saturday, September the Fourth, about break of day, we saw the ship again,
at the distance of a League, more or less, and not above a mile to windward of
us. They stood out as soon as they espied us, and we stood directly after them.
Having pursued them for several hours, about four of the clock in the
Afternoon, we came up within the distance of half our small Arms shot, to
windward of them. Hereupon they perceiving who we were, presently lowered all
their Sails at once, and we cast dice among our selves for the first entrance.
The lot sell to larboard; so that twenty men belonging to that watch, entered
her. In the Vessel were found Fifty packs of Cacao-nut, such as Chocolate is
made of, many packs of Raw-silk, Indian cloth, The Prize taken.
and Thred-stockings; these things being the principal part of her Cargo. We
stood out S. W. by S. all the night following.

The next day being come, we transported on board our ship the chiefest part of
her lading. In her hold we found some Rigging, as had been told us by Nicholas
Moreno our Pilot, taken in the former Vessel off of Guayaquil: but the greatest
part of the Hold was full of Timber. We took out of her also some Osenbriggs,
of which we made Top-gallant sails, as shall be said hereafter. It was now
nineteen days, as they told us, since they set sail from Guyaquil; and then
they had only heard there of our Exploits before Panama, but did not so much
as think of our coming so far to the Southward, which did not give them the
least suspicion of us, though they had seen us for the space of two or three
days before at Sea, and always steering after them; otherwise they had made for
the land, and endeavored to escape our hands.

The next morning likewise we continued to take in the remaining part of what
goods we desired out of our Prize. They turn away many prisoners.
When we had done, we sent most of our Prisoners on board the said vessel, and
left only their sore-mast standing, all the rest being cut down by the board.
We gave them a fore-sail to sail withal; all their own water, and some of our
flour to serve them for Provisions; and thus we turned them away, as not caring
to be troubled or encumbred with too many of their company. Notwithstanding we
detained still several of the chiefest of our prisoners. Such were Don Thomas
de Argandona, who was Commander of the vessel taken before Guayaquil; Don
Christoval, and Don Baltazar, both Gentlemen of Quality taken with him; Captain
Peralta, Captain Juan Moreno, the Pilot, and twelve slaves, of whom we intended
to make good use, to do the drudgery of our ship. At this time I reckoned that
we were about the distance of thirty five Leagues, little more or less from
Land. Moreover, by an observation made this day, we found Lat. 7. d. 1. S. Our
plunder being over, and our Prize turned away, we sold both Chests, Boxes, and
several other things at the Mast, by the voice of a Crier.

On the following day we stood S. S. W. and S. W. by S. all day long. One of
their company dies
That day one of our company dyed, named Robert Montgomery, being the same man
who was shot by the negligence of one of our own men with a Pistol through the
leg, at the taking of the vessel before Guayaquil, as was mentioned above. We
had an observation also this day, by which we now found Lat. 7. d. 26. S. On
the same day likewise we made a dividend, and shared all the booty taken in the
last Prize. They make a ^i^idend.
This being done, we hoisted into our ship the Lanch which we had taken in her,
as being useful unto us. All these days last past, it was observed, An
observatio^ of these S^as.
that we had every morning a dark cloud in the sky; the which in the North Sea
would certainly foretell a storm; but here it always blew over.

Wednesday September the eighth in the morning, we threw our dead man
abovementioned into the Sea, They (...) at Sea.
and gave him three French Volleys for his Funeral-Ceremony. In the night
before this day, we saw a light belonging to some vessel at sea. But we stood
away from it, as not desiring to see any more sails to hinder us in our voyage
toward Arica, whither now we were designed. This Light was undoubtedly from
some ship to Leeward of us; but on the next morning we could descry no sail.
Here I judged we had made a S. W. by S. way from Paita, and by an observation
found 8. d. 00* S.

CHAP. XIII. A continuation of their long and tedious Voyage to Arica, with a
description of the Coasts and Sailings thereunto. Great hardship they endured
for want of Water and other Provisions. They are descryed at Arica, and dare
not land there; the Country being all in Arms before them. They retire from
thence, and go unto Puerto de Hilo, close by Arica. Here they land, take the
Town with little or no loss on their side, refresh themselves with Provisions;
but in the end are cheated by the Spaniards, and forced shamefully to retreat
from thence.
ON September the Ninth we continued still to make a S. W. by S. way, as we had
done the day before. By a clear and exact observation taken the same day, we
found now Lat. 8. d. 12 S. All the twenty four hours last past afforded us but
little wind, Calms.
so that we advanced but as little on our Voyage, and were forced to tack about
every four or five hours.

The next day by another observation taken, we found then Lat. 9 d. 00. Now the
weather was much warmer than before; Warm weather again.
and with this warmth we had small and misty rains that frequently fell. That
evening a strong breeze came up at S. E. by E.

The night following likewise we had a very great dew that fell, and a fresh
wind continued to blow. At this time we were all hard at work to make small
sails of the Osenbrigs we had taken in the last Prize, They make sail^ at Sea.
as being much more convenient for its lightness. The next morning being
Saturday, September the 11th, we lay by to mend our rigging. These last twenty
four hours we had made a S. by W. way. And now we had an observation that gave
us Lat. 10. D. 9. S. I supposed this day that we were West from Cosmey about
the distance of eighty nine leagues and an half.

September the 12th. This day we reckoned a S. S. W. way; and that we had made
thirty four leagues and three quarters or thereabouts. Also that all our
Westing from Pa^^a was eighty four leagues. We supposed our selves now to be in
Lat. 11. D. ^0. S. But the weather being hasey, no observation could be made.

September the 13th, yesterday in the Afternoon we had a great Eclipse of the
Sun, A great Eclipse of the Sun.
which lasted from one of the clock till three after dinner. From this Eclipse
I then took the true judgment of our longitude from the Canary Islands, and
found my self to be 285 D. 35. in Lat. 11 D. 45 S. The wind was now so fresh,
that we took in our Top sails; making a great way under our Courses and
Sprit-sail.

September the 14th we had a cloudy morning, which continued so all the first
part thereof. ^
About eight it cleared up, and then we set our fore-top-sail; and, about noon,
our main-top-sail likewise. This was observable, that all this great wind
precedent did not make any thing of a great Sea. We reckoned this day that we
had run by a S. W. by W. way, twenty six Leagues, and two thirds.

The next day, in like manner, we had close weather, such as the former
morning. Our reckoning was Twenty four Leagues and two thirds, by a S. W. by W.
way. But, by observation made, I found my self to be 23 D. Southward of my
reckoning, as being in the Lat. of 15 D. 17 South.

On the 16th, we had but small and variable winds. For the twenty four hours
last past we reckoned twenty four leagues and two thirds, by a S. W. by S. way.
By observation we had Lat. 16. D. 41. That evening we had a gale at E. S. E.
which forced us to hand our topsails.

The 17th likewise, we had many gusts of wind at several times, forcing us to
hand our topsails often. But in the forenoon, we set them with a fresh gale at
E. S. E. My reckoning this day was thirty one leagues by a S.S. W. way. All day
long we stood by our topsails.

On the 18th, we made a S. by W. way. We reckoned our selves to be in Lat. 19.
D. 33. S. The weather was hasey; and the wind began to dye this day by degrees.

The next day, being the 19th, we had very small wind. I reckoned thirteen
leagues and an half, by a S. W. by S. way; and our whole Westing from Paita to
be 164 leagues in Lat. 20. D. 06. S. All the afternoon we had a calm, with
drizling rain.

Monday, September the 20th. Last night we saw the Magallan Clouds, Magallan
Clouds.
which are so famous among the Mariners of these Southern Seas. The least of
these clouds was about the bigness of a man's hat. After this sight, the morning
was very clear. We had run at noon at E. S. E thirteen leagues and an half:
and, by an observation then made, we found Lat. 20. D. 15. S. This day the wind
began to freshen at W. by S. Yet notwithstanding we had a very smooth Sea.

But on the next morning, the wind came about to S.W. and yet slacken by
degrees. At four this morning it came to S. by E. And at ten the same day, to
S. E. by S. We had this day a clear observation, and by it Lat. 20. D. 25. S.
We stood now E by N. with the wind at S. E.

September the 22d. This morning the wind was at E. S. E. By a clear
observation we found Lat 19. D. 30 S. Likewise on a N. E. by E. way, -- and two
leagues and two thirds.

September the 23d we had a fresh wind, and a high (...). This morning early
the wind was at E. and about (...) E. N. E. From a clear observation we found
our latitude to be 20 D. 35 S. The way we made was S. by W. That morning we
happened to split our Sprit-sail.

Next morning the wind was variable and inconstant, and the weather but hasey.
We reckoned a S. by E. way: this day we bent a new main-top-sail; the old one
serving for a fore-top-sail. In the afternoon we had but little wind, whereupon
we lowered our topsails; having, in like manner, a very smooth sea.

The following day likewise brought us calm and warm weather; which occasioned
us to set up our shrouds both fore and aft. An observation taken this day
afforded us Lat. 21. D. 57. That evening we bent a sprit-sail.

On September the 26th, an observation gave us Lat. 22. D. 05. S. At noon we
had a breez at N. N. E. our course being E. S. E. In the afternoon we set up a
larboard top-sail studden-sail. In the evening the wind came about at North
pretty fresh.

The next day we had a smooth sea, and took in four studden-sails. For
yesterday in the afternoon we had put out, besides that abovementioned,
another studden-sail, and two main studden-sails more. This day we had by
observation 22 D. 45 S. having made by an E. S. E. way, thirty five leagues and
an half. Our whole Merid. differ. sixty eight leagues and an half.

September the 28th, all the forenoon we had very little wind, and yet withal a
great Southern sea. By observation we had Lat. 22 D. 40 S.

September the 29th. All the night past we had much wind, with three or four
fierce showers of rain. This was the first that we could call rain, Much rain.
ever since that we left Cape Francisco abovementioned. This day our allowance
was shortened, and reduced unto three pints and a half of water, and one cake of
boiled bread to each man for a day. Their allowance shotned again.
An observation this day gave us Lat. 21 D. 59 S. by a N. E. by E. way.

On September the 30th we had a cloudy day, and the wind very variable, the
morning being fresh. Our way was N. E. half N. wherein we made eighteen leagues.

October the First. All the night past and this day we had a cloudy sky, and
not much wind. We made a N. E. by E. way, and by it seventeen leagues and two
miles. Their allowance still shortens.
This day we began at two pints and a half of water for a day.

The Second, we made a E.N. E. way, and by it twenty six leagues, more or less.
Our observation this day gave us Lat. 20 D. 29 S. I reckoned now that we were
ten leagues and an half to East of our Meridian, the Port of Paita; so that
henceforward our departure was Eastward. The wind was this day at S. E. by S.

On the Third we had both a cloudy morning, a high sea, and drizling weather.
An observation which we had this day, gave us Lat. 19 D. 45 S. In the afternoon
the wind blew so fresh, as that we were forced to hand our topsails and
sprit-sail.

The 4th likewise we had a high sea and a cold wind. At break of day we set our
topsails. An observation made afforded us Lat. 19 D. 8 S. Here we supposed our
selves fifty nine leagues D. M.

The 5th we had still a great sea, and sharp and cold winds, forcing us to our
low sails. By a N. E. by E way, we reckoned this day twenty six leagues and an
half.

But on the 6th we had great gusts of wind. Insomuch, that this morning our
ring-bolts gave way which held our Main-stay, and had like to have brought our
Mainmast by the board. Their Mainmast in danger.
Hereupon we ran three or four glasses West before the wind. By an observation
we found Lat. 19 D. 4 S.

On the 7th of October the wind was something fallen. We had both a cloudy day
and variable winds.

The 8th of the said Month we had again a smooth sea, and small whistling
winds. Water-snakes and Seals.
This morning we saw a huge shoal of fish, two or three Water-snakes, and
several Seals.

On the next day we had in like manner a very smooth sea, and withal a cloudy
day. Our course was East.

October the Tenth, we had likewise a cloudy day, with small and variable
winds* and what is consequent unto these, a smooth Sea. Our way was S. by E.
This day we espied sloating upon the Sea, (...) of sea-grass.
several Tufts of Sea-grass, which gave us good hopes that we were not far from
shore. In the afternoon we had a N. E. by E. wind that sprang up* the night was
very cold and cloudy.

On the eleventh we had a fresh wind at S. E. and E. S.E. together with a
cloudy day; such as we had experimented for several days before. We reckoned
this day thirty two Leagues by a N. E. by E. way. Here our Pilot told us, that
the sky is always hasey nigh the shore upon these Coasts where we now were. A
(...) sky (...).


On October the 12th we had a clear day, and a North-East way.

The 13th we had but little wind. This day we saw a Whale, ^
which we took for an infallible token that we were not far distant from Land,
which now we hoped to see in a few days. We made an E.S.E. way, and by it we
reckoned nineteen Leagues. All the evening was very calm.

Thursday October the 14th we had both a calm, and close day until the
afternoon. Then the weather became very hot and clear. This day we saw several
land-Fowls, being but small Birds. ^
Concerning which our Pilot said, that they use to appear about one or two days
sail from the Land. Our reckoning was eleven Leagues by an E.S.E. way. In the
evening of this day we thought that we had seen Land; but it proved to be
nothing else than a foggy bank.

October the 15th, both the night past, and this day, was very clear. We made
an observation this day, which gave us Lat. 18 d. 00 South.

The 16th, last night and this day were contrary to the former, both cloudy.
Our way was N.E. by E. whereof we reckoned thirteen Leagues.

Sunday October the 17th the wind blew very fresh, our course being E. N. E. ^
About five that morning we saw Land; but the weather was so hasey, that at
first we could scarce perceive whether it was Land or not. It was distant from
us about eight Leagues, and appeared as a high and round hill, being in form
like unto a Sugar Loaf. We saw Land afterward all along to the S. E. by E.
from it. In the evening, we being then within five Leagues of the shore, the
Land appeared very high and steep.

October the 18th, all the night last past we stood off to sea with a fresh
wind. This morning we could just see Land at N. N. E. We reckoned a S. E. by E.
way; and by observation we found Lat. 17 d. 17 South.

Tuesday October the 19th, we had very cloudy weather, finding what our Pilot
had told us to be very true, High-lands (...) Arica.
concerning the haseyness of this shore. We saw all along as we went very high
Land, covered with Clouds; insomuch, that we could not see its top.

On Wednesday the next day, we had likewise cloudy weather, and for the most
part calm. The same weather being very cloudy, as before, continued in like
manner on Thursday.

Friday October 22. this morning we saw the Land plain before us. Our Pilot
being asked what Land that was, Punta de Hilo.
answered, it was the Point of Hilo. At N.N.E. and about six or seven Leagues
distance it appeared thus unto us.

Punta de HILO. Lat. 18. d. 4. S.


There is every morning and evening a brightness over the Point, which lasts
for two or three hours, being caused by the reflection of the Sun on the barren
land, as it is supposed. This day we had but little wind; and the huge want of
water we were now under, Great want of water.
occasioned much disturbance among our men. As for my part, I must acknowledge
I could not sleep all night long through the greatness of my drougth. We could
willingly have landed here to seek for water; but the fear of being discovered
and making our selves known, hindered us from so doing. Thus we unanimously
resolved to endure our thirst for a little longer space of time. Hereabouts is
a small Current that runs under the shore. This morning we had but little
wind at South, our course being E S. E. The Point at the distance of five
leagues N. E. looks on the following side, thus:

Punta de HILO.


Our wind continued to blow not above six hours each day. We reckoned the
difference of our Meridian to be this day one hundred and eighty leagues. Very
great was our affliction now for want of water; Hal^ a p^nt a day.
we having but half a pint a day to our allowance.

October the 23 d. This day we were forced to spare one measure of water,
thereby to make it hold out the longer; so scarce it became with us. At three
this afternoon the Point looked thus:

Punta de HILO. Mora de SAMA.


Here the Point looks like unto an Island. And Mora de Sama, to the Southward
thereof, gives this appearance:

Mora de SAMA.


About nine of the clock at night we had a land wind, and with it we stood S.
E. by S. But all the night after we had but little wind.

October the 24th. All the night past we had very cloudy and dark weather, with
mizling rain. The morning being come, it cleared up; but all the land appeared
covered with clouds. Yet notwithstanding in the afternoon it gave us again this
appearance.

Mora de SAMA. Lat. 18 d. 29 S.


Under the Hill of Mora de Sama are eighteen or nineteen white cliffs; which
appear in the form above described. ^
This day we resolved that One hundred and twelve men should go ashore. And
about eight this evening, we sent our Lanch and four Canoas, with fourscore
men, to take three or four Fishermen at a certain River, close by Mora de
Sama, called el Rio de Juan Diaz, with intent to gain what intelligence we
could how affairs stood at present on the Coast and Country thereabouts.

Monday October the 25th. Last night being about the distance of one league and
an half from shore, we sounded, and found forty five fathom water, with an hard
ground at the bottom. This morning our people and Canoas that were sent to take
the Fishermen, ^
returned, not being able to find either their houses or the River. They
reported withal, they had had a very fresh wind all the night long under shore,
whereas we had not one breath of wind all night on board.

Tuesday October the 26th. Last night, being the night before this day, about
six of the clock, we departed from the ship to go to take Arica, resolving to
land about the distance of a league to windward of the Town. ^
We were about six leagues distant from the Town when we left our ship* whereby
we were forced to row all night, that we might reach before day the place of
our landing. Toward morning, the Canoa^s l^^t the Lanch, which they had had
all night in a Tow, and wherein I was; and made all the speed they possibly
could for the shore, with design to land before the Lanch could arrive. But
being come nigh the place where we designed to land, they found, to our great
sorrow and vexation, that we were descryed; and that all along the shore, and
through the Country, they had certain news of our arrival. Yet notwithstanding
our discovery, we would have landed, if we could by any means have found a
place to do it in. But the sea ran so high, and with such a force against the
rocks, that our boats must needs have been staved each in one thousand pieces,
and we in great danger of wetting our arms, if we should adventure to go on
shore. The Bay all round was possessed by several parties of horse; and
likewise the tops of the hills, which seemed to be gathered there by a general
alarm through the whole Country, and that they waited only for our landing,
with design to make a strong opposition against us. They fired a gun at us, but
we made them no answer, but rather returned to our ship, giving over this
enterprise until a fairer opportunity. The hill of Arica is very white, being
occasioned by the dung of multitudes of Fowls that nest themselves in the
hollow thereof. Hill of Arica
To Leeward of the said Hill lies a small Island, at the distance of a mile,
more or less, from the shore. About half a league from that Island, we could
perceive six ships to ride at anchor: four of which had their Yards taken down
from their Masts; but the other two seemed to be ready for sail. We asked our
Pilot concerning these ships, and he told us that one of them was mounted with
six guns, and the other with only four. Being disappointed of our expectations
at Arica, we now resolved to bear away from thence to the Village of Hilo, They
(...) away for Hilo.
there to take in Water and other Provisions; as also to learn what
intelligence we could obtain. All that night we lay under a calm.

On October the 27th in the morning, we found our selves to be about a league
to windward of Mora de Sama. Yet notwithstanding the weather was quite calm,
and we only drived with the current at Leeward. The land between Hilo and Mora
de Sama forms two several Bays, and the Coast runs along N.W. and S.E. as
may appear by the following demonstration. Over the land we could see from our
ship, as we drove the coming or rising of a very high land, at a great distance
far up in the Country.

October the 28th. The night before this day, we sent away our four Canoas with
fifty men in them, ^
to seize and plunder the Town of Hilo. All the day was very calm, as the day
before.

The next morning about break of day, we had a fair breeze sprang up, with
which we lay right in with the Port. (...) price at the Port.
About one in the afternoon we anchored, and the Port lies thus, as is here
described.

Port of HILO.


We cast anchor at the distance of two miles from the Village: and then we
perceived two flags, which our men had put out, ^he Town taken.
having taken the Town, and set up our English Colors. The Spaniards were
retreated unto the hills, and there had done the same. Being come to an anchor,
our Commander Captain Sharp sent a Canoa on board of us, and ordered that all
the men our ship could spare, should come ashore. Withal they told us, that
those of our party that landed the morning before, were met by some horsemen on
the shore, who only exchanged some few volly's of shot with our men, but were
soon put to slight. That hereupon our forces had marched directly to the Town,
where the Spaniards expecting we would have landed at first, made a
breast-work, thirty paces long, of clay and banks of sand. Here, in a small
skirmish, we happened to kill an Indian, who told us before he died, that they
had received news of our coming, nine days ago, from Lima, and but one day
before from Arica. Having taken the Town, we found therein great quantity of
Pitch, Tar, Oil, Wine and Flower, with several other sorts of provisions. We
endeavored to keep as good a watch as the Spaniards did on the hills, fearing
lest they should suddenly make any attempt to destroy us.

On the next day, being October the 30th, we chose out threescore men of them
who were the fittest to march, They search the valley.
among the rest; and ordered them to go up and search the valley adjoining and
belonging to the Town. We found the said valley to be very pleasant, being all
over set with Fig Trees, Olive Trees, Orange, Lemmon, and Lime-trees, with many
other fruits agreeable to the Palate. About four miles up within the valley, we
came to a great Sugar-work, or Ingenio de azucar, as it is called by the
Spaniards, where we found great store of Sugar, Oil, and Molossus. But most of
the Sugar, the owners had hidden from us in the cane it self. As we marched up
the valley, the Spaniards marched along the hills, and observed our motion. From
the tops of the hills they often tumbled down great stones upon us, but with
great care we endeavored to escape those dangers, and but the report of one
Gun would suddenly cause them all to hide their heads. From this house, I mean
the Sugar-work abovementioned, Mr. Cox, my self, and one Cannis a Dutchman
(who was then our Interpreter) went unto the Spaniards with a flag of Truce.
They met us very civilly, They agree with the Spaniards.
and promised to give us fourscore Beeves for the Ransom of the Sugar-work, and
upon condition that it should not be spoilt nor demolished. With them we
agreed, that they should be delivered unto us at the Port, the next day at
noon. Hereupon Captain Sharp in the evening sent down unto the Port twenty men,
with strict orders that our forces there should offer no violence in the least
unto those that brought down the Beeves.

Sunday, October the 31st. This day being employed in casting up some accounts
belonging to our Navigation, I reckoned that Hilo was to the Eastward of Paita,
one hundred eighty and seven leagues. This morning the Captain of the Spaniards
came unto our Commander Captain Sharp, with a flag of Truce; and told him, that
sixteen Beeves were already sent down unto the Port, and that the rest should
certainly be there the next morning. Hereupon we were ordered to prepare our
selves to retreat, and march back unto the Port, and there embark our selves on
board our ship. My advice was to the contrary, that we should rather leave
twenty men behind to keep the house of the Sugar-work, and that others should
possess themselves of the Hills, thereby to clear them of the Spaniards and
their look out. But my counsel not being regarded, each man took away what
burden of Sugar he pleased, and thus we returned unto our vessel. (...) to
(...) double dealing in the enemy.
Being come there, we found no Beeves had been brought down at all, which
occasioned us much to suspect some double dealing would in the latter end be
found in this case.

The next morning being November the first, our Captain went unto the top of
the Hills aforementioned, and spoke with the Spaniards themselves, ^
concerning the performance of their agreement. The Spaniards made answer, that
the Cattle would certainly come down this night. But in case it did not, that
the Master or Owner of the Sugar-work was now returned from Potosi, and we
might go up and treat with him, and make, if we pleased, a new bargain for the
preservation of his House and Goods; whose interest it was, more than theirs,
to save it from being demolished. With this answer our men returned unto us,
and we concluded to expect until the next day for the delivery of the Beeves.

On the following day about eight in the morning, there came in unto us a Flag
of Truce from the enemy, telling us, ^
that the winds were so high, that they could not drive the Cattle, otherwise
they had been delivered before now. But withal, that by noon we should in no
manner ^ail to have them brought unto us. Noon being come, and no Cattle
appearing, we now having filled our water, and finished other concerns,
resolved to be revenged on the Enemy, and do them what mischief we could; at
least, by setting fire on the Sugar-work. Hereupon, threescore men of us
marched up the valley, They burn the sugar-work
and burnt both the House, the Canes, and the Mill belonging to the Ingenio. We
broke likewise the Coppers, Coggs, and multitudes of great Jars of Oil that we
found in the house. This being done, we brought away more Sugar, and returned
unto the Port over the Hills or Mountains; the which we sound to be very
pleasant, smooth, and level after once we had ascended them. It fell out very
fortunately unto us that we returned back this way we did, for otherwise our
men at the Seaside had inevitably been cut off and torn in pieces by the
enemy, they being at that time dispersed and straggling up and down by two and
three in a Party. For from the Hills we espied coming from the Northward of the
Bay, above three hundred horsemen, Three hundred Horse coming against the^
all riding at full speed toward our men, who had not as yet descryed them,
and little thought of any such danger from the enemy so nigh at hand. Being
alarumed with this sight, we threw down what Sugar we had, and ran
incontinently to meet them* thereby to give our other men time to rally, and
put themselves into a posture of defense. We being in good rank and order,
fairly proffered them Battle upon the Bay; but as we advanced to meet them,
they retired and rid toward the Mountains to surround us, and take the Rocks
from us if possibly they could. Hereupon, perceiving their intentions, we
returned back and possessed our selves of the said Rocks, and also the lower
Town; as the Spaniards themselves did of the upper Town (at the distance of
half a mile from the lower) the Hills and the Woods adjoining thereunto. The
Horsemen being now in possession of these Quarters, we could perceive, as far
as we could see, more and more men resort unto them, so that their Forces
increased hourly to considerable numbers. We fired one at another as long as we
could reach, and the day would permit. But in the mean while we observed, that
several of them rid unto the Watch-hill, and looked out often to the Sea-board.
This gave us occasion to fear, that they had more strength and Forces coming
that way, which they expected every minute. Hereupon, least we should speed
worse than we had done before, we resolved to imbark silently in the dark of
the night, ^
and go off from that Coast where we had been so early descryed, and the enemy
was so much prepared against us. We carried off a great Chest of Sugar, whereof
we shared seven pound weight and a half each man; What they got at Hilo.
thirty Jars of Oil, and great plenty of all sorts of Garden Herbs, Roots, and
most excellent Fruit.

CHAP. XIV. The Bucaniers depart from the Port of Hilo, and sail unto that of
Coquimbo. They are descryed before their arrival. Notwithstanding they land:
are encountered by the Spaniards, and put them to flight. They take, plunder,
and fire the City of la Serena. A description thereof. A Stratagem of the
Spaniards in endeavoring to fire their ship, discovered and prevented. They
are deceived again by the Spaniards, and forced to retire from Coquimbo,
without any Ransom for the City, or considerable pillage. They release several
of their chiefest Prisoners.
THe next morning (being Wednesday November the th^rd, ^
1680) about seven of the clock we set sail from Hilo, standing directly off to
Sea, with a small land-wind. A Description of Hilo
Upon the shore we could not discover this morning, above fifty men of our
Enemies Forces, which caused us to suspect the rest were run away from their
Colors, and had deserted in the dark of the night. If this were so, we were
equally afraid of each other, and as we quitted the Land, being jealous of
their multitudes, so they abandoned their stations for fear of our Encounters.
All the while we lay in the Port of Hilo, we had a fresh wind but now being
come out from thence, we found it was almost stark calm. Hereabouts runs a
great Sea all along this Coast, as we experimented at Arica; insomuch, that
there is no landing except under the favor of some Rock or other.

November the fourth in the morning, we saw the Port of Hilo at E.N.E. at the
distance of nine Leagues, A great reflection.
more or less from the Land. The white sand gives a bright reflection over the
land; the which we could see after we had lost the sight of the land it self.

The next day unto this, we had an indifferent fresh wind at S.S.E. We reckoned
a S. W. half west way, and by it, that we had made twenty Leagues. The day was
very fair and sun-shiny, and the sea very smooth

November the 6th, we had a clear night the last past, and the day proved very
fair and clear, like unto the former. We reckoned by a S. W. by W. way, about
twenty one leagues. In the afternoon it was almost stark calm.

On the following day we had in like manner very little wind, no more than the
last twenty four hours. They are troubled with the Survey.
We were now about this time many of us very much troubled and diseased with
the Survey. It proceeded as we judged, from the great hardship and want of
Provisions which we had endured for several Months past, as having had only
bread and water, as was mentioned above. Only at Hilo we killed a Mule, At Hilo
they eat a Mule.
which gave unto those who would eat of the flesh, a very good meal, as we
esteemed it, the Spaniards having swept away with them all other provisions of
flesh. But there we had plundered some small quantity of good Chocolate,
Chocolate.
whereof the Spaniards make infinite use. So that now we had each morning a
dish of that pleasant liquor, containing almost a pint.

Next day likewise we had very little wind, as before. We made an observation
this day, and found Lat. 20. d. 05. South.

November the Ninth we had still very little wind, and that variable. We took
almost every hour an observation, and found our selves to be in the Lat. of 20
d. 18. South.

The 10th we had in like manner but little wind, as for so many days before. We
observed an E.S.E. current, or nearest unto it, to run hereabouts. This day we
saw the homing of a very high land, which much admired us, for at this time I
conceived we could not be less than thirty five or forty leagues distant from
land. They descry land.
We supposed it to be Mora Tarapaca. That day we set up our shrouds.

Upon the 11th an indifferent gale of wind sprang up at S. W. by S. by which we
made twenty five Leagues, B^t are d^c^i^ed.
and one third. We had now a great S.S.W. sea. In the night the wind as we
experimented, came one or two points from the land. This morning we saw the
like homing of land, whereby we were made sensible it was no land, that which
we had seen the day before.

On the 12th we had several mists of rain, with windy weather. We made by a S.
S. W. half S. way, twenty five leagues and one third. We had likewise a great
and rolling S. S. W. sea, as the day before.

The 13th of the said Month, we had both cloudy and misty weather. We made a S.
S. W. and one quarter S. way; by which we ran fifty leagues.

But the next day, fair and clear weather came about again. We had likewise an
^^sie gale of wind, by which we made a S. W. way, and advanced twenty two
leagues and an half.

On the 15th of November, we had also clear weather, and an indifferent gale of
wind. Our way was S. W. by W. by which we reckoned eighteen leagues. Likewise
that our Westing from Hilo, from whence we set forth, was one hundred and
fourteen leagues, and one third. Our latitude by observation we found to be 23
D. 25 S. The Table of Lima used by the Author.
I to^k now the Declination-Table used and made by the Cosmographer of Lima.

Tuesday, November the 16th. In the night last past, we had a shower or two of
rain. This day we made an observation, by which we found Lat. 23 D. 35 S.

The 17th we made a S. W. by W. half S. way. By observation we found Lat. 23 D.
46 S. with very little wind.

The 18th, upon a S. W. by W. way, we made twenty one leagues. By observation
we found Lat. 24 D. 20 South.

Friday, Nov. the 19th, 1680. This morning, about an hour before day, we
observed a Comet to appear, A Comet seen.
a degree N. from the bright in Libra. The body thereof seemed dull; and its
tail extended it self eighteen or twenty degrees in length, being of a pale
color, and pointing directly N. N. W. Our prisoners hereupon reported unto us,
Strange sights seen in the A^.
that the Spaniards had seen very strange sights* both at Lima, the capital
City of Peru, Guayaquil, and other places, much about the time of ^ur coming
into the South Seas. I reckoned this day we had ran twenty leagues by a S. W.
way.

The following day, unto the appearance of the Comet, we had many storms of
wind at S.S.E. and at E. S. E. What followed the Comet.
Our reckoning by a S. W. by W. way, was twenty two leagues.

Sunday, November the 21th, we had likewise many gusts of wind, such as the day
before, with frequent showers of rain. The wind varyed to and fro, according as
the Clouds drew it here and there. We reckoned a S. S. W. way, and by it twenty
one leagues and a half. In all. West from Hilo, we judged our selves to be one
hundred seventy eight leagues and two thirds. We had this day a great S. W.
Sea, and cloudy weather. I supposed our Latitude to be 26 D. 53 S.

November the 22d we had in like manner cloudy weather, and now but little
wind. We reckoned a S. way, and fifty one leagues.

The 23d we had very little wind, all the storm, after the appearance of the
Comet, ^
being now quite allayed. We reckoned we had made a S. E. by E. way; and found
our latitude, by observation, to bare 27 D. 46 S.

Wednesday, November the 24th. All the twenty four hours last past, we had a N.
W. wind. Our way was S E. half S. by which we reckoned thirty one leagues and
one third.

The 25th. Last night the wind blew at W. S. W. but this morning it came about
again at N. W. as the day before. Our reckoning this day was a S. E. and one
quarter E. way, twenty nine leagues and one third Our Latitude now, by
observation made this day, was 39 D. 57 S. Our difference of Merid. 13 5.

November the 26th. In the night the wind started to S. S. W. But this day at
noon we had little better than a calm. I reckoned an E.S.E. half E. way, and by
it twenty three leagues.

Saturday the 27th. Yesterday in the evening the wind came to S. I reckoned an
East, and something Southerly way, and by that, twenty three leagues, as the
day before this.

November the 28th. All the twenty four hours last past we enjoyed a fresh wind
at S. S E. having a high S. W. sea. Our reckoning was an E. by N. and half N.
way, and withal twenty four leagues. By observation, we found Lat. 30 D. 16 S.
and Meridian distance eighty eight leagues. At noon the wind came at S. half E.

On the 29th we had a very great S. W. sea; and withal cloudy weather. My
reckoning was by an E. one third S. way, twenty leagues and one third. This day
we happened to see two or three great fowls flying in the air. Great fowls.
Concerning which our Pilot told us, that they used to appear seventy or eighty
leagues off from the Island, called of Juan Fernandez. The day before this,
Captain Peralta our prisoner, was taken very much frantic, Captain Peralta
taken frantic.
his distemper being occasioned, as we thought, through too much hardship and
melancholy. Notwithstanding, this present day he became indifferent well again.

The following day we had likewise cloudy weather. We made, according to our
account, an E. half N. way, and by it sixteen leagues and two thirds. Our
Meridian difference fifty two leagues.

The first of December we had hasey weather, and withal an indifferent good
wind at S. yea, sometimes S. by W. Our way was E. by S. by which we reckoned
twenty two leagues. The night before this day, we sailed over white water like
banks, of a mile in length, or more. But these banks, upon examination, Huge
shoals of Anchovas.
we found to be only great shoals of Anchovas.

On December the second, very early in the morning, we espied Land, They s^e
land.
the which appeared to be very high About noon this day we were at six leagues
distance from it. All the preceding night we had so much wind, that we were
forced to make use only of a pair of courses. By an observation made this day,
we found Lat. 30. d. 35. South. We went away largely, driving better than nine
leagues every watch. With this wind we made all the Sail we possibly could,
designing by this means to get into Coquimbo, Bay of Coquimbo.
upon which Coast we now were before night. But the wind was so high, that
sometimes we were forced to lower all our sail, it blowing now a mere fret of
wind. Toward the evening it abated by degrees; insomuch, that at midnight it
was stark calm ag^^^. At that time we hoisted out our Lanch and Canoas, and
putting into them one hundred men, we rowed away from the ship, with design to
take by surprizal a considerable City, situated nigh unto the Coast, called by
the Spaniards, la Ciudad de la Serena.

Friday December the third, 1680. when we departed from the ship, They land and
take the City of la Serena.
we had above two leagues, more or less, to row unto the shore. But as it
happened, the Lanch (wherein I was) rowed so heavy, in comparison to the Canoas,
that we could not keep pace with the said Boats. For this reason* and no other,
it was broad day before we got unto a certain Storehouse, situate upon the
shore; the which we found our men had passed by in the dark of the night,
without perceiving it. They being landed, immediately marched away from their
Canoas, toward the City aforementioned of la Serena. But they had not
proceeded far on their march, when they found, to the great sorrow and chagrin
of us all, that we were timely discovered here also, as we had been at the
other two places before, to wit, Arica and Hilo. For as they marched in a body
together, being but thirty five men in all, who were all those that were landed
out of the Canoas, they were suddenly encountered and engaged by a whole Troop
of an hundred Spanish horse. We that were behind hearing the noise of the
dispute, They rout the Spanish horse.
followed them at their heels, and made all the have we possibly could to come
up to their relief. But before we could reach the place of the Battle, they had
already routed the Spaniards, and forced them to fly away toward the Town.

Notwithstanding this rout given unto the horse, they rallyed again, A
Stratagem of the Enemy.
at the distance of about a mile from that place, and seemed as if they did
wait for us, and would engage us anew. But as soon as all our Forces were come
together, whereof we could make but fourscore and eight men in all, the rest
being left behind to guard the Boats, we marched toward them and offered them
Battle. As we came nigh unto them we clearly found they designed no such thing;
for they instantly retired and rid away before us, keeping out of the reach of
our guns. We followed them as they rid, being led by them designedly clear out
of the road that went unto the Town, that we might not reach nor find it so
soon. In this engagement with the horse, our company had killed three of their
chiefest men, and wounded four more; killing also four of their horses. When we
found that we had been led by this stratagem of the enemy, out of the way of
the Town, we left the Bay, and crossed over the green fields to find it; wading
oftentimes over several branches of water, which there serve to enclose each
plot of ground. Upon this march we came unto several houses, but found them all
empty, and swept clean both of inhabitants and provisions. We saw likewise
several horses and other heads of cattle in the fields, as we went along
toward the City. This place of la Serena, La Serena a considerable City.
our Pilot had reported unto us to be but a small Town; but being arrived
there, we found in it no fewer than seven great Churches and one Chapel
belonging thereunto. Four of these Churches were Monasteries or Convents, and
each Church had its Organs for the performance of Divine Service. Several of
the houses had their Orchards of Fruit, and Gardens, belonging unto them; both
Houses and Gardens being as well and as neatly furnished, as those in England.
In these Gardens we found Strawberries as big as Walnuts, Huge Strawberries.
and those verg delicious to the taste. In a word, every thing in this City of
la Serena, was most excellent and delicate, and far beyond what we could expect
in so remote a place. The Town was inhabited by all sorts of Tradesmen, and
besides them, had its Merchants, some of which were accounted to be very rich.

The Inhabitants of la Serena, upon our approach and discovery, were all fled,
The Inhabitants all fled.
carrying with them whatsoever was most precious of their goods and jewels, or
less cumbersome unto them. Much of their valuable things they had likewise
concealed or buried, as having had time since we were first discovered, so to
do. Besides that they had had forewarning enough how to beware of us, sent them
over land from Arica, and several other places where we had landed or been
descryed at Sea. Notwithstanding, we took in the Town one Friar, and two
Chileno's, or Spaniards natives of the Kingdom of Chile, which adjoyneth unto
that of Peru, toward the Straight of Magallanes. These Prisoners related unto
us, that the Spaniards, when they heard of our coming, had killed most of their
Chilean slaves, fearing lest they should run or revolt from them unto us.
Moreover, that we had been descryed from their Coasts four days before our
arrival, or descent upon land; all the which time they had employed in carrying
away their Plate and Goods. ^
Unto this information they added, that for their defense they had received a
supply of sixty men from Arica. Having taken possession of the Town, that
evening there came a Negro unto us, running away from the Spaniards. He
likewise informed us, that when we were before Panama, we had taken a Negro,
who was esteemed to be the best Pilot in all the South Sea; but more especially
for this place, and all the Coasts of Coquimbo. Moreover, that if the Spaniards
had not sent all the Negro's belonging unto this City farther up into the
Country, out of our reach and communication, they would all undoubtedly have
revolted unto us.

That night about midnight our Boatswain, being accompanied by forty men, ^
and having a Chilean for their guide, went out of the Town some miles within
the Country, with design to find out the places where the Spaniards lay
concealed, and had hid their goods and plate. But before they came, the
Spaniards had received intelligence thereof from some secret spies they had in
the Town, and both the men and their women were all fled to places that were
more occult and remote. So that by this search, they only found an old Indian
woman and three children; but no gold nor plate, nor yet any other prisoners.
This morning our ship came to an anchor, by the Storehouse abovementioned,
named Tortuga, at the distance of a furlong from shore, in the depth of seven
fathom water. Mean while we were quartered in the Town, I took this follow^^g
ground-plat thereof.

The City of (...). Serena. Altitude 30. d. 00. South.


The next morning, being Saturday, December the 4th, came into the Town a flag
of Truce from the Enemy. A flag of Truce from the Enemmy.
Their message was to proffer a ransom for the Town to preserve it from
burning; for now they began to fear we would set fire unto it, as having found
no considerable booty nor pillage therein. The Captains, or chief Commanders of
both sides, met about this point, and agreed betwixt them for the sum of 95000
pieces of eight to be the price of the whole ransom. 95000 pieces of eight
promised.
In the afternoon of this day, I was sent down unto the Bay of Coquimbo, with a
party of twenty men, to carry thither both goods taken in the Town, and
provisions for the ship. It is two leagues and a half from the Town unto the
Port; one league on the Bay, the rest being a very great road, which leads
from the Bay unto the City. The Spaniards promised that the Ransom should be
collected and paid in by the next day. This day also there dyed one of our
Negro slaves on board the ship.

The following day in the morning, I returned back unto the Town, with the men
I had brought down the day before. Only six of them I left behind, to look
after our Canoa's at the end of the Bay. When I came up into the City, The
Enemy breaks his promise.
I found that the Spaniards had broken their promise, and had not brought in
the Ransom they had agreed for; but had begged more time until to morrow at
eight in the forenoon. This evening another party of our men went down unto the
ship, to carry goods, such as we had pillaged in the Town. Moreover, that night
about nine of the clock, An Earthquake.
happened an Earthquake, the which we were very sensible of, as we were all
together in the Church of San Juan, where our chief rendezvous and Corpse du
guard was kept. In the night the Spaniards opened a sluyce, and let the water
run in streams about the Town, with intent either to overflow it, and thereby
force us out of the place, or at least that they might the easier quench the
flame, in case we should fire the Town.

On the next morning we set fire to the Town, perceiving it to be overflown,
They fire the Town.
and that the Spaniards had not performed, or rather that they never designed
to perform their promise. We fired, as nigh as we could, every house in the
whole Town, to the intent it might be totally reduced into ashes. Thus we
departed from la Serena, carrying with us what plunder we could find, having
sent two parties before loaded with goods unto the ship, as was mentioned
above. As we marched down unto the Bay, we beat up an Ambuscade of two hundred
and fifty horse, An Ambuscade of the Enemy.
which lay by the way in private, with an intent to fall on our men, in case we
had sent down any other party again with goods unto the ship. When we came to
the Seaside, being half way unto our ship, we received advice that the
Spaniards had endeavored, by an unusual stratagem, A stratagem discovered.
to burn our ship, and by these means destroy us all. They acted thus: They up
blew a horses hide like unto a bladder, and upon this float a man ventured to
swim from shore, and come under the stern of our ship. Being arrived there, he
crammed Okeham and Brimstone, and other combustible matter, between the Rudder
and the Stern-post. Having done this, he fired it with a match, so that in a
small time our Rudder was on fire, and all the ship in a smoke. Our men both
alarmed and amazed with this smoke, ran up and down the ship, suspecting the
prisoners to have fired the vessel, thereby to get their liberty and seek our
destruction. At last they found it out where the fire was, and had the good
fortune to quench it, before its going too far. As Soon as they had put it out,
they sent the boat ashore, and found both the hide aforementioned, and the
match burning at both ends, whereby they came acquainted with the whole matter.
When we came unto the Storehouse on the shoar-side, we set at liberty the
Friar our prisoner, and another Gentleman who was become our Hostage for the
performance of the Ransom. Moreover, They set at liberty their chief prisoners*
when we came aboard, we sent away and set at liberty Captain Peralta, Don
Thomas de Argandona, Don Baltazar, Don Christoval, Captain Juan, the Pilots
Mate, the old Moor, and several others of our chiefest prisoners. Unto this
releasment of our prisoners we were moved, partly because we knew not well what
to do with them, and partly because we feared lest by the example of this
stratagem* they should plot our destruction in earnest, and by the help of so
many men, especially persons of Quality, be able to go through it.

CHAP. XV. The Bucaniers depart from Coquimbo for the Isle of Juan Fernandez.
Anexact account of this Voyage. Misery they endure, and great dangers they
escape very narrowly there. They mutiny among themselves, and choose Watling to
be their chief Commander. Description of the Island. Three Spanish Men of War
meet with the Bucaniers, at the said Island; but these outbrave them on the one
side, and give them the slip on the other.
BEing all embarked again, as was mentioned in the precedent Chapter, the next
morning, which was Tuesday, December the 7th, twenty of us were sent ashore to
observe the motion of the Enemy. We went unto the look-out, or watch-hill, but
from thence could learn nothing. Hereupon* about noon we returned on board the
ship, and at two in the afternoon, we weighed anchor, and set sail, di^ecting
our course for the Isle of Juan Fernandez, not far distant from the Coast of
Coquimbo. At night we were five (...) distant from thence at N. W. by N. The
Souther^^^^ Island of those which are called de los Paxaros, or the Islands of
Birds, ^
was then N. N. W. from us. Before our departure, I took this following draught
of the Bay of Coquimbo, and City of la Serena.

Coquimbo Bay described


December the 28th we had but very little wind, and a leeward current here,
which we could perceive did heave us to the Northward. The aforementioned
Island de los Paxaros, at three in the afternoon, bore N. E of us. At the
distance of three leagues, more or less, it appeared thus.

Isla de los PAXAROS.


It is distant from the main Continent four leagues, and from the next Island
of the same name, about two. The Main is extreme high and mountainous
hereabouts. At evening we were West from the said Island five leagues. About
eight or nine leagues to Windward of Coquimbo, are certain white cliffs, which
appear from the shore to those that are off at Sea. White cliffs.


On the 9th of December we had likewise but little wind, as the day before. I
supposed my self this day to be about thirteen leagues West from the Island
abovementioned. The weather was cloudy, with misling rain, so that no
observation could be taken. They are put to an allowance of water.
However, this day it was thought convenient to put us to an allowance of
water; for we had taken in little or none at Coquimbo. The same weather, or
very like unto it, we had the next day, being the 10th; that is to say, stark
calm and cloudy.

On the 11th of December, we had some small rain in the forepart of the day.
Calms.
But in the afternoon it cleared up, so that the weather was very hot. We had
still but little wind.

The next day, December the 12th, we had very fair weather, and by a clear
observation made this day, we found Lat. 30 D. 06 S.

December the 13th. By a W. S. W. way, we made forty two leagues. By
observation we found Lat. 30 D. 45 S. D. M. four leagues and two thirds.

On the 14th in the morning, we had a handsome shower of rain, which continued
for some while. Then, about eight of the clock, there sprang up a S. S. W.
breeze. My reckoning was by an E. S. E. way, fourteen leagues. And by
observation, we found this day 30 D. 30 S. One of their company dies.
In the afternoon of this day, dyed one of our men, whose name was William
Cammock. His disease was occasioned by a furfeit, gained by too much drinking
on shore at la Serena; the which produced in him a Calenture, or Malignant
Fever, and an Hicup. Thus in the evening we buried him in the Sea, according
to the usual custom of Mariners, giving him three French Vollies for his
Funeral.

The following day, we had an indifferent fresh wind on both tacks. Our way was
W. S. W. and by it we reckoned thirty four leagues. So likewise by an
observation we had Lat. 30 D. 42 S. All the afternoon blew a S. by W. wind very
fresh, with a short topping S. W. Sea.

But on the next ensuing day, we had no small breez, but rather hard gusts of
wind. These grew so high, that they forced us to take in our topsails. We made
a S. W. half S. way, and forty five leagues.

On the 17th we had likewise high winds, and withal a S. W. sea. Our way W. by
S. By observation taken this day, we found Lat. 30 D. 51 S. In the afternoon we
had a S. S. E. wind, our course being S. W.

December the 18th. This day we had the same high winds as before, at S. S. E.
We reckoned by a W. S. W. way forty five leagues. At noon the wind was
something fallen, and then we had some rain.

The 19th we had both cloudy and windy weather. My reckoning was a S. W. by S.
way, and here upon fifty eight miles. Yesterday we were assured by our Pilot,
that we were now in the Meridian of the Island of Juan Fernandez, whither our
course was directed for that present. What occasioned him to be so positive in
his assertion, was the seeing of those great birds, Great birds seen again.
of which we made mention in the foregoing Chapter.

On the 20th, we had cloudy weather in the morning on both tacks. We made a S.
W. and half S. way, and by it fifty two leagues. By observation we found this
day Lat. 32 D. 20 S. Difference of Meridian was now one hundred and twenty
three leagues.

The next day likewise we had cloudy weather; yet by observation we found a W.
way. On the 22d by observation we found and E. way proved.

Thursday, December the 23d. All the night past we had a fresh wind. But in the
morning, from topmast head, They descry land.
we descryed a hammock of land. In the evening we saw it again. We found
afterward that what we had seen, was the Westermost Island of Juan Fernandez;
which is nothing else but a mere rock, there being no riding, nor scarce
landing, near unto it.

Friday, December the 24th. This morning we could descry the Island it self,
They see the l^st of Juan Fernandez.
of Juan Fernandez, S. by E. it being at sixteen leagues distance when we saw
it yesterday. At seven this morning the Island stood E. the wind being at N. W.
by N. At eight the same morning, the Island, at the distance of five leagues,
little more or less, appeared thus.

Isla de JUAN FERNANDEZ.


Here my observation was, that I could see neither fowl nor fish nigh unto this
Island; A particular observation.
both which things are usually to be seen about other Islands. Having told my
observation unto our Pilot, he gave me for answer, that he had made many
Voyages by this Island, and yet never saw any either fowl or fish more than I.
Our reckoning this day was an E. S. E. way, and hereby thirty six leagues. Our
latitude by observation was found to be 33 D. 30 S.

Saturday, December the 25th. Yesterday in the afternoon, at three of the
clock, we saw the other Island, making two or three hammocks of land. This
morning we were about eight leagues distant from it, the Island bearing E. S.
E. from us. At eight the same morning, we were right at breast with it. Here
therefore are two Islands together, the biggest whereof is three leagues and an
half in length, Bigness of these Isles.
nearest N. W. and S.E. the other, and lesser, is almost one league, and no
more in circumference. At ten of the clock we sent off from the ship one of our
Canoa's, to seek for the best landing and anchoring for our Vessel. As we
approached, both Islands seemed unto us nothing but one entire heap of rocks.
That which lies more unto the N. is the highest, though we could not now see
the tops thereof for the clouds which covered it. In most places it is so
steep, that it becomes almost perpendicular.

This day being Christmas Day, we gave in the morning early three Vollies of
shot, Christmas Day.
for solemnization of that great Festival. I reckoned an E. by S. way. By a
clear observation from the middle of the Island, I found here Lat. 33 D. 45 S.
and M. D. to be ninty nine leagues. In the evening of this day, we came to an
anchor at the South end of the Island, in a stately Bay that we found there,
but which lies open from the South, to the South-East winds. We anchored in
the depth of eleven fathom water, and at the distance of only one furlong from
the shore. Here we saw multitudes of Seals covering the Bay every where,
insomuch that we were forced to kill them, Many Seals.
to set our feet on shore.

Sunday, December the 26th. This day we sent a Canoa to see if we could find
any riding secure from the Southerly winds; these being the most constant winds
that blow on these Coasts. The Canoa being gone, our Commander sent likewise
what men we could spare on shore, to drive Goats, They kill Goats.
whereof there is great plenty in this Island. They caught and killed that day
to the number of threescore, or thereabouts. The Canoa returning unto the ship,
made report that there was good riding in another Bay, situate on the North
side of the Island, in fourteen fathom water, and not above one quarter of a
mile from the shore. Moreover that there was much wood to be had, whereas in
the place where we had first anchored, not one stick of wood nor tuft of grass
was to be found.

The next day, being the 27th, between two and four of the clock in the
morning, A great storm.
we had a tempest of violent winds and fierce showers of rain. The same day we
got in two hundred jars of water, bringing them the full distance of a league
from the place of our riding. They take in water.
In the mean while, others were employed to catch Goats, as they had done the
day before.

On the 28th of the said month, in the morning I went with ten more of our
company, and two Canoas, to fetch water from the land. Being come thither, and
having filled our jars, we could not get back unto the ship, by reason of a
Southerly wind that blew from off the Ocean, The Author in great danger*
and hindered our return. Thus we were forced to lie still in a water-hole, and
wait till the wind were over for a safer opportunity. Mean while, the violence
of the wind increasing, our ship was forced to get under sail, and make away,
not without danger of being forced ashore. Hereupon she sailed out of the
harbor, to seek another place of anchoring. At noon I ventured out, to try if
I could follow the ship, but was forced in again by the wind and a raging sea.
Thus we lay still for some while longer, till the evening came on. This being
come, we ventured out again both Canoa's together: but the winds were then so
high, that we were forced to throw all our jarrs of water overboard to lighten
our boats, otherwise we had inevitably perished. I ought to bless and praise
God Almighty for this deliverance; for in all humane reason, the least wave of
that tempest must have sunk us. Notwithstanding, we came that night to our
place or harbor, where we expected to have found our ship (called False wild
harbor) but found her not. Hereupon not knowing what to do, we went ashore,
and halled up our Canoa's dry. Having done this, we ascended higher within the
Island, along a Gulley, for the space of half a mile, there to clear our selves
of the noise and company of the Seals which were very troublesome on the shore.
Here we kindled a fire, Multitudes of Zeales.
and dried our clothes, and rested our selves all night, though with extreme
hungry bellies, as having eaten very litte or nothing all the day before. In
the sides of the hill, under which we lay, we observed many holes like
Coney-holes. These holes are the nests and roosting-places of multitudes of
birds that breed in this Island, called by the Spaniards, Pardelas. One of
these birds, as we lay drying and warming our selves, fell down into our fire.
Pardelas.


The next morning being come, very early before Sunrise, we went farther to the
Northward, to seek for our ship which we feared we had lost. But we were not
gone far, when we soon espied her at sea. Hereupon we passed a point of land,
and entered a certain Bay, which was about a mile deep, and not above half a
league over. Into this Bay we put, and instantly made a fire, thereby to show
the ship whereabouts we were. Here we found good watering and wooding close
unto the shore. In this Bay also we saw another sort of amphibious Animal, the
which I imagined to be the same, that by some Authors is called a Sea-Lyon.
These Animals are six times bigger than Seals. (...) of ^ Sea-Lyon.
Their heads are like unto that of a Lion, and they have four fins not unlike
unto a Tortoise. The hinder parts of these Creatures are much like fins, but
are drawn after them, as being useless upon the shore. They roared as if they
had been Lions, and were full of a certain short and thick hair, which was of a
Mouse color; but that of the young ones was something lighter. The old ones of
these Sea-Lyons are between twelve and fourteen foot long, and about eleven or
twelve foot in thickness, or circumference. A Seal is very easily killed, as we
often experimented, but two of our men with great stones could not kill one of
these Animals.

That day in the afternoon there came a Canoa from on board the ship with
Provision for us, The ship forced to sea twice or t^^ice.
they fearing least we should be starved. In like manner the Lanch came with
men to cut wood. They told us that the ship came to an Anchor in the other Bay,
but that within half an hour the Cable broke, and they were forced to leave
their Anchor behind them and get out to Sea again. Night being come, we made
our beds of Fern, whereof there is huge plenty upon this Island; together with
great multitudes of Trees like unto our English Box, the which bore a sort of
green Berries, smelling like unto Pimiento, or Pepper. All this day the ship
was forced to ply off at Sea, not being able to get in.

December the thirtieth. The morning of this day we employed in filling water,
and cutting down wood. But in the afternoon, eight of us eleven, went aboard
the ship, all in one and the same Canoa, sending her ashore again with
Provisions for the men that were there. This day in like manner we could not
get into the Harbor, for no sooner the ship came within the parts of Land, but
the wind comeing out of the Bay, blew us clear out again. Thus we were forced
to ply out all that night, and great part of the following day.

On the next day having overcome all difficulties, They get the ship in again.
and many dangers, we came to an Anchor in the afternoon, in fifteen fathom
water, at the distance of a Cable length from shore. Here it was observable,
that we were forced to keep men ashore on purpose to beat off the Seals, mean
while our men filled water at the Sea side, at high water mark, for as much as
that the Seals covet hugely to lie in fresh water. About this Island fish is so
plentiful, that in less then one hours time, two men caught enough for all our
whole company.

Saturday January the first, 1680. Craw-fish.
This day we put up a new Main-top, larger then the old one; and we caught
Craw-fish that were bigger than our English Lobsters.

The next day being January the second, dyed a chief man of our company, whose
name was John Hilliard. The death of the Master of the ship.
This man until our weighing Anchor from the Port of Coquimbo, had been our
Master all the space of this Voyage. But from that time we chose John Cox for
the Starboard, and John Fall for the Larboard watch. The disease whereof he
dyed was the Dropsy. That evening we buried our dead Companion, and gave him a
Volley for his Funeral, according to the usual custom.

On the third of January we had terrible gusts of wind from the shore every
hour. A man lives five years alone.
This day our Pilot told us, that many years ago a certain ship was cast away
upon this Island, and only one man saved, who lived alone upon the Island five
years before any ship came this way to carry him off. The Island has excellent
Land in many Valleys belonging thereunto. This day likewise we fetched our
Anchor which we left in the other Bay when the ship broke her Cable.

Now dangers of the ship.
Tuesday January the fourth, 1680. This day we had such terrible flaws of wind,
that the Cable of our ship brake, and we had undoubtedly been on shore, had not
the other held us fast. At last it came home and we drove outward. By the way
it caught hold of a Rock, and held some time, but at last we haled it up, and
the wind came with so much violence, A great storm
that the waves slew as high as our Main-top, and made all the water of a foam.

January the fifth, the same huge gusts of wind continued all the night last
past, They (...) again
which notwithstanding this day at noon it was brave and calm. But in the
morning the Anchor of our ship gave way again, and we drove to the Eastward
more than half a mile, till at last we happened to fasten again in the depth of
sixty fathom water. Here in this Bay where we rid at Anchor, did run a violent
current, sometimes into, and at other times out of the Bay; so that all was
uncertain with us. But our greatest discomfort was, that our men were all in a
mutiny against each other, and much divided among themselves. The m^n begin to
mutiny.
Some of them being for going home toward England, or our Foreign
Plantations, and that round about America through the Straights of Magallanes,
as Captain Sawkins had designed to do; others of them being for staying longer,
and searching farther into those Seas, till such time as they had got more
Money. This day at noon our Anchor drove again; whereupon to secure our selves
from that dangerous place, They remove to another Bay.
we sailed from thence into the West Bay, and anchored there in twenty five
fathom water, and moored our ship one quarter of a mile from shore.

On Thursday January the sixth, our dissentions being now grown unto a great
height, The Mutineers make a new Commander.
the Mutineers made a new Election of another person to be our chief Captain
and Commander, by virtue whereof they deposed Captain Sharp, whom they
protested they would obey no longer. They chose therefore one of our company,
whose name was John Watling, to command in chief, he having been an old
Privateer, and gained the esteem of being a stout Seaman. The election being
made, all the rest were forced to give their assent unto it, and Captain Sharp
gave over his command, whereupon they immediately made Articles with Watling,
and signed them.

The following day being the seventh, Cook put i^ Irons.
we burnt and tallowed the star-board side of our ship. In this Bay where we
now anchored, we found a Cross cut in the Bark of a Tree, and several Letters
besides. Hereupon, in another Tree up the Gulley, I engraved the two first
Letters of my name, with a Cross over them. This day likewise William Cook,
servant unto Captain Edmund Cook, confessed that his Master had often times
Buggered him in England, leaving his Wife and coming to bed to him the said
William. That the same crime he had also perpetrated in Jamaica; and once in
these Seas before Panama. Moreover, searching his Writings, we found a paper
with all our names written in it, the which it was suspected he designed to
have given unto the Spanish prisoners. For these reasons, this evening our
Captain thought it convenient to put him in Irons, which was accordingly done.
The next day unto the abovementioned in this Paragraph, we finished the other
side of our ship.

Sunday January the ninth, this day was the first Sunday that ever we kept by
command and common consent, Sundays ordered to be kept.
since the loss and death of our valiant Commander Captain Sawkins. This
generous spirited man threw the dice over board, finding them in use on the
said day.

January the Tenth, Great plenty of fish.
this day the weather was very clear and settled again. We caught every day in
this Bay, where we now were, great plenty of fish; and I saw the same day a
shoal of fish a mile and more long.

On the next day being the eleventh, we filled our water, and carried our wood
on board the ship. Moreover, water and wood taken in
our two Canoas went to the other side of the Island to catch Goats, for on the
barren side thereof are found and caught the best; and by Land it is impossible
to go from one side of the Island to the other.

They espy three men of war.
Wednesday January the twelfth, this morning our Canoas returned from catching
of Goats, firing of Guns as they came toward us to give us warning. Being come
on board, they told us, they had espied three sail of ships, which they
conceived to be men of War coming about the Island. Within half an hour after
this notice given by our Boats, the ships came in sight to Leeward of the
Island. Hereupon we immediately slipped our Cables, and put to Sea, taking all
our men on board that were ashore at that time. Only one William a Mosquito
Indian, was then left behind upon the Island, because he could not be found at
this our sudden departure. Upon the Island of Juan Fernandez do grow certain
Trees that are called by the name of Bilbytrees. (...)-trees.
The tops of these trees are excellent Cabbage, and of them is made the same
use that we do of Cabbage in England. Here fish abounds in such quantity*
that on the surface of the water I have taken fish with a bare and naked hook,
that is to say, unbaited. Much fish is taken here of the weight of twenty
pound; the smallest that is taken in the Bay being almost two pound weight.
Very good Timber for building of Houses and other uses, is likewise found upon
this Island. It is distant from the Main Continent the space of ninety five
Leagues, or thereabouts, being situate in 33 d. 40 South. The plats of the
Islands lie N.W. and S.E.

Being got out of the Bay we stood off to Sea, and kept to windward as close as
we could. The biggest of these Spanish men of War, Strength of the men of war.
for such they proved to be, was of the burden of eight hundred Tuns, and was
called El Santo Christo, being mounted with twelve Guns. The second named San
Francisco, was of the port of six hundred Tuns, and had ten guns. The third was
of the carriage of three hundred and fifty Tuns, whose name I have forgot. As
soon as they saw us, they instantly put out their bloody flags, and we, to show
them that we were not as yet daunted, did the same with ours. We kept close
under the wind, and were, to confess the truth, very unwilling to fight them,
by reason they kept all in a knot together, and we could not single out any one
of them, or separate him from the rest. Especially considering, that our
present Commander Watling had showed himself at their appearance to be faint
hearted. As for the Spaniards themselves, they might have easily come unto us,
by reason we lay by several times: but undoubtedly they were cowardly given,
and peradventure as unwilling to engage us, as we were to engage them.

The following day being January the thirteenth, in the morning we could descry
one of the forementioned men of war, under the Leeward side of the Island; and
we believed that the rest were at Anchor thereabouts. At W. by S. and at the
distance of seven Leagues the Island appears thus.

Isle of Juan Fernandez. Lat. 33 d. 40 South.


At noon that day we stood in toward the Island, They gave them the (...).
making as if that we intended to be in with them. But in the afternoon our
Commander propounded the question unto us, whether we were willing now that the
Fleet was to windward, to bare away from them? Unto this we all agreed with one
consent. And hereupon, night being come, with a fresh wind at S.S.E. we stood
away N.E. by N. and thus gave them handsomely the slip, after having out braved
them that day, and the day before.

Isla de Juan Fernandez.


CHAP. XVI. The Bucaniers depart from the Isle of Juan Fernandez, unto that of
Yqueque. Here they take several Prisoners, and learn intelligence of the
posture of affairs at Arica. Cruelty committed upon one of the said prisoners,
who had rightly informed them. They attempt Arica the second time, and take the
Town, but are beaten out of it again before they could plunder, with great loss
of men, many of them being killed, wounded, and made Prisoners. Captain Watling
their chief Commander is killed in this Attacque, and Captain Sharp presently
chosen again, who leads them off, and through Mountains of difficulties,
makes a bold Retreat unto the ship.
HAving bid our enemies adieu, after the manner as was said in the precedent
Chapter, They leave the Isle of J. Fernandez.
the next morning being January the 14th. we bore N. E. We reckoned this day a
N.N.E. one quarter South way, and by it, thirty Leagues. We were four Leagues
Eastward from the Isle of Juan Fernandez, when I took our departure.

Saturday January the 15th, we had hasey weather. This day we made by a N. E.
by N. way eleven Leagues. The same hasey weather continued in like manner the
16th. But about ten that morning the wind dyed away. Our reckoning was a N.E.
by N. way, and thirty six Leagues.

On the 17th we had a soft gale, and a clear observation. We found by it Lat.
28 d. 47 S. Easting seventy Leagues. The next day we had likewise a clear day,
and we reckoned by a N^ E. by N. way, thirty one leagues. By observation Lat.
27 d. 29 South.

Wednesday January the 19th, we had a clear day, as before, They resol^e for
Arica.
and reckoned a N. E. by N. way, and thirty five Leagues and two thirds. By
observation we took Lat. 25 d. 00. South. This day we put up our top-gallant
masts and sails, the which we had taken down at the Island of Juan Fernandez,
when we thought to have gone directly from thence for the Straights of
Magallanes. But now our resolutions were changed, and our course was bent for
Arica, that rich place, the second time, to try what good we could do upon it
by another attempt, in order to the making all our fortunes there. In the
evening of this day we saw Land at a great distance.

^
January the 20th, about midnight past we had a small Land-wind that sprang up
and reached us. At break of day we could descry Land again, at the distance of
nine or ten Leagues more or less. This day was very hot and calm, Easting
ninety two Leagues.

On the 21. we had very little wind, and all along as we went we could descry
high land, and that barren. We sailed N. by E. and N.N.E. along the Coast of
the Continent.

The next day being Saturday the 22 of January, we had very hot weather. (...)
look out for Yqueque.
This day we sailed N. and N. by E. and looked out continually for the Island
of Yqueque, which our Pilot told us was hereabouts. We kept at a just distance
from Land, for fear of being descryed by the enemy.

On the following day, Sunday the 23. we sailed in like manner N.N.E. along the
Coast, which seems to be very full of Bays hereabouts. By observation this
day, we took Lat. 21 d. 49. South.

Monday January the 24th, this day we had an indifferent gale of wind, ^
and we stood N. and by E. the wind being S.S.E. We found Latitude by
observation 21 d. 02 South. Our whole Easting I reckoned to be ninety two
leagues and an half. In the afternoon of this day Captain Watling our
Commander, and twenty five men more departed from the ship in two Canoas, with
design to seek for, and take the Island of Yqueque, and there to gain
intelligence of the posture of affairs at Arica. We were at the distance of
twelve leagues from shore, when they went away from the ship.

The next day by a clear observation, They find it not.
we found Lat. 20 d. 40 South. At four in the afternoon this day, returned one
of our Canoas, bringing word that they could not find the Island, though they
had searched for it very diligently. At night came the other, being brought
back by a wrong sign given us by the first Canoa. This second Canoa had landed
upon the Continent, and there found a track, the which they followed for some
little space. Here they met a dead Whale, with whose bones the Spaniards had
built a Hut, and set up a Cross. There lay also many pieces of broken Jars.
They observed likewise, that hereabouts upon the Coast were many Bays, good
landing, and anchoring for ships. That evening about seven of the clock, a
fresh gang departed from the ship to seek for the same Island, mean while we
lay becalmed all night, driving about a league to leeward.

Wednesday January the 26th, Rich Mines on the Continent.
we had extreme hot weather. This day the Spanish Pilot told us, that on the
Continent over against us, and at the distance of a very little way within the
Land, are many rich Mines of Silver, but that the Spaniards dared not to open
them for fear of an Invasion from some Foreign enemy or other. We sailed
North, at the distance of about two leagues from shore. At noon we had an
observation, and found Lat. 20 d. 21 S. At four of the clock we saw a smoke
made by our men, The Island i^* ^ound.
close by a white clift, which proved to be the Island. Hereupon we immediately
sent away another Canoa with more men, to supply them in their attempts. But in
the mean while the first Canoa which had departed the evening before this day,
came aboard, bringing with them four prisoners, two old white men, and two
Indians.

An account of the Island.
The other Canoa which set out last, brought back Molossus, Fish, and two Jars
of wine. To windward of the said Island, is a small village of eighteen or
twenty houses, having a small Chapel nigh unto it, built of stone, and for
adornment thereof, it is stuck full of Hides, or the skins of Seals. They found
about fifty people in this Hamlet, but the greatest part of them made their
escape at the arrival of the Canoa. Unto this Island do frequently come Barks
from Arica, which City is not far distant from thence to fetch clay, and they
have already transported away a considerable part thereof. The poor Indians,
Inhabitants or Natives of this Island, are forced to bring all the fresh water
they use, the full distance of eleven leagues from thence, that is to say, from
a River name Camarones, which lies to Leeward of the Island. The Barque
wherein they used to bring it, was then gone for water, when our men landed
upon the place. The Island all over is white, but the bowels thereof are of a
reddish sort of earth. From the shore is seen here a great path which leads
over the Mountains into the Country. The Indians of this Island use to eat much
and often, a sort of Leaves that are of a taste much like unto our Bay Leaves in
England. Insomuch, that their teeth are died of a green color, by the
continual use thereof. The Inhabitants go stark naked, and are very robust and
strong people; yet notwithstanding they live more like beasts than men.

^
Thursday January the 27th, this morning on board the ship, we examined one of
the old men, who were taken prisoners upon the Island the day before. But
finding him in many Lies, as we thought, concerning Arica, our Commander
ordered him to be shot to death, which was accordingly done. Our old Commander
Captain Sharp was much troubled in his mind and dissatisfyed at this cruelty
and rash proceeding; whereupon he opposed it as much as he could. But seeing he
could not prevail, he took water and washed his hands, Sharp (...) at it.
saying, Gentlemen, I am clear of the bl^od of this old man; and I will warrant
you a hot day for this piece of cruelty, whenever we come to fight at Arica.
These words were found at the latter end of this expedition of Arica, to
contain a true and certain prophecy, as shall be related hereafter.

The other old man being under examination, informed us, that the Island of
Yqueque aforementioned, Another prisoner examined.
belonged unto the Governor of Arica, who was Proprietor thereof; and that he
allowed unto these men a little wine, and other Necessaries, to live upon for
their sustenance. That he himself had the superintendance of forty or fifty of
the Governors slaves, who caught fish and dried it, for the profit of the said
Governor; and he sold it afterward to the inland Towns, and reaped a
considerable benefit thereby. That by a Letter received from Arica, eight days
ago, they understood there was then in the Harbor of Arica, three ships from
Chile, and one Bark. That they had raised there a Fortification mounted with
Twelve Copper Guns. But that when we were there before, they had conveyed out
of the Town unto the neighboring stantions, all their Plate, Gold, and Jewels,
burying it there in the ground, and concealing it after several manners and
ways. The which whether it were now returned or not, he could not easily tell.
That there were two great places, the one at ten, the other at twenty five
leagues distance from Arica, at which Towns lay all their strength and
treasure. That the day before had passed a Post to declare our having been at
Coquimbo. That the Embargo laid on all vessels going to the Northward, was now
taken off; so that a free passage was allowed them. That by Land it was
impossible to go from hence unto Arica in less than four or five days, for as
much as they must carry water for themselves and Horses for the whole journey.
At last, that those Arms that were brought from Lima unto Arica, as was
mentioned above, were now carried away from thence unto Buenos Airs. All these
things pleased us mighty well to hear them. But however, Captain Sharp was
still much dissatisfyed, by reason we had shot the old man. For he had given us
information to the full, and with all manner of truth, how that Arica was
greatly fortified, and much more than before; but our misfortune was, that we
took his information to be all contrary to the truth.

The leaves of which we made mention above, are brought down unto this Island
in whole Bales, They take the Barq^e of the Island.
and then distributed unto the Indians by a short allowance given to each man.
This day we had very hot weather, and a S. W. Sea. By observation we found Lat.
20 d. 13 South. Besides the things abovementioned, our prisoners informed us,
that at Arica the Spaniards had built a breast-work round about the Town; and
one also in every street, that in case one end of the Town were taken, they
might be able to defend the other. We stood off and in for the greatest part of
this day. In the afternoon we were eight leagues and an half distant from
shore, with a fresh wind. That morning moreover we took the Barque that was at
the River of Camarones, to fill water for the Island.

Friday January the 28th, last night about midnight we left the ship, They
embark in the Boats for Arica.
and embarked our selves in the Barque aforementioned, the Lanch, and four
Canoas, with design to take Arica by surprizal. We rowed and sailed all night,
making in for the shore.

Saturday January the 29th, about break of day this day, we got under shore,
They lie hidden by day.
and there hid our selves among the Rocks for all the day long, fearing lest we
should be descryed by the enemy, before we came to Arica. At this time we were
about five leagues to Southward of Arica, nigh Quebrada de San Vitor, a place
so called upon that Coast. Night being come, we rowed away from thence.

Sunday January the 30th, 1680. this day (being the day that is consecrated in
our English Calendar, They land and atta^^e the (...).
unto the Martyrdom of our glorious King Charles the First) in the morning
about Sunrise, we landed amongst some Rocks, at the distance of four miles,
more or less, to the Southward from Arica. We put on shore ninety two men in
all, the rest remaining in the Boats, to keep and defend them from being
surprised by the enemy, to the intent we might leave behind us a safe retreat,
in case of necessity. Unto these men we left strict orders, that if we made one
smoke from the Town, or adjoining fields, they should come after us toward the
harbor of Arica with one Canoa; but in case we made two, that they should
bring all away, leaving only fifteen men in the Boats. As we marched from our
landing place toward the Town, we mounted a very steep hill, and saw from
thence no men, nor Forces of the enemy; which caused us to hope we were not as
yet descryed, and that we should utterly surprise them. But when we were come
about half of the way unto the Town, we espied three horsemen, who mounted the
Look-out hill; and seeing us upon our march, they rid down full speed toward
the City, to give notice of our approach. Our Commander Watling chose out forty
of our number, to attaque the Fort, and sent us away first thitherwards, the
rest being designed for the Town. They assault the Fort.
We that were appointed for the Fort, had ten hand Grenades among us, when we
gave the assault, and with them, as well as with our other Arms, we attacked
the Castle, and exchanged several shot with our enemies. But at last, seeing
our main body in danger of being overborn with the number of our enemies, we
gave over that attempt on the Fort, and ran down in all have unto the valley,
to help and assist them in the fight. Here the Battle was very desperate, and
they killed three, and wounded two more of our men from their outworks, before
we could gain upon them. But our rage increasing with our wounds, we still
advanced, and at last beat the enemy out of all, and filled every street in the
City with dead bodies. The enemy made several retreats unto several places,
from one breast-work to another; The Town taken.
and we had not a sufficient number of men wherewith to man all places taken.
Insomuch, that we had no sooner beat them out of one place, but they came
another way, and manned it again with new Forces and fresh men.

^
We took in every place where we vanquished the enemy, great number of
Prisoners, more indeed, then peradventure we ought to have done, or we kn^w
well what to do withal; they being too many for such a small body as ours was
to manage. These prisoners informed us, that we had been descryed no less than
three days before, from the Island of Yqueque, whereby they were in expectation
of our arrival every hour, as knowing we had still a design to make a second
attempt upon that place. That into the City were come four hundred Soldiers
from Lima, the which, besides their own, had brought seven hundred Arms for the
use of the Country People; and that in the Town they had six hundred armed men,
and in the Fort three hundred.

^
Being now in possession of the City, or the greatest part thereof, we sent unto
the Fort, commanding them to surrender. But they would not vouchsafe to send us
any answer. Hereupon we advanced toward it, and gave it a second Attaque,
wherein we persisted very vigorously for a long time. Being not able to carry
it, we got upon the top of a house that stood nigh unto it, and from thence
fired down into the Fort, killing many of their men, and wounding them at our
ease and pleasure. But mean while we were busyed in this Attaque, the rest of
the enemies Forces had taken again several Posts of the Town, and began to
surround us in great numbers, with design to cut us off. Hereupon we were
constrained to desist the second time, The spaniards (...)
as before, from assaulting the Fort, and make head against them. This we no
sooner had done, but their numbers and vigor increasing every moment, we found
our selves to be over powered, and consequently we thought it conve^^ent to
retreat unto the plaee where our wounded men (...), under the hands of our
Surgeons, that is to say, our (...). At this time our new Commander Captain
(...), both our Quartermasters, and a great many o(...) our men were killed,
besides those that were woun^^^ and disabled to fight. So that now the enemy
rallying against us, and beating us from place to place, we were in a very
distracted condition, and in more likelihood to perish every man, than escape
the bloodiness of that day. Now we found the words of Captain Sharp to bear a
true prophecy, being all very sensible, that we had had a day too hot for us,
after that cruel heat in killing and murdering in cold blood, the old Mestizo
Indian whom we had taken prisoner at Yqueque, as before was mentioned.

Being surrounded with difficulties on all sides, and in great disorder, Sharp
is chosen anew.
as having no head nor leader to give orders for what was to be done, we were
glad to turn our eyes unto our good and old Commander Captain Bartholomew
Sharp, and beg of him very earnestly to commiserate our condition, and carry us
off. It was a great while that we were reiterating our supplications unto him,
before he would take any notice of our request in this point. So much was he
displeased with the former mutiny of our people against him, all which had been
occasioned by the instigation of Mr. Cook. But Sharp is a man of an undaunted
courage, and of an excellent conduct, not fearing in the least to look an
insulting enemy in the face, and a person that knows both the Theory and
practical parts of Navigation, as well as most do. Hereupon, at our request and
earnest petition, They retreat with great difficulty.
he took upon him the command in chief again, and began to distribute his
orders for our safety. He would have brought off our Surgeons, but that they
had been drinking in the mean while that we assaulted the Fort, and thus would
not come with us when they were called. They killed and took of our number
twenty eight men, besides eighteen more that we brought off, who were
desperately wounded. At this time we were all extreme faint for want of water
and victuals, whereof we had had none all that day. Moreover, we were almost
choked with the dust of the Town; this being so much raised by the work that
their great Guns had made, that we could scarcely see each other. They beat us
out of the Town, and then followed us into the Savanas, or open fields, still
charging us as fast as they could. But when they saw that we rallyed again,
resolving to dye one by another, they then ran from us into the Town, and
sheltred themselves under their breast-works. Thus we retreated in as good
order as we could possibly observe in that confusion. But their Horsemen
followed us as we retired, and fired at us all the way, though they would not
come within reach of our Guns; for their own reached farther then ours, and
out-shot us more than one third. We took the seaside for our greater security;
the which when the enemy saw, they betook themselves unto the Hills, rolling
down great stones, and whole Rocks to destroy us. In the mean while those of
the Town examined our Surgeons, and other men whom they had made prisoners.
These gave them our signs that we had left unto our Boats that were behind us,
so that they immediately blew up two smoaks, which were perceived by the
Canoas. This was the greatest of our dangers. For had we not come at that
instant that we did, unto the seaside, our Boats had been gone, they being
already under sail, and we had inevitably perished every man. Thus we put off
from the shore, and got on board about ten of the clock at night, having been
involved in a continual and bloody fight with the enemy all that day long.

CHAP. XVII. A description of the Bay of Arica. They sail from hence unto the
Port of Guasco, where they get Provisions. A draught of the said Port. They
land again at Hilo to revenge the former affronts, and took what they could
find.
HAving ended our attempt at Arica, the next day, They depart from Arica
being January the last, we plied to and fro in sight of the Port, to see if
they would send out the three ships we had seen in the Harbor to fight us. For
upon them we hoped to revenge the defeat and disappointment we had received at
the Town the day before. But our expectations in this point also were
frustrated, for not one of those vessels offered to stir.

The houses of this Town of Arica are not above eleven foot high, as being
built of earth, An account of Arica.
and not of brick or timber. The Town it self is foursquare in figure, and at
one corner thereof stands the Castle, which may easily be commanded even with
small Arms, from the hill which lies close unto it. This place is the
Embarcadero, or Port-Town of all the Mineral Towns that lie hereabouts, and
hence is fetched all the Plate that is carried to Lima, the head-City of Peru.
I took the Bay of Arica as it appeared to me thus.

A description of Arica


On Tuesday February the first, we had a clear observation, and by it we found
Lat. 19 d. 06. South. They make a s^all dividend.
This day we shared the old remains of our Plate, taken in some of our former
booties. Our shares amounted only unto thirty seven pieces of Eight to each man.

N. B. Here I would have my Reader to take notice, that from this day forwards,
I kept no constant Diary or Journal, as I had done before, at least for some
considerable space of time, as you shall see hereafter; my disease and sickness
at Sea being the occasion of intermitting what I had never failed to do in all
the course of this Voyage till now. Only some few Memorandums, as my weakness
gave leave, I now and then committed to paper, the which I shall give you as I
find them, toward a continuance of this History. Thus:

Monday February the 14th, this night between eleven add twelve of the clock
dyed on board our ship William Cook, Captain Cooks man dies.
who was the servant aforementioned unto Captain Edmund Cook, of whom likewise
mention has been often made in this Journal. He desisted not in the least,
even at his last hour, to accuse his Master of Baggering him, as before was
related. Moreover, that his Master should say, It was no sin to steal from us,
who thought it none to rob the Spaniards.

February the 16th, 1680. this day we found our selves to be in Lat. 27 d. 30
South. We had a constant breeze at S. E. and S. S. E. till we got about two
hundred Leagues from land. Then at the Eclipse of the Moon, we had a a calm for
two or three days: Several calms.
and then a breeze at North for the space of two days; after which we had a
calm again for two or three days more.

March the first we found Latitude by observation 34 d. 01 South. Dirty weather
At this time begins the dirty weather in these Seas. We lay under a pair of
courses, the wind being at S. E. and E. S. E. with a very great Sea at S.S.E

March the third, all hands were called up, and a Council held; wherein
considering it was now dirty weather, They resolve to go home over land.
and late in the year, we bore up the Helm, and resolved to go unto the Main
for water, and thence to Leeward, and so march over land toward home, or at
least to the North Sea. But God directed us from following this resolution, as
you shall hear hereafter. We being thus determined that day, we stood N.E. with
a strong wind at S.E. and E.S.E.

On March the fifth dyed our Coquimbo Indian. The seventh we had a west-wind,
our course being E. by N. The eighth of the said Month we were put to an
allowance, Are put to an allowance.
having only one Cake of bread a day. March the tenth we had a strong
South Wind.

They descry la^d.
On March the 12th we fell in with the main land, something to Leeward of
Coquimbo. Within the Island of Paxaros are double lands, in whose Valleys are
fires for the melting of Copper, Furnaces of Copper.
with which Metal these Hills abound. Off to sea-board it is a rocky land, and
within it is sandy. About the distance of eight Leagues to Leeward is a rocky
point with several Keys or Rocks about it. About one half mile to Leeward of
this point turns in the Port of Guasco. Point of Guasco.
Right against the anchoring are three Rocks, close under the shore.

Being arrived here, we landed on shore threescore men of our company, They
land.
with design to get Provisions, and any thing else that we could purchase. The
people of the Country ran all away as soon as they saw us. There was building
on shore in this Port, a fire-Barque of sixteen or eighteen Tuns burden, with
a Cock-boat belonging unto it. And get Provisions.
We took one Indian Prisoner, and with him went up the space of six or seven
miles into the Country, unto an Indian Town of Threescore or Fourscore houses.
From thence we came back unto the Church, which is distant four miles from the
Seaside, and lodged there all night. Here are multitudes of good Sheep and
Goats in the Country adjoining to this Port, and it is watered with an
excellent fresh water River; but the getting of water is very difficult, the
banks being very high, or otherwise inaccessible. However, we made a shift to
get in five hundred Jars of water. Furthermore, we brought away one hundred and
twenty Sheep, and fourscore Goats, with which stock we victualled our vessel
for a while. As for Oxen, they had driven them away farther up into the
Country. An account of Guasco.
The jurisdiction of Guasco it self is governed by a Teniente, or
Deputy Governor, and a Friar, and is in subjection unto the City of la Serena
abovementioned, as being a dependence thereupon. Here grows both Corn,
Pease, Beans, and several other sorts of Grain; and for Fruits, this place is
not inferior unto Coquimbo. Here we found likewise a Mill to grind Corn, and
about two hundred bushels thereof ready ground; the which we conveyed on board
our ship. Every house of any account has branches of water running through
their yards or courts. The Inhabitants had hidden their Wine, and other best
things, as Plate, and Jewels, having descryed us at sea before our landing:
They were descryed before landing.
so that our booty here, besides Provisions, was inconsiderable. However, we
caught some few Fowls, and eat five or six Sheep, and likewise a great Hog,
which tasted very like unto our English Pork. The hills are all barren, so that
the Country that bears Fruit, is only an excellent Valley, being four times
as broad as that of Hilo abovementioned. These people of Guasco serve the Town
of Coquimbo with many sorts of Provisions. We gave the Indian whom we had taken
his liberty, and I took the Port of Guasco thus.

A Description of Guasco


Tuesday March the 15th, 1680. They depart from Guasco.
This morning we departed from the Port of Guasco aforementioned, with very
little wind, having done nothing considerable there, excepting only the taking
in the few Provisions above-related. We were bent therefore to seek greater
matters, having experimented but ill success in most of our attempts hitherto.
On March the 20th, Moro de Horse, being high doubled Land, and at E. by N.
appeared thus unto us, in Lat. 24 d. South.

Moro de Horse. Lat. 24 d. S.


At North, and at the distance of ten Leagues, more or less, we saw the great
and high hill of Morro Moreno, being so called from its color. It is a dark
hill, but much higher and bigger than the other aforementioned, and appears
like unto an Island, thus.

Morro Moreno. Lat. 23 d. 30 S.


We had now very dark weather all along the Coast. On March the 21 we were West
from the Bay of Mexillones. Bay of Mexillones.
The point of this Bay one League upwards, represents exactly a Sugar Loaf.

They seek for the River Loa.
March the 22. This day our Boat and Canoas went from the ship, being well
manned, to find the River Loa. They went also about two Leagues to Leeward of
it, But cannot f^^d it.
unto a fishing village, but could find no place fit for landing; whereupon
they returned without acting any thing. The next day another Canoa of our
company went out upon the same exploit, but found the same success. Yet
notwithstanding, here Sir Francis Drake watered, and built a Church, as we were
told by our Pilot. This Church is now standing on the Seaside by the River,
whose mouth is now dry. There are several Huts to windward of it; and from the
said Church or Chapel goes a great path up the hills, which leads to Pica.

On Thursday March the 24th, we found Latitude by observation, 20 d. 10 South.
This day also we saw Land, at eighteen leagues distance more or less.

Sunday March the 27th, we saw Mora de Sama, and La cumba at some distance. The
same day we had an observation, and found by it Lat. 18 d. 17 South. That
evening we departed from the ship with our Boats and Canoas, toward the Coast
of Hilo, upon which we now were. We landed and took the village of Hilo
undiscryed, They s^rprize Hilo.
they scarce suspecting we could have any design upon that place the second
time. We caught the Friar who was Chaplain unto the Town, and most of the
Inhabitants asleep, making them prisoners at war. Here we heard a flying
report, as if five thousand English had lately taken Panama the second time,
and kept it. But this rumor, as it should seem, proved to be a falsity. At
this time the River came out, and was overflown, it being near the time of the
freshes. Here the prisoners told us, (...) of their Surgeons at Arica.
that in Arica ten of our men were still alive, whereof three were Surgeons,
all the rest being dead of their wounds. The Spaniards sent word unto Hilo,
that we had killed them seventy men, and wounded three times as many of their
Forces. But here the Inhabitants said, that of forty five men sent to the
relief of Arica from hence, there came home but only two alive. We filled what
water we pleased here; but a small boat that we brought from Guasco broke loose
from us, and was s^aved to pieces on the Rocks. Here we took eighteen Jars of
wine, and good store of new Figs. On Tuesday following we went up to the
Sugar-work, mentioned in our former expedition against Hilo, and found all
Fruits just ripe, and sit for eating. There we laded seven Mules downwards with
Molossus and Sugar. The Inhabitants told us moreover, that those men who came
to fight us when we were here the first time, were most of them Boys, and had
only fifty Firearms amongst them. They being commanded by an English Gentleman
who is Married at Arequipa. Likewise that the owner of the Sugar-work
aforementioned was now engaged in a Suit at Law against the Town of Hilo,
pretending it was not the English who robbed him, and spoilt his Ingenio, when
we were there before, but the Townsmen themselves. This day in the evening we
sailed from Hilo with dark weather, and little wind, which continued for
several days afterward.

CHAP. XVIII. They depart from the Port of Hilo, unto the Gulf of Nicoya, where
they take down their decks, and mend the sailing of their ship. Forty seven of
their Companions leave them, and go home over land. A description of the Gulf
of Nicoya. They take two Barks and some Prisoners there. Several other
remarques belonging to this Voyage.
They leave Hilo.
FRom the time that we set sail from the Port of Hilo, until Sunday April the
tenth, 1681. nothing happened unto us that might be accounted remarkable; neither
did I take any notes all this while, by reason of my indisposition
aforementioned. This day we could hear distinctly the breaking of the Seas on
the shore, but could see no land, the weather being extreme dark and hasey.
Notwithstanding about noon it cleared up, and we found our selves to be in the
Bay called de Malabrigo. The land in this Bay runs due East and West. By an
observation made, we found this day 6 d. 35 South. We saw from hence the
Leeward Island of Lobos, or Seals, being nothing else than a rocky and scraggy
place. On the S.W. side thereof is a red hill, which is a place about the said
Island, where the Indian Fishermen much frequent. It is situate in Lat. 6 d. 15
S. This day likewise in the evening we saw the Point called Aguja.

On Saturday April the 16th, we came within a league distance of the West End
of the Island of Plate, (...) Pla^e.
above described. (...) among themselves.
The next day unto this, being Sunday April the 17th, 1681. our Mutineers broke
out again into an open dissension, they having been much dissatisfyed all along
the course of this Voyage, but more especially since our unfortunate fight at
Arica, and never entirely reconciled unto us since they chose Captain Watling,
and deposed Sharp at the Isle of Juan Fernandez, as was related above. Nothing
now could appease them, nor serve their turn, but a separation from the rest of
the company, and a departure from us. Hereupon this day they departed from the
ship, to the number of forty seven men, all in company together, Forty seven
return home.
with design to go over land by the same way they came into those Seas. The
rest who remained behind, did fully resolve, and faithfully promise to each
other, they would stick close together. They took five slaves in their company,
to guide and do them other service in that Journey. This day we had 1 d. 30
minutes Southern Latitude. We sailed N. N. W. before the wind.

The next day after their departure, being April the 18th, we began to go to
work about taking down one of our upper decks, Te^y begin to take down the
decks.
thereby to cause our ship still to mend her sailing. We now made a N. W. by N.
way, and had Latitude by observation 25 North, the wind being at S. W.

On April the 19th we made a N. W. by N. way. This day our observation was Lat.
2 d. 45 North. In the afternoon we had cloudy weather. The following day
likewise we made the same way, and by it seventy miles, according to my
reckoning.

On the twenty first in the morning we had some small showers of rain, and but
little wind. We saw some Turtle upon the surface of the water, and great
quantity of fish. We caught twenty six small Dolphins. By a N. W. by N. way, we
reckoned this day forty miles.

April the 22. this day we caught seven large Dolphins, Dolphins caught.
and one Bonito. We saw likewise whole multitudes of Turtle swimming upon the
water, and took five of them. We had an observation that gave us Lat. 5 d. 28
North. Hereabouts runs a great and strong current. This day we lowered the
quarter deck of our ship, and made it even unto the upper deck.

They save water from the rain that fell.
The following day we had but small wind, and yet great showers of rain.
Hereupon every man saved water for himself, and a great quantity was saved for
the whole company. In the morning of this day we caught eight Bonitos, and in
the evening ten more.

On April the 24th we had both cloudy and rainy weather. By an observation we
had Lat. 7 d. 37 North. Meridian difference was ninety two Leagues. This
morning we caught forty Bonitos, and in the evening thirty more. In the
afternoon we stood North, the wind being at S. W. by S.

Isla del Cano.
Monday April the 25th, all the night before this day, we had huge gusts of wind
and rain. At break of day we were close in with Land, which upon examination
proved to be the Island of Cano. To westward thereof is very high land. About
noon this day it cleared up, and we had Lat. 8 d. 34 N. In the evening we sent
a Canoa to search the Island. In it they found good water, and even ground, but
withal, an open road. At night we stood off the first watch, and the last we
had a land wind.

They anchor ^ere.
The next day following, at day light we stood in, and about noon we came to an
anchor at the East side of the Island aforementioned, which is not in breadth
above one league over. In the afternoon we removed from our former anchoring
place, and anchored again within shot of the N. E. point of the Island. In this
place grows great number of Cacao trees, Cacao-trees.
all over the greatest part of the Isle. On the North side thereof are many
Rivulets of good water to be found in sandy bays. What else they (...).
We saw moreover some good Hogs on shore, whereof we killed one and two pigs.
Here are great numbers of Turtle-doves, and huge store of fish, but withal,
very shye to be caught. To Northward of the Island it looks thus.

Isla del Cano. Lat. 8 d. 45 N.


April the 27th, we had some rain and wind the forepart of the day; but the
afternoon was fair. They depart from the Isle of Cano.
The next day in like manner we had great quantity of rain. On Saturday the
30th, about seven of the clock in the morning we weighed from the aforesaid
Island with little wind, and stood N. W. That day fell much rain with great
thunder and lightning.

Monday, May the 2d. This day we observed and found Lat. 9 D. N. The Coast all
along appeared to us very high and mountainous, and scarce six hours did pass,
Much thunder and rain.
but we had thunder, lightning, and rain. The like continued for the two days
following, wherein we had nothing but almost continual thunder and rain.

On May the 5th we had an indifferent fair day. And that evening we were right
off of the Gulf of Nicoya. Gulf of Nicoya


Friday, May the 6th. This morning we saw the Cape very plain before us. N. by
E. from it, are certain keys at eight leagues distance, close under the Main.
We steered N. N. W. toward the biggest of them; at whose E. S. E. side are two
or three small rocks. The Main Eastward is fine Savana, or plain and even land,
through which goes a very great road, which is to be seen from off at Sea. At
noon the Port of Caldero, Puerto Caldero.
commonly called Puerto Caldero bore N. from us. At which time the Ebb forced
us to sound in the middle of the Gulf, where we found fourteen fathom water.
After this we anchored nearer unto the Eastern keys, in the depth of nineteen
fathom, where we had oosey ground.

Saturday, May the 7th. The night before this day was very fair all night long.
In the morning we went in a Canoa, being several in company, to seek for a
place to lay our ship in. Amongst the Islands along the shore, we found many
brave holes, but little or no water in them, which caused us to dislike what we
had found. On one of the said Islands we happened to find a hat, and many empty
jarrs of water, which showed us that some people had been lately there. About
eight in the evening our ship weighed anchor at young flood, and about three
after noon we anchored again in six fathom water.

Sunday, May the 8th, 1681. The night before this day, we had much rain with
thunder and lightning. The morning being come, our Commander Captain Sharp
departed from the ship in two Canoas, with twenty two men in his company, out
of design to surprise any vessels or people they could meet hereabouts. In the
mean while, in the evening we drove up with the tide (there being no wind) in
the ship, They take some prisoners, and two barks.
for the space of two or three leagues higher, till that we found but three
fathom high water. Here we backed a stern. At this time we saw one of our
Canoas coming off from the Island, that was at head of us (which was named
Chira) calling for more men and arms, and saying there was two sail of ships
that were seen higher up the Gulf. Hereupon eight of us went away with them
ashore, whereof two joined the party aforementioned, and the six remaining were
appointed to guard the prisoners they had taken. Unto these we showed our
selves very kind, as finding that they were very sensible of the cruelties o^
the Spaniards toward them and their whole Nation. Here we found to the number
of eight or nine houses, and a small Chapel standing. These people have been
in former times a considerable and great Nation, but are now almost destroyed
and extinguished by the Spaniards. We ascended a creek of the Sea for the space
of a league, or thereabouts, and took there by surprisal two Barks, which were
the two sail they had told us of before. On of these Barks was the same we had
taken before at Panama, of which I made mention at the beginning of this
History.

On Monday following this day, we weighed anchor with our barks, and drove down
the creek, with the tide at ebb, toward our ship. They learn intelligence, and
get some Spanish Carpenters
The prisoners that we had taken here, informed us, that when we were to
Westward in these Seas before, there lay one hundred men at the Port of Santa
Maria. That our men who left us at the Island of Cayboa, as was mentioned
above, met the other Bark that we lost at Sea, as we were sailing thither, and
thus all went over land together. That in the North Seas, near Puerto Velo,
they had taken a good ship, and that for this cause, ever since the Spaniards
had kept at the mouth of the river of Santa Maria, three Armadilla-barks, to
stop and hinder others from going that way. On Monday night our Captain with
twenty four men, went from the ship into another creek, and there took several
prisoners, among whom was a Shipwright and his men, who were judged able to do
us good service in the altering of our ship; those Carpenters being there
actually building two great ships for the Spaniards. Having taken these men,
they made a float of timber to bring down the Tools and Instruments they were
working withal. Here it happened that they put several tools, and some quantity
of iron-work, into a Doree, to be conveyed down the river with the float. But
this Doree sank by the way, as being over-laden with iron, and one of our
company, A Scotchman drown^d.
by name John Alexander a Scotchman, was unfortunately drowned by this means.

On Thursday following, May the 12th, we sent a Canoa from the ship, and found
the Doree that was drowned. That evening likewise drove down the body of our
drowned man aforementioned. Hereupon we took him up, He is found and buried.
and on Friday morning following threw him overboard, giving him three French
vollies for his customary Ceremony. Both this day and the day before, we
fetched water from a Point near the houses, on the Island of Chira
aforementioned. From the ship also we sent away a Spanish Merchant, A Merchant
sent to seek a ransom.
whom we had taken among the prisoners, to fetch a certain number of Beeves,
that might serve for a ransom of the new bark taken here. This day the weather
was fair; but on Sunday following it rained from morning until night.

On Monday, May the 16th, we began to work all hands together on our ship. On
Tuesday an Indian boy named Peter ran away from us. A boy runs away.
He belonged unto Captain Sawkins, and waited upon him as his Servant. On
Wednesday died an Indian slave, A slave dies.
whose name was Salvador. On Thursday we heard thirty or forty guns fired on
the Main, which caused us to think that these would also turn to Hilo Beeves.
On Friday we caught cockles, which were as large as both our fists. At night
there fell such dreadful rain, with thunder, Much thunder and rain.
lightning, and wind, that for the space of two hours the air was as light as
day; the thunder not ceasing all the while. On Sunday we continued to work; the
night before which day we had more thunder, lightning, and rain.

Wednesday, May the 25th. This day we finished our great piece of work, They
finish their work.
viz. the taking down the deck of our ship. Besides which, the length of every
mast was shortened, and all was now served and rigged. Insomuch that it would
seem incredible unto strangers, could they but see how much work we performed
in the space of a fortnight or less. They set at (...).
The same day likewise we set at liberty our Spanish Carpenters, who had been
very serviceable to us all this while; the old Pilot; the old Spaniard taken at
the Isle of Yqueque; and several others of our Spanish prisoners and slaves.
Unto these people, but chiefly unto the Spanish Carpenters as a reward of their
good service, we gave the new Bark, which we had taken at this place. But the
old Bark we thought fit to keep, They (...) men into the other Bark.
and sail her in our company, as we did, putting into her for this purpose six
of our own men and two slaves. The next day we fell down as low as Vanero, a
place so called hereabouts, and would have sailed away again that very evening,
Vanero.
but that our tackle gave way in hoisting our anchor, whereby we lay still. In
the Gulf of Nicoya we experimented most commonly a fresh breeze, and at night a
land wind.

Friday, May the 27th. This day likewise we drove down with the tide as low as
Cavallo, another place so named in the Gulf. Here we stayed and watered that
day; and here one Cannis Marcy our Interpreter, Their Interpre^ runs away.
ran away from us.

On May the 28th in the morning we sailed from thence, and came within twenty
nine leagues of that rich and rocky shore. Yet notwithstanding we had but seven
fathom water. Here I saw this day a white Porpus. A white Porpus.
Behind this Island is a Town called New Cape Blanco. At Puerto Caldero
abovementioned is but one Storehouse to be seen. We came to an anchor in the
depth of seven fathom water, at the distance of a league from shore, and caught
five Turtle.

May the 29th. This day we saw Cape Blanco. Both this day and the day following
we continued turning it out of the Gulf, against a South wind. Here I took the
ensuing demonstration of the Gulf of Nicoya, which, for the use of the Reader,
I have hereunto annexed.

Gulf of Nicoya described


CHAP. XIX. They depart from the Gulf of Nicoya, unto Golfo Dulce, where they
careen their Vessel. An account of their sailings along the Coast. Also a
description of Golfo Dulce. The Spaniards force the Indians of Darien unto a
Peace, by a stratagem contrived in the name of the English.
WEdnesday, June the first, 1681. They leave the Gulf.
This day we had very fair weather, and yet withal but little wind. Hereupon
the Tide, or Current, drove us to the Westward of Cabo Blanco. Off of this
Cape, and at the distance of two miles within the Sea, is situate a naked and
nothing but barren Key. At E. by N. and at four leagues distance, Cape Blanco
gave us this appearance.

Cabo BLANCO. Lat. 9 D. 30 N.


The Coast here along runs N. W half W. and grows lower and lower toward
Cape Guyones. This Cape now mentioned, at seven leagues distance, and at N. W.
by N. appeared thus unto us.

Cabo de Guyones. Lat. 10 D. 00 N.


At first sight the Cape appeared very like unto two Islands. The latter part
of this day was cloudy, which hindered much our prospect.

June the 2d. This morning we saw land, which appeapeared like several Keys to
us at N. W. by N. and at seven leagues distance. It was the land of Puerto de
Velas, and appeared thus.

Puerto de VELAS.


They resolve to careen, and then cruize.
This evening our Captain called us together, and asked our opinions concerning
the course we ought to steer. Having discussed the points by him proposed
amongst us, we all resolved to bear up for Golfo Dulce, and there to careen our
Vessels. This being done, we concluded to go from thence unto the Cape, and
cruize thereabouts under the Equinoctial. We observed this day that our Bark
taken at the Gulf of Nicoya, sailed much better than our ship.

Friday, June the 3d. The night before this day was very fair, and we had a
fresh wind, our course being S. E. This morning we saw no land. In the evening
the wind came about at S. S. W. and S. W. by S.

June the 4th. This day we stood E. and E. by N. the wind being W. and W. by N.
In the evening we stood N. E. and descryed land at the distance of twenty four
leagues, more or less, from Cabo Blanco.

Sunday, June the 5th. Last night we lay by for all, or the greatest part
thereof. This morning we saw the Island of Cano above described, which bore E.
S. E. from us. We saw likewise multitudes of fish, but they would not bite.
Also Water-snakes of diverse colors.

June the 6th. All the night past we had rain, and with it but little wind.
Yea, scarce enough to carry us clear off from the Island aforementioned.
Toward morning we had a fresh wind at N. N. W. So then we stood out S. until
morning, and this being come, we stood N. E. by E. The land runs from Punta
Mala to Golfo Dulce, and Punta Borrica, E. S. E. half S. At nine leagues
distance we laid the Island of Cano. And Punta Borrica at the same distance, or
thereabouts, looks thus.

Punta Borrica. Lat. 8 D. 00 N.


The West End of Golfo Dulce is very high land, and a high rock lie close off
it. Besides which, two other rocks lies farther out; the outermost of which is
a mile distant from the shore. The East Side is also high, but breaks into
small points and bays, growing lower and lower to Punta Borrica. We came within
the mouth of the Gulf about the space of a mile. They anchor.
Then we anchored in eight fathom and a half water. The mouth of the Gulf is
almost three leagues over.

The next day, being June the 7th, we weighed anchor again at young flood, and
got about two leagues higher. At evening we came again to an anchor in the
depth of seven fathom and a half water. It rained this day until eight of the
clock, Much rain.
more like the pouring down of water from the clouds, than the usual falling of
drops.

Wednesday, June the 8th, at day break we weighed anchor again, with a fresh
Sea-breeze. The higher up we went, the deeper we found the Gulf, and at last no
ground even with thirty fathom of line. This day we sent our Canoa away to seek
water and a good place to lay our ship in. Having landed, they found one Indian
and two boys, all which they made prisoners and brought aboard. They take three
prisoners.
Here we used them very kindly, giving them victuals and clothes, for they had
no other than the bark of a tree to cover their nakedness withal. Being
examined, they informed us that a Spanish Priest had been amongst them, and had
made Peace with their Nation, ordering them strictly not to come near any ship
nor vessel that had red Colors; forasmuch as that they were Englishmen, and
would certainly kill them. Being asked where now the Priest was? they answered
he was gone to a great Spanish Town, which was distant from thence four sleeps
up in the Country. After this, the Indian left the two boys which were his
children, with us, and went to fetch more Indians unto us, from a Plantane-walk
or grove, situate by a river a league off, or thereabouts. We came to an anchor
in a Bay close by one of the Indian Keys, where two fresh Rivers were within a
stones throw of each other, in twenty seven fathom and a half water, and at a
cables length from the mark of low water. The Indians whom our prisoner went to
seek, came to us several times, selling unto us Honey, Plantanes, and other
necessaries that we usually bought of them, or truckt for with other things. We
also made use of their bark-logs in tallowing our ship, in which concern they
did us good service. Their Darts are headed with iron as sharp as any razor.

Here one of the prisoners which we took at the Gulf of Nicoya, informed us, by
what means, A peace forced upon the Indians of Darien.
or rather stratagem of War the Spaniards had forced a peace upon the Indians
of the Province of Darien, since our departure from thence. The manner was as
follows. A certain Frenchman who ran from us at the Island of Taboga unto the
Spaniards, was sent by them in a ship to the Rivers mouth, which disembogueth
from that Province into the South Sea. Being arrived there, he went ashore by
himself in a Canoa, and told the Indians, that the English who had passed that
way, were come back from their adventures in the South Sea. Withal, he asked
them, if they would not be so kind and friendly unto the English men, as to
come aboard and conduct them on shore? The poor deceived Indians were very
joyful to understand this good news; and thus forty of the chiefest men amongst
them went on board the Spanish vessel, and were immediately carried prisoners
at War to Panama. Here they were forced to conclude a peace, though upon terms
very disadvantageous unto them, before they could obtain their liberty.

These poor and miserable Indians of Golfo dulce, would come every day into our
company, They (...) their vessel.
and eat and drink very familiarly with us all the time we were there. We laid
our ship on ground, but the water did not ebb low enough to see her keel. Mean
while we were careening our vessel, we built a house upon the shore, both to
lodge and eat in; and every day we caught plenty of good fish. On Sunday June
the 12th, the work of Careening our ship going on in due order, we came to
cleanse our hold, A strange accident.
and here on a sudden, both my self and several others were stricken totally
blind with the filth and nastiness of the said place. Yet soon after we
recovered our sight again, without any other help than the benefit of the fresh
and open air, which dissipated those malignant vapors that oppressed our eyes.
On June the 14th, we had a great and fierce Tornado, with which our Cable
broke, A great danger.
and had it not then happened to be high water at that instant, we had been lost
inevitably. However, we had the good fortune to shore her up again, and by that
means secure our selves from farther danger. On June the 21. we weighed anchor
again, and went a league higher than the former place. Here we watered, and in
the mean while left men below to cut wood.

Two Negroes make their escape.
Thursday June the 23. this day ran away from us two Negroes; the name of one of
them was Hernando, who was taken with Don Thomas de Argandona, upon the Coast
of Guayaquil, as was mentioned above. The other was named Silvestre, being
taken at the Town of Hilo. Following the example of these aforementioned, on
Monday June the 27th, that is four days after, two more of our prisoners
endeavored to make their escape, both of them slaves. One of these was named
Francisco, who was a Negro, and had been taken in the Cacao-ship mentioned
before. The name of the other was also Francisco, and he was an Indian born,
Others endeavor it but are taken.
who was taken before Panama. Their attempts to escape succeeded not, for we
caught them both again, before they got on shore. On Tuesday following I went
to sail up and down the Gulf, in the little Bark belonging to our ship; and
having viewed all places, took this description of Golfo Dulce here inserted.
Our Captain gave this Gulf the name of King CHARLES his Harbor.

Adescription of Golfo Dulce


CHAP. XX. They depart from Golfo Dulce, to go and cruise under the
Aequinoctial. Here they take a rich Spanish vessel with 37000 Pieces of Eight,
besides Plate and other Goods. They take also a Pacquet-boat bound from Panama
to Lima. An account of their Sailings and the Coasts along.
OUr vessel being now careened, and all things in a readiness for our
departure, They resolve to go and cruise.
on Tuesday June the 28th in the afternoon, we weighed anchor to go to Sea
again, turning out toward the mouth of Golfo Dulce. Our design was to cruise
under the Aequinoctial, as had been concluded upon before, thereby to get what
purchase we could by Sea, seeing the greatest part of our attempts upon land
had proved hitherto very unsuccessful unto us.

Wednesday June the 29th, both the night last past and this day we had rainy
weather. About three in the afternoon a fresh gale sprang up at S. W. and
S.S.W. our course being S. E. and S. E. by S. At five this evening the Gulf
bore N. W. by W. being seven leagues distant; and Punta Borrica three leagues
and an half distant.

The bark out-saileth the ship.
Thursday June the 30th, all night past we enjoyed a fresh gale at S.S.W. We
sailed in the Barque (where I was) better than the man of war; for so we called
the Trinity vessel; notwithstanding that she was newly cleansed and tallowed.
This day we had hasey weather, and I reckoned my self from Punta Borrica S.S.E.
eighteen leagues and an half.

Tornados.
July the first 1681, last night we had two or three Tornados. I reckoned this
day a S.S.E. way, and by a clear observation, found Lat. 6 d. 10. North. We saw
great quantities of fish as we sailed this day.

July the second, we made a S. East way, and our reckoning was 64 by it. By
observation I found Lat. 5 d. 20. North. At noon the same day we had a fresh
gale at S.W. with some rain.

July the third, we had hasey weather. We made a S.E. by S. way, and 37.

Monday July the fourth, the night past was windy with rain, which forced us to
hand our topsails. Our reckoning this day was a S. E. way, and an hundred
miles.

July the fifth we had a clear night the last past, and withal, a fresh gale.
By this we made a S.E. way. Our Latitude this day gave us 2 d. 20. North. This
morning we saw Land Southward of us lying in low hammocks. It was the Point, so
called, of Manglares.

Wednesday July the 6th, we turned up along shore, and by observation took this
day, Lat. 2 d. 02 N. Hereabouts every new Moon is experimented a windward
current. In the evening of this day we were close in with low land. We had
windy weather and a great Sea.

Thursday July the seventh, this day by observation taken, we found Lat. 01 d.
48. North. In the evening of the said day we lost sight of the said ship.

The next day being July the eighth, we saw the ship again, whose loss began to
create some concern in our minds. This day we made very high land all along as
we went. And the Port, or rather Bay, of San Mateo, or St. Matthews, appeared
unto us like several Islands.

Saturday July the ninth, this morning we stood fair in with the Port of
Tucames* Off of the highest part of the land seems to lie a Key. At the North
East point of the Port it appears exactly thus.

Puerto de Tucames.


This day at noon we had a clear observation, which gave us Lat. 01 d 22 North.

Sunday July the tenth, last night past we stood off to Sea, thereby to keep
clear of the shore. This days observation showed us Lat. 01 d. 31. North. About
noon the same day we happened to espy a Sail, They espy a Sail.
unto which immediately we gave chase. We bore up one point of the Compass,
thereby to hinder her lasking away; but notwithstanding in the evening lost
sight of her again. However, our great ship got up with her, and about eight of
the clock at night made her a Prize. She proved to be the same ship named San
Pedro, which we had taken the last year, being then bound from Truxillo to
Panama, and laden with Wine, Gunpowder, and pieces of Eight, whereof mention
was made in its due place. Thus this same bottom became doubly fortunate unto
us, being twice taken by us in the space of fourteen Months. For she had on
board her now twenty one thousand pieces of Eight, in eight Chests, and in bags
sixteen thousand more, besides Plate.

Monday and Tuesday the 11th and 12th of the said Month we made in for the
shore. Our Prize was so deeply laden, that she seemed clearly to be buried in
the water. She had forty men on board her besides some Merchants and Friars. On
Tuesday an observation gave us Lat. 1 ^. 20 N.

Wednesday July the 13th, this day we dared not adventure into the Bay of San
Mateo, because we saw some Indians who had made a great fire on shore, which as
we judged, was designedly done to give intelligence of our arrival. Hereupon we
bore away for the River of San Tiago, six leagues more or less, distant from
the Bay aforementioned, to the North East. Thursday, Friday, They rommage the
Prize.
and Saturday of the said week, we spent in taking out what parcels of
Cacao-nut we thought sit from on board the Prize, which was chiefly laden with
the said Commodity. This being done, we cut down the Mainmast by the board,
And turn (...) away.
and gave them only their Main-sail, and thus turning the ship loose, sent away
in her all our old slaves, for the good service they had done us, taking new
ones from the Prize in their room. One only we still detained, who was
Francisco the Negro, that attempted to run away by swimming ashore, as was
mentioned above.

Sunday July the 17th, this day we went from the ship, and found the River of
San Tiago aforementioned. River of San Tiago,
At the mouth of this River we stayed Monday and Tuesday following to take in
water, which we now much wanted. On the sides of the River we found good store
of Plantans. Our fresh water we fetched the distance of four miles up the
River. We saw several Indians, but could not speak with them, they were so shy
of us, being forewarned by the Spaniards not to come near us.

On wednesday July the 20th, we shared our plunder among our selves, They make
a dividend.
or rather this day made part of the dividend of what we had taken, the rest
being reserved to another day. Our prisoners being examined, informed us, that
the Spaniards had taken up our Anchors and Cables which we left behind us at
the Isle of Juan Fernandez. Also that they had surprised the Mosquito Indian
that we left behind us there on shore, by the light of a fire which he made in
the night upon the Isle.

Tuesday July the twenty first, all the four and twenty hours last past, we
stood off and in. They share the rest of the goods.
The next day we shared the rest of our things taken in the Prize; as also the
Money that was in the bags; the rest we laid up to divide upon another
occasion. Especially after such time as we were got through the Straights of
Magallanes. Our dividend amounted to the sum of 234 Pieces of Eight unto each
man. Our prisoners informed us this day, that a new Viceroy of Peru was
arrived at Panama, and that he dared not adventure up to Lima in a ship of
twenty five guns that was at Panama, for fear of meeting with us at Sea, but
had chose rather to stay until the Armada came down from Lima to safeguard and
conduct him thither.

July the 23 we had a fresh breeze at S.W. And the next day a clear
observation, which gave us only Latitude 14. m. North. This day Cape San
Francisco at N.E. appeared thus unto us.

Cabo de San Francisco.


Monday July the 25th, this day we observed Latitude 01 d. 20 S. And we had a
South West wind. July the 26th, this morning we had a very great dew fallen in
the night last past. The weather in like manner was very close. On Wednesday
July the 27th Cape Passao, at S.S.W. and at six leagues distance appeared thus.

Cabo Passao.


The same morning about seven of the clock we espied a sail E.S.E. from us,
under the shore. They espy another sail at sea
We presently gave her close chase, as eagerly as we could, and about noon came
up with her. But several of the people belonging to her were already got to
shore, whereby they made their escape from being taken our prisoners. These
were chiefly a Friar, who was either a passenger, or Chaplain to the vessel,
and five Negroes. She proved to be a Barco de Aviso, Which is taken.
or Pacquet-boat that was going with Letters from Panama to Lima. In this
Barque we took among other Prisoners, two white women who were passengers to
the same place. Both these and the rest of the prisoners told us, they had
heard at Panama, that we were all gone out of these Seas homewards over land,
and that made them adventure now up toward Lima, otherwise they had not come.
This day and Thursday following, we spent in taking out of the Pacquet-boat
what we could find in her; which all were things of no considerable value, they
having scarce brought any thing with them but the Packet. They told us
moreover, that the new Viceroy of Peru, of whom we made mention above, was
setting forth from Panama under the conduct of three sail of ships; the one of
sixteen, the other of eight, and the third of six Guns. That a general peace
was all over Europe, excepting only that the English had wars with the
Argerines by Sea, and the Spaniards by land. Having got what we could out of
the prisoners and the vessel, we gave them their liberty, and sent them away in
the same Barque, as being desirous not to encumber ourselves with more then we
could well manage. That night we stood out to Sea all night long, most of our
men being fudled.

CHHP. XXI. They take another Spanish ship richly laden under the Aequinoctial.
They make several Dividends of their booty among themselves. They arrive at the
Isle of Plate, where they are in danger of being all Massacred by their Slaves
and Prisoners. Their departure from thence for the Port and Bay of Paita, with
design to plunder the said place.
THe next morning after we had turned away the Pacquet-Boat aforementioned,
(...) with (...) Prize.
the weather being very close, we espied another sail creeping close under our
Lee. This vessel looked mighty big; so that we thought she had been one of
their chiefest men of war, who was sent to surprise or destroy us.
Notwithstanding, our brave Commander Captain Sharp resolved to fight her, and
either to take the said vessel, though never so big, or that she should take
us. Unto this effect, coming nearer unto her, we easily perceived she was a
Merchant ship of great bulk, as most of your Spanish Vessels are, and withal,
very deeply laden. Being up with them, those within her fired three or four
Guns at us first, thinking to make their party good against us. But we answered
them briskly, with a continual volley of small Arms, so that they soon ran down
into the Hold, And take her.
and surrendered, crying aloud for quarter. As it should seem we had killed in
that Volley their Captain, and one Seaman, and also wounded their Boat-swain;
which loss of their Commander daunted them so suddenly, he being a man of good
repute in those Seas. Captain Sharp, with twelve more of our Company, entered
her the first. In this Vessel I saw the beautifullest woman that I ever did see
in all the South Sea. The name of the Captain of this Vessel was Don Diego
Lopez, and the ship was called el Santo Rosario, or the Holy Rosary. The men we
found on board her, were about the number of forty, more or less.

Having examined our prisoners, they informed us, that the day before they set
sail from el Callao (from which Port they were going toward Panama) our men
whom they had taken prisoners at Arica, were brought in to that place. They
hear of their Surgeons.
And that they had been very civilly entertained there by all sorts of people,
but more especially by the women. That one of our Surgeons, whom we suspected
to be Mr. Bullock, was left behind and remained still at Arica.

We lay at anchor from Friday, July the 29th, which was the day we took this
prize, until Wednesday following, They rummage the prize.
at the same place under Cape Passao that we anchored before. Here we sunk the
Bark that we had taken at the Gulf of Nicoya, being willing to make use of what
rigging she had, They sink their Bark.
and also to contract our number of men. In the mean while we took out of the
prize much plate, and some money ready coined, besides six hundred and twenty
jarrs of wine and brandy, and other things. Thus, leaving only the foremast
standing in the said vessel, we turned her away, as we had done the others
before, together with all the prisoners in her, giving them their liberty not
to be encumbred with them; and withal, being desirous to spare our provisions
as much as we could. We detained only one man, named Francisco, who was a
Biscainer, by reason he reported himself to be the best Pilot of those Seas.
This being done, we shared all the Plate and Linen taken in our prize, and
weighed from thence, standing S.S. E. with a fresh wind that sprang up.

Friday, August the 4th. This day we shared the ready money taken in the
Rosario, Another dividend made.
our last prize. Our dividend came unto ninety four pieces of eight each man.
Cape Passao, under which all these prizes were taken, at N. E. appears thus.

Cabo Passao.


The land runs S. E. and is for five leagues together to windward of this
Cape, all mountainous and high land.

The next day, being August the 5th, we completed our dividends, They complete
their dividends.
sharing this day all our odd money ready coined and plate, with some other
things.

Saturday, August the 6th. This day perusing some letters taken in the last
prize, Letters perused
I understood by them that the Spaniards had taken prisoner one of the last
party of our men that left us. Also, that they were forced to fight all their
way over land as they went, both against the Spaniards and the Indians; these
having made peace with the Spaniards since our departure, as was mentioned
above. That our Englishmen had killed, amongst other Spaniards, the brother of
Captain Assientos, and Captain Alonso, an Officer so named. Moreover, that ten
sail of Privateers were coming out of the North Sea, with intent to march
over-land into the South Sea, as we had done before, but that they were
prevented, being forced back by the great rains that fell near the Islands
called Zamblas.

On August the 7th we had very fair weather, and notwithstanding sometimes
strong winds from shore, A strong Current.
and also a strong Current to leeward. This ran so fierce against us the next
day, August the 8th, that in the space of the last four and twenty hours we
lost three leagues.

Tuesday August the ninth, Manta.
we saw the Port and Town of Manta; this being nothing else than sixteen or
seventeen straggling houses, with a large and high brick Church belonging unto
it. What we got in the day by the help of the wind, we lost in the night by the
current. The same fortune we had the next day, for we still gained no way all
this while.

Thursday August the eleventh, all the night last past we had but little wind;
this day we had a violent current to windward, as before, with some gusts of
wind. However, by the help of these we made shift to get to windward of the
Isle of Plate.

August the 12th, in the morning, we came to an anchor at the aforesaid Isle.
We sent our boat ashore with men, Isle of Plate.
as we had done formerly to kill Goats, but we experimented them to be
extremely shy and fugitive over what they were the last year. Here it was that
our Quartermaster James Chapel and my self fought a Duel together on shore.
The Author fights a Duel
In the evening of this day our slaves agreed among themselves, and plotted to
cut us all in pieces, not giving quarter to any, when we should be buried in
sleep. They conceived this night afforded them the fittest opportunity, by
reason we were all in drink. A plot of their slaves.
But they were discovered unto our Commander by one of their own Companions.
And one of them named San Tiago, whom we brought from Yqueque, leapt
overboard; who notwithstanding was shot in the water by our Captain, and thus
punished for his Treason. The rest laid the fault on that slave, and so it
passed, we being not willing to enquire any farther into the matter, having
terrifyed them with the death of their companion. We lay at this Isle until
Tuesday following, and in the mean while gave our vessel a pair of boots and
tops, being very merry all the while with the wine and brandy we had taken in
the Prize.

On Tuesday August the 16th, in the afternoon, we weighed from thence with a S.
W. wind. The Island at N. W. from us, gave us this following appearance.

Isla de la Plata.


Wednesday August the 17th, the Island at East, this morning and at two leagues
and an half distance, appeared thus.

Island of PLATE.


All the day long until the evening we had a Leeward current, but then I could
not perceive any.

Solango.
Thursday August the 18th, this morning we were to windward of the Island of
Solango. In the night before we had continual misty rain. At noon the aforesaid
Island bore N. by E. of us, and at three Leagues distance appeared thus.

Isla de Solango.


About three Leagues from Solango are two Rocks, called Los ahorcados. They
appear both high and black unto the view. Besides this N. N. E. from Point St.
Helena is a high Rock, which to windward thereof runs shoaling for the space
of half a mile under water. It is distant about eight leagues, more or less,
from the said Point, and is called Chanduy. At this place, and upon this Rock,
was lost the ship aforementioned, that was ordered from these Seas, to the aid
of our most gracious Sovereign King Charles the First, late King of England.
Said ship had on board, as the Spaniards relate, to the sum of many millions of
pieces of Eight; all which quantity of Plate was sent as a present unto our
King, being then in his troubles, by the worthy Merchants of Lima. The Rock
aforementioned lies about two Leagues distant from the Main.

August the 29th, this day our Pilot told us, that since we were to windward, A
great (...) vessel cast away.
a certain ship that was coming from Lima, bound for Guayaquil, ran ashore on
Santa Clara, loosing there in money, to the value of one hundred thousand
pieces of Eight; which otherwise, peradventure, we might very fortunately have
met withal. Moreover, that the Viceroy of Peru had Beheaded their great Admiral
Ponce, for not coming to fight and destroy us, mean while we were at Gorgona.
This evening we saw the Point of Santa Helena, at the distance of ten leagues
to S.S.E. from us.

August the 20th, Point St. Helen
this day we had both misty and cold weather. In the afternoon we saw la Punta
de Santa Helena, at N. E. by N. and at seven leagues distance more or less.

On Sunday, August the 21st, we had a fair and clear day. I reckoned my self
this day to be about twenty five leagues to the Southward of Santa Helena.

August the 22d. This morning about two of the clock we came close in with the
shore. We found our selves to be Leeward of a certain Point called Punta de
Mero, Punta de Mero.
which is nothing else than a barren and rocky Point. Here runs an eddy
current under the shore.

Tuesday, August the 23d. This day in the morning we had but little wind. At
noon it blew fresh again. We made all day but short trips, and riffed topsails.

Wednesday, August the 24th. This morning a great dew fell. At noon we were
West from Cape Blanco. We found by observation Lat. 4 D. 13 S. We resolved now
to bear up for Paita, They resolve for Paita.
and take it by surprizal if possible, thereby to provide our selves with many
necessaries that we wanted.

CHAP. XXII. They arrive at Paita, where they are disappointed of their
expectations, as not daring to land, seeing all the Country alarmed before
them. They bear away for the Straight of Magallanes. Description of the Bay and
Port of Paita, and Colan. An account of their Sailings toward the Straight
aforementioned.
THursday, August the 25th. The night before this day, They descry the land of
Paita.
we stood off to Sea for fear of the shore, and lest we should be descryed from
the Coast of Paita, unto which we were now pretty nigh. About noon this day we
began to stand in again, and saw the homing of land, though with hasey weather.
The next day, being August the 26th, we had cold winds, great dews, and dry
weather.

Saturday, August the 27th. All this day, La Silla de Paita.
but more especially in the morning, we had many fogs. In the afternoon we saw
la Silla de Paita at W. S. W. being about five leagues distant from it.

Sunday August the 28th, last night about ten of the clock we were close in
with land, at the distance of half a league, more or less to leeward of the
Island of Lobos. Isle of Lobos.
We continued our course all that night, and about break of day found our
selves to be close under Pena Horadada, a high and steep rock so called. Pena
Horadada.
From hence we sailed with a land-wind, and sent away from the ship two Canoas
well Manned and Armed, They endeavou^ to land.
with good hopes that we had conceived in our mind, to have taken the Town of
Paita undiscryed. But as it should seem, they had already received news of our
coming, or being upon that Coast, and also supplies of Forces that were sent
them from the City of Piura, distant from thence twelve leagues up within the
Country. These supplys consisted chiefly of three Companies of Horse and Foot,
all of them being armed with firearms. Besides this, they had made for the
defense of the Town, a breast-work along the seaside, and the great Church
which lies at the outermost part of the Town. From these places, as also from
a hill that covers the Town, they fired at our men, who were innocently
rowing toward shore with their Canoas. This preposterous firing was the
preservation of our people. For had the Spaniards permitted our men to come
ashore, they had assuredly destroyed them every man. But fear always hinders
that Nation of Victory, at least in most of our attempts.

Our men perceiving themselves to be discovered, and the enemy prepared for
their reception, hereupon retreated, They dare not to land.
and came on board the ship again without attempting to land, or do any thing
else in relation to the taking of the place. We judged there could not be less
then one hundred and fifty firearms, and four times as many Lances upon the
shore, all in a readiness to hinder our people from landing. Within the Town
our Pilot told us, there might be to the number of one hundred and fifty
Families, more or less.

Being disappointed of our expectations at Paita, we stood down the Bay toward
Colan. A description of Colan.
This is another Town so called, and which exceeds three times the bigness of
Paita. It is chiefly inhabited by Fishermen, and from hence they send fish unto
most inland Towns of Peru; and also serve Paita with water from the River
Colan, not far distant from the Town. It is the space of two leagues more or
less from the Town of Paita aforementioned to Colan, and from thence unto the
River, one league, although the Houses of Colan do reach almost unto the River.
The Town it self of Colan is only inhabited by Indians, and these are all rich;
for as much as that they will be paid in ready money for every thing they do
for the Spaniards. But the Town of Paita is chiefly inhabited by Spaniards,
though there be also some Indians; but the Spaniards do not suffer the Indians
to be any great gainers, or grow rich under them.

About ten of the clock a young breeze sprang up, and with that, They stand
away for the Straight of Magallanes.
we stood away West, and W. by S. Within a little while it blew so fresh, that
we were forced to riff our topsails* the weather being very dark and hasey. I
took the Port of Paita, and Bay of Colan, as they lay exactly situated, thus.

A Description of Paita and Colan


Monday, August the 29th. All our hopes of doing any farther good upon the
Coasts of the South Sea, being now frustrated, seeing we were descryed before
our arrival wherever we came, we resolved unanimously to quit all other
attempts, and bear away for the Straight of Magallanes, in order to our return
homewards either for England, or some of our Plantations in the West Indies.
This day we had a great dew, and I reckoned my self W. S. W. from Paita
thirteen leagues and an half, with very little wind. So we stood East.

The next day, August the 30th, we had misty weather. We made a W.S. W. way,
and by it five leagues and one third. In the afternoon of this day, the wind
freshned again, having been but little before, and we stood E.S.E.

The last day of August we had very fair weather. I believed now that the wind
was settled at S. E. and S. S. E. We made a S. S. W. way, and twenty one leagues
and two thirds.

September the First. The night past was very cloudy, but withal we had a fresh
gale. Our reckoning was a S. W by S. way, and that we had made sixteen leagues
and two thirds.

September the 2d we reckoned a S. W. way, and by it twenty six leagues and two
thirds. This day we had an observation, and found Lat. 7 D. 40 S.

September the 3d brought us both cloudy and misty weather. We made a W.S.W.
way, and fourteen leagues.

September the 4th. This day the wind was at E. S. E. and sometimes E. coming
in many flaws. We had a S. W. by S. way, and reckoned twenty three leagues and
two thirds. We had a great Sea from the South.

Monday, September the 5th, we had great winds, and a high and short Sea. Our
way was S. S. W. and half W. by which we reckoned twenty eight leagues and two
thirds of a league.

September the 6th we had a very fresh wind at S. E. by E. with an indifferent
smooth Sea. By observation we found this day Latitude 12 d. 00 South. We made a
S.W. by S. way, and twenty eight leagues and one third.

Wednesday September the seventh, we had a very fresh wind. We reckoned a S.W.
by S. way, and thirty six leagues. We observed Latitude 13 d. 24 South. We make
now each mess a plumb Pudding of Salt Water and wine-Lees.

On the eighth we enjoyed a fresh gale of wind, though with hasey weather. Our
reckoning was a S.W. by S. way, and hereby twenty five leagues, and one third
of a league.

September the 9th, we made a S.W. by S. way, and twenty one leagues and a
third. In the afternoon the wind came about something more Southerly, allowing
us a S. W. course.

Saturday September the 10th, all the night past and this morning the wind was
very fresh at East. Our way was S.S.W. and by our reckoning thirty five leagues
and one third. The weather now was warm. An observation this day gave us Lat.
16 d. 40. South.

September 11 we had whiffling winds. A South-west half South way, and thereby
twelve leagues and two thirds. By an observation made we found 17 d. 10 South.
Now we had a very great Sea, so that we took in our sprit-sail.

September the 12th, all the night before this day, we were under a pair of
courses. Yet this morning we heaved out main top-sail. We made a W. S. W. way,
and seventeen leagues and one third. By observation we found Lat. 17 d. 30
South.

The 13th, in the night past we had huge and great storms of wind. In the
morning our Goose-head gave way, so that about noon we were forced to lie by
till four in the afternoon to mend it. Our course was S. W. half W. and our
reckoning twenty nine leagues, and two thirds of a league. Latitude by
observation 18 d. 12 South.

Wednesday September the 14th, this day we had very hasey weather. We made a
S.S.W. way, and twenty leagues.

September the 15th, this day likewise we had a S.S.W. way, and reckoned twenty
three leagues and one half. Our observation taken this day gave us 20 d. 09.
South.

On September the 16th, we had a clear day, a S. W. half South way, and made
sixteen leagues and two thirds, We found by observation, Lat. 20 d. 48 South.

The 17th, last night was very calm. Also this day, it being a full Moon. We
reckoned a S.W. way, and only by reason of the calmness of the weather nine
leagues and one third of a league. We had an observation which afforded us 21
d. 08 S. Latitude.

Sunday September the 18th, in the night last past a wind sprang up at S.S.E.
which the morning of this day freshned at S. E. We made a W. S. W. way, and by
it eighteen leagues. Moreover, this day we had a clear observation that showed
us Lat. 21 d. 30 S.

September the 19th, all the night past we had a very fresh wind. But this
morning it came about to E. by S. and E.S.E. with hasey weather. I reckoned a
S.W. by S. way, and twenty two leagues.

September the 20th, this day gave us a fresh wind, hasey weather, a S. by W.
way, and hereupon twenty three leagues and one third.

September the 21, this day also the fresh gale continued, with cloudy, and
sometimes misty weather. Our reckoning showed us a S. by W. way, as the day
before, and by it twenty eight leagues and one third. By an observation made,
we found Lat. 25 d. 15 South.

Thursday September the 22, this day we had a very fresh wind. We reckoned a
South half West way, and by that twenty nine leagues and two thirds. An
observation taken gave us Lat. 26 d. 42 South. We observed this day a North
East Sea, A North East Sea.
which seemed very strange unto us.

The next day we had several showers of small rain. My reckoning was a S. by W.
way; and thereupon twenty six leagues. We found by observation Lat. 27. d. 57
South.

September the 24th, we had hasey weather, and the wind not so fresh at E. S.
E. with a smooth Sea. We made a S. S. W. way half westerly, and twenty three
leagues and two thirds. This day also an observation gave us Lat. 28 d. 57
South. I reckoned now that we were distant from Paita 302 leagues and two
thirds.

Sunday September the 25th, this day we had not much wind, and withal, hasey
weather. At noon the wind came East, then E.N.E. and then again N.E. by E. We
reckoned a S. by E. way, half Easterly and 55.

Monday the 26th, we had hasey weather and a fresh wind at N. East. We reckon a
S.E. half South way, and twenty four leagues. In the afternoon we experimented
a N.N.E. Sea, and then soon after a N.N.E. wind. After this a North wind, and
that but very little.

September the 27th, all the night before this day we had a fresh wind at
N.N.E. About eight this morning it came about again to N.N.W. We made a S.E. by
S. way, and thirty eight leagues. By observation I found Lat. 32 d. 30 South.
Now we enjoyed a very smooth sea, and fair weather.

Wednesday September the 28th, in the night past a very fresh wind at N.N.W.
and N.W. At break of day we had a wind at.... heaving us a back at once. At
noon again the wind was at S.W. our course being S.E. This morning we took down
our top gallant-masts. We made a S.E. by E. way, and on this road twenty seven
leagues and two thirds. We found by an observation made, Lat. 33 d. 16 South, a
South west sea.

On the 29th we had very windy and hasey weather, with some rain now and then.
All last night we handed our main top-sail. We made a S.E. by E. way, and
thirty two leagues and two thirds. We had a South west sea and wind.

Friday September the 30th, this day we had fresh winds between S. W. and W. We
reckoned a S. E. half South way, and thereupon forty four leagues. By
observation we found Lat. 35 d. 54 South.

October the first, the wind this day was not very fresh, but varying. My
reckoning was a S. E. half South way, and twenty four leagues. An observation
gave us 36 d. 50 South. Another Quadrant made by the Author.
This day I finished another Quadrant, being the third I finished in this
Voyage. We had a South west sea, with showers of rain and gusts of wind.

Sunday October the second, the wind this day was hanging between W.N.W.' and
N.W. by N. We made a S.E. by S. way, and thirty three leagues and two thirds.
By observation we found 38 d. 14 South. About noon we had a fresh wind at N.W.
and S.W.

October the third, the last night in the forepart thereof was clear, but the
latter was rainy. The wind very fresh at N.W. by N. But this day we had little
wind, and cloudy weather. A S. W. by W. wind, and a S.E. by S. way, by which we
reckoned thirty three leagues and one third of a league.

October the fourth, we had a clear night and a very fresh wind. We reckoned a
S. E. by S. way, and thereby forty three leagues. An observation taken showed
us, that we were in Lat. 41 d. 34 South. This day also fell several showers of
rain.

October the fifth, we had a windy night the last past, and a clear day. We
reckoned a S.S.E. half E. way, and forty four leagues and two thirds. By an
observation made, we found Lat. 43 d. 26 South. The weather now was very windy,
causing a huge tempestuous sea. The wind at N.W. and N.W. by N. blowing very
high.

October the sixth, this day the wind was still at N.W. and yet not so fresh as
it was yesterday, the weather very foggy and misty. As for the wind it came in
gusts, so that we were forced to hand our topsails, and sprit-sail. We
reckoned a S. E. half S. way, and thereby forty three leagues and one third of
a league. The Seas now were not so high, as for some days past. In the evening
we scudded away under our fore course.

Friday, October the 7th. Last night was very cloudy, and this day both dark
and foggy weather with small rain. We made a S. E. way, and thirty leagues and
two thirds. A fresh wind at N. N. W. and N. W. We keep still under a fore
course, not so much for the freshness of the wind, as the closeness of the
weather.

October the 8th, we had a clear night the night before this day, and withal a
strong gale; A great storm.
insomuch that this day we were forced to take in our fore-sail, and loosen our
Mizen, which was soon blown to pieces. Our eldest Seamen said that they were
never in the like storm of wind before. The Sea was all in a foam. In the
evening it dulled a little. We made a S. E. half E. way, and eighteen leagues,
with very dark weather.

Sunday, October the 9th. All the night past we had a furious W. N. W. wind. We
set our sail a drough, They drive at a great rate.
and so drove to the Southward very much, and almost incredibly, if an
observation had not happened, which gave us Lat. 48 15 S. We had a very stiff
gale at W. N. W. with a great Sea from W. which met with a S. S. W. Sea as
great as it. Now the weather was very cold, and we had one or two frosty
mornings. Yesterday in the afternoon we had a very great storm of hail. At noon
we bent another Mizen.

Monday, October. the 10th. This day brought us a freshwind at N. W. and N. N. W,
We made a S. E. half E. way, and by it forty four leagues. By observation we
found Lat. 49 D. 41 S. I reckoned my self now to be East from Paita sixty nine
leagues and an half.

Tuesday, October the 11th. Last night we had a small time calm. This day was
both cloudy and rainy weather. The wind at S. W. and S. S. W. so furious, that
at ten of the clock this morning we scudded under a main sail. At noon we
lowered our fore-yard while we sailed. We made a S. E. by E. way, and thirty
leagues.

CHAP. XXIII. The Bucaniers arrive at a place incognito, unto which they give
the name of the Duke of Yorks Islands. A description of the said Islands, and
of the Gulf, or Lagoon, wherein they lie, so far as it was searched. They
remain there many days by stress of weather, not without great dangers of being
lost. An account of some other things remarkable that happened there.
WEdnesday, October the 12th. All the night before this day we had many high
winds. I reckoned an E. S. E. way, and twenty leagues; for our vessel drove at
a great rate. Moreover, that we were in Lat. 50 D. 50 S. So that our Easting
from Paita by my account ought to be one hundred and one leagues, or
thereabouts.

This morning about two hours before day, we happened by great accident to epsy
land. They see land before day, and are miraculously preserved
It was the great mercy of God, which had always attended us in this Voyage,
that saved us from perishing at this time; for we were close ashore before we
saw it; and our fore-yard, which we most needed in this occasion, was taken
down. The land we had seen was very high and towering; and here appeared to be
many Islands scattered up and down. We steered in with what caution we could,
between them and the Main, and at last, God be praised, arrived at a place or
rather Bay, where we perceived our selves to be land-lockt, and as we thought
pretty safe from the danger of those tempestuous Seas. From hence we sent away
our Canoa to sound and search the f^ttest place for anchoring. At this time one
of our men, One of their me^ drowned.
named Henry Shergall, as he was going into our sprit-sail top, happened to fall
into the water, and was drowned before any help could be had unto him, though
we endeavored it as much as we possibly could. This accident several of our
company did interpret as a bad Omen of the place; which proved not so, through
the providence of the Almighty, though many dangers were not wanting here unto
us, as I shall relate.

We came to an anchor in the depth of forty fathom Water, more or less, They
came to an anchor.
and yet at no greater distance than a stones cast from shore. The water where
we anchored was very smooth, and the high lands round about all covered with
snow. Having considered the time of the year, and all other circumstances, we
resolved, that in case we could find a sufficient stock of provisions here,
They resolve to stay here.
we would stay the longer, that is, until Summer came, or something more,
before we prosecuted our intended Voyage homewards through the Straights of
Magallanes; which now we began to be careful how to find. That day of our
anchoring in this Bay, we shot six or eight brave Geese, They kill Geese and
Fowls.
and some smaller fowl besides. Here we found also many hundreds of
Mussel-banks; all which were very plentifully stockt with that kind of fish. We
buried our dead man on the shore, giving him several Volleys for his
Funeral-Rites, according to the custom. In the night of this day our anchor
came home, so that we were forced to let go a grapling to secure our selves.
But still every flaw of wind drove us. Hereupon we set our sprit-sail, They are
in danger.
and ran about a mile into another Bay, where we let go another anchor, and
thus anchored again. The first anchor, which was also the biggest in our ship,
we lost by this accident, the cable being cut by the rocks. Unto these Islands
aforementioned our Captain gave the name of His Royal Highness the Duke of
Yorks Islands.

Thursday, October the 13th. This day we began to moor our ship, They moor
their vessel.
she driving as we easily could perceive with every flaw of wind that blew. The
tide sloweth here full seven foot up and down. We moored our Vessel into a
rockey point, being a key whereof there be many in the circumference of this
Bay. The ground of the bottom of the said Bay we found was hard and sandy,
being here and there rockey. This evening we brought on board great store of
Lamperts, of which we made a kettle of broth, that contained more than all our
company could eat.

On Friday October the 14th, we killed several Geese. As also many of another
sort of Fowl like unto an Eagle, but having a bigger beak, A strange sea-fowl.
with their nostrils rising from the top of the middle of their beak by a hand
trunk. This Fowl lives on Fish, but we saw none. Yesterday in the evening
there fell a great fleet of snow on the hills, round about the Bay, but none
where we were at anchor. Moreover, this day in the evening we caught Lamperts
in great quantity, Multitudes of Lamperts and Mussels.
being three times as many as we could eat. Our men in ranging the Keys for
Game, found grass plaited above a fathom long, and a knot tied at the end
thereof. In like manner on other Keys they found Mussels and Lampert shells.
From these things we presently concluded, They find tokens of the Inhabitants^
that these Countries were inhabited, and that some Indians or others were to
be found hereabouts.

Saturday October the 15th, in the night last past we had much rain, Another
storm.
with large hailstones. About midnight the wind came to North with such great
fury, that the Tree unto which our Cable was fastened on shore, gave way, and
came up by the Roots. All those gusts of wind were mixed with violent storms of
rain and hail. Thus we fastened again unto other trees. But here it happened, that
our ship coming up to the shore, our Rudder touched, and thereupon broke our
Goose-neck. Great was now our extremity, and greater it will be, They are in
great danger.
if God send not better weather. Scarce a minute now passed without flaws of
wind and rain.

Sunday October the 16th, all the night past was rainy, as before. Much rain.
About nine of the clock our biggest harser gave way and brake. All this day
likewise we had rain with several showers of hail, and but little wind to
westward of the North.

Monday October the 17th, all last night until five this morning, it ceased not
to rain. Then until ten it snowed. On the hills it snowed all the night long.
Tracts of people.
This day we hanted on the shore many tracts of people hereabouts, but could
find none hitherto, they having fled and concealed themselves for fear of us,
as we supposed.

October the 18th. In the night past we had much rain and hail. But the day was
very clear. Hereupon we made an observation, which gave us Lat. 50 D. 40 S.
Moreover, this day we had pretty warm weather.

October the 19th. Both a clear and frosty night the last past. This day was
hasey, and something windy from the North quarter. Every day we had plenty of
Lamperts, and Mussels of a very large size.

October the 20th. The night past was rainy, Another storm.
and this day windy, with very great gusts of wind at N.N.W. until the
afternoon. Then we had wind at N. W. being very fresh and in gusts.

October the 21st. All the night past was tempestuous, Which continues.
with huge gusts of wind and showers of hail. Yesterday in the evening we
carried a cable ashore, and fastened it unto a tree. This being done, at
midnight our biggest cable broke in the middle. New dangers.
Toward morning we had much snow. In the day, great gusts of wind with large
hail stones, and also great plenty of Lamperts.

October the 22d. Last night we had strange gusts of wind from N. W. together
with much hail and rain. This day we killed a Penguin; and also began to carry
water on board. Penguin.


October the 23d. Much rain still
All the twenty four hours last past we had much rain. The wind was but little
at W. and W. S. W.

October the 24th. All this time until noon nothing but rain. At that time it
held up fair for the space of half an hour, or thereabouts, and then it rained
again all the rest of the day.

October the 25th. All this while we had not one minute fair. Toward evening
it held up from raining, but the weather was cloudy, and withal much warmer
than when we came hither at first. (...) w^ath^r.


Wednesday, October the 26th. All the night past, and this forenoon, we had
fair weather. But after noon it rained again. We found Cockles like unto those
we have in England. (...).


Thursday, October the 27th. In the night past we had much rain, A n^w storm.
with very great gusts of wind, lasting for the whole space thereof. Yet
notwithstanding, this day proved to be the fairest that we ever had since we
came into this place. In the evening of this day, our Canoa which was gone to
search the adjacent places for Indians, or what else they could find, returned
unto the ship, with a Doree at her stern. They had gone, as it should seem,
beyond the old Bay where we first anchored, and thereabouts happened to meet with
this Doree. In it were three Indians, who perceiving themselves nigh being
taken, They take a Doree and one prisoner. H^^ habit.
leapt overboard to make their escape. Our men in pursuing them did
unadvisedly shoot one of them dead. A second, being a woman, escaped their
hands. But the third, who was a lusty boy about eighteen years of age, was
taken, and him they brought on board the ship. He was covered only with a
Seals skin, having no other clothing about him: His eyes were squinted, and
his hair was cut pretty short. In the middle of the Doree they had a fire
burning either for dressing of victuals, or some other use. The Doree it self
was built sharp at both ends, and flat bottomed. They had a net to catch
Penguins, and a club like unto our bandies, called by them a Tomahunks. His
Language we could not understand, but withal he pointed up the Lagoon, giving
us to understand, that there were more people thereabouts. This was confirmed
by our men, who also said they had seen more. They had Darts to throw against
an Eenemy pointed with wood.

On the next day, being October the 28th, in the evening our Canoa went from
the ship again to seek for more Indians. They went into several Lagoons, They
search for more people, but find none.
and searched them narrowly. But they could find nothing else than two or three
Huts; all the Natives being fled before our arrival. In the evening they
returned unto the ship, bringing with them very large Lamperts, and also
Mussels which were six inches and an half long. Huge Mussels.
Our Indian prisoner could open Mussels these with his fingers, which our men
could not so hreadily do with their knives. Both the night past and this day we
ad very fair weather.

On the 29th we had in like manner a very fair day, and also a smooth wind at
S. S. E. Our Indian this day pointed unto us, that there were men in this
Country, or not far off from hence, with great beards. He appeared unto us by
his actions to be very innocent and foolish. But by his carriage I was also
persuaded that he was a Man-eater. This day likewise we caught Lamperts enough
to suffice us for the morrow.

Sunday, October the 30th. This day was fair, and there blew a small S. S. E.
wind. They can find neither provisions nor Indians.
In the morning we sent a Canoa over to the Eastward-shore, to seek either for
provisions or Indians. I my self could not go, as I desired, being with two or
three more, at that time very much tormented with the Gripes. I am persuaded
that this place where we now were, is not so great an Island as some
Hydrographers do lay it down, but rather an Archipelago of smaller Islands. We
saw this day many Penguins, but they were so shie, that we could not come near
them. Penguins.
They pad on the water with their wings very fast, but their bodies are too
heavy to be carried by the said wings. The Sun now made the weather very warm,
Warm weather
insomuch that the snow melted apace.

October the 31st. Both last night and this day were very fair. At noon our
Canoa returned from the Eastern shore, bringing word they had found several
good Bays and Harbors, that were deep even close unto the shore. Only that
there lay in them several suncken Rocks, the which we had also where we were.
But these Rocks are not dangerous to shipping, by reason they have weeds which
lie two fathoms in circumference about them. This morning blew a small wind at
N.N.E.

November the first, this day was also fair, and we had a small wind as before,
at N.N.E.

November the second, last night I took the Polar distance of the South star of
the Cocks foot, and found it to be 28 d. 25. I observed also the two Magallan
Clouds, of which I made mention in this Journal before, and found them to be as
follows, viz. the lesser 14 d. 05. and the greater 14 d. 25. The morning of
this day we hoysted an end our top-masts, and also brought too a Main-top-sail,
and Fore-sail, and finished our filling all the water we needed. At the same
time the wind hung Easterly, and I was still much tormented with the Gripes as
before.

November the third, this morning we hanged our Rudder, They make ready to
depart.
the greatest piece of work we had to do, after those violent storms
abovementioned. In the afternoon we halled in our two biggest Harsers; and
also our biggest Cable from the shore. For the three days last past we had a
very great and dark fog between us and the Eastward shore. We had now very
little wind in the Cove where we were, but abroad at sea there blew at the same
time a stiff gale at S.S.E. Moreover, we could perceive now, the stormy weather
being blown over, much small fry of fish about the ship, whereof we could see
none, as was mentioned before. This day we had a very clear and calm evening.

November the fourth, both all last night and this day we had very calm
weather. Calm weather again.
And this morning a small breeze sprang up at N. and N.N.E. which afterward
wheeled about unto S. and S.S.E. This morning we hoisted our Main and
Fore-yards; and likewise fetched off from the shore our other harser and Cable,
into the depth of eleven fathom water. Our resolutions were now changed for a
departure, in order to seek the mouth of the Straights of Magallanes, seeing
that we could not winter here, for want of Provisions, which we could not find
either on the Continent, or about these Islands aforementioned. The weather
now was very warm, or rather hot, and the Birds did sing as sweetly as those in
England. We saw here both Thrushes and Black birds, and many other sorts of
those that are usually seen in our own Country.

Saturday November the fifth, this morning brought us a wind at N.N.E.
hereupon, we warped unto a rocky point, They sail away
thereby to get out of the Cove where we lay. For our anchor came home unto us
as we were carrying our Warp out. At this time a second breeze came up very
fresh in our stern; so that we took the opportunity thereof, and went away
before it. By noon this day we hoisted in our Canoas, and also turned away
loose unto the sea our Indian Doree. As for the Indian boy whom we had taken in
said Doree, we kept him still prisoner, and called him Orson. Our Cove at our
departure from this place, looked thus, as I took then the description thereof.
When we were come out into the Channel, the weather grew stark calm. Only now
and then we had a small breeze, sometimes from one quarter, and then from
another. By this slackness of wind we observed, that the Current hoisted us to
the Southward. On the East Side of this Lagoon, we perceived the Indians to
make a great smoke at our departure.

A description of his Royal* Highnesses Isles


We had a very fair day till six in the evening, when we got without the mouth
of the Gulf, it blew so hard, that in an hour it forced us to hand our
topsails. Having now a fit gale at N. W. and N. N W. we stood S. W. by W. to
clear our selves of some breaks which lie four Leagues from the Gulfs mouth at
S. and S. S. E. Hereabouts we saw many riffs and rocks, which occasioned us to
stand close halled. I have drawn here and given unto my Reader, so much as I
have seen of the Gulf it self; the rest must be completed in due time by them,
that have greater opportunities of making a farther search into it, then I had
at the time of our stay here under such tempestuous weather, as I have
described, and the distemper which hung upon me at the same time.

A description of ye English Gulf Lying a little to the Northward of Magallanes
Straights.


CHAP. XXIV. They depart from the English Gulf in quest of the Straight of
Magallanes which they cannot find. They return home by an unknown way, never
Navigated before.
SUnday November the sixth, this morning we had lost the sight of land, so that
we could see it no more. All the night last past, and this day, we were under
our two Courses and Sprit-sail. The weather this day was hasey. My reckoning
was a S.W. half South way, and by it twenty one Leagues. We had now an
indifferent high Sea, and a fresh wind at N.N.W.

November the seventh, Variation of the Needle found here.
last night was both rainy and foggey, but in the morning it cleared up. The
wind for the most part was at W. and W. N. W. But at noon it came about at W.
S. W. Our reckoning was a S. W. by S. way, and by it twenty Leagues. We found
by observation Lat. 52 d. 03. We now steered away S.S.E. the wind being at that
time at W.S.W. In the evening of this day I found a variation of the Needle to
N.E. to the number of 15 d. or better. I was still troubled with the Gripes as
I had been before.

November the eighth, we had a fair night the last past. About midnight the
wind came to N.N.W. This day early, at the break of day, we all were persuaded
that we had seen Land, but at noon we saw that it was none, but only a Cloud.
The wind was now at North. My reckoning was a S.E. half East way, and thirty
two leagues and one third of a league. We had an observation that gave us 53 d.
27 South. The whole day was very fine and warm, and we saw great numbers of
Fowls and Seals.

November the ninth, yesterday in the evening the weather was cloudy. Hereupon
we lay by under a main-course. After midnight we sailed East, and E. by N. with
a fresh wind at W. N. W. and not any great Sea. The day it self was cloudy, and
toward noon we had some rain. So at two in the afternoon we lay by under a Main
course, the wind being fresh at N. W. I reckoned an E. N. E. way, and thereby
twenty eight Leagues.

Thursday November the tenth, all the night last past we lay under a
Main-course, Astorm.
with a mere fret of wind at N.W. and N.N.W. Day being come, the wind did
rather increase; insomuch, that about noon our sail blew to pieces. Hereupon we
were forced to lower the yard, and unbend the sail, lying for a little while
under a Mizen. But that also soon gave way. So that all the rest of this day we
lay a hull in very dark weather, foggy and windy, with a huge sea, which often
times rolled over us. In the afternoon it seemed to abate for some space of
time; but soon after it blew worse than before, which compelled us to lower our
Fore-yard.

^
November the tenth, all the night last past we had furious windy and
tempestuous weather, from the points of N.W. and N. N. W. together with Seas
higher and higher. In the evening we set our Mizen. At which time the Sun
appeared very waterish; but the wind now abated by degrees, and the Seas also.

November the twelfth, this morning little wind was stiring* but only some rain
fell. About ten it cleared up, and by an observation then made, we found Lat.
55 d. 25. The Sea was now much fallen, and a fresh wind was sprung up at W. and
W.S. W. We experimented also a very great current to the S. W. In the afternoon
of this day we set our sails again, resolving now unanimously together, to make
for the Straights of St. Vincent, otherwise called the Straights of Fernando de
Magallanes. We had a fresh wind at W.N.W. our course being S.S.E. under our
Sprit-sail, Fore-^^^l, and Fore-top-sail. This day we saw many Fishes, or
rather Fowls, ^
who had heads like unto Muscovia Ducks, as also two feet like unto them. They
had two Fins like the fore-fins of Turtles: white breasts and bellies; their
beak and eyes being red. They are full of Feathers on their bodies, and their
hinder parts are like unto those of a Seal, wherewith they cut the water. The
Spaniard calls these Fowls Paxaros Ninos. They weigh most commonly about six
or seven pound, being about one foot, a little more or less in length. Our
Commander Captain Sharp, had so much dexterity as to strike two of them. In the
evening we set also our Main-sail; the wind now coming to the Southward of the
West.

Sunday November the 13th, all the night past we had a fresh wind between S.W.
and W.N.W. with sometimes mists of small rain. In the evening we enjoyed a fine
leading gale at W. N. W. together with both clear and wholesome weather. We
made a S.E. way, and by it forty two leagues and two thirds. This day an
observation gave us Lat. 56 d. 55 South. We still experimented a great S. W.
current. In the afternoon of this day we steered E.S.E. and in the evening had
whiffling winds.

November the 14th, both last night and this morning we had cloudy weather.
About eight it cleared up. My reckoning was a S.E. by E. way, and by it thirty
two leagues. Our observation gave us Lat. 57 d. 50. South. This day we could
perceive land, They see Land.
and at noon were due West from it. In the evening we stood E. by S.

November the 15th, all the night past was very cloudy. But lose it again.
We judged now that we should be close in with the Land we had seen the day
before, but the morning being come we could see none. In the night much snow
fell, and in the day we had great fleets thereof, the weather being very cold
and cloudy. I reckoned an E.S.E. way, and hereby twenty nine leagues and two
thirds. Moreover, that our Latitude was 58 d. 25 S. The wind was now so fresh
at North, that we were forced to lie under our two Courses and Sprit-sail.

Novembe the 16th, most of this time we had still rain and snow, but now no
night at all, though the weather was dark. The wind was various, but from
midnight before this day, They alter their course.
the wind was at S.E. and S.S.E. We now lay E.N.E. I reckoned a N.E. by E. way,
and twenty three leagues. About four in the afternoon two of our fore-shrouds
bolts broke, but withal, were presently mended. This afternoon also we saw a
very large Whale. In the evening we handed in our fore-top sail, A Whale seen.
and lay under our pair of Courses, and Sprit-sail, the evening being very
clear.

November the 17th, in the night past there was a very hard frost. Great
Islands of Ice.
At four this morning we saw two or three Islands of Ice, the distance of two
or three leagues to the Southward of us. Soon after this, we saw several
others, the biggest of them being at least two leagues round. By an observation
made this day, we found Lat. 58 d. 23 South. We had now a vehement current to
the Southward. At noon I saw many others of these Islands of Ice
aforementioned, of which some were so long, that we could scarce see the end
of them, and were extant about ten or twelve fathom above water. The weather in
the mean while was very clear, and the wind cold. I found variation of the
Needle eighteen degrees to the North East. Variation of the Needle.


November the 18th, all the night past was very fair. I must call it night; No
night hereabouts.
for otherwise it was not dark at all. The Sea was very smooth, and the wind at
N. and N.N.W. I reckoned a N.E. by N. way, and by the same twenty two leagues.
At ten it grew stark calm, which held all the afternoon of this day. But at
night we had a wind again at N. and N. by E.

November the 19th, this day was cloudy with snow, and a frosty night
preceding it. The wind now was so fresh at North, that we were forced to take
in our topsails, and lie all day under our Courses and Sprit-sail. We made by
an E.S.E. way, eighteen leagues and two thirds.

November the twentieth, we had a cloudy night the last past, A great fog.
together with mis^ing rain and snow. This morning fell so great a fog, that we
could not see from stem to stern of our ship. From ten of the clock last night
we had also a calm and very cold weather. But what was worse than all this, A
short allowance.
we were now kept to a very short allowance of our sorry victuals; our
Provisions growing very scanty with us. About ten this morning we had a very
small breeze at North. Extremity of cold.
Several of our men were not able to endure the cold, so fierce it was, whereby
they were forced to lie and keep themselves as close as they could. We made an
East way, and by the same sixteen leagues. This day at noon I reckoned my self
to be East from the Gulf, from whence we last departed, two hundred and five
leagues and two thirds of a league.

Monday November the 21, Land Fowls seen yet no Land.
last evening we caught a small and white land fowl, and saw two or three more;
and also this morning. This sight afforded us good hopes we were not far
distant from some Coast or other, yet none we could see in all this long and
tedious voyage. In the night past we had a calm, and all this morning a great
fog with much snow and rain. We reckoned an E. by N. way, and ten leagues. At
one in the afternoon we had a fresh gale that sprang up at East, and at E. by N.

November the 22, most part of this day was calm. In the mean while we could
observe our ship to drive East. My reckoning was an E. N. E. way, and thereby
thirteen leagues and one third. At one in the afternoon we had a small gale at
W. S. W. our course being N. N. E. and N. E. by N.

November the 23, this day we had a gale at N.W. and freshning still more and
more; so that we were forced to take in our topsails and sprit-sail. The wind
was not a settled gale, but often varied from point to point. At noon it came at
N. E. and our course was then N. N. W. By a North way we reckoned sixteen
leagues.

November the 24th, both the night past and this morning was foggy weather,
with some calmes between times. But at eight in the morning the Sun brake out,
though notwithstanding the day was not clear. By a N.N.E. way we reckoned
fifteen leagues. This morning the wind came about to East, and by noon it was
again at N.E. We had a clear evening and a fresh gale.

November the 25th, all the night past we had a fresh wind at E. and E.N.E.
Insomuch, that at eight in the morning we took in our topsails. But at noon
the wind was not so fresh as it had been before. I reckoned a N.N.W. half West
way, and by the same twenty leagues.

November the 26th, last night the wind was not altogether so fresh as before;
but this morning it was again very high. The weather was both dark and cloudy,
and brought now and then rain and snow. We made a N.N.E. way, and hereby thirty
leagues. The wind all along E. by S. and E. S. E. In the evening we had fair
weather again. We experimented for the ten days last past a great Western Sea,
and saw in the same time several Seals.

Sunday November the 27th, all the night past we enjoyed a fresh gale and clear
weather. I reckoned thirty six leagues by a N. E. by N. way. By an observation
made, we now found Lat. 52 d. 48 South. 30 d. variation of the Need^^.
And I judged my self to be East from the Gulf, two hundred eighty five
leagues. In the evening of this day we had a very exact sight of the Sun, and
found above 30 d. variation of the Needle. From whence ought to be concluded,
that it is very difficult to direct a course of Navigation in these parts.
Observation.
For in the space of only twenty five leagues sailing, we have experimented
eight or nine degrees difference of variation, by a good Dutch Azimouth Compass.

November the 28th, all last night we had a fresh wind at E.S.E. More land
Fowls seen, but no land.
Toward morning we had but little wind, all the day being hasey weather. This
day we saw a whole flight of such Land-fowles, of which sort we killed one
before, as was mentioned above. This sight gave us occasion to believe, that
neither then, nor at this present, we were not far distant from land, and yet
we descryed none in the residue of this whole voyage. We made by a N. N. E.
way, thirty three leagues. Yesterday in the evening we set a new sprit-sail,
and about three this morning we also set our main-sail. At one afternoon, the
wind came about N. E. and N. N. E. which in the evening blew very fresh, with
cloudy weather.

November the 29th. The night proved very cloudy, and the wind blew very fresh
at E. N. E. and N. E. by E. This morning it was at East, both with snow, and
hail. Toward noon the weather cleared up, and we found by an observation
taken, Lat. 49 D 45 S. Our reckoning was a North way, and thirty leagues. This
day we had a short Eastern sea, and withal, a very cold evening. I took the
Sun, and hereby I found variation 26 D. 30. unto the North East. This night the
wind came about W. and W. N. W. continuing so all the night.

November the 30th. This day the wind was N. and N. N. E. with some clouds
hovering in the sky. At this time we had already almost four hours of night.
Four hours of night.
The morning of this day was very fair and clear. Hereupon for to give my self
satisfaction in the point, as fearing the truth of Spanish Books; I worked the
true Amplitude of the Sun, and found his variation to be 26 25 to the N. E.
being very conformable to what I had both read and experimented before.
Hereabouts, also we experimented a current to the Northward. Moreover, this day
we saw much rock-weed, which renewed our hopes, Rock-we^d.
once more of seeing land. We reckoned a N. E. way and by the same twenty two
leagues. By an observation made we found Lat. 48 D. 53 S. This day also we saw
several of those fowl-fish before described called Paxaros-ninos; Paxaros-ninos
and these of a larger size, than any we had seen before. In the afternoon, the
wind came about at N. N. E. whereby we stood N. W. by W. with a fresh gale, and
smooth water. The weather now began to grow warmer, then hitherto, and the
evening of this day was clear.

Tuesday December the first. The latter part of the night past was very cloudy,
and also sometimes rainy. About midnight we had a furious and violent Tornado,
Several Tornados.
forcing us in a moment to hand in our topsails. At five in the morning we set
them again, and at eleven, we had another Tornado, forcing us to hand our
topsails the second time. We made a N. N. E. two thirds East way, and thereby
thirteen leagues and two thirds of a league. The afternoon of this stormy day,
proved very fair, and the wind came to W. S. W. our course being N. E. by N. In
the evening the wind freshned, with cloudy weather.

Which continue
December the second. Last night we experimented a very furious whirlwind,
which notwithstanding, it pleased God, did pass about the length of our ship,
to Westward of us. However, we handed in our topsails, and halled up our
low-sails, in the brails. After the whirlwind came a fresh storm of large
hailstones, in the night, and several Tornados; but God be thanked, they all
came large of our ship. We now made a great way under a fore-course and
sprit-sail. At four of the clock this morning, our fore-sail split, whereby we
were forced to lower our fore-yard. At half an hour after ten we hoysted it
again with a furious S. W. wind. We made a N. E. by E. way, and by the same
forty seven leagues and an half. By observation we now had Lat. 46 D. 54 S. We
riffed our fore-sail, with respect to the violence of the wind. But in the
evening, this rather increased, and we had a very great Sea. Our standing
rigging, through the fury of this gale, gave way in several places, but was
soon mended again.

Warm weather
December the third. The wind all the night past, was very fresh, with several
flaws both of wind and rain, at S. W. and S. W. by S. We enjoyed now very warm
weather. This morning we set our fore-top-sail. Our reckoning gave us, a N. E.
half E. way and forty five leagues. We found Lat. by observation 45 D. 28 S.
This day at noon, a large shoal of young Porpusses came about our ship, and
played up and down. Porpusses.


December the 4th. All the night past we had a fresh gale at W. S. W. The night
was clear, only that now and then we had a small cloud affording some rain. In
the morning, from four of the clock till eight it rained. But then it cleared
up again, with a S. W. wind and a very smooth sea. We made by a N. E. one
quarter N. way, thirty nine leagues. By observation we found Lat. 44 D. 01 S.
At noon the wind came to S. S. W. our course then being N. N. E. This day we
agreed among our selves having the consent of our commander, A dividend made of
eight chests of mon
to share the eight chests of money, which as yet were remaining unshared.
Yesterday in the evening, we let out the reiff of our fore-sail, and hoysted up
our fore-yard. This evening I found variation 17 D. N. E.

Monday, December the 5th. All the night past, a clear night, and this a fair
day, with a fresh wind at S.S. W. We reckoned a N. E. 5. D. N. way, and by the
same forty two leagues. An observation gave us Lat. 42 D. 29. S. This afternoon
we shared of the chests abovementioned, three hundred pieces of eight each man.
300 p. 8. to each man
I now reckoned my self to be East from my departure four hundred seventy one
leagues and one third of a league. At night again we shared twenty two pieces
of eight more to each.

December the 6th. We had a clear star-light-night the last and a fair morning
this day, with a fresh gale at S. W. At noon we took in our fore-top-sail. We
reckoned a N. E. half N. way, and hereby fifty leagues and two thirds. An
observation taken afforded us 40 D. 31 S. This evening was cloudy.

December the 7th. The night was both windy and cloudy. At one in the morning,
we took in our topsails, and at three, handed our sprit-sail, and so we
scudded away before the wind, which now was very fresh at West. This morning a
gust of wind came and tore our main-sail into an hundred pieces, which made us
put away before the wind, till we could provide for that accident. My reckoning
was a N. E. three quarters E. way, and by the same thirty three leagues. By
observation we found Lat. 39 D. 37 S. We had now a great Sea, and a fresh wind
At three in the afternoon we set another fore-sail; the first being blown to
pieces. Moreover, at the same time we furled our sprit-sail. At five the wind
came at W. S. W. with very bad weather. This day our worthy commander Captain
Sharp, had very certain intelligence given him, that on Christmas Day, A plot
against Captain Sharp discovered.
which was, now at hand, the company, or at least a great part thereof, had a
design to shoot him; he having appointed that day some time since to be merry.
Hereupon he made us share the wine amongst us, as being persuaded they would
scarce attempt any such thing in their sobriety. The wine we shared fell out to
three jarrs unto each mess. That night the wind increased.

December the 8th. The night past was both cloudy and windy; the wind often
varying between the N. W. and S. W. points. This morning it varyed between W.
and N. W. by W. About noon this day, we brought a new main-sail to the yard,
but did not set it then, by reason there blowed too much wind. I reckoned a N.
E. half N. way, and by the same thirty leagues. By observation made we found
Lat. 38 D. 29 S. In the afternoon we had one or two squalls of wind and rain;
but the violence of both fell at stern of us. In the evening it blew again very
hard. I observed this day, the rising and setting of the Sun, The variation.
and found the exact variation to be 12 D. 15 N. E.

December the 9th. The night was starry-light, but withal, very windy. About
the break of day, the wind came to N. W. and at seven we set our fore-top-sail,
and stood N. N. E. with not much wind. We made since our last reckoning a N. E.
quarter E. way, and twenty nine leagues. We found by observation Lat. 37 D. 30
S. The sea was much fallen, Their Vessel is leaky.
but our ship now began to complain of several leakes, through our tedious and
long Voyage. This afternoon we hoysted up our main-yard and set up back-stays
and main-swifter; whose ring-bolt gave way, but was mended. In the evening of
this day we had but little wind.

December the 10th. The night was very clear, but till ten of the clock this
forenoon, we had no wind. Then a small breeze sprang up at N. and N. by E. We
made an E N. E. one third N. way, and hereby twenty one leagues. An observation
gave us Lat. 37 D. 01 S. In the afternoon of this day our chief Surgeon cut off
the foot of a Negro boy, which was perished with cold. The foot of a Negro cut
off.
Now it was like to be bad weather again. Hereupon we furled our topsails, and
lay under a pair of courses. But in the evening we lay under a fore-sail and
mizen, with misty weather.

Sunday, December the 11th. All the night past, we had a fresh wind at N. and
sometimes at N. N. W. The weather was very cloudy with drizling rain. We made
an E. way, and thereby twenty five leagues. This day brought a great sea. About
ten in the morning, one of our main shrouds gave way. In the evening fell some
small rain.

December the 12th. All the night past we had misty rain, and but little wind;
yea, in the morning a perfect calm. At noon came up a small gale at E. S. E.
and S. E. bringing with it cloudy weather. We reckoned a N. E. by E. way, and
by the same eighteen leagues. Yesterday dyed the Negro boy whose leg was cut
off by our Surgeon, Two Negro's dye.
as was mentioned the day before. This afternoon also dyed another Negro,
something bigger than the former, named Chepillo. The boy's name was Beafero.
All this evening but small wind.

December the 13th. All night the wind was at E. S. E. our course being N. N.
E. At three in the morning it came about at S. S. W. and at nine at E. by N. I
reckoned a N. E. by N. way, and fifteen leagues. The weather was hasey. In the
afternoon the wind was at N. E. our course being N. N. W. We enjoyed now a very
smooth sea, and saw multitudes of Grampusses, Whales, Grampusses, Whales, and
Porpusses.
and Porpusses, every day as we sailed along.

December the 14th. The evening past was cloudy, as also the night foggy.
Hereupon we took in our topsails. At half an hour after three this morning, we
stood N. E. the wind being then at N. N. W. At five we put out our topsails
again. At seven of the morning, we saw a Turtle floating upon the sea. We
reckoned a N. N. E. way. This days observation afforded us 34 D. 32. S. At this
time we had very hot weather, Very hot weather.
and great dews in the night. My whole Easting I reckoned to be now, six
hundred seventy seven leagues and one third of a league.

December the 15th. We had a fine night the last past, and a great dew. The
wind in the interim was between N. and N. W. I reckoned a N. E. half E. way,
and by the same thirty one leagues. We had an observation that gave us Lat. 33
D. 46 S. At noon the wind came about at N. N. W. our course being N. E. We had
this day a very clear evening, and at the same time a fresh wind.

December the 16th. We had a fair night and wind at N. N. W. and N. W. by N.
This morning I took the Sun at its rising, Variation of the Needle.
and found N. E. variation 20 D. 30. My reckoning was a N. N. E. way, and
thirty six leagues and one third of another. By observation I found Lat. 32 D.
09 S. At noon this day the wind came about to N. W.

December the 17th. Most part of the last night, the wind was at N. W. as
before. But toward morning a a fine and easy gale sprang up at W. N. W. This
morning we saw several Dolphins playing upon the sea, Dolphins seen.
which made us hope they would at last befriend us, and suddenly show us some
land or other. We reckoned a N. E. by N. one third N. way, and by the same
twenty five leagues. An observation gave us, now Lat. 31 D. 04. A fair evening.

December the 18th. We had a clear night past, together with a smooth gale at
N. W. which this morning was at W. by S. We had now a smooth sea, for several
days past. Our reckoning was twenty five leagues, by a N. E. by N. way. By
observation we perceive Lat. 29 D. 48 S.

December the 19th. A clear night the last past, and a fresh breeze at S. S. W.
and S. W. by E. lasting until nine in the morning. Then sprang up a wind at S.
E. by E. I reckoned this day a N. N. E. half E. way, and upon the same thirty
leagues. By observation made, we took Lat. 28 D. 29 S. The day was very fair,
and a smooth sea, with weather that was very hot. Very hot weather.
My whole Easting I reckoned now to be seven hundred and sixty leagues. This
evening I found variation 02 D. 50 N. E.

CHAP. XXV. The Bucaniers continue their Navigation, without seeing any Land,
till they arrive at the Caribby Islands in the West Indies. They give away
their Ship to some of their Companions that were poor; and disperce for several
Countries. The Author of this Journal arriveth in England.
DEcember the 20th, 1681. The night before this day was something cloudy, but
the weather was fair and the wind but little. At noon the wind came about N. by
E. our course being W. N. W. We made a N. N. W. way, and thereby as I reckoned
twenty two leagues. By an observation made we took Lat. 27 D. 25 S. The evening
of this day was cloudy, and now and then there fell a shower of rain.

December the 21st. At eight of the clock last night, the wind came N. W. by N.
but withal, with such dark weather, that we were forced to take in our
topsails. The night was something rainy, and the weather, this morning calm
and rainy. About ten we had a small breeze at N. W. We reckoned a N. by E. way,
and by the same sixteen leagues. The afternoon of this day was calm and still.

December the 22d. We had a fair and clear night the last past, which produced
this day a smooth sea, and extreme hot weather, and very little wind near the
Sun; so that no observation was made. Extreme hot weather.


December the 23d. The night was very fair. At midnight or thereabouts, a fresh
gale sprang up at S. E. and E. S. E. which sometime was E. This freshned by
degrees. We had in the day very hot and clear weather. By a N. way I reckoned
fifteen leagues.

December the 24. Last night we had both a fresh gale, and a clear night. The
wind was at E. by S. We reckoned a N. E. by E. way, and by it thirty one
leagues.

Sunday, December the 25th. This day being Christmas Day, Christmas Day.
for celebration of that great festival, we killed yesterday in the evening a
sow. This sow we had brought from the Gulf of Nicoya, being then a sucking pig
of three weeks old, more or less, but now weighed about fourscore and ten
pound. The weather extreme hot.
With this hogs-flesh we made our Christmas-dinner, being the only flesh we
had eaten ever since we turned away our prizes under the Aequinoctial, and left
the Island of Plata. We had this day several flaws of wind, and some rain; but
the weather otherwise was pretty clear. I reckoned a N. by E. way, and thirty
three leagues by the same. It was now also extreme hot weather, as we signified
before.

December the 26th. We had this day several gusts of wind, which forced us to
stand by our topsails. Yet were they but very short, and all the rest of the
while we enjoyed an indifferent fresh gale at E. and E. by S. We reckoned a N.
by E. way, and twenty eight leagues.

December the 27th. We had fair weather, and a fresh wind at E. and E. by S. I
reckoned a N. by E. way, and upon the same thirty two leagues. The evening of
this day was cloudy.

December the 28. Last night was cloudy with a fresh w^nd. We reckoned a N. E.
way, and by the same forty six leagues. We found by an observation made Lat. 15
D. 30 S. My whole Easting I reckoned this day to be eight hundred and twenty
five leagues. Now we saw much flying-fish, with some Dolphins, Bonito's, Much
fish seen.
and Albicores; but they will not take the hook.

December the 29th. All last night was cloudy, with a fresh wind between E. and
E. S. E. The weather all the afternoon was hasey. I reckoned a N. by E. way,
and hereupon forty leagues and one third. In the afternoon we had a S. E. by E.
wind, which blew very fresh. The evening was clear. Variation.
At Sunset I found variation to N. W. 04 D. 19.

December the 30th. The night past was cloudy. Toward morning the wind came
about at E. At six it came E. S. E. and at ten to S. E. by S. We made a N. by
E. way, and forty three leagues. By observation we found Lat. 11 D. 03 S. The
evening of this day was clear.

December the 31st. We had a cloudy night the last past, but the morning was
hasey. We came now, to a strict allowance of only three good pints of water
each day. We made a N. by E. way, and found Lat. by observation 08 D. 55 S. In
the afternoon we had an E. S. E. and S. E. by E. wind. My whole Easting I
reckoned now to be eight hundred eighty four leagues and one third. At noon we
stood away N. W.

Sunday, January the first 1681. All the night past was cloudy, as this day
also with some showers of rain. We made a N. W. one eight N. way, and forty
leagues. In the afternoon came about a fresh wind at S. E. and E. S. E.

January the 2d. The weather this day was both dull and cloudy. We reckoned a
N. W. one quarter N. way, and by the same thirty two leagues. By observation we
found, that our Lat. now was 06 D. 06 S. The wind came pretty fresh at S. E.

January the 3d. We had several squalls of wind, and some rain. But, withal a
fresh wind at S. E. and E. S. E. Our reckoning was a N. W. one quarter N. way,
and thirty four leagues. The afternoon was clear, but the evening cloudy.

January the 4th. All the night past was very cloudy; but this forenoon it
cleared up. Yesterday we put abroad our main-top-sail, studden-sails; but took
them in at night. At four this morning we set our larboard studden-sail, and
before noon fitted up top-gallant masts, and yard. We made a N. W. way, and by
it forty leagues and two thirds. By observation we had now Lat. 03 D. 09 S.
This afternoon also, we set our top-gallant-sail, being forced to make out all
its running rigging. The wind was pretty fresh at S. E. and S. E. by E.

January the 5th. Most part of the night past was clear, and starlight, though
with some rain toward the morning. This being come, we put out our
top-gallant-sail, and both our top-sail, studden-sails. At noon likewise, we
put up our fore-top-gallant masts, and yard. We caught an Albicore, A (...)
Albicore taken.
this day, weighing about one hundred and twenty pound weight. The wind was at
S. E. by S. and S. S. E. We made a N. W. way, and reckoned thereby thirty five
leagues. By observation we found Lat. 02 D. 03 S. We had now mighty hot weather.

January the 6th. Yesterday in the evening we caught another Albicore which
weighed only eight or nine pound weight. (...) small one.
We made a N. W. way, and reckoned thirty five leagues, as before. Now by an
observation made, we could perceive only Lat. 00 D. 49 S. The evening of this
day was very clear.

January the 7th. The wind was variable between S. S. E. and S. S. W. though
not altogether so fresh as before. Our reckoning was a N. W. one quarter N.
way, and thirty six leagues by the same. This day an observation gave us Lat.
00 D. 32 N. of the Aequinoctial, (...) the Aequinoctial.
which now we had passed again. In the afternoon of this day we caught another
Albicore which weighed more than the first we took; An Albicore of ^3^
that is, between one hundred thirty five, and one hundred and forty pound. But
little wind stirring this afternoon.

January the 8th. This evening last past, we had little better than a calm. At
nine this morning, we had a fresh wind at S. S. E. with dark weather, so that
we thought it convenient, to take in our main-top-sail. But, at noon we set it
again, and also, our larboard top-studden-sail with both top-gallant sails. We
made a N. W. way, and by it thirty four leagues. By an observation made we
found Lat. 01 D. 55 N. We had now extreme hot weather, and a very small
allowance of water.

January the 9th. Last night we took in topsails all night, the wind then
whiffling between S. and W. points. We had nowithstanding, for the most part
very little wind. The morning of this day was rainy, and thereupon, with good
diligence, we saved a bompkin of water. There was now a great ripling sea,
rising very high; and it is reported, that sometimes and somewhere hereabouts,
is to be seen an enchanted Island; which others say, and dare assert, An
enchanted Island.
that they have sailed over. I reckoned a N. W. by N. one quarter N. way, and
twenty five leagues. This afternoon we had very dark and calm weather, looking,
as if we should have much rain. Now, reckoning up my meridian I found my self
E. from my departure, seven hundred and two leagues. In the evening we had very
rainy weather and a cockling sea.

January the 10th. All the night past was cloudy. About midnight sprang up a
small breeze varying all round the compass. At five this morning we had a
breeze at S. E. and a very clear sky, which afterward continued to freshen,
with the same clearness as before. We made a N. W. by N. one quarter N. way,
and by the same two leagues and two thirds. By a clear observation we had now
Lat. 03 D. 16 N. At four this evening the wind was at E. S. E. the weather
being violent hot; in so much, that our allowance of water was tedious unto us
for its shortness. At the same time we had an indifferent smooth sea from the E.

January the 11th. All the night past we had little or no wind. But about two
in the morning, the wind freshned again at E. N. E. and brought both a clear
and hot day. We made twenty three leagues by a N. W. one quarter W. way. This
days observation gave us Lat. 04 D. 06. N. In the afternoon we had a shower of
rain; and afterward a fresh wind at E. N. E. But the evening grew dull.

January the 12th. In the night past we had two or three squalls of wind, and
some showers of rain. In the mean while the wind blew fresh at N. E. and N. E.
by E. as it also continued to do in the day. I reckoned a N. W. way, and forty
four leagues and one third. Our observation this day gave us 05 D. 49 N.
Yesterday and to day we set our main-top-sail. Now I could not find much
variation of the needle. Little (...) no variation.


January the 13th. We had a fresh gale all the last night, but more Northerly
than before; for now it was N. E. by N. We reckoned a W. N. W. way, and
thereupon -- leagues and two thirds. An observation taken showed us Lat. 06 D.
41 N. We had a N. N. E. sea and very clear weather.

January the 14th. We had a clear night the last, and a fresh wind at E. N. E.
We made a N. W. one fifth W. way, and thirty eight leagues. By observation we
found Lat. 07 D. 46 N. We had a smooth sea; and now we were come to only three
horns of water a day, which made in all but a quart allowance for each man. The
evening was clear, Their allowance shortened.
and we had a fresh wind.

Sunday, January the 15th. The night past was clear, and the wind fresh at
E.N.E. and again at N.E. by E. very fresh. About eleven of the clock at night,
dyed one of our companions, One of their men dies.
named William Stephens. It was commonly believed that he poisoned himself with
Manzanilla in Golfo dulce, for he never had been in health since that time.
This forenoon was cloudy. We reckoned forty four leagues and a N. W. way. An
observation gave us this day 09 D. 18 N. All the last night we kept out our
top-gallant-sail^. We saw hereabouts, many flying-fish being very large in
size. This morning also, we threw over board our dead man, and gave him two
French volly's and one English one. I found now again very small variation.

January the 16th. We had a clear night, and a very fresh wind at N. E. and E.
N. E. with a long homeing sea. My reckoning was a N. W. one seventh W. way, and
thereby forty eight leagues and one third. The observation made this day gave
us Lat. 10 D. 48 N. I reckoned my self now, East from my departure five hundred
fifty three leagues. We had a cloudy evening.

January the 17th. All the night past we enjoyed a fresh wind, and so this day
also, at N. E. by N. We made a N. W. half W. way, and thereupon forty seven
leagues and one third of a league. By observation we found Lat. 12 D. 19 N. We
had now a long North sea. At noon this day we steered away N. N. W. The day was
very hot, but the night both cool and dewy.

January the 18th. All the night past was both cloudy and windy. At six this
morning our sprit-sail-top-mast broke. I reckoned a W. N. W. way, and forty
eight leagues by the same. We found by observation Lat. 13 D. 12 N. At noon we
steered away W. the wind being at N. E. fresh, with a clear evening.

January the 19th. We had a clear night the last, and a fresh wind at E. N. E.
which sometimes came in pushes. Our reckoning was a W. half Southerly way, and
by the same forty six leagues. We found by observation Lat. 13 D. 01 N.
Yesterday in the evening we put up a new sprit-sail-top-mast; with a fine
smooth gale at N. E. by E.

January the 20th. The night past was clear, and not very fresh; but at
daybreak it freshened again. Last night we saw a great shoal of fish; whereof
we caught none, by reason the Porpusses frightened them from us, as they
ofttimes had done before. Yesterday in the evening also, we saw a Man of
War-Fowl, A Man of War-Fowl.
and that gave us good hopes we should er'e long see land. These hopes, and the
great desires we had to end our voyage; gave us occasion this day to put in, or
stake down, each man of our company a piece of eight for a reward unto him, A
reward to him that first ^^th land.
that should first discover land. We reckoned a W. one sixth Northerly way, and
by it thirty eight leagues. An observation gave us this day Lat. 13 D. 11 N.
The wind was at N. E. and E. N. E. This day we passed over many riplings, and
also saw many multitudes of fish; Porpusses hinder their fishing.
but the Porpusses did always hinder us of having any good of them.

On January the 21st. We made a W. way, and reckoned forty seven leagues. By
observation we found Lat. 13 D. 07 N. The wind was at E. N. E. and from thence
came a long sea. The evening was very clear.

January the 22d. We had a fair and a clear day, the wind being at E. We
reckoned a W. by N. one third W. way, and forty leagues. An observation showed
us Lat. 13 D. 17 N. We had a clear evening, and a fresh wind at E. N. E.

January the 23d. This day was both clear and hot, with a fresh wind at E. N.
E. My reckoning was a W. way, and forty six leagues. Our observation made this
day afforded us Lat. 13 D. 15 N. In the evening we had some rain.

January the 24th. This day brought us likewise clear weather, such as the day
before. I reckoned a W. way, and forty leagues and one third. By observation we
found Lat. 13 D. 12. N. The afternoon was cloudy, and had some rain, the wind
freshning at E.N.E. and at E. by N. I reckoned now, that I was East from my
departure three hundred and eleven leagues. We had a cloudy evening.

January the 25th. Both last night and this morning the weather was cloudy.
This morning we saw several Tropick-birds of diverse sorts. Tropick-birds seen.
Our reckoning was a W. three quarters N. way, and forty three leagues. We
found by observation Lat. 13 D. 29 N. This afternoon we saw a Booby flying
close aboard the Horison. A Booby seen.
The weather was hasey. They look out sharp for land.
But now we began to look out sharp on all sides for land, expecting to see it
every minute. I reckoned my self to be Eastward of my departure two hundred
sixty eight leagues.

January the 26th. The night last past was indifferent clear. Yet
notwithstanding, this morning we had a smart shower of rain, and it was very
windy. Hereupon we furled our sprit sail, the weather being very hasey to the
Westward. We reckoned a W. way, and thereby forty six leagues and one third. By
observation taken we found Lat. 13 D. 17. N. At noon this day, we had a very
fierce Tornado, and rain together; but withal, a clear afternoon. We had a high
E N. E. sea; A fierce T^^nado.
and saw multitudes of flying-fish, also several fowls, and amongst these, two
or three Booby's. The evening was hasey.

January the 27th. All night past we had a fresh wind, and clear weather. This
morning our fore-top-mast back-stay gave way, and at daybreak, the
star-board-sheet of our fore-top-sail brake. We had several Tornado's this day,
and dark weather. Our reckoning was a W. way, and forty eight leagues by the
same. We had a clear evening, and a dark night. This day also a certain bird,
called a Noddy, came on board us, A Noddy comes aboard.
which we took for a certain token that we were not, now very far from land.

Saturday, January the 28th. We had a very clear night the last past. About an
hour before day one of our company happened to descry land, They descry the
Island of Barbado's.
which proved to be the Island of Barbado's, at S. S. W. from us, and at two
leagues and an half distance, more or less. Hereupon we clapped on a wind, N. and
by W. At daybreak we were only four leagues distant from Chalky-Mount, at
which time we stood S. W. by S. As we sailed we saw several ships at anchor in
Spikes-Road. Soon after a Shalop passed by, between us and the shore, but would
not come within call of us. Hereupon we stood in, within a mile of the shore;
and made a wiff unto a Pinnace which we saw coming out of the road
aforementioned. She came close aboard us, and as it should seem, was the Barge
of one of his Majesty's Frigates, They are afraid of the Richmond- Frigate.
the Richmond then lying at the Bridge-town at anchor. They told us of a peace
at home, but would not come on board us, though often invited thereunto.
Neither dared we be so bold, as to put in there at Barbado's; for hearing of a
Frigate lying there, we feared least the said Frigate should seize us for
Privateers, and for having acted in all our voyage without Commission. Thus we
stood away from thence for the Island of Antego. (...) bear away (...) Antego.


Here I cannot easily express the infinite joy we were possessed withal, this
day to see our own countrymen again. They told us that a ship, which we saw in
the offing to leward of the Island, was a Bristol-man, and an Interloper; but,
we feared that same vessel, to be the Frigate aforementioned. I reckoned a way
of twenty five leagues. So that I was now by my account, to Eastward of my
departure one hundred fifty one leagues. Now we stood N. by W. and by
observation found Lat. 13 D. 17 N. we being then N. W. from the body of the
Island of Barbado's, between seven and eight leagues. This afternoon we freed
the Negro who was our shooemaker by his trade, They give liberty to a Negro.
giving him his liberty for the good service he had done us in all the course
of this voyage. We gave also unto our good commander Captain Sharp, a Mulato
boy, as a free gift of the whole company, for to wait upon him, in token of the
respects we all were owing unto him, for the safety of our conduct through so
many dangerous adventures. This being done, we shared some small parcels of
money, that had not as yet been touched of our former prizes; The last dividend
ma^^.
and this dividend amounted unto twenty four pieces of eight each man.

At one of the clock this day, from our fore-yard we descryed the Island of
Santa Lucia, ^
being one of the Western Islands, not far distant from that of Barbados. I had
omitted to tell a passage which happened in our ship, on Thursday last, which
was the 26th day of this Month, and just two days before we made the Island
aforementioned of Barbados. On that day therefore a little Spanish shock-Dog, ^
which we had found in our last Wine-prize, taken under the Aequinoctial, and
had kept alive till now, was sold at the mast by public cry, for forty pieces
of eight, his owner saying that all he could get for him should be spent upon
the company at a public merriment. Our commander Captain Sharp bought the Dog,
with intention to eat him, in case we did not see land very soon. This money
therefore, with one hundred pieces of eight more, which our Boatswain,
Carpinter and Quartermaster had refused to take at this last dividend, for some
quarrel they had against the sharers thereof; was all laid up in store till we
came to land, to the intent of spending it ashore, at a common feast, or
drinking bout. At Sunset the Island of Santa Lucia bore W. S. W. from us, and
was at ten leagues distance. Isle of Martnica.
Also the Island of Martinica bore N. W. by W. of us at twelve or thirteen
leagues distance. We had this day a very clear evening.

Sunday, January the 29th. We had a clear night and a fresh wind at E. by N.
and E.N.E. Our reckoning was a N. N. W. half W. way, and hereby forty six
leagues. By observation we took Lat. 15 D. 46 N. At noon this day we saw the
Island named la Desseada, la Desseada.
or the Desired Island, which then bore N. W. from us, and seemed to be at eight
leagues distance more or less. At six of the clock in the evening, we saw
likewise Marigalanta, Marigalanta.
another of the Cariby Islands, at S. W. by W. from us, and that of Guadalupe,
streaking it self in several hammocks of land, Guadalupe*
both Westward and Northward: as also la Desseada abovementioned at S. E. which
from thence shows like tableland, and at each end has a low point running
out. At six this evening it was W. S. W. and at five or six leagues distance
from us. At the same time we saw the Island of Monserrate, at a great distance
from our ship; Monserrate*
and making three round hammocks close together. This evening likewise, we
caught an Albicore of twenty pound weight.

Monday, January the 30th. We had a fair night all the last past, and a fresh
wind. Hereupon, all night we halled up our main-sail in brails, standing at the
same time N. by W. with the wind at E. N. E. At midnight we stood N. W. At
three in the morning we lay by until five. Then we stood away W. N. W. until
six; and at that hour we stood W. At eight of the clock we saw the Island of la
Antigua, (...) Antigua.
called by us Antego, to the Southward of us, making three round hammocks of
land, and a long high hill to Northw^^d. Hereupon, we stood W. S. W. for it. At
noon we fo^nd Lat. 17 D. N. the Island being then just W. from us.

We came about to the S. of the Island, and sent a Canoa on shore, for to get
Tobacco, and other necessaries that we wanted; as also to ask leave of the
Governor to come into the Port. The Gentry of the place and common people,
were very willing and desirous to receive us. But on Wednesday, February the
first, the Governor flatly denied us entry; at which all the Gentry were much
greived, and showed themselves very kind unto us. Hereupon we agreed among our
selves, They give away the ship.
to give away, and leave the ship unto them of our company, who had no money
left them of all their purchase in this Voyage, having lost it all at play; And
disperse.
and then to divide our selves into two Ships, which were now bound for
England. Thus I my self, and thirteen more of our company, went on board
Captain Robert Porteen his ship, called the Lisbon Merchant, and set sail from
la Antigua on February the eleventh, and landed at Dartmouth in England, March
the 26th, Anno 1682.

FINIS.
THE TABLE To the Second Volum OF THE BUCANIERS
A.
ALbicores, a sort of fish so called by the Spaniards, 47, 203. An huge one
taken, 204. Another taken of one hundred and thirty five pound weight, ibid.
Alexander (John) one of the Bucaniers, and a Scotchman, drowned at the Gulf of
Nicoya, 145 Captain Alleston, a Commmander among the Bucaniers: his Forces, p.
2. He is left to guard the ships, 4 Captain Alonso, a Spanish Officer, killed
by the Bucaniers, 164 Ahorcados, two rocks so called, nigh the Island of
Solango, 167 Anchova's, huge shoals of them, 103 Captain Andraeas, a chief
Commander among the Indians: he conducteth the Bucaniers to the Golden Island,
3. He embarketh with them for Santa Maria, 8. He returns home with the King
of Darien from Panama, 35 Captain Antonio, a man of great parts, and a chief
Commander among the Indians of Darien, 5. He joyneth the Bucaniers, and
persuades them to undertake the Journey of Santa Maria, ibid. He returns
home from before Panama. 35 Antigua, alias Antego, one of the Caribe Islands,
212. Its Governor denies entry to the Bucaniers, ibid. Argandona (Don Tomas)
Commander of a Spanish Vessel, taken before Guayaquil, 81. He is set at
liberty, 109 Arequipa, an English Gentleman inhabitant thereof, and married
there, fought the Bucaniers at Hilo, 143 Arica, designed upon by the Bucaniers,
53. Being arrived there, they dare not to land, 93. is designed upon the second
time, 126. its Governor is Proprietor of Yqueque, 129. The Town assaulted and
taken, but the Fort stands out, 130, etc. A description of its Coast, and
situation, 136. Some account of the place, 135 Alligators, their bigness and
nature, 43 Armadilla of Panama destroyed by the Bucaniers, 27. Description of
that bloody fight, ibid. etc. Three Armadilla-barks sent to keep the mouth of
the River of Santa Maria, for fear of the Bucaniers. 145 Captain Assientos his
brother killed by the Bucaniers, 164
B.
Don Baltazar, a Gentleman of Quality, taken in a Vessel before Guayaquil, 82.
He is set at liberty, 109 Barahona (Don Jacinto) Admiral of the Armadilla of
Panama, 28. He is killed in the engagement, 30 Barbadas Island descryed by the
Bucaniers, being the first land they saw, 209 Barbacoa, a part of the Continent
of America, in the South Sea, 49 Barcos de la Armadilla, 27. Two of them taken
by the Bucaniers, ibid. etc. Barco de aviso, or a Packet-boat, taken by the
Bucaniers, 161 Bark-logs, 70. Their use, 78 Beafero, or rather Viviero, a
Negr^-boy, whose leg was cut off at Sea, dies, 199 Boca del Toro, the place of
the general rendezvous of the Bucaniers, 1 Bonitos, a sort of fish so called,
47. many caught, 141, 142 seen, 203. Booby, a bird so called seen at Sea, being
a token of land nigh at hand, 208 Captain Bournano, a French Commander; his
forces; his attempts on a place called Chepo: he tampereth with the Indians of
Darien, 2. He leaves the Bucaniers, and why, 3 Bucaniers, they land on Darien,
being in all three hundred and thirty one men: their march toward Santa Maria,
4. Their Arms and provisions, ibid. Four of their number tire, and return to
the ships, 5. Difficulties of this march, ibid. etc. They are jealous of the
Indians, yet without cause, 9. They take the Town and Fort of Santa Maria, 10.
They find little purchase there, the Gold being conveyed away, ibid. They
resolve to go for Panama, 12. Are deserted by the Indians, excepting the chief
Commanders of them. Are encouraged by a Spaniard, who promises to guide them
safely, ibid. They take two Barks by the way, 24. Item, several prisoners (whom
they kill in cold blood) as also a Peragua at Chepillo, 25, 26. They engage the
Armadilla of Panama, and destroy it by a fierce and bloody fight, 27, etc. They
block up Panama by Sea, and take several Vessels before the Town, 31. They go
to the Isle of Tavoga, where they take other prizes, 36. Thence to Otoque, and
Cayboa, 38, 39. They are repulsed from Puebla Nueba, 41. They take here one
Vessel, and destroy two more, 42. Are deserted by many of their company, 43.
They careen at Gorgona, and alter their Vessel, 49, etc. They lose a ship of
their company, and find her again, 55, 62. They design to plunder Arica, 54.
Eight of their company lost at the Isle of Gallo, 75. They take a prize off of
Guayaquil, 72. Their cruelty toward a Spanish Friar, 75. They arrive at Arica,
but dare not land* 92. Hence they bare away for Hilo: take the place: plunder
and destroy a Sugar-work: are cheated by the Spaniards; and at last forced to
retire with little or no pillage, etc. They arrive at Coquimbo: take the City
of la Serena; plunder it, and are forced again to retire without any
considerable purchase, 104, etc. Multitudes of dangers they were in at the Isle
of Juan Fernandez, 116, etc. They mutiny among themselves, and choose a new
Commander, 120. They out-brave three Spanish men of war, and give them the
go-by, 122. Their cruelty toward an old man at Yqueque, 128. They attempt
Arica the second time, 126. Are beaten out of the Town, yet make a bold
retreat, 132, etc. They resolve to go home over-land, 137. They land at Guasco,
139. They surprise Hilo the second time, 142. They mutiny again among
themselves, 140. They go to the Gulf of Nicoya, where they take down the decks
of their ship, and hereby mend its sailing, 140, etc. Forty seven of their
Companions leave them, and go home over-land, 141. They take some prisoners and
two Barks at the Gulf of Nicoya, 144. They careen at Golfo Dulce and resolve to
go and cruize under the Aequinoctial, 150, 156. They take there several prizes,
158, etc. especially one very rich, 162. They are in danger of being massacred
by their own slaves, 165. They attempt the surprizal of Paita, but in vain,
168, etc. They stand away for the Streights of Magallanes, 170. They arrive at
a place incognito, which they call the Duke of Yorks Islands, and are in great
danger of being lost at their arrival, 178. They run many other dangers in the
said place by stress of weather, ibid. etc. Some of them resolve to shoot
Captain Sharp on Christmas Day, 198. They arrive at Barbadas, but dare not put
in there for fear of the Richmond-Frigat, 209. They bare away for Antego, and
arrive at the said Island, 212. They give away their ship to the poorest of
their company, and disperse for several places, 212. Some of them arrive in
England, ibid. Mr. Bull, one of the Bucaniers, killed, 25 Mr. Bullock, one of
the Bucaniers, and a Surgeon, made prisoner at Arica, and detained there by the
Spaniards, 163
C.
Cabbage-trees, 122 Cacao-nut, whereof Chocolate is made, the best sort, 71.
Cacao-trees in great plenty at the Isle of Cano, 142 Caldero, a Port of this
name in the Gulf of Nicoya, 143 Calms, very great, and where, 68 Camarones, a
river of this name nigh Yqueque, 130 Cammock (William), one of the Bucaniers,
dies 113 Cannis, a Dutchman, Interpreter to the Bucaniers, 95. He runs away
to the Enemy, 147 Canoas, none about Guayaquil, 70 Cano, an Island of this
name: its latitude and appearance at Sea, 143. Some account thereof, 142 Cape
of San Francisco, 58, 160 Cape Passao, 51, 161, 164 Cape St. Lawrence, 61 Cape
Blanco, 77, 149. New Cape Blanco, a place so called, 147 Carabaxal (Don Diego)
one of the Commanders of the Spanish Armadilla, 28. He escapes from the fight,
29 Carpenters (Spanish) do the Bucaniers good service at the Gulf of Nicoya,
and are rewarded by them, 146 Cavallo, a place so called in the Gulf of Nicoya.
145 Cayboa, an Island famous for the fishery of Pearl, 39. its situation,
ibid. Some account thereof, 43 Chandy, or Chanduy, a Point so called, 71, 167
Chapel (James) one of the Bucaniers, with whom the Author fought a Duel, at
the Isle of Plate, 165 Santa Clara, a place so named, where a rich Vessel was
cast away, 167 Chepillo, an Island nigh Panama, where the Bucaniers meet, 25.
They take there several prisoners, and a Peragua, 25, 26 Chira, an Island of
this name, in the Gulf of Nicoya, 144, 146 Chocolate, much used by the
Bucaniers, 100 Christmas Day solemnized by the Bucaniers, 116, 202 Don
Christoval, a person of Quality, taken before Guayaquil, 82. He is set at
liberty, 109 Comet, one seen and observed, with what followed, 101 Coasts very
deep, 55 Colan, a Town of this name, its description, 170, 171 Cold, in
extremity, whereabouts the Bucaniers experimented it. 193 Cockles as large as
two fists, 146. like unto those in England, 192 Captain Cook, a Commander among
the Bucaniers: his Forces, 2. What party he led at their first landing, 4. He
is put into a Vessel taken at Puebla Nueba; but soon quitteth that Command, 44.
is put into irons, and wherefore, 121 Cook (William) servant unto Captain Cook,
dies, 137. He accuses his Master of several Crimes, ibid. Copper-furnaces and
Mines, 138 Coquimbo-Bay, 103. its description and topography, 111 Coves, or
Cuevas, what they are, 2 Cox (Captain John) one of the Bucaniers, is put into a
Vessel taken at Puebla Nueba, 44. His Vessel is sunk by order, 76. He is sent
to parley with the Enemy at Hilo, 95 Cox's River, 188 Captain Coxon sets
forth toward Darien, 1. His forces, 2. What party he led at the first landing,
4. He is chosen to be chief Commander of the Bucaniers, 12. He engages a
Spanish Bark, but misseth of his design, 25. is branded with cowardice, 35. He
mutineth, and returns home, with many more over-land, ibid.
D.
Darien, a Province of America, whose Indian King meets the Bucaniers: his
habit and attire: as also the of Queen, 6* 7. The women free, airy, and brisk,
ibid. The Indians of this Country can tell no farther than twenty, 8. They wage
almost continual Wars against the Spaniards, 2. Whereabouts is the place of
their general rendezvous in the said Wars, 9. The Kings Daughter redeemed by
the English at Santa Maria, 12. Cruelty of the Indians against the Spaniards,
ibid. They desert the Bucaniers, ibid. Are forced to a Peace with the Spaniards
by a Stratagem contrived in the Name of the English, 153 Drake (Sir Francis)
some memoires of him, 63. He divided the Plate by whole bowls unto his Company,
and threw much overboard, idid. He built a Church at the River Loa in the
South Sea, 142 Desseada, one of the Caribe-Islands, 211 Dog, one sold by the
Bucaniers at the mast for forty pieces of eight, 210 Dolphins caught, 141. Seen
at Sea with hopes of land, 200, 203 Duke of Yorks Islands, so called by the
Bucaniers: an account of them as far as they were searched, 178. etc. Their
draught 186
E.
Earthquake, which happened at the City of la Serena, while the Bucaniers were
there, 108 Eclipse of the Sun observed, 84. What followed, ibid. Embargo laid
on all Spanish Vessels in the South Sea, for fear of the Bucaniers, 76. it is
taken off, 129 Enchanted Island, 205 English Gulf, a place so named by the
Bucaniers, its draught, 188
F.
Farol, or Farollon, de Glantanos, an Island so called nigh Panama, 24. The
Bucaniers arrive there, and seize the watchman of the Isle, ibid. Fowls very
great seen at Sea, and where, 102. seen again, 114. A strange Sea-fowl like an
Eagle, 180 Francisco, a Negro, attempteth to make his escape, 154. He is
detained prisoner for this attempt, 159 Francisco, an Indian, attempteth the
same, ibid. Francisco, a Biscayner, and a Pilot of the South Sea, 163
G.
Galapagos, an Island of the South Sea, where the Bucaniers designed to careen,
48. Great currents and calms thereabouts, 64 Gallo, an Island nigh Gorgona, its
latitude and appearance at Sea, 56 Grampusses, 53, 61, 199 Guayaquil, designed
upon by Sawkins; also by Captain Sharp, 45. They change this resolution, 53. An
account of the said place, 71 Goat-key, a place so called, 74 Goats in huge
quantity at the Isle of Juan Fernandez, 116 Gold, whereabouts gathered in great
quantity, 11, 50, 53, 127 Golden Island, whereabouts situated: the Bucaniers
meet at the said place, 4 Golfo Dulce, a draught thereof, 155. it is named King
Charles his Harbor, by Captain Sharp, 154 Gorgona Island, its latitude,
situation, appearance at Sea, and description, 50, 51, etc. its continual
rains, 49 Gorgonilla, another Island, 56 Gulf of San Miguel, 4, 15, 16. its
smoothness of water, 18 Gulf of Ballona, 14. its description, 20. How it lies
in relation to the Bay of Panama, 40 Gulf of Nicoya, its description, 148. The
Bucaniers arrive there, and search it, 143. They take there some prisoners and
two barks, 144 Gulf of the English, or English Gulf, its draught and
description, 188 Guadalupe, one of the Caribe-Islands, its appearance at Sea,
211 Guasco its Point, 138. An account of this place, 139. Description of its
Port, 144 Guyones, a Cape so named, its latitude and appearance at Sea, 150
H.
Captain Harris, a chief Commander among the Bucaniers, 2. What party he led at
their first landing upon Darien, 4. He takes a Spanish Bark, 25. is killed in
the engagement before Panama, 32 Hilo, its Port and Point, 94, 91, 92. The Town
taken, 94. The Sugar-work burnt, 97. The inhabitants force the Bucaniers to
retreat, ibid. What they got there, 98. The place surprised and taken again,
142 Hernando, a Negro of this name, runs away from the Bucaniers, 154 Houses
of Darien, how they are built, even neater than those at Jamaica, 6
I.
Juan Fernandez, an Island of this name, its appearance at Sea, description,
and some account thereof, 115, etc. A particular observation made there by the
Author and others, ibid, Juan Diaz, a River so called nigh Arica, 136 Captain
Juan, a Spanish Commander, promises to conduct the Bucaniers to Guayaquil, 45.
He is set at liberty, 109 Joseph Gabriel, a Spaniard, dies, 53. He promises
to deliver Panama into the hands of the Bucaniers, ibid. Islands of Ice, 192
Island enchanted, 205
K.
King of Darien goes with the Bucaniers to take Panama, 13. He promises 50000
men to assist the English, ibid. He returns home from Panama, 35 King
Golden-cap, Son unto the King of Darien, 13. He goes with the Bucaniers on the
expedition of Panama, ibid. He remains behind after his Father was returned
home, 35 King Charle's his Harbor 154 King Charles the first of England
assisted by the Merchants of Lima, 63
L.
Land of San Tiago, 57 Land of San Matteo, 57 Land-fowls, 88. seen at Sea, yet
no land, 193, 194 Land seen, but not found, about the Latitude of 57, D. South,
191 Leaves of a certain nature, eaten by the Inhabitants of Yqueque, 128
Lapina, the Embarcadero of Guayaquil, 71 Lima, its Merchants send a ship laden
with Plate unto the King of England, 63. its Table used by the Author, 101.
Whereabouts the ship was lost, 167 Limpets in strange quantities at the Duke of
Yorks Islands, 180, etc. Limpet point, 188 Loa, a River so called, 142. The
Bucaniers could not find it, ibid. A Church built there by Sir Francis Drake,
ibid. Lobos, an Island so called, or the Isle of Seals, 140, 169 Lopez (Don
Diego) Commander of el Santo Rosario, being a rich prize taken under the
Aequinoctial, 163. is killed in the fight, ibid. Santa Lucia, an Isle of this
name, being one of the Western Islands, 210 Lions adore the Cross at Tumbez, 76
Lion of the Sea, or a Sea-Lyon, its description, and where seen by the Author,
110
M.
Captain Mackett, a Commander among the Bucaniers; his forces, 2. He is left to
guard the ships, 4 Magallan-Clouds, very famous among the Bucaniers, 85
Man-of-war-fowl, a Sea-fowl so called in the West-India's 207 Manta, a Port and
Town so called, 60, 61, 165 Manzanilla-tree, the effects of the drops falling
from off the leaves, 44. One of the Bucaniers poisoned therewith, 206 Santa
Maria, a Town so called, with a Garrison: is designed upon by the Bucaniers:
its situation, 4. is taken and burnt, 10, 14 Santa Martha, a Spanish Town
taken by Captain Sawkins, 38. The Bishop thereof made Bishop of Panama.
Marigalanta, one of the Caribe-Islands, 211 Martinica-Island, another of the
Western Isles. ibid. San Matteo its Bay, 158. Land of San Matteo, 57 Mero, a
Point of land of this name, 168 Mexillones, a Bay so called, 142 Mines of
Silver very rich. 127 San Miguel, the Gulf. ibid. Miscelaw, how it is prepared,
7, 8 Monte de Christo, its latitude and appearance at Sea, 61 Montgomery
(Robert) one of the Bucaniers, dies, 82 Monserrate, one of the Caribe-Islands,
its appearance at Sea, 211 Mora de Sama, 91, 92 Moro de Horse, its appearance
at Sea, 141 Morro Moreno, its appearance at Sea, ibid. Mulato-boy, one given by
the Bucaniers unto Captain Sharp for to wait on him, 210 Mules flesh eaten by
the Bucaniers at Hilo, 99 Mussels in great quantities found at the Duke of
Torks Islands, 180. Huge ones, 183. Those Indians open them more readily with
their fingers, than we with knives, ibid. Mussel Point, 188
N.
Negro's, two of them make their escape, 154. More attempt it, but are taken,
ibid. Negro, a Shoemaker to the Bucaniers, set at liberty for his good service,
210 Needle, its variation observed by the Author, at several places and times.
189, 192, 194, 198, 200, 203, 206 Nicoya, the Gulf. Night, whereabouts the
Bucaniers found none, 192 Noddy, a bird of this name seen at Sea, with hopes of
seeing land, 209
O.
Observation made by the Author, concerning the Navigation about the latitude
of 52 D. S. where the Needle varieth very much, 194 Orson, a name so given to
an Indian boy taken in the English Gulf, 185 Oisters very large and great at
Cayboa, 44 Otoque, an Island of the Bay of Panama, 38, 40
P.
Paita, 77, 78. The Bucaniers design upon the said place, 168. Description of
its Bay and situation, 191 Panama taken by Sir Henry Morgan, 1. Designed upon
anew, 3. The Bucaniers arrive there, and block it up by Sea, 27, etc.
Description of the present state thereof, 33. It has been burnt three times
within this few years, ibid. its Bay described, 40 Pardela, a bird of this
name, 117 Paxaros, an Island so called; its appearance at Sea, 112 Paxaros
Ninos, a Sea-fowl so called by the Spaniards; its description, 190, 195 Plate
Island, or Isle of Plate, 55, 62, 140, 165, 167 San Pedro, a Ship of this name,
twice taken by the Bucaniers in the space of fourteen months, 158 Pena
Horadada, a high and steep rock of this name near Paita, 169 Penguin, a
Sea-fowl so called, 181. Some account of them, 183 Penguin-shoal, 188 President
of Panama, sends a message to the Bucaniers, 38. Their answer, ibid. Peter,
an Indian boy, runs away from the Bucaniers, 146 Peralta (Don Francisco) a
valiant Spanish Commander, 28. His undaunted Courage in the engagement before
Panama, 30. He highly commends the valor of the English, 32. He disswadeth
the Bucaniers from attempting the ships at Perico, 31. He gives an account of
the present state of Panama, 33. is removed from the Admiral, on board the ship
of Mr. Cox, 45. He directs the Bucaniers to the Island of Gorgona, 49. He
admireth the sailings of the English, 64. is taken frantic, but recovereth,
103. He is set at liberty. 109 Perico, an Island before Panama, where the
Bucaniers take veral Vessels, 27, etc. Philippinas Islands, how the Spaniards
sail unto them, 47 Pilots of the Spanish Nation, their ignorance, 63 Piura, an
inland City, unto which Paita serves as a Port or Embarcadero, 169 Point St.
Helen, 69, 167 Point Chandy, or Chanduy, 71, 167 Point Parina, 77, 78 Point of
Mangroves, 57. its draught and description, 65 Punta de Mero, 168 Punta de
Hilo, 89, 90 Punta Borrica, its latitude and appearance, 151 Punta Mula, a
Point so called in Golfo Dulce, 151, 155 Punta de San Lorenzo, 17. Under it is
a great ripling, 21 Puebla Nueba, a Town on the Continent, where Captain
Sawkins was killed, 41 Puerto Velo taken the second time, 1 Porpus, a white one
seen, 147. Young Porpusses, 196, 199. They hinder the fishing of the Bucaniers,
208 Prisoners released by the Bucaniers, 81. Others detained, ibid. 109
Q.
Quicara, its latitude and appearance at Sea, 46 Quito, a great City, unto
which Guayaquil serves for an Embarcadero, 71
R.
Rains very continual, and almost incessant, at Gorgona, 49 Reflection of the
white sand very great at Hilo, 99 Richmond-Frigat hinders the Bucaniers from
landing at the Isle of Barbadas, 209 Mr. Ringrose the Author embarketh on the
River of Santa Maria, 8. His misfortune going to Panama, 14, etc. He is cast
away, 17. He saves the lives of six Spaniards, 19. is made prisoner by the
same, but released for his generosity, 21, 22. He overtaketh the rest of the
fleet, 23. He puts to flight one of the Vessels of the Armadi^la, 29. He
resolves to stay, and not go home over-land with the desertors, 43. He
repents of this resolution, and wherefore, 49. He makes Quadrants at Sea,
68, 176. He is sent down with a party of men from the City of la Se^^a to the
Bay of Coquimbo, 60. and returns, 108. is sent with a flag of truce to the
enemy at Hilo, 95. His advice is not followed, to the prejudice of that
enterprise, 96. is in great danger of being cast away in the Isle of Juan
Fernandez, 117. is stricken blind by a strange accident, but recovereth again,
153. He fights a Duel at the Isle of Plate, 165. He arriveth in England, 212
Rio de Juan Diaz, a River of this name, 92 Rockweed seen at Sea, yet no land,
195 Rosario, or el Santo Rosario, the name of a great Prize taken under the
Aequinoctial, 163, 164 Captain Row, a Commander among the Bucaniers; his
forces, 2. He leaves the Bucaniers, and why, 3
S.
Salvador, an Indian slave dies, 146 San Tiago, a River of this name, 159 San
Tiago, a slave so named, shot in the water by Captain Sharp, for plotting the
destruction of the Bucaniers, 165 Captain Sawkins sets forth toward Darien,
1. What party he led at the first landing, 4. He leads the forlorn with
fourscore men, 7. He goes to pursue them that fled from Santa Maria, 12. He
behaveth himself very courageously in the engagement before Panama, 29. is
three times beaten off from the ship of, Captain Peralta, 30. yet at last
takes him, ibid. He is chosen in chief, 36. He took the Town of Santa Martha
some years ago, 38. is complemented by the Bishop of Panama, ibid. He is killed
before Puebla Nueba, 41 Captain Sharp sets forth toward Darien; with what
design and forces, 1. What party he led at the first landing, 4. He was then
very faint and weak, ibid. He was absent at the engagement before Panama, 36.
He takes in his absence a Spanish bark, ibid. Is chosen in chief at Cayboa,
42. He takes there three several Vessels, ibid. He designeth upon Guayaquil,
45. but changes resolution, 53. He strikes Tortoises very dexterously, 66. He
is removed from his Command, Watling being chosen in his place, 120. His
prophecy at Yqueque, seeing the cruelty of the Bucaniers, 128. He is chosen in
chief again, 133. He makes a bold retreat from Arica to the ship, 133. He
shoots in the water one of the slaves, who had plotted the destruction of the
Bucaniers, 165. He strikes two Paxaros Ninos, 191. He discovers and
preventeth a Plot against his life, 198. He buyeth a dog for forty pieces of
eight, with intention to eat him, 211. Is presented with a Mulato-boy from the
rest of the Company, 210 Slaves of the Bucaniers, they plot to massacre them at
the Isle of Plate, 165 Snakes of huge bigness, 53. Water-Snakes, 61
Strawberries very large at la Serena, 105 Seals, 87. Huge quantities at the
Isle of Juan Fernandez, 116. Isle of Seals, 140 Sea-grass, 88 la Serena, a City
so called, taken by the Bucaniers, 104. its description, 105, etc. The Town
fired, 109 Shergal (Henry) one of the Bucaniers, drowned, 178 Shergal's River,
188 Stephens (William) one of the Bucaniers, dies, 206 Silvestre, a Negro of
this name, runs away from the Bucaniers, 154 Silla de Paira, 78, 169 Captain
Springer, one of the Bucaniers, 29. He puts to flight one of the Vessels of
the A. midilla, ibid. Solango, an Isle of this name its lat, and appearance,
69, 167 Sloth, an animal so called, taken, 53 South Sea, an observation made
therein, 82 Snowy hills and mountains, 188 Sundays ordered to be kept among the
Bucaniers, 121 Scurvy much troubles the Bucaniers, 99
T.
Tavaga, a little Island before Panama, where the Bucaniers lay several days,
and took several prizes, 36, etc. Trinidad (La Santissima) or the Blessed
Trinity, a ship so called taken before Panama, 32. He choseth her for his chief
Vessel, 44. They take down her Round-house, 54. And her decks, 140, etc. In
this Vessel the Bucaniers came home, 212. They give her away to the poorest of
the Company, ibid. Tocamora, a great and rich place, designed upon by the
Bucaniers, 2. They quit this design for another, 3 Tornados, 156, 195, 196, 209
Tortoises, the pleasantest meat in the world, 2. Great quantities of them, and
where, 66, 141 Tropick-birds so called, 208 Tucames, a Port of this name; its
appearance at Sea, 158 Tumbes, the first place settled in the South Seas after
Panama, 76 Thunder and lightning, very great at Cayboa, 45 Truxillo, a rich
Vessel of this place taken before Panama, 37
V.
Vanero, a place so called in the Gulf of Nicoya, 147 Variation of the Needle.
See Needle. Velas, a Port so called, its appearance at Sea, 150 Viceroy of
Lima presses ships, and armeth them against the Bucaniers, 73. Another new
Viceroy dares not adventure up to Lima from Panama, in a ship of twenty five
guns, for fear of the Bucaniers, 160. He resolves to go under the conduct of
three sail of ships, 161. He beheadeth Admiral Ponce for not destroying the
Bucaniers at Gorgona. 167 Water-key, an Island so called, 2 Water snakes, 61,
87 Captain Watling chosen to command in chief, 120. He was an old Privateer,
ibid. He puts Captain Cook in irons, 121. He orders Sundays to be kept,
ibid. is daunted at the sight of three Spanish men of war, 123. His cruelty at
Yqueque, 128. He is slain at Arica, 132 Whales, 53. a sign of land, 88, 192,
199 William, a Mosquito-Indian left behind at the Isle of Juan Fernandez, 122.
He is found there, and taken prisoner by the Spaniards, 159 Winds very
inconstant in some parts of the South Sea, 47 Old Wives, a sort of fish so
called, 47 Woman, one very beautiful taken in the Rosario, 163
Y.
Yqueque, an Island of this name: some account thereof, 127 etc. Customs of the
inhabitants, ibid.
Z.
Zamblas, certain Islands so called: whereabouts they lie: habit of the Indians
of those Isles: their women fairer than the fairest of Europe: these can see in
the dark better than in the light, 2, 3. The natives dissuade the Bucaniers
from the design of Tocamora, 3. Great rains falling there, hinder ten sail of
Privateers from landing, and going to the South Sea, 164
FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS printed and sold by William Crook Bookseller, at the
Sign of the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple
by Devereux-Court, 1685.
DIVINITY.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the Truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason, 12o. price Bound 10 d. 2. The Primitive Institution, showing the
antiquity and usefulness of Catechizing, together with his suitableness to heal
the distempers of the Church. By L. Addison, D. D. and Dean of Litchfield.
Price 1 s. 6 d. 3. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober religious man,
found drowned in a Pit. In 8o. price Bound 1 s. 4. Mr. Howel's
Visitation-Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester, 4o. price 6 d. 5. Dr.
Hascard's two Sermons, the one on the Fifth of November, the other before the
Lord Mayor of London, both in 4o. 6. Mr. Manningham's two Sermons, one before
the Lord Mayor, the other at St. Mary's in Oxford. In 4o. 7. A Sermon preached
at the Savoy-Church in French, and since printed in French and English, 12o.
price bound 8 d. 8. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is considered the
reasons why the Clergy are so contemned and neglected. By L. A. D. D. and Dean
of Litchfield. Price 1 s. 6 d. 9. Hugo Grotius his Catechism, Greek, Latin, and
English, with a Praxis of all the Greek words therein contained. In 8o. price
bound 2 s. 10. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving that Christ and his Apostles
were Prophets: written by the directions of, and recommended to the Press, by
the late Peter Gunning, then Lord Bishop of Ely. In 8o. price 3 s. 11. The
King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in a sincere discourse to the French
King: written by a Roman Catholic. In 4o. price (...). 12. Justifing Faith; or
the Faith by which the Just do live, together with the excellency of the
Common Prayer Book. In 8o. price bound 1 s. 13. Mercy Triumphant, or the
Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow bounds which have been wont to be
set to it. By Ed. Lane, M. A. and Rector of Sparshalt. 14. Du Moulin's
Reflections reverberated, being a full answer to the damning Doctrine of Dr.
Lewis du Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmond Hickeringill against the
Ecclesiastical Courts. By E. Lane, etc. In 4o. 1 s. 6 d. 15. A Discourse about
Conscience, relating to the present Differences among us, in opposition to both
extremes of Popery and Fanaticism. In 4o. price 6 d. 16. A Thanksgiving-Sermon
for the Discovery of the late Fanatic Plot September. 9. 1683. By John Harison,
D. D. Rector of Pulborrow, 4o. 17. An Introduction to the Sacrament: or, a
short, plain, and safe way to the Communion Table, being an Instruction for the
worthy receiving the Lords Supper; Collected for, and familiarly addressed to
every particular Communicant. By L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield. 18. The
Protestant Religion the safe way to Salvation: or, an Answer to a Book
entitled, Mercy and Truth, or Charity maintained, by Catholics which pretend
to prove the contrary; together with the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy;
as also nine Sermons on special occasions. By William Chillingworth, M. A. of
Oxford, the fifth Edition; to which is now added Mr. Chillingworths Reasons
against Popery, to persuade Mr. L. to return to the Church of England. In fol.
price 14 s. 19. The Case of Resistance of Supreme Powers stated and resolved.
By W. Sherlock, D. D. 20. A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Lobb, etc. with an Examination of Mr. Humphreys materials for Union. By W.
Sherlork, D. D. 21. Primitive Christianity: or, the Religion of the Ancient
Christians in the first Ages of the Gospel. By W. Cave, D. D. 22. The History
of the Charter House, (being once a Carthusian Order) setting out the Gift of
Mr. Sutton in making it so famous an Hospital, with all the Laws and
Institutions of it, etc. written by Mr. Heiron of the said Foundation. In 8o.
23. Dr. Barrows two Sermons; the one at the Spittle in Easter, the other a
Passion-Sermon. In 8o. 24. The Souls Communion with her Savior: or, the
History of our Lord Jesus Christ, written by the four Evangelists: digested
into Devotional Meditations; 12o. price 1 s. 6 d. 25. Responso Valedictoria ad
secundum Sandii Epistolam, etc. Per Sam. Gardener, S. T. D. In 8o. price 1 s. 6
d. 26. A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature, and of the
Christian Religion, in two parts, by Sam. Parker, D. D. in 4o. 27. The Practice
of Christianity, in two parts. By Dr. Sherlock. In 8o. price 5 s. 28. A
Collection of private Devotions in the practice of the ancient Church, called
the hours of Prayer; taken out of the Scriptures, Fathers, etc. By Doctor
Cozens late Bishop of Durham, 12o. price 2 s. 29. Robinson's Annalium Mundi
Universalium. Folio. With other sorts of Divinity Books.
LAW.
THe Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court-Barons,
Court-Marshalsea, etc. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures,
and all their Incidents of Essoyns, etc. with the Return and Forms of several
Original and Judicial Writs, now in use, relating to Writs of Error, Writs of
false Judgment, and other Proceedings of frequent use in the Courts of
Westminster, by I. Kitchen of Gray's Inn Esquire To which is added Brevia selecta,
being a choice Collection of special Writs; the Fifth Edition, in 8o. price 7
s. 2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author F. Clarke. In 12o. 3. The
Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, folio, price 10
s. 4. The second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the
Exposition of the Statutes. By Sir Edw. Coke, folio, price 15 s. 5. The third
Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Pleas of the
Crown. By Sir Edw. Coke, folio, price 6 s. 6. The fourth Part of the Institutes
of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. By Sir Edw.
Coke, in folio, price 10 s. 7. The Law of charitable Uses revised, and much
enlarged, with many Cases in Law, both ancient and modern; with the Readings of
Sir Francis Moor upon the Statute of the 43 of Eliz. digested by G. Duke Esquire
folio. 8. Officina Brevium, select and approved Forms of Judicial Writs, and
other Process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas; as
also special pleadings to Writs, fol. 9. Young Clerks Guide, in four parts, or
an exact Collection of their English Presidents, 8o. 10. Reports of diverse
Cases in Law, taken by R. Brownlow and J. Goldsbrough Esquires, both
Prothonotaries; with directions how to proceed in any intricate Actions, both
real and personal, with an exact Table; the third Edition, in 4o. 11. The
Touchstone of Presidents, relating to Judicial proceedings at Common Law, in
8o. 12. Actions on the Case for Deeds, viz. Contracts, Assumpsits, Deceipts,
Nusances, Trover, and Conversion, etc. with two Tables, by W. Sheppard Esquire 8o.
13. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philosopher, about the Common Law of
England, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. In 8o. 14. Several Statutes of Bankrupt,
with the Judges Resolution thereon. In 8o. price 1 s. 6 d. 15. Les Reports des
tres Honorable, Edw. Seigneur Littleton Baron de Mounslow, Custos de la Grand
Seal d' Angleterre, and de ses Majesty pluis Honorable Privy Council, en le
Courts del Common Bank and Exchequer, en le 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. ans del
Reign de Roy Charles le I. 16. The Complete Clark, containing the best Forms
of all sorts of Presidents for Conveyances and Assurances, and other
Instruments now in use and practice; with forms of Bills, Pleadings, and
Answers in Chancery, etc. whereunto now are diverse Presidents that were
wanting; and also some Saxon Presidents, with exposition of Words used in
ancient Charters, etc. with Alphabetical Tables of the whole Contents of the
Book. In 4o. 17. The Complete Solicitor, entering Clerk and Attorney, fully
instructed in the practice, methods, and Clerkship of all his Majesty's Courts
of Equity and Common Law, Superior and Inferior, as well as those at
Westminster, and in the City of London, as elsewhere throughout the Kingdom of
England: a Collection more correct, uniform, and universally advantageous, than
any Treatise heretofore extant of the same kind. In 8o. 18. The Laws against
Conventicles, written at the request of the Justices of Peace of Middlesex, by
Order of the Council, by the late Sir Edmund Saunders Lord Chief Justice of
England. In 8o. price 1 s. 6 d. 19. The Reports of all the pleadings to them of
the late Lord Chief Justice Sir Edm. Saunders are printing in folio in two
Volumes.
With other useful Law Books.

HISTORY.
1. AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
complete body thereof, in two Volumes, by W. Howel, late Chancellor of
Lincoln* In folio. 2. Historical Collections; being an account of the
Proceedings of the Four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, by H. Townsend,
Esquire in folio. 3. Clelia, the whole work, in five parts; written in French, now
put into English, in folio. 4. Scarron's Comical Romance; being an Historical
account of a company of Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare
Adventures, amorous Intreagues, etc. being both witty and pleasant. In folio.
5. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Treasons of Dr. Parry against
Queen Elizabeth, with his Confession of it at his Trial, and his Denial at his
Execution, folio, price 1 s. 6. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written
by himself in Latin, since translated into English. In folio, price 6 d. 7. An
Historical Narration of Heresy, with an account of the Punishments thereof. By
Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. In folio, price 6 d. 8. Megalopsichy; being a
particular and exact account of the last seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, both Military and Civil; the first written by Sir W. Monson one of the
said Queens Admirals; the second written by H. Townsend Esquire a Member of her
last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relation of all the expeditious
attempts, designs, successes, and errors, both of the English and Spanish, in
the Wars from the year 1585, to the said Queens Death; with a full account of
the eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the said time: To which is added, Dr.
Parry's Trial in the year 1584, all written at the time of the Actions, by
persons that were eminently acting therein. Folio, price bound 10 s. 9. A
Voyage into the Levant, being a relation of a Journey lately performed from
England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Henry Blunt, 12o. price 1 s. 10. A description
of Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and Surrender of it to the
Turks. In 8o. price 1 s. 11. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing
the Original, Antiquity, etc. of that Dukedom. In 4o. price 6 d. 12. The
Travels of Ulysses, how he went to Hell and came back again, etc. by Tho.
Hobbs, price 1 s. 13. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity,
Fame, Walls, Rivers, Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and
Infranchisements. By I. Bridal Esquire price 1 s. 14. The Wonders of the Peak in
Darbyshire, commonly called the Devils Arse of Peak. By Tho. Hobbs, 8o. price 1
s. 15. The Life and Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism,
showing all the designs that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle
the Turkish Religion; written by L. Addison D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 16. The
Historians Guide: or, Britain's Remembrancer; being a summary account of all
the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battles, Designs, Attempts, etc. taking notice
of the Year, Month, and day of the Month, all eminent Passages that have been
for 80 years last past, price 1 s. A portable Book. 17. The Connection; being
Collections of some principal matters in the Reign of King James, being the
time that nothing of this nature is printed, being betwixt the end of
Megalapsichy, or the last seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth, and the beginning
of Mr. Rushworth, Heath, Nalson, Whitlock, and others, price 1 s. 6 d. 18. The
Moors ba^^^ed; being a discourse of the Government of Tangier, under the Earl
of Tiviot; showing the subtilty and policies of both parties: written by Dr.
Addison, who lived there many years, 4o. price 6 d. 19. All the Works of Homer,
both Illiads and Oddyses, translated out of Greek into English, by Thomas Hobbs
of Malmsbury, price ^ s. 6 d. 20. Considerations on the Loyalty, Religion,
Manners, and Reputation of Thomas Hobbs, 8o. price bound 1 s. 21. The Memoires
and rare Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere, a great Lady in France, now
living, written by her self, in six parts in French, and now translated into
English, price 4 s. 22. Tho. Hobbs Angli Malmsb. Vita, being an account of Mr.
Hobbs, of the Books he wrote of the times, when, and the occasion thereof; of
the Books and Authors against him, of his Conversation, Acquaintance, etc. part
wrote by himself, the rest by Dr. B. in 8o. printed 1681. 23. Behemoth, being
the History of the Civil Wars of England, and the Councels and Artifices by
which they were carried on, from 1640, to 1660. printed now from his own
perfect Copy, in which is many pages more than was in the former Counterfeit
Edition; none of which Editions before this, had less than a thousand faults in
them, whole Lines left out in a hundred places, which did extremely pervert the
sense of the Author Tho. Hobbs. 24. The Tracts of Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury,
in two Volumes in 8o. gathering nine of his Treatises together, which are also
to be had single, viz. 1. His Life in Latin. 2. His Considerations on his
Loyalty, Religion, etc. 3. His Art of Rhetoric, in English. 4. His Dialogue
about the Common Law of England. 5. His ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy. 6.
His Civil Wars of England, the perfect Edition. 7. His Historical Narration of
Heresy. 8. His Answer to Bishop Bramhab in defense of his Leviathan. 9. His
seven Problems, with an Apology for his writings to the King, price bound 12 s.
25. A New Survey of the present State of the World, newly written in French,
and now translated into English, in 8o. 26. Compendium Geographicum: or, a more
exact, plain, and easy Introduction into all Geography than yet extant, after
the latest Discoveries and new Alteration; very useful, especially for young
Noblemen and Gentlemen; the like not printed in English. By P. Chamberlayne of
the Inner Temple, Gent. the second Edition with Additions, 12o. price bound 1
s. 27. Bucaniers of America: or, a true Account of the most remarkable Assaults
committed of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the Bucaniers of
Jamaica and Tortuga, both English and French, etc. Written in Dutch, Spanish,
etc. and now put into English; the second Edition, with the Addition of Captain
Cooks, and another Relation to it, in 4o. 28. The present State of the Jews,
wherein is contained an exact Account of their Customs, Secular and Religious;
to which is annexed a summary Discourse of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara. By L.
Addison D. D. Dean of Litchfield, and Archdeacon of Coventry, 12o. price bound
1 s. 6 d. 29. French Intrigues: or, the History of their Delusory Promises
since the Pyrenaean Treaty: printed in French at Cologne, and now made English,
price 1 s.
With other Curious Histories, etc.

A DESCRIPTION of The South Sea and Coasts of AMERICA Containing ye whole
Navigation and all those places at which Capt: SHARP and his companions were in
the years 1680 and 1681



