MEMENTO MORI

REMEMBER TO DIE

AN ELEGY On the (very little) Lamented Death of Old Father Peter's, the Late
Famous English Jesuit, who departed this Life at St. Omers in France, on May
Day, 1699, in the 70 Year of his Age.
WEEP all ye Romans who have Tears to spare,
You that have none, continue as you are;
and you that cant your usual Tempers keep
Then if you please may laugh at those that weep
But now (perhaps) you will ^sk The Reason why,
Or wherefore you should either laugh or cry?
I Will tell you then, It Is for a sad Mischance,
Old Father Peter's lately dead in France:
He Is dead, he is dead, who made all England shake,
And caused Old J -- these Reamls to forsake.
Nay, greater things than this he here did do,
A Young Prince run before that he could go
Which by his Art he ordered should be so
Oh Famed Confessor! Wonders thou have don,
All Miracles are ceased, since thou art gone:
Oh let my Pen give thee thy praises due,
You could give Pardons, yea, and Children too:
Nay, some have been so bold as for to s^ear,
You taught the Feeble how to get an Heir.
But whether that be true is yet unknown,
Being loath to give you more than is your own.
Thy Christian Bowels cheerfully extended,
To Female stuners though they would much offended:
Who by long Custom in their Sins were hardened,
If they were handsome, yet their sins were pardoned.
Though dead in Sin, if Carcass was but living,
Thou raised them up by art of Sins forgiving;
Whole sholes of Beauties purged of Sinful Leven,
By thee are set in the High-Road to Heaven.
Farewell, dear Saint, Religions best Forecaster,
The more our sins to Heaven we go the faster:
Young Tender Females, who for frail Transgressions,
Received Stripes from thee at their Confessions:
If Sns were many (though thy Strokes were mild)
Thou sometimes whipped them till they proved with Child.
A Young and Holly Sister at the Bath,
Conceived by thy Help, and her strong Faith;
And though her Father (skilled in Physic Trade)
Cannot cure the Wound which on her thou have made.
These and many more great things, which I could tell
Were done by thee, when with us thou did dwell
And more than this, Preached up a frightful story,
Of Punishments in a Damned Purgatory.
Who with such Doctrine made a dismal rout
If thou art there, stay while we pray thee out
Even thou, who led so many Saints astray,
Ar't gone thy self, yet none can tell which way,
It Is true, some Guess (indeed) but who can tell,
Whither in Purgatory, Heaven or Hell.
Is thy abode; since thou have left Earth's Ball
Where by your Craft, you got the Devil and all.
But now Alas, that head in Dust is laid,
Which has so sweetly Taught, and sweetly prayed.
But though thy, outward part, is gone and Rotten,
Thy better part, among Saints will not be forgotten,
Thou 'rt Cannoniz'd at Rome, in White and Red,
And there thou wilt Live, though here thou art quite Dead
Sure Rome will Mourn for, loss of this Confessor
And in his place Advance a true Successor
Therefore Dear Father since you have Quit this Stage,
Resign your Post, to the Learned of this Age,
And let them choose a Man like you in Evil;
Though it is a task, perhaps, beyond the Devil,
But now I think on it if it goes by Votes
No Man more fitter for it, than Docter O -- t -- es.
EPITAPH.
HERE lies a Confessor
Who whipped the Transgressor
And in time of great need
In case he was Feed
Upon true Confession
Could Pardon Transgression
And could Cancel a Sentance
Without a Repentance
The Femal Young Sinners
Though but new beginers
By their Beads he could tell
When backwards they would fell
And when all was not well.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.


