AN ELEGY To the Memory of the Never-to-be-forgotten WILLIAM JUXON, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; Who died the 4th of June, 1663.
I Creep and tremble ere I come to pay
My pious Offering to Thy hallowed Clay:
Nor can the slender Tribute of my Verse
Be Ornament sufficient to Thy Hearse:
Only the Honor that I owe Thy Name
Gives my Muse breath, and yields my Fancy flame.
Juxon! Hab, what of Him? is dead: You lie,
Sordid Report, against Truth and Memory.
Can He that was the Subject of all Pens,
The Laws, the Prophets, and the best of Men's,
Be said to Die? How gross is the Mistake?
Banish those Mists of Error, and awake
Your Sluggish Reason: He that not long since
Clothed the Church in its Prim'tive Innocence,
And gave a Life to every Child she had,
Cherisht the Good, and did convert the Bad,
Had all His Learning wrapped in Purity
Of Doctrine, and His Life Sincerity;
Can He be said to Die? Base Envy, No:
He lives, though none of Thine would have it so.
He that the Sacred Hand of Majesty
Did stamp for good, can He be said to Die?
He that has seen the worst that Death could do
Without a Shrink, as did His Sovereign too.
His Virtues were His Refuge and His Guard,
That were against all Dangers still prepared.
Of such it may be said, Death only can
Touch at the Carcass, but not reach the Man.
He that was with Temptations roundly set,
Yet proved His Princes untouched Cabinet:
The Jewels there enclosed were never known
Till blessed CHARLES the Heir did claim his own.
Oh happy Prince in such a faithful Peer,
Send You more such: but there are few, I fear.
He that in time of danger stood unmoved,
Firm as a Rock, and constant where He loved,
Whom nothing could corrupt or draw aside
From the Principles for which his Master did;
Can He be dead? What does that word imply?
Be not deceived, the Righteous cannot die.
And though the Clergy may Lament and Weep,
Yet They do know the Saints are said to Sleep.
For bear your Griefs then, spend not Tears in vain,
He Is gone where none can call Him back again;
Where you must follow if you live as well;
If not, take the other Road, and then farewell.
He lay but Leidger here to manage things
Of great Concernment for the King of Kings;
And now is summoned to His Home, to do
Business of State You yet cannot reach unto.
But Lambeth mourns, and (now) to me appears
An Inundated Town o'er-flown with Tears,
Salt, and Corroding, as Griefs Limbeck can
Distill them down the Cheeks of every Man;
As though their Griefs were so intemp'rate grown,
They would comply both with the Month and Moon.
Away with your ungrateful Sorrow, know
The Knowledge that You have He did bestow;
And such Provision He has left by's Care,
Of godly Ministers You need not fear.
And more to comfort You, know He is gone
To put the Robe of Resurrection on;
And be a Witness to appease the Blood
Of Strafford, Laud, and Charles the Just and Good;
Featly and Hewyt, Vowel, and the rest,
And there with Them to live among the BLESSED.

