THE CHRISTIAN DUTY COMPOSED BY B. BERNARD FRANCIS STUDENT IN DIVINITY

ISA. 30. 21. THIS IS THE WAY WALK IN IT

1. COR. 14. 38. If any man know not, he shall not be known.

IHS



PRINTED AT AIR BY CLAUDE FRANCOIS TULLIET, M.DC.LXXXIV.

with License of Superiors

TO THE READER
GOd desires so cordially and seeks so earnestly our salvation, that He calls
it his work and his affair by excellence; His Son Io 4. 34.
said to his Disciples I have meat you know not: It Is to do the will of my
Father, and to accomplish his work; And to his Mother in the Temple: Knew you
not that I must labor in the affairs of my Father? And in the Vigil of his
death: Father I have accomplished the work, you have given me to do. Because
it is the work of works: the affair of affairs, and the aim, and end of
other works. He employes in it not men only, but also Angels. All the
Angelical Spirits that are sent Heb. 1. 14.
into this world, are sent for the salvation of the Elect, says S Paul.

What say I men and Angels? He employes in it his divine Perfections; For if
He exercises his Power in working miracles: Wisdom in inventions to convert
us: Patience in expecting us to penance: Goodness to allure us: Justice to
frighten us: Mercy in pardoning us, Providence in removing occasions of sin:
it is for our salvation.

And to the end there be nothing in Him, or of Him that is not employed in this
great work: He sends the adorable Persons that proceed from him.

He sends his beloved Son: who applies himself to it with so great tenderness
and affection, that from thence He takes his name: with so much fervor and
Zeal, that he spends in it his sweat and blood.

He sends the holy Ghost, who shows likewise His Zeal; when our salvation is in
danger, we being in the state of sin, what does He not to draw us out of it,
and to convert us? He excites us: wakens us: threatens us: importunes us:
knocks almost incessantly at the doors of our hearts* and if we open them to
Him, He Enters into our souls: dwells in them: animates them: governs and
conducts them: works by them our good works: in our prayers, He prays,
cries, groans in us, and by us* in temptations He aids us: in perplexities,
Enlightens us: in afflictions, comforts us.

May not the Eternal Father say, Quid debui facere vineae meae and non feci?
What should I have don for the salvation of men that I have left undon? He has
desired it most earnestly: He has designed to it his creatures: Employed in it
his Servants, Favorites, infinite Perfections: and the divine Persons of his
Son, and of his holy Spirit.

How coms it to pass then, that so few are saved, even amongst Christians? One
reason is, that very many are yet ignorant of the ways ordinain'd by God to go
to heaven. Another is, that the greater part also of the Faithful, are
negligent and careless in the use of the means prescribed to be saved: they
will not labor and strive to enter by the narrow gate, and therefore our
Savior says they shall not. Wherefore desiring the salvation of every one with
all my heart, I show the First and put before their eyes, the plain and open
ways to Heaven; and to correct the negligence of the other, I add the most
pressing and urgent motives to walk and run in those ways.

Peruse this work (good Reader) with the same intention and desire that I
present it to you. Consider not who made it: nor how it is made: but what is
therein said to you. If you shall become more knowing in the Faith and Law of
Christ: and in ptactise more Dutiful to Him: it will abundantly recompense the
labor of

YOUR WELL WISHING FRIEND AND SERVANT IN CHRIST F. B.

APPROBATIONS.
JNfrascripti testamur nos librum perlegisse, tui Titulus, The Christian Duty.
Idiomate Anglicano a V. Adm. P. Bernardo a Sancto Francisco Ordinis FF. Minorum
Recoll: Provinciae Angliae compositum: in quo nil Fidei Orthodoxae vel bonis
moribus contrarium deprehendimus: verum e contra salutari plenum devotione,
solidaque refertum doctrina; Quem idcirco Communi Bono vti^issimum, praeloque
dignum Iudicavimus, Hac 29 Octobris. An. Domini 1683* In Conventu nostro FF.
Min: Recoll: Anglorum Duaci:

F, Pacificus a Sto. Albino F. Bonaventura. a Sta. Anna S. Theologiae Lector.
S. Theologiae Lector.

The License of the Superior.
Ego F. Gervasius a Sto. Francisco Provinciae Angliae. FF. Min. Recoll:
Minister Provincialis, facultatem concedo ut hoc opus cui Titulus, The
Christian Duty a V. Adm. Patre Bernardo a Sto. Francisco compositum, et eiusdem
Provinciae Theologorum judicio approbatum, typis mandetur. Datum Ariae. 9.
Septembris. An: 1683.

F. Gervasius a Sto. Francisco qui Supra.

Imprimatur liber cui Titulus, The Christian Duty a Reverendo Patre Bernardo a
Sancto Francisco conscriptus.

Actum in Vicariatu Audomarensi die decima septima Septembris. Anno 1684. De
Mandato. B. DE LARRE. Secret.

DISCOURSE. I. OF THE FIRST ARTICLE
I believe in God.
AMongst the noble actions which the holy Penitent David practiced to appease
God and satisfy his justice, This is one of the most notable: Docebo iniquos
vias tuas, and impij ad te convertentur: I will teach sinners thy ways, my
God: and the impious shall be converted to Thee. These words show me how to do
well this worthy fruit of Penance; I must not flatter: I must not tickle ears:
but I must teach: Docebo. And whom must I teach? The poor as well as the rich:
the little and ignorant, as well as the great and learned, my self also as well
as others; for we are all sinners: and I must teach sinners, iniquos. And what
is it that I must teach? Not the conceits of Plato: not the discourses of
Aristotle, but thy ways, o my God! Vias tuas, the ways by which we must go to
Thee. And why must I teach? not to receive popular praise: Not to be esteemed
learned: but that sinners be converted to thee o my God! and impij ad te
convertentur. The ways by which we go to God, are Faith, and the Mysteries
which it teaches, Hope, Charity, Grace, good Works, the Commandments, and the
Sacraments. These ways, God aiding, I will open plainly, teach practically,
and urge earnestly: that sinners may be converted into them, and unto God. And
first I will consider the material object or the Mysteries of Faith, which the
Apostles propose in their Creed to us, and begin with these words, I believe in
God.

2. That there is a God, nature teaches us, the Pagans them selves confessed
it: and it is a thing so manifest, that the scripture tells us, that none but
fools deny it.

3. This word God in the singular number teaches us that there is but one. And
if he were not the only one, he would not be God: He would not be the Sovereign
of all: his Empire would not be absolute: nor his Dominion universal: since
that a Corrival or Competitor, would have right to dispute with Him, if not the
superiority or the preeminence, at least equality and independence.

4. The Apostles say not only, I believe God: but I believe in God: and these
two expressions are very different; for the first imports only an Act of Faith
by which we believe that there is a God, and what does come from Him: as what
He teaches us in the Scripture, and what the Church proposes as revealed by
Him. But the other signifys not only an act of Faith: but also of Hope, and
Love. And we learn by this expression that it is not enough for a Christian to
believe God: but he must moreover hope in Him, and love Him: and so distinguish
himself from the wicked, and from the devil: who can believe that there is a
God: and give credit to his word: but because they confide not in him, nor love
him; they believe not in God.

5. But what is God? This Question the disciples of learned Epictetus made to
him; who answered, my Children, if I could tell you what is God, either He
would not be God, or I my self should be God; He said true, but he said not
enough: it is not only impossible to explicate what is God: but whatsoever we
can say of Him is infinitely below what we ought to say of Him, Wherefore S.
Austin says, that we cannot say any thing that is worthy to be attributed to
God, because in this it is unworthy, that it is possible to be said.

6. Nevertheless we ought to speak of Him for to make Him known, and we must
make Him known for to make Him to be loved and feared: and we must make Him to
be loved and feared, for to avoid sin which offends Him.

7. The Scripture says that He is great and above all praise, Magnus Dominus
and laudabilis nimis. But we must not imagine that it Psalm. 47. 2.
speaks of a material and corporeal greatness. When we say that one King is
greater then another: this is not to say, that he is of a greater and higher
stature: but that he is greater in Power, and Dominions: so when we say, that
God is great, we mean not in material quantity, length, largness, and other
corporeal dimensions; for He is a spirit, and has no body, nor parts; But He is
great in Nobility, in Power, in Wisdom, in Goodness, and other divine
Petfections.

8. He is great in Nobility; He is so noble, that all Kings and Emperors are
but his servants and his slaves; All crowns of the world depend on Him, and he
disposes of them at his pleasure.

He is so noble that the kings are his beggars; they say to Him daily upon
their knees, give us this day our daily bread, and if He should not give it
them, they must necessarily want it.

He is so noble that Kings compared to Him are but worms, who can do less
against Him, then worms of the earth against you; I am a worm, said a great
king in the light of his contemplation.

9. He is great in Power: Potens and metuendus nimis. The power which makes
great ones of the world is commonly but to destroy; they say Alexander the
great, Pompie the great, because by their armies they have defeated millions of
men, ruined Towns, and desolated Provinces; And what power is this? a scorpion,
a spider is able to destroy and kill a man: a little contagious air may defeat
a whole army; and this power also of the great ones is so vain and weak, that
they cannot annihilate or reduce to nothing a little fly, for always something
of it remains. But God is so powerful, that He can not only reduce all things
to nothing, but draw all things out of nothing, even without any assistance,
without any labor, and more easily then you look upon me; for you may be
wearied in looking on me, or hindered from seeing me: and God cannot be wearied,
nothing can hinder the execution of his will.

10. He is great in Wisdom; He is so wise, that He makes all the actions of his
creatures to contribute to his intentions, also those that are done against His
intention; He lets the second causes act as if He acted not: He lets each
cause move according to its genious and particular inclination; the natural
naturally; the free freely; and He makes all their actions to serve His
designs as infallibly, effectually, and happily as if He alone did do their
actions purposely. He makes likewise to contribute to the Execution of his
Will, and to the accomplishment of his intentions: all that men do against his
Will, and all that opposes his intentions; the impious do all they can to
dishonor Him: the infidells to ruin his Church: the reprobate to afflict and
destroy his Elect: and He makes the attempts of the impious to conduce to his
glory: the infidelity of the infidells to the good of his Church: the
persecutions of the reprobare, to the salvation of the elect. What an ineffable
wisdom?

11. He is great and admirable in his Goodness: He is an infinite sea and an
Abiss of love, mercy, and liberality, which without diminution flows
continually and abundantly. In the order of nature, what flowers, what fruits,
what plants, what animalls, what voices, what perfumes, what colors, what
drugs, what meats and drinks, for our nourishment, for our service, remedy, and
divertissement?

12. In the supernatural Order He shows us evidently his Goodness: He
accomplishes that which He said, Mensuram bonam and confertam Luke 6. 38.
and coagitatam, and supereffluentem dabunt in sinum vestrum: He gives good,
stuffed, shaken, and overflowing measure into the bosoms of the saints. One,
for example, gave a morcel of bread, to a poor man, or a word of instruction
for his salvation; this action was so small, this word so soon past, that one
would not think them worthy to be remembered. Nevertheless; God forgets them
not: He will look upon them with complacence, he will praise them, and
recompense them, not for a hundred or a thousand years only, but for ever: so
good He is and ardently amorous of good.

13. To men in this life He gives graces with so much liberality Ephesians. 1. 8.
and affluence that S. Paul says, The riches of his grace have superabounded in
us. If then we are deprived of them, or receive them slenderly, it is not a
defect of the source, but our own fault: because we make our selves unworthy of
them: not complying with them, not esteeming them: but neglecting, and
contemning them.

Who would not admire the nobility of this Royal and divine heart, who
vouchsafes to give all these goods, not only to the elect who are thankful for
them, but also to his enemies, who acknowledge him not, who blaspheme him,
contemn him, and persecute him; Nevertheless he suffers them, he supports them,
he conserves them in health, he gives them honors, riches, and prosperities,
he invites them to penance by summons and inspirations which would reclaim
tigers, and if they return to him, he receives them, he pardons them, he
embraces them with inconceivable Clemency and sweetness.

14. Nevertheless He is so great and terrible in Justice, that though, the
death and Passion of JESUS CHRIST is capable to redeem a hundred thousand
worlds, He sees notwithstanding an infinity of Jews, of Pagans of Turcks,
Heretics, of bad Catholics, in the mass of corruption, in the way of
perdition; He draws them not powerfully out of it, through a most profound and
incomprehensible, but most just judgment: and he accomplisheth the verity of
this word, of this tunder-clap: many are Mat. 20. 16*
called, but few elect.

15. He is great and admirable in his independence, and in the plenitude of his
Being. He is naturally sufficient to himself, most content with himself, most
happy in himself, and has no need of any thing without himself. He had from all
eternity power to produce creatures, heaven, earth, and all that is in them,
and he has not created them but in time, for to show that he had no need of
them; for to make known, that since he has been perfectly happy without them
from eternity, he created them not for any S. Austin^ 12. de Civit. c. 17. sub
fin.
want he had of them, but by a free goodness, and by a pure and disinteressed
charity.

Let us make an end of speaking of Him whose greatness has no end, who is
infinite in his Essence, and infinite in Perfections; for it is to mafle as
infants, it is to obscure his perfections to speak of them so imperfectly: and
if He were not infinitely merciful and condescendent it would be a punishable
temerity, to speak so lowly, so grossly, and so unworthily of Him. Yet this is
enough to make us see what a Majesty we offend, and whom we make our enemy,
when we commit a mortal sin. And after this, shall we not endeavor to conceive
a lively repentance of our sins? shall we content our selves with a little
sorrow, and which regards nothing but our own interests? if we detest our sins,
because they rob us of our merits, subject us to the tyranny of the devil,
engage us to Eternal damnation; if we have no other motive, it is to feel and
resent a scratch of a pin which we have received, and not a great stroke of a
sword which we have given; The injuries that sin does to the Creator, are
without comparison greater, then those which it does to the Creature.

16. For to avoid them then, Let us remember that God is infinitely noble. If a
Prince, though a stranger that appertains not at all to us were in this Country,
we would not abuse or injure him, but would honor him and treat him with
respect; and shall we dare to offend our God, our Sovereign, the King of Kings?
This King who is so great that all the Kings of the earth in respect of Him are
but slaves, and worms of the earth.

Let us consider, that He is infinitely powerful. We fear to offend the Powers
of this world, because they can punish us, deprive us of our liberty, estates,
or temporal life; and shall we dare to offend the omnipotent God, who by one
word, one act of his Will, can reduce us to dust; who after He has killed the
body, will cast our souls into Eternal flames?

Let us consider that He is infinitely Wise: that all things ly open to his
sight, that he can not forget any thing: that whatsoever excuse we forge for to
flatter our conscience, and to diminish the greatness of our offenses, He sees
the greatness of them: He knows all the circumstances of them, and pierces the
bottom of our hearts: He knows that it is neither violence, nor poverty, nor
necessity that makes us to commit sin: but that it is because we have not the
fear of God, nor the due love of him.

Let us consider that He is good, and that He has always been so to us. It Is a
great injustice, a very unnatural malice to offend a person that has never
given us any cause, who has never disobliged us all his life. We know that it is
God who created us, who conserves us at present, and has preserved us from a
thousand dangers: He who has given us more than we have desired, more than we
should dare to desire: and what is above all desire, who has given his own
life; and died upon the Cross by pure charity toward us. After all these
graces, shall we have the malice to commit a mortal sin, which infinitely
displeases Him?

Let us remember that He is infinitely just, and that his justice ought to have
its course; His Prophet said I feared all my Job. 9. 82.
works knowing that thou would not spare the offender, He leaves not
unpunished the least failings; what will he do then to mortal sins, to great
Crimes? We must hold it then as most certain, that if we commit these sins, we
shall suffer soon or late most bitter and grievous torments in this world or in
the other.

Let us in fine consider, that He is independent, that He depends not of any
one in his Being, nor in his designs, nor in his operations: that if He
associate sometimes his creatures in the Execution of his designs, it is by an
Excess of goodness, and not out of indigence. If He could have need of us, we
might think that He would be obliged to pardon us, and to seek our amity, But
he needs us not; He has been well without us from all Eternity: he will be well
without us for all Eternity: and if we honor not his mercy in heaven, we shall
honor his justice by our sufferances in hell, from which I pray God to keep us
by his mercy. Amen

DISCOURSE II. OF THE FIRST ARTICLE
The Father Almighty, Creator Of Heaven and Earth.
THe first verity expressed in these words requires as much virtue and strength
of Faith as any other Verity revealed; It obliges us to believe and adore a
plurality of divine Persons in a most perfect Unity of nature: and to Confess
that in the Diety there is a Person who intellectually produces a coeternal and
consubstantial Son. Hence the Apostles truly call Him Father; and his Paternity
or fatherhood is so proper to Him, that it is not an Attribute or Quality: but
that which enters the intrinsecal and individual constitution of Him.

Father also of us: because he created us, conserveth us at present, and
nourishes us.

Father again, because he redeemed us by his own Son, makes us his Children by
adoption, governs, and directs us, and conducts us to the inheritance of
eternal life.

2. Almighty or Omnipotent: This signifies a perfection not so proper to him,
as is that of Father. Omnipotence also is not his particular Attribute or
Quality, but to him appropriated and attributed. You know that the faith of the
church adores three Persons subsisting in the Divinity* You know that Divinity
acknowledges and reverenceth in God three principal Perfections: Power,
Wisdom, Goodness: You know that the Scriptures and the Fathers do attribute to
each one of these Divine Persons, one of these Perfections, though all three be
common to them all. Omnipotence to the Father, because He is the source and
origin of Divinity. Wisdom, to the Son, because He is begotten by the way of
understanding and of knowledge: Goodness, to the Holy Ghost, because. He is
produced by the way of Will and Love. These are three Divine Persons which
inseperably and indivisibly applyd themselves to the Creation, to the
Conservation, and to the Government of the Univers: These are the three fingers
of God, as the Prophet I say calls them, who sustain, conserve, and govern the
world: Those are their three infinite Perfections which are applied unto this
work; For if we consider the matter out of which the World was drawn, we shall
admire an infinite Power: If we consider the manner in which the World is
governed, we shall acknowledge an incomprehensible Wisdom: If we consider the
End to which this World is designed, we shall see and love an ineffable Goodness.

4. First we shall admire an infinite Power; For if there were so Excellent a
workman that could make a Cup of gold of a lump of silver, he would be
admired; but if he should make a golden Cup of a mass of lead, he would be a
workman far more Excellent; and yet more, if he should make it of a bar of
Iron; and yet more, if he made it of a piece of wood; but if he made it of a
grain of sand, he would pass for a demi God, and we would say that his power is
almost infinite. Ought he not than to be God indeed, and to have a power
entirely infinite for to make, not a Cup of gold, but Heaven and Earth, Angels
and men, and all the other Creatures, and to make them of nothing, as our God
did, whom we confess in this Article to be the Creator of Heaven and Earth?

5. If his Divinity and his infinite Omnipotency appear so Clearly in the
matter of which he made the world: his Divinity and his incomprehensible Wisdom
appears yet more, in the manner by which he governs it. This Wisdom, say I,
shines so brightly, in the conduct of the Univers, that we need not but to open
our Eyes for to see it as clear as the day; For we see that the Heavens turn
about us, in so regular, so constant, and so unvariable an order: that the
seasons of the year serve us by quarters: and that they succeed one another
with a vicissitude so proportioned to our life. We see that the animalls that
have not judgment, and also that the plants which have not sense, perform all
their functions, with so much industry and perfection, and commodity for our
service, as if they had judgment. All this makes us to conclude, that there
must be in the Univers a Sovereign Wisdom, a divine Spirit, most intelligent,
and most provident, who rules, governs, and directs all these things: and who
by an ineffable Goodness obliges them to serve us.

6. For God created all these things for us: He governs them all for us: and to
show us this his admirable Goodness, He created man the last of all as the End,
to which He referred his works; For the end is always the first and the
principal in the intention of the Workman, and the last in the Execution of
the work. And we experience to our great profit, that they all tend unto this
End, and that they conspire to serve and intertaine us; some to bear us:
others to nourish, cloth, cure, and rejoice us.

It Is then for you o man! that the heavens move, that stars glitter, that fire
warms, that air refreshes, that rivers run, that the earth produces fruits,
that animalls live and labor; and it is for you in fine that God conserves and
employs all these Creatures, when you think least of it: when you recreate:
when you sleep: when you injure and offend him: He then thinks on you, He acts
for you, and makes all Nature to labor and sweat for you.

He says to you, not by word, but by work, you disoblige me extremely, you
commit sin which displeases me infinitely: But nevertheless take the presents
which I make you: taste and see that I am a sweet Lord. For is it not to be
very sweet to give you so many sweetnesses and dainties in return to so many
bitternesses which you present me daily? Ha! we cease not to offend him, and He
ceases not to caress us; what admirable Goodness! should we not be monsters of
ingratitude, and abortives of nature, if our hearts be not softened, and gained
by so many favors?

7. Moreover we must note, that we are obliged to God for all the good He has
don to other creatures. When a Father employes a Tailor, nourishes him, pays
him for his labor: gives him stuff to make a robe for his daughter: it is not
the robe that is obliged to him; and if also the robe should have sense and
understanding it would not be much obligd to thank him, since he has not don
all this to the robe, for love of the robe, but for love of his daughter; it is
the daughter then that has the obligation, and who ought to thank her father
for it; so we are obliged to God, for all the beauty, goodness, qualities, and
proprieties that He has distributed among his creatures: because it is not for
them, but for us, that He has given them all these qualities and perfections:
to the end we may thank him, praise him, love him, serve him, and keep his
commandments: He gave them the Countries of Nations, Says the Royal Prophet,
and Psalm. 104. 44.
they possessed the labors of people, that they might keep his justifications
and seek his law. O how ill does he that serves not God! o what injustice does
he commit against his Creator! It Is an insupportable ingratitude not to
acknowledge, honor, and love such a Benefactor.

8. If you let a poor Cottage to your neighbor, you will that he pay you rent
for it: and if he should fail, you would cry out against him: How comes it then
says S. Chrysostom, that you pay not the tribute of thanks to your great God;
that you hom. 12. ad Romans
serve him not cordially, who has placed you in this world, in this glorious
Palace, which He built, and which wholly appertains to him?

If you have a Vineyard which you neither made, nor planted, nor cultivated,
but have received it by inheritance; letting it to a farmer, you will have the
half, or the thirds of the fruits of it, though that the farmer be poor, and
has many Children. God has let you a Vineyard or field to farm, and how
vouchsafe you not to pay him not only not the fourth part of the revenew of it,
not also the tithe, perhaps not the twentieth part of the rent of it, but
rather choose that your children make good cheer with it, that they give of it
to this flatterer, or to this dissolute companion, than to your God, who dies
with hunger in the person of the poor? I know well that you excuse your selves
by the number of your children. But if your farmer should dispense with himself
from paying you your dues upon the same account, would you admit of his excuse?
S. Chysostome sends us to learn our lesson of the beasts, since that we put our
selves in their predicament, and perhaps also below; learn your lesson of your
dog, said this great Doctor, you have not so much of judgment, or at least not
so much of gratitude as your dog; for after you have given a morcel of bread to
him, he flatters you, to thank you in the best manner that he can, to excite
you to continue your favor to him; and you who are endued with reason, who
blame so much ingratitude in others, whilst that God does feed and nourish you
delicately, you thank him not. What say I? we thank him not, we offend him
much, and many ways: Nay we abuse the very benefits in offending him.

9. I say that we abuse them; for we make them to revolt against the Creator,
and we employ them to sin against him. We use the light to read Romances, and
other naughty books: the darkness of the night to Cover dishonest actions: the
air to breath out dissolute songs, the fruits of the earth, in gluttony and
drunkenness, clothes and spoils of animalls, in vanites.

10. Jn this we do as a poor man that should throw money given him at the face
of his benefactor for to hurt him; as a Commander, that should use his
authority, to levy men for war against his Sovereign; as a wife that should
abuse the presents her husband gave her, in pleasing an Adulterer. God
complains of this abominable ingratitude by his Prophet Osee; and Osee. c. 28.
there we see how God punishes it in this life: I gave them corn, and wine,
and oil which they sacrificed to Baal. Therefore I will take my corn, and my
wine; He will send sterility, famine, war, and other public afflictions;
Wherefore a pious Doctor admonishes us very wisely, that as often as we use the
creatures, we should imagine that they say to us these three words, Accipe,
Read, Cave: Take the benefit, return service, beware punishment.

11. Take the benefit: Receive the creatures as so many Talents which this
great Master gives you to make good use of them: as so many Presents, which
this cordial Friend does make you for a testimony of his benevolence: and as so
many burning coals which he heaps upon your head, for to heat you in his love.

Return service; Render service and the fruit of your negotiation to so
liberal a Master: thanks to so obliging a Benefactor: obedience to so sweet a
Father: and love to a so faithful Friend. In fine.

Beware punishment. Take heed that you incurr not the reproaches and the
punishments of the ungratfull. Take heed you be not like to those unclean
beasts, which never lift up their eyes to him who beats down acorns to them,
and which thinks not of but eating and grunting at one another.

Beware to imitate them who content themselves to use the creatures, or to
speak more properly, to enjoy them, to make good cheer, and to take their
pleasures, without ever thinking in themselves: to whom belongs this bread I
eat, this air I breath, this fire which warms me, and this horse that carries
me.

Take heed of failing to acknowledge from whence these benefits do com; you will
be ungratfull in not acknowledging them; more ungratfull in forgetting them:
but most ungratfull in abusing them, and in using the benefits against the
Benefactor; you will be a monster of ingratitude, who would deserve, not only
to be deprived of the creatures, but also to be punished by them. For God has
not put the creatures under our feet for to serve as snares and stumblingblocks
to make us fall, but to serve us as stepps and ladders to mount up to the
knowledge of him: He has put them into our hands, not as arms to fight against
him; but as instruments to work with them in his service; He has put them
before our eyes not as objects in which we may repose and place our last end:
But as means and ways by which we may go to him, who is our sovereign Good,
and our ultimate Beatitude Amen.

DISCOURSE III. OF THE SECOND ARTICLE
And in JESUS CHRIST his only Son, our Lord.
THough that the authority of the holy Apostles is more than sufficient to make
men to believe simply and most reasonably, the verities proposed to them in
these words; Nevertheless many in this unhappy age look upon them as
impostures, and laugh at all Christianity as a humane invention or Romance;
Wherefore the Honor of JESUS CHRIST, the Dignity of our Faith, and the Zeal of
men's salvation oblige me to prove and establish them in their source, and to
show to every understanding, which is not blinded wilfully, that JESUS CHRIST
is the true MESSIAH, promised in the Law and Prophets.

2. If JESUS CHRIST had not come in the manner that He came, and if He had not
done, that which he has don, it would not be a Crime not to know and
acknowledge him; But coming with all the Marks and Signs which the Scriptures
give to the MESSIAH: having don the wonderful works which He has done: the
incredulity of men cannot be palliated with excuse, since that these evidence
JESUS CHRIST to be the true MESSIAH, as will appear by the consideration of
them.

2. In the first place the Prophets who were sent by God, also according to the
belief of our greatest Enimys, and who worked so many miracles for the proof
of their mission, who signed with their blood the verity of their Prophesies,
who have been found true and faithful, by the event of that which they
foretold: whose writings could never possibly be falsifyd, nor altered the
least by Christians, since that they were always in the hands of the Jews:
These Prophets, I say, foretell, not generally and obscurely, but particularly
and distinctly, the Mysteries of JESUS CHRIST, the time of his coming, the
place of his birth, the Virginity of his Mother, the quality of his Person,
the kind of life He would lead, the virtues He would practice, the miracles He
would work; his Passion, his Death, his Burial, and his Resurection, with all
their circumstances. The time of his Coming in the 49 Chapter of Genesis,
where Genesis 49.
Jacob. Says at the hour of his death The scepter shall not be taken away from
Judas, and a Duke out of his thigh, 'till He do come that is to be sent, and He
shall be the Expectation of the Gentills. Here we see two illustrious
Prophesies, which could not be foretold but by the Spirit of him who pierces
future ages, and disposes of Kingdoms. He foretells that the Sovereignity and
the Royal Authotity should enter into the Tribe of Judah, and that it should
remain there 'till the coming of the MESSIAH; In the first He foresees that
which was to be effected after a thousand years; what man could see so far? He
foresees what was to come contrary to all humane apearance: for Ruben, Simeon,
and Levi were Judas his elder Brothers, and by the right of eldership were to
be preferred. Nevertheless, the Royalty in fine enters into the Tribe of Judah
in the person of David: and is there established, and continues there 'till
the coming of the MESSIAH, notwithstanding the murmuration of the ten other
Tribes, the revolt of Israel, and the captivity of Babylon. Isay. 11. 1.
Hierem. 23. 3.


The Prophets Isaiah and Hieremiah foretell that He should issue out of the
race of David, and JESUS CHRIST issued thence: which is so clear, that He was
called commonly the son of David: and it is proved by the deduction of his
Geneaoligy ^n S. Matthew and S. Luke. Micheas fortells that He should be born
in Betheleem: Mich. 5.
He is born there. Isaiah, that He should be conceived and born Isai. 42. Isai.
35. 6. Isai. 53. Psalm. 21. Psalm. 14. Isai. 11. Zachuri^h. 19.
of a Virgin: He was so* the Psalmist, that the Kings of the East should bring
him presents: they did so. Isaiah Prophesies that He should be carried into
Egypt, that He should be gentle, merciful, peaceable; That He should restore
light to blind, hearing to deaf, and speech to dumb. That He should be
despised, humbled, afflicted, and put to death with the wicked for the sins of
men. David wrote almost from point to point his crucifixion, his death and
Passion. He foretells, that his Body should not cor rupt in the Sepulcher, but
that He should rise again. Isaiah that his Sepulcher should be glorious and it
is at present visited by all Nations of the world. Zachariah assures us, that
He should bannish Idolatry, which He has done so happily, that the Jews
themselves, his greatest Ennemies, have not since his coming fallen into it,
tho before they were so subject to it.

3. And because JESUS CHRIST came not only for Jews, but also for Gentills, who
had no other Prophesies than those of the Sibyls: the Providence of God put
into the mouths of these Prophetesses divine Oracles, who announced the
coming, works, and Mysteries of the Messiah, as JESUS has accomplished them:
The injuries of the times have deprived us of the greater part of their
writings: But S. Clement Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. bib. 6. strom. Lactan. lib.
45. de vera Sap. S. Just. Mar. in Apol. ad Ant. S. Aug. l. 10. de Civit. c. 2
and lib. 11. c. 23.
Lactantlus, S. Justinius Martyr, S. Augustine, and other ancient Fathers, who
cited them for the proof of our Religion, show, that yet in their times these
Prophesies were in Vogue among the Pagans.

4. The Prophets announced that the Messiah would come: But S. John Baptist
proclaimed that He is come, and showing him with his finger said, Behold him.
His testimony cannot be refused by any reasonable man: for He led an innocent
and irreprehensible life from his infancy; He was a disinteressed man, who
contemned honors, riches, and the delights of the world. The perfection and
sanctity of his life is so eminent, that they take him for the Messiah: and it
was in him to be acknowledged for such. All the Synagogue sent to him Priests
and Levites, for to know of him, if He were CHRIST or no; if He had answered
but yes, they had believed his simple word giving testimony of himself; with
more reason ought one to believe him when he testifys for another; He says,
that he is unworthy to unty the shoostring of his shoos: he hides himself so
soon as JESUS begins to show himself: and of so many Disciples as he had, not
any of them appears after JESUS began to preach.

5. But though the predictions of the Prophets, nor the testimony of the
Precursour should not authorize in any sort the Mission of JESUS CHRIST: the
works and miracles which He wrought show evidently that He was sent by God.
When one affirms himself to be sent extraordinarily from God, if he will that
men believe him, he ought to give proofs of his Mission, to work miracles,
which are the bulls and patents of it; if he does evident, palpable, and
irreprehensible miracles, men ought to believe that he is sent by God, and give
credit to his words; for it is impossible that God should work a miracle in
confirmation of a ly. JESUS shows then evidently and effectually that He is
sent by God, and that He is God, since that He works so many Miracles in
confirmation of his Mission, and his Doctrine; He makes seen his power in all
Orders of the Universe: He exercises his empire upon all that is in nature, and
he works miracles upon all creatures, as appears in the writings of the
Evangelists.

6. Now that these miracles were not impostures but truly worked, many
powerful reasons persuade every man that has common sense. But this shall
suffice at present, That the Evangelistes name often the persons, they
particularize circumstances of place and manner in which the miracles were
wrought: and they write those that were don in their time, in public, and in
the presence of many witnesses; if they had not said the truth, they might
easily be reproved, and they would have had thousands that would have
contradicted them, and who would have taken all credit from them, and from
their Gospells; They report that JESUS fed four thousand persons with seven
loaves: and another time, five thousand with five loaves; They say that JESUS
raised Lazarus half rotten in Bethania, very near to Jerusalem: the child of
the Widow in Naim at the gate of the City, in the sight of very many; that they
brought into Jerusalem the infirm of the neighboring Towns, and that the
shadow of S. Peter passing upon them, they were all cured; If these things were
falls, when the Evangelists pteached, and published their books, they would have
had as many Witnesses against them, as there were persons in Naim, in
Jerusalem, and in the neighboring Towns, who would have said, we were then in
the Town, we have neither seen nor heard any thing of all this.

They say that in the passion of JESUS CHRIST the sun was eclipsed, that
darkness covered all the earth, that the earth trembled, that the sepulchers
opened, that the Vail of the Temple was rent, and that this was done in the
feast of Pasche, when rhere were in the City more than eleven hundred thousand
persons according to the history of Josephus; these Persons came to the Feast
from all parts of the world where the Jews were then dispersed, as may be seen
in Philo, Josephus, and Tacitus, and from thence they returned to their
respective homes. If these miracles had not been true, there would have been in
every place, who would have deposed against the Apostles and the Gospel which
they brought with them: who would have said to them: you are great liars: we
were that year in Jerusalem, and we saw nothing of all this: they would have
sent them back into their counrrey with their books, But this happened not: for
these miracles were so evident, so notorious, and confessed of all the world:
that the Apostles who preached them were received by all the world. The
Gospells which contain them being published; not one of the Pharisees, who
were enraged with spite against JESUS CHRIST and his Religion, ever dared to
contradict the narration of these miracles in the books which they composed;
But on the contrary, all the enemies of christian Religion, Jews, Mahometans,
and Gentills, have acknowledged these miraculous works.

7. As concerning the miracles of the Apostles and primitive christians, Aug.
lib. 1. de Consen. C. 10. Evang.
which they wrought in the name of JESUS, they were so frequent and so evident,
that Pagans not being able to reproach them by any artifice, attributed them to
magic, as may be seen in S. Augustine. But to attribute them to Magic, is a
malice as black and diabolical as magic it self. For first Julian the
Apostate, and so many others, who were so much affected and addicted to
magicians and to magic, never could render sight to one blind, or raise one
only dead man. Secondly magic has no power but by the concurrence of the
Devil: and how came it that he would assist the Apostles to do miracles,
seeing that the Apostles by these miracles abolished the worship of the
devils; But if you are so incredulous, that you will not belive any thing but
what is before your eyes: believe a miracle which you see, the conversion of
the world: and confess that JESUS CHRIST by himself, and by his Disciples has
made in the world the greatest, the hardest, and the best change that was ever
made.

8. He has made the true God, the God of Israel, who was not known but in
Palestine, and to a few in the other parts of the earth, to be known and adored
by all the world; He has banished Idolatry, discredited the devils who abused
men, silenced their oracles, ruined their Temples, demolished their Altars
broken their Idols, abolished their sacrifices, and annihilated their service:
He has drawn men from murders, impurities, parricides and other abominations
which they committed in the worship of these falls Gods: And what is yet more
wonderful, in the place of this false worship, He has planted and established
a new religion, though the more speculative points of it appear contrary to the
maxims of reason: The proper precepts and counsills of it pieces of great folly
according to humane prudence, and the opinion of infidells: And the practice of
it is the mortification, the cross, and the crucifixion of a man.

9. The Jews and other Infidells must confess this at least, that this change
was a work, which could not be accomplished but by a man not only sent by God,
but extraordinarily assisted by him: since the ancient Prophets, who made so
many invectives, gave so many threats, and worked so many miracles against
Idolatry, could not yet banish it from one only kingdom of Egypt, one only City
of Babylon, nor from any other pagan Town. Now this JESUS who is sent by God,
and extraordinarily assisted by him: who negociates with so much success the
affairs of his glory, John. 14. 6.
says that He is the Son of God, that He is the Way, and the Verity, and the
Life: that God and He are one and the same Thing: This is John. 10. 30.
than most true, else God would not have authorized, but disowned and punished
him, as the most detestable Impostor and blasphemer that had ever been; And on
the contrary He is extremely angry with those, who put him to death: and has
punished, and punishes yet at present this furious attempt, with the most
terrible and longest vengeance that He ever exercised in this world.

10. Let us say then with S. Philip, we have found the MESSIAH of whom Moses
and the Prophet wrote: we have known him by certain and John. 1. 45.
evident marks. But to what serves it to have known and received him, if
instead of being our most good and amiable Redeemer, we by not practicing his
doctrine nor following his examples, do make him to be our most terrible and
severe Judge? what profits us to have carried the name and character of
Christians, if neglecting to be true Christians, good and virtuous Christians,
we make by our fault, that JEsus, who was sent to be out Father and our Pastor,
become to us a stumblingblock and an Enemy?

11. Let then every Christian look upon his Doctrine as a Law; which obliges
them: as a Rule to which they must conform their lives: as a Contract that God
has made with us, which contains conditions under which He promises us his
Paradise, and not otherwise. When then you read in this Law, Rule, and Contract
any verity, or have it otherwise proposed to you: you must consider it,
ruminate upon it, and apply it to your self, and to your actions: for God said
it expressly to you, and for this end.

As when you read or hear. Unless you bocom as little children, you shall not
enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Unless you do penance you shall perish; Say in
your self: Certainly if I be not simple, candid, and innocent as an infant: If
I do not penance: I shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Believe that
when you shall be present at the terrible Tribunal of God, They who flatter you
now, will not plead for you then: they who say in compliance with you, that
it is not necessary to follow so scrupulously this Law and Rule, will not then
excuse you; God will judge you, not according to your thoughts, nor according
to their little reasons, nor according to the maxims of the world: But
according to that which is written in this Law and Rule, and that with so much
exactness, that there shall not be one word, not one syllable, not one jota,
that shall not be infallibly accomplished.

And to say no more, behold an irrevocable sentence of the eternal Verity,
which no excuse, no pretext, no reasons can put off: They that obey not the
Gospel, shall undergo eternal pains; 2 These, 1. 8.
As on the contrary, God promises to those that shall hear and profit by the
instructions of CHRIST, to be their recompense: He promises to give them joys,
delights, treasures, and eternal benedictions. Amen.

DISCOURSE IV: OF THE SECOND ARTICLE
And in JESUS CHRIST his only Son, our Lord.
HAving shown that JESUS CHRIST is the true object of our Faith, we must now
consider what the Apostles propose to our belief in this Article concerning
him. Wherefore in the first place we will see, what is JESUS CHRIST to whom
they give these names; And in the second place, Why they give these names to
him.

What is CHRSIT? This is a Mystery well known to many: But which ought not to
be unknown to any: because it is the foundation of Christianity, And the Source
of our salvation; And it oonsistes in this: that as in us there are two parts:
the one interior, invisible, and Spiritual, which is the soul; The other
exterior, visible, and material, which is the body; body and soul so knit
together, that they make but one thing which is man; So in our Savior there
are two Natures, one increated, eternal, and infinite, to wit the Divinity; the
other created, temporal, and finite, to wit the Humanity, that is to say, a
body and a reasonoble soul; which Divinity and Humanity are so united and
joined together, that they make but one Person, which is true God, and true
Man; whom the Apostles signify by these names, JESUS CHRIST, SON OF GOD, and
OUR LORD.

2. First they call him JESUS, which signifys a Savior; And it was imposed
with great reason. For if Joseph in the Egiptian tongue was Called Savior,
because he kept the people from Genesis 41. Numb. 13.
famine by his providence; if Osee the Son of Number the Successor of Moses had
the same name, because he led the people into the land of Promise after they had
fought many battles; And if the Son of Iosadech had also the same name, for
contributing 1. Esdras. 3.
to the delivery of the people out of the captivity of Babylon; with much more
reason our Savior received this name, since He does not only deliver some
particular people out of certain calamities as they did: but moreover all
mankind from sin, damnation, and eternal misery.

3. He also apply's himself to our Salvation with so much tenderness and
affection, with so much fervor and zeal, that more than most deservingly He
may take from this also his Name. They that love passionatly write in a ring
with their own name, that of their beloved, The Son of God has written our
salvation, not with his Name, but in his Name: He cannot think of his own Name
without remembering our Salvation. When you will express an ardent desire of any
thing, you say, I would give for it a part of my blood: JESUS said it not: but
He has don it: and He gave, not a part only, but all his precious Blood for
our Salvation.

JESUS makes so much account of our souls, that having bought them with his
Blood, He pleases himself in the bargain: and shall we sell them to the Devil,
for a little money, or for a brutal pleasure? He begins to suffer for us from
the time He begins to live: and shall we serve him, but when we decay, or begin
to die? He thinks not on his Name, without remembering us: and shall we hear or
pronounce this holy Name without calling to mind the benefit of our
Redemption: without thanking and honoring the Person named? Let us have him
in our thoughts frequently in the day, thanking him, and offering our selves to
him; In our words speaking often of him, and of what He has done to be our
JESUS; In our prayers, demanding of him, and by him, the graces and virtues
which are necessary for us; In our hearts, loving him, and rejoicing in him.

4. In the second place, the Apostles call him CHRIST, which signifys
anointed; And this name was given to Priests, Kings, Exodus 29 1. kings. 10. 3.
kings. 19
and Prophets: because they were anointed with oil (which signifys grace) in
figure of JESUS CHRIST; But JESUS is not a Priest only: but the sovereign
Priest of Priests: not King only: but the King of Kings: not Prophet only: but
Prophet of all the Prophets; Priest, King, Prophet; Anointed, not by men, but
by God: not with oil, but with the fullness of his graces,

5. In the third place, they call him Son of the Omnipotent Father; SON, not by
adoption or grace only, but by nature; For He is begotten from all eternity,
not according to his humanity, or according to his Soul and Body, but according
to his divine Person: Begotten I say, not carnally, corporeally; but
spiritually, divinely, and incomprehensibly, by the understanding of the
Father, or by the knowledge the eternal Father has of himself. And by the
property of his birth. He receives three names, which are to him particular,
notional, and personal: which appertain to him, and not to the other Persons
of the BB. Trinity. He is a WORD, an JMAGE, a SON. He is a WORD, Verbum erat
apud Deum, the WORD was with God. S. John. 1. Collos. 8.
He is an IMAGE, Ipse est Imago Dei invisibilis; He is the JMAGE of the
invisible God; He is a SON: misit Deus filium suum: God sent his Son. He is a
WORD; because produced by the Understanding; a WORD: for the science, knowledge
and doctrine of the Father is most simple and uncompounded; it is but one only
WORD, but which represents all, says all, and does all. He is an Image: for He
is the actual knowledge which God has of himself, the Expression of his
Essence: He represents it then perfectly, otherwise the Science of God would be
imperfect; He is then the natural image, lively representation, and perfect
character of Gods substance. He is a SON: for He is produced by the
Understanding, by a natural Power, by a natural and vital action, and through
inclination the Eternal Father has to produce his like, not only by
resemblance, but in identity of Nature. He is then the true Son of God, his
production is true generation and He is not only equal to the Father, but the
same God with him.

6. They Say, only Son. And He is so the only one, that it is impossible there
should be another; because the eternal Father begets him most necessarily and
continually: and his generative Power though infinite, is wholly, entirely; and
eternally employed in producing him.

7, In fine the Apostles most justly call him Our Lord. For so He is by many
Titles. Other Lords and Sovereigns have generally but one Title, one only right
to their Dominions, and that sometimes pretended, usurped, and uniustly
acquired, or at the best a very slight one. JESUS is our Lord by all sorts of
Rights, by all the Titles that can give authority and jurisdiction. He is our
Lord because He created us; the Workman is naturally Master of his work 'the
Father of his child, and the Potter of his earthen vessel; He is our Lord,
because He conserves, nourishes and hinders us from returning to the nothing,
out of which He drew us; He is our Lord, because He directs, governs and
commands us, and by other prerogatives of Nature.

8. And because that all these Titles of Sovereignity give him Empire and
Dominion over other creatures as well as over mankind, He would be our Lord by
Titles that give him particular and special authority over us. We appertain to
him by the right of Conquest, by the right of Emption or purchase, and
Redemption. This right God alleged often to the Jews, for to oblige them to
be faithful in his service, and obedient to his Laws, I am the Lord thy God,
who have brought thee out of the land of Egypt: I am your Lord and Sovereign,
you are my Vassalls, and Slaves' not only as other people, by reason of the
benefit of creation: but by a new right and a special obligation: because I made
w^^r against Pharao for you: and you are my Captives and prisoners of war.
JESUS has much more reason to make the like plea to us, and to oblige us to
his service: for he has fought in his own person for us: He has been wounded
in the combat: He has delivered us from the deplorable servitude of Sin, freed
us from the most cruel tyranny of Satan, and drawn us from his oppression; are
we not then his slaves? Add to this, that He has bought us 1. Cor. 6. 20.
with his blood: you are bought with a great price, Says the Apostle. You are
then no more your own: your Being, your soul, your body, and your actions are
not yours; if you employ them then for your selves, you are usurpers of
another goods; since JESUS has bought you, you belong more to him than a
slave unto is Lord, than a horse unto his Master.

9. Nevertheless, what is most unjust, and most deplorable: Many acknowledge
not JESUS CHRIST to be their Lord: He receives no homage from them. For what
honor, what service, and what obedience do they render him? If they are in a
chamber of an earthly King or Lord, *it is with great respect, with a profound
silence, and with fear to commit the least incivility; But if they are in a
church, in the house of God, in his presence, they commit irreverences,
insolences, and insupportable impudences.

What service do they render him? In the morning as soon as they are up, they
fall upon their employments, or upon fooleries, or trifles and pastimes; if
they go to Church, they give to God their lips, and their hearts to their
affairs, to vanities, and often to worse; in the Evening they pray in bed, or
half a sleep, or with so little respect, that they would not speak in that
manner to a Civil man; In the rest of the day, they think not of him, they
speak of him no more than if there were no God, unless perhaps pronouncing his
holy name, or calling upon him irreverently, and offending him.

10. What Obedience do they yield to his divine laws? What little King is there
in the world, or Lord of a Village that they would disoblige as they do this
great Lord? If He were a King of cards, they would not transgress his
commandments with greater impudence than they do; If He were a God of straw*
they would hardly offend him with more temerity and less regard to Him. They
swear by his holy Name, transgress his Commandments, commit sins which
displeas him infinitely, and after this they laugh, play, and sleep as boldly,
as if they had done nothing.

11. No, He is not their Lord: they say with the Jews, we will not have this
man reign over us: they deny by their works, what they profess by these words:
I believe in JESUS CHRIST Luke 19. ^4.
our Lord. Who is then their Master? to whom do they appertain? to whom do they
homage and service? To the most barbarous, Cruel and infamous tyrants
imaginable; tho they know by serving such Masters they gain but hell: that they
have not one day of true repose, not one hour of solid content; that they are
tortured by the furies of their conscience, by apprehension of death, by fear
of damnation, and by the sight of the inconstancy and mortality of Creatures
which they love. The world cries I fail you in time of need; the flesh cries I
defile and cover you with ordures; the Devil cries, I deceive them that trust
in me: and many go after these Masters; JESUS our Lord cries, come to me all
and I will refresh you: I will discharg you of the heavy burden of the world: I
will deliver you from the Tyranny of your passions: I Matt. 11. 28.
will free you from the servitude of the Devil; And yet few do go to him; Ah!
few of them also who cry out to him Lord Lord, and do seem to honor him; for
many of these desire to go, but stand still: they cannot abide to take pains
in the way, they will not labor to practice the virtues which He commands;
though He has given so excellent and heroycal Example of obedience, having made
himself obedient to death, and to the death of the Cross; and though they know,
that since He has redeemed us by his Obedience to the Commandments of his
Father, He will apply to us the fruit of his Redemption by our Obedience to his
Commandments: He is made says the Apo-stle the cause of eternal salvation to
all them that do obey him.

12. Let us say then with S. Austin: Command what you will: Heb. 5. 9.
give what you Command. you may Command what so ever you please, for you are
Lord; You cannot command any thing that is not just, for you are a most
equitable Judge; You command nothing, but what is sweet, profitable, and facile
with your grace: for you are our Father.

Give what you Command: There is much repugnance in our corrupted nature, much
opposition to the observance of your divine Laws: But you are Omnipotent and
can easily overcome it by your Grace. You promised by your Prophets, that you
would write your Commandments in our hearts; they are as hard as stones; But
you wrote them upon stones; Engrave them then we beseech you, in the center of
our hearts: that you coming to Judge may not find transgressions to be
punished: But good works which are your gifts, to be rewarded in the happy
Eternity. Amen

DISCOURSE V. OF THE THIRD ARTICLE
Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Marie.
Spiritual and devout souls, who meditate upon the Mysteries of this Article,
are transported with joy and admiration, at the sight of the great wonders
divinely wrought in the womb of the B. Virgin, in the Conception of
JESUS CHRIST. For if in this Conception there is one thing natural, there are
many that surpass all nature. That our Redeemers Body was formed of the Blood
of a woman is a natural thing: But that it was formed, not by man's operation,
but by the operation of the holy Ghost; That his Body was made in an instant,
without the imperfections in which ours are made; That in this instant it
receives a reasonable soul, without the igno^ance where in we are conceived:
without the stayne of original sin which Adam put upon us; But on the contrary,
with perfect knowledge of all things and with plenitude of Grace; That this Body
and soul are united to the second Person of the B. Trinity; That, that which
arises by this Union is perfect God and perfect man; That He was such in a
woman's womb; That she remaining a Virgin, was a Mother: Mother of a Man-God:
Morher of God and Mother of Man: these, I say, are things which surpass Nature:
and are the subjects of our admiration. I admire not said S. Cyprian, the
stabylity of the earth which stands by its own weight in the midst of the
Universe; I admire not the volubility of the firmament, which moves day and
night and has no Center in which it may end its motion; I admire not the
inconstancy of the Moon, which never remains in the same state, but increases,
or decreases every moment; I admire not the Sun which shows it self always
full, which is infatigable in its course, and marches as a Giant to communicate
its light and heat to all the quarters of the world; But I admire God made man,
I admire a God in the womb of a Virgin: I admire the Omnipotent an impotent
infant: And we may add, I admire the Creator made a Creature: the Lord and
Soverign, a subject, and a slave: and the Judge, a criminal in appearance. In
all the other wonders of nature, I find some reasons that do satisfy me; But
in this Mystery I have nothing else, but that which the prophet Abacuc did say,
I have considered your works, and am astonished.

2. Born of the Virgin Marie. This is the second Birth of the Son of God; In
his first, He issued forth of the Understanding of the Father from all
eternity; In this He came forth of his mothers womb in time. The eternal birth
is admirable: the temporal is amiable; I honor and reverence the eternal; I
embrace and love the temporal; I rejoice in that* and I enjoy this; I glorify
God for the first: and I thank him for the second; the eternal created me, and
the temporal repaired me; It would have nothing profited me to have been
created, if I had not been redeemed; by JESUS begotten of the Father I was
created; by JESUS born of the Virgin I was redeemed; I have then more
obligation to JESUS born of the Virgin, than to JESUS begotten of the Father;
And I find many marvells in this second birth, as well as in the first. I will
explicate the marvells of these his births, and of his Conception, by a
comparison so proper and so natural, so clear and so intelligible, that the
most indocible may come by it to a competent knowledge of these mysteries.

3. Amongst all the creatures purely corporal, there is not one that expresses
God so naturally as the Sun. You see the Sun produces a Ray, which is its
offspring; There is nothing more visible than the Sun producing its Ray:
nothing also is more clear, bright, and visible than the Ray; and nevertheless
there is nothing that we have so much difficulty to eye: we cannot fix our eyes
upon it: not through want of light; but through excessive clearness, and
through the weakness of our sight; So the Son of God is begotten by his Father
in the light of his Divinity, by the way of understanding and of knowledge;
there is nothing then more intelligible than this Generation: and nevertheless
there is nothing that we are so unable to understand: it is darkness to us, by
reason of the weakness of our understanding

Tho the Ray be the offspring of the Sun: it is nevertheless as ancient as the
Sun: and if the sun had been from all Eternity, its Ray would have also been
eternal; So though JESUS CHRIST according to his Divinity be the Son of God thc
Father: He is nevertheless as ancient as his Father: He is from all Eternity,
even as his Father.

The Sun by its Ray warms the air, makes the earth fruitful and produces gold
and silver, metalls and mineralls in the heart of it; So the eternal Father by
his Son Created Heaven and earth, men John. ^.
and Angels, and does by him his works: omnia per ipsum facta sunt

The Sun loses nothing by giving Being to its Ray: on the contrary, the ray is
the glory, beauty, and ornament of the Sun; So the Son of God is the splendour
of the Father, and the figure of his substance: it is the Father's great
perfection to begett a Son, who is God as He, and the same God with him.

The Ray coms forth of the Sun, and is sent down to us: but it coms forth of
it, without coming from it: you see it in the Sun, tho it be upon the earth;
So when faith teaches us, that the Son of God descended from heaven, and came
into this world, this is not to say he left the bosom of his Father: He always
remained there tho He appeared here.

The Sunbeam coms into this Church and passes through red glass How did it
enter into it, how did it go out of ir? I know not; It went into it without
opening it: it went out of it, without breaking it; so the Son of God came into
this world, and passed through the blessed womb of the Virgin: How was He there
conceived? I know not; How was He brought forth? I know not; He was conceived
there: He was brought forth: without opening, without breaking, and without
prejudicing the Virginal womb.

The ray passing through the glass beautifies it, renders it more clear and
resplendent; So JESUS passing through the womb of Mary, rendered her Virginity
more pure, more holy, and more sacred: Matris integritatem non minuit, sed
sacravit.

What has the Ray don in this glass? it has borrowed a little redness; it is
become colored, the glass has clothed it with a red color; And what did
JESUS in the womb of Mary? He borrowed humane nature, which is made if a little
red earth, Adam, that is to say, red earth: He made himself man there, the
Virgin clothed him with our humanity.

The ray borrowing of the glass this red color, deprived not the glass of it;
JESUS borrowing of Mary our humane nature, did not any hurt or prejudice to
Mary.

The sunbeam before it entered into the glass, was a Ray, but it was not color,
nor colored: But since it is entered into this glass, and is com into this
Church, it is a colored Ray, it is a radiant color, it is a color which is a
Ray; So JESUS before the incarnation was God from all eternity: But He was not
man: Now since He is entered into Mary, He is a humanised God, He is a Deified
man; is a God who is man, and a man that is God.

The support and the subsistence of this red color that appears here, is the
Ray; for this color subsists not, but by this Ray; So what is the support and
the subsistence of the holy Humanity; It Is the Son of God, it has no
subsistence besides him.

This Sunbeam as a Ray or light of the Sun, is in all the world: But as a
colored Ray, it is not every where, it is only here and in some other places;
JESUS as God, and Son of God, is in every place; But as man He is not every
where: He is but in Heaven, and in the holy SACRAMENT.

Who is the Father of this colored Ray? It Is the Sun; But the Sun produced not
the color: But it produced the Ray which is joined with the color; and who is
the mother of this colored Ray? it is the glass, but it made not the ray but it
produced the radiant color: it clothed the ray with this Robe of color; Who
is the Father of JESUS MAN-GOD? It is the eternal Father: He begot not of his
substance the Humanity of JESUS; But He begot of his Substance the Person of
his Son, who is Man; Who is the Mother of this MAN-GOD? It is Mary; she begot
not the Divinity: But she conceived the Man who is God: the clothed the Person
of the Son of God with our humanity*

Which is the more ancient, this colored Ray, or the glass? The Ray, as a Ray,
as the offspring of the Sun, is a long time before the glass, it is from the
beginning of the world, it is as ancient as the Sun: But the Ray as colored is
younger than the Sun; Who is the more ancient JESUS or Mary? JESUS as God, or
as Son of God, is long before Mary, He is from eternity, as the Father and the
holy Ghost: But JESUS as man, is younger than his Mother.

This Ray being in the sun is so bright and resplendent that i^ dazells the
eyes of them that look upon it; but the same ray being descended here below,
and clothed with a red color is easily beheld; so the son of God in the
bosom of his Father, is invisible, ineffable, inaccessible, and
incomprehensible; But the same Son of God, being clothed with our humanity, is
made visible, palpable, and sensible: to the end He might illuminate and
instruct us, that He might be the Director of souls, and the Doctor of justice,
as He is called by the Prophets; And He begins betimes to perform the charge:
He exercices the office from the beginning of his life.

4. This insant newly born does preach: his pulpit is the cradle: his Auditory
the univers: his Doctrine is the contempt of the world; He preaches, not by
word: for He cannot speak: but by example; He preaches not to the ears: But to
the eyes: He says, that voluntary poverty is better than riches; And the world
on the contrary says, that money is to be procured in the first place: that a
man must have it, though he hazard his soul for it.

This divine infant says, the humble, simple, innocent, and mortifyd life is
that which pleases God.

The World says, a man must greaten himself, appear glorious, Machevalize
subtily, Circumvent and diceive craftily* and live in delights and pleasures.

5. Behold two Masters quite contrary, two doctrines diametrically opposite! It
is necessary the one, or the other be deceived. To say this infant is deceived,
is horrible blasphemy; He is the eternal Wisdom, the increated Wisdom, the
Angel of the great Council. It must then be confessed, that the Avaricious,
Ambitions, Voluptuous, and Machiavilians are grossly deceived.

6. Let us then Conform our selves to JESUS who is established by the eternal
Father as our model; Let our life resemble his, as an Image the Prototipe or
original; Let it be a copy, an expression, and a representation of his; that
we paticipating his virtues, Spirit, and graces in this life, may be partakers
of his glory in the other. Amen*

DISCOURSE VI. OF THE FOVRTH ARTICLE
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried
THe Apostles who made in their Creed an abridgement of the principal
Mysteries of our Faith, having spoken of the Conception, and of the Nativity of
our Savior, pass his Life in silence, and treat immediately of His death: to
teach us the chief reason of his coming was, to suffer, and to redeem us by
his Passion.

2. He saw by the light of glory the abyss of sin, and the Eternal damnation to
which men were doomed for the fault of their first Parents, and for their own
sins; He had pity on them and prayed his Father to pardon them for the Love of
Him. What man on earth: What Angel in Heaven, knowing that the only Son of God,
a Son so amiable, and so beloved, demands pardon of his Father for men, to whom
He is like in nature: What man or Angel, say I, knowing this, would not have
said, surely, surely, the eternal Father will pardon mankind for the love of
his Son, who is a man, and that also freely, without any satisfaction; No, the
Father does it not; But He says, Isaiah. 53. 10.
my Justice must have its course; my Son, I will pardon men, if you will answer
for them, and undergo death for them. The Son has a great apprehension and
horror of a death so cruel and ignominious; we see it in the Prayer He made in
the Garden, which was an expression of that which He acted in the womb of his
Mother after the instant of his Conception.

3. Nevertheless He accepted not only with patience and resignation, but also
with pleasure and satisfaction the decrees of Gods Justice concerning him; He
offered himself most willingly and with an ineffable love not only to be nailed
to the Cross, but also to remain and languish thereupon 'til the end of the
world, if it should so please his Father: Ecce venio ut faciam voluntatem Heb.
10. 9.
tuam. He that should have seen this submission, might with probability have
said: the eternal Father will content himself with his good will, as He was
satisfyd with the good will of Abraham and of Isaac; at least the Justice of
God will be contented that he suffer but one prick of a thorn, or one stroke of
a whip, that He shed one drop of his Blood, which is sufficient to sanctify the
whole world; No: He wills that He suffer actually all the punishments,
humiliations, and afflictions we sinners did deserve.

4. A Sinner deserves to be deprived of the use of creatures, since he abused
them; to be humbled and confounded, because he would not be subject to the laws
and will of God; To be punished both in body and soul, because he offended the
infinitely high Majesty of the Creator. And JESUS has taken upon himself to
satisfy for all these pains and punishments.

5. He was deprived of the use of Creatures; for what privation more rigorous,
than to be spoiled of his very clothes? to be as naked as a worm of the
earth: not to have so much as a poor shift to cover him, not a drop of water to
refresh his tongue in the agony of death? One of his Apostles betrays him:
another denis him: all forsake him: and tho some holy Women followed him, yet
they were not permitted to assist him.

6. He was humbled and confounded; What greater humiliation than to be exposed
to derision and rudeness of the rabble, and to insolence of soldiers? Who treat
him as the very scum of men: who salute him in mocherie, blindfold him, buffet
him, pull off his beard: who put a reed in his hand for a scepter, and thorns
upon his head for a crown, as if He were a king of the Theater? To be decry'd
and condemned as a blasphemer, as a seducer, as ambitious, as sedicious, as an
Imposter: What confusion greater then to be dragd through the streets of
Jerusalem with hues and cries, as a fool, and as an extravagant person, from
Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to the Pretory? To be less
esteemed then Barrabbas a seditious person, and a murderer? to be esteemed
more wicked, more unworthy to live, and more worthy of the cross then he? What
indignity more intolerable than to receive foul and fi^thy matters in token
of vility and baseness, not upon his garments or hands only, but upon his most
venerable and adorable face? this indignity was so ignominious in Israel, that
if a child received it from his father, he was to bear the confusion Numb. 12.
14.
of it at least seven days: To be short, What greater contempt, than to die
not the death of Nobles, nor with honorable persons, not in private and in
prison, not in the night by torch light: but the death of slaves, with infamous
persons, in a high and public place, at midday, in the sight of more than two
hundred thousand persons.

7. What shall I say of the punishments received in his sacred Body? He suffered
more horrible, harsh, and bitter torments than were ever suffered by any
creature upon earth. The Prophet Isaiah calls him by excellence the man of
Pains. Abel was murdered, c. 33. 3.
Zachary was stoned, Isaiah sawed, Lazarus covered with ulcers, and not one of
them is called the man of Pains. We have heard of men, to whom their virtues
or their vices, their birth or their condition, have given honorable or
shameful Names; But we have not heard but of JESUS CHRIST only to whom Pain
has given a name; He is the Man of Pains, because He did bear all our pains;
He is the man of Pains, because He suffered in all his members; and He is the
man of Pains, because He was pierced through with Pains, exposed, Sacrificed,
and given wholly over to sufferances and Pains.

8. But the sufferances in his soul will make appear yet better the Greatness
of his Pain. He said in the Garden, my soul is sorrowful to death: It would
separate my soul and Body, if I shoul not hinder it, for to endure yet more.

To whatsoever part He casts his sight, He sees objects of the greatest sorrow:
His soul is nailed to a most hard Cross, before his Body is Crucifyd; and the
Cross of his Soul is much more harsh, and insupportable, then that of his Body.
The three nails of this interior cross are the injuries don to his Father: the
Commpassion of his Mother: and the damnation of his brothers.

Philosophy teaches us that a pain is more sharp and bitter, when it is
received in a power more pure and immaterial. JESUS was pierced, with pain not
only in the inferior part of his soul, but also in the superior, which is wholly
spiritual, in the part in which He was blessed: and his Beatitude also
contributed to the increas of pain, says S. Laurence Justinian. He de
tryumphali Christi Agone.
saw by the light of glory God face to face: He knew clearly the Greatness of
his Majesty: the outrage and the injury that sin does him: he loved him with a
most ardent and excessive love: and therefore He could not be but excessively
afflicted seeing the Ocean of sins committed against that most high, adorable
and amiable Majesty; The wounds of his Body were made by hands of Torterers:
hands indeed most cruel and inhumane: Yet their activity had still limits; But
the wounds of his heart were inflicted by the hand of love, by the love which
He had for his Father: a love ineffable and incomprehensible; If a soul that
loved God well, could have as much contrition as she would desire; o how would
she pierce herself with sorrow* How willingly would she bathe herself in her
tears! o how would she calcinate her poor heart! JESUS had as much of sorrow as
He desired, and He desired as much of it as He had love for his Father: his
sorrow was equal with his love; If He had seen but one only mortal sin
committed against him whom He so loved, He would have grieved infinitely; o how
then was He afflicted when He saw so many, so different, and so enormous!

9. The love which he had for his Mother, was another nail that pierced his
heart, and which fastened him to this interior Cross. He sees her present at all
the Mysteries of his bitter Passion; He sees all the wonds of his Body united
in her heart: and we may say that his compassion was another Passion.

10. He looks below: His soul is sorrowful: He sees the torments of hell,
wherein so many shall be plunged notwithstanding his sufferances for them. He
sees that their wounds are incurable, that they abuse his Blood, death, and
merits, and that after so many remedies they damn themselves for trifles, and
what He endured for them, would serve but as oil and sulphur to inflame the
divine Justice to punish their ingratitude more rigorously.

11. S. Austin wholly astonished at the sight of CHRIST'S sufferance cry's out: o
Son of God? whither has your humility descended! whither has your charity
been inflamed! whither has your piety extended it self! The Wiseman said, that
you have don every thing in number, weight, and measure, But in this work of
your Love, You have observed neither number, nor weight, nor measure; You have
exceeded all hopes and desires; You have made an excess that could not be
imagined; The Angels were astonished considering this wonder: a God whipped! a
God covered with spittle! the King of kings crowned with thorns! a God
crucified for slaves! a God pierced with sorrows for worms of the earth, of
whom He had no need, and knowing, that they would be ungratfull for so great a
Benefit. What transport! what excess! and if He were not God, I might say with
Pagans, what folly of Love! Gentibus stultitia.

12. After a love so cordial, undeserved, and so excessive, shall we not love
him? If the least slave had don the same for us, He would be Master of our
hearts; and seeing a God has don it, shall He not be? Qui non diligit Dominum
Iesum Anathema sit, 1. cor. 16. 22.
says S. Paul: since JESUS suffered for us, if any one love him not, let him be
Anathema, Cursed, excommunicated, and abhorred of all creatures. But if any one
should not love him, and moreover be so ungratfull as to offend him, what
punishment would You wish him holy Apostle. He adds it not; nor can one wish
him a pain so great as he deserves; there should be a new hell to revenge an
ingratitude so monstrous and enormous.

13. For as S. Bernard said, if Moses speaking to the Jews, who had but a gross
and imperfect Law. who had not been redeemed by JESUS CHRIST, said to them Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy foul, and with
all thy forces; what ought Christians to do after the Incarnation, Redemption,
and Passion of our Savior? Ought they not to burn with love? should they not,
if it were possible, love JESUS above all their forces, thoughts, and activity
of their hearts? If I owe my self wholly to him for making me, what shall I add
now for repairing me, and repairing me in such a manner?

14. Let us love him then, since He so loved us; let us not love him only in
words and compliments; let us not content our selves to say, I honor much my
Savior, I love him with all my heart: But let us love him in work and Verity:
in doing, in giving, and in suffering for him: for so He loved us; And since
his goodness is so infinite, and his love to us so excessive, that He preferred
us, not only before Angels, but also before himself: it would be a horrible
blindeness to prefer any other good before him; it would be a strange folly to
offend him, to disoblige his goodness, to lose his amity and his favor, for
honor, pleasure, profit, or satisfaction of a Passion. Do not so if you be
wise: Say rather with S. Austin, all abundance, all honor, all felicity, that
is not you my God, is but poverty, vanity, and misery; say as S. Francis did,
my God You are my All! Love him with all your heart, since He his all your
good: love him with a sovereign love, since He is sovereignly good: love,
adore, bless, praise, glorify him now, and ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE VII. OF THE FIFTH ARTICLE
He descended into Hell, the third day He rose again from the dead.
JESUS applied himself so earnestly to our Salvation, that whilst He was on
earth, He let not a moment pass without laboring for it: And for this effect,
whilst his Body laid in grave, He descended into Hell.

This world Hell signify's an inferior and low place; And therefore the holy
Church makes use of it in diverse occasions, to signify diverse inferior places.
By this word she most often understands the place of everlasting damnation; And
so our Savior called it in 1. Luke. 36.
S. Luke where speaking of the unfortunate rich man says, he was buried in hell.

Other times she uses this term to signify Purgatory: where they are, who died
in the grace of God, but having not fully satisfied the divine Justice, are
further to be punished; so in the Mass of the dead she prays. free o Lord the
souls of the faithful departed, from the pains of hell.

She makes use of it also to signify the place, whither the souls of holy and
just persons who were not subject to purgation, or had duly satisfyd for their
offenses went, before the death of the Savior of the world: expecting He
should open them the gates of Heaven by his Passion.

2. He descended, not only by effect into these two last places making his
power and goodness to appear by delivering the souls in them detained: But in
substance He descended into them: his soul was really in those places, and He
honored the souls that were in them, and made them happy by his presence

The third day he rose again from the dead; He rose no sooner, for to testify
that He was truly dead, and to fulfill the figure of Matt. 12. 40.
him; As Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of a whale so shall
be the Son of man in the bowels of the earth.

He would be three days subject to the law of death, to teach us mystically
that by his death and Passion, He had satisfyd the three Persons of the B.
Trinity, for the sins committed in the three states of the world: in the Law of
nature, in the Law of Moses, and in the Law of grace: And to show us that his
Passion was the cause of the delivery of the ancient Fathers out of hell, of
the Redemption of men on earth: and of the reparation of the Angelical thrones
in Heaven.

He rose again: By which words the Apostles teach us, that He S. John. 10.
returned to life by his own power; He said also in the Gospel, I have power
to lay down my life, and to take it up again; and in another place, I will
raise up my Body in three days after death

3. I know well, that S. Peter and S. Paul teach in many places, that his
Father raised Him up to life; because this miracle S. Pater
is an effect of the omnipotency of God, which tho common Ast. c. 3. 26. and c.
5. 30. S. Paul in the 4. 8. and 10. to the Romans Phil. 28. and 9.
to all the 3. Persons of the B. Trinity, yet is attributed commonly to the
Father. It Is true then that He rose up by his own Power; and it is true also,
that the eternal Father raised him: to the end He might show his goodness both
to him and us.

4. First to him: that his Body might receive the Glory which He merited by his
labors, humiliations, and sufferances; For He humhled himself says the Apostle
being obedient unto death: for the which thing God has exalted him; Note
exalted him: for his Resurrection was not a simple return from death to life:
but an entrance into a glorious life; That Body which He laid down passible and
mortal, He receives impassible and immortal: that which was inglorious, now is
glorious: which was infirm, now is powerful: which was a natural Body now is
become a spiritual. These are the excellent qualities which S. Paul attributes
to every 1. cor. 15. matt. 13 43.
glorifyd Body; But that of Glory or clarity delights me most; for the body of
every saint shall shine by it, as the sun: fulgebunt justi sicut sol; and
nevertheless one shall differ from another in this Quality, as much as he
exceeded him here in good works, or as S. Paul says, as one starr differs in
glory from another. What glory then, what admirable splendour, what ravishing
beauty was given to the adorable Body of JSUS in recompense of his merits? And
what satisfaction, and felicity will it be to see it, when our eyes shall be
able to behold it, as hereafter they shall be by their impassibility?

These four qualities belong to the Body of the Son of God, as a body glorifyd;
But as a Body Deifyd, as subsisting in the Divinity, it has yet a far other
Glory: It has a supereminent, ineffable, and incomprehensible Glory, as we may
see in the next Discourse.

5. Wherefore the Son of God thanks his Father for that He brought his soul out
of hell, and his Body out of the sepulcher, and that He raised him up again,
Exaltabo te Domine quoniam suscepisti psalm. 29.
me. Eduxisti ab inferno animam meam. And He esteems so much this favor, that
He exhorts us to thank God, to praise and glorify him for it, Psallite Domino
fancti ejus, and confitemini memoriae sanctificationis ejus. psalm. 29.


6. This is that which many never did, that of which many never thought. Our
devotions are often but productions of self love, practices of interest, and
reflections upon our selves. If we pray God, we demand not of him but that
which concerns our spiritual or temporal profit. If we thank him, it is but for
the good which He has don us, or those of our family: this is to love our
selves, and our salvation; this is good, but not perfect. If we are perfect
Christians, and loving Disciples of JESUS: we will love him more than our own
selves, be concerned in his interests, and pray God his Father for the
exaltation of his glory, and the accomplishment of his designs: We will thank
Him often, that He revived his Son, and restored Him the life which our sins
had taken from him, that He elevated him, and placed him at his right hand.

7. Secondly, God shows in this Mystery his Goodness also to us; for as his Son
was incarnated for us, as He lived and died for us, so He is raised to life
again for us; We are quickened with him, are raised-up with him, and his
Resurrection is an assurance and pledge of ours. If there be no resurrection of
the dead, neither 1. Cor. 15.
Christ is risen again, says S. Paul; But now Christ is risen again from the
dead the first fruits of them that sleep; by a man death, and by a man the
Resurrection of the dead; and as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be
made alive. We shall all indeed rise again, says the same Apostle: But we shall
not all be changed: to wit into a better, and more glorious state. But only
such as conform themselves to JESUS CHRIST, who is their Rule, mirour, and
model.

8. He contributed much to his glorious Resurrection, He merited it, and
disposed himself to it, by his sufferances, humiliations, patience, and other
most perfect and heroical acts of virtues which He practiced. He by dying,
taught us to dye to sin: by rising again, to rise to a new life, and by dying
no more, to live, profit, and persever to the end in sanctity and holiness, as
his Apostle declares and urges much in his epistle to the Romans. Romans 6.


9. Let not then men deceive themselves; Let them not think to be glorifyd in
Heaven, if they be not Sanctified on earth; Let them not think to enter into a
glorious life any other way then that of sufferances, of mortifications, and
Christian virtues; This is the only way which the Son of God prescribed: which
our Savior beat, and which the saints have followed. Hear S. Paul and S.
Bernahas By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom Acts. 14. 21.
of God; they say not, that it is a salutary Counsel: it is a more assured way:
But, we must, that it is necessary to pass, not through two or three; but
through many suffetances to com to the kingdom of God. There is nothing more
clear, more firm and certain then the words of the son of God, who says, He S.
Luke 9. 23.
that will com after me, Let him renounce himself, and carry his cross daily,
and follow me. Now in good earnest, will they dare to say, that living as they
do in the world: hanting almost continually balls, commedies, places of
lewdeness, banquets, other pleasures and pastimes, is to renounce one self, and
to carry daily the cross, and to follow Christ?

He tells his Disciples in the day of his Resurrection, what way S. Luke. C. 24.
He went; Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into
his glory? Note ought; It was necessary that Christ should suffer, and that He
should enter by this means into his glory, into the glory which was his own, to
which He had so much right: and will they think without suffering any thing to
tame their passions, and without mortifying themselves, to enter into the
glory, to which they have no right, into the glory which they have so often
demerited, and which they have renounced by so many Crimes?

We cannot have this glory but in quality of the heirs of God, and coheirs of
Jesus Christ: and his Apostle declares, that to obtain this favor, we must
suffer with Jesus Christ. Rom..8 17.
We shall not be more privileged than his Parents, favorites, and beloved
friends; all the Saints suffered with him: all either were Martyrized, or led
an austere, humble: and penitent life; S. John Apor. 7. 14.
in the Apocalips seeing the assembly of them, one said to him, that they came
out of great tribulation: they are happily arrived: they took then a good way:
and we if wise, will follow the same, and leave the other way.

10. We see in the Church two different ways, two different lives of those that
have any desire to save themselves; one is of those who lead a holy life,
mortifyd, devout, perfect, and fervent in good works; The other is of them that
lead a life, not in the sight of men Criminal: but slack, negligent, and
imperfect; they commit not great Crimes: but they do not also much good: and
withal they will that selflove be always satisfyd; they treat themselves well:
they pass their time in sports, walks, superfluous visits, and other
divertisments, which they term innocent: they do no injury to any: but they
concern not themselves in the necessities of their neighbors. All without
exception approve and commend the first way; not one, or very few will have the
boldness to warrant the second way; this way then at least is uncertain,
fallible, and dangerous. And S. Augustine says, when Lib. 1. de Bapt. C. 3.
the salvation of our souls is concerned, we fail against the love we owe to
our selves, if we take not the surest way. It Is a maxim of the Law, that we
must not leave the certain for the uncertain; and that we must use the more
precaution, where there is more danger; Common sense and experience show, that
by how much a loss is greater, we apprehend the danger of it with more fear: by
how much an evil is more terrible, we avoid the peril of it with more care.
Does it not seem to you a great loss to lose the kingdom of heaven, the
possession and the enioyance of a God? And is it not a great evil to be burnt
a live? to be always burning and not consuming? It Is an infinite loss, an
infinite evil. We must then avoid, I will not say the danger, but the
appearance of danger; for we cannot have too much assurance in a matter of so
great importance. I pray our Lord to give us grace to live so holily, that we
may be found worthy of this immortal Resurrection, and of the happy Eternity.
Amen.

DISCOURSE VIII. OF THE SIXTH ARTICLE
He Ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
THe Apostles having taught Christ's Victorious Resurrection: teach us in this
Article his tryumphant Ascension. By his Nativity, He went forth into the field
to fight; by his Passion and death He fought the battle: By his Resurrection He
overcame his enemies: and by his Ascension He tryumphs. His tryumphant chariot,
was a thousand thousand of celestial spirits, Psalm. 67. 18.
and according to the translation of S. Hierom, innumerable thousands. He
tryumphed not only over enemies of flesh and blood, but also over devils, sin,
and death. The spoils He carried with him, were not flocks of sheep and troops
of other beasts, but innumerable multitudes of souls, which He redeemed out of
Prison, and rescued out of the jaws of Hell: Thou art ascended high, thou have
taken Captivity, says the Rayal Prophet to him. Psalm. 67. 10.
With all this glorious train He ascended, not carried in a chariot, as Elias,
nor by Angels, as Abacuc the Prophet, and S. Philip: nor did He ascend only by
the force and agility He recived in his resurrection: but moreover by the power
and virtue He had, as God.

2. He Ascended into heaven There are three Heavens according to the scripture,
Airy, Statry, and Emperial; and He mounted above all heavens, as his Apostle
says; so passing the Air, Sun and all ^phes. 4.
the heavens, He mounted to the most high and sublime place of the world.

3. He sits at the right hand of God the Father. God is a spirit, a pure and
incorporeal Being, who has neither side, nor hand, no^ part; How does He sit
then at his right hand? And if He sits in a seat or Throne: of what matter is
it made? is it of wood, marble, gold, silver, or Diamant? I know well it is
answered, the Apostles accommodate themselves to our low manner of
understanding and of speaking, and that by this session at the right hand of
the Father, they express the equality and consubstantiality of the Father and
the Son. When we see one speak to the king on knee, we conclude he is a
Vassal; But if we see one sit upon a throne near the king, and at his right
hand, we say he is a Prince or Sovereign. The Apostles say, JESUS sits at the
right hand of the Father: this is to say, He is Sovereign, Omnipotent and
infinite as the Father, equal, coessential, and coeternal with the Father.

4. Yes: But JESUS as man, is not consubstantial, nor coeternal with the
Father, and yet He is at the right hand of the Father, not only as God, but
also as man, as S. Leo expressly teaches in his first sermon of the Ascension.

You will say, the humane nature of JESUS is in the Throne of God, and at the
right hand of the Father, because being as it were ingraffted, and inserted in
the Being of God, in the subsistence of the Word, and making but one Person
with him, it is served and reverenced as God.

5. You say true, but this solues not the difficulty; For this holy Humanity is
united to the Word, and subsisting in his Personality from the first instant of
Christ's Conception: and nevertheless, to speak properly: it is not but since
the day of his Ascension, that the Humanity is elevated to the glory of the
Father, and seated at his right hand, as the church says in the Canon of the
Mass that day.

6. For to clear then these difficulties, we must remember, that in the Mystery
of the incarnation, the Son of God communicating his subsistence to the holy
Humanity, should have made it at the same time participant of all the
perfections and Attributes, of which a created Nature may be capable; For if in
a perfect marriage, the Woman espouses not only the Person of her husband, but
also his nobility, prerogatives, and Honors: shall not the sacred Humanity
which is married much more perfectly and inseparebly to the Word, receive from
him the Perfections that are communicable to It? A Vegetative soul penetrating
the stock of a little tree makes it live with a Vegetative life. A sensitive
soul informing the body of a Lamb, makes it live with a sensitive life: An
intellectual soul animating the body of a man, makes it live with a reasonable
life: and the divine Word actuating, filling, and possessing the holy Humanity
shall He not make it live with a divine life? Ought He not to communicate to it
his proprieties and his Attributes? since He is united to it more strictly,
perfectly, and nobly, than any soul is to her Body, or form to its matter?

7. Nevettheless the divine Word to procure our salvation, and to accomplish
the work of our Redempion, suspended in his Incarnation the communication of
diverse of his perfections. For if JESUS had been immortal, how should he have
dyed for us? If He had been impassible, how would He have suffered for us? If
He had been independent and sovereign, how would have he given us an example of
obedience, subjecting himself to his holy Mother? But in the day of his
Ascension He made an entire effusion of himself, and of all his excellencies,
and perfections, that were communicable to Humanity.

8* This is that which He asked of his Father in the Vigil of his death, when
He said, Now glorify me o Father with thy self, with the glory which I had with
thee, before all ages. Upon which S. John. 17. 5. Lib.. 11. in Io. C. 17.
Colloss. 2. 9.
S. Cyrill of Alexandria says, The Savior asks to be glorifyd, not with an
accidental glory but with a natural glory; and a little after, The glory which
He always had as God, He asks now as man. This is moreover that which S. Paul
teaches us, when he says, the plenitude or fullness of the Divinity inhabits
corporally, in him, that is, in his Humanity, says the same S. Cyrill.

And this is that which ought to rejoice us in this Mystery: This is that which
renders this Mystery dear and precious to JESUS: to the Virgin: and to all the
Church.

It Is in the Ascension properly that JESUS Man God sits at the right hand of
the Omnipotent; it is in the Ascension, that He was received into the Throne of
God: and that He entered into the Glory of his Father.

9. He sits, that is to say, He is no more subject to labors, tributary to
wearines, liable to humane miseries and infirmities.

10. He is at the right hand of the Omnipotent; that is, He has the
superintendence and the administration of Heaven and earth, of men and Angels,
of spiritualls and temporalls. What honor, what happiness for us, to know and
to be assured, that a person of the same nature with us has the keys of life
and death, of Heaven and hell, that He governs all and does whatsoever He sees
good?

11. He is in the Throne of God: that is, He entered into the real, actual, and
eternal enjoyance of his Empire.

12. He is in Glory of the Father; that is, He is received into a full, entire
and perfect possession of all the Grandeures of God that are agreeable to his
merits and to the quality of a man-God.

13. This Mystery was moreover expedient for the holy Virgin. For if JESUS had
remained amongst us, until the end of the world, the Virgin all that time would
have been deprived of part of her felicity; of the sight of the adorable Body
of her son, which is the most beautiful, charming, and ravishing of all bodies.
He said then with good reason to the Virgin as well as to the rest It Is
expedient for you that I go. S. John. 16. 7.


14. But how did He say his Ascension was expedient for us also? Was it
expedient the Pastor should be separated from the sheep, the Head from the
members, and the Espouse from the spouse?

Nevertheless it was expedient for us; For He goes away, but leaves us not: He
separates from us, and dwells always amongst us: He dwells not only amongst us,
but with us, but within us; had He remained amongst us, He would not have
entered into us: for He would not have instituted the Eucharist which He left us
for a supplement of his absence.

And though JESUS CHRIST remaining on earth with us, would have instituted the
holy Sacrement: Yet his Ascension is very favorable to us; It is a subject of
great consolation and joy: because it is a most certain Pledge, and an assured
hope, that we may follow him; He said to his Disciples, I go to prepare a place
for you. He left behynd him the print of his feet upon the mountain from whence
He ascended: and suffers not the place to be covered through which He passed,
to teach us by these permanent miracles, that the way to Heaven is open and
beaten for all the faithful who will follow thither the tracts and footsteps
which He left us.

15. But is not it a strange thing that we cannot persuade Christians a verity
so assured, and so important to their salvation, that to follow him thither,
they must necessarily imitate his actions. S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John
Evangelist, the three most famous Apostles of the Son of God declare it to us.
S. Peter, JESUS CHRIST ^. Ep. 2. 21. Romans 8. 29, 1. Ep. 2. 6. John. 15. 6.
suffered for us, giving you exemple that you may follow his steps. S. Paul,
whom God has foreknown, He has also predestined to be made conformable to
his Son. S. John Evangelist, He that says that he abides in JESUS CHRIST, ought
to walk as He has walked.

The Son of God says if any one abide not in me he shall be cast forth as a
branch, and shall wither, and they shall gather him up and cast him into the
fire; to be saved then, and not to be cast into hell fire, it is necessary to
abide in CHRIST. Now his beloved Disciple says, that to abide in JESUS CHRIST,
we must walk as He walked, live as He lived, imitate the virtues which He
practiced, each one in his condition, and according to his capacity, by the
assistance of his grace.

16. Let us then resolve from this present hour to follow Him; The labor in
practice of Virtue is but little: and the joy of it will be infinitely great;
The pleasure of this world which draws us from it is but short; the pain that
attends it will be very long; the combat is very light: the Crown will be most
excellent; this present life is short: and the future is eternal; of this short
life depends an eternity of happiness: which I pray God grant us all. Amen.

DISCOURSE IX. OF THE SEVENTH ARTICLE
From thence He will com to judge the quick and the dead.
IT is a certain verity, that a man is judged at the end of his life, or at his
departure out of this world; For the Wise man assures us, his works are then
disclosed: Ecclus 11. Matt. 20
and that then God rewards every one according to his ways. And in the Parable
of the Gospel, the Lord of the Vineyard commands the Workmen to be Paid in
the evening of the same day they labored. In fine the sacred text both of the
old and Psalm. 67. 19. Luke. 23. 43. Numb. 16. 33. Luke. 16. Ep. of. Jude. v. 7.
new Testament teaches us, that many souls are at present happy in Heaven: and
many others miserable in hell; And we know, God does not reward or condemn any
one without examining his merits and demerits.

2 But some perhaps will say; If there be a particular Judgment at the end of
life, why shall there be a general in the end of the world? Is He who says of
himself, I am meek and humble of heart: who was promised by the Prophets showed
by the Precursor under the figure of a Lamb so inclined to judge, that He is not
satisfyd in judging once, but will judge again? The sentence which He pronounces
against us, or in favor of us in the hour of our death, is it not definitive
and without appeal? or is there any thing in it to be reformed that He will
make revision of it in his general Assizes?

3. To see cleary that it is more than most convenient that after the
particular, there should be a general judgment in the face of the Universe; we
need not but consider the following reasons.

First it is expedient for the honor and glory of JESUS CHRIST; S. Io. 5. 22.
All judgment, says He, the Father has given to the Son that all may honor the
Son.

And his Apostle, all shall stand before the trybunal of CHRIST; Romans 14. 11.
Why? for it is written, that every knee shall bow to me; Angels and men,
predestinate and reprobate shall be all assembled, that all together acknowledge
the man*God: that they do homage to his Sovereignity: and that every tongue
confess that He is in the glory of God his Father.

He was judged most unjustly, laden with reproaches and confusions, dragged
shamefully through the streets of Jerusalem, nailed to an infamous cross, He
is daily contemned and mocked by Infidells, Jews, Heretics, and by bad
Catholics; Is it not reason that the world should make him honorable amends,
and that He receive as much of Glory as He received of affronts and ignominies?

4. His Father himself does him so much honor* that He gives him not only
authority to judge men, but takes him for judge in his own cause. The eternal
Father says, He will assemble Joel. 3. 2.
all nations in the Valley of Josephat, and will plead against them there. But
in what Trybunal will He plead this cause? In the Tribunal of JESUS; He has
given all judgment to his Son; He puts into his hands all his rights and
pretentions; He will say Joan. 5. 22.
to him, my Son, do me justice; I have don such favors, given such graces to
such and such persons: and they were so ungratfull as to contemn me: after so
many benefits, they offended me: they committed so many and so great crimes;
what chastisement do they not deserve; I make you judge of it. And since all the
right will be on God's side, and all the wrong on ours: JESUS will take his
Fathers part, and espouse his quarrel: will do him justice for the injuries He
received, and judge us without favor, or acceptance of persons. ^phes. 6. 9.


5. He will rejoice exceedingly to satisfy his Father: because his interests are
dear and precious to him. Impious and Idiots censure the Providence of God,
because they know not the reasons and the end of it: they murmr, that the just
are humbled* the poor afflicted, the bad honored and glutted with riches, and
delights: they are astonished, that the child of a devout woman dies without
Baptism, and is reproov'd: the child of a dishonest woman is predestined,
and dies after Baptism; our Savior will justify his Father: He will make
clearly seen the Wisdom of his conduct, the uprightness of his judgments, the
equity of his decrees, and the admirable Economie of his Providence. This
rejoices souls that love our Savior: this nourishes their hope, and is the
object of their devotion. Let us elevate then our selves to God, and say with
the Psalmist, make jubilation in the sight of the king our Lord: because He coms
to judge the earth. Psalm. 97.


6. In the second place, it is convenient there should be another Judgment
besides that which is made in the hour of our death: because in this the soul is
judged only, and the body ought to be judged also. For The body contributs much
to the merit, and demerit of the soul: it cooperats usually to the good, and to
the evil which she practices; it is the cause that a reprobate soul offends
God by intemperance, drunkenness, luxury, idleness, vain ornaments; it is the
cause that an elect soul pleases God, in fasting, whatching, wearing hair
cloth, kneeling, traveling, keeping Virginity, enduring death for defense of
Faith; since then in the particular judgment these bodies received not the
salary, nor the pain, which they merited in this life, there ought to be
another judgment, which recompenses, or punishes them according to their
deserts.

7. In fine it is expedient: that the elect may be praised, honored, glorifyd:
and the reprobate dispraised, reproched, and confounded in the face of the
whole world. Our Lord will then give 1. Cor. 4. 5.
to every one the praise which he deserves, says the Apostle; He will praise
you, for your Charity: you, for your patience: you, for your humility; He will
discover your secret penances, your alms given to the poor, your hidden hair
shirt, your nightly and early rising to prayers, And consequently, He will give
also to the reprobate, the blame and infamy which they deserve.

8. To this effect he will enlighten the hidden things of darkness, 1. Cor. 4.
5.
and will manifest the counsels of the hearts, as the Apostle says; He will
discover all thoughts, words, and actions of the reprobate in in the sight of
that great assembly; He will confound the hippocrisie of those that deceive the
world: reprove the craft and subtility of them who supplant the simple: and
thunder against the calumniators, and diffamers of the innocent; He will show
how unjustly the elect are contemned, derided vilefied neglected, and abused:
and how vainly and foolishly the reprobate are admired, praised, honored, and
preferred He will show that He is good, not only by praising, approving, and
recompencing good: but also by dispraysing, condemning, and persecuting the
enemies of good.

9. Cheer up then, o chosen Souls! cheer up and rejoice, when we speak of
judgment: lift up your heads, for behold your Redemption Luke. 21. 28.
is at hand; What consolation, what joy, what gladness, and what assurance for
you, when the whole world shall be moved at the terrible sound of the trumpet:
when the Judge shall be in a throne of glory and of Majesty, amidst thunders and
lightnings: when the rocks themselus shall tremble, and people shall shake and
shiver for fear: when you shall see Hercules and Alexanders, Cesars and Pompies,
Plato's and Aristotle's, the great Conquerors and Wise of the world dragged as
Criminalls to the Tribunal of the Judge, reduced to an extreme despair, not
daring so much as to lift up their eyes, expecting with horror the sentence of
their condemnation: Then Then if you will believe me, if you will endure a
little here, and keep exactly the commandments of God, Then I say, you will
rejoice heartily: you who are esteemed the lees and the scum of the world, the
objects of a thousand incommodities, you will laugh with a celestial laughter,
you will be filled with a solid assurance, you will acknowledge him whom you
have so well served, and whilst others tremble, you shall go to meet him in the
Air obviam These. 4. ^6.
Christo in aere: you shall approach to him with confidence saying with joy
which cannot be expressed; behold my good Master that was crucifyd: behold my
Savior whom I loved so ardently; Look upon him now you worldly souls! Is not
this the Savior whom you so much despised? heretofore you mocked us: you called
us hyppocrits, scrupulous, and superstitious people: you held it simplicity to
pardon injuries: to endure affronts: to deprive your selves of sensual
pleasures: to mortify your flesh and passions: to contemn temporal goods,
through the hopes of eternal: which you esteemd uncertain: You see well now,
that we were not deceived: you see it by experience.

O God! what extreme favor to have served well a king now so honored; Sacred
labors, happy mortifications, and persecutions, which are now so divinely
recompensed, sweet austerities! How great and admirable are the joys you breed
me! Then Then o Christion souls; these bodies so often bowed and humbled before
God, shall be exalted and replenished with glory; then you shall be justifyd from
the faults of which at present you are so unjustly accused: you shall be
delivered from the persecutions they raise against you.

9. But you on the contrary o worldly soul! you ought to tremble and shake,
when we speak of judgment, You ought to consider that you must render an
account to a Judge infinitely powerful, to whose anger none can make
resistance: To a judge infinitely Wise and knowing, who searches the bottom of
the heart: from whose knowledge you cannot hide your most secret thoughts: to a
Judge infinitely good: who is obliged by his nature, to be mortal enemy to sin.

Hear then and put in practice his divine Words, by which He vouchsafs to
instruct you how to avoid the rigor of his justice; behold how He concluds the
sermon which He made of the last judgment; Look well to your selves, lest
perhaps your hearts be aggravated Luke. 21.
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life: Watch therefore,
praying at all times, that you may be accounted worthy to escape the things
that are to com, and to stand before the Son of man. Amen*

DISCOURSE X. OF THE SEVENTH ARTICLE
From thence He will com to judge the quick and the dead.
1. IT is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God says S. Paul;
because He is always living; Heb. 10. ^1.
and as long as He shall be living, the damned shall be in torments. Wherefore the
Son of God threatens a long time before He striks, He speaks much of judgment
before He does justice: He never hurls a thunderbolt, without making the
thunder sound, the lightning flash, and without covering the air with clouds.
He sent from time to time Prophets as Heralds of his justice, forerunners of
his judgment: who always endeavored to express the terror of it, by the most
proper and significant epithets imaginable; they call it the day of anguish and
tribulation: the day of affliction and misery: the day of obscurity and
darkness: the day of outrage and tempest: of anger and vengeance: the day of
the fury of the Lord: the day of horror and of slaughter; you may see this in
Isaiah, in Hieremiah, in Ezechiel, and in Joel. Isay. 13. and 34. Hiere. 16.
Ezec. 7. and 27. Joel. 2.


2. And because usually the faithful only believe the Prophets: and as S. Paul
says infidells have need of signs and prodiges; To the end none may doubt of
it: God will proclaim it to all the world by most remarkable signs, which He
will show in Heaven, earth, sea, and other parts of nature; and as at present,
according to the saying of the Prophet, the heavens and the stars declare the
Omnipotence, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, who produced such glorious creatures,
governs them in so constant and regular an order, and designs them for an end
so noble; so before the judgment, the sun, moon, and stars shall foretell the
justice of God: they shall preach it to all people, and that in so loud and
intelligible a language, that none, not the most stupid, incredulous, and
insensible shall doubt the least of it; In which we ought to admire and adore
the goodness of God, who exercising his patience so long time, and toward so
many persons: will exercise his justice as late, and against as few as He can.
He exercises his patience from the beginning of the world, He employs in it not
one day, month, or year, but many ages. He exercised it above six thousand
Years, and He will exercise it to the end of ages, toward all sinners: but He
will not execute the last judgment, the act of his great wrath, but at the end
of time, as late as possible; and that He may find but few upon whom to
exercise the same, He forewarns them of it: He frightens, threatens, and sends
Prophets: He gives signs in heaven and in earth, showing by this, that He
desires not to strike, that he wills not the death of a sinner, but that he be
converted and do live; and this shows also the great and enormous malice of
sin, which provoks and irritats so much, a God so mild, and merciful.

3. The Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and the Apocalypse foretells us many
terrible signs, which shall be as messengers Matt 24. 30. 2. Pet. 3. Psalm. 76.
19.
and forerunners of the Judge: see here some of them. The sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood; Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the
Powers of it shall be moved. The Heavens burning shall be resolved. There shall be
no light, but that of lightning, which shall always flash; The thunderclaps shall
be so great that the Heavens will seem to tear; thunderbolts shall be darted
Wisdom 5. 22. Wisdom 5. 22,
forth, as from a bow full bent, and shall fall directly contrary to their
custom. The Water of the sea shall rage against men, and the rivers shall run
together roughly; The earth agitated with convulsions and tremblings will open
as if threatening, to swallow them. God will send devouring fire which shall burn
the 2. Pet. 3.
elements, consume Towns, and reduce to ashes all the works of men What
horrible spectacle to see and feel the air changed into flames; stones, into
burning coals: rivers, into boiling water: houses* into furnaces of fire?

4. If one only of these prodigies should happen now, in what a condition
should we be? If we should see the sun and moon to lose their light, or the
earth to tremble a whole week, in what a trance should we be? how should we
cry-out mercy? what ^ill it be then to see all the aforesaid things together?
And yet they shall be but signs and presages of what shall follow after: they
shall be but the commencement of the sorrows says JESUS in the Gospel. And if
the beginnings are so sorrowful, what shall the progress be? if the shadows and
the figures are so terrible, what will the reality be? if it be so tirrible to
see the Sergeants and the Apparitors that precede the Judge, what will it be to
see the Judge in the heat of his anger, and to be struck with the thunderbolt of
of his sentence.

5. He is now our Advocate, He will be then our Judge, not only to reveng
injuries don to Orphans, Widows, Laborours, and to the Poor: But moreover to
reveng offenses committed against God his Father; He has infinite obligations
to him, a passionate love for him, a most ardent zeal for his glory, is very
sensible of that which offends him, His interests are dear to him, He will have
an ocean of enormous sins to condemn and punish: I leave you to think with what
indignation, with what heat of anger He will be inflamed; It will be so great,
that it will be a horror, and a death to sinners. I will not say, to be
condemned. but to appear in his presence; I will not say, they will not dare,
but they will not be able to subsist in the sight of his Majesty: they will not
be able to think of him; who shall he able to think the day of his Advent? and
who shall stand to malach. 3. 2.
see him? says his Prophet.

6. The terror of him will be so great that the reprobate will desire rather
to be crushed, ground and reduced to dust, then to be presented to the tribunal
of this terrible Judge. they Luke, 23 30.
will say to the mountains, and to the rocks, fall upon us and hide us from the
face of the Lamb: we have abused his meekness, we have obliged him to become a
Lion, we shall not be able to endure the reproaches He will make us; rocks fall
upon us, and crush us to pieces, that we may not be forced to appear in his
presence: hide us from the face of the Lamb: they have cause to fear it, His
presence only will put them to more pain; the rocks would but crush their
bodies: the presence of JESUS will crush their bodies and their souls.

7. They know, they must now render a most punctual and exact acount of all the
Talents, and Goods they received from the liberal hand af God, and of all the
evils they have ever don.

8. They know, they must answer not only for mortal sins, but also for venial,
for little lies, detractions, and derisions of their neighbor in things of small
importance, for words, or unprofitable actions. good God! who would believe our
judge would be so rigorous, as to exact an account of his creatures for an
unprofitable word! If Preachers should affirm it without the Word of God clear
for it, would not men cry-out against them as Impostors?

9. They know they shall be damned, not only for their own sins, but again, for
those of others, to which they contributed; And they see now clearly, that they
contributed to an infinity of sins in others: either before they were
committed, to wit by ill council: or bad example; or when they were committed,
being the cause of them, by putting the objects, or the subjects, or by giving
assistance to commit them. And after they were committed approving, or not
exteriourly disapproving them: or not avoiding the hante of those that
committed them, for to give them a horror of them.

10. They know, they shall not only be comdemn'd for sins of Commission: but
mpreover for sins of Omission: they will expect to hear Go ye accursed into
eternal fire; for I was hungry, I was thirsty, and you have not given me to
eat and drink: I was naked and you have not clothed me. And if they are to be
condemned, for not giving corporal nourishment: how much more for not giving
spiritual? the life of the soul being of more importance a thousand times, then
that of the Body? if those that refuse material bread to poor strangers, shall
be so grievously punished what will become of them, who give not the spiritual
bread of instruction, corection, and good counsel, to their children,
domestics, and strayed neigbours?

11. In fine, they know they shall not only be condemned for sins of omission,
and commission, but shall moreover be answerable for good works which they have
don with any imperfection, which shall be found mixed with any impurity of
intention, with selflove, secret vanity, or any other vicious circumstance; Cum
accepero tempus Ego justitias judicabo; when I shall hold my Psalm. 74 2. sopho.
1. 12.
great day, I will judge also just works; and by his Prophet Sophonias He says:
Scrutabor Jerusalem in lucernis: I will search narrowly the devout soul; and
that no secret crany may escape me, I will light a candle; How then will He
sound a reprobate soul signifyd by Babylon, if He examine so rigorously a devout
soul signifyd by Jerusalem?

12. Sinful souls, I say, know all this and much more; they know also, that
their Judge is not now a Lamb, but is become a Lion: that the time of mercy is
now past, and the time of justice and reveng is com. I leave now you to think,
in what horrible desolation they must be, expecting nothing, but (as the
Prophet Hieremy says) the whirlewind of the Lords indignation Hierem. 23. 19.
Matt. 25. 41.
to com upon them. And what whirlewind, what tempest, what thunderclap, what
Lions roaring shall be this voice? Go ye accursed into eternal fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels* As many words, so many thunderbolts and Anathemas.

13. Depart hence reproved soul! I banish thee for ever from my Paradise, and
from my Grace; Get thee gone strayed sheep. I will be no more thy Pastor: be gone
rebellious servant: I will no more be thy good Master; be gone unnatural child I
will be no more thy Father; be gone adulterous spouse: I will be no more thy
espouse; get thee gone ungratfull creature: thou shall never have any part in my
kingdom, nor in my delights, nor in my amity, nor in my company, nor in any
thing that pertains to me,

Get thee gone thou accursed: I excommunicate and anathematize thee for ever: I
strike thee with the sentence of eternal malediction: thou shall be accursed in
thy understanding, which shall never have a good thought: cursed in thy will,
which shall always rage with spite and desperation: accursed in thy eyes, which
shall never see any light: in thy ears, which shall never hear the harmonious
music of the Angels; cursed in thy mouth, which shall never have one only drop
of water; in thy feet and hands, which shall be always bound: in the chamber
where thou shall dwell. which shall be but a furness: in the company which You
shall have, which shall be but Devils: cursed in every thing that can happen to
thee.

Go accursed into fire, where thou shall not have for lodging, but a prison;
for bed, but coals; for clothes, but flames; for meat, but serpents; for
drink, but gall; for music, but blasphemies; and for rest, but torments.

Get thee gone into fire which shall endure ever: which shall inflame thee and not
light thee; burn thee, and not consume thee; as long as I shall be, I will be
thy enemy, as long as this fire shall be fire, it shall torture thee: as long as
eternity shall endure, thou shall remain in this pain.

Depart, go into the fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: I prepared
it not for thee: it is against my inclination, that I send thee thither: But thou
have transgrest my Commandments, neglected and profaned my Sacraments, abused
my graces, and have been ungrateful for an infinity of favors: go
ungrateful, go accursed, go unfortunate* depart from my presence; I will never
have pity on thee. My Dear Brothers and sisters, behold a shadow, but a very
slender and imperfect one of the sentence which shall be pronounced against the
Reprobate; Think on it if you be wise: think upon, it in the presence of God,
to whom be honor, praise, glory, benediction for ever and ever. Amn.

DISCOURSE XI. OF THE EIGHTH ARTICLE.
I believe in the holy Ghost.
IT is reported in the Acts of the Apostles, that S. Paul Acts. 10.
entering into the Town of Ephesus, and finding there some Faithful, demanded
of them, if they had received the holy Ghost, and they answered, we know not so
much as that there is a holy Ghost. If we should put now the same Question to
many Christians, they might make the same answer, or at least, they might say,
we know not what is the holy Ghost. To exclude and banish far from Christians
an ignorance so pernicious, the Apostles employ this Article to instruct us
concerning his adorable and amiable Person.

2. They teach us, that He is a Person distinct from the Father, and the Son;
since they made us to say before, I believe in God the Father; I believe in
Jesus Christ his Son; and now, I believe in the holy Ghost.

They teach us also, that this Person is God with the Father and the Son: since
they make us say, I belive in the holy Ghost; They do not only make us to
profess, that there is a holy Spirit: But to believe in Him, to reverence Him
as God, and to love him as our sovereign Good.

3. They call him holy Ghost or Spirit: which is common to the Father, and the
Son; For the Father is a most holy Spirit: and the Son likewise is a most holy
Spirit; But they appropriate this name to him: because his Emanation or
Procession is so far above our thoughts, and our expressions, that there is no
language in the world that can express his Person, for want of a proper name:
And because we are accustomed to call those things spirits, of whose origin and
manner of production we are ignorant: So we call the wind, specter, Angels,
and our souls, spirits: and we are likewise very ignorant in the production and
procession of the holy Ghost.

4. Secondly the Apostles appropriate this name to him: because He proceeds
from the Father and the Son, as from one only Source, and not as made or
created, nor as begotten, but produced by the Will, by an ineffable way, which
Divines term Spiration, a breathing and impulse of the Will toward the thing
beloved.

5. Thirdly this name is appropriated to him, because He is the Spirit of our
spirit, the Soul of our soul, the Life of our life: For He is given to the
Souls of the just, to animate and govern them. He is not given so to a Bishop,
or a Priest, in his ordination, if he be in the state of sin: He is not in him,
to sanctify him, but to operate and act by him. Hence it is that a Bishop or a
Priest that is in sin and has not grace, gives nevertheless the grace of God
by the Sacraments, because he is the instrument of the holy Ghost: as a pen
gives to paper characters which it has not, because it is the instrument of the
Writer.

6. The Church moreover appropriated to this glorious and holy Spirit, the name
of Love and Charity, because He is produced by the Will, the author of Love, or
by the mutual love and dilection of the eternal Father and the Son.

7. From this second name which the Church attributes to the holy Ghost,
proceeds the third, which is that of Gift, Donum Dei Altissimi the Gift of the
most high. For that which is do^ by pure love, is do^ freely and liberally, and
donation is a free and liberal action. The two first names appropriated to the
holy Ghost referr him to the Father and the Son; but this of Gift relates him
to Creatures that are capable to receive him and to enjoy him, as are men and
Angels only: and this Gift is the first: the most necessary: and the most
excellent of all gifts that God ever gave, or can give to us.

8. He is the first and cause of all the rest: for there is a great difference
'twixt the love of God, and the love of men. When we love any one, it is because
we find in him some goodness, some beauty, or other Perfection. Gods love
supposes not its object in any creature, but He puts it in them; God begins not
to love us with a love of Benevolence because we are good: but we are good,
because He loves us; so when the eternal Father gives us his only Son in the
Incarnation: He gave us first his Love: and He gave not to us his Son, but by
his holy Spirit, and by his Love: He was conceived of the holy Ghost. So God
loved the world, that He gave his only begotten Son.

9. This Gift is so necessary, that without it all the other Benefits profit
very little: the work of creation is appropriated to the Father; the
Incarnation to the Son, the Sanctification to the holy Ghost; the two first
Benefits are unprofitable to us without the third. In the creation God gave us
Being, He made and designed for our service all the creatures of this world:
But our Savior says to us: What profit has a man, if He should gain the
whole world and lose himself: and he will lose himself infallibly, Luke. 9. 25.
if the holy Ghost sanctifys him not. The Incarnation and the Death of the Son
of God* would not much avail us without the coming of this holy Spirit; the
torments of JESUS would have made him die, and not have made us live: He might
have satisfyd, without restoring us to grace; a king offended by his Vassal,
may receive from him satisfaction, and not receive him into favor, nor restore
him to his former state, and to the privileges which he had lost. When I see
the Savior in the Crib or on the Cross, I know not whether it be to satisfy
only, or moreover to restore us to the rights we lost by sin: when He rises up
again from death, I know not whether it be for recompense of his death, or to
give us life: When He ascends to Heaven, I know not whether it be to give a
convenient place to his Body, or to prepare also a place for us; But when He
sends the holy Ghost to sanctify us: He ascertains us that we reenter into
grace, and that He applys to us his merits, He has sealed us, and given the
pledge of the Spirit in our 2. Cor. 1. 22. 1. Ep. 4. 13.
hearts, says S. Paul. And the beloved Disciple. In this we know that we abide
in him, and He in us, because He of his Spirit has given to us.

10 What admirable favor, and what incomparable grace, that God vouchsafs to
give us his Spirit, Love, divine and admirable Heart: If one should give to a
Philosopher the spirit of Aristotle or of Plato: to an Orator the spirit of
Cicero or Demostenes: to a Physician, the spirit of Hypocrates or of Galen: and
to a Divine the spirit of S. Thomas or of S. Augustine, would not this be a
singular favor? God gives you not the spirit of Aristotle, Cicero, Hypocrates,
but his own Spirit, the Spirit of Verity* Wisdom, and Sanctity. When one has
the heart of a person, one has all; If you be in the state of grace, you have
the heart of God; for properly speaking, the holy Ghost is the heart of God. o
Father of mercies, and Father of the miserable! how deigne you to give them
your heart? It Is that chosen souls are your treasure. and you put your heart
upon your treasure, Quid retribuam Domino?

11. What acknowledgment, what satisfaction, and what return can we make? Love
is not paid but by love: nothing corresponds to a heart but another heart: and
what heart can correspond to the heart of God? What love can answer his? Would
you not desire to be all heart? Would you not wish to have as many millions of
hearts, as there are drops of water, and grains of sand in the sea: would you
not referr, apply, and consecrate them to the love of God? And what would this
be compared to the heart of God, which He has given us? It would be less than
a grain of dust compared to all in Heaven and in Earth. But He desires not so
much; He demands but only one: but He will have it all: He commands you to give
it him: Thou shall love thy God with all thy heart; and if you refuse it him,
He will damn you eternally. What horrible ingratitude is it to give ones heart
to a Creature, to a foolish passion, to a shameful pleasure, and not to love
God after a gift so precious? to refuse him our poor little heart, after He
has given us his? What monstrous malice is it to offend the holy Ghost, who is
the end and the non plus ultra, the Center and the consummation of all the
liberalities, and donations of God to us.

12. His scripture teaches us, that we offend Him in dlvers manners: either
resisting, or in contristating, or affronting him, or by extinguishing him in
our hearts; S. Steven said to the Jews, you resist always the holy Ghost: When
we feel an impuls to rise out of the state of sin, and to convert our selves
seriously Asts. 7 51.
to God, it is the holy Ghost that kno^ks at the door of our hearts; It seems
that He makes it his employment: so assiduous He is to solicit us by his
inspirations; if we consent not to his summons we resist him. When we have
consented to him and He is entered into our hearts, we contristate and afflict
him, if we commit voluntarily and deliberatly a venial sin: All naughty speech,
let it not proceed out of your mouth: and contristate not the holy Ghost, sais
the Apostle. We affront him consenting to Ephesians. 4.
mortal sin, by which we chase him shamefully out of our hearts, and admit into
them the evil spirit, his corrival, and mortal ennemy Such an one has don
contumely to the Spirit of grace, says Heb. 10. 29.
the same Apostle. We extinguish him in our hearts, when we commit the sins
which are directly and diametrically opposite to him: as when we presume of the
mercy of God, and to have pardon of our sins without doing penance for them;
when we are sorry for the virtues of others, which are the works of the holy
Ghost: or when we endeavor to destroy them, mocking those that pray much, that
frequent the Sacraments, that remain long in the church: or when we oppose the
known truth, or contradict it: it is to extinguish in our selves the holy Spirit:
it is to do contrary to this advertisement of S. Paul, The Spirit extinguish
not. ^. Thessalonians. 5. 19.


13. Since then the holy Spirit enters not into our hearts without our free
consent, nor without dispositions convenient for such a Guest: since we are so
obdurat rhat we refuse him entrance, and that we have not only indisposition
and indignity: but opposition and contrariety to his grace: and that when we
have received him we are so weak and miserable, that we often afflict him or
affront him; Let us pray him humbly and fervently to remove all these
impediments: to vanquish our rebellion: to introduce into us by his mercy, the
necessary dispositions: to open himself the door: to enter victoriously into
our souls: to make them worthy sanctuaries where He may dwell in this world by
his grace, and in the other by his Glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XII. OF THE NINTH ARTICLE
I believe the holy Catholic Church the Communion of Saints.
1. THe Apostles by these Words make us to believe that CHRIST has a true
Church or Society of faithful people upon earth: And they oblige us to submit
to all, that this Church proposes to be believed, as a matter or an Article of
Faith.

2. This Submission is so necessary that unless we believe the Church, we
cannot reasonably belive any Point of Faith; Nay we cannot so much as know what
things are to be believed. For we cannot be ascertained and assured, but by the
Church, that they have been revealed.

Some will say, that they are assured by the holy Scripture of what is
revealed, and learn in it, what is to be believed.

3. But how know they which is holy Scripture? And how know they, that the
Gospells are the Word of God? God never appeared to them, to tell them, this
Book printed in such a place is my Word, is my Scripture. The Bible also says
not, I am holy Scripture; And if also it should say so, it should be in this
suspected: since it gives testimony of it self: and another book might say I am
the Word of God, I am holy Scripture, and we ought not to believe it.

They will say, the Scripture is known by its own light, to be divine: or a
light within them, makes them see that it is the Word of God.

4. If this were so: How could it com to pass that there should be hardly one
book of Scripture, that has not been rejected; The Marcionits rejected the
five Books of Moses: the Manicheans rejected the Prophets: the Albigenses, the
Psalms, and all the ancient Testament: the Ebionites received but one of the
four Gospells, to wit the Gospel of S. Matthew: the Cardonites admitted but
one part of the Gospel of S. Luke: Luther rejected the Book of Job,
Ecclesiastes, the Epistle to the Hebrews, that of S. James, and that of S.
Jude: the second of S. Peter, the two last of S. John, and the Apocalypse: all
which books the Calvinists and our Protestants in England admit as holy
Scripture.

How coms it, that Protestants in England and in France do see diverse books to
be the Word of God, which Protestants in Germany and other parts do not?

And How does the whole Catholic world admit diverse bocks to be Canonical,
which Protestants reject as Apocryphal? If there were any such light in the
Books by which they discover themselves to be certainly divine: or in men by
which they see them to be the word of God: all must necessarily see the same
Books to be Canonical: and all would acknowledge the Lib. cont. Epist.
Fundamenti Cap. 5.
same: since the same Faith is necessary for all; And S. Austin would not have
said, that He would not believe the Gospel, if the authority of the Church did
not move him to it: for he would have seen them to be divine.

Must we not then necessarily believe the Church and learn of her which is holy
Scripture, And what is to be believed? And since we have not the original of
one only Canonical Book: must we not believe the Church and trust her for a
faithful Copy?

5* But suppose that God gave the Bible in English, and that He said, this
Bible printed at London is his Scripture; I say again, that we must yet believe
the Church and rely on her for the sense and meaning of it. For S. Peter in the
same Bible sais, 1. Pet. 3. 16.
in the Epistles of S. Paul there are things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and the unstable deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures, to
their own perdition. Note perdition. Have not Disputes controversies and
contests always risen concerning the sense and meaning of them, and that in
matters of the greatest importance? Have not the best copies of the Bible been
consulted, and all passages conferred, the controversies still remaining and
increasing?

Do we not see that diverse and contrary Parties do confidently affirm that
they have the true sense and understanding of the Scriptures: and that
consequently they make to themselves Faiths, Religions, and models of
Government to the utter destruction, of Unity, Peace, and Charity it self? Is
it not then Necessary for the avoiding of Heresies, and Divisions, and for the
preservation of Unity and Peace, to harken also in this part to the Church, and
to adhere to her sense of the holy Scripture? Wherefore the Apostles oblige us
to follow her, and to rest in her judgments; to dispute against whom. S.
Austin with great reason, tells us, is Ep. 1
insolent madness.

And lest we might doubt which among all the Societies of men in the Christian
world, is the dwelling place of Faith, the spring of truth, an the true Church
of the living God; the Apostles mark her out to us by three evident Notes,
which are proper to her, and distinguish her from all other Churches; they
teach us that she is One, Holy, Catholic.

6. First they teach us that She is One: for they make us not to say, I believe
Churches, but, I believe the Church; which is the kingdom of the Son of God,
his flock, and mystical Body. You never find in the Gospel, that the Son of
God has many kingdoms, many flocks, many mystical Bodies; But always one
kingdom, one sheepfold, one mystical Body. In S. Matt. 4. 23. Chapter 13. 41. John.
10. 16. Romans 12. Ephesians. 4. v. 4
Matthew, JESUS went about preaching the Gospel of the kingdom. And again He
says in the Same Gospel, that He will send his Angels, and they shall gather
all scandalls out of his kingdom. There shall be made one fold and one Pastor.
We being many are one Body in Christ, One Lord, one Faith, One Baptism.

7. I demand now the Church of England, is it the true Church? if so: the
Protestant Church in Holland is not: that in Germany is not: that in France is
not; there is but one true Church, and these are many; they have nothing that
unites them: they depend not one of another, they have not the same Superior.

But among Catholics, many Bishoprics, many Republics, Nations, and Kingdoms
are one Church, because they are united in the same Spiritual Head, or supreme
Pastor.

8. You will say, that which unites us is Faith: we are one Body by the Unity
of Faith. But besides that this Unity (which also excludes not Schismatics) is
not enough to make one Church: We need not but look into the books of Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius to know the war they make with one another: We need not but
to read the Works of their successors to see their disagreement in Points of
the greatest importance. There is nothing for example, so important to Faith,
as to know which are the Canonical Books, in which we ought to learn the
Christian Verities, and they agree not, as we have seen, in them. And if they
agree not about the prime Principle: How can agreement be expected in the
things which are drawn from thence? Many differences might be named, about most
important matters; their pursuit also of those differences demonstrats they do
not judge them light: which stretches to the condemning one another for
Heretics, and Schismatics, and sometimes to breaking into open arms one
against another.

9. But Catholics however divided by country, language, particular interest,
civil dissentions, or war: Yet agree exactly in all points of Faith; If you go
to France, Spain, Poland, Italy, or the Indies: You will see that they teach
the same Doctrine, that they make every where the same Catechismes.

10. And are not there, some will say to me, Thomists, Scotists, And other
Parties who dispute continually? Yes, but this is not, but in school
difficulties, in Philosophical Points, in Questions grounded upon humane
reason: as concerning Articles of Faith, All agree in them: not one
contradicts: not one questions them.

11. Secondly the Apostles teach us that the true Church is holy* I believe the
holy Church; This is not to say, that All that are therein are Saints; For she
is the field of the husbandman, Matt. 3. 21. Matt. 13. 47. Ron. 9. 21
where the Cockle is mixed with good corn. She is the net which takes and holds
bad fish with the good. She is the house, where there are Vessels of ignominy
with those of honor. She is the Arc of the true Noah, where there are clean
and unclean animalls. Genesis 7. 2*
But the true Church is holy, because she has means to Sanctify her self, and
many obtain it by those means. We ask it there, and obtain it of God, by
Sacrifice: It is given by Sacraments; conserved by the observance of the
commandments of God: increased by the practice of good and virtuous works.

12. But Reformers have forbidden all these ways: they have abolished among
them the only sacrifice of the Mass; they have diminished the Sacraments: of
seven that CHRIST instituted, they retain but two: Baptism and the Eucharist,
which also they have made almost unprofitable. For they say that Baptism is
not necessary for their children, and so deprive them often of this remedy, to
the exclusion of them out of the kingdom of Heaven, according to the express
words of the Son of God. They have used yet wors the Eucharist; instead of the
real Presence John. 3. 5.
of our Lord and Savior, Source of all sanctity, who sanctifys our souls and
bodies in this Sacrament: they have not in their supper but a morcel of bread,
an inefficatious and empty Sacrament, which contains not what it signifiys.

13. As concerning the Commandments, besyds that they preach but those which
Moses gave, and not those which JESUS CHRIST added to sanctify his Church: they
say, that they are impossible, also with the grace of God. And what man will
undertake to execute that which he judges to be impossible?

14. As touching good Works, they deny the worth and merit of them; And who
will undergo difficulty to practice good works, when he believes that they have
no worth or merit: that faith only justifys, and suffices to salvation; if
these principles do not usher in the neglect of all good works: it is not
because the Doctrins do not afford it, but because they act by some other
motives. What Sanctity then may one expect, where there is no Sacrifice, to
obtain it of God: No efficatious Sacraments, where by to receive it: No
possibility to obey the Commandments of God, to preserve it: no good works to
increase it? So they say not, S. Luther, S* Calvin, S. Beza, as they say S.
Gregory, S Bernard, S. Bonaventure, whom they confess to have been of the Roman
Church; and experience shows, that there are none so holy, so virtuous, so
perfect: None so devout toward God, charitable toward their neighbor, so
sober, chaste, modest, and humble, as are innumerable Souls, who live entirely
according to the maxims and the instructions of the Catholic Church.

15. Thirdly, the Apostles teach us, that the true Church of CHRIST is
Catholic: that is to say Universal, or general: and the Apostles by putting
this word oblige us to follow that Church whose Faith and Religion is received,
and publicly professed, the longest Time: by the most Persons: and in most
Places: and so the Faith of the Roman Church has been.

16. Read but the Annals of Baronius, or of Gualterus: or The longuest Time.
the works of Bellarmin, or Coccius, and You will see that ever-since the
Apostles, the Church has had from age to age the same Articles of Faith, which
the Roman Church teaches at this present. Reformers confess that during the
first four hundred years, the Roman was the true Church: if this Present were
new: they ought to show, who was the first Author of this novellty: what was
the new doctrine that was taught: in what time: and in what place: from what
Church the Roman did separate, when she embraced this new doctrine: and who were
they that opposed this novellty? These things are noted in every little
alteration of Religion: and one cannot show them in the great pretended changes
of the Faith of the Roman Church.

17, All those that have been converted to the Faith of CHRIST, By the most
persons
and have embraced Christian Religion, have always taken the Roman, and were
converted by Romanists; Other Religions convert not infidells, and have never
extended the Empire of JESUS in any Province of the Earth.

18. We must put out our Eyes, and burn all Histories, not In most Places.
to see that the Roman Church only has been extended in all the places where
JESUS CHRIST is or has been adored: and that no other Congregation of
Christians has ever had public exercise of Religion throughout the world. But
we may read in S. Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and S. Athanasius that in
their times the Catholic Church was already in all the inhabited Earth: and
this in accomplishment of what David had often foretold, saying that the Reign
and Empire of JESUS CHRIST, that is to say, CHRIST'S Church should be extended
throughout all the earth; I will give thee Gentills for thy inheritance, and thy
possession the ends of the Earth; He Psalm. 2. Psalm. 71.
shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river even to the end of the round
world.

19. Follow then the Faith of the Roman and Catholic Church, since these
Notes evidently agree to Her, and to no other church: Heb. 11. 6.
and since with out true and entire Faith; *it is impossible to please God.

20* Have and hold inviolable Unity with this Church, since all Faith without
this Unity will not save You: There is but one Universal Church out of which
nobody is saved said the great Council of Lateran, consisting of a 1215.
Fathers. And S. Paul Gallatians 5. 20
himself, does teach expressly, that not Sects only, but also Dissentions,
Divisions or Seperations shall not possess the kingdom of God. Wherefore S.
Cyprian in the book of Unity says, Whosoever seperats from the true Church, is
excluded from the promises of the Church, and who has abandoned the Church of
CHRIST shall never com to receive the recompenses of CHRIST: He is a stranger,
he is profane, he is an enemy of God; for He connot have God for his Father,
who has not the Church for his Mother. S. Chrysostom testifys, that separation
from the In Ep. ad Ephesians. 4. p. 822. de papt. cont. Don. lib. 1. c. 8. lib. 2.
c. 6.
Church, or dividing of it, is no less sin then falling into heresy, nay S.
Austin holds that it is greater then that of infidelity and Idolatry; and for
proof of what he says, he alleadges the example of Core, Dathan, and Abiron,
and other Schismatics of the ancient Testament, who were sent living into
hell, and punished more rigorously than Idolaters: who doubts, says he, that
this was committed more criminally, which was revenged more severely* But he
says things, yet more terrible; for he assures us, that all they that are not
in the true Church, though they live extraordinarily well, tho they give great
alms, and also shed their Ep. 152. and. lib. 4. de Bap.
blood for the love of JESUS CHRIST, if they die out of the Church, nothing
will profit them, but shall be damned eternally. All those that were out of the
Arc of Noah which was a figure of the Church, perished by the deluge. Only
they that labored in the vineyard reciv'd the recompense of the penny, that
is eternal life. Members that remain not united to the body, cannot have life.
Branches cut of from the tree, cannot bringforth fruit. JESUS CHRIST is the
Savior of his Body, which is the Church. He is the Espouse of the Church, and
cannot have or acknowledge other children, then those of his Spouse.

21. Let us then resolve to live and die in the bosom of the Catholic or
Roman Church. There we may avoid damnation: there we shall be assisted to obtain
Salvation; For there is Communion af Saints: that is, communication of good
works, and of prayers; There then every one may help his neighbor: the Living
may succor also the Dead in Purgatory: and the Saints in Heaven can help by
their merits and their prayers, sinners upon Earth; Amen.

DISCOURSE XIII. OF THE TENTH ARTICLE
The Forgiveness of Sins.
1. HE that should know well the monstrous nature and malice of Sin: the
ingratitude, impudence, and insolence of the sinner: the infinite Greatness,
Sanctity, and Majesty of him against whom it is committed: and should also
know, what the Scripture expressly tells us, that a God is thereby irritated,
exasperated, put into anger and fury against the sinner; such an one I say,
could not by any light of reason hope for pardon: it would seem to him
impossible, that sins committed against God, should be remitted: and he would
need the light of Faith to believe that a sinner may obtain remission of them.
Who would ever think that a God, who has need of none: who had not respect to
the celestial Principalities, and who spared not so great a number of noble
Spirits, but condemned them all without exception, to eternal flames, would
show favor to worms of the earth, to so ungrateful and base creatures, after
they have so many, and so many times offended Him, multiplying sins upon sins,
and reiterating the same sins? Here then we have need of Faith; and therefore
the Apostles make us to believe, that God will pardon sins; and since they
except none, that He will remit all sorts of them, how ever great and enormous
they may be, by the Sacrament of Baptism: and after by Absolution, as often as
we shall do true penance for them.

2. Here we meet with an error, and one of the most great, and most pernicious
of some Reformers. They say, that it belongs not to a sinner to absolve others
from their sins: and that it is an injury to the Son of God, to ask pardon of
our sins of any other. On this account, they do ill in believing, that they
being sinners, can by Baptism wash away the sins of others: and do injury to
the Son of God, by going themselves, or by carrying their children to their
Ministers to have their sins remitted by this Sacrament: since it belongs to
the Son of God to wash away sins by Baptism. Heaven declared this Verity to S.
John Baptist: Upon whom thou shall see the holy Ghost John. 1. 33.
descending, He it is, that Baptizes. But who is so weak, that does not answer
easily, that they baptize on the part of God, in his Name, and by his Command:
that they go not to their Ministers, as men, but as God's Deputies and
Vicegerents to be baptized? I say the same of Absolution: we absolve from sins,
not of our own selves: but in the Name of God: as his Deputies, and Ministers,
by the Power, Authority, and Commission which He has given us.

3. Behold the Commissions and Patents of it, Whatsoever You shall Matt. 18.
unbind on earth shall he unbound in heaven; and in Saint John, Whose sins you
shall forgive, they are forgiven them; And whose You John. 20.
shall retain, they are retained.

These words of our Savior are as clear as the Sun: but let us suppose they
have need of interpretation; To whom shall we recurr for the interpretation of
them? To one that came a 100 or sixscore years ago, or to the ancient Fathers
of the first ages, when according to Reformers themselves the Church was in her
purity? S. Chrysostom speaks great things upon this subject, Lib. 3 de
Sacerdotio.
and seems to have foreseen all the evasions of Reformers. First he says, that
the Son of God communicated to his Apostles the same power that He received
from his Father; and this great Saint speaks so, after our Savior himself; For
in the same time He said to his Disciples, whose sins you shall remit, they are
remitted: He said to them, I send you, as my Father sent me; But our Savior had
not only power to declare that sins are remitted by faith, but He had power
also to remit them. In the second place S. Chrysostom says: If a king should
give to a favourit power to imprison, and to deliver prisoners, what favor
would this be? Yet this would be nothing if compared with the power of Priests;
there is as much difference 'twixt these powers, as between heaven and earth
Thirdly he says, that the Priests of the old Law, had not power, but to judge
the leaprosie of the body, and to judge of it only, not to cure it; ours have
power to judge of sin, which is the leaprosie of the soul, and also to cure her
of it Aug. hom 49. ex. 50. S. Amb. Lib. 1. de Penit. c. 7.
S. Austin says, let no body flatter himself, saying, I confess in my heart, I
confess to God: this is not enough: and on this account, in vain the Son of God
would have said to Priests: All that you shall unbind on earth And S. Ambrose
speaking to the Novatians who said that men have not power to remit sins, says,
Why baptize you if men have not power to remit sins? for Baptism is the
remission of sins; and what if Priests attribute to themselves the power that
is given them, either by Baptism, or by Penance?

Let us leave Dissenters: and consider the wonders of this Power, that we may
with those in the Gospel glorify God, who gave such power to men. I confess
that there are not many Misteryes in our Matt. 9.
Religion which I more admire than this; and you will admire it with me, if you
consider with me the circumstances of it.

4. The first is, that this Power is Divine, it pertains not properly but to
him who received an injury to remit and pardon it; It belongs then to God to
remit offenses against him. Wherefore the Pharisees hearing our Savior say to
the Paralitick, thy sins are forgiven thee, and not believing that He was God,
thought that He blasphemed. What would they have then thought? what wou^d they
have said, if they had known, as we know, that JESUS CHRIST would give to men,
and to sinful men, this Power?

5. A Power in the second place so sovereign, that it is definitive without
appeal. The sentences which Priests pronounce, and all that they justly ordain
on earth, is ratifyd infallibly in heaven. When you have confessed with necessary
dispositions, if the Priest say to you, I absolve thee etc. fear not that God
will condemn you: He cannot fail in his promise; and He promised to absolve
you, if the Priest absolve you legitimatly.

6. And this is don with so much Authority and Majesty, that this Power is
perfectly Royal; for the Priest absolves not praying: If he should say over you
the misereatur only, or should pray God to absolve you, you would not be
absolved; JESUS CHRIST wills that he say, I absolve thee; and heaven and earth
shall melt rather than you shall fail of absolution, how ever great and enormous
your sins may be.

7. This is a fourth Circumstance of this Power, that it is most ample,
absolute and general, without exception, restriction, or modification; For
there is no sin which the Church cannot remit: since the Son of God has said
absolutely and without reserve: Whose sins you shall remit, shall be remitted.

8. But that which is to be admired most in this Power, is the facility and
convenience we have to use it. It Is true, that having committed a sin, it is
not so easy as some think, to have a true repentance of it; We must ask it
instantly of God, and endeavor to obtain it of him by good works. But when we
have obtained it what is more easy than to find a Priest, who may absolve us?
Have we not great cause to be astonished, and to cry out? my God! How have you
been so liberal, as to give this Power to your Church, and to so many Priests?
If you had given it but to the Pope, or to Patriarks, or to Bishops, or for one
only time of the life of each one: the excess of liberality would not have
seemed so great; but for always, for so many times, and to so many Priests:
What excess of love, of grace, and mercy? o how will a soul that considers well
thi^ Benefit melt with dilection? how will she burn with the love of such a
Benefactor? How often will she kiss those sacred wounds? How often will she
bless that adorable Blood, which purchased her so great a good? How often will
she say, my soul bless thou our Lord. On the contrary, What regretts shall we
have in hell, if we are damned, for having neglected, contemned, or profaned
so great a Benefit?

The devout Rupertus was wont to say, he had no pity on Christians that were
damned; and when one said to him, why have you not? if a dog should be so
afflicted, we should be moved to compassion. I have none, said he, for it is
their fault, they have well deserved it: since they might have saved themselves
so easily.

9. But th'o we have so much convenience to make use of this great Benefit, and
to help our selves by this Power; Yet if we should be so ill advised, as to
lose the grace of God by consenting to a mortal sin, we should hazard our
salvation. Wherefore the Royal Prophet advises us, that if we have innocence,
to take great care to keep it: to be solicitous not to offend God: and for
Psalm. 36.
this effect, to remember, that He is just: and that his justice obliges him to
punish sinners: and to favor and save the Just. Beware to say when temptation
solicits you: J'le taste the sweetness of this pleasure: I will satisfy my
desire: when I have taken my pleasure, and contented my passion I will do
penance: I Will go to confession and be absolu'd. Will you do penance? you might
do it, if it depended but on you: if you could do it of your self. But the Son
of God says to you in the Gospel, You can do nothing without me; you cannot
then do penance, if God does John. 15.
not make you do it: you cannot have repentance, if God does not give it to
you. This gift is an effect of his benevolence, and You provoke his vengeance
by your sin; it is an effect of his goodness: and you draw severity; it is an
effect of his mercy: and you irritate his anger; The ordinary effect of his
anger is to abandon a sinful soul: to deliver her up to the tyranny of her
passions: to let her fall from sin into sin, from precipice into precipice; The
people Isa. 64. 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
said to him in Isaiah, You are angry and we are fallen into sin, we are become
unclean And He himself in Deuteronomie, The Vengeance that I will take of them
is that I will permit that they do fall, And yet more terribly by Ezechiel, if
the Just shall be turned from his Justice, and shall do iniquity, I will lay a
stumblingblock before Ezec. 3. 20.
him; Snares shall be laid, and occasions of sin Will be given you by the
permission of God: who will also substract from you his efficacious grace in
punishment of your sins.

10. S. Chrysostom, S. Basil and other Fathers Speaking of the Chrysostom. hom. 3.
in Ep. ad Heb. S. Basil. de Humil. in med.
sin of S. Peter, who denied so weakly and deplorably his Master say, that our
Savior left him in his own weakness, and permitted him to fall in punishment
of his rashness: because he had presumed of himself, and said, though all the
rest should abandon their Master he would die with him, rather then deny him;
if God let S. Peter fall into a mortal sin, in punishment of a venial: have you
not reason to fear, that in punishment of a mortal sin which you commit, He
will let you fall into another: and in punishment of the second, into a third,
fourth, fifth, and into other sorts of crimes, as Cain, Pharao, Saul, and in
fine into obduration.

11. But you will say, the grace of God is so powerful, that there is no
understanding so blind, but He can enlighten it: no heart so hard, but He can
soften it: no will so rebellious but He can overcom it; It Is true; But God has
not promised his Victorious grace to any sinner in particular: He owes it to
none: and He refuses it to many.

12. But has not our Savior said, I will not reject him that coms to me? Yes,
but He adds, Nobody coms to me unless my Father draw him.

13. But S. Austin Says. Are not you drawn? pray God to draw you; and the Son
of God makes us this promise: Ask and you shall receive: Yes, you shall receive
all that you ask as you ought and as God wills you to ask: otherwise you will
obtain nothing; for S. James says to many of us: you ask and James. 4. 3.
you receive not; because you ask amiss; You ask not so much, nor in the manner,
as a thing so precious deserves to be demanded, says S. Augustine. Solomon
prayed God to give him Continence, and he asked it not slackly or tepidly, but
with his whole heart as the Scripture tells us: and yet he obtained it not; he
became about his old age, most carnal and voluptuous: because he asked it not
with that confidence and perseverance, which God required of him; As when the
holy Scripture Says: He that shall invocate the name of our Lord, shall be saved:
this is not to say, all they that invocate him in what manner soever; but they
that invocate him with the faith, piety, and purity of conscience that God
requires. Do you not then see, that by consenting to a mortal sin, You hazard
your salvation, that you endanger your happy eternity? You may be surprised in
this state by a sudden and unprouided death, which arrives daily by so many
accidents. If it should not: Yet you will not get out of this mire, if God draw
you not out of it; and He being not obliged: it is a doubtful case whether or
no He will; All the assurance you have of it is a perhaps; If you commit the
sin, perhaps God will draw you out of it, exercising his mercy in respect of
you: perhaps he will leave you in it, exercising his justice upon you; the
first is not more to be hoped, then the second is to be feared. Nay, experience
makes us see, that in this case more are the objects of his justice, then of
his mercy; for we find more that fall into the second, third, or hundredth sin,
then they that truly rise after the first; And if you have difficulty to resist
a temptation now, when you are powerfully assisted by God: how will you when
these great helps shall be drawn from you? If you do not when you are free: how
will you when you are a slave of sin? If you do not when you are well covered
and armed with the grace of God, and gifts of the holy Ghost: how will you when
you shall be naked and unarmed? If you do not when you are strong and in good
health: how will you do it when you shall be weak and wounded? Are you then in
the state of grace? Say as holy Job, and do as he, till I fail, I will not
depart from my innocence, Job. 27. 5.
my justification which I have begun to hold, I will not forsake Amen.

DISCOURSE XIV. OF THE ELEVENTH ARTICLE
The Resurrection of the flesh.
IT was so necessary that this Article should be well established in our faith:
that after the Apostles had made the Faithful to profess it in their Creed: S.
Paul yet proves it by many Arguments: He solves also the objections that might
be made against it: and assures us so much of it, that he says, if our Bodies do
not rise again, neither is CHRIST Cor. 1. 15. Cor. 2. 5. 10.
risen up again And in the second to the Corinthians We must all be manifested
before the judgment seat of CHRIST, that every one may receive the proper
things of the body according as he has don, either good or evil. For justice
requires that we be recompensed, and chastised in the same things which have
contributed to good or evil; But the greater part of sins are caused or
Committed by the body: it is then reason that it rise again and feel the
punishments due to them. It concurrs likewise to virtuous actions: it is
mortifyd by holy souls, subjected to rigours of penance, and to labors of a
christian life: it sufferrs prisons and punishments in Confessors: torments and
death in Martyrs: it is deprived of its pleasures in Virgins, and in Widows, and
crucifyd in all true Christians; it is then very just that it should
participate in the satisfactions, pleasures, and recompenses of Heaven. The
flesh, says Tertullian, is the Tertull. de Resur. Carnis.
hinge of our salvation, and if the soul be united to God, it is it that gives
her capacity; the flesh is washed to the end the soul be cleansed: the flesh is
anointed, that the soul be consecrated: the flesh is shadowed by imposition of
hands, that the soul be illuminated in Spirit: the flesh is fed with the Body
and Blood of JESUS CHRIST to the end the soul be nourished by God; they cannot
then be separated in recompenses having been so joined in actions.

And it is vain to alleadg against this Verity the low condition of the flesh;
for the same Father says: the flesh which God formed to the resemblance of a
man-God: which He animated by his breath, to the resemblance of his life: which
He fortifyd with his Sacraments: of which He loves the purity, approves the
austerity, and esteems the labors and the sufferances, shall it not rise again?
It will never be that He leave in eternal death the works of his hands, the
care of his Spirit, the tabernacle of his Breath, the heir of his Liberalities,
the keeper of his Law, the Victime of his Religion, and the Sister of his
CHRIST: It will then be raised up again; and in this, God does as a Potter: who
seeing his Pot ill made, breaks it, to repair it better; so God having formed
man of earth, and finding him depraved by sin, broke him by death, to which he
doomed him: but with design, to repair and make him better, in the day of the
Resurrection.

2. But if any one should ask me, how that which is withered and rotten, can
become living and flourishing again? He needs not but to consider the
Omnipotency of the Creator: or with S. Paul the grain of corn, which rots, to
rise again: Fool, 1. Cor. 15. Cgrysol. Ser. 59.
it first do die. All things in this world, according to S. Chrysologue are
images of our Resurrection: the Sun sets, and rises: the day is buried in
darkness, and returns: months, years, seasons, fruits, seeds, die in passing,
and rise again returning; and to touch you with a sensible example, as often as
you sleep and wake, you die in a certain manner, and rise again. Let us now
reflect upon the words of this Article.

3. The Apostles say not The Resurrection of the man, though this he true, But
of the flesh: for to teach us that when the man dies, his soul dies not: and
therefore in the Resurection, is nor raised-up again: but reunited only to the
body; since nothing can be raised again to life, unless it first be dead.

4. They say not the Resurrecton of the body, but of the flesh because the holy
Ghost would afford us a means to Confute the error of certain Heretics, who
would sustain, as in the first ages of the Church some did, that we should
rise, not in a body of flesh, but formed of air.

5. They use moreover these terms, to convince orhers, who in the time of the
Apostles thought, that the Resurrection of which the Scripture speaks, signifys
not that of the body, but only that by which the Soul is raised out of the
death of sin to the life of grace.

6. In fine, this word Resurrection makes us understand, that we shall receive
the same bodies which we had; for since rising again signifys returning to life
again: It must be the same flesh which was dead, that rises and returns to life.

7. We All then shall have the same bodies which now we have, but entire and
perfect, without want or superfluity: without the imperfection of youth, or the
defect of old age; None shall rise blind or purblind, deaf or dumb, lame or
crooked, too great, or too little: nor with any other defect or imperfection.
Because it is God alone, whose works are perfect, that will raise us up: He will
not in this work make use of natural causes, from which all defects proceed.

8. Nevertheless the Resurrection of the Elect, and that of the Reprobate will
be very different; The blessed Souls shall receive bodies like to Christ's,
endowed with Light, Subtility, Agility* and Impassibility: that will shine as
clear as Stars: that will penetrate and pass through althings, as beams of the
Sun through glass: that will move as swiftly, as lightning. That will be
impassible and immortal, so that nothing in the world can hurt them. They will
enter into their bodies with great joy and gladness: with many benedictions and
congratulations: o my body! such a soul will Say: o my dear companion and most
faithful friend! receive now with joy, the fruit of thy labors,
mortifications, and pains in the works of holiness: thou have been in miseries,
and in sufferances: be thou now in felicity and in happiness: and let us praise
together the Author of our good. but the reprobate Souls will reenter into
their bodies with great a version, rage, and many maledictions of those members
which they go to animate. for to render them sensible of ineffable and eternal
torments.

Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo, aut quis requiescet in monte sancto
tuo? Lord, says the Royal Prophet, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? or who
shall rest in thy holy hill? He answers, Psalm. 14.
Qui ingreditur sine macula and operatur justitiam. He declares that two things
are absolutely necessary; to avoid evil: and to do good: one without the other
suffices not; Quis habitabit? who shall be that happy, that fortunate person,
that shall com to the glorious Resurrection, and shall dwell amongst the Blessed?
O what happy lot attends him! happy a thousand times the womb that bore him,
and the breasts which He did suck! happy the pains taken to bring him up, o
how well was it employed! happy earth that he tramples under feet: one ought to
strew with flowers the paths which he honors with his steps: happy air that
he breaths! one ought to sweeten it with all the perfumes of Arabia; happy the
bread which he eats: one ought to nourish him with all that is most precious
in nature; and what deserves he not who is Wisdom 3. 5.
worthy of God? Invenit illos dignos se. Blessed a thousand times his holy and
virtuous life, which disposes him to such a glory; blessed his happy death,
which will be to him as a door to enter into an immortal life: Blessed his
understanding, which shall see one day openly and face to face the divine
Essence! his Will, that will love God and enjoy him for all Eternity! Blessed a
thousand times his head, upon which the holy Trinity will put a Crown of Glory
in the presence of the Universe: Blessed and happy his hands, which shall carry
always palms, as the ensigns of his Victories; Blessed his feet, and his
steps, since he shall walk upon the celestial Glob, in the company of Angels;
Blessed, and happy a thousand times all the members of his body, and the powers
of his soul, which shall be filled and satiated with all sorts of delights,
joys, glory, happiness, and with eternal Beatitude. What I say of this elect
Soul, I say to every one that shall do violence to himself to rise out of the
state of sin: to overcom his passions, to keep the commandments, and to live
according to the maxims of the Gospel: Violenti rapiunt illud: the Matthew 11.
12.
Violent bear heaven away, they that do violence to themselves, to their
vices, and their passions, obtain Heaven. God grant us the grace, to whom be
honor, glory, praise, and benediction for ever Amen.

DISCOURSE XV. OF THE TWELFTH ARTICLE.
Life Everlasting. Amen.
IN this last Article is declared to us the End, for which we were created, for
which we were made Christians, and to which all Laws, Sacraments, Virtues, and
other things are directed; we ought then to believe firmly, and to ruminate
often, that after the Resurrection there shall be in the Universe two conditions,
the one most happy, the other most miserable, and that neither of them shall
ever end; that every one of us shall be either of the one, or of the other: of
the right hand, or of the left: of the number of the good, or of the bad: of
them that go to heaven, or of those that go to hell: And that it is now the time
to look to our affairs, fitting our selves to be of the happy side: for after
this, there shall be no more time for us. This doubtless we shall do, if we
consider and ponder well: What is Eternal Life? and how great are the goods of
it?

2. S. John in the Apocalypse speaking of sinners, says, their Apoc. 28. 8.
part shall be in the pool burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. The second or everlasting death then is, when the soul and the body are
deprived of their Beatitude, and confind to the fire of hell. And on the
contrary, eternal life is, when they are freed from those and all other evils,
and do enjoy the eternal Goods of heaven.

3. These are so great, that the Apostle, who was rapt up into heaven, would
not describe the Greatness of them: he speaks not of them but with
astonishment: neither eye has seen, says he, nor ear has heard, nor has the
heart of man conceived, what God ^ath prepared for them that love him.

Nevertheless, for to attain to some knowledge, or rather to some slender
conjecture of their greatness: fourt hings shall be considered.

4. First the liberality of God toward all men in this life: cast the eyes of
your consideration with S: Austin* upon the extent of the Universe: see what
stately buildings there are: what chambers richly furnished: what beauteous
gardens: what pleasant medows: what odoriferous and colored Flowers: what
sorts of savory fruits: what delicious meats: what delicate wines: what sweet
odours: what melodious voices: what sumptuous garments: what dogs for chase:
what birds of prey, for recreation: It is God that gives all these things to
men; But to what men? And who are they that more usually enjoy them? Atheists,
Infidells and others that forget him, and incessantly offend him. Now if He do
so much good to his enemies, what will he reserve for his friends? If He be so
liberal to give: how much more to recompense? if He be so charitable to those
that offend him: how much more to those who love him? if He be so magnificent
to those He owes but punishments: how much more to those to whom He has made
so many promises? Run through in your mind all that you have ever seen, heard,
or imagined: all that is great, rich magnificent, precious, pleasant, and
desirable: all that is nothing if compared with that which God has prepared
for you, if you love him; for all that may be seen, recounted, or desired: and
it is impossible to see decipher, or desire the great goods which God has
promiss'd, and prepared for those that love him.

5. To have a second conjecture of them, you need not but weigh and consider
the iourneys and toils of Apostles: the torments of Martyrs: the watchings and
austerities of confessors: the temptations, combats, and Victories of Virgins:
the alms and charities of Widows: the heroical virtues of other Saints: and
that after so many toils, so many sufferances, penances, mortifications, good
works, services, merits, the Apostle says, that Romans 8. 18.
the very sufferances and afflictions themselves of this life, are little in
comparison with the glory of heaven. And again, the tribulation which at
present is momentary and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory in us: note above measure exceedingly. 2. Ior. 4. 17.


6. Nevertheless a third consideration will make this weight of glory to
surpass yet much more all value and esteem of it; For Heaven is not only the
Salary of the Saints, but also the recompense of the merits of JESUS; Consider
what He is in his divine Person: what He is with God his Father: the ardent
love He had for him, the Zeal which He had for his Glory: the great services He
did him: what He suffered for his honor, what his precious Blood is worth; the
Glory of Heaven is the Salary of all that, given by a King most liberal in his
gifts, and most magnificent in his recompenses.

7. Hell also, though very low, may serve us for a footstool and a step to
mount up to Heaven by contemplation, and to make a guess at the felicities of
it. What is hell? it is an abyss, a Collection, a Rendevow of the most excessive
sorrows, bitternesses and afflictions imaginable. What is it to be damned? It Is
to be eternally in a prison most deep, most obscure, and most incommodious: to
be eternally in captivity, under a Tyrant most insolent, most cruel, and most
barbarous: not to have one mite of bread in an eternal and most ravenous
hunger: not a drop of water, in a most burning thirst: not a ray of light in
the greatest darkness: not a moment of rest in an unsuportable and eternal
weariness: to be eternally afflicted with all the miseries a humane body is
capable: to be continually burning in a most violent fire without consuming. To
be in an eternity of regret, sorrow, vexation, rage, and horrible despair; It
is so great a good to be exempted from these pains, that according to S.
Austin, and S. Gregory, the justice of God leaves the reprobate in those
miseries, that the elect may know their great happiness and felicity in being
freed from them, by the grace of God: Vt liberatus de non liberato discat quale
supplicium sibi conveniret, nisi gratia subveniret; And they shall not only be
perfectly delivered from them: but they shall have quite contrary favors: and
not the contrary only, which we may possibly conceive: but moreover such as
cannot com into the thoughts of a mortal man. When then the Scriptures tell us
that the Saints possess God perfectly: that this infinite Good holding the
place of all things satisfies all their desires, and makes their souls most
happy: that they shall be brought into the house of God with eternal joy and
gladness: and that they shall be inebriated with the plenty of his house, and in
the torrent of his pleasures He will make them drink: all these and the like
expressions give us only some obscure notions, imperfect images, or shadows of
that ineffable Glory, which has not ascended, as the Apostle says, into our
hearts.

8. And it is not only the Vision and the Fruition of God, the joy and
delectation which flow from them, which the Apostle speaks of in those words;
But also the particular joys, and accidental glorys and Laurells that Saints
shall have given them there, according to their combats and victories here; to
Martyrs such an one: to Confessors such a one: to Doctors such a one: to
Virgins another, as it pleases him; which particular Glorys what they shall be,
how inestimably delightful they shall be to us, and how graceful in the sight
of others, we neither know, nor can know here. If then the lesser things be so
great, what is all Heaven? What is God who is the sum and substance af all
reward and felicity? I doubt not, but all Christians believe more then any man
can say of them: and I doubt as little, but they think them well worthy their
study and care, and of their pains and cost.

9. But what is the pains and cost that belongs to them, which men and women
so shrink at? Is it loss of life or limme? Not so: but in case of Martyrdom. Is
it to give all to the Poor? No: though CHRIST advised it one, if he desired to
be perfect. Is it to suffer burning or the pains of hell for them? Not so: and
yet S. Austin and Venerable Bead wished with all their hearts to feel hells
torments a good while, to be sure of them: so great was their apprehension and
value of heavens greatness!

10. Why do they not then to obtain a happy and eternal life, that which they
do to preserve this unhappy and languishing life? Thy deprive themselves of
meats which prejudice their health: they renounce all divertisments which may
probably distemper them: and they quit all that is most pleasing when it may be
hurtful to them. Why do they not as much to obtain the happy life? When they
labor so much to preserve this miserable life, they defend themselves not from
death, and all that they can pretend to by the order of their diet, and by
their remedies, is not to live always, but only to die a little later. Let them
do as much for the other life, and testify by their actions that they have
belief, love, and esteem of it, and they shall live eternally.

11. How much would you give says S. Augustine to be Augustine ser. 64. de
Verb. Dom.
exempt from suffering, and to be ascertained to live always? You would think
all which you possess, would not suffice to buy so great a good* though also
you should possess the whole world; Nevertheless this good, and what is yet
infinitely more excellent is to be sold: You may buy it if you will: and you
need not trouble your self about the price of it: for it is rated but at what
you have; you may purchase it by alms: obtain it by good works: merit it by
good desires: acquire it by becoming a virtuous person. Contemn then not so
great a happiness, which depends not but of grace, and your free will; and if
you have any love of your salvation, so run, as the Apostle bids you, that you
may obtain. The chief ennemie to this virtuous course, is an idle, uncertain,
and unsettled life. Let us busy our felves then always in something which is
good. Let us have a certain and settled form and method of our practices, which
we will not without necessity omit: and we shall so run as by the grace of God,
we may obtain a most happy end. Resolve from this present moment upon this
course, exclude all dalliance and delay: and pronounce after the Apostles with
mouth and heart this word, Amen.

DISCOURSE XVI. OF FAITH.
HE that shall examine by the touchstone of holy Scripture, the value and worth
of every thing, will acknowledge vithout difficulty, that amongst the christian
virtues, one of those that honor God the most, And of the most important to
our salvation, is Faith the first Theological virtue. For if S. Paul writing to
the Romans, says, that when we employ Romans 12. 1.
our bodies in the service of God, by mortification, and the practice of good
works, we offer to God a very acceptable Host, surely, when we captivate our
understandings in obedience to Faith and mortify them, forcing them against
their inclination to receive and approve the Articles of our Faith, which are
obscure, and incomprehensible: this sacrifice cannot fail to be much more
acceptable and pleasing: since we offer to him our Spirit, which is
incomparably more excellent and noble.

2. If Faith be so glorious and acceptable to God: it is no less profitable and
necessary to men. For He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: but he
that belives not shall be condemned. By Faith, the Mark. 16. 16. Heb. 11.
Ancient obtained testimony that they were just and pleased God: But without
Faith it is impossible to please him.

3. A Dissenter or libertine Catholic hearing this will say: I am assured of
my salvation: nothing is necessary to it, but Faith and Baptism; thanks be to
God. I belive and am baptized. I shall then infallibly be saved. You say true:
if you have true and living Faith: if you have such faith as God demands of
you: for there is Faith, and Faith: there is humane faith and divine Faith:
habitual faith, and actual faith: implicit faith, and explicit faith: Interior
faith, and exterior faith: dead faith, and living faith.

4. Humane faith is an assent to a proposition upon the simple testimony of men.

5. Divine faith is a special gift of God, by which we firmly hold for true all
verities revealed upon the assured and ascertained testimony of God, who cannot
deceive, or be deceived. Habitual faith is, when it is permanent as a habit, and
remains in us 'til we lose it by infidelity. Actual faith is, when we exercise
formally and expressly an act of belief upon a revealed Verity. Implicit is,
when we believe not the Articles of Religion, but confusedly, in general, and
in gros, as when we say, I believe all that the Church believes. Explicit is,
when we believe distinctly and in particular, that there is one God in three
Persons, that the Son of God was made man, and the like important verities.
Interior faith is, when we believe in heart, without making known by any sign
whether we believe or no. Exterior is, when we make profession of our belief
by words, or by external and visible actions. dead faith is, when it is
deprived of the love of God, and of other virtues. Living faith is, when it is
animated by charity, and the practice of good works.

6. Humane faith conduces not to justification, nor consequently to salvation;
this the Apostle expressly teaches, when he says, By Ephesians. 2. 8. 2. Cor. 5. 2.
grace you are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the
gift of God. And again, we are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God.

7. Habitual faith suffices not for an Adult, or one that has sufficient use
of reason; but he must believe actually the Mysteries of faith. For he that
coms to God, must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that
seek him, says S. Paul: And S. Heb. 11. John.. 3. 18.
John, He that does not believe, is already judged; He says not, he that has
not faith, but he that does not believe: which expresses a formal act. I said,
habitual faith suffices not one that has sufficient use of reason; for infants
and such as have not the use of reason may be saved by habitual faith, which
they receive when they are spiritually regenerated by Baptism. For this
habitual gift of faith, and the other habitual and supernatural gifts of Hope
and Charity, which they then by the merits of CHRIST receive, justify them,
makes them adoptive children of God, heirs of his kingdom, and remains in them
for these effects, and to be the sources of correspondent acts, when they shall
com to the use of reason.

8. Implicit faith suffices not to be saved; It is not enough to say, I believe
all that the Church believes: you are obliged to know and believe explicitly,
that there is one God in three Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Creator,
Savior, Sanctifier: the Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST, his Nativity, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, his coming to Judgment; if any one committed to your
care should be ignorant of these Mysteries, you would be more culpable, then if
you should permit them to work on Christmas day, this being only against a
precept of the Church: that against a Commandment of God. And for the same
reason, if others, who do not particularly pertain to you, should be ignorant
of those mysteries, you would offend against charity if you instruct them not,
more then if you should leave them in ignorance of their obligation to hear
Mass on Easter day.

9. Interior faith suffices not; It is not enough to have a firm faith in our
heart, we must make a profession of it by our words Romans 10. 10.
and actions; For with the heart we believe unto justice: but with the mouth
Confession is made to salvation, says S. Paul. We receive body and soul, and
all from God: we must acknowledge, and honor him as He commands us, though with
the loss of all. 1. Cor. 13. Galat. 5. 6. S. James. 2. 14. Matthew. 7. 21 S.
Matt. 25. 41. Aug. Lib. de Fide and Oper. C. 15. Tom. 4. ^, med.


10. Dead faith in fine suffices not, for if a man has all faith and have not
charity, he is nothing, says S. Paul. And in another place he assures us, that
the faith only which works by charity is that which profits and conduces to
salvation. S. James confutes largly dead faith, and thus concludes, You see
then Brethren, how that by works a man is justifyd and not by faith only. Our
Savior himself declares it insufficient to salvation, when He says, Not every
one that says Lord, Lord (which is not said without Faith) but he that does the
will of my Father, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And in the same
Gospel, He blames those He sends into everlasting fire, not because they
believed not in him: but because they did not good Works; and this passage S.
Austin also urges much against the Solifideans.

11. Catholics believe this: but many among them fail in the practice of it.
What Christian works, what supernatural works conformable to their faith, and
what works more perfect than those of Pagans, do they? Tbey labor to maintain
themselves, to nourish and provide for children, and the Pagans did so; They
honor their Parents: the Pagans respected also theirs; they injure none: and
honest Pagans did not; They love their Benefactors: I will not say what Pagan,
but what Tiger does not? They love their friends, and such as do love them: the
Publicans or Pagans, do they not the same? and what reward shall you have? said
our Savior. You must do works conformable to your faith, supernatural, Matthew.
5. 46.
heroical, and worthy of the recompense we pretend to.

12. A good Christian acts not by natural inclination, nor by humane reason,
nor by maxims of policy, nor by temporal interest, but has faith for the
Principle of his actions, and for the Rule of his life.

He labors and gains money, not for the love of it, nor of any honor, or
pleasure he may get by it: but for a necessary entertainment of himself in the
service of God, and to give Alms: because faith teaches him to use it for these
ends. He nourishes and provides for children, not because they are his, but
because they are Gods creatures, his Images, and the Members of JESUS CHRIST.
He abstains from sensual delights and carnal pleasures, not because a man is
too noble and born to higher things than to be a slave to his body, but because
JESUS CHRIST recommended it. He does no injury to any, not because he would
have the repute of an honest man, but because JESUS has forbidden him. He
suffers injuries and affronts, and pardons them, not because it is the property
of a great courage to contemn and look upon them as unworthy of his anger, as
a Lion or an Elephant slights the cries of little dogs, but because CHRIST
commands us to pardon injuries, to do good to those that hate and persecute us.

He serves faithfully his Master, not because his Master nourishes him well, and
gives good wages, but because God said by the mouth of S. Paul, Servants render
obedience to your Masters as to JESUS CHRIST. He gives alms to a poor man, not
through tenderness of heart, but because JESUS has commanded him: and said,
that which you shall do to the least of mine, shall be don to me. Who Matthew. 25.
40.
ever shall give a cup of cold water to one of mine in the name of a Disciple,
shall receive reward: He promises you nothing if you give an alms to a poor man,
because he is your countreyman, of the same condition, of the same nature with
you: but if you give to him, Because he is a Christian, and a Disciple of the
Son of God: in the name of a Disciple. Matt. 10. 42.


13. Let us hear then with respect and put in practice this Word of JESUS,
Habete fidem.

Have faith: It is the extreme misery of a Christian to lose Faith; whilst it
subsists in the soul, there remains always some hopes of salvation; when it is
once lost, all is lost: there is no recovery, but by a miracle.

14. Have divine faith, not humane only; You ought to believe what I say to
you, not because I say it, but because God said it: because God revealed it to
his Church, and the Church teaches you it by my ministry. Divine faith
believes all the words of the Scripture, without exception; if you believe some
and not the other, it is humane faith, or opinion, or fancy, not divine
faith, which believes, because God is the sovereign and infallible Verity, who
cannot deceive in any point; if He could in one, He might in all the rest.

15. Have actual faith, not habitual only; It is very profitable to exercise
often formal and express acts of faith, especially in temptation, and in
occasion of Sin: to do as our Savior, who being tempted in the desert, opposed
to each temptation a text of holy scripture; And S. Paul counsels us to make
use of the shield of faith in every occasion; are you tempted by imprudence to
defer your conversion? oppose to it this shield, enliven your faith by Ephesians.
6. 16. Luke 12. 40.
these words of our Savior, the Son of man will com in what hour ye think not;
Death and judgment will surprise you, when you think least of it. Are you
tempted by injustice to do any injury to your neigbour? oppose this shield,
actuate your faith by these words of JESUS: Do not to another what thou would
not have don to thy self. Are you tempted by choler to abuse another by your
words? actuate your faith by these words of our Savior: He that is angry with
his brother, he that calls him fool shall be guilty of fire. Are you tempted by
impurity? oppose this shield: quicken your faith by these words of S. Paul,
know that all fornicators and unclean Ephesians. 5.
persons have no part in the kingdom of JESUS CHRIST. Are you tempted to go in
an open dress and to show your breasts? Stir up your faith by these words of
JESUS: Woe to him by whom a Scandal comes, that is, to him who gives an
occasion, to one only person, to commit a mortal Sin.

16. Have firm and perfect faith, which doubts not, wavers not, staggers not at
all. You must be more convinced and persuaded of all that the Church does
teach, than you are of what you see. S. Peter having seen the glory of JESUS
upon Luke 17. 1.
mount Thabor: having heard the voice of the eternal Father, This is my beloved
Son, says that he was yet more ascertained of it by the testimony of holy
Scripture, habemus firmiorem Propheticum 2. Pet. 1. 19.
sermonem. And since the sacred text does say, Fornicators, Avaricious,
Robbers, and other sinners shall never possess the kingdom of God, if they
correct not in themselves these Vices; you must be more certain never to be
saved, if you commit these sins, and have not true repentance, then of what you
see, or hear. if you doubt of it, or have doubted of it voluntarily: you must
accuse your self thereof, as of a Sin of infidelity. I say voluntarily: For
when thoughts do rise against faith: if they displeas you: or if you reject
them promptly, as soon as you perceive them, there is no Sin. But to avoid the
occasions of them, do what S. Paul commands you: avoid those that would seduce
you: they will cast always into your mind I know not what malign and venomous
disposition; if your calling be to serve, though they would give you great
wages, serve them not; if you pretend to marriage, beware to marry them: for
you put your selves in danger of being seduced: and when there should be no
danger: yet you may die and leave children, who being bredvp by them, will
follow their errors, and lose their souls. Beware also to read or to have in
your house naughty books: some of your people may happen to read them, and be
perverted or prejudiced by them.

17. Have explicit faith: content not your selves to say, I am a good
Catholic, I believe all Articles of faith: but learn them in particular, at
least the principal and most remarkable. To learn them, you ought to hear as
often as you can sermons, catechismes to read Spiritual books, to frequent
devout persons who can instruct you: to meditate upon them, for to conceive the
importance of them.

18. And to make a public profession of them: you should of ten explicate
them, and make others to admire them. You must not fear to oppose those who
speak unworthily of them, of God, or of his Church: nor be ashamed to practice
the observances and devotions prescribed by the Church in consequence to them:
But remember this word of the Son of God: He that shall be ashamed Luke. 9. 26.
of me before men, I will be ashamed. of him in the presence of my Father and
his Angels.

19. Have living faith animated with charity, and fruitful in good works,
otherwise S. Paul will say, Your faith is vain; for 1. Cor. 15. 17. James 2.
yet you are in your sins. S. James will say, Shall dead faith be able to save
you? S. Bernard will say, behold a fine honor you render to your God! you offer
to him a dead carkess, a faith joined to infamous and stinking actions. The
Saints did not so: they practiced Heb. 11.
virtue by their faith; they converted kingdoms by the heroical actions of
their faith: they obtained the promises which God made to the true faithful,
the possession and enjoyment of the principal object of faith, the intuitive
and clear vision of the essence of God in the happy eternity, which God granr
us all. Amen.

DISCOURSE XVII. Of Hope
1. THe God of Hope says the Apostle, replenish you with all Romans 15. 13.
sort of joy, that you may abound in hope; In which words he wills not only
that we hope: but he demands of God for all the Faithful, an abundance of this
gift, and virtue; by which we may hope through the merits of JESUS CHRIST to
possess God, and to enjoy eternal felicity. This Virtue is so necessary, that
without it, we would not aspire to so high a good: and it gives us such
assurance of Heb. 6. 19. Heb. 6. 17. Phil. 2. 12.
This Good: that S. Paul calls Hope the sure and and firm anchor of the soul;
and yet the same Apostle bids us work our Salvation in fear and trembling. But
if our hope be so sure, how can we fear? if so firm, how can we tremble?

2. To reconcile this and the like apparent Contrarieties, we must remember
that though our hope be founded upon the promises which God made us, through
his infinite Goodness, and the merits of his Son; Yet these promises are not
accomplished, with out the concours and cooperation of our free Will. On the
side of the promises of God, there is nothing to be doubted, our hope is most
certain, and cannot be deceived; but our free will being fragil and inconstant,
we have cause to fear, that being wanting to the grace of God, and to what He
demands of us, we render our selves unworthy of the goods, which his mercy
promised and prepared for us. The faults which are usually committed in this
matter of hope, may be reduced to three principal, We hope not what we ought to
hope; or not of whom we ought to hope: or not as we ought to hope. To avoid
these defects, and to practice well this important Virtue: I will show what we
ought to hope; of whom we ought to hope; and how we ought to hope.

3. My God you are my Hope, said the Royal Prophet; Note says S. Bernard, that
the Prophet says not only, my God I hope in you; but he says, You are my Hope.
when you ask of God health, long life, prosperity, you hope in him; but it is
health, long life, prosperity, which is your hope, that is to say, the object
and the subject of your desires, pretentions, and affections; but the holy
Prophet made God his hope; and in effect, God as the Author of S. Ber. Ser. 9.
in qui habit sub. sin.
grace, and the object of felicity is the supernatural good of man, it is this
Sovereign Good which is infinitely to be preferred before all other goods. This
Good then merits to be desires, pursued, and expected by him: and if he should
do otherwise, he would not only be extremely wanting to himself: but also
highly injurious to this Good: who only is capable to give him the
accomplishment of his last perfection.

4. But as faith aides the understanding to believe in God, as its prime and
principal object, aides also to believe many other things that are revealed by
him, as its secondary and less principal; so Hope which assists the will to
hope God as its prime principal and chief object, helps it consequently to hope
many other things that proceed from God, and which serve to complete the
beatitude of man, or as means to attain it.

5. Our Lord's prayer is an abridgment of all that we ought to hope, as the
Symbol of the Apostles is a compendium of all we must believe; And in this
most excellent and perfect prayer which the Son of God put into our mouths, we
ask no corporal thing, but what is precisely necessary, our daily bread; we
beg not wordly Glory, nor earthly riches, nor ease or pleasures for our bodies,
nor the satisfaction of our passions; if we hope or beg Conc. in Psalm. 34 Post
med.
such things of God S. Austin tells us, we do injury to him, and prejudice to
our selves, injuriam facis illi and damnum tibi; for what is all that, but
desires of the flesh, irregular and vicious hopes, acts of ambition, avarice,
and sensuality? To hope God will accomplish such desires, is it not to injure
him? Is it not to make Him a servant of your ambition, a complice of your
avarice, and a partener of your passions? if you should hope in Jupiter, if you
should pray Mars, Venus, Cupid, if you should pray a Devil, you would not ask
of him other favor; and to ask those things of the true God, to demand them in
the Name of his Son, to hope to obtain them by the intercession of the Saints:
sensual pleasures, by the intercession of the B. Virgin who was so pure and
mortifyd: riches of the earth, by the means of S. Francis, who so loved
poverty: the Glory of the world, by the mediation of the Martyrs, who despised
it: is not this to mock and offend God? should you obtain these things they
would prove prejudicial rather than beneficial: and one might say to you, as to
the sons of Zebedee, you knew not what you asked; God refuses some through
benevolence and mercy, what He grants others through wrath and reprobation,
says S. Augustine. Ang. in Psalm. 40. Psalm. 48.


6. The second fault against this virtue is committed by them, who confide in
themselves, and in their virtue: Qui confidunt in virtute sua.

The holy Ghost commands us often to put our hope in God: and He promises his
infallible assistance to them that do it; He Psalm. 16. 7. Psalm. 17. 31. Psalm.
21. 5. Thren. 3. 25. Hier. 17. 5.
saves all that hope in him. He is the Protector of all that hope in him. In
thee our fathers have hoped and thou have delivered them, says the Psalmist.
Our Lord is good to them that hope in him, says Hieremie.

7. On the contrary the same Prophet says; Cursed be the man that trusts in
man. These words Dissenters object to us: they say that we are cursed: because
we confide either in living or dead men: since we invocate them, and implore
their help. But if this curs concerns us, then cursed were they who said to
Samuel, pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God; cursed was Samuel himself,
who answered: far from me be this sin, that I 1. Kings. 12. 19. Romans 15. 3.
should cease to pray for you; and cursed was S. Paul, who desired them so
often to whom he wrote, to pray for him.

8. Who is he then, that according to the Prophet trusts in man? It Is he that
neglecting the help of God, looks only, or chiefly for the help of man; this
the Prophet himself declares, when he adds, and makes flesh his arm, and his
heart departs from our Lord.

9. You are subject to this malediction, if you put such a confidence in your
self, since you are a man, says S. Austin; if you confide in your pretended
virtue, in your firm resolutions, in your good nature; it is a greater fault
then you imagine: it is to arrogate to your self that which belongs to God only,
who is the Author of all good: it is to be diffident in him, and in the
sufficiency of his succor: it is to contradict these words, which the Church
puts into your mouth: God, you know that we confide not in any of our actions.
Is not this a strange vanity, and a horrible arrogance, that a mortal man,
whose life is full of miseries, whose Spirit and body are so inconstant, who is
laden with so many sins, exposed to so many temptations, subject to so many
corruptions, designed to so many just punishments, should confide in himself,
and presume to make himself happy, said Aug. Ep. 54. ad Macedonium.
S. Austin. This vain relyance which men have on their own selves, and on the
force of their free will, is the cause that they rashly cast themselves into
occasions of sin: that they work not their salvation with fear and trembling
as the Apostle commands: that they stand not upon their guard, to keep
themselves from falling: that they pray not God fervently to hold them by the
hand: that they are not in a state of perpetual humiliation, as the Saints
advise them to be: that they disdain those that humane frailty made to fall:
and that they glorify themselves in their good works; whence it comes often,
that God chastises them, to humble them: He lets them fall into interior
aridities and desolations, or into some furious temptations, which cast them
down to the brink of hell, when they thought themselves at the gates of heaven,
and makes them say as David, Ego dixi in abundantia mea non movebor in eternum,
avertisti faciem tuam and factus sum conturbatus: It seemed Psalm. 29. 7.
to me that I should never be troubled in the resolution I had to serve you, o
my God: You have withdrawn your grace, and I find my self wholly perplexed and
in danger to be lost. Hope not then in your selves, nor in the force of your
free will, which is but weakness and misery: hope in God and in his assistance;
but hope in him as you ought: that is to say, with great confidence.

10. Blessed be the man who puts his confidence in God, says Hieremie; he is
like to a tree planted by the water, the leaf whereof is always green, and
which never fails to bring forth fruit. Hierem. 17. 7. Collect of the 5. Sunday
after Epiph.
Wherefore the Church begging the favor of Gods protection, makes a
remonstrance to him, that she relyes wholly upon the hope of his grace. There
his nothing that obliges us more to act faithfully for another, then when we
see that he confides in us, and wholly depends upon us: nor is there any thing
that averts us more from succouring and assisting him, than to see that he is
diffident of us: and can we think that our God will assist us powerfully, when
we confide not entirely, but diffide in him; Diffidence makes us un worthy of
his favors, it binds the hands of the Omnipotent, and stops the course of his
particular graces.

11. Give me a soul that has a great confidence in God, she would work
miracles: but if one staggers, or diffides never so little in the Providence of
God, he will not have good success. S. Peter finding the wind strong, did not
quite diffide: since he cried out Lord save me; he had a little confidence,
since JESUS said to him, o thou of little faith! But because he doubted, he
began to sink. so certainly, the reason why we are not powerfully assisted by
God, and that we do not the great works He would operate by us, is because there
is always in our hearts some grain of diffidence.

12. Follow then the counsel of the holy Ghost. Have confidence Prou. 3. 5.
in the Lord, and rely not upon thy own prudence. In all thy ways think on him,
and He will direct thy steps.

Have confidence; you confide in a friend, who never said to you, trust in me:
who perhaps is changed and has lost the love he had for you; And will you not
trust in God who is always the same, and who says to you in his Scripture with
so much tenderness and assurance: I will not leave, nor abandon Heb. 13. 5.
thee Will you not trust in your God, who can, and will aid you powerfully, if
you cast your self into his arms?

In the Lord; He is Master, and He will show it, permitting you sometimes to be
overwhelmed by a tempest, leaving you long in disgraces* suits, poverty,
infirmity, and afflictions of Spirit; But if you put great confidence in him,
though you be even past all remedy, and ready to be lost: He will strike the
stroke of a Master: will make a signal demonstration of his Providence, and
deliver you for his glory, to the admiration of the world.

Rely not upon your own prudence; trust not in your ability, it is a weak
support, a rotten planck, a reed, and a foundation upon sand; acknowledge in the
presence of God, that your light is but darkness: that your Wisdom ss but
folly: demand his conduct, invocate his mercy in the beginning, in the
progress, and in theend of your actions.

In all your ways think on him; It Is a great fault we commit, and the cause of
all our failings, that we have not recours to God often enough, nor fervently
enough. We are less able to do any thing that conduces to eternal life of our
own selves, than a child that has never written, is capable to write well; if
then you will do well, you must not only recommend your self to JESUS in the
beginning of your actions: but often lift up your soul to him: dart forth
respectfull and affectionate aspirations, and ask his grace and light; If you
do so: He will direct your steps: He will enlighten your understanding in
perplexities, strengthen your heart in temptations, hold your hand in dangers,
direct your footsteps in his ways: He will make your actions succeed to
acquisition of his grace in this world, and to possession of his glory in the
other. Amen.

DISCOURSE XVIII. Of the Love of God.
CHarity is amongst Christian Virtues, that which gold is amongst metalls:
'that which the Palm is among trees: that which the Lion is amongst beasts:
that which a man is among all Creatures of this world: that which the Seraphins
are amongst Celestial creatures. S. Ireneus calls it properly Eminentissimum
Charismatum, the most eminent and precious gift of the holy Ghost; he agrees in
this with the Apostle, who having said that God has chosen some 1. Cor. 12. 31.
in his Church to be Apostles, others to be Doctors, others to work miracles:
He adds I will show you yet a grace more excellent: a gift of the holy Ghost
more to be desired than to be an Apostle, or a Prophet, and this grace is
charity, of which he speaks immediately. One may be an Apostle and an ill man,
witness Judas; a Prophet, witness Balaam; a Doctor, witness Tertullian; a
Virgin, witness the five foolish: a worker of miracles, witness they who will
say have we not worked many miracles in your name? But one cannot love God
perfectly and Matthew. 7. 22.
have Charity, without being good, holy, and pleasing to God.

2. Here we ought to admire the Goodness and Providence of God, who placed all
our felicity and happiness in a thing so sweet, and conformable to our nature:
And which poor as well as rich, ignorant, as well as learned, weak and sick, as
well as strong and healthy, and in a word, all the world may have by his Grace.
And because He desires that we be perfect, and wills that we be happy, He
commands us to love him.

3. Thou shall love the Lord thy God. Upon which S. Austin* Quid mihi es?
miserere, ut loquar: Quid tibi sum ego? ut amari te jubeas a me, and nisi
faciam minaris ingentes miserias, parva ne est ipsa miseria si non amem te? O
my God! have pity on me, pardon me if I am bold to speak, being but dust and
ashes; what is this to say that you command me to love you? ought one to
command a Vassal to love his Prince? an Infant to love his Father? a Spouse to
love her Espouse? a Creature to love the Creator. are not you my Sovereign, my
Father, my Espouse, my All, and my Creator? Nevertheless you threaten me with
great miseries if I love you not; is there in the world a greater misery then
not to love you? is it not the misery of miseries to be deprived of your love?
You command me to love you: what mercy! It Is too much honor to have the
permission of it, a Vassal would not dare say to his Prince, Sr. I love you;
he may say, I honor your Majesty, I have much affection for your service: but
not I love you: and I may say it to my God, not only without temerity, but with
much merit: He permits it, He desires it, He commands it.

4. Nevertheless we have this misfortune among many others, and which is not of
the lesser; that we often make more account of things which we ought to
consider less. You find many who say this day is the feast of S. Matthew, to
morrow Ember day, or Easter is at hand: we must hear Mass, fast, prepare our
selves for communion: You find very few that ever said in their lives we must
make an Act of the love of God: and nevertheless it is a commandment of God,
which obliges more stricly than those of the Church: it is the first and
greatest commandment: it is an affirmative commadement: Note affirmative; the
affirmative Precepts are those which command some action: the negative are
those which forbid to act; to obey negative commandments, we need not but
abstain from acting: to observe these commands, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall
not swear, Thou shall not Steal, there is no need to do any thing, it is enough
to abstain from killing, swearing, robbing. It is not so in the affirmative. We
fulfill them not by doing nothing, but by practicing Acts which they command;
Now the Commandment of loving God is affirmative, which obliges to express
and formal acts, and without doubt obliges sometimes: and men think not of it.
They employ every week half an hour at least in hearing Mass, to obey the
command of the Church: it is well don: and if they did not, they would offend
God; But how coms it to pass, that they employ not half a quarter of an hour,
nither every week, nor every month, nor every year to make an act of the love
of God, to obey this commandment of God, which our Savior published with is
own mouth, thou shall love thy God.

5. Belive me, and you will believe one that desires your salvation with all
his heart; resolve from this present to employ some little space of time in the
exercise of the love of God: and give it the qualities and conditions of true
love: else it is not Charity, and loses its value and its merit. The love of God
must have at least three qualities; It must be a love that is Sovereign, Pure,
and Active.

6. The love of God is a love of preference: it will be a king, or nothing: it
cannot live without reigning, and it cannot reign but Soveraignly. The Son of
God says in the Gospel. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not
worthy of me: Matthew. 10. 37.
and he that loves son or daughter above me, is not worthy of me; And to show,
that we ought not only not prefer them before God: but that we ought to
postpose them much, and to neglect them for him; He says in S. Luke, if any one
com to me and hates not Luke 14. 26. S. John. 12. 25.
his father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers and sisters, and
his own life, he cannot be my Disciple. And in S. John, he that loves his life,
shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world does keep it to
everlasting life.

S. Austin explicating these words sais they are to be understood of the love
of preference, which we ought to testify to our Savior Aug. tr^ct 51. in Io.
in occasion, when his commandment is in opposition with the love of any
Creature whatsoever: that is, Your heart ought to be in this disposition, that
in case you must lose your suit, goods, husband, wife, children, honor, life,
or commit a mortal sin, you will choose rather to lose all, than commit it; if
you have not this sincere and cordial Will, you have not the true love of God,
you are in the state of damnation: if you die in it, your process is wholly
ended, you are condemned and damned eternally.

8. He that loves not God more than himself, inverts the order of charity says
S. Prosper; he had reason to say inverts; Is not this a horrible inversion,
perversion, and a prodigious disorder to love a particular good more than the
universal, the stream more then the source, the ray more then the sun, the
image more than the prototype, the nothing more than the All, the creature
which is but dust and putrefaction more then the most high, most excellent, and
infinite Majesty of the Creator?

9. It is this disorder that makes that a mortal sin, also in a thing which
seems not to be of great importance, does merit hell; It seems very rigorous to
damn one for stealing a crown; but you must not only regard the value of a
crown, but that you make more account of a piece of a silver, then of God
himself, since you will lose his amity and Him for it.

10. In the second place, the love of God must be a pure and disinteressed
love; S. Paul says nor only that charity seeks the 1. Cor. 13. 5.
the glory of God, and his divine interests, but that it seeks not its own
interests: Non quaerit quae sua sunt.

S. Thomas treating of this Verity concludes with all Divines, that charity is
not a mercenary love, a love of profit and of interest: but a free and
disinteressed love, a love of amity and benevolence, a love by which we will
good to God, not for the love of our selves, but for the love of him: we love
him not in regard of our profit, but in regard of his goodness: not because He
does good to us, or that He may do us good, but because He is good, and deserves
to be loved; for God, is so good, great, holy, powerful, and worthy to be
loved, that if He did desire it, we should sacrifice our selves for his
service, though there were neither heaven for those that love him, nor hell for
those that love him not.

11. We should do as the blessed Spirits do: it is JESUS that gives the
Counsel, putting these words into our mouths, Your will be don in earth as it
is in heaven: that is as the Angels do it; they do the will of God and obey
his Orders, with a free, pure, and disinteressed love: all that they pretend is
to obey God, to do his will, all the recompense that they passionately desire,
is to receive new Orders, to be employed again in his service, purely for the
love of him.

12 This is not said, that a faithful soul may not hope, and keep the
commandments for reward or retribution as the Prophet says he did: But that it
be not the principal, yet less the only aim of our love? for as S. Bernard
says, perfect love of God intends no recompense, but merits much. The loving
soul receives from the hands of God ineffable and incomprehensible goods: but
though she should not, though there should be no Paradise, nor reward, she
would not omit to love God, serve him, and to be pleasing to him: and if she
practices virtue for reward: the reward which she desires is the increase of
her love; if she is glad to merit to be higher in heaven, this is not to have
there more of honor and glory, but it is to have more of love: if I merit much
says she, I shall see God more clearly and perfectly in heaven, I shall glorify
him more excellently, I shall praise him more advantagiously, I shall be united
to him more strictly and intimatly, I shall love him more ardently; and so love
is the true salary* of love.

13. In fine your love must not be idle and paralitick, but active to render
service to God, and to do good works for his glory: Charity works great things
where it is, and where it works not, there it is not, says S. Gregory. S. John.
14. 23. 1. Ep. 3. 18. Psai. 96. 10.


He that loves me will keep my word, says JESUS. My little children, says his
beloved Disciple, let us not love in word and tongue only, but in work and
verity; and the Royal Prophet, You that love our Lord hate ye evil; he says
not only commit not evil: but hate it: He says not hate it in your self, but
absolutely hate it; If you love God, you will hate sin, wheresoever it is
found: you will destroy it in your self, and in your neighbor also, if if you
can; if one should say, I abuse not my friend, but is not sorry that another
does, nor hinders him when he can, may one truly say, he loves him?

Let us conclude with a reflection upon these words of JESUS, I Came to cast
fire upon the earth, and what desire I but that it be inflamed? Luke 12. 49.
And does He not move, solicit, and stir up our hearts to this fire and flame
of love by all possible ways?

14. He prevents us with great love; He loved us more than riches: He was made
poor for us; more than honors: He suffered a thousand infamies; more than his
ease and pleasure: He led a life in pain and labor; more than his body: He
deprived it of glory, and of life; more than the Angels: He redeemed them not;
And though we are so ungratful and unworthy as not to return love for love: He
tryes yet other means.

15. He heaps Benefits upon us, and makes us presents to engage our mercenary
hearts. He practices the counsel He gives us by the Wiseman, and by his
Apostle, Give meat and drink to your enemy, Prove. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20.
when he has need, and you shall heap upon him burning coals, to heat his love
to you; so many prosperities that are sent you: so many morcells of bread you
eat: so many creatures that serve you: are so many burning coals, He heaps
upon you to heat your love, so many presents He makes you, to gain your
affection: so many baits he lays, to catch your heart; Et si parva sunt ista,
adiiciet majora.

And if it seems to you that all this is too little, and that your heart is yet
worth more: He assures you, that all the favors whiich he has don you, and
which he does you yet every day, are not but gages and pledges of the great
Goods He has prepared and promised you, if you love him; Neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, 1. Cor 2. 9
nor the heart of man can comprehend the things which God has prepared for
them that love him says S. Paul.

16. But since we esteem not these promises enough, and are like those
Israelites who contemned she desirable land: He lifts up his hand: He commands
us to love him, and threatens punishments, if we do not; Is not this to be
extremly desirous of our love, to put as it were a dagger to our throats, and
say to us, love me, J will kill you if you will not. He does not only say it,
but he does it, he damnes us eternaly, if we love him not.

17. And when He sees that fear of future punishments do not sufficiently move
our hearts, He sends us sometimes afflictions to force our love: He takes away
all you love in this world; because you love not well that which ought to be
loved above all things; He removes from you all that may amuse and employ your
heart: that it may be in a manner forced, for want of other object, to unite it
self to Him; o great God? what can you do more to have this heart which you so
passionately desire; you besige it on all sides, and it renders not; neither
the preventions of your love: nor the attractives of your benefits: nor your
promises of paradise: nor your strict commands: nor threats of hell: nor
constrains of afflictions can open this locked heart; Extremis morbis extrema
remedia.

18. When a passionate lover has tried all ways, and finds them unsuccesfull,
he coms to the last, makes use of a charm, composes a love potion: JESUS, makes
use of this artifice to gain our affection: He puts himself upon our Altars,
and into our Tabernacles: there he is the charm of love, They say that in a
charm of love, to render it more powerful, the Lover ought to mix with it some
of his own substance, some drops of his blood: and JESUS puts all his blood
into this potion: not a part of his substance only, but all his substance,
Body, Soul, and Divinity.

19. What think you; Judge you not that God ought to have your heart after so
many pursuances: do they not inflame you to beg that of God which is so
necessary, and which you cannot have of your own selves? Ask it of God
fervently, humbly, frequently, ask it of God if you be wise: I say again once
more, and I would say a thousand times to all Christians in particular, ask
often of God his Love, if you will work your salvation: pray the B. Virgin and
other saints, to intercede for you: give great alms or many little ones that
God may give you his love: fast sometimes, pray virtuous persons to beg it for
you, and renonce all that displeases him: for if God be the object of our love
in this life, He will be the object of our vision, fruition and felicity in the
other, Amen.

DISCOURSE XIX. OF THE LOVE OF NEIGHBOVRS.
NAture inclines and prompts all creatures to love their like; It obliges us to
will, and also to do good to others: and teaches us that we cannot deny them
good offices, or hate them without renouncing humanity. Generosity will that we
pardon our Enemies: Invites us to do good to those that hurt us, and to oblige
them to repentance by our favors. God to confirm men in this necessary love of
others, commanded it: and made the legitimate love of their own selves the
model, and Rule, by which they were to regulate their love of others. CHRIST
in the Gospel confirms and renews the commandments of Love with a great
Encomium: He says The whole Law, and the Prophets depend on them, It is then
one of our greatest Mat. 22. 40.
obligations and debts to love our neighbors as our selves: a debt which we
must pay, but cannot clear: always pay, and always owe; Owe no man any thing,
but that you love one another, says S. Pau. Romans 38.
S. Paul: that is, pay to every one what you owe, so that you owe no more: but
know, that you must pay them the debt of Charity, and owe still more. Let us
then see: who is our neighbor; that we may render to him this debt: and in the
second place, how we must pay it to him.

2. When a certain Lawyer in the Gospel made this Question, who is my
neighbor? JESUS to instruct him, proposed to him Luke. 10. 30.
this Parable: A certain man went down from Jerusalem into Jericho, and fell
amongst thieves, who robbed him, wounded him, and left him half dead, And it
happened that a certain Priest went down the same way, and having looked upon
him, passed by. In like manner also a Levit, when he was near the place* and
saw him, passed on. But a certain Samaritan going in his way, Came where he
was; and seeing him was moved with compassion. And going to him, bound up his
wounds, having powered into them oil and wine; and setting him upon his beast,
brought him to an Inn, and took care of him. Then JESUS demanded of the Lawyer,
which of These three, was in his opinion neighbor to him that fell among the
thieves? The Lawer said, he that showed mercy to him. And JESUS approved his
answer, saying, go and do thou in like manner By which we see, that CHRIST
forced him to confess, that not only the just, not only friends, not only jews,
as the Lawyer thought, were neighbors, but a Samaritan was neighbor to a Jew,
that is, an enemy was neighbor to an enemy: and Consequently, every humane
creature, though Pagan, Jew, Turk, or Heretic, is our neighbor. And this also
is made evident by S. Paul, who says, that all the commandments Romans 13 9.
are comprised in this word. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; for if
any man whatsoever should not be comprehended under the notion of a neighbor,
he would not sin against the precept of loving his neighbor, who should steal
his goods, kill him, or bear falls witness against him, which contradicts
expressly the doctrine of the Apostle. We are then obliged by this precept to
love every man, be he a friend or an enemy, a relation or a stranger, a
faithful person, or an infidel, as we love our selves.

3. But when do we love truly our own selves? When we love God truly; for as S.
Austin most judiciously does note, no body loves himself, unless he loves God;
and again, speaking upon these Ep. 95. ad Innocent Papam
words Peter love thou me; it is most strange, says he, but very true, that he
that loves himself, if he loves not God, does not love himself: and he that
loves well God, and loves not himself, truly loves himself; For we cannot love
God as we ought, but at Aug. Tract 51. in Joan. sub med.
the same time we repair or preserve our Spiritual life, and procure our
Sovereign good; nor can we fail in this love, but we deprive our selves, of
those goods, and truly hate our selves. If then we love our neighbors as our
selves, we must make them to love God; if they be unfaithful, we must convert
them: if sinners, correct them: and as much as in us lies make all to obey God,
to love him perfectly, and serve him faithfully.

4. But again, when do we love well our selves? when we make God and his
service the But and End of our designs, enterprises and actions: when our
hearts are in this posture and disposition: I will be wholly referred to God, I
will not be in this world but for him: if I recreat my self, this shall not be
only to pass the time, but to preserve my health for his service, if I nourish
children, it is to the end they serve him: if I gain money, it is for a
necessary Support of my self in the service of God, and to give alms: If I
pursue an estate or office, it is to have an occasion to serve God, my
neighbor, and the Church therein. So we should endeavor that our neighbor
serve not God accidentally, occasionally and secondarily, that they make not
themselves, nor the advancement of their families their chief and principal
intention, nor the end of their studyes, labors and endeavors; but God, his
glory, and his service.

5. But again when do we truly love our selves? We love not well our selves
satisfying our senses, and our passions, taking ease and pleasures, and seeking
the felicities of this world; for he that loves so his life shall lose it, Says
our Savior, But we love our selves truly when we content our selves with what
is necessary: and when we mortify our passions and sensualities: and labor for
grace and virtue in this life, and for glory in the other. So our love of
others must not comply with their sensualities, passions, or defects: but must
separate what is hurtful: and procure them what is good and necessary in this
life, and what may better them for the other.

6. But once more: when do we truly love our selves? When we love our souls
more then all things of this world: more then ease, pleasure, riches, honor, or
life it self, and choose to live in pain and labor, in poverty and misery, in
disgrace and infamy, and to lose our life, rather than hazard our salvation,
or hurt in the least our souls; for what does it profit a man, says the Son of
Matthew 16. 26.
God if he gain the whole world and sustain the damage of his Soul? And so if
we will be good Christians, we ought to love our Neighbors; there is nothing
that we ought not to lose, pleasure, riches, honor, and also, if need be, life
it self, for the Salvation of our neigbors; And this the beloved Disciple and
faithful Interpreter of his Master teaches us in these clear words, In this we
know the Charity of God, because He has given his life for us, and we ought
also to give our life for our Brothers; He does not say 1. Ep. 3.
only, that it is expedient, that it is a Salntary counsel, but that we must
give our lives for their salvation: and to move us more, He puts before our
eyes the example of JESUS CHRIST: S* John. 13.
who made his love of us, the rule of our love of others; I give you a new
commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you. And lest we should
less note it: He repeats it again in the John. 15.
same Gospel: This is my Precept, that you love one another as I have loved
you.

7. Though this Virtue be so pleasing to God, and so important to our
Salvation: nevertheless men fail, in this the most; and to say nothing of all
those who live in hatred, envy, discord, contention, scandal, which are the
common pests of the world, and the mortal ennemies of charity: there are many
who seem to have good intelligence, who make mutual visits, complements,
offers of service: Yet love but in word and tongue, not in work and verity:
they will not open their purs, nor use their power, nor apply their pains and
labor for the assistance of their neighbor in necessity.

8. Others love their kindred and relations, but with a natural inordinate, and
hurtful love; they procure them what is honorable, or profitable upon earth,
though they put them into eminent danger of losing heaven; they give them what
pleases the senses and satisfys their foolish inclinations, though to the
prejudice of their souls and their salvation: and if they see them desirous to
renounce the world, and to betake themselves to a virtuous course of life, they
call upon them, and to show their love, diswade them from it, and recall them
to the usual and libertine course of life; so they seem to love, but do truly
hate, to be good friends, but are the worst of enemies, and the maxim of our
Savior is verefyd in them: The enemies of a man are his domestics. Matt. 10


9. Others in fine extend their love beyond Relations, but to those only from
whom, or by whose means, they expect honor, pleasure, or profit. This is an
imperfect love, a love of concupiscence and interest, and not of charity, which
seeks not proper interest: but loves God, and in him, or for him, or for the
love of him all others, though they be our enemies, because they are his images,
redem'd by the precious blood of JESUS, capable to know, serve, and possess
him: and because it is his Will, intimated to us, by this general precept to
love our neighbors, and particularly commanded in S. Matthew: I say to you love
Mat. 5. 44.
your enemies, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that persecute and
calumniate you, that you may be children of your Father.

10. But the first and most necessary effect of this good will and love which
is exacted of us for our ennemies, is to pardon them; for this is the first
mercy and charity that we can do them, and the most necessary alms we can
bestow upon them. What good can we do them, if first we do not pardon them, but
keep in our hearts, odium, enmity, bitterness, and a desire to take reveng of
them? Wherefore the Son of God who endeavors by all means our Salvation, does
not only command this charity and mercy, but moreover obliges us to it by other
pressing motives; He promises us his greatest mercy, which is the pardon of our
sins, if we pardon others: dimittite and dimittemini: and he assures us that
his Father will treat us most rigorously if we do not: Sic Pater meus celestis
faciet vobis: so my heavenly Father will cast you into the prison of hell, if
you forgive not others from your hearts. And S. James tells us, judgment James
2. 13.
without mercy shall be done to them. who shall not have don mercy. S. Austin
praying for the soul of his deceased Mother said, I know that she led, a holy
and innocent life; but woe to a laudable life if you examine it without mercy;
Whatsoever life you lead, woe to you, woe to you, if you have enmity: you shall
be judged without mercy: and woe to a laudable life, if judged without mercy.
What laudable thing do you? You pray: woe if you have bitterness, woe to you
notwithstanding your prayer; for that he Psalm. 11^
remembered not to do mercy, let his prayer be turned into sin, says the
Psalmist. Your prayer condemns you: saying our Lords prayer, you demand
Vengeance against your self; you say, I pardon such a person: but I will not
speak to him: I will not that he com into my house, and after this you say,
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; God will
hear you, He will not speak to you favorably, nor admit you into his house,
and if you be not admitted into heaven, whether shall you go?

What laudable action do you? you give alms: woe to you if you have malice, woe
to you notwithstanding your alms; S. Paul says, if you should give all your
goods to the poor, if you 1. Cor. 13
have not charity, you are nothing; and by charity in this place, he
understands the love of neigbours.

What virtuous action do you? you fast: woe to you notwithstanding your fast,
if you have dissension. In Isaiah the Jews Isay 58. 3
complained to God, We have fasted and you have not regarded us; God answers
them, with all your fasts you do your wills, you press your poor debtours, you
have debates and contentions.

What laudable thing perform you? Sacrifice; woe to you if you have malice; God
says by Osee, and twice in the Gospel, I love and will rather mercy then your
sacrifice; And therefore many Osee. 6.
great Saints offering to God, the most meritorious sacrifice that can be
offered to him, the sacrifice of their lives: have interrupted it, to obey this
Commandment of mercy; in the hour of their death, when they had time little
enough to elevate themselves to God, to offer, and to unite themselves to him:
they remembered their enemies, prayed for them, and desired their good.

11. These heroical virtues of the Saints were extracts and copies of those,
which we admire in JESUS CHRIST the King of Martyrs, and the Saint of Saints:
He being unjustly, and most cruelly nailed to the Cross, mocked, blasphemed,
did not do as some do: they think that they exercise great acts of charity and
patience toward their enemies, when they say, I will not reveng my self: I
leave reveng to God: let God do to him according to his deserts; know you well
what you do, says S. Austin: you make your self judge of your neighbor, you will
not, or you cannot execute your sentence, but you desire that God should be the
Executioner of it. He that will be revenged, says Ecclesiasticus, shall find
reveng of our Lord, and keeping he will keep his sin; He says not, he that will
reveng himself, but he that will be revenged, shall be the object of the divine
vengeance; You will not reveng your self, nor hurt your neigbor: but you desire
that God would reveng the injury that he has don you: this ir to desire to be
revenged, it is to incur the Vengeance of God. The Son of God does quite
otherwise upon the Cross: He prays God to pardon them: He excuses them as much
as he can: He seeks reasons to diminish the greatness of their crimes; Pardon
them, says He, for they know not what they do; He expects not his Resurrection
to pray for them, when the abundance of glory and the charms of its delight
would blot out the sense of his pains: He prays for them in the midst of most
bitter torments: when He has his enemies before his eeys, who offend him
actually, his ears ringing with their blasphemies, his mouth full of gall and
bitterness, his body all covered with wounds. When He prays for himself, He
says, my God: when He prays for his enemies He says, my Father, to incline
Him by the sweetness of this appellation; when He prays for himself in the
garden, it is with condition, If it be possible; here He prays absolutely: my
Father, I beseech you to pardon them, by these thorns which pierce my head, by
these tears which fall from my eyes, by these wounds which are as so many
mouths that demand your pardon. If so rare and prodigious an example of
charity does not move us, nothing in the world will move us: it is in vain to
say more: God have mercy on us, and convert us. Amen

DISCOURSE XX. OF THE NECESSITY OF GRACE
I Treat not in this discourse of natural graces: not of those which Divines
call gifts gratis given: not of habitual grace, which is a most noble and
excellent quality, by which we are made children of God, most pleasing to his
Majesty. and heirs of his Paradise; it is called habitual, because it remains
always in us as a habit, when we have once received it, 'til we lose it by
consenting to a mortal sin; it is also named sanctifieng and justifieng grace,
because it sanctifys us and renders us holy and just before God; But here I
speak only of actual Grace, which is a good motion, a holy inspiration, an
interior light, a secret touch, a supernatural aid by which the holy Ghost
wakens us, and excites us to rise out of sin, or to the practice of some good
work; It is called actual, because it makes us do acts of Virtue: and it remains
not always in us, but passes as an act, or as a flash of lightning; I will show
the necessity we have of this grace: because it imports very much to be well
convinced of it, and to put in practice the Documents which are drawn from it.

2. God the omnipotent Creator having reposed from all Eternity, and satisfyd
himself in the plenitude of his divine Being, in the enjoyance of his infinite
Perfections, in the fecundity of his adorable Emanations, in the society of his
divine Persons, and willing by a sally of love, and by a powerful inclination
of his natural Goodness to communicate himself out of himself, created man in
the beginning of time to his own image and resemblance, that by grace and
particular privilege, he might be partaker of the same felicity, which the
Creator possessed in himself by the prerogative of his Nature. He created him,
I say, to his own image and resemblance; to his Image in the Understanding: to
his resemblance in the will; to his image in reason: to his resemblance in
dilection: to his image in the k^owledg of verity: to his resemblance in the
love of virtue; having so created him, He made him Lord of all the creatures,
and as a little God in this world, lodged him in a garden of delights; He
honored him with one only commandment very easy to be observed: that meriting
by his own acts the Beatitude prepared for him: he might have more honor and
contentment to enjoy it, not as a present freely given, but as a crown happily
and gloriously obtained by conquest. Satan perceived this, and raging with
envy desired to frustrate the design, feating that man whom he esteemed much
inferior to himself, should merit by his humility and obedience the glory of
heaven, which he had lost by his arrogance and rebellion; and seeing well, that
he could not vanquish him by force, made use of fraud and artifice. and having
induced him to transgress the commandment of God, gave him traitorously two
mortal wounds contrary to the two prerogatives he received from God in his
creation: Ignorance of good. against the light of his understanding:
Concupiscence of evil. against the rectitude of his will. From these two
accursed sources. have flown all the dismal evils which destroy our nature,
and principally the two more notable, Delict, and Crime: Delict coms from
ignorance, Crime proceeds from concupiscence; Delict is the omission of good
commanded: Crime is the commission of evil prohibited; For such infectious
wounds two remedies were necessary; man had need of counsel and of aid*
consilio and auxilio indigebat; of counsel. to clear his ignorance: of aid,
to correct his concupiscence: of counsel, to enlighten his understanding: of
aid to fortify his will; of counsel, to make him know verity: of aid, to make
him love virtue.

This is that wherewith the divine Word incarnated for for the salvation of men
has enriched us abundantly: who came as S. John says, full of Grace and
Verity; Grace, there S. John. 1.
is Aid; Verity, there is counsel.

4. But is not this a wonder capable to ravish the highest Scraphins with
admiration, to see that the Son of God deferred so long a remedy so necessary?
The Son of God resolved from all Eternity to make himself man; He made promises
of it from the beginning of ages; and nevertheless He defers more then four
thousand years the execution of a design so worthy of himself: so conformable
to his goodness: so conducible to his glory: so advantageous to men. o my God,
how wonderful are you! How incomprehensible is the Abyss of your secrets! You
are so jealous of your honor; how permit you then, the evil Spirit, your
mortal Enemy, to tyrannize so over your creatures, to possess your dominion, to
be adored instead of you for the space of four thousand years? you have so
mortal and irreconcilable hatred of sin: how permit you Idolatry, a sin so
detestable and unnatural, to reign so long in the whole world? You have so much
zeal for the salvation of men: how permit you that so many souls fall into
perdition? I confess to you that you are terribly magnifyd: You will magnify,
you will manifest the necessity and the excellency of the grace of JESUS your
Son: you will show how Excellent and precious it is: since it was to be
expected, desired, demanded by so many prayers of the Patriarks, groans of the
Prophets, tears and sighs of virtuous people; how necessary it is, since the
light of nature: the exquisite precepts of Philosophers: the rich discourses of
Orators: the sharp invectives of Prophets: the terrible threats of your
Scriptures: the exemplar chastisements of sinners, joined with the interior
grace you gave to men, drew so few from Sin.

You will make known how freely it is given: since you gave it in a time, in
which men did demerit it by so many crimes: in a time, in which the world was
prostituted to sins so black, enormous, and excessive that they provoked
vengeance instead of inviting your mercy. It Is S. Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans and to the Galatians, and after him S. Austin in diverse places, who Aug
lib. 1. de Gratiae Christi Cap. 8.
inculcate to us this verity, that God lest so long the Gentills in their
ignorance, and the Jews in the weakness of their concupiscence, for to oblige
us to acknowledge, confess and magnify the necessity of his grace.

5. When we consider this, I wonder we cry not out continually, at least jn the
bottom of our hearts, Grace, Grace, with out it I know nothing, I can do
nothing, I am nothing; I marvel how we can be proud in any good work
whatsoever: that we cast not our selves into the center of our nothing. and say
with S. Paul, By the grace of God I am what I am. We are not sufficient to
think any thing of our selves, as of our selves.

If we will be aided by this grace, without which we are in disgrace with God,
and miserable for ever. we must do our duty, before it coms, when it coms, and
after it is come

6. Before it coms, we must acknowledge and confess the need we have of it: That
which the Wiseman said of a particular Wisdom. 8. 21.
grace, we must say of all: knowing that I could not have the grace of
continency, if God did not give it to me, I went to him* and demanded it of Him
with my whole heart: and this very thing is Wisdom to know that it is a gift of
God; We must do the like; We know or ought to know, that we cannot practice any
vertous action by which we advance toward heaven without the grace of God; we
must then ask it of him humbly, fervently, and with all our heart; and this not
once or twice, but very often; for since it is wholly necessary to the practice
of Virtue, and also to every good and meritorious work in particular, ad
singulos actus, as the Counsels Speak: what shall we do? and what will become
of us, if we are not continually prevented by it?

7. We cannot of our selves prevent and merit it; But we can demerit it, and
render our selves unworthy of it, by many, great and enormous sins, as the jews
did; Let us not do as Ezechiel. 9. 9.
they: let us not hinder or retard the happy coming of his grace.

8. And when it coms: we must carefully not its genious and motions, for fear
of a mistake, and of following the inclinations and the instincts of nature,
instead of the conduct and designs of grace, for though they are wholly
opposite, they are in appearance very like, and it imports very much, not to be
herein deceived; for they that are led by nature are children of the old man:
and they that are guided by grace are children of the new man JESUS CHRIST, or
as the Apostle says, they are the Sons of God.

9. Nature hates all captivity: will not subjection nor humiliation: loves to
govern and command. Grace loves subjection: desires Thomas a Kempis de
Imitatione Christi. lib. 3. cap. 54.
humiliation: and will not govern or command, if not obligd to it.

10. Nature loves praise and glory: to make it self seen and known to many: to
employ and dissipate it self in exterior affairs; Grace loves to be hidden
and unknown to the world: it seeks recollection and retyrement, peace, and
communication with God.

11. Nature flys all that gives difficulty or pain either to soul or body? it
seeks what is proper and particular: loves its own ease and commodity, and
referrs all to it self and to its interest. Grace requires that which is
laborious, which mortifys, and is incommodious to the flesh, which is
serviceable and profitable to many, which conduces to the glory of God. When
then you have thoughts and desires of the first sort, beware such thoughts,
mistrust such inclinations, what ever fair pretense, appearance, and hopes you
may have, to do good by following them, for there is danger: it is to be
feared, that they are not but the inclinations of Nature, and the productions
of self love; But when you have thoughts and affections of the other sort,
suspect them not: for they are ordinarily the instinct^ and motions of Grace.

12. When you have received it: be very careful not to be ungrateful.
Ingratitude says S. Bernard, is a murderer, an opposer of S. Ber ser. 3. de
sept. panib. S. Ber. contrapessimum. vitium Ingrat.
Grace, an enemy to salvation; I think nothing displeases God so much as
ingratitude: it shuts the door against grace which has no entrance where this
Vice is found. There is nothing but ingratitude that hinders your advancement:
the Benefactor reputing the graces lost which he gave to the ungrateful, shuts
his hands, and gives them to him no more* Happy he who returns thanks for every
benefit received from God, who is the Source of all grace; for when we are
grateful for favors receiv'^ we deserve to receive greater.

13. When Grace has produced in you or by you any good, beware to say, that
Our high hand and not our Lord has don these things: Beware to attribute to
your selves the glory of them: say always as S. Paul, by the grace of God I am
what I am; If I have not yielded to temptation, it is by the mercy of God; If I
have received any grace from him, it is by his mercy; if I have consented to it
and labored with it, it is by his mercy; If I am exempted from many sins which
are committed in the world, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
it is by his mercy. Who distinguishes you from others? Have you any thing that
you have not received, and if you have received it, why glorify you your self,
as if you had it of your self?

What difference is there between me, and the most execrable Criminal in the
world? the mercy of God; what difference and distinction between my soul and
the blackest soul in hell? it is the mercy of God; this great sinner, this
unfortunate person was drawn out of nothing: and I also; he was in the mass of
corruption: and I also; he inclined naturally to it: and I also; he had flesh
that rebelled against the spirit, sensuality that was contrary to reason: and J
also; If I have not been so violently tempted as he; If I have not been in the
immediate occasions as he; if I have been more strong and firm then he: it is by
the grace and mercy of God. Acknowledge, says S. Austin, the grace of God, to
which you are debtours for being freed from the crimes which you have not
committed: for no sin is committed by a man, which another might not commit: if
forsaken by him who made man. And after this shall we be proud; shall we think to
be something of our selves? shall we disdain others?

14. S. Paul had great reason to cry-out to us, Tu fide stas, Romans 11. 20. S.
Ber. Ser. 54. in cant.
noli altum sapere, sed time, though you have faith, and other virtues,
nevertheless, be not proud, but fear. Upon which words S. Bernard says, in
verity I have learnt that there is nothing so effectual to keep and recover
grace, as Humility and Fear: you are happy if you fill your heart with a triple
fear; if your fear when you have received grace: and more, when you have lost
it: and yet more, when you have recovered it; fear then when grace comes: fear
when it retyres: fear when it returns; when it comes, fear lest you comply not
well with it; when it retyres fear more: because you have lost your safeguard:
and doubt not but that pride is the cause of it, though you know it not: for
God sees that which is hid from you: God who gives his grace to the humble,
takes it not from the humble; when then a man is deprived of grace, it is a
sign that he is proud. And if it return by the mercy of God, it is then you
ought to fear much more, lest you fall into a more lamentable relaps; fear
therefore God always and withal your heart: mistrust your dispositions how
ever holy and good they may seem, if they make you proud; God left so many
souls in the way of perdition before the Incarnation, to make you know the
necessity of Grace, and to establish you in Humility; will He not permit you to
be lost, if you are not humble? fear if you commit great sins, that God will
not give you efficacious grace to raise you out of them. Fear if you attribute
it to your selves, that God will draw it from you; work your salvation in fear
and trembling: for it is God who produces in you the good will and the work; and
this is the reason why Saints always fear, lest being proud of their good
works: they be deprived of the help of grace, and left in weakness, says S.
Leo, S. Leo. Ser. 8. de Epiph,


Have you yet Baptismal Innocence, fear, beware to lose it: avoid all occasions
that may make you suffer so great a loss; it is a most precious and inestimable
treasure: but a tender one: if it be opened, it will soon rot. Are you in an
ill state, fear; you are in the power of satan, the object of the anger of God,
at the brink of hell; there needs not but an unhappy accident, a sudden death,
to bury you in eternal fire. Are you raised out of sin? fear; fear to fall back
again: your relaps would be more dangerous, your ingratitude more great, the
remedy more hard. In whatsoever State you be, acknowledge the grace of God the
great need you have of it, and call often and instantly for it; if you
acknowledge the necessity of Grace: if you ask it: if you receive it: and
improve it unto the end, assuredly you will be saved; for this divine grace in
the seed, merit, and last disposition to eternal Glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXI. Of good Works in general.
SOme say that Catholics think to be saved by their good works without being
beholding to JESUS CHRIST: by their own merits: not by his; and consequently
that they are the proudest, and the most ungrateful to God of all people in the
world.

2. It Is a strange thing, that they can be so mistaken in our Doctrine: since
our Church constantly and clearly ^ver taught the contrary.

We belive that no force of nature; nor dignity of our best works, can merit
our justification: but we are justifyd freely by grace, through the Redemption
that is in JESUS CHRIST.

3. We teach that our following merits or good works signisy no more, than
actions don by the assistance of God's grace, to which it has pleased his
Goodness to promise a reward; a doctrine, so far from being unsuitable to the
holy scriptures, that nothing is so frequently repeated in them, as God's
gracious promises to recompense with everlasting glory the faith and obedience
of his servants:

4. We believe that the merit and rewardableness of these actions 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Romans 2. 8. Romans ^. 3. Heb. 6. 10. Matthew. 25. 21 2. Tim. 2. 21. Matt. 25. 21.
Matt. 19. 12.
arises not from the value of them, as they are ours, but from the grace and
bounty of God. So we boast not in our selves, but all our glorying is in
CHRIST. We say with S. Paul, that we are naughty and unfaithful servants of
our own selves: but good and faithful, as our Savior says, by the grace of
God; that we are unprofitable by our own works: but profitable* as S. Paul says
by the works of grace; and if we should be absolutely unprofitable, we must
expect the sequel there of, utter darkness that is damnation.

5. Besides good works of obligation, there are other of Supererogation: and
at these Dissenters startle much; they hold it a proud and arrogant thing to
think, that a man may do more than he is commanded as Catholics do teach. Yet
what more plain in Scriptures? Our Savior says, there are Eunucks who have
made themselves Eunucks for the Kingdom of Heaven; and this is more than a man
is bound to, for he may marry if he will, and yet go to heaven. He says again,
If thou will be perfect, go and sell all Matt. 19. 21.
thou have, and give it to the Poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven;
No man can reasonably suppose this to to be a command; he then that obeys it,
as the Apostles did, does more than he is commanded. Concerning Virgins, says
the Apostle I 1. Cor. 7. 25.
have no command: but I give counsel, plainly distinguishing betwixt counsel
and command: betwixt that which we must do, and what we may do: betwixt we^l
and better; He that marries doe^ well: but he that marries not, does better;
and He that does 1. Cor. 7. 38.
well, does not sin, does not break a commandment: but he that does better,
does more than he is commanded. Wherefore Catholics say, that God does not
require of us all the good that He enables us to do; and this is the ground of
works of superero gation, and doing more then is commanded. Now if God do not
require all, but only thus much, to do well: then the doing better then well,
is a stock which God gives us, to offer Him liberal services, beyond the band
of duty. And what pride is it for man, to acknowledge this sweet providence of
his Creator, and to p^aise his merciful indulgence in not exacting so much as
He might: and giving him a way and means to show his voluntary and unexacted
love to him. We give surely by this more honor and glory to God, then they who
say, that God requires of us all that He enables us to do, yea and more,
commanding things impossible: and then punishes us for not doing them. Far be
such a thought of God from a Christian heart* God commands nothing, but what is
honorable, profitable, and also easy with his grace. That which He demands to
save us is, that we do good works conformable to our supernatural Being, and
to the high end to which we are designed; that we do them in a competent and
convenient Quantity; and that we do not abuse or lose the Talents which He
lends us, but use these well in the practice of them: as shall be seen, God
Matt. 3. 10.
aiding, in this Discourse.

6. Now the axe is put to the root of the tree, every tree therefore that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the Matt. 7. 19.
Matt. 20.
fire: says S. John Baptist. And our Savior himself in the Gospel confirms
the Sermon of his Precursor and repeats his words Every tree that bears not
good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be cast into the fire. It is not then
enough for to be saved, to have only the Psalm. 61. 13. Matt. 16. 27. Romans 2. 6.
2. Cor 5. 10. Apoc. 2. 23.
leaves of Saintlike words: or only the flowers of holy and good desires: or
only the rinds and the exterior of good fruit: but we must have good and
perfect fruit, which are the works of Virtues. And in S. Matthew He calls the
Elect, not Speakers, not designers, not complementers, but Workmen: Voca
operarios. So in diverse other places of holy Writ it is said: God will render
unto every one, not according to his designs or fine discourses, but according
to his works.

He that made you without you will not save you without you said S. Augustine.
And explicating these words of David I sought God with Aug. Ep. 21. ad Prob. c.
13. Psalm. 76. 2.
my hands, since God has no body, says he, how can one seek him with the
hands? he answers, that is to say, with good works. And this is not that God
is hard to bestow his gifts, and to do good to his creatures: but it is that He
would do it reasonably and decently, according to the rules of his providence
and infinite Wisdom. He has united his glory and our interests in procuring
our Salvation: He will exercise and make seen his adorable perfections, his
Power, Wisdom, and incomprehensible Goodness. The glory of his power shined
more when he overcame Egypt by an army of flies, when he defeated Holofernes by
the hand of a woman, than when He made use of powerful armies, Erit memoriale
nominis tui, cum manus feminae dejecerit eum. And this same power shines yet
more gloriously, when He ruins the empire of Satan, beats down the reign of
sin and of the world, conquers heaven, and bears away the Crown of glory by
feeble instruments.

He shows his Wisdom, which demands that his goods and gifts be not
undervalued: that one give them not to the unworthy, who contemn them: it is to
have little esteem of them, and despise them: if we will not labor to obtain
them.

He makes his goodness seen, in that he vouchsafes to make use of his
creatures, in an employment so honorable and so glorious. We hold it a great
honor to be employed by a King in the regency and the government of a Kingdom;
how much more honor is it, to be associated with a God in his more great, and
noble actions, to conquer the kingdom of heaven, to sanctify our souls, and to
enrich our selves with christian Virtues?

7. The Scripture speaking of the glory of heaven, says it is a salarie, a
harvest, a crown, for to teach us that if we will be saved, we must necessarily
labor, sow, fight; Each one shall receave his reward according to his labor,
says S. Paul to the Corinthians 1. cor 3. 8. Gal. 6 7 2. Tem. 2. 5.
and to the Galatians, a man shall not reap but what he has sown; And to
Timothy, No man shall be crowned, but he that has fought legitimatly. A servant
that should not have don any evil, but should have held his arms closed all
the day and year, would he have the impudence to demand a salary? a labourer
that should neither have sown nor planted, would he hope to gather or reap any
thing? A Soldier that has played whilst that others fought, would he have the
boldness to desire to be crowned? The Son of God who is our model, was not
contented to desire our Salvation and to demand it of his Father: He labored
for it: and to succeed in it, we must apply our selves to virtuous works
efficaciously and seriously: and in the second place as good trees, we must
produce these good fruits plentifully.

7. The Son of God says in S. John, I am the Vine: you the John. 15. 5.
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth much fruit; He
says not simply fruit, but much fruit: then He adds, if any abide not in me,
he shall he cast forth as the branch and shall wither, and shall be thrown into
the fire. He was so much concerned for the fecundity of his branches, that He
suffered death to merit grace for them to produce an abundance of good fruit;
He delivered himself, says S. Paul, that He might redeem us from all iniquity,
and might cleanse to himself a people acceptable, a pursuer of good works.
Wherefore the Apostle ceased not to pray for the Collossians, Ep. ad Tit. 2.
14. Colloss. 1. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 17.
that they might walk whorthy of God, in althings pleasing, fructifying in all
good works. And in like manner, prays God to exhort comfort and confirm the
Thessalonians in every good work and word. But he makes us see yet more the
necessity of this fecundity or abundance of good works, in the second Epistle
to S. Timothy: for behold how he deciphers there an elect soul, who aspires
seriously to the happy life, and who shall obtain it: she is says he, a Vessel
unto honor sanctifyd, and profitable to our Lord, ready and disposed to every
good work; He says ready or prepared, 2. Tim. 2 21.
because every one cannot practice effectually all good works: but a chosen
soul is disposed to do them promptly, whenever God gives him ability and
occasion.

These Words of S. Paul instruct us to employ the Talents, and to cooperate
with the grace that God gives us, faithfully. In what consists the fidelity of
a servant? in that he employes the goods of his Master to as much profit as he
can: and therefore the servant in the Gospel, who had employed well the five
talents which were given him to trafick, was called faithful servant, S. Matt.
25. 26.
serve bone and fidelis, and the other who gained not with his talent was
termed, naughty servant. This ought to admonish us Gregory. hom. 9 in Evang.
says great S. Gregory, to consider carefully, lest we who have received more
from God than others, should be therefore judged more severely and rigorously
than others: for when the gifts of God are augmented in us, the accounts which
we must render of them also do increase: every one of us ought then to be so
much more humble and more diligent in the service of God, how much he finds
himself more obliged for the fovours he received from him.

9. Nevertheless, there are very many Christians that make not good use of
them: there are but few comparatively, to whom one may not say, as to the idle
servant in the Gospel who hid his Talent, serve nequam, naughty servant.

Some have the Talent of a good wit and understanding; And in what do they
employ this fine wit? to speak a witty word in company: to jest pleasantly: to
study curiosities, and complements: to make ingenious replies: to the end they
say, there is a Lady that has a great wit: there is a man that knows how to
intertain company; they do as that foolish Emperor, who spent the day in
chasing and killing flies with a golden bodkin; they have golden understandings
which are not employed but to catch flies: the flies of vain glory: of worldly
praise: of complacencie in them selves: and at the best, but in the affairs of
this world; God gave it them to consider his works: to contemplate his
perfections: to meditate upon the Mysteries of Faith: to conceive acts of
repentance: to do good works: to assist the poor: to confort the oppressed; to
help widows and orphans: and to instruct the ignorant: and they do nothing
less: is not this to lose or abuse their Talent?

Others have the Talent of perfect health, a body entire and well composed,
that they may bear the labors of good and virtuous works, and the austerities
of penance; and they let this health w^ste away in an idle, slack, and faint
life. Ladies if you are good Christians, after you have don your devotions, you
ought to labor in some work for the Poor, since S. Paul does say so.

To others God has given riches of this world to do good with them, to buy
heaven, and to redeem their sins by alms. if God had don this favor to one man
only, to be able to redeem eternal pains with temporal goods, to be able to
oblige his Savior, and to gain his favor with money, how happy would he be
esteemed? when a rich man is upon his deathbed, and dispair'd off by
Physicians, we are wont to say: o if life and health could be bought with
money, how glad would this man be? how willingly would he give the half of his
fortune to free himself from present death? Yes, life and health may be
purchased with money: not the fragil and temporal health, but the solid and
eternal: not this life which is full of miseries: but the happy life which is a
collection of all goods: And instead of purchasing this life, instead of
redeeming their sins by alms, instead of traficking with this Talent they keep
it ^id and locked up in a Coffre, or they throw it away in vanities,
superfluities, and debaucheries.

Another Talent which God desires us to manage with more care, is the time He
gives us to do penance, and other works of holiness. He desires so much that
we make use of the present time, that he leaves us uncertain of the future: we
know not that after this year, this month, this week, this day, there will be
any time for us. Is it not then a great want of prudence, to let it pass
without making good use of it? Consider well your life, see in what you employ
the precious time? You rise at eight or nine a clock: you lose two or three
hours in dressing your selves: you content your selves to hear a short mass:
the afternoon is spent in giving or receiving visites: the evening in frivolous
discourses, in cards, or other pastimes: is this the life of a Christian? is
this to bring forth much fruit? is this to be a Pursuer of good Works?

But that with which we ought to cooperate most diligently, is the grace of
God: Wherefore. S. Paul cryes-out to us, receive 2. Cor. 6.
not the grace of God in Vain. Nevertheless holy Job notes our abuse of it:
Ipsi fuerunt rebels Lumini: they have been rebels against the light. Is it
not true that this word is verifyd in you? you Job. 24. 23.
do not sin through ignorance; you know well that you live not as you ought;
you would not dye in the state of negligence, Vanity, worldliness, in which you
are; you do many things which in the hour of death you will wish you had not
don; you do not many things which you will wish you had don: you seek arguments
and apparent reasons to flatter your selves in your imperfections, and abuses
of Gods graces; But We need not to go out of the parable of the Gospel to
confute them. The Master said to the servant, who had hid his Talent. naughty
servant, why have you not put it out to profit? He had not dissipated, nor
employed ill the Talent: but because he had not gained by it, he said to him,
naughty servant; take him, and cast him into exterior darkness.

Let us then apply our selves to good works so, that we may say with S. Paul
the grace of God has not been fruitless in me; that 1. Cor. 15. 10. Colloss 4.
12. Apoc. 3.
we may be of the number of those to whom it is said, You stand perfect and
full in all the Will of God; that we may not be subject to this reproach in the
Apocalypse, I find not thy works full before God. Consider what you would say
to a workman that should rest two or rhree hours daily more then he ought;
what you would say to your farmer, if he should bring you but half the rent he
owes you.

These holy dispositions must com from God; it belongs to him to give the
beginning, the progress, and the accomplishment of our virtue. Beg then these
graces of him humbly, fervently, and frequently: cooperate with them
faithfully: render to him all the glory of your actions: and confess that when
God shall crown your merits, He will crown his mercies and his favors, Amen.

DISCOURSE XXII. OF NOT DEFERRING GOOD WORKS
THat which learned Hypocrates said in a certain occasion, we may apply to
penance, and the practice of other good Works; Life is short, Art is long,
occasion flies away swiftly, the experience is dangerous. Life is short: it is
but seventy or eighty years: infancy and chilhood cuts off a good part of it:
another part is made unprofitable by extreme old age; sleep and other
necessities of the body take up at least a third part of it: all which being
deducted, the remainder will be found to be but short. Art is long: it is a
trade full of difficulty, a high and hard enterprise for such as accustom
themselves to the ways of the world, to do penance, and satisfy an infinite
Justice for many and great sins, and after that to acquire virtue and
perf^ction. Occasion flies away swiftly: It slides away insensibly, it is bald
behind, having escaped, it cannot be retaken: when the convenience to do
penance, to acquire perfection is past, we shall not recover it again. The
Experiment is dangerous: for the dignity of a man's body says the Interpreter
of Hypocrates, and I Will say to my purpose, for the dignity of the reasonable
soul: It is an Experience very dangerous to try whether or no we have don true
penance, and practiced solid virtue: there is nothing less at stake than our
soul, than our eternal salvation; if we experience in the hour of our death,
that our penance has been falls, that our virtues have been wanting or
defective, it is an irreparable fault: we commit it but once, but it is for all
Eternity.

Whence comes it then that we lose so easily the fair occasions which God
presents us to labor in a work of so great consequence, delaying our
conversion to old age, or to the time to com, which perhaps will never be for
us.

I desire to destroy utterly so penicious an abuse by three powerful reasons.
First, that the Conversion which you pretend to make hereafter is uncertain:
Secondly, harder: and thirdly, less fruitful.

2. It is a maxim in Divinity: that God is absolute Master of his goods,
independent in his gifts, and that He gives them as He pleases; You say you
will convert your self hereafter: that nothing presses: and you have leisure
enough. Know that you will never do it without a particular favor of God; Know
that He owes it not to any: He has refused it to many, and when you delay to
leave your evil and negligent life, adding sin to sin, you give him cause to
refuse it to you also. Consider the works of God Amos 1. 2.
says the holy Ghost by the mouth of the Wise man and see that none can
correct whom He has despised; of this Predicament were those of Damascus,
Tire, Moab, and others, of whom the Creator says non convertam, I will not
Convert them; of this number were the Jews: to whom the Son of God did say, I
go, S. John. 8. S. John. 12. 33.
and you will seek me, and you will die in your sin. and those, of whom the
Evangelist said, that they could not believe, because God had blinded them, and
hardened their hearts, that they might not be converted.

It is rhen a strange folly: It is to build upon quick sands: it is to
establish a design of the greatest importance upon an uncertain event, to
defer your conversion to old age, or to future time.

You let the time slide away, the occasions and inspirations which God gives
you to do penance, and advance in piety: who has ascertained you that* He will
give you them hereafter?

You dispose of your self, and make the appointement of your life, as if you
were the Master of it: you speak of your conversion, as if it depended on you
only: you say, I will now take my pleasure content my passion, satisfy my
inclination: afterward I will convert myself: will apply my self seriously to
the affairs of my salvation; Poor man! you imagine that God will take your
measures, that He will accommodate himself to your little projects, and
regulate his thoughts, designs, and conduct according to the level of your
rash thoughts: You deceive you self.

You imagine that you have leisure enough to convert your self; But if God call
you out of this world suddenly, will you convert your self in old age? if you
dye in the flower of your age, will you become virtuous in declining years, if
you dye this year, how will you do it?

The evil spirit deals with men, as the Physician or Apothecarie with his
Patient: when he sees the sick cannot swallow a whole pill. he devides it, and
makes him swallow it by piecemeal; Satan to seduce our first parents and o make
them fall boldly into sin, said to them, You shall not dye; at present seeing it
impossible to persuade you, that you shall not dye, because you see daily the
contrary before your eyes: he devides the pill to make you swallow it: he says
to you, you shall not die so soon: he makes you believe, that you will not die
this year: afterward he persuades you that you will not dye in the following
year: nor in the year after that: so by little and little he persuades you what
you would not believe in general, that you shall not dye: 'til it happens to you
as to our first parents, that sad experience makes you see the contrary: when
on a sudden you will be surprised, when you think least of it.

3. But if you should not be surprised by sudden death, and your life should be
a hundred years: it is a folly to believe that you will convert your self more
easily in the latter season of your age then in the present. The word of God
tells you so expressly, Adolescens juxta viam suam, etiam cum senuerit non
recedet Prou. 22. 6.
ab ea: it rarely happens that a man withdraws himself in old age from the way
he followed in his youth. And by Hieremie He says, if the Ethiopian can change
his skin, and the Leopard his spots, you may Hierem. 13. 23. Job. 20. 11.
become virtuous when you are accustomed to vice. And therefore the holy Ghost
says by the mouth of Job of one that had not mortifyd but given himself to
vices in his youth, his bones shall be filled with the vices of his youth and
shall accompany him to his grave; for the infirmities of the soul, the
inclinations and vicious customs which we quit not in good time, remain
commonly with us until old age: now old age being feeble, weak, impotent, not
able to do violence to it self, and thinking of little else then of maintaining
the short life that rests, seldom purges it self from evil customs; the old
are as much inclined to ambition, detraction, anger, as they were at the age of
30 years; so that the first part of the maxim of the holy Ghost is verifyd in
them, that the infirmities of their youth have accompanied them to old age; And
who doubts, if God do not work wonderfully in them, and if they do not use the
greatest violence upon themselves, that the second part will be found as true:
that these vices will remain with them 'til death? Et cum ipsis in pulvere
dormient.

S. Austin notes judiciously that the Son of God to raise Lazarus, proceeded
otherwise than He did to raise the daughter of the Prince of the Synagogue; to
raise this young maid, He took her only by the hand, and said to her, daughter
rise, as if He wakened her out of a sweet sleep: to raise Lazarus, He troubled
himself twice, wept, cry'd-out with a loud voice, Lazarus com forth; this was
not that He had more difficulty to raise him than the other, since He will
raise all men in the end of the world, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye;
But this was 1. Cor. 15. 52.
to show that there are sinners which are with much more difficulty converted
than some other; He that having fallen through humane frailty makes speedy
recourse to the Son of God, is easily revived; but he that is half rotten as
Lazarus, buried and bound by his ill coustoms, covered with the stone of
obduration, returns not so easily to the life of grace: but to this effect
there is need of cries, tears, groans, great force and violence upon himself;
such is the strength of bad customs, and vicious habits: which if not in the
beginning rooted out do daily grow stronger, increase, and become a second
nature. You see then that your conversion deferred to future time, or to old
age, is not only very dangerous, but also much more hard. Let us then proceed
and show, that it will be likewise less fruitful.

4. To convince you of this, let us suppose you will live to extreme old age:
and that you will do penance and practice virtue about the end of your days;
this I grant you to convince you: though most probably it will never be. But
what will you say of the Time so dear, precious, and important, which you lose
by delaying your conversion? Have you forgotten the counsel of the holy Ghost,
who says to you by the Wiseman: go to the school of the Ant, disdain not to
learn your lesson of this little Prou 6.
creature: see how diligent it is in the summer, to make provivision for the
winter: how it loses not one moment of time. Have you forgotten this advice of
our Savior, work whilst it is day, for the night will com in which you can do
nothing; And this John. 9. 4.
word of S. Paul: Let us do good whilst we have time; This life, is the time to
make provision, the proper day to work, the season to merit; All our good
actions are the seed of eternity: they will produce us eternal joys, honors,
riches, and delights; Is it not then a great prejudice to lose so great
treasures as you might heap up in the space of many years?

A noble and learned young man who lived a little licentiously having written a
fine letter in heroic verse to S. Austin, the Saint answered him in this
manner: Reading your letter I desired to have for some hours your poetic
vein, to describe in a doleful Elegy, the greatness of your loss. God has
endued you with a good understanding, with a happy memory, and with much
acquired Science: o great damage to lose all these talents! how much am I
displeased to see that you lose them for trifles: If you have found a golden
chalice, would you not make a present of it to our Savior* would you not give
it willingly to the Church to be employed in his service? God has given you a
golden understanding; Why do you not make of it an acceptable sacrifice to Him?
I say the same to you; you are in the spring of your age, you have a good
nature, a lively spirit, a solid judgment, and a free Will; o if all this were
seriously consecrated to God, what glory would He receive thereby? what
services might you render Him? what souls would you gain to him? what
recompenses would you find in Heaven? and you lose all this for the desire of I
know not what: for a little sensual pleasure: for a tie to some Creature, for
fear to displeas I know not whom: through slothfulness to give your self in
good time to God, you bury these rich treasures in a tepide, unprofitable, and
idle life: And you reserve for God but the scum of your life, the ruins of
your age, the incommodious and uncertain time, your old age, in which you will
be able to do little more then to say a few prayers sitting in a chimney corner.

5, God commanded in the ancient Law that they should offer to Him in
Sacrifice, the strongest, best, and soundest of the creatures: will He permit
that one offer to him the most weak, feeble, and unprofitable age of man? He
that ordered the first fruits of the earth should be offered to Him, and
otherwise blessed not the rest: does He not exact that a man should offer to
him the first fruits of his life? will He bless the old age of him, who denied
him his youth? Remember o man that your life is the possession and the
inheritance of God: if your farmer brings you for ren^ wheat mixed with much Ry
you complain, and esteem him unjust; what would you do then, if he should
bring you only weeds: What would you do, if the Keeper of your Vineyard instead
of good and pure liquour which he owes you, should bring you nothing but dregs
and lees? And of your life which is the inheritance of God, you give to the
Devil the good corn, the fine flower, the pure liquour, to wit your younger
and better years, and you reserve for God but Ry, straw, dregs and lees, which
is your old age. Are you not ashamed to reserve for the exercise of virtue but
the time of old age? Is it time to begin to live well, when you are ready to
dye? and to lay the foundations of your eternal happiness in that age, to which
so few do live?

6. S. Augustine cryed-out to himself, Quamdiu cras, quare non modo, quare non
in hac hora? I say the same to you; How long w^ll you say to morrow? why not at
this present, since you have time to do it, and time that is proper, which is
in your power, and you know no^ that you shall have the time to com. How many
see you die i^ their youth, and have not time to do the good which they
designed; Why not now? whilst your custom to evil is ye^ weak and easy to be
broken: and if you expect long it will be confirmed and made invincible; Why
not at thi^ present whilst you have strength to bear Austerities; since in old
age you will be worn out, and will have difficulty enough to bear the
inconveniences of old age i^ self. Why not now whilst you are in the flower of
your age, whilst you have the most fine, strong, and vigorous part of your age,
and which God will accept, if you present it to him: but will perhaps reject
you, if you offer to him but old age, the remainder of your time.

Give then your selves now entirely to God: break at once all those fetters
which hinder you: resolve at this present to divorce without delay all those
evil habits, and affections to creatures: and you will see, that being so
unbound, you will seem to be another man, unloaden of a heavy burden, freed
from a cruel tyranny; brought into a terrestial Paradise: you will say as S.
Austin when he was converted, You have broken o Lord! my chains, and I will
sacrifice to you a host of praise. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXIII. OF TRVE PENANCE.
IF we have never so little of understanding and good nature, we w^ll
acknowledge the great obligations we have to God, in that He having exercised
his justice upon the apostate Angels, and having left them in their misery
without remedy, He vouchsafed to have mercy on us, and instituted a means, to
wit penance, by which we may obtain pardon of our sins and regain his favor.

I will here consider only the necessity of it, and the Conversions which it
makes in us, remitting the rest to the discourse upon the Sacrement.

Misericordiae Domini quia non sumus consumpti, said the Prophet Jeremiah: It
is a great mercy of our Lord that He darts Lament. 3. 22.
not forth the thunderbolts of his justice upon our criminal heads: When we are
in the state of sin, He has good reason to do it: we deserve it more than
justly. It is a mercy incomparably greater, that He vouchsafes to think of us,
to have thoughts of peace, reconciliation and accommodation: Ego cogito
cogitationes pacis; But it is a mercy above all thought and hope, that He
vouchsafes for this effect, to send to us Ambassadors: for Christ we are
Legates, says S. Paul; Woe to us, if we receive 2 Cor. 5. 20.
them not with gratitude for so great a favor; woe to us, if we hear them not,
since it is not the custom to send Ambassadors, but for affairs of the greatest
consequence. What is that which God desires of us? what is the affair these
Ambassadors must nogotiate with us? It is to induce us to penance. This is that
which Prophets, Apostles, and Doctors have always announced on the part of God:
Convert and do penance from all your iniquities, Ezech. 18. 30. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Says the Prophet Ezechiel; And the Apostle, For Christ we beseech you to be
reconciled to God. O my God what is this! What goodness? what mercy? God
vouchsafes to seek us, to exhort us, to pray us, to be reconciled to him by
Penance; And He complains of the false Prophets, and complying Preachers that
negociate not this af^aire. Thy Prophets, not mine, have seen falls and foolish
things to thee: nor have they opened thy iniquities to provoke thee to penance.

2. This word penance coms from the word pain, and this word pain, is derived
from the latin word pone, behind, because pain does always follow sin; If we
offend God and imagine to escape unpunished, we imagine a thing that never has
been, and never will be, a thing impossible. This made holy Job say, I feared
all my works, knowing that thou did not spare the Job. 9. 28.
offender; For if the sinner himself does not punish sin during this life by
penance, he will fall into the hands of the Lord says Ecclesiasticus, who will
punish it terribly in the other world. And we see in the scripture that the
holy Ghost attributes to Ecclus. 2. 22.
impenitence the punishments that God inflicts on men: and to penance, the
pardon and the mercy that He does them; the same Prophet Job speaking of an
obstinate Soul said, Let his Job. 24. 19.
sin lead him even into hell, let mercy forget him: because God has given him
place to do penance, and he abused it; and on the contrary, the sacred text
does say, that God pardoned the Ninivites, because they did penance.

3. Let us suppose you have a suit at law, in which you have a trial for your
estate, honor, and also for your life: your Soliciter tells you, such a paper
is wanting; Your Advocate tells you, if you will gain your Suit it is necessary
to have such a writing; the wife of your Judge, who has an affection fort you
says to you, I heard often my husband and other Iu^ges, who Spoke of your
business, Say, that you must have such a writing to gain your Suit; the Judge
who is favorable to you likewise says, I shall be forced to condemn you, if
you produce not such a paper; will you not be void of Judgment sense, and
reason, if you use not all endeavors to produce this writing? You have a
process of the greatest importance in the Tribunal of the justice of God, which
must be judged in the hour of your death; The question is not about lands, or
other temporal goods, but of possessing the kingdom of heaven, or being burnt
eternally in hell. The Preacher who is your Soliciter, who solicits your
salvation with all affection, says to you, that to gain your suit, you must do
penance; S. Peter S. Paul, S. John Evangelist, and the other Saints, who are
Acts. 2. 38.
your Advocats, declare to you, that it is necessary for you; S. Peter: Do
penance to have pardon of your sins; S. Paul, God announces unto all men that
they do penance, S. John, They shall be in the greatest affliction, if they do
not penance; The Church which Acts. 17. 30. Apoc. 2. 22.
is the Spouse of your Judge tells you, that to be saved, you must follow the
exhortation which S. John Baptist made you saying, Yield fruits worthy of
penance; The son of God who is your Judge, says to you twice in the same place,
to move you the more, If you do not penance, I will condemn You: You shall
perish all; Will you not then be Ennemies to your own salvation, Luke. 13. 3. 5.
and fools in the highest degree; if you do not penance?

4. Do penance then if you be Wise; do it at present not expecting longer; you
have not perhaps ever don it well; perhaps you will never do it so well as you
may now; if you let this present time and occasion slip, perhaps there will be
no more time for you; The Son of God declares to you, that He will call you
when you think least of it; S. Paul tells you, that when you shall think that
you enjoy a profound peace, and are sure to live, then a sudden death shall
surprise you; the examples of so many that die suddenly or before they
expected, admonish you to lay hold on the present time; say not then we have
time enough: that nothing presses to do penance; It is quite contrary; There is
nothing that does not urge and press* What is it that urges and Pressess, you
to penance? It Is the Will of God who commands you by S. John Baptist, by the
Apostles, by the holy Doctors, by the Counsels of the Church, and by the mouth
of his own Son. What is that which urges you? It Is the fear you ought to have
to offend the greatness of God, his infinite justice, his Immensity, and most
adorable Presence. What is that which urges you? The fear of falling into new
sins, of dying in an ill state, of losing the merit of your good Works: It is
the example of the Saints, who have don Penance all their life; It is the
charity of JESUS, who incarnated himself, who endured so much, Who dyed upon
the Cross to oblige you to it: who has expected you so long, and so patiently
with this intention; who promises you pardon and to receive you, if you do true
Penance.

See then the changes which true penance makes, that you may not so easily be
deceived in a matter of so great importance. The Prophet Iool expresses them in
a few words: Convert to me in all your heart, in fasting, and in weeping, and
Joel. 2. 12.
in mourning. In the first place it makes a change in us, Convert; In the
second. it changes our heart: convert to me in your heart; In the third place,
It changes all the heart: convert to me in all your heart; in the fourth: It
rests not in the heart on^y, but changes our exterior: Convert to me in
fasting and in mourning.

5. In the first place, true penance changes and converts us: Convert; It is an
admirable Chimistrie which transforms not metalls, but souls; ir changes not
peuter into silver, copper into gold: but men into Angels: from carnal,
terrestrial, vicious and brutal, it turns them into spiritual, virtuous, and
divine men. S. Paul calls him that is converted, a new creature, a new man, and
he says that by penance we are renewed and reformed, because we divest our
selves of the old Adam, for to revest our selves with the new, which is
JESUS CHRIST.

6. This Word; in your hearts, notes the second change, and teaches us, that
it is the heart, which must be first and Ephesians. 4. 24.
chiefly changed. It is the heart that God demands always, when He speaks of
conversion: convert your selves to me in all your heart; rent your hearts and
^n o^ your garments says He by his Prophet Joel. And by the Psalmist, my God
you will not despise a contrite Joel 2. Psalm. 50. Ezech. 18. 31.
and humbled heart; and by the Prophet Ezechiel, cast away all your
prevarications. and make your selves a new heart, and a new Spirit; A new
spirit, that is thoughts, sentiments, and opinions; A new heart: that is wills
affections, and desires quite other then before.

7. Upon which S. Gregory admonishes us of two Errors into part. 1. Past. c. 9.
which we are apt to fall very dangerously; we take often, says he the thought
of our understanding for the disposition of our heart, the Idea of our
imagination, for the affection of our will. You will find sometims Penitents,
whom the Confessor asking: Are you well prepared to confession? They will
answer readily, yes Sir; we have made an act of contrition; And how have they
made it? They have read in a book a prayer or form of contrition: my God it
repents me from the bottom of my heart to have committed Sin, because it
displeases you; I am sorry to have offended you because you are infinitely good;
and because they have said these, or the like words in their understanding, or
with their mouth, they think that they have made an Act of contrition. It Is
well don to say these words, provided you say true; But to think you have made
an Act of Contrition, by saying them with your mouth, or in your understanding,
is a most pernicious error; For Contrition is not in the lips, nor in the
imagination, nor in the understanding, but in the Will. God requires not that
you say, you are sorry to have offended him, but He wills that you be so in
effect; a man that harbors animosities in his heart, or that restores not
goods unjustly gotten, may say a hundred times my God I am Sorry to have
offended you, and yet he will not have one grain of true repentance. By what
may one know that he has it? by the effects: if you make restitution; if you
leave off this unjust suit and repair damages; if you fly this occasion of sin:
you show probably that your heart is changed. But if you content your self with
words or imaginations. one will say to you, that you give to God the motion of
your lips: But the affection of your heart is far from Him*

8. Others change their lives, and their hearts notwithstanding are not
changed; the change is made about them, not in them; they were heretofore
frequenters of naughty houses, and of ill companies? Now they are ruined in
their fortune, health, and reputation by their dissolutions; Wherefore they go
no more to those houses, into those companies, they make no more excesses, they
play no more: because they have not wherewith to to defray the charges, or their
health will not permit them; it is their purses, or their bodies that are
changed, not perhaps their hearts. I know not what confessions such do make:
their bodies and their tongues cease to commit the sin: But their hearts perhaps
cease not to love it; and if God has not the heart, He makes little or no
account of all the rest; He loves so much the heart, that He will have it all.

9. He says by his Prophet, Convert your selves to me with all Deuteronomy. 4.
your heart; And by Moses, when you shall seek the Lord you will find him, if
you seek him in all your heart. He demands not all your money, but only a part
in alms: nor all your fruits, but only a part in tithe; but he will have all
your heart without reserve, restriction, or division: so that no affection
whatsoever may remain in it to mortal sin: no division permitted of your love,
which is as fatal to it, and to your conversion, as it is unto your heart: He
wills that you quit, not one, two, three, or four sins only, but all without
exception: and not only for the present time, but for ever; for if there remain
in your heart, the least design for the future, your conversion is false,
deceitful, and unfruitful.

10. The fourth conversion that true penance makes is of our exterior: it
makes us to do exterior works of penance when these are in our power. The
Prophet said not only, convert in your heart, but moreover in fasting, and
weeping, and in mourning. And S. John Baptist required exterior works of
penance when he said, yield fruits worthy of penance; And our Savior sais not
only, that a good tree bears not bad fruit, but he adds, that it produces good,
and that it is by this, that we must know it to be good; if your penance be not
of this stamp, it is steril as the figtree near Bethania, and is likewise
cursed by our Savior.

11. If you ask S. Paul, what are the fruits that this good tree of penance
ought to bear? He answers writing to the Corinthians, that it is a great care
of our salvation, a holy indignation against Sin, a fear and apprehension of
Gods jugements, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
a great desire to be pleasing to him, an ardent zeal of his glory, a spirit of
vengeance to punish in our selves the offense of God.

If you demand of S. Chrysostom, what are these fruits? He answers, that they
are the practices of virtues wholly contrary to the crimes you have committed:
for example, you have usurped Hom. 1. in Matt. circa sin.
another goods, content not your self with the restitution of them, but give
liberally of your own. You have wallowed in the mire of sensual pleasures,
deprive your self of the delights which are not forbidden. You have offended
your neighbor by word or work, render good for evil to them that disoblige
you. You have been given to excesses, and to drunkenness, addict your self to
abstinence, and fasting.

If you ask S. Pacian, what are the fruits worthy of penance? Epist. 31.
He answers, that they are mortifications of of the flesh, retrenchments of
pleasures, privations of temporal goods distributed to the Poor, and the
labors of life.

12. This penance cannot be a work of a man: it must be an effect of Gods
mercy; wherefore beg it of him, affectionately; say often vouchsafe to bring us
to true penance. He disposes us and brings us to it sometimes by alms; give as
many as you can, either corporal, or spiritual: Redeem your sins with alms said
the Prophet Daniel. He Dan. 4. 24.
leads us to it by mortifications: for as exterior humiliation is the way to
interior humility, says S. Bernard, so austerities, and exterior penances,
are dispositions to interior compunction. He brings us to penance by the
intercession of the Saints, and by the examples of their virtues; implore their
aid devout ly: have in your houses the history of their lives, read it, and
make it to be read to your families: excite your selves to penance by the
consideration of their austerities; if you have perfectly this second,
Baptism, it will restore you to the innocence of the first; if you have this
shield you will save your selves from the anger of God; if you have this
planck, it will carry you to a good haven, to the haven of eternal felicity.
Amen.

DISCOURSE XXIV. OF PRAYER.
1. JESUS CHRIST being the Idea, Mirror, and the Model of the Elect, He
instructs them by his Example in all which they ought to do to obtain
salvation: He says to them, Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you example; And
because Prayer is one of the most profitable, important, and necessary actions
in a Christian life, He would give most authentike, and remarkable examples
Tract. 24 in John. sub med.
of it. This is the reason, as S. Austin notes, why He pray ed often with a
loud voice; if He had pryed only to obtain graces for his Church, it would have
been enough to have prayed interiourly, in secret, or with a low voice; But
being our Advocate He remembered that He was also our Doctor, and the prayer
which He made for us, He pronunced before us, that He might profit us, not only
by impetration of graces for us, but also by giving us a model. Whence it
follows, that to be heard in our prayers, we ought not to ask any thing, but
what JESUS has asked; He never demanded nor will He ever demand for his, the
Glory of the world, the riches of the earth, or delights of the flesh; we ought
then to ask of God, as his members, and by his merits, love, fear, grace,
conduct, virtues, and temporalls precisely necessary: and we ought to ask them
so, as He asked them. His Apostle teaches us, that his prayer was always
accompanied with Heb. 5.
three circumstances, wherewith ours ought also to be seasoned; During the
course of his life He offered prayers and supplications to God with tears and
great Cry, and He was heard for his Reverence; first then we ought to pray with
Humility; secondly, with Fervor; thirdly, with Perseverance. For his
Reverence: there is Humility; with tears and great cry: there is fervor;
During the course of his life; there is Perseverance.

2. We ought to pray with humility and with interior and exterior Reverence.
The interior consists in a profound abasement and annihilation of our selves in
the presence of God; we ought to esteem much, and apprehend lively the
greatness of his Majesty, the excellence of his Being, and the infinity of his
Perfections, our lowness, littleness, and infirmity: to acknowledge and avow
that we are more then most unworthy, not only to convers with him, or to speak
to him, but also to appear in his presence; we must go to Him as a poor begget
to a rich man, for an Alms: as a sickman to a Physician, to be cured: as a
criminal to a judge, to implore favor and pardon; and say with great S. Austin,
you are infinitely merciful, I am extremely miserable: you are the true
Physician, I am sick to death: you are an Abyss of all good, I poor and in want
of all things. We must go to him with a lively sense of the extreme need we
have of his assistance, and of the severeign independency He has of all
without himself: believing firmly, that all the service we can do him, all the
homages and praises of the highest Seraphins add not one grain to his essential
Beatitude and glory.

3. From this interior disposition proceeds the exterior reverence, by which we
prostrate on the ground before God, or we kneel, and if we cannot, we hold our
selves in an humble, modest* and respectfull posture. This exterior humility is
so suitable with the honor we owe to God, that it has been always used by them
who desired to appease Him, to obtain his mercy, and the grant of their
requests. The just Lot being prostrated ^en. 19. 2.
before an Angel who personated God: his prayer was heard: and this humble
posture helped him to obtain his Request. Iosuah and the Ancient of Israel
desiring to calm the Spirit of Iosuah. 7.
God, prostrated a long time before the arc. The valiant Judith to obtain
success in her generous enterprise, prostrated in her oratory, clothed her body
with a hairshirt, and covered her head with ashes; And what is more
considerable, our Savior himself, when He prayed in the garden, fell upon his
face. Whereupon S. Ceser Bishop of Arles complaining says, Mercy prostrats
himself, and Misery does not: Sanctity humbles himself, and iniquity will not:
Innocence inclines, and malice will not bow; the Judge lies upon the ground, and
the criminal rests himself indecently.

4. It Is true, God is a Spirit, and He demands chiefly of us humility of spirit
and affection of heart; But we are composed of body and soul: we received both
from him: and we ought to employ both in his service. When we kneel reverently,
bow, or prostrate humbly before God, we testify his greatness and excellence:
our lowness, indignity, and vility: that the burden of our sins oppress us, and
that we com to God to be eased: and these humble postures excite our interior
humility and devotion, they dispose us to receive the dew of heaven more
abundantly, and the grant of our requests; one reason why the man-God was heard
of his Father was, that He prayed with great humility of spirit, with a
profound reverence, and prostration of body: He was heard for his reverence,
says S. Paul

5. He prayed in the second place, with tears and a strong cry; to show the
fervor of his spirit, and to testify the aspirations of his heart; we may
note, that very frequently, if not as often as it is said, any one has
cryed-out in prayer to God, the sacred text does add, that he was heard: and
God promises it expressly: He shall cry out to me, and I will hear him; What is
it to cryout to God in prayer? Is it to raise the Psalm. 90.
Voice? No: for Moses moved not his lips, and God said to him: you cry-out to
me; When you pray, an ardent desire is a great cry in the ears of God said S.
Bernard.

6. Why think you God deferrs a long time the grant of our requests, also when
we ask virtues and spiritual favors? It is says S. Austin to increase and
inflame our desire: that we may learn to esteem much, and to have a great
desire of great S. Ang. tr. 1. in. Io: and ser. 5. de Verbis Domini.
things, We are accustomed to say that a thing is little worth, that is not
worth the asking; It is then worth the asking so much the more fervently, how
much it is more noble and more precious; and what is more precious then the
love of God, his grace, and the Salvation of our souls? when we pray coldly or
tepidly, we make no great account of the graces that we ask: if we make no
great account of them, we render our selves unworthy of them.

7. The reason why we pray negligently, and that we have not a great desire to
be heard, is that we ponder not the extreme need we have of Gods mercy: we
consider this affair as a thing indifferent, or of little consequence; We ought
to believe firmly, that if God has not pity on us, we shall be most miserable
and unhapy creatures; we know not that God has pardoned the sins of our youth:
that we have had a supernatural and legitimate repentance of them; and if we
should know this: we know not what will become of us; for we are more fragil
than glass, more weak then reeds, and more unconstant then the winds: what will
then beco^m of us, if God has not pity on us.

7. He that knows not how to pray, let him go to sea, and see how they pray in
a great strom, and in danger of death: and let him pray so always, and He will
be saved infallibly. We are in a greater danger of damnation, then they are of
death; they are not so endangered, but by two or three winds: we are by more
then six: by pride, avarice, envy luxury, and other passions; betwixt them and
death there is but a planke: betwixt me and hell, there is but my will, which
is more fragil than that planke; if that planke were left alone, it would last
a longtime: but if my will were left to it self but a little while, it would
fall into horrible precipices, and lose it self; we are more incapable to
govern our selves and obtain salvation without a particular grace of God, than
a man who has never-been at sea, is to govern a ship in a tempest in the midst
of rocks and sands; Now I make your selves judges, if we ought not to pray with
all the force of our hearts?

8. But let us not go to sea: let us stay on land: there is no need to go so
far to learn to pray; I find here a great number of excellent Teachers: but I
am a bad scholar and learn not my lesson well: these are the poor that ask
alms; they give us, not thinking of it, fine instructions, if we reflect upon
them* If they know where early in the morning is a great concours of people,
they rise not flowly, but hasten to the place; Rise you so early, to have
opportunity to pray half an hour or an hour: the Spirit is then more fresh,
less incombred with affairs, and more vigorous to pray. They range about the
streets and Churches where they know are rich and charitable persons; make you
recours to the friends of God, to the Saints who are rich in merits, and
powerful with the Son of God; The Poor discover their wounds, they show their
ulcers, and half rotten members: and if they have none, they counterfeit some,
to move men to compassion; we have no need to counterfeit: we have but too many
in our souls: we must acknowledge them in the presence of God, and expose them
to the Compassionat aspects of his mercy, and say: my God! you see I am but
darkness, weakness, poverty, and misery: I have nothing of my self, but
ignorance and sin.

Though many of these Poor are Idiots and ignorant: yet they find words,
reasons, and arguments to move us to compassion, to persuade us to mercy, and
to draw from us an Alms; Madame have pity on me: bestow one penny upon me, you
will not be the poorer, and I will pray for you. I am a poor orphan, a stranger
and far from my friends and country, where I was ruined by fire; show your
charity to me, I ask it for the love of God. for the Passion of our Savior.
why find they so many words to beg an alms, and we find them not to pray God?
It is because they have a great desire to receive an alms from men: and we
desire but little to receive one that is more necessary from God. It Is necessary
that the feeling of our wants do suggest to us words; and one half hour of
prayer made with such a feeling will be better then three hours of prayer
without it.

9. Solomon made a prayer accompanied with the two first conditions: he asked
of God continence with humility and fervor; he asked it humbly: for he
acknowledged that he could not have it of himself, and that it pertain'd to God
only to give it Wisdom. 8. 21.
to him. he asked it fervently: for with all the force of his heart: and yet he
was not heard: he obtained not chastity; whence was this? It was because his
prayer failed of the third condition, which is perseverance; he prayed once or
twice, and this was not enough: he should have continued. it: It is the
counsel which the true Solomon our Savior gives us, who having preached the
rigor and the severity of the last judgment, concludes: watch therefore,
praying at all times; He speaks not to Religious, or to Priests only, but to
all Christians; He knew the impediments we should have, the importance of our
affairs, and He says, pray at all times. It was by perseverance that the
Cananean woman obtained of the Son of God the deliverance of her daughter, as
Saint Chrysostom has noted; she prayed with interior humility: since she
said, whelps also eat of the crummes: Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Mart. S. Mrk. 7. 29.
and with exterior: for she prostrated at the feet of our Savior: with fervor
of Spirit: which she showed by crying-out, clamavit; Nevertheless the Son of
God rejected her, and would not hear her; But she strugled with him, and got
the Victory by her importunity; so must you to have success, stand obstinate in
a holy obstinacy, and pray unto the end. And therefore our Savior himself
says to you in S. Luke, It behooves you to pray always and not to be weary. S.
Luke. 18. 1.


10. And what hinders you from praying? Is it that you have not leisure: that
you have many affairs, and affairs of importance? this is that which should
oblige you to pray; for the more serious your affairs are, the more it
concerns you to have success in them: and prayer is the means to obtain it. You
have not-leasure to pray: Why not? You find time for dinner, supper, and other
necessities of the body, notwithstanding your great affairs: and why find you
not time for the refection of your Soul? it is as necessary to pray God well
for to work your Salvation, as to take your refection to preserve your life.
You have not time to pray? Believe me you have enough, if you manage it well.
Cut off superfluous visits, idle words, unpro^^table works and conversations,
and unnecessary divertisements, and there will remain time to be employed in
prayer. But are you so pressed with business that you cannot find now and then a
quarter of an hour to spend in prayer? At least then in working elevate often
your heart to God by jaculatory prayers, adore him from time to time, and beg
of him his love, grace, and guidance: put a pin upon your sleeve, that seeing
it you may be minded of it, 'til you are accustomed to it: for it behooves you
to pray always.

What is that which hinders you? Is it that you have offended grievously? This
is as if you should say, I am too much wounded: I must not go to the Surgeon.
On the contrary, this should incline you more to go to him: Com to me all ye
who areburdened, Says our Savior; He says not receive me, communicate so much
the more often and the more boldly, the more you are burdened with sins, but
com to me, to pray me, and to ask help and succor of me; however great, and
numerous may be your sins, if you have a lively resentment of them, if you
desire to be delivered from them: it is a good motive to show God to obtain his
mercy: It is that which David did when he, said, I am poor and needy. It Is that
which the Publican did saying, God be merciful to me a sinner; It Is that which
the Church puts into your mouth: we sinners do beseech thee to hear us.

What is that in fine that hinders you? Is it that God hears you not, that He
rejects you, and withdraws himself from you, and that it is long since you
begged of Him, not temporal goods, but spiritual, and you obtain not? This gives
you cause to persever, and to pray more fervently; since He defers so long to
hear you, it is a sign that what He will bestow upon you, is most excellent and
precious; though He seems to refuse what you ask, He is pleased with your
devotions; and if He delays to hear you, it is for good reasons; It Is to
exercise your patience, to heat your desire, to try your perseverance, to
augment your merit; And if you have patience, and persever importuning him:
Sooner or later He will accomplish your desires, and give you grace in this
World, and glory in the other Amen.

DISCOURSE XXV. OF FASTING. And the Institution of Lent.
1. IF the Apostle S. Paul were now on earth he would bewail extremely the
horrible blindness of those, who prefer the pleasure of their mouths before
the precept of the Church, and the Salvation of their souls: He would say to
us what he said to the Philippians, there are many amongst you, of whom I
weeping tell you, that are enemies Philip. 3. 18.
of the Cross of Christ, that abho^r all mortification of the flesh, that have
the belly for their God, and shall have eternal damnation for their end. for our
fasts, are not things indifferent, or works of supererogation: they are works
of precept and obligation.

Some will say to me, your fasts are not prescribed in Scripture: they are
commandments of men: and therefore ob^ige not other in Conscience. But if a
Dissenter should command his child a thing very profitable or necessary for his
family: and his child should say to him: Father you are a man: the
Commandments of men oblige not in conscience; I find not In the Scripture,
that God commands me to go to such a place, or to do such a thing; No, he will
say to him; But he commands thee to obey thy Father and thy Mother; So I say to
you: It is not in Scripture, that you must fast such a day: that you keep such
a holy day; But God commands you in many Ephesians. 6. Coloss. 3. 20. Heb. 13. 17.
places of the Scripture, to obey the Church your Mother. For the Apostle that
said in the behalf of God Children obey your Parents: the same said also, Obey
your Prelates. If men have not power to command other men, nor to oblige them
in Conscience: whence comes it that JESUS CHRIST said to his Apostles and Luke
10. 16. Matthew. 23. 2. Matt. 18 17. Romans 13. 2
to their successors. who hears you, hears me, and who despises you despises
me. And to the people do all that they shall say to you. whence is it that
JESUS CHRIST has said, He that hears not the Church esteem him as a Pagan or
a Publican: Whence is it that S. Paul said, He that resists Superior power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist it purchase to themselves
damnation; But it is to resist Superior power, and to disobey the Church, not to
observe the fasts which She commands; it is to transgress an Apostolical
command, not to fast the Lent, when you have not a legitimate excuse: I say,
Apostolical command.

2. And to prove this Verity, I might alledg many testimonies of the ancient
Fathers: but because JEUS-CHRIST does say, that we ought to give credit to two
or three good Witnesses, I will allege the depositions of three or four, of
three parts of the world, Africa, Europe, and Asia.

In Africa Tertullian reports an objection which the Catholics de Ieiunio C.
1. 3. 13. cont. Psychicos
made against him, who would have had them to keep three Lents: the Apostles,
said they, imposed no other Lent common to all, then that, in the time when
CHRIST was taken from the Church his spouse by his death and Passion.

S. Hierome in Europe, speaking of the Novelty of the Montanists, says, they
observed three lents, as if three Saviors had suffered: but we observe but one
of them according to the Tradition of the Apostles. And the same holy Father
writing to Marcella tells her the Ember days as well as the Lent were
instituted by the Apostles.

In Asia S. Gregory of Nazianzen, reprehending a Perfect named Epist. 74
Celusius, said to him, you dispensing with your self from fasting, do injury
to the Laws: how will you keep humane laws, since you contemn divine.

4. You will not think the precept of fasting too severe, if you consider the
reasons which moved the Apostles to institute the Lent. It was first to
commemorate and honor the retreat and the penance of our Savior in the desert:
to honor it, I Romans 8. 26.
say, by imitation, according to our power; For S. Paul says, his servants must
follow and imitate him, to be one day with him. In what must they follow and
imitate him? Not in preaching, and in working miracles: but in fasting or
suffering for the love of him; his Apostle declares it in these express words:
Let us show, that we are the Ministers or servants of God by our fasts, our
watchings, our labors, and other practices of 2. Cor. 6. 6.
virtue. Note, in Fasts, not in fasting once or twice a year, as many do when
they form some design, but many days, as our Savior has given us example.

In the second place the Lent was instituted for the conversion of souls; to
purify our consciences from the ordure of sin by the practice of penance: and
by this sanctification to dispose us to receive worthily the Eucharist. For the
Prophet Joel says, fasting conduces much to a true conversion: that it is one
of the parts of penance convert your selves to me in fasting. Joel. 2. 14.


The Lent is moreover fasted, to make the anniversary funeral of our Saviors
death; But sorrow and funerals are incompatible with good cheer: for the holy
Ghost distinguishes and opposes them to one another:: It is better, says He, to
go to the house of mourning, then to the house of banqueting.

4. S. Paul tells us that many have their Belly for their God; for this reason
they are very eloquent and zealous to plead its cause: they fight for their God
with many arguments; With some they would show fasting to be superfluous or
superstitious: with others, hurtful or pernicious. If you are predestined,
will you not be saved say they, without your fasting? do you think God did
expect your fasting to predestinate you? Answer, God did not expect our fasts,
but He foresaw them and other good works, for which He predestined us to
glory: or this He did predestinate, and this He does decree: that by these
means we shall obtain that end: not otherwise.

CHRIST fasted for you to deliver uou from this labor; Why do you then afflict
your selves in vain by fasting, as if Christ's fast did not suffice for your
salvation, without your little fasts? Answer; CHRIST also would be baptized,
and indeed for us, not for himself: and yet it follows not, that I ought not to
be baptized: so though He fasted for me, yet I ought to fast by his Example; He
suffered for us, says S. Peter leaving us an example, S. Peter 1. 2. Romans 8. 17.
that we may follow his footsteps; and S. Paul, if we suffer with Him, we shall
be also glorifyd with him.

Since you are resolved to fast, why do you not chose rather to fast
voluntarily, than necessarily? Have you not read in the Psalmist, I will
Sacrifice to you voluntarily? Answer: a fast commanded by the Church is better
than that we take up by our own election; for this proceeds out of one virtue,
to wit Temperance: that from two, Temperance and Obedience: And if a commanded
fast should proceed from obedience obly: yet it would be so much better, and
more Excellent than the other, how much the virtue of obedience is better than
that of Temperance: Obedience is I. Kings 15. 22.
better than Victimes, said Samuel to Saul. And obedient Souls fast not as you
suppose, unvoluntarily, with regret and sorrow: but voluntarily, with alacrity
and gladness.

5. The Epicurians, and the Advocats of self love urge, as they imagine, yet
more forcibly: and to justify themselves make this remonstrance; We must love
our bodies as well as our souls for God created both, and loves both, and wills
that we do love them: But fasting and other austerities hinder sleep, punish
the body and weaken it: prejudice health, and shorten life: and consequently by
fasts and other austerities, we act against the will of God, the law of nature,
and are injurious to our selves.

Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he seem to himself wise, God Would
have us to love our Body; True: but He wills us to love it truly; and to love
it truly, is to procure it, by the means of fasting, prayer, and other
exercises of virtue, true, perfect, and everlasting health. What does it profit
the flesh. that You nourish it delicately, if you nourish it for hell? If you
feed it so, that it becoms the fuel of eternal fire? would you not love it
better if you curb it, and afflict it here a little with hunger and with
thirst, to have it sound and glorious for all Eternity? This is that which our
Savior says, Qui amat animam suam perdet eam: et qui odit in hoc mundo animam
suam, in vitam Eternam 1. John. 12.
custodit eam; He that loves this temporal life, and therefore permits not his
flesh to be molested, nor afflicts it with fasting watching, and other virtuous
labors, does not keep it to everlasting life.

Fasting hinders sleep: I believe it: and it was also instituted to hinder too
much sleep: that so you may have more time for prayer, spiritual reading, and
other exercises of a Christian.

Fasting punishes and afflicts the body; I doubt not of it, if well practiced;
And do you think it was instituted for other purpose than to punish it; you
will not then go to heaven if the way be not easy and pleasing to the flesh? if
it be not strewn with flowers and sweet herbs? And where then is the law of
christianisme, which is a law of mortification and of the Cross? And what will
become of these words of our Savior: Strive to enter by the narrow gate? You
say fasting does prejudice health and shorten life; The Church, the Canon law,
good Physicians, and experience Quicqd Etc. legimus de Consecra. did. 5.
say quite the contrary; the Church in the Collect of the first saturday in
lent says, this solemn fast was holily instituted for the health both of soul
and body. And in the Decretalls of Gratian we read, that many who had
infirmities, their goods being confiscated, and they reduced to poverty, so
that they could not make good cheer, were cured by this forced diet. All good
Physicians will tell you, that for one hurt by fasting, fifty are killed by
eating and drinking: And Experience shows that the more abstemious usually
enjoy better health, and longer life.

It is true, that Fasting macerates and weakens bodies that are not well
accustomed and hardened by it: But it strengthens souls and makes them reign:
they are disposed by it to prayer and contemplation: they please God by it,
satisfy his justice, merit and impetrate of Him Benefits, temporal and eternal:
The servant body then must endure theses pains and labors. by which accrue so
many, and so great advantages to the lady soul nor does the Soul do injury to
the body making it to fast, but much obliges it; She exempts it from
punishments which it merited by rebellions; for nothing appeases more the anger
of God, nothing averts better the thunderbolts of his justice then fasting and
other macerations of the body, which proceed out of true conversion and
compunction of heart: Witness the Ninivites.

It is doplorable* that they who glory in the name of Christians have not so
much sight and judgment, as those poor Pagans; the Son of God has reason to
say, that they shall rise in judgment and condemn them; Jonas said not to the
Ninivites, fast, put on hair-cloth, do penance, but only forty days and
Ninive shall be subverted: and yet Pagans as they were, had the light to know,
that to appease God, it was necessary to fast, and to do penance; they
published a fast so general and severe, that all from the greatest to the
least, from the eldest to the youngest, also bruit beasts, fasted three days
and nights without any meat or drink: Should the Church command such a fast,
how would they cry-out against her? but he Creator approved this Edict, and
pardoned the sins of those that had so fasted.

6. To be short: if austerities be unlawful and forbidden: we must condemn all
the ancient Anchorets, and a great part of the primitive Christians who fasted
almost daily in bread and water, through the Spirit of penance and
mortification; we must condemn the Religious of the present Church, who weaken
their bodies by the exercises of penance; We must condemn our Savior who fasted,
and spent whole nights in prayer upon mount olivet, to give us example; we must
condemn the holy Ghost. who exhorts us by the Apostle earnestly, to show that
we are the Ministers or servants of God, by Patience, by Watchings: 2. Cor. 6.
6.
and fastings, by longanimity and sweetness, by the sincerity of our words, by
chastity, and by cordial charity.

7. These are the virtues and dispositions which ought to accompany our fasts.
They who have not health or strength for the one, ought to addict themselves
with more zeal to the practice of the other, showing that they are the
faithful servants of God, and true Children of the Church.

By much patience. You say you cannot fast because you are big with child, or
you are a nource. And well says S. Chrysostom, God excuses you from this fast;
But He requires another of you: S. Chry^. hom. 22. ad pop.
which is that you abstain from anger; this abstinence will do no hurt to the
fruit you bear; on the contrary, the too ardent Passion by which you are
transported, may hurt it much, and make it to dye without Baptism.

By longanimity and sweetness; If God say to you in judgment, why have you not
fasted? if you answer: I had a great weakness of stomach, a continual and great
giddiness of my head when I fasted; And well: if you say true, God will admit
of this excuse. But what will you answer, when He will reply: why have you not
pardoned your ennemie? Why have you not thrown that hatred out of your heart?
which filled you with gall and betterness? One sweet word said to salute your
neighbor, and to gain his heart, would it have burnt your mouth, or caused
dizziness in your head?

By sincerity of words? you are sick: they command you to eat flesh; obey your
Physician and Confessor; but eat not that flesh which is forbidden you. I fear
I shall see one day, that many eat flesh in the Lent: not boiled, but raw, and
also humane flesh, by calumny, and detraction: it is the Scripture that speaks
so: the harmfull approach upon me, and eat my flesh, said the Royal Prophet.
And holy Job, why do you persecute me. Psalm. 26. 2.
and are filled with my flesh? They make a conscience to put their teeth into a
piece of dead flesh, and they make no scrupule to tear with their tongue the
living flesh of their neighbor by calumnies and murmurations, which is wors.

By Chastity; fast not only with the mouth; for it is not the mouth only that
offends God; make all the members of your body to fast. Impure looks. touches,
lacivious thoughts and delectations are carnal meats; these are prohibited in
all times, and chiefly in the Lent; he that fasts not commits but one or two
sins a day: but he that consents to dishonest thoughts commits sometimes more
than ten.

By cordial Charity; The holy Fathers say fasting is not only instituted to
punish the body, but also that we may have more means and leisure to give alms,
to viset sick, and to practice other works of charity: fiat refectio pauperis
abstinentia jejunantis. Either you fast or not: if you fast, you should give to
the poor what you would spend in a supper; if you do not fast, seeing you honor
not God by abstinence, honor him by mercy corporal, or spiritual. We ought to
fast so in charity toward our neigbor; We must fast in charity also toward
God, and not for terrene and temporal Ends.

8. The Son of God says to us, When you fast, wash your face Matt 6. 18.
that is to say, purify your intention; Make not a fast of Gallen, to be well
and in good health: nor the fast of the Avaricious, to spare the purse: but the
fast of a Christian, to obey the Church: to have more means to give alms, more
leisure to practice good works: the spirit more free to pray: to satisfy the
justice of God: to make the funeral of our Saviors death: to dispose our
selves to communion: to honor and imitate the fast of JESUS in the desert; so
having accompanied Him in his penance and fast on earth, we may merit to be
satiated by the torrent of pleasure with him in heaven. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXVI. OF ALMS.
BLessed is the man that considers the necessities of the poor to have pity on
him, God will treat him sweetly and mildly in the day of judgment, Psalm.
in the day which the Royal Prophet calls the evil day. The Sentence of the
Judge will be favorable to him: He will say to him with an Encomium, I have
been hungry, and you have given me meat, ad that it may prove so, He forewarns
and says to us: make your selves friends, give alms, do good to the Poor* that
they, and the alms which you put into their bosoms may plead and intercede for
you, Let us then consider, who must give alms? To whom they must be given? and
how men ought to give them?

1. Who is he that must give Alms? All Christians that pretend to obtain one
day the kingdom of Heaven. we need no other proof then the word of JESUS, and
the definitive sentence which He will pronounce in favor of the elect, and
against the reprobate: Com ye blessed of. my Father, possess the kingdom; for
you have given, Get ye gone from me ye cursed into everlasting fire for you have
not given; All either are saved for giving, or damned for not giving alms:
every one then is obliged to give them. And in the same chapter He compares the
whole Church to an assembly of Virgins, whereof some are admitted to a nuptial
feast for having furnished their lamps with oil: the others are excluded, for
having none.

9. Hence S. Chrysostom concludes, if those that were Virgins, Hom. 22. in Io.
that is to say, that had no other great sins, were banished from heaven, for
not giving alms with more reason those who have committed sins, and have not
redeemed them by alms, shall be condemned. He adds, let us have then this oil
of mercy, if we will enter with the Espouse: for what ever we shall do, it is
impossible without alms, I say again, it is impossible to approach to the door
of the Kingdom of heaven.

2 Can we be saved without Charity, without loving God, and being beloved of
God? no surely; Now his beloved Disciple says: If any one having the goods of
this world, and seeing his brother in 1. John. 3. 17.
necessity shuts up his bowels of charity from him, how does the Love of God
remain in him? He says not seeing his brother in extreme necessity, but simply
in necessity; It Is then an error to believe, the commandment of giving alms
obliges not, but when our neigbor is in extreme necessity; Yes it obliges when
he is in a great and notable poverty, as are so many in these deplorable times;
For as Vasquez reasons very well, the precept of charity obliges all, as well
poor as rich to succor their neigbor when he is in extrem necessity: nature it
self teaches it, without other positive command; and it is principally to the
rich that the holy Scripture makes this commandment of alms; It Is not then only
in extreme necessity the rich are obliged to give: but also in a considerable
and important need command the rich of this 1. Tim. c. 17. 1. Cor. 22. 26.
world to give easily says S. Paul. And he gives in another place the reason of
it: we are parts and members of the Mystical Body of JESUS; But when one member
has received any hurt, all the other suffer with it, all contribute to the
help of it; if a thorn has entered into the foot, the back bends, the eyes open
and seek it, the hand pulls it out: and if they should do otherwise, it would
be irregular, monstrous and unnatural: with much more reason in the body of the
Church, which has JESUS for its head, and the holy Ghost for its soul, the
members are obliged to solace and serve each other with a sincere and cordial
charity.

S. Peter Confirms the saying of S. Paul, and adds another reason: that we are
not independent Proprietors and Masters of the riches, Epist. 1. c. 4. 10.
talents, gifts, and graces which we received from God: He obliges us to be
good Economists and Dispensers of them: to assist and serve the necessities of
our neighbors with them: if then we employ them not, but only keep them, we do
against the intention of the Master that lends them: and on the contrary, if we
employ them in dissolutions, and other Superfluities, we do contrary to the
will of him who intrusts us with them. If an Economist of a great house should
reserve to himself all the bread and wine, and other provisions; and refuse to
give them to the children, and servants, according to the order of his Master,
would he not merit to be punished? if on the contrary, he distributes them
faithfully, would he not gain the salary promised to him? The power and
authority you have, God has given you to protect this Widow, and this Orphan
that are oppressed: the understanding, Science, industry which are in you, you
received from God, to assist and instruct the ignorant: and these goods you
possess, God made you the steward of them to Communicate them to the Poor,
after you have had the honor and the prerogative to take of them what is
necessary for your person, and your family; if you do not He will say to you.
as to the naughty servant in the Gospel: Why have you not employed well my
money? If you do as you ought, He will say to you: Com faithful Servant enter
into the joy of thy Matthew. 5.
Lord. Let us see then to whom we ought to give.

3. Charity obliges us to give to all that are in necessity, but especially to
the faithful: to others, we must give alms as to the creatures, and the images
of God: but to the faithful moreover, as to the members of JESUS CHRIST, and
for the love of Him, and so to JESUS CHRIST in them; for He will say in
judgment, I have been hungry: I have been thursty: I have been sick; JESUS
then is sick, and suffers in his members: and JESUS receives our help and
assistance in them; if we bestow our alms so, our charity will be more
acceptable to him, and more meritorious to us, than if we did give them to his
own person. if you had lived in that golden age when JESUS was visible to the
world: would you not have been ravished with joy to have lodged Him, served,
and entertained. Him? you merit more if you do it to a poor man says S.
Chrysostom, for the charms of his pleasing Countenance and his Comportment
would allure your hearts, and force them by a sweet attraction to will him
good; but when you do it to him in the person of the Poor, who are so
disagreable: your faith is more lively: your charity more generous, and your
piety more disinteressed, since self love finds not there her reckning.

It seems JESUS should say in the last iugdment to S. Matthew, you made me a
banquet in your Conversion: to Zacheus you received me into your house: to S.
Martha you log'd me in your Castle, you served me with great diligence. No, He
will not praise them principally for these good offices: But He will say to
them. That which you have don to the least of mine, you have don to me: because
He esteems more that which is don to his members, than what is don to himself;
let us weigh these words.

4. First He says: That which you have don to the least of mine; He means
chiefly; the poor, since He speaks of those that Matthew 52. 40.
hunger and thirst; It Is then a strange folly, which displeases him extremely, to
give your goods to flatterers, to dissolute persons, or to employ them to
enrich your children, to elevate or greaten your parents, or to leave them
wherewith to live in dilights, in dissolutions, whilst our Savior has not
where with to live in the person of the poor? is not this a great injustice to
give to your child wherewith to live in superfluity and not to give to our
Savior, wherewith to sustain. a poor life says S. Austin? He says, Wherewith
to live in superfluity; for you may merit, if out of the spirit of charity and
mercy you leave to your children, or to your parents, as to the members of
JESUS CHRIST, goods as alms, wherewith to maintain themselves according to
their quality, in Christian modesty and frugality: not in superfluity, and in
the ambition of the world.

5. You have don to me, for the love of me, if you give alms out of natural
compassion, it is not christian charity, but moral virtue; if our of
ostentation, to be esteemed liberal: it is vanity; if because the poor man is of
the same country profession or condition that you are, that he is a Soldier,
and you have been: that he has been a merchant, and you are; it is to give an
alms to a man, to a soldier, to a merchant, and not to JESUS, and because the
poor man is his member, Disciple, or his Brother; likewise if you give it to
the end only that God may recompense you by temporal goods: JESUS will not say
to you, you have given to me; because in effect it is not for JESUS that you give
it, but for your selves: it is not alms but avarice.

You have don to me; He says not to my servants, my faithful, but to me: we
must then consider JESUS in the poor, and comport our selves toward them, with
the same dispositions, that we would to JESUS: and season our alms with all
that is requisite to a most virtuous and meritorious action.

6. First bestow your alms with tenderness, commiseration, and with bowels of
compassion; for mercy ought to make our hearts miserable by a sympathy of
charity, participating in the sufferances, and afflictions of others.

7. Secondly with benignity, sweetness and affability, the testimony of
affection and benevolence; and abstain from all reproaches, which would make a
poor man suffer more by the confusion to which you put him, than you pleasure
him by the alms you give him.

8. In the third place, with interior humility, thinking that you are not
worthy to give an alms to JESUS; and in effect, all that we do is nothing in
comparison of that we should do: and what we give less than our lives, is less
than that which in occasion we ought to give, for God has given his life for
us, and we ought to give also our lives for our 1. Ep. c. 3.
brethren says S. John.

9. In fine, give prompty, joyfully, and copiously: let your good will exceed
your power; in giving a penny, wish it were a pound, an have also a desire to
give it if you had it, and if it were convenient; in giving a mess of broth,
wish it were the best, because it is for your best beloved, who merits that we
should consume the treasures of the world, for the service of the least of his
members.

10i. Let us conclude with the fine words of S. Augustine: Brothers, exercise
mercy, there is no other band to tie us to the love of Aug. in Psalm. 102
God and of our neighbor: there is no other means to carry us from earth to
heaven; and a little after he adds, Behold what you may buy: how much you must
give for it: and when you must buy it?

Behold what you must buy! Paradise is to be sold: you may buy with money the
kingdom of heaven, eternal life, and the possession of God; What great favor!
what incomparable happiness! if God did not permit it, who would dare so much
as to think of it? o if men be damned, they deserve not to be pitied! Satan
will have good reason to laugh at them, and say; o great fools they would give
willingly the half of their goods to buy 30. or 40. years of life, and of a
life full of afflictions, infirmities and miseries: and they would not give it
to buy millions of years of a most happy and delicious life. And do not tell
me. so precious merchandise is not sold at a cheap rate, and that you have
neither gold, nor silver, nor means to buy it.

Bohold how much you must give for it: a glass of cold water, a little service
if you have nothing else, may procure you it. our Savior speaking to his poor
Apostles said: you have always poor with you, and you may do good to them when
you please: He says not, you may give to them; But you may do good to them;
because many cannot give: but every one can do good. You may viset the sick, and
imprisoned, and though you have nothing to give: you may comfort them, exhort
them, and do them other services: The Son of God will not say, you have not
redeemed me out of prison: but you have not visited me that you may have no
excuse.

You are a married woman: it is not permitted you to give great alms of your
husbands goods: But it is permitted, and it will be a good alms to serve, assist,
and cherish with respect and tenderness, for the love of God, the old and
infirm of your family.

You are a chambermaid: it would be theft and not alm^ to give to the Poor the
goods of your Master against his will; but it will be a Charity, if you help
this inferior servant, if you assist her in the labor wherewith she is oppressed.

You are a Counselor, an Advocate, or a Solicitor; you have many Children and
little means, and not able to give alms; But you may assist with your credit*
counsel and service, this poor widow* this orphan, poor man, and the like
persons. whom commonly men neglect. You may instruct in the Mysteries of faith,
and in what is necessary to salvation, your domestics, servants, neigbors, and
the poor that beg alms at your door; this is the best alms you can bestow upon
them: an alms more excellent than the corporal so much as the soul is better
than the body: heaven than earth: the grace of God than money or bread. You
have enemies that do you great injuries; if so: they are poor in virtue; o what
an excellent alms would you bestow upon them, if you procure it them; and you
will procure them virtue: if you gain their affection by pardoning them, and
seeking their amity. Know brothers said S. Austin, that there are Aug hom. 5.
ex 50. post medium.
two sorts of alms: the one of the heart: the other of the purs; you may excuse
your selves sometimes from this, but not from that; the alms of the heart is to
pardon your enemies, to love cordially your neighbors, to have pity and
compassion on the poor, to be sorry you have not wherewith to succor them, and
to pray God that the rich may help them; our Saviout says not only, give and it
shall be given to you: but he says first, pardon, and you shall be pardoned.
Behold how easily, and at how small a rate you may buy the kingdom of heaven:
see now when or in what time you must buy it.

The time of buying it, is the time of this life only: do not as the foolish
Virgins, who neglected to make provision of oil till they were called before
the Bridgroom: and whilst they went to buy it, the Bridchamber door was shut
and they excluded for ever, Imitate rather the wise Virgins, make in time
provision of oil, and be not surpised by death. Remember that two sorts of
oil are necessary for us; shat of God on us: for woe to the most laudable
life, if God examine it without mercy, said S. Austine: and ours upon our
neighbor: for judment without mercy to him, who shall not have don mercy; But if
you open to your neighbor your bowels of mercy, God will open his to you: and
so happy are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXVII. of the Commandments in general.
IT was with great reason, that God giving the Law to his people, did use this
Preface, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus, I am the Lord thy God; For by many most
just Titles He is our Lord, and has right to command us, And to oblige us to
pay dutys to his commandments and Orders, and principally three; we must study
them: we must keep them: and we must love them.

1. In the first place we must study them, learn them, and meditate upon them.
Some will say: Who is he that is ignorant of them? what little schoolboy is
there amongst us that does not know the ten commandments? Yes, they can
rehearse them: but this is not enough; We must study them learn the sense and
meaning of them, and search into the depth of them; David was a great Prophet,
and he studied them, searched into them, meditated upon them, and prayed God to
teach him them: Give me understanding, said he to God, and I will learn thy
justifications; and to learn them he contemplated them attentively. And in
effect, if it be necessary to study the rules of grammar, and of rhetoric, to
learn to speak well, is it not necessary to study the Law of God, and his
Gospel, to learn to live well, said S. Austin? And S. Ambrose makes us to
consider that in she book of Ecclesiastes the holy Ghost says not only, Mandata
ejus serva, keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12. 13.
but observa, Note them, and search into them diligently. For the Decalogue
given to Moses does nor declare so clearly all things that are necessary to be
don, nor forbid so expressly many sins which render us most criminal before
God; we must then ponder them, examine, and consider all the words, beg light of
the holy Ghost, to find out the sense* meaning and intention of God.

2. Moreover the Commandments of the Decalogue were given to men, as men; But
God gave moreover many to the Jews, as Jews: which made S. Paul say, He that
made himself a Jew, receiving Circumcission, obliged himself to keep Gal. 5. 3.
all the Law of Moses. And to learn it well, the Israelites in the time of the
Prophet Esdras, made a Lecture of it four times a day: and in the time of S.
Paul, on all Saturdays; so 2. Esdras. 9. 3.
also the Son of God has given other Commandments to Christians, as
Christians; which made the same Apostle say to the faithful, They who obey not
the Gospel shall suffer eternal pains. 2. These. 1. 8.
We must be then solicitous to learn the Evangellical Commandments, to read
the books which treat of them, to assist at Sermons and Catechismes which teach
them, to beg the grace of God to understand them, and to learn them not only,
nor chiefly for to know them, but to keep them and to put them in practice;
Thou have very much commanded thy commandments to be kept, says the Royal
Prophet: Note very much, very much.

3. It is wonderful to see with what earnestness and instance God recommended
to his people the memory and observance of them. First He wrote them upon
Tables of stone, to teach us to engrave in our hearts, what He vouchsafed to
write with his own hand. Secondly He commanded a Tabernacle to be made, and
within it an Arc of incorruptible wood, covered with fine gold, to lodge
therein the Tables. In the third place, that the king of the people should
write with his own hand these holy Commandments. In the fourth place He
Commanded the people, that having passed Jordan, and entered into the land of
promise, they should place great stones upon the shore, upon which the
Commandments should be written, that all might be ascertained if they kept
them not, they should not enjoy long that happy land. And because they would
not be always there to read them often: He commanded them to be written upon
the doors of all their houses, to be imprinted in their hearts, and in the
hearts of their children. Behold his words: these words Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
which I command thee shall be in thy heart: and thou shall tell them to thy
children, and thou shall meditate upon them sitting in thy house, and walking
on thy journey, sleeping, and rising. And thou shall bind them as a sign in
thy hand: and thou shall write them in the entry, and on the doors of thy
house.

And because profit and recompense are the baits of humane hearts, He makes
promises so advantageous to the observers of them, that they would be
incredible, if any other then himself did make them. I will send you rain in
time and season, the earth Levit 26.
shall bring forth its Spring, and the trees shall be burdened with fruits. I
will give peace in your coasts: you shall sleep, and there shall be none to
fright you. five of yours shall pursue a hundred strangers, and a hundred of
you, ten thousand. I will respect you, and make you increase: you shall be
multiplyd, and I will establish my Covenant with you. Note that 'twas to the
Jews He made these great promises, whom He was wont to recompense with worldly
goods when they observed his Commandments, and chastise them with temporal
punishments, when thy transgrest them: because they were material, gross and
terrestrial; But to Christians, He promises Spiritual and Celestial goods,
recompenses that are eternal, so great, so charming, and so excellent, that the
felicities He promised to the Jews, and which seem to us so admirable, are but
shadows and figures of them.

4. But some will say, what will these great Promises avail us, if we cannot
perform the condition under which they are made to us? and if we cannot keep
the Commandments of God, also with that grace He gives us? Some indeed have
said this: But the Scriptures say quite the contrary; This commandment which I
command thee is not above thee, says the eternal Father. My yoke Deuteronomy 30. 11.
Matthew. 11. 30. 1. John. 5. 3. S. Luke. 1. 6.
is sweet, and my burden light, says JESUS CHRIST. His commandments are not
heavy, said his beloved Disciple. And his Evangelist S. Luke does tell us. that
Zachary and Elizabeth were just, and walked without reproof in all the
Commandments and justifications of the Lord. And we also may do as they: Else
God would be unjust, imposing impossible commands upon us: cruel, in punishing
us for not keeping them. and a mocker in promising us his heaven, if we shall
observe them.

5. We ought also to keep these divine commandments, not with a servil fear,
but with a filial love, as S. Austin says so often; not as slaves, but as
children; for we have not received the spirit of servitude again in fear; But
we have received the spirit of adoption of children, says S. Paul. And this
David did yet in the old Law, repeating so often: I have loved your Law: I have
affected your commandments: they are the joy of my heart: I have loved them
more than millions of gold: more than the Topase, and other precious stones:
more than all the riches of the world: they are to me more sweet than honey: I
take more pleasure in keeping them, than a Conqueror in burdening himself with
spoils.

And to see clearly that they are most reasonable, most just, and most amiable:
let us make a supposition, that there are but two Towns in this world: and
that in one of them, all the inhabitants keep exactly the commandments of God:
and that to the other God has not given any commandments, but permits every
one without punishment to live as he list; Is it not true that the former City
would be a terrestrial Paradise, a garden of delights a place of peace and
tranquillity, an image of the state of Innocence, and a foretaste of Felicity.
There would be no envy, no detraction, no quarrel, no enmity, no injustice, no
fear or diffidence; there would be no need of bolts upon doors, nor locks upon
coffers, nor of guards, nor sentinells, but upon the frontiers; But the other
City where no body should be obliged to keep the commandments of God, would be
a forest peopled with robbers, who would pillage one another: a den of Lions,
who would tear and eat each other: a Sty of hoggs, who would wallow in all
sorts of ordures.

6. Have we not then cause to thank God for giving us commandments so holy,
so just, so saving, and so amiable? ought we not to submit our selves with much
respect to the orders of his soveraignity? The Epithetes which the scripture
gives them ought to persuade us to it. It says that they are Testimonies,
because they testify to us, and certify us of that which God requires of us;
That they are Judgments because they will condemn us if that we transgress
them; That they are justifications, because they justify us, and render us just
before God when we keep them; That they are ways and paths, because we go to
Heaven by the observance of them; which God of his mercy grant us. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXVIII. Of the first Commandment.
I Am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of egypt, and out of
the house of bondage, Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven thing, nor any similitude that is in heaven
above, or in earth below, or of things that are in the waters under the earth.
Thou shall not adore, nor serve them; I am the Lord thy God, strong and
jealous, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and
fourth generation: and showing mercy to thousands of those that love me and
keep my commandments. Exodus 20.

Some, also of the Ancient, put only these words r^ Thou shall not have strange
Gods, or as other Versions have, other Gods before me, in the first
commandment; And they begin the second from the following words, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven thing: and lest that by so doing, they increase
the number of the commandments, which are called ten Words in the scripture,
they comprise these last words, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife; Thou
shall not desire his house, or other goods, in one commandment. But we divide
these last words into two commandments: and the first words, which others
divide, we unite in one: because this has been more generally received: aprov'd
for the better division by S. Austin: and is also more conformable Aug. Quest.
71. in Exodus concl. 1. in Psalm. 32. Ep 119. ad Ian c 11 lib. 15. cont Faustuns
and else where Deuteronomy 5*
to reason; for the exterior octs of adultery and theft being forbidden by two
precepts, should not the interior acts or desires be prohibited by two
commandments, since these are as different as the other? Nor does it make
against us, that the interior acts seem in Exodus to be indistinctly and
promiscuously prohibited by one precept; since in Deuteronomy, which is a
repetition, revision, and an explication of the Law, they are distinctly and
severally prohibited; and that the 70. Interpreters put these Precepts in both
places as distinct and diverse. Since then we find diverse prohibitions, and
diverse acts prhibited in the last words: and that the correspondent exterior
acts are forbidden by diverse precepts: we have more reason to divide the last
words, than the first: which forbid in substance but one kind of Sin, and make
one complete and perfect prohibition of Idolatry; which will yet more appear by
the explication of them; though this controversy raised by Calvin seems not to
be of great importance: since it imports not much how these words are divided,
provided that ten commandments be admitted, and all the words acknowledged and
observed.

2. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven thing, nor any similitude, God forbids not to make a statue, Image,
or a representation absolutely, either for ornament, memory, instruction, help
of devotion, or for any good use or purpose whatsoever; For He commanded soon
after, Images, similitudes, and representations of diverse things to be made:
Images of Angels, to wit Cherubins, Exodus 25. the similitude of a serpent,
Numbers. 21. Representations of oxen and Lions, and other graven things, 3. of
kings 6. and 7. And therefore Protestants themselves Scruple not to have and
make such things: No Presbiterian or Puritan is so precise, but he will
engrave, carve, print, and paint them: and no man doubts to set any Painter or
Graver on work, notwithstanding these words of the law. God then forbids them
to be made to the End divine worship be given to them: and to signify this, He
adds, Thou shall not adore nor serve them: He confirms us in this sense in the
26. chapter of Leviticus, You shall not make to your selves, an Idol and graven
thing, neither shall you erect Pillars, nor set an Image of stone in your land,
for to adore it; We gather this sense also from the reason which God gives of
the command: I am the Lord thy God: all sovereign honor, all divine worship,
all supreme adoration is due to me; I am a jealous God: I Suffer not any divine
worship, but my own: I connot allow my honor to be given to another; Wherefore
S. Austin, and other Interpreters of scripture so understand these words, that
we make not images against the intention of the law, if we make them not S.
Aug. in Quest. Iosue. 22 30.
for to adore them. so the Israelites were fatisfyd that the Tribes of Ruben
and Gad erected not an Altar against the intention of the law, since they made
it not for sacrifice, but only for a monument.

S. Admire here the goodness of God, who seperates us from idolatry, the most
vile, foul, and cruel servitude imaginable: which made the poor idolaters to
serve a thousand most vile and most base Masters: which urged men and women in
their public service to actions so foul and impudent, that impudence it self
would blush to see. or hear of them: which engaged them to such inhumanities
and cruelties in their sacrifices, that we cannot without horror speak or
think of them. And He does not only endeavor to free men from this most hard
and pernicious slavery: but moreover binds them to himself; not that He has
any want of us; He has no need of our goods, nor of our service: He was most
happy from all Eternity, and would be for all Eternity without us; But it is,
because He desires that we be perfect: He will that we be happy and He sees that
our perfection consists in loving and serving him; And therefore He moves and
solicits us to it by most effectual means; He commands strictly, and threatens
the transgressors of his command to punish them in their children to the third
and fourth generation: and to move our mercenary hearts yet more, He promises
to recompense our obedience in thousands; and all this is but a pledge and gage
of the great goods which He prepared and promised us if we love him and keep
his commandments.

4. After such Commands, threatenings and promises, can we think that a great
Church, a Church so learned, so curious and careful in other points, and so
addicted to good works, would give supreme honor, divine worship and
adoration to Saints, and to their Relics, which she believes to be no Gods?
Nay, to statues and pictures, which she declares to have no Divinity or virtue:
and this with the loss of Gods favor, forfeiture of his promises, labor in
this world, eternal punishment in the other: and without gain of any honor,
pleasure, or profit whatsoever?

May be believe that CHRIST having banished Idols out of the world for ever,
or out of the greater part of it: as it was by the Prophets foretold He should:
and that the Turks, who adore Isaiah. 2. 18. Zachar. c. 13. V. 2.
him not, and the jews, his greatest enemies, enjoy the fruit and
accomplishment of this promise: and Christians, who honor, adore and love him
should not, but should live and dye in Image, Saint, and Host Idolatry? He has
not made by himself or his Apostles Idolatry to cease one only moment of time,
if it be Idolatry to adore the B. Sacrament, to honor the Saints, their Relics
and their Images so as the Roman Church does honor them: since these things
have been so practiced in all times, in both Greek and Latin Church. You see
then, that to make Catholics Idolaters, is to tear one of the most precious
and replendent jewels out of the Crown of JESUS: that it is to make the
Prophets of his Father Liars: and that it is to give occasion to Infidells to
make him this reproach Thy Prophets see vain things. and divine a ly.

Is it Possible, that the Catholic or universal Church, the Church to which
God promised, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against Matt. c. 16. v.
18. Matt. c. 28. v. 19. John. c. 16. v. 12. Osee. c. 2. v. 19.
Her; That He would be with her all days even to the consummation of the world;
That He would preserve her from falling into errors, and guide her into all
truth; the Church which God Espoused to himself for ever, The Church, which He
obliged all to believe and follow: I believe the holy Catholic Church. Is it
possible, I say, that she breaks always notoriously the first commandment, by
teaching and committing Idolatry? It is impossible she should adore any other
thing than God alone. Note that I say Adore.

5. For though this word Adore, is used in the Bible, and in the Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin tongues, to signify all sorts of honor; supreme and divine honor
which is given to God only, Psalm 96. where it is said, adore him all ye
Angels. Inferior honor which is given to Saints, Iosuah 5. 14. where it is
said, that Iosuah adoted an Angel. Humane and civil honor, which is given to
men on earth, 3. kings 1. 23. where it is said the Prophet Nathan adored David;
and in many other places it does signify these three different sorts of honor;
Nevertheless, since this word Adore does signify in our language divine honor,
and worship proper to God alone, I say.

6. We adore not the Saints; because we acknowledge not sovereign and supreme
excellency and perfection in them. But we give them an inferior honor
according to their dignity, their holiness, and relation to God; for according
to the law of God, and reason, a proportionable honor is due to excellency.

7. Secondly, we honor and Venerate the Relics of the Saints, though with an
honor inferior to that we give to the Saints themselves, For we find in Relics
some dignity, holiness, and relation to God. They were the living members of
CHRIST, and Tempells of the holy Ghost; They are the Organs and Instruments of
God, by which He works many miracles, and imparts diverse benefits to men; and
they shall be one day raised up again, to be the habitations of glorious souls,
and to live and reign with CHRIST; therefore they deserve some respect, and the
primitive Church, as the holy Fathers testify, did not deny it them.

Thirdly we adore not Images and pictures. For we know and believe that there
is no divinity in them. Neither do we give them any inferior honor, veneration
or respect absolutely, or for themselves, or which is terminated upon them;
because we acknowledge not any virtue or perfection in them that deserves it from
us. But seeing that the holy Fathers declare: all Nations acknowledge: and
nature it self does teach, that the honor or dishonor don to an Image is
referred to the Prototype or thing represented, and is don by the Image to it;
We do not with the Iconoclast Heretics break them, trample them under feet and
deface them as profane, or scoff at them as Idols; But on the contrary, we
reserve them, lodge them decently, make good uses of them, and in occasion we
kiss them, we put off our hats and bow or kneell before them, for to adore
JESUS CHRIST, and honor his Saints by them. And surely all this practice is
some part of Christian duty; since neither common sense, reason* nor religion,
will permit us to do less in this behalf to our Savior and his friends in
heaven, then that which others do to honor, and to show their love to men on
earth.

9. Is it not then very strange that some will hold, that to honor JESUS CHRIST
by his image, is forbidden? And is not this as unreasonable as that is strange,
to conclude from a fasly supposed prohibition, that the worship is therefore
terminated upon the image, and is Idolatrous? We have shown that it is not
forbidden by the Law to honor CHRIST by his image, but to honor the image it
self for CHRIST, or instead of CHRIST. And now we add that in case it were
indeed forbidden yet it would not be Idolatry: it would be still the worship of
the true God: it would terminate upon Him, as well as the offerings of the
blind and lame, which God had forbidden, and yet complains, that the jews by
them polluted Him; It would terminate upon him as well as blasphemy, Malac. 1.
and other crimes, which He forbids: It would be then disobedience, or some
other sin: But not Idolatry, by which one gives Gods honor to a creature.

10. oh! your ignorant people at least, do adore images themselves: they pray
to them and demand succor from them, as from God: and therefore it is better
that the use of them should be abolished, than that it should be the occasion
of Idolatry.

It is very hard to judge that any are so ignorant; since they cannot learn the
first Article of the Creed, nor the first of the Commandments but they must
know, that images are not Gods, nor to be adored: and since they must be as
senseless as the images themselves, that will pray to them, or demand help of
them.

But suppose there happen some abuse; this must be very rare, and easily
removed: and therefore is to be amended by instruction, not by the abolishing
of the adundant good use of images.

They go on to make us Transgressors of this commandment, and Idolaters; They
say that we honor the Saints with divine worship, and do them Sovereign
homage: that we do not only implore their in^ercession, but pray the Saints to
give us the things which we desire: that we build Temples, erect Altars, and
offer Sacrifice to them; for we name the Church of S. Steeven, the Altar of S.
Peter, the Mass of our B. Lady.

11. These are great mistakes; for we believe that God alone i^ the Author and
the Giver of all good things; this is our public Doctrine set forth in the
Council of Trent, inculcated to the faithful in Catechismes, and put often
into the public prayers SS. 25. de Invoc. Sanctorum.
of the Chruch: Lord who art the Author and Giver of all good things; God from
whom all good things com; God the Giver of all good things; When we say then
sometimes to the Virgin, help the miserable, strengthen the weak, comforr those
that mourn, and use these, and the like expressions after S. Austin himself:
our sense and meaning is no other, but to desire her to obtain for us of Aug.
ser. 18. de Sanct. in med.
God the blessings which we desire, and which we believe that He alone can give.

12. Nor is there a less mistake in the other part of the objection; For we
build no Churches, erect not Altars, nor offer Sacrifice to Saints; For as S.
Denis says, the Temple is for the altar, the Altar is for the Priest, the
Priest is for Sacrifice, and Sacrifice is for God only. And when we name the
Church of S. Steeven, the Altar of S. Peter, or the Mass of our Lady: We
understand that the Church is dedicated, the Alter consecrated, and the Mass
offered to God, in thanksgiving for the favors He has don to the Virgin, to
S. Peter, or to S. Steeven; as when we name the Mass of the dead, of marriage,
of peace, of Travelers: It is because we offer the sacrifice to God, to demand
of him rest of souls, benediction of Marriage, peace between Princes, and a
good journey for Travelers. See what the Council of Trent, who knew best the
faith and practice of the Church does say of it: Though that the Church
celebrates sometimes Masses in the honor and memory of Saints: she ss. 22. 3.
teaches nevertheless, that it is not to them that she offers sacrifice, but to
God alone, who has crowned them; whence it is that the Priest says not, S.
Peter S. Paul, I offer to you this Sactifice, but to God, to whom he gives
thanks for their Victories imploring their intercession. And so S. Austin
teaches, answering Faustus the Manichean Heretic, who made the same objection
against the Catholics S. Aug. lib. 20. cont. Faust.
of his time.

Some perhaps will say they cannot understand, how we can offer Sacrifice to
the honor of a Saint, and not sacrifice to the Saint, for whose honor it is
offered.

13. Know then, that honor is but a sign, a testimony, or protestation of some
excellency; and that thanks given to God by words or Sacrifice, for the gifts
or graces bestowed on such persons, is a testimony or protestation of such
excellency in those persons, and therefore for their honor: though both words
and Sacrifice be directed to God, and not to them. If Protestants should keep a
solemn day of thanksgiving to God for the wit and zeal their Doctor has shown
against Popery: this would be much to his honor, though the thanks be given to
God, and not to him.

14. Let us learn then by the unfortunate failings of others, not to blaspheme
that which we understand not; Let us not fear Idolatry or falls worship
following the general practice of that Church, which alone does labor to
extirpate Paganism, to ruin Idols and Idolatry, and to put in vogue this
commandment. But Let us beware to make other Idols in our selves and to our
selves, which are harder to be extirpated, and as pernicious to Salvation as
those of Pagans. For if we prefer our judgment before that of the Catholic
Church, we make an Idol of our fancy or opinion, and adore it. If we affect a
Creature disordinately against the commandment of God, we erect an Idol in
our heart, and adore it. If we are intemperate, subject to drunkenness or to
gluttony, S. Paul says to us, that our belly is our God. if we are avaricious,
he declares to us, that Philip. 3. 19. Colloss. 3. 5. Ephesians 5.
gold and silver are our Idols. if we are unchaste, we adore an Idol of flesh.
If it be our design to greaten our selves and to make our fortune at what rate
soever, our idols are the world and its vanities, or our children. If we
cloth our selves excessively, our Idols are our bodies; in a word, all that
weighs most in the balance of our affections is our God, says S. Austin.

Banish then all such inordinate affections; honor and adore the true God only;
give your selves to him without reserve: love him, bless him, fear him, serve
him with all your heart; refer to him all that you do, all that you say, all
that you are, He only is your treasure, your refreshment, your life, and your
glory; He alone is your honor, prosperity, and felicity in soul and body, in
time and in eternity, upon earth and in Heaven: where He will satiate and make
you perfectly happy by the enjoyment of his eternal glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXIX. OF THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not have strange Gods before me etc.
AS by this commandment God excludes unjust worship and adoration of falls
Gods: So by the same He demands just honor and homage which we owe to the only
true God. It is by the Virtue of Religion that we acquit our selves of this
obligation; For this virtue moves us to give to God the honor, worship and
adoration due to him by reason of the infinite Excellence of his nature, and
sovereignity over althings; It teaches us to honor him by our Understanding and
our Will, with our Body and ou^ goods: and moreover to honor althings that are
specially referred to him; And this is that which is exacted of us by this
Commandment: and which we shall show in this Discourse.

1. The Virtue of Religion has this Excellency amongst other moral Virtues,
that we may practice it in all occasions, and in all times. We have always the
object of it: great reason: and Power to do it. The object: God is always near
us, we are in his presence, He is always great and worthy of honor. Great
reason: He obliges us incessantly, we receive from him continually Being,
Preservation, Motion; we should think of him as often as we breath, if we
could; and He did require it of us; we have always Power to exercise this
Virtue: for there is no need of riches, strength of body, fine words: It is
practiced by the motion of the heart, by the affection of the soul, by the acts
of the understanding and the Will.

2. By the understanding we must conceive a high and great esteem of his
Greatness and Excellence, of his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and other
Perfections: apprhend lively, believe firmly, profess humbly, that He is
infinitely Powerful* Wise, Good: that whatsoever He does, He does it most
wisely, justly, holily; that all that we can think, all that the Angels can
conceive of his Greatness is nothing to that He is.

We must acknowledge before God, that he is our Creator, Beginning, last End,
sovereign Good, true Treasure, only Beatitude: that He is our legal Lord,
sovereign King: that He can dispose of us more justly, and absolutely, then a
King of his Vassal, then a Master of his slave, then a Potter of his earthen
Vessel: that if He should take our Children from us, our goods, honor, life
without having given Him any occasion of offense He would not do us injury,
would use his right, would be in so doing most just, amiable, and adorable.

By our will, we must resolve to do promptly all that we know conduces to the
service of God, and to the advancement of his glory, and to avoid all things
which displeas Him: To desire and beg frequently the things that are convenient
to be asked of him: that so we may honor and reverence Him, by submitting our
selves to him, and by acknowledging that we have need of him, and totally rely
on him. To adore him often, professing subjection to his divine Will, in
acknowledgment of his excellency and infinite Majesty, and our subjection and
dependence on Him.

3. And because we are composed of soulw and body, and receive them, and all
other goods from him, we owe him not only the interior, but also the exterior
acts of Religion; such is Sacrifice, by which we honor him as our God and
Sovereign, professing his supreme Dominion, and a dependency of all things on
him; we thank him for Benefits: satisfy his justice: and implore succor of
our necessities; such is the use of Sacraments, by which we tacitly protest,
that God is the Sanctifier and the Author of grace which subjects to him more
and more our Souls. Such are genuflections, prostrations, to testify by these
signs the high esteem we have of his Greatness, and our submission to him.
Such in fine are thanks, Vocal prayers, praises* and other like tributes of
honor and homage which we pay to him. We ought more over to employ our labor*
and to use our goods for the service of him: Yea, to contemn our honor, and
sacrifice our lives, in a just occasion.

4. And since all that is in God, is God, and consequently amiable, honorable,
and adorable: we ought also to honor and adore all his divine Attributes and
Perfections, chiefly in occasions when it pleases him to practice them; When he
sends prosperities to virtuous people, or to their children, adore his fidelity
who promised to favor the virtuous; when He gives goods to ill men, adore his
Goodness, who does good to his Enemies; when He calls a just man out of this
life, who seemed necessary in this world, adore his Independence, who has not
need of his creatures; when He preserves in life the Vicious, adore his
Patience and Longanimitie; When He sends afflictions. adore his justice.

5. In fine the Virtue of Religion obliges us to reverence God not only in
himself, and in his divine Perfections: But also in his Friends and Servants,
in the Times, and Places, which are particularly consecrated to his service,
and in all that has a special respect and relation to his Majesty. It was by
this disposition that Iosuah 5. Genesis 48. 16. Psalm. 138. Or. 139. Apoc. 1. 4.
Iosuah honored the Angel that appeared to him. That Jacob prayed an Angel to
bless his Children. That David honored very much the friends of God. And that
S. John Evangelist implores the assistance of Angels to obtain grace and peace
from God.

It was by the same Virtue that great S. Antony honored Priests as Ministers
of Christ's Inheritance, Officers of his Crown and Dispensers of his treasures:
and that meeting even the least of them, he fell upon his knees and demanded
his Benediction. By this Virtue S. Charles the Great entered into Rome and
visited a foot the Churches of it, embrased and kissed with devotion the
Pillars of them. By this Virtue another Saint Charles, the Cardinal Boromeus
honored so much the holy scripture, that also studying it, he read it always
kneeling and uncovered The seraphical Saint Francis commanded, that papers
which had the name of God written in them, should not be Profaned but placed
in decent and convenient places. S. Lewis forbid painting and graving of the
Cross upon the pavement, for fear the people should tread upon it. On
Festivalls and Vigills, in honor of the Saint celebrated, or of the Mystery
solemnized, he gave dinner to two hundred Poor, and served them at the table.
He fasted all fridays of the year: and in those of Advent and Lent, he eat
neither fish nor fruit, because these two Times are consecrated to God.

6. If these great Saints were now on earth, what would they say, what would
they do seeing the comportment of men? What think they now in heaven seeing
the irreligion of those, who will not allow them any honor, though God does
honor them and honor be a due salary of their Virtue; who count it superstition
Luke 15. 6. Luke. 16. Apoc. 5. 8. and 8. 4. Matthew. 18. 10
to implore their intercession, though they have credit and favor in the sight
of God, do hear our prayers, do know our necessities, have experienced our
miseries, and have Charity and affection for us, as the scriptures tell us.
What think they seeing the indevotion of others, who rise in the morning, and
go to bed at night as beasts: who sit down to table at noon as Epicurians, and
pass over the day as if there were no God; who even fear to assist often at the
Sacrifice, to frequent the Sacraments, to adore God, and pray him as they
ought, lest men laugh at them, and call them devotes. or hypocrites, though
they are not ashamed to do ill in open street. What do they think in fine
seeing such irreverences of men toward holy things? They employ the time of
holy days, in playing, in visits, and drunkenness; if they discourse for
pleasure and recreation, it seems not well seasoned if it clash not upon
Priests, or Religious Persons; if they com to the Church, it is not to appease
God, but to offend him, to see and to be seen; They profane the holy
scripture, and use it in their jests, meriments, and Scurrilities.

7. Si Ego Pater, ubi est honor meus? If I am the Father. where is my honor?
He might have said, if I am King, If I am Judge. If nature teaches the most
barbarous to honor their father who is more worthy of honor than He from whom
we have received, not Body only, but also Soul and All?

8. If we honor the King. and also the Courtiers for his sake: should we not
honor the King of kings, so great, powerful, and Sovereign, that all the Kings
of the world are his Uassalls, and are but worms in respect of Him.

9. If we honor Judges, because they have some Power in this world: ought we not
to honor him who is infinitely powerful, and from whom all power is dereiv'd?
And give also an inferior honor to the Saints, whom God does so much honor,
that He makes them our Judges; You shall sit, says our great Judge, upon S. Matthew
19. 28. 1. Kings 2. 30.
seats, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Let us remember then, what God says to Samuel, whosoever shall glorify me, I
will glorify him: and they that contemn me shall be base; If we neglect the
service of God: if we respect not his friends, and althings that specially
appertain to him: sooner or later, we shall be contemned, co^^r'd with shame,
dishonor and infamy; But if we honor him as we ought, we shall be replenished
with glory, either in this world by the good odor of our reputation, or in the
other, by the crown of justice, which God reserves for us in Heaven. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXX. OF THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain. For the Lord will
not hold him innocent that shall take the name of the Lord his God in Vain.
Exodus 20.
THe royal Prophet representing to us the name of God as holy, represents it at
the same time as terrible, and dreadful: Holy and terrible is his name. Let us
confess to thy great name, because it is terrible and holy; And he joy ns
Majesty and power with Sanctity, to imprint in our hearts reverence, and to
stricke terror into us, lest we should at any Psalm. 110 Psalm. 98.
time dishonor him; And God assures us in this Commendement: that he will
punish us for it, that we may not pretend ignorance to be any cause of it. The
Lord will not hold him Innocent, that shall take the name of the Lord his God in
vain. In other sins the mercy of God pleads in favor of sinners, demands
pardon, strives S. James. 2. 13.
with justice, and sometimes overcoms it, and mercy exalts it self above
judgment, says S. James; But in this sin the Verity of God joins it self to
justice, and obliges God to punish the prophaner, lest his word do fail. Is it
not then a misery which de serves to be deplored with tears of blood, to see
that there is nothing so licenciously and frequently profaned and abused by
Christians as the name of God, by pronouncing his holy name irreverently:
violating Vows unworthily: swearing falsely, or profanely: Cursing, or
blaspheming detestably.

2. But some will say: Oaths are they essentially naught? Is it not permitted
to swear sometimes? Yes it is lawful: since the Scripture permits and approves
it: Saints have practiced it: and God himself vouchsafes to swear. The Prophet
Hieremy permits us Hierem: 4. 2. Psalm. 62. 12. Apoc. 10. 6. Genesis 14. 22. 3.
kings 17. 1. Romans 19. 2. Cor. 1. 23. Gal. 1. 20 Genesis 22. 16. Hier. 22. 24.
Luke. 1. 73. Psalm. 109
to swear in the name of God, provided it be with all necessary circumstances.
David praises those that swear by the true God, not by falls Deities as Pagans
did. Angels, Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles have sometimes sworn. An Angel
in the Apocalypse lifts up his hand to heaven, and swears by him that lives for
ever and ever, that after judgment there will be no more time. In the book of
Genesis, the Patriarch Abraham says to the King of Sodom, I lift up my hand to
the most high Majesty of God who possesses heaven and Earth. In the third book
of kings the Prophet Elias said, by the living God in whose sight I stand. S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, God is my witness that without intermission
I make a memory of you. In the second to the Corinthians, I call God to witness
upon my soul, that sparing you, I came not any more to Corinth. And in the
Epistle to the Galatians, Behold before God, that I ly not. God himself whose
least word is more firm then heaven and earth, having nothing greater then
himself vouchsafes to swear by himself, and by his life. And the Psalmist says
expressly The Lord has Sworn.

3. It is true then, that absolutely speaking, an Oath that is accompanied with
all its circumstances, is neither mortal, nor venial sin: on the contrary, it
is a virtuous and meritorious action; It is an Act of the virtue of Religion,
which has for its object the payment to God and his divine Perfections, the
honor and homage that we owe him. When an oath is well made, we honor the
Immensitie, Science, and Veracity of God; Calling him to witness what we say.
we acknowledge him to be in all places, present with all his creatures: to know
all that passes in this world: and to be the Sovereign and infallible Verity,
Source and Origin of all verity, who authorizes by his testimony all truths.

4. There are diverse sorts of oaths: But that I may not burden your memory, I
will distinguish them into 3. kinds only, which Divinity calls, Assertory,
Promissory, Execratory.

5 First the Assertory is, when you ascertain any thing that is past or
present, calling God to witness what you say: calling him I say, either by
himself, as when you say, by God, before God, I say this in the presence of
God: or by some creature S. Matt. 5.
that has relation to him, as when you say, by my soul, by this light, by this
fire; so JESVS-CHRIST says in the Gospel, that to swear by heaven, is to
swear by the Throne of God: to swear by the earth, is to swear by the
footstool of his feet.

6. Secondly the Promissory is, when you promis under oath to do, or not to do
any thing. And You commit perjury and offend God mortally, if you have not an
intention to do, or not to do what you promis: or if you know that you cannot
do it: or if afterward you voluntarily fail to do what you promised, in a
matter of importance.

7. In the third place, the Execratory, or oath of imprecation is then, when to
assure any thing, you call God not only to witness what you say, but you call
him moreover to reveng the ly, in case you say not true; as when you say: God
punish me: may I die presently: never may I go out of this place: Never may I
see God: the Devil take me, if this be not true; it is as much as if you said:
if I say not true, I will that God permit that I die, that I never depart from
hence, that the Devil carry me away etc.

8. And it happens sometimes, that God takes such swearers at their word, and
sends them the evil which they wished. Niceforus Calixtus says, that three
Calumniators accusing the Bishop Narcissus of Adultery one of them said, that
he would dye if what he affirmed was not true: another, that he would be burnt:
the third, that he might never see. The first died suddenly: the second was
burnt with his house, by a spark of fire that fell from his lamp: the third
having seen the punishment of his accomplices, repented of his fault, and wept so
bitterly that he lost his sight.

9. The Prophet Hieremiah above cited, marks out to us the conditions wherewith
an oath must be accompanied that it be not vicious, but virtuous and
meritorious: Iurabis, vivit Dominus, in veritate, in justitia, and judicio: He
permits you to swear by the life of God, or other oath, provided, that it be
with truth, with justice, and with discretion.

10. First with truth, this circumstance is so absolutely necessary to an oath,
that if you swear an untruth, or are not sure of what you swear, it is a
perjury, though it should be about the vallue of a pin.

I say though it should be upon the matter of a pin; for it is not in this sin
as in other kinds of crimes* wherein the levitie of the matter makes the sin to
be but venial; here the levitie of the matter diminishes not the sin, but
increases the malice of it; for it is a greater contempt of God to abuse his
authority, and to call him to witness an untruth for a thing that is friyolous,
and of little consequence.

11. And we must not only not swear to assert an express and formally, But not
also to confirm a disguised and palliated untruth. I call palliated lies,
equivocations, ambiguous words and of a double meaning; for these deceive men:
they are subtle and crafty cheats; And is it not a great evil to make use of
the name of God, and his credit, to cheat and deceive men? S. Isidore and S.
Bernard tell us, that what ever artifice of equivocation we use in swearing,
God who sees our conscience, S. Isod. lib. 2. sent. 6. 31. S. Ber. lib. de mod.
been vivendi: ser. 32. Aug. Ep. 224. ad Alipium.
takes our words according to the sense that he to whom we swear does
understand them. S. Augustine concludes the same: I doubt not says he, but you
ought to keep the fidelity of your promise, according as he to whom you swore
did understand it, and not according to the ambiguity of your word; whence it
follows that those are perjured, who contenting themselves to perform their
words according to their own concealed sense of them, have deceived the
thoughts and expectations of him to whom they swore; and consequently shall not
be saved: since the Prophet says, that to go to heaven, one must not in
swearing deceive his Neighbor; Qui jurat proximo suo, and non decipit.

12 Secondly, you must swear with justice: that is to say: you must not swear
but that which is just and lawful, And therefore they sin grievously, who
swear to reveng themselves, or to do any thing displeasing to God. They are not
at all obliged to keep such oaths: since nobody can be obliged to do ill; Nay,
they are obliged not to keep them, because the Law of God obliges them, not to
do such things.

13. In the third place, it must be with judgment, that is with prudence and
maturity, for things necessary, and of importance, and by reason of some
obligation grounded in a virtue, as charity, justice, or obedience: For to
swear lightly, rashly, without just cause or necessity, though it be for
verity, is a sin, and moreover the cause of many inconvenients; It is an
irreverence and a dishonor of God to call him for witness in things that are
frivolous, or of little or no importance; It Is as if Lackeys playing in the
court of Whitehall, should call the King to be Arbitrator in all their childish
disputes and differences.

14. But take the inconveniences which do follow this accursed language from
Ecclesiasticus, or rather from the holy Ghost: A man that is given to swearing
shall be filled with iniquity, and Ecclus. 33. 12.
his house shall be always afflicted. He shall be filled with his own sins which
he commits by swearing lightly: and also with those of others, who will learn
to swear by his example, and through the force of custom, forswear also
themselves, and he will be responsible. The holy Ghost tells us not, with what
punishments He will chastise him; beeaus he sends diverse sorts of them; some He
chastiles in one manner: other in another, according to the Rules of his
Providence and good pleasure. But why labor I in this behalf? This word which
the Son of God said, ought to be S. Matt, 5.
more then enough to avert men from unnecessary Oaths: You have heard, that it
was said to them of old, Thou shall not forswear thy self: But I say to you,
Swear not at all; He understands here vainly, or in vain: for He explicates
or extends this Precept, Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain.

15. If Christians must abstain from oaths: with greater reason yet from
Blasphemy: Which is a reproach or contumely, thrown upon God himself, or upon
his Saints; This Vice is so detestable, that virtuous Persons in the Scripture
had a horror to pronounce it, and in stead of sayng blaspheme God, they were
wont to say, Bless God: Lest perhaps my children have sinned, and blessed God
said holy Job. The Jews had this Vice in so great-abomination Job. 1. 5.
that when they heard a blasphemy: they rent and tore their garmetns: to show,
they would have no part in so enormous a Crime, and that they detested it
extremely. I would not counsel you to tear your clothes as often as you hear
blasphemy, you would do it too often in these times; I dare not counsel you
that which S. Chrysostom counseled his Auditors: when you hear a monster of
Chrysostom: hom. ad pop. Antioc infin.
nature, who dares to blaspheme, give him a great blow upon his face: you will
sanctify your hand by this action, this service which you do to God will be as
sacred oil, and a holy unction that will consecrate your hand: I dare not give
you this counsel: unless for those that are under your care, as your children,
and your servants; But when you hear others blaspheme, you ought at least to
rent your heart, to be displeased at this impudence, and to show that it
displeases you, admonish charitably the insolent: and if he will not hear you,
fly his company, and adore the high Majesty of God, making him by this action
as it were amends for the injury He received: that you may avert from you and
from the Community, the wrath and Vengeance of God that blasphemy brings upon
you*

16. Follow then if you be wise, and put in practice the advertisement of the
Son of God; Let your speech be, yes, yes, S. Matthew. 5.
no, no; when you will affirm any thing, content your selves to say, this is
so, or else, it is not so: and that which is over and above these, is of Evil
says JESUS CHRIST: if you add any oath, it is an ill effect of an evil cause.

This evil comes sometimes, from the incredulity of him to whom you speak;
But if he will not believe you, let him go see, or let him stay there; ought
his incredulity to make you disobedlent to God? if you swear not, he will not
believe you: and if you swear, God will be offended with you: which of the two
is most to be feared?

It is of evil; This evil coms often from your bad Conscience: you swear
because your Conscience dictates to you that you deserve not to be credited upon
your simple word: and consequently you show that you are subject to lying; if
you be subject to lying, you are bad: if you are bad, you deserve not to be
believed, also when you swear.

It is of evil; This evil coms from a bad habit you have contracted; you will
never put it off, if you watch not over your selves: if you do not some penance
as often as you swear. Give something to the Poor, say a Pater noster, bite
your tongue, pull a hair out of your head, that the rigor of the penance may
make the ill Custom to give place, says* S. Austin. Can you cure a dangerous
and inveterate infirmity without bleeding, physic, or any remedy? Think you
to root out this bad custom, without labor, penance, or any violence?

It is of evil; this evil coms from your anger, you excuse your selves there
upon; but it is to wash your selves with ink; you are culpable, both for being
angry, and for swearing or blaspheming in anger. If you correct not your self,
God has anger as well as you, but very different from yours; He has anger
most reasonable and just, which will punish yours most justly.

It is of evil. This evil comes from the evil Spirit, who rages with hatred
against God, and against you: and who is glad to use your tongue to spite God,
and to make you criminal, unhappy, an enemy of God as he, companion in his
miseries and his pains. Let us then detest the execrable language of sinners:
and let us say with Saints, I will bless our Lord in all times; I will bless
him in the morning, because He ought to have the first and the best of all
things; In the evening: because He is the last end of all my works; During the
day: because by his order the day continues to enlighten me; I will bless him in
adversity, because then He is with me; In prosperity, because it is a present
that he makes me, to oblige me to praise and love him; I will bless him in all
times, that I may begin in this life, what I shall do by his grace in heaven:
where I shall praise, bless, and glorify him for ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXI OF THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.
Remember that thou Sanctify the Sabbath day.
1. IF this commandment does oblige us Christians, as it obliged the Jews: we
commit three great faults, each of which does bring damnation: This
Commandment obliged the Jews to rest on the same day that God Exodus 20. 9.
Levit. 23: 3. Exodus 35* 3. Exodus 16* 23. Levit. 23.
did rest, to wit on saturday: and we rest on Sunday. It forbid them all work:
as to light a fire, to dress meat, to wa^k in the fields, except one mile, or
there about: And we do on sunday these works which were forbidden. The day of
rest began from the evening of its Vigil: and we begin it, but after midnight:
Who has given us all these dispensations? Who has licenced us to break all
these Laws? We find not in the new Testament one only word that gives us a
plain and clear excuse. We read indeed in the Apocalypse, that S. John was in
spirit upon our Lords day; there was then such a day as our Lords Apoc. 1.
day; But a Sabbatharian will say to us: he does not tell you that the
Sanctification given to saturday was taken from that day; nor that there was
given a command to all the world, not to work upon that day which he called
our Lords day; nor does it appear there, or elsewhere in the scripture, that it
was not the day of the Resurrection, or Ascension, or Christmas day which S.
John called our Lords day.

We read again in the Acts, that the first christians met upon the first day of
the week which is our sunday, to communicate. But Acts. 20. 7.
a Sabbatharian will reply again what then? The Text does not say they assembled
always on that day: or only on that day: yea we read in the Acts, that they
communicated very frequently, Acts. 2.
or every day; How do you then infer from their communicating once upon that
day, that the Sabbath was abrogated, and the Sunday was subrogated in its
place? Nay, you find in the new Law, that though the old Law was by CHRIST
evacuated, yet the ten Commandments were by Him confirmed; For in S. Matthew,
one came to our Savior saying, what good shall I do that I may have everlasting
life? Our Savior Matthew. 10.
answered, keep the commandments. And when that man replied to know what
commandments? Our Lord explicated himself to mean those Commandments, which
that man knew very well, S. Mark. 10. S. Luke. 18. Cor. 7. 19*
as appears also in S. Mark, and in S. Luke,

Secondly S: Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians says, Circumcision is
nothing, and prepuce is nothing, but the observance of the Commandments of
God; this is the thing you must look too, if you will have everlasting life.
Behold here that great Apostle tells you, rhat even then, when Circumcision was
abolished, and made nothing, yet the observance of the Commandments, and he
excepts not one, was necessary to salvation. And our Savior foretelling his
Apostles the destruction of Jerusalem, which was to be 40. years after his
Resurrection, when one would think the observance of the Sabbath would have
been, S. Matthew. 24. 20.
if ever it were to be abolished: yet He bids them pray, that their flight
might not be upon the Sabbath or the 7. th day for to avoid the profanation of
that day. The seventh day then was to be observed, long after the supposed
practice of Communion upon the Sunday: Acts. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16*
and long after S. Paul bids Christians to make their collections upon the
first day of the week: from whence you draw another argument: though the
Apostle does not so much as say, that they did use to meet that day: and seems
to appoint that day only for a pious beginning of the week.

2. Since then the Scriptures are not clear for us in this important point:
yea, seem rather to be against us; How do we know that the obligation of
sanctifying the Sabbath or seventh day was taken away? And how do we know that
a new obligation of sanctifying the Sunday was put upon us? we know it by the
same way we know the Bible is the Word of God: that the Creed was made by the
Apostles: that infants are to be baptized: that the prohibition of the new Law
to eat suffocated Acts. 15.
meats and blood is repealed: and to be short, as we know other things of great
importance not written, or not plainly 2. These. 2. 15.
declared in Scripture: And this is Apostolical Tradition, which S. Paul bids
us hold; For the Church by the instruction of the Apostles tells us plainly,
that the Son of God has freed us from all obligation to sanctify the Sabbath
of the Jews: and has instituted Sunday for us Christians. For on this day,
the principal Works attributed to the most holy Trinity, and don in favor of
us, were begun or accomplished. It was on Sunday that God began to create the
World; It was on Sunday, that our Savior came into the world: that He was born
of the B. Virgin: and that he rose again from the dead; It was on Sunday, that
the holy Ghost descended upon the Faithful to sanctify the world.

3. These incomparable Works should be the object of our devotion on Sundays
to conform our selves to the intentions of our Savior, and of the Church. For
this Commandment is both affirmative, and negative; as negative, it forbids
servil works: as affirmative, it commands us to sanctify the day: that is to
employ the day in holy Works: as in assisting devoutly at divine service, in
praying, in contemplating particularly those great works of God, for to admire
the excellency of them, and to thank, bless, and praise him for them: in
receiving the Sacraments, in reading spiritual books, in hearing the word of
God, in visiting the Poor, Sick, and Prisoners, which is an act af Religion
says S. James: in instructing one another in the Mysteries of Faith, in the
Commandments of God, in S. James* 1. 27.
the practice of virtue and Religion. S. Chrysostom said, that Sunday was
called the day of bread, because all Christians then received the bread of
Angels in the Eucharist: the day of light: because we ought to receive t^erein
light and guidance for all the week, by sermons, catechismes, spiritual
reading, and meditation. If then we employ great part of the day in dancing,
playing and recreating our selves, we offend not indeed against the negative
Commandment, which forbids servil works, but we do not accomplish perfectly
the affirmative precept, which commands us to sanctify the day.

4. They violate the negative Commandment who employ the holy days in
traficking, in buying or selling, or other servil and mercenary employments:
and are subjects of the complaynt which God makes by Ezechiel. The houses of
Israel provoked me, and my Ezeeh. 20. 13.
Sabbaths they violated exceedingly.

4. You will say; If I sell not, another will: I shall lose my custom, and shall
want. But if this be so: S. Paul would not say, Piety is profitable to all
things, that is, both to the spiritual 1. Tim. 4. 8 Matt 6. 31.
and the temporal. Nor would our Savior conclude. Be not therefore solicitous
for the Sustenance of your bodies, seek first the kingdom of God, and his
Providence will furnish you the rest, by the means of moderate labor. If we
ever ought to seek the kingdom of God, we ought to do it at least on Sundays,
and because you seek it not, you are not supplied with the rest. You neglect the
spiritual, for the temporal: and you lose both temporal and spiritual: you are
poor in this world, and in the other.

5. They have violated my Sabbaths exceedingly; God says. Exceedingly, against
those, who not only serve not God on sundays, but offend him more outragiously
than in any other day, by debaucheries, impieties, and dissolutions. It seems
the sunday is made by some the sink of all the week, who having not leisure to
offend God on other days, transferr this to the sunday; It is not now our Lords
day with them, but the devils: their solemnities are not the festivalls of
Saints, but of Bacchus, Ceres, and Venus. Heretofore the devils left the
bodies of possessed persons. and withdrew themselves into the desert, as unable
to endure the piety and devotion of the Faithful; But now they possess the
hearts of Christians, as those hoggs of the Geraseens, to precipitate them into
the lake of a thousand brutal actions: and after, into the pool of fire and
brimstone of everlasting death. It is certible to hear Isaye. 1. 14. Malac. 2.
3.
with what execration God speaks of holy days so Profaned: my soul hates your
Solemnityes: I will cast upon your faces, the dung of them.

6. Let us say then with the Psalmist, Turn o my Soul into thy rest: because our
Lord has don good to thee. Psalm. 114. 7.


Turn o my Soul, convert your self entirely to God on the sunday at least. It
is instituted for this end, and it is called the day of our Lord: because if we
have been turned to our selves, and to our affairs the other days: we must at
least turn to God and to his service this day, which He has reserved to
himself. It seems an usurpation of another goods, and a sort of sacriledg to
rob him of this day, and to employ it prophanly against his will.

Turn o my Soul into thy rest; It is a great crime to refuse Obedience to a
commandment so sweet; other Masters urge their servants and cry out to them,
work, work: ha! God says to his: my children: I will not that you weary out
your selves: give some respit to your selves from labors: rest in me, who am
the Center of your hearts, and the true rest of your souls. He calls this day
by his Prophet, The delicate or delicious Sabbath: His Isaiah. 58. 13.
delights are to be, and to convers with us: why should we not then make it our
delights to be and convers with Him?

Turn into thy rest, because our Lord has don well to thee. The Sunday was
instituted that we might have opertunity to serve God, and more leisure to
thank Him for our Creation, Preservation Redemption, Sanctification, and
Vocation to his Service: for all graces and good works which He gives us: for
preserving us from a thousand infirmities, miseries, deaths, and from so many
occasions of sin: He has delivered, says the Prophet, my soul from death, my
eyes from tears, my feet from sliding; if we are grateful for benefits
received, we shall give him occasion to give us new: if we employ we^l the time
designed for the service of God, He will bless the time granted us to make
provision for our selves and families. do then the works of God on holy days,
and He will do yours on other days: and moreover make you pass from the figure
to the Verity, from the shadow to the light, from the symbol to the reality,
and from the temporal rest of this life, to the eternal repose of glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXII. OF THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT
Honor thy Father and thy Mother
AS the Commandments written in the first Table, tend immediately to the
honor and glory of the Creator, recommending to us Piety and devotion toward
Him; So these of the second Table tend immediately to the salvation and the
utility of men* and recommend to us charity and justice toward all our
neighbors: that each one doing his duty in his state and condition, the
families and communites of Christians may be well ordered and disposed. The
most important of these duties, is that of children toward their Parents; and
therefore it is exacted by the first commandment of the second Table; and to
move them more to it, recompense is herein promised to those that shall honor
their Parents with the triple honor of Reverence, Obedience, and Assistance.

2. First, with the honor of Reverence; for our Parents are the images of God,
whose authority is a Ray of his Paternity: they are Sources and Causes of our
life after Him: Organs and Instruments which He uses, to give and preserve our
Being. Hence it comes that we ought to honor them, be they whatsoever: though
your Father be vicious and deboist, he is still your Father a cause of your
life, an instrument of God, and an image of his Paternity. And because the chief
part of this honor consists in the interior: you must esteem your Parents in
your heart, acknowledge them your Superiors, respect and reverence their
Authority; And because they know not your interior: you are obliged to testify
by exterior signs, the honor which you have for them: to speak to them humbly:
of them to others, honorably: to give them respect and reverence, and to do
nothing that savours of neglect or contempt. The Queen Bethsabee was not of the
Royal blood, but of mean extraction, and nevertheless the wise Solomon her Son,
though a great and powerful Monark, and sitting in the Throne of Justice, rose
out of it, to meet and reverence her, and placed her in a Throne at the right
hand of his Majesty. This wise King was the figure of our Savior, who being
King of kings, and God of infinite Majesty: disdained not on earth to be
subject to his holy Mother, and who elevated, and placed her in heaven at Psalm.
44.
his right hand; Astitit Regina a dextris tuis.

3. To honor your Parents: you must moreover consult them, before you
undertake any thing of consequence; when you would marry, commence a suit,
undertake a far journey, or engage your self in any other thing of importance:
ask their counsel, and follow it; this shows you esteem their prudence, and
God blesses this proceeding; the young Tobias had a great blessing, was
assisted by an Angel, delivered from all danger, replenished with riches and
prosperity in his journey, because he undertook it by the advice and direction
of his Father.

4: The second honor of our Parents exacted by this Commandment, is that of
Obedience; This honor S. Paul often recommends to us, and in the Epistle to the
Ephesians he proves it by this commandment to be their due: Obey your Parents
in our Ephesians. 6.
Lord: For this is just: Honor thy Father and thy Mother. He adds In our Lord:
For if they command you any thing against the commandments of God, or of his
Church: or if they would avert you from Religion and his service, S. Bernard
tells you, that Epist: 104.
it is Piety to neglect them for the love of JESUS CHRIST; for He that said:
Honor your Father and your Mother: says to you also, He that loves his father
or his mother more than me, is not worthy of me. But when they command just and
lawful things, you must obey them, they are your Superiors, and the Causes of
your Being: they then as Superiors ought to move you: and as Causes of your
Being, to be also the Authors of your operations. And if a servant be obliged
to obey his Master for a little nourishment, and a small salary he receives; how
much more a child his Mother, who nourished him with her own substance: and his
Father, who labored so much, to bring him up, and endeavors to provide for
him?

5. I find in the holy scripture, that your obedience to be perfect, ought to
have three conditions at the least, it ought to be blind, cordial, and
perseverant.

In the first place blind to the motives of the Command: It must propose no
whyes, no questions, and no reasons. All your why, and all your reason ought to
be the will of your Parents representing to you the will of God. Be subject,
says S. Paul, in all things pleasing, not contradicting, or murmuring. Tit. 2.
9.


Secondly, your obedience ought to be amorous, and to proceed out of a filial
heart. when you do the things commanded, out of humane considerations, out of
servil fear, or with a mercenary spirit, you lose the fat of your sacrifice,
the grace of your action, and the merit of your good work. You must offer
marrowie sacrifices: you must obey your Superiors with a good will says S.
Paul; with a sincere and cordial affection: acknowledging and honoring in them
the soveraignity of God.

Thirdly, your obedience must be perseverant: it must continue to the end of
your life; It Is true, that Justinian in his Institutes: and after him other
Lawyers have taught diverse ways, by which a child may be emancipated;: But
there is no civil Law, nor humane power, that can free a child from the
obligation he has by this commandment, and by the Law of nature, to honor and
obey his Father and Mother unto the last moment of his life. Wherefore
Venerable Tobias thinking that Tob. 4. 4.
he should die, amongst other admonitions which he gave his Son, said to him
with great tenderness, Thou shall honor thy mother all the days of her life; Is
it not then deplorable to see children, who during their minority, are humble,
respectfull, and obedient to their parents; But being become men or women,
married, and elevated to offices, when they think they have no more need of
them, forget and neglect, disdain and contemn them. our Savior does not so; He
being elevated to the Throne of glory, to the right hand of the Father, adored
by all the celestial Powers, forgets not his mother: He honors her more than
ever, accomplishes her desires, favors and assists those who honor and
invocate her, and works more miracles for the honor of her, than for the honor
of his own Body; there is no Kingdom, Nation, or Province in the Catholic
world, where there are Churches or Chappells consecrated to God, in honor of
the Virgin, that God does not render famous by certain miracles.

6. In fine this Commandment obliges us to honor Parents, by helping,
succouring, and assisting them. Wherefore Christ Matthew. 15. S. Hierom and. S.
Bid. Tim. 5. 3.
reprehended the Pharisees as transgressors of this Commandment, for denying
them this honor. And the holy Fathers have truly noted, that the word Honor in
the Scriptures, signifys not so much salutations and profers of services, as
giving alms and making presents: Honor Widows, that are truly Widows says S.
Paul to his disciple Timothy: that is, nourish them with alms; and recommending
to him Priests, Let them that rule well, especially they Tim. 5. 17.
that labor in word and doctrine, be esteemed worthy of double honor, that is
of a greater recompense or reward than others.

7. If then we will observe this Commandment, we ought not to content our
selves with Ceremonies: we must not think it enough to say that we honor and
respect our Parents: but we must show it them in effect; We must recompense
them says the holy Ghost by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus: Them, who brought us
Ecclus. 7. 31.
into the world: who have loved us so long, so cordially, and effectually. When
then they are broken with old age, think it not a burden to entertain them: be
not more void of reason than animals that have none: you who are humane
creatures, and by your nature ought to have humanity; you who are Christians,
and by this quality ought to have charity, be not less charitable than storkes
that nourish their parents in old age; have not less piety then a pagan woman,
who deprived her child of nourishment, to give it to her father: say no more,
we have children: we fear they will want: we cannot nourish Parents without
injuring our families; For Divinity also teaches you, to D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 26.
ar. 9. ad 3 m. Coloss. 3. 21.
let your children dye with famine, to assist your Parents in extreme necessity.

8. To excite Children, to acquit themselves worthily of these duties, S. Paul
proposes three motives to them. The first is, that by so doing, they please
God; and we see this clearly by the benedictions which God bestows upon those
that are respectfull and obedient. But would you believe, that God worked
miracles, also amongst Infidells, to approve this piety of children? Aristotle
in the book of the wonders of the world: and in the abridgment of Philosophy
which he sent to Alexander the Great reports, that a raging fire divided and
gave passage to a young man, that retarded his flight, and neglected his own
life, to save his aged father, and reunited it self upon those that ran before
them.

9. On the contrary the impiety of a child is so abominable in the sight of
God, that in the anc^ent Testament He condemned him to death, not only if he
killed or beat, but if he cursed them, or was notably rebellious or
disobedient. Exodus, 21. 17. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. Ephs. 6.


10 Secondly the holy Apostle tells us, that it is just to honor them. Consider
I pray, what languishings, what faintings, what loathings, and incommodities
your poor Mother suffered for you, whilst She did bear you in her womb! what
pains, what dangers, and what fears of death she had in bringing you into the
world* what uneasy nights, what toils, what vexations she had, and what
ordures, cries, and importunities she suffered, to nurse and nourish you!

Consider, what cares, what troubles, what watches, what journeys, what suits,
what labors your poor Father has embraced to get and keep a few goods for
you! God willing to afflict the son of Pharao, said by Moses to this king, I
will send my plagues upon thy heart: because a father and a mother love their
children as their hearts; you will be never able to return the tendernesses
which they had for you; when you were sick, they were ill; when you were
contented, they were joyful: when you discontented, they sorrowful: and after
so many testimonies of affection, not to love them, not to rejoice them, not to
comfort and content them to the utmost of your power, but to be the cause of
their sorrow and affliction; is not this to be more cruel than Tigers, and
more monstrous than monsters themselves?

11. But if your duty, and the strict obligations that you have to them do not
touch you: let at least the love of your own selves, and your proper interest
move you, through hope of the promises which God has made you; He promises you
long and happy life, if you honor your Father and Mother. S. Thomas says, he
that is grateful for a benefit merits to have it continued Ephesians. 6.
and increased: the child then that is grateful for the life he has received
from his Parents, deserves that it be polong'd and preserved. If then we see
good natured and obedient children dye young: it is that the providence of God
foresaw, that temptation would chang them, and put them in danger of damnation:
and in recompense of their obedience, he gives them eternal life in lieu of
temporal: He was taken away, says the holy Wisd. 4. 11.
Ghost, lest malice should change his understanding, or lest any guile might
deceive his soul. or God calls them to himself that they may not see and feel
the public afflictions and calamities of the times. Isay. 57. 1.
The ^ust is taken away from the face of evil, said the Prophet Isaiah.

12. S. Paul says, that Piety serves not only to merit a long life, but to
obtain all other grace and favor of God, the salvation of the soul, health of
body, a happy posterity, with an abundance also of temporalls, if they are
profitable to the Spiritual. Tim. 2. 4. and 8.
The Wiseman had taught this long before, assuring us, He heaps up treasure,
that honors his Mother: and he that honors his Father, shall joy in children,
and in the day of his prayer, shall be heard. Ecclus. 3.


13. Honor them then, as Ecclesiasticus there bids you, by words, by actions,
and by patience; Speak to them, and of them to others, always with respect: do
nothing to offend them, with your works: and if they give you yet occasion of
sufferance or discontent: endure and bear it patiently; so you will be the
children of God, fruits of benediction, and coheires of JESUS CHRIST, in the
possession of the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXIII. of the Duty of Parents.
IT is a Question in Divinity, Why God has not in the Decalogue recommended to
Parents their Duty in respect of children? S. Chrysostom answers: that it was
not necessary, since nature does teach it clearly: and the great love they have
for their children does sufficiently incline Parents to have a care of them.
Whence S. Paul takes occasion to draw this consequence He who has not care of
his own, and especially of his domestics is wors then an infidel; because he
does not violate only the laws of Christianity: but transgresses also the law
of nature, so deeply imprinted in the hearts of all men. And if according to
the Gospel, they that are not more virtuous than Pagans, shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven; what salvation may they hope: Nay, what damnation should
they not expect, who as the Apostle says, are wors than Infidells? To avoid
this then, Parents must pay exactly four debts they owe to children:
Nourishment: Instruction: good Example: and Correction.

2. First Nourishment; For Parents that deny them this debt, are not only wors
then Infidells, but more unnatural and cruel than savage beasts. It is God
himself that complains of it by Hieremiah, Lamiae nudaverunt mammam,
lactaverunt catulos suos, filia populi mei crudelis ut struthio, instead of
lamiae, there is in the hebrew Thren. 4. 3.
(Tanim) dragons, wild dogs. There is no beast so cruel, but has care to
nourish its young: the dragons themselves, and the wild dogs do it: and there
are many amongst my people, who are cruel as the ostritch; the ostritch, you
know, is a very greedy and devouring foul: cast to it iron, peuter, silver, it
swallows all, it degests all to nourish its own self: but toward its young it
is most cruel; for as holy Job says, she Job. 39. 13.
is content to lay her eggs: she does not cover or sit upon them: and if any
one by the heat of the Sun does bring forth a young one, and it cryout to the
mother for a little nourishment she is deaf to this mournful voice: she is
hardened against her young, as if it were not her own. Many fathers do the
same: they are as revenous and cruel as this bird: they consume silver, peuter,
iron, linen, which they sell to defray the charges of their disorders: they
content themselves to people the world, to have children, and take no care to
breed them up. Whilst they make good cheer in Taverns, these poor innocents cry
for hunger, they lament and say as Micheas, we make mourning as it were of
ostritches. Mich 1. 8


3. There are others who fail in this first duty by a disposition quite
contrary to profusion: by a spirit of avarice and unsatiable covetousnes: they
love so much their money, that they will not employ a little for the good
education and salvation of their children; they choose rather to see them
ignorant, rude, and vicious, then to disburse money for a good Instructor, to
send them to school, to buy them spiritual books, and to make them learn
something in which they may profitably employ the time of their life, and
improve the Talents God has given them: in defect whereof, they are miserable
both in regard of this life and the other. they fear says S. Austin, to lose
the image of the King engraven on the money in their purs, and they fear not at
all to lose the Image of God imprinted in the souls of children, of whom He
has given them charge.

4. They ought not also to do as the Ape, which often kills its young by
hugging them too much; they ought not to do as Agrippa, who being told that her
Son should be Emperor, imperious, and take away her life; I care not, said
she, so that he do reign, occidat modo imperet. Say in like manner to another,
you are ill advised to accustom your daughter to go so richly clothed, to
kill your self in body and soul to marry her so richly; what need is there that
she should be better then you? when she shall be elevated she will laugh at
you, despise you, look upon you as below herself, be ashamed to accompany you,
and to show that you are her mother; this will make you dye with regret;
occidat modo imperet: I care not, so that she be great. say to this father
after S. Austin, that it is not to have care of your children, but to stifle
them, to burden them so with riches gotten by the ruin of the Poor, to make
them swim thus in the tears of widows, and orphans, whose goods you hold:
this will draw down the malediction of God upon them, and upon you eternal
damnation; I care not provided that he be great. Say to, him your elder Son is
ignorant: he has neither judgment nor virtue, and is incapable of that
office: if you resign it to him, or obtain it for him, he will do therein a
thousand injustices; your younger Son is not called to an Ecclesiastical state:
he has not the gift of continence, nor any devotion; if you obtain for him
that Benefice, he will damn himself therein, and will damn many other: and
you will be responsible for all; occidat modo imperet: I care not provided that
he be great.

5. This too great care which they have to enrich and greaten them, hinders the
care they ought to have to instruct and teach them; Bring them up says S. Paul,
in erudition and correction Iphes. 6.
of our Lord: that is bring them up in good learning and correction; according
to the law or will of God. And since the holy Ghost recommends so often, and so
instantly to Prove. 1. and 4. and 6.
children to hear with attention the instructions of their Parents, without
doubt He supposes that the words which they will speak to them will be as they
ought to be, words of edification and salvation: not maxims of vanity,
ambition, avarice, and worldliness, as they are so often in these times.

6. The Venerable Tobias, who was but in the Mosaical Law, Job. 4. 2.
that terrestrial and imperfect law, gave to his Son quite contrary Documents;
We are in the law of grace, a perfect law: and therefore he will condemn us in
the day of judgment; hear what he said to his Son: Be mindful of God all the
days of your life, and take great heed that you never consent to sin; Bless
God in all times, and pray him to guide you in all your actions: and that all
your designs may be according to his will; That which you would not have don
unto your felf, never do unto another; Turn not away your eyes of compassion
from any poor person; for by this means God will not avert the eyes of his
mercy from you; Be merciful in what manner you can: if you have an abundance
of goods, give abundantly: if you have but little: you can give but little, but
give it with a good heart: alms will be a great confidence before God to all
that give it; avoid the conversation, and haunt of sinners, consult the wise in
your enterprises.

You must give to your children all these instructions and others yet more
perfect, because they are in the law of grace: you must imprint in them the
maxims of Christianity, a great respect for holy things, for humility,
patience, pardon of enemies, the contempt of worldly things, the love of God, a
great zeal for his glory, and of all that contributs to his service.

7. And forget not, that works are more powerful than words: that examples
persuade much more than reasons: that one hears with more respect him, who
practices what he teaches, than him, who contradicts and denies his doctrine by
his life; that Princes themselves as powerful as they are, are yet more
absolute by their examples, and gain more upon their subjects by their virtues,
than by their Edicts; that therefore Christ our Master, began first to do, and
then to teach; And his great Apostle proposing himself for Preacher to the
Faithful, proposed himself also for their Example: Be ye Imitators of me, as I
also of Christ. if then you will educate your children well as you are obliged:
have more care to instruct them by examples than by words. 1. Cor. 11 1.


8. Philo calls Parents the visible Gods of their children. They have you
always before their eyes as the modells of their actions: they consider you as
the sources of their Being, preservation, and good fortune: they naturally
follow you, and glory in the imitation of you: and if they learn not virtue of
you, of whom may they learn it? to teach them virtue well, make them to
practice it: and practice you it with them; take them with you to prayers, to
Mass, and Vesperas, and see that they comport themselves in them reverently and
devoutly; give alms in their presence, and do it by them, to the end you may
induce them to it; command them to give it with respect, for to honor
JESUS CHRIST in the person of the poor; take them with you to visit the poor,
sick, and prisoners: make them read with you the lives of Saints: the works of
Granado, or other good books, especially on sundays, and holy days; make
examins of Conscience: Acts of Faith, Hope, Charity, Gratitude, and Contrition
with them; they will take these things from you: will deliver them to their
children, and so these good practices will pass unto many generations: and you
will have the merit of them, and the glory before God.

9. But if they will not imitate you, and practice your instructions: you must
do that which S. Paul adds: make use of chastisement: in defect where of, God
will chastise you: and that most severely, as appears by many and most
authentike examples. Ephesians. 6.


Hear then and put in practice the admonitions of the holy Ghost: withdraw not
Discipline from a child: for if thou shall strike him with the rod, he shall not
die. Thou shall strike him with the rod, and Prove. 23.
deliver his soul from hell. He that loves his child, accustoms him to stripes,
that he may rejoice in his later end. Flatter thy child, and he will make thee
afraid: play with him, and he will make thee sorrowful. Eccles. 31


10. Let us Make an end with this word of S. Hierom: The salvation of the
Children, is the gain of the Parents; if you procure the salvation of your
children, mortifying the natural tenderness and love you have for them, to
correct their imperfections: and choose rather to leave them poor and low, then
to enrich and raise them against Conscience, you will gain the favor of God,
He will say to you as to Abraham: Because you have been so faithful to me, that
you spared not your son for the love of me, I will bless your family, and give
you a happy posterity. And on the contrary, if you do as Hely, you will be
punished as he; he was blind and feeble: he could not himself chastise his
children: but the law of God commanded him to bring them to the Judge: to accuse
them of their disorders: to demand justice against them, and to make them to be
condemned to death: and because he did it not, he was himself condemned; God
obliges you not to so great severity, but to chastise them, at least when they
offend him. He commands so strictly your children to honor you: why should you
not recommend to them the render of the honor which they owe him? He punishes
them so rigorously if they obey you not: why should you not punish them, when
they obey not him? He spared not his own Son, his most innocent and amiable
Son, He preferred your salvation before his life: Why should you spare your
child, your ungodly, intemperate, dissolute, and vicious child? Will you Iose
both his and your own soul, to show a fond love, or to make him great?

The salvation of the children is the gain of Parents; if your children work
their salvation, you will gain repose: when they are prudent and virtuous, you
have no disquiet, no sting of conscience, no interior nor exterior trouble
concerning them.

It is the gain; you will gain honor and reputation in the world: for Parents
are known by their children: the cause by its effects: the original by the
copy; such a Master such a man: such Parents, such children, commonly speaking.

It is the gain of the Parents; you will gain the affection and the praises of
your children; They will say after your death; Thanks be to God, who gave us
Parents so exemplar, vigilant, and virtuous.

It is your gain; you will gain Heaven; for S. Paul says, if a woman continue
in faith and love, in sanctification and sobriety: and breed up her children in
the same, she shall obtain salvation. 1. Tim. 2. 18.
Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXIIII. OF THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not kill.
THis Commandment forbids us to kill without legitimate Authority either our
own selves, or any humane creature: either positively, by putting the cause of
death: or negatively, by not removing it, if in our power; To which the Son of
God has added: But I say to you, Whosoever shall be angry, shall be in danger of
judgment. Nevertheless since our Savior Matthew. 5.
is the perfect model and Idea of the elect: and that we see in the scripture,
He has been sometimes angry; It seems that imitation of him in this point, is
an action, not permitted Mark. 3. 5.
only, but virtuous, and meritorious. To clear this point, in which the
difficulty of this commandment consists, and to make this discourse beneficial:
We will see first, whether or no, there was any anger in JESUS CHRIST;
Secondly, the difference of his and ours: and thirdly, the remedies of ours.

Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastise me in thy anger: says the Royal
Prophet. Our Savior JESUS CHRIST, is He transported with fury? Is He subject
to any passion, as to Psalm. 6.
make his blood boil, his eyes sparkle, his mouth froth, to set his face on
fire, and afterward to make it pale: to disorder his soul in her functions,
and to deprive her of her empire and command? for these are the proper effects,
and symtoms of anger: which made the Stoics, after many disputes upon this
subject say, a wise man, is not subject to these passions.

It is certain, that in our Savior, as he is God, there is no such Passion,
for his Divinity being most pure, simple, and invariable cannot be subject to
these transports, and alterations.

3. Nevertheless, the holy Ghost in the Scripture, to condescend to our
infirmity, and to accommodate himself to our manner of speaking and
understanding, attributes to God many things which pertain not to him properly,
but only by Analogy and likeness to that which is seen in creatures: so He
attributes to him anger, which is no other thing in him, than his justice,
which is called anger, because it has the same effect as anger, but not the
weakness and imperfection of anger. He that is angry revenges the injury
received, but with transport and commotion: God by his justice punishes sin,
but with tranquillity without passion: Thou judge with Wisd. 12. 18.
tranquillity, says the holy Ghost in the book of Wisdom.

4. But if we consider JESUS CHRIST as man, I will say with Divines, that the
passions, love, hatred, choler, and joy, sorrow, desire, and fear, being
appurtinances to humane nature certainly were in JESUS CHRIST, as man; But
without the imperfections wherewith original sin has soiled them: which has
made them in us strong and vigorous, and to revolt continually.

The Passions of JESUS were not such: He had absolute command over them: they
were perfections, natural organs, and instruments which He applied to holy
uses. Wherefore the Saints dared not call them simply Passions, but
Propassions, to signify that in this holy Soul, there were some dispositions,
which held the place of passions, and therefore are called propassions: as the
Pronounes are so called, because they hold the place of Nounes: So the sacred
Historians recount that JESUS entering into the Temple, raised in himself anger,
ouverthrew the tables of the Marchands, and chased them out as dogs, May we
imitate him in this? Is it good to raise anger in our selves? ought we not to
confess it? We need not absolutely speaking; it is neither vice nor
imperfection, but a good action and a virtue to raise anger, provided it be
seasoned with all necessary circumstances, and like to that of JESUS. But
because we are commonly so frail and so imperfect, that we know not how to use
this knife without cutting our own selves; all things well considered, it is
better to deprive our selves of it, and not be angry.

5. For the anger of JESUS was furnished with two conditions, which commonly
ours does want; wherefore his was most virtuous and laudable: ours vicious and
reproachful. That of JESUS, never prevented or surprised Him: He had it not,
but when, in what manner, and so much as He would. In in effect, it is said in
the Gospel, that He troubled himself, and not that He was troubled. S. John.
11. 13. S. Mark 14. 33.
And again in the Vigill of his Passion, He began to fear: not before, though
He had a longtime the object present in his Spirit. Anger did not prejudice the
use of his reason: it cast no darkness, nor obscurity into his understanding: it
hindered him not to proceed most wisely, and with entire circumspection in his
actions; His rod, says Hieremiah, is a watching rod, which Hierom. 1. 11.
has open eyes, to see where it strikes, and how it strikes: his anger is a
zeal, and not a passion, most reasonable and most just. Ours on the contrary,
is generally blind, inconsiderate, and rash: It prevents the judgment, and
darkens reason, and is the cause we know not what we do, and that we do nothing
that is good.

6. All that you say, or do in passion, is never well said, or well don: and
though you should speak golden sentences, though you should do wonders, they
make no account of them: they attribute them to your passion* and not to you:
as they attribute to the liquor all that a man says or does in drink: because
they know a man drunk with liquor or with passion, is incapable to say or do
any thing of worth; So the Civil Laws I. Quocqd. Si. de Reg Iur. 4. king. 3.
declare we ought not to regard what you say or do in the heat of passion, if
you persever not in it when your anger is allayed: Eliseus finding himself
moved by a just anger would not pronounce his Oracles, and instruct the Kings:
but called a Musician to appeas first the commotion by the gravity of his
music; He knew well, that a soul troubled with passion is incapable Psalm. 106
27. S. James. 1. 20.
of celestial lights; And that anger of man works not the justice of God. It
belongs not but to JESUS and to his holy Mother to do a thing well in the heat
of passion.

7. Moreover there is a second difference of his and our anger; His is never
mixed with bitterness, nor exercised with a desire of vengeance; when He is
angry and punishes us, it is not out of hatred or i^l will, it is out of love,
or xeal of justice; his strokes are favors, and his wounds are antidotes: He
is angry as a dove, with out gaul or malice: our anger is of a contrary
quality, it is the anger of a viper, with interior venime and black bile; when
we are angry, we are full of aversion, and bitterness: and the malignity also
of this viper is so great, that often it vomits out its poison against the
goodness of God himself.

7. What remedy for a passion so unreasonable, malign, and prejudicial? First
we must remove the cause in our own selves: must pull out the root, which is an
inordinate affection to temporal goods, or to our selves, or to some other
creature. An Ancient named Cottis broke many Vessels which his friends had
presented him, fearing he should be angry, when his servants broke them; I
counsel you not to destroy, or to quit wholly all that is, or may be the
occasion of your anger: but to moderate your affection to them: and to love
them rather out of obedience to the Will of God, than by inclination; so having
no tie of irregular affection to them: you will not be in danger to be much
moved, when you shall be deprived of them.

9. Consider in the second place from whence the accidents and Crosses com
which are wont to move your anger; Know that all that happens in this world, I
say all, except sin, does com from God: and therefore ought to be well
received, both in regard of the divine source whence they proceed, and the
beneficial effects, they are sent to produce in us. The holy Ghost says in
Ecclesiasticus that good things and evil, life and death, poverty Ecclus. 11.
Aug. in Psalm. 48.
and riches com from God. And hence S. Austin assures us, that whatsoever
happens in this world against our wills, coms not but by the will of God, by
his Providence and order, though we know not the reason of it. Whosoever
considers well this Providence of God, his goodness, and his Wisdom, has a
true and sweet prevention of his passions; he cannot think the Crosses are
designed for ill to him because, they are disposed by an Infinite Goodness, who
intends and projects his good; He will not Giant like set up his will against
the will of God, and with a foolish rashness kick against the spurr; but submit
to all that has been decreed in his counsels, receive all patiently and
thankfully, as coming from so good a hand, and happily rejoice also in so good
a hope.

10. By these means well practiced, you may prevent your anger, so that it will
not easily surprise you; And to extinguish it, or moderate it when it is
inflamed, your companions may by the grace of God do much, if they imitate him
in a like occasion; you see sometimes a thick cloud that covers the sky,
darkens the Sun, and makes as it were night at midday: you hear a thunderbolt
that runs in it, lightens, thunders, and astonishes the world: you will say
that all goes to rack, and the end of the world is com, What does our good God
to dissipate this tempest? Educit ventos de the sauris suis: He brings out of
his treasures a gentle west wind, a little wind, that dissipates these clouds,
calms this tempest, and makes the Sun to shine again; this tempest is resolved
into refreshing showers, which water the earth, and brings a thousand
commodities. When your neigbor is in passion, he is like this cloud, is in a
tempest, and in a rage: the Sun of his reason is ecclipsed, and has with in
him a dark night: he murmures, storms, and makes a noise like a clap of
thunder, gives looks that resemble lightinings, threatens, rants and tears, and
makes appearance of overthrowing all. If you are well disposed, you will
dissipate all this easily; you need not but to let out of your heart, which
ought to be the treasure of God, a mild word, as a gentle wind: you must not
disavow any thing that he says at that time: you must not resist him, nor
retort a fault upon him, but excuse him, and demand pardon, though you have not
committed any fault. to morrow when this violent heat of passion is cooled, and
his spirit quieted, he will return to himself, will admire your patience,
acknowledge his fault, repent himself of his folly, and love you better, than
before.

11. But the souveraign remedy of anger and other passions is the grace of God.
We commit great faults not making fervent and frequent recours to it. Our
Savior had no need to pray: and yet to give us example, being near his
passion, said to his Father, My soul is troubled; my fother save me from this
hour: Do John. 12. 27.
as He: when you percieve any temptation in your heart* cast your selves at the
feet of the Son of God, beg help: say with the Apostles, Lord save us, we
perish. And when you are not Matthew. 8. 25.
in temptation, court him, pray him, practice virtues that please him, to the
end he assist you, when you shall be assaulted; And ruminate sometimes these
words of S. Paul: Patience is necessary Heb. 10. 36.
for you, that doing the will of God, you may receive the promise. If you be
patient, the promise of God will be fulfilled in you; first, in this world; He
said, the meek and gentle shall possess the earth; Matthew. 5. 4.
moderate, patient, and well tempered spirits dispatch affairs with more
conduct, and better success, than hasty, turbulent, and violent; Fabius Maximus
did more by his Patience against the Carthaginians, than Scipio with his Armies.

Promise, for the other life; He said, In your patience you shall Luke 21. 19.
possess your souls: you will avoid an ocean of sins, which would put you in
danger of losing your soul: you will diminish the pains due to your crimes; so
many injuries, so many affronts, so many displeasures which you endure for the
love of God, are so many penances and satisfactions for your offenses. By
patience you practice humility, charity toward your neigbbor, resignation to
the will of God, and other virtues, which will increase in you the grace of
God, and make you merit Glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXV. OF THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not kill.
AS the reasonable soul is incomparably more noble than the body: So the
Spiritual murder is much more pernicious and damnable than the corporal.
That which I call Spiritual murder, is Scandal; for S. Paul speaking to a
corinthian who scandalized his neighbor, 1. Cor. 8.
said to him, You are the cause that your christian Brother, for whom Christ
has dyed, does perish. This word of that great Apostle is enough to oblige us
to speak all our words, and to do all our actions with great circumspection,
that we may never give ill example, nor scandalize so many who have their eyes
upon us: and who more usually and willingly do imitate our evil, than our
good. By the same Word also we may learn, that scandal is not a word or action,
which gives occasion of dishonor, infamy, or confusion: that to scandalize
another is not to discover his Vice, to publish and make it known to the world:
this is not to scandalize him properly speaking, it is to diffame and dishonor
him: Scandal is a word, or an action, that is not so right as it should be,
which gives occasion to our neihgbor to commit a sin; So S. Thomas, and after
him all the school: Dictum, vel factum minus rectum praebens alicui occasionem
ruinae.

To have a perfect knowledge of this Definition* we must weigh all the words of
it: the defect whereof makes men to be deceived often, and to remain in
ignorance.

2. Dictum: scandal is sometimes a word; for the body is poisoned by the mouth,
and the soul by the ears said Plato; and S. Paul who cites but seldom profane
Authors, alleges to this purpose the saying of the greek Poet: corrumpunt
bonos 1. Cor. 15 33. Psalm. 118
mores colloquia prava, evil discourses corrupt good manners; David seemed to
fear the contagion of them when he prayed Lord deliver my soul from unjust
lips and from the deceitful tongue: and we have greater reason to do the
like: you will find many who will not speak openly against the faith, lest they
should be accounted impious, or Atheists; But they will say, one might object
such a thing against our belief: or Infidells propose to us this argument;
Deceitful tongue. They move not manifestly their neighbor to dissension, but
slyly and secretly: I wonder, say they, how you endure that: you are too
patient: he will tread upon you: one said such a thing of you; Deceitful
tongue. They speak not words openly impure, but covered, equivocal, and of a
double meaning: Deceitful tongue. such words are usually more hurtful, than
the other; these are sharp arrows which enter more deeply into the mark; and
the wit and subtility which is in these covered words, makes them enter more
easily into the imagination, and to remain there longer. These are the burning
coals which desolate and ruin the purity, charity, and simplicity of
Christian souls.

3. Dictum vel factum; Scandal is a word or work and action, which may be the
cause of sin; and works or actions are more scandalous than words: these move
indeed: but those draw: it is enough to draw another to what is naught, if
others do it: if it be the mode: if but one only considerable person do it: if
it be the custom: so inclined are men to what is naught! they are like goats
or Sheep: if one pass a place, the rest follow, not regarding the danger of it.

What do I say follow? Men do not only follow others in what is naught: but
they will with tooth and nail endeavor to justify the following of them; They
say, we must accommodate our selves to the place in which we are, and live
according to the world, since we are in the world. To which I oppose this of
the S. Paul Be ye not conformed to this wordl. and this of S. John. Love not
the world, nor the things which are in the world; and this of the Romans 12. 2.
1. Iohd. 2. 15. S. John. 17. Romans 1. 7. These. 1. 4. And 7. S. Pet. 1. 3. And
9. Acts. 10 15. 1. Cor. 6. 2.
Son of God speaking of his disciples to his Father, they are in the world, but
they are not of the world. Christians, Disciples of Christ, have been sanctifyd
in Baptism, and in the other Sacraments: they are obliged to be holy, it is
their vocation and profession: they are called to be Saints, says S. Paul to
the Romans; and to the Thessa^onians, God has called us into Sanctification.
And S. Peter. But you are an elect Generation. a holy people. To be holy, and
to be common, are two opposite Terms: what God has Sanctifyd, do not thou
call common. Christians shall judge the world, says S. Paul in his 1. Epistle to
the Corinthians; they must nor then be Accomplices or Companions in the actions,
customs, and proceedings of the world. Reason it self forbids us to follow
them; We know, that there is nothing so erroneous as the opinion of the world:
nothing so corrupted and perverted as the judgment of men; there are but few
that know in what true virtue does consist; and amongst those that know it,
there are but few, that live according to this knowledge: because their Passions
oversway their judgments, and corrupt their actions; and therefore a wise man
ought to steer a quite contrary course.

But ought we not to avoid singularity? yes, that which you affect of your own
head, and by the spirit of Vanity; but not that which you accept from the will
of God, and by the spirit of sanctity.

Are not the high and common ways the more sure? yes, to go to a place on
earth: but not to go to heaven; our Savior tells us so in express terms,
Enter by the narrow gate: because broad is the gate, and large is the way that
leads to perdition, and many there bes that enter by it. How narrow is the
gate, and strait is the way that lead Matt. 7. 13.
to life: and few there are that find it?

But if I leave the usual way of men, what will they say? I shall pass for a
scrupulous, a melancholy person, or a hypocrite, and they will laugh at me. And
who will laugh at you? Libertines, Impious, and Atheists; but God, Angels, and
virtuous Persons will esteem and praise you. Will it not be much honor to you,
to be blamed by those that are worthy of blame, and to be esteemed by those who
merit to be esteemed? The conscience also of Libertines themselves will be
forced to admire what their mouth condemns; for virtue sends forth such bright
rays, that they strike a holy terror into the souls of her greatest enemies:
and she receives praises from those, who at the first sight of her, did burden
her with reproaches.

But suppose, that you are really laughed at and derided. What virtuous Person
has not passed this trial? Tobias and Job, were they not mocked, as Idiots and
simple men? S. Charles, did he not pass amongst worldly soule^ for a man too
stiff and obstinate in his way? S. Chrysostom, for too austere? Granado and
Avila for scrupulous? and what is most considerable, the Saint of Saints
JESUS CHRIST, has he not passed for a fool or madman, for a friend of good
cheer, for a hlasphemer and for a magitian? We must then have the courage,
says great S. Francis Sales, to make the world know by our manner of living,
that we are not of this world, but the servants of God, that the lights of the
Gospel, and not the maxims and the customs of the world, are the rules of our
life; so we shall tie the tongues of the impudent: and draw many to the same
manner of living, by the examples of our virtues. Let us after this not
unprofitable digression, return to the definition.

5. Dictum, vel factum, a word or action. In this word Action, is couched
Omission: when you can do an action which would hinder the offense of God, and
you do it not. JESUS being required to pay tribute, declares himself not
obliged, and nevertheless he paid it, lest He should scandalize the farmers.
So the Virgin circumcised her Son, and submitted herself to the law of
purification, for fear of giving ill example. So S. Paul says, the Ancient
Philosophers having known the true God by the light of nature: and having not
communicated this knowledge to the rest of men, to draw them from Idolatry,
incurred the anger of God, and were guilty of all sins the people committed for
want of that knowledge. We are then culpable, when we ought to correct,
reprehend, or punish the defects of others, and do not: we scandalize them: for
they say, there is no ill in this, my Parents, Confessor, Superior, say nothing
to me of it.

6. Minus rectum. This word teaches us that if an action be good and laudable,
commanded by God or his Church, we ought not to omit it, though our neighbor be
scandalized by it; if one is scandalized when you say the truth, it is better to
permit scandal then to oppose Verity says S. Gregory; It Is a Pharisaical
scandal, a S. Greg. hom. 7. in Ezec.
passive scandal, not an active, a scandal taken not given.

7. And if the action be good and laudable, but not of obligation: ought we to
omit it, if one will be scandalized by it? S. Thomas answers learnedly with a
distinction. either our neighbor is scandalized maliciously and out of a
spirit of contradiction: 2. 2. q. 43. ar. 7.
or is scandalized through ignorance, or infirmity; if he be scandalized
maliciously; we ought not to omit our good work; for it is his own fault, and
not ours. He does as the Pharesees, who were scandalized maliciously by the
predications of JESUS; But JESUS contemned their scandal, and left not off his
preaching. If he be scandalized through ignorance, or through weakness: it is
better to do your good work in private, or to omit it for a time, than to give
an occasion to your neighbor to fall into any sin. And with much more reason,
if the action be of it self indifferent, neither good, nor evil, charity
obliges us to omit it, when it would be an occasion of sin, or temptation to
our neighbor. If you offend your neighbor giving him occasion of sin through
his weakness, you offend our Lord: and therefore If I know my brother is
scandalized to see me eat flesh, I will never eat it, lest I scandalize my
hrother, says S. Paul. 1. Cor. 8. 12. Romans 14. 15. 20.
And again, do not with thy meat destroy him, for whom CHRIST dyed. Destroy not
the work of God for meat. Though then an action be permitted, if it be not
commanded, we must abstain from it, if it be a snare or stumblingblock to
infirm and weak souls.

8. Prebens alicui: giving occasion to our neighbor. Some may imagine, that it is
not to be scandalous, if they do not a public action, which is manifest to
many. But our Savior says, if you move Matt. 18.
to sin but one only, you are scandalous. You say, they are simple and weak
people, that are tempted by such an action or such a word: the wise and well
grounded in virtue are not moved by it; JESUS says you must not scandalize one
of the lesser ones, unum de pusillis; and S. Paul tells us that in scan
dalizing the weak ones, we sin against JESUS CHRIST; And the Son of God adds:
Voe mundo a scandalis, Woe to the world for scandalls; He Speaks so, because
the world is full of them; and because they destroy so many souls, so dear and
precious to him.

9. It seems that souls are more dear to JESUS than his innocent blood; He
willed it should be profaned, and trod under feet, for the ransom of these
beloved souls. I leave you to think, what punishment, and what reproaches we
shall receive from him: if by our bad exemple, or by our negligence, we let any
one of these souls fall into sin, and damnation?

Believe, that in the hour of your death, nothing will cause you more regret:
nor afflict you more, than the sight of the souls which by your fault are
lost; You will acknowledge this truth, and feel the weight of these dreadful
words: Vae homini illi per quem scandalum venit: woe to the person by whom
Matt. 18. 7.
Scandal coms.

You will see all the graces God had given to souls through your fault lost:
all the merits they had gotten: all that our Savior did and suffered for their
salvation: and you will with sorrow, and sighing say; Ha! I have destroyed
souls for which JESUS CHRIST dyed; how shall I restore to him the blood which
He has shed? vae homini illi: woe be to that person! It were better for you one
had tied a millstone about your neck and thrown you into the Sea.

You will see the excellency and the value of the souls you have cast away:
and this will oppress you with grief, as if you had a millstone upon your heart.

You will see that those who learnt of you the vanities of the world, will
teach their children them: these will derive them to their descendents unto the
third or fourth generation, all which will be imputed to you: this sight will
cast you even into despair.

Will you avoid* this miserable condition: Do not by bad examples, indiscreet
words, or negligence destroy a soul, for whom JESUS CHRIST dyed. But if you
have been so unhappy: do judgment, and justice; punish your fault by true
penance repair the loss as much as lies in you; bring back the lost sheep to
JESUS: or if you cannot: gain another in his stead: by prayers instructions,
and good examples; so you may be confident of pardon: God has promised it.
Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXVI OF THE SIXTH AND NINTH COMMANDMENTS
thou shall not commit Adultery. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors Wife.
Amongst all the irregular motions of a man, there is none more contrary to his
nature, nor more abominable to the Creator, than the unhappy vice of
carnality. It is contrary to man's nature: because it is beastly, terrestrial,
and unworthy of a man; In anger, envy, pride. ambition there is some kind of
spirit; But luxury clouds the understanding: depresses the faculties of the
soul: renders her unable to elevate her self above the objects of sense, and
impaires all that is manly in us.

2. This vice is abominable to God, who repented to have made man, and sent a
deluge to drown the earth; who consuin'd by fire four of the most flourishing
cities of the world: and slautered 24 thousand of his people at one time: and
60 thousand at another, in punishment of this sin.

Though this vice be so contrary to a man, and so abominable to God: Yet fails
it not to be most general; For it is the source of an abundance of sins; of an
abundance in regard of the diverse Species of it; of an abundance in respect of
the individuums or particulars.

3. There is no kind of vice that has so many Circumstances which chang the
Species or kinds, as this. The other commonly have but three or four at most:
this has seven; which we must express in confession, if we have fallen into
them, either in effect or will.

The first species or kind is simple Fornication: when you are not married, and
do ill with a person that is not bound, neither by Vow, nor marriage; And
though this be the least crime amongst the species of this vice: it is
nevertheless a mortal sin; for S. Paul declares to us at least three times,
that this sin excludes 1. Cor. 6. Gal. 5. Ephesians. 7. 5.
us out of the kingdom of Heaven.

5. The second is Stupration: when yon defloure or dishonor a Virgin; you
ruin in her soul the grace of God, which is the greatest good she can have in
this world: and in her body a precious treasure, the loss of which is the more
deplorable, because it is irreparable.

6. The Third is Incest, when it is with any of your Relations, by blood, or by
affinity, unto the fourth degree inclusively.

7. The fourth is Adultery: when you are married, or do ill with a person that
is bound in marriage: a sin, which violates divine, natural, and humane Laws:
a sin, which Pagans, ot Infidells themselves have punished with death or
exquisite torments: some by fire, others by wild horses: some by the halter:
others in pulling out their eyes: cutting off their noses: and in the law of
Moses it was punished by stones: so great appears this disorder by the light of
nature, and so enormous in the sight of God.

8. Nevertheless this sin is now incomparably more black and criminal than it
was in the law of Moses, or in that of nature; For you break as much as lies in
you the indissoluble bond of marriage: you violate a bond which represents the
Union of JESUS CHRIST with his Church; It Is as if you said that JESUS ^ath
divorsed the Church his Spouse: or that his Spouse has quitted him*
notwithstanding his promises to the contrary.

More yet: the bodies of Christians are worthy of honor, and ought to be
treated with respect and reverence, not only because they are the members of
Christ, and Temples of the holy Ghost: but moreover, because they have been
sanctifyd by Baptism: by the sacred Chrisme in Confirmation: by the most holy
Body of JESUS in Communion: by being the matter of a Sacrament, which S. Paul
calls Great: and by the nuptial benediction when they married; And they soil
them by adulteries, prostitute them as profane things, to black, infamous,
shameful, and abominable actions; Wherefore the Emperors Constantine,
Constantius, and Constance sons of the great Constantine, published an Edict
against adulterers, condemning them to the punishment of paricides: which was
to be butnt, or drowned, because say they, such are, sacriligi nuptiarum,
abusers and prophaners of marriage.

9. The fifth Species of this Vice is Rape: when you force one: or you draw
consent by deceits, lies, promises, or persuasions so powerful, that they are
equivalent to constraint.

10. The six is Sacrilege: when you commit an impurity being a person sacred
by solemn or particular Vow, or by holy Orders: or when you permit such a
person to take carnal pleasure in you: it is in some manner to rob him, if it
could be, of consecration: it is the highest pitch of malice in the matter of
fornication, says S. Chrysostom. S. Chry. Hom. 76. in Matt.


11. The seventh in fine is the sin against nature: which is so abominable,
that we name it not, and which nevertheless is committed sometimes also amongst
married persons. Remember that S. Briget did see in ecstasy many married
people in hell, for having abused marriage. Remember what S. Austin says,
that* you may be drunk with your own wine as well as with another S. Aug. ser.
14. de diver. Genesis 38. 10.
Remember that in Genesis Onan was grievously punished by God, because he
offended him in marriage, eo quod rem detestabilem faceret?

Confessors are very reserved, and ought to be so in this matter of carnality;
Preachers and good Writers treat sparingly of such subjects: lest the very
articulate sound or characters in this matter should offend chaste ears: or
cause wors effects in the hearts of others; if than you do not help your
selves: if you confess not these ordures, unless you be examined you may remain
in them 'til death.

12. These are the seven heads of this Monster: seven heads by which we may sin
by this Vice; But the Individuums or particulars of it are infinite. There is
no kind of vice wherein men commit so great a number of mortal sins, as in this
vice of Luxury; a Drunkard is not drunk, but once, or twice a day: a Robber
robbs not every day: a murderer kills not very often: But he that gives
himself over to impurity, commits dozens of mortal sins a day; it happens very
often, that he takes delight interiourly, ten, twelve, or twenty times a day in
impure objects: and the voluntary delectation is a sin: though he has no will
to do it in effect.

13. Wherefore I would counsel him that is a slave to this Passion, to make to
himself the same reply, which heretofore the Buffoon or Iester of Francis the
first of France did make; The King having assembled his Counsel, to deliberate
what way was best to go to Pavie: some said one way: others another: and others
a third; the Buffoon, who heard all behind the tapestry, when they were gone,
cryed-out: they have all consulted by which way the King shall go: but they have
not considered by what way he shall return! And the event made appear it had
been an important counsel; for the King was there made prisoner. When
temptation flatters the hearts of them: they consult not, but of the means to
content it: and how they may find a fit occasion to satisfy their passion; But
they consider not, how they may get out of the inconveniences, which they bring
upon themselves by it; they consider not, the certain loss of spiritual life,
the danger of the temporal, and of their fame: and that by begetting
illegitimate children, they deprive unjustly the legitimate, and oblige
themselves to restitutions, which will be very hardly made. These things well
considered, will be a bridle to their passion: and make them also fly those
conversations, dispositions, affections, and occasions of falling into a snare
so prejudicial, and into a labyrinth so inextricable, for we must fight in this
war, as the Parthians flying: and therefore S. Paul bids us not to struggle or
graple with this vice, but to fly it fugite fornicationem.

14. Consider in the second place with Solomon, that you cannot have
continence, unless God gives it you; demand it then of him with all your heart:
use the means of mortification to obtain: make daily supplication to the
Mother of Purity, that by her powerful intercession, you may be drawn out of
this deep mire.

15. Consider in fine, what the sacred Text does teach us of this vice, and of
the contrary virtue: The holy Ghost will not Prove. 22. 11. Matt. 5. 1. Cor. 6.
15. 13. Rom..8
dwell in a Body subject to sin. He that loves purity of heart shall have the
King his friend.

Blessed are the pure and clean of heart, for they shall see God. Know you not,
that your Bodies are the members of CHRIST? Taking therefore the members of
CHRIST, shall I make them the members of a harlot? Know you not that your
members are the Temple of the holy Ghost? God will destroy him who violates his
Temple. 2. Cor. 7.
If you live according to the flesh, you shall dye. But if hy the Spirit, you
mortify the works of the flesh, you shall live. Having these promises let us
cleanse our selves from all inquination of the flesh and Spirit, perfecting
sanctification in the fear of God. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXVII. OF THE SEVENTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS.
Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not covet thy neigbours goods.
GOd having made an express Commandment to defend the life of man, and another
to secure him from injury in the person of his wife: it is with great reason
that He gives this Commandment to secure his goods; to which I join the tenth,
by which He forbids us to covet or desire them. And to explain well the crime
of Robbery, which both forbid; we must consider first, what is the cause of it?
In the second place, what is the essence and nature of it? And in the third
place, what is the proper effect of it?

1. The Ordinary cause is Avarice: a vice contrary to the Gospel: condemned by
the Law of God: and pernicious to the Salvation of an infinity of people; For
the world is full of avarice: and the Poor are very often more reprehensible,
and more slaves to this passion, than the Rich themselves. When we praise
poverty, or inveigh against riches: there are many poor, who rejoice, and look
upon the rich with disdain and contempt. JESUS said not simply blessed are the
poor: but Blessed are the poor of Spirit, by love and affection, who love
poverty; If you Matt. 5. 3.
be as poor as Lazarus, and have affection to riches: if you be as much wedded
to your rags, and trifles, as the Rich to their silk, and costly furniture: if
you forswear your self to gain a little money: if you steal little things, not
daring or not being able to steal more: this first Beatitude is not for you:
you are not poor in the sight of JESUS; but richer than the Rich themselves,
poor by necessity, by a miserable, not by a laudable Will says S. Bernard S.
Ber. ser. 1. in festo omnium Sanctorum.


2. The Rich also often deceive themselees grossly in this point, Whatsoever
affection and tie they have to riches, they think themselves secure, in that
they would not possess the goods of their neigbour, nor covet to have them by
unjust ways: as if the holy scripture did condemn injustice only, and not also
avarice. They consider not that S. Paul distinguishes avarice from robbery: and
that he says not only the robbers, but also the 1. Cor. 5. 10. 1. Cor. 6. 9 S.
Basil, hom. de Divite avaro. S. Ambr. Ser. 81. S. Aug. Ser. 196. de Temp. S.
Aug. Ser. 19. de Verb. Apost. 1. Tim. 6. 17.
avaricious shall not possess the kingdom of God; Do not Err, neither thieves,
nor the covetous, nor extorsiners, shall possess the kingdom of God.

3. Who is he whom the scripture terms covetous? said S. Basil, and after him
S. Ambrose; He say they, who is not content with that which ought to be enough.
And S. Austin declares, that not only he who takes the goods of another: but he
that keeps his own with avidity is covetous. And the same Saint makes us note,
that all the Rich that are damned and declared such in the Gospel, were not
Usurpers of other men's goods: but only too greedy and tenacious of their own.
Wherefore the Apostle writing to his Disciple Timothy charges him, to command
the rich of this world, not to trust in the incertainty of riches, but in the
living God; to do well, to become rich in good works, to give easily, to
communicate their wealth to those that want, to heap unto themselves a good
foundation for the time to com, that they may obtain the true life. We see then
that avarice is pernicious, though it prevail not so far with us as to make us
to commit injustice; which effect avarice so frequently produces, that the
earth is filled with it: though injustice does oblige to perfect Restitution:
and this be hard and very rare. You will avow these verities, if you consider
with me the Definition which Doctors give of Robbery.

4. They say; that it is to take, or retain, or to endammage the goods of another
against the will of him to whom it belongs. It Is to take: either by your self,
or by others: either secretly and by theft, or openly by force, exacting,
receiving, or permitting others to exact, or to receive what is not due to you;
as when you exact fourshillings for merchandise, or service, which is not worth
three.

5. To take or retain; Not only to take, but to retain that which is not yours
is robbery. If you inherit goods ill gotten by your Father or by your
Ancesters, if you owe any thing to others: if you have found that which another
lost: by retaining it you commit robbery; There is no great difference said
Pope Innocent the third in the Lateran Council as to the danger of the soul,
betwixt unjust detention, and invasion of another goods.

6. Or Endammage; if you damnify your neighbor in his corn, or other thing; if
you thrust your self into an office, Trade, or other employment of which you
are incapable, and are the cause through your ignorance that any one be
prejudiced in health or other good, you commit robbery.

To good of another; understand either spiritual, or corporal: which is not
pondered and considered enough by some. If you have destroyed your neighbors
house, you are judged a Robber: you are obliged to make Satisfaction; you have
made a horrible destruction in his soul: you destroyed in his heart the
treasures of the grace of God, soliciting him to sin, and you reflect not on
it: you think not to put again into a good way this unhappy soul which you
have made to stray; you are a robber.

8. They add in the definition, against the will of him to whom it belongs:
that is to say, without his voluntary and absolute free consent; For though he
consent to it, if he consent unwillingly: if he does wish it otherwise: if his
consent be any ways extorted either by force, or fear: it excuses you not from
robbery; for there is nothing so contrary to a free consent as force, or fear.
He then is a robber, who to do justice to a Party that has right, receives a
bribe or present. He is a robber who wearyes another with suits and expenses,
to the end he quit that which he may pretend to justly. He is a robber who
makes his dependents to do him services, to which they are not obliged, without
paying them well for them. He is a robber, who forces his Creditors to
composition, for fear of inconveniences which he may bring upon them: because
the consent to these, and the like actions, is not free and voluntary. so far
these palliated injustices are from being justifiable in the sight of God: that
on the contrary they add to simple theft a circumstance which changes the
species of it, and which is called Rapine.

9. To have a horror of these, and the like disorders: Consider that this vice
engages you in an ocean of sins, and precipitates you in a manner-irreperably,
into eternal damnation. For it is not so in this sin as in others: You are not
quit of it by repenting, confessing, and doing penance for it: it obliges
moreover to Restitution; And see here, what Divines say of it.

10. They teach us in the first place, that restitution is an act of
commutative Justice, and consequently that there must be an equality between
the damages which you have caused, and the reparation which you make of it; In
Vindicative Justice, if mercifully you relax a little the rigor of the Law: if
you make not the greatness of the pain precisely equal to the grievousness of
the crime, the mercy of God excuses easily your fault; But in Commutative
Justice, if having stolen 50. shillings, you restore but 48. you are still a
thief.

11. Secondly, they assure us, that Restitution is necessary to salvation; that
without it sorrow, confession, and absolution are unprofitable, that nothing
can excuse you from it, but only impossibility to make it.

12. But to restore all must I fall from my estate and Condition? You are
obliged to it; having built your fortune upon the ruin of your neighbor, it
is most reasonable you repair that of your neighbor, by the ruin of yours;
ought not the condition of the Innocent to be better then that of the Criminal?

13. But I cannot make restitution without defaming my self; for he to whom J
shall restore, will see that I have injured him and will decry me. You must give
it in this case to your Confessor, or to a faithful friend, who may render it
without naming any person, take an acquittance of him, and show it to you.
that you may be sure of your discharg, from this obligation; an obligation so
strict, that no power on earth can free you from it. Death it self, which
dissolves consummate marriage, delivers you not from it; and if God should
raise you up again, you would not be obliged to retake your wife: but you would
be to pay your debts: and your heirs ought to do it in your defect.

14 Divines inform us further, that not only he who does an injury, but
moreover all that cooperate or concur to it are obliged to Restitution: as
Receivers, falls Witnesses, makers of antidates, and falls contracts:
Counselors, who counsel you to prosecute a suit which they know to be
unjust: or they, who by notable negligence make their Clients lose a just one:
and Notaries who by ignorance or malice change the intention of the Testatour.

15. Infine they conclude that this commandment obliges always and
incessantly; because it is not an affirmative precept only that commands us to
restore: but also a negative, that forbids us to retain: and as such it is
expressed commonly by negative terms in the Bible. It Is the property of
negative commandments to oblige always, and for always; and therefore we sin
at least so often, as the thought of paying, satisfying, restoring, coms into
our minds, if having power, we neglect it.

16. Do better, injure no man, commit not sins which oblige to restitution; for
you will make it, or not; if you make it, you will have contracted sin, and
obligation to punishment, without receiving the profit of it: since you must
restore the principal, and make good all prejudice and damage; and if you make
it not, being in capacity to make it, you are undon, you are lost for ever.

17. If then you have been so unfortunate as to oblige your selves to it; do
as a rich man of our age, who going from a Sermon, distributed his goods to
those he had injured, saying, Pereant mihi, ne ego Peream: may I lose these
goods, lest I lose my self; these goods are for the earth, my soul is for
heaven: these goods are perishable, my soul is immortal: these goods will stay
here, my soul will go with me; they will be the possession of my heirs, my
soul will be my own; these are not true goods however great and abundant they
be, since they make not good so many bad men that possess them: they are not
true riches since they make not rich nor content those that are flaves to them:
I must leave them one day necessarily, and without merit, it is better then that
I quit them now voluntarily, and with merit.

18. This good man did very well to cure his wounds: But I advise you, by
flying avarice which was the cause of them, to prevent all wounds. Hear then
what the holy Ghost has said of it: Nothing is more wicked than to love money.
Hear our Savior, Eccli. 10. 10. mark. 10. 24. Tim. 6. 9.
How hard it is for them that trust in money to enter into the kingdom of God!
Hear also his Apostle, They that will be made rich fall into temptation, and
hurtful desires, which drown men into destruction and perdition. For the root
of all evils is avarice. Root out then covetousnes says S. Austin, and plant
charity, the root of all good; This will make you feed Christ in the hungry:
refresh him in the thirsty: harbor him in the stranger: cloth him in the
naked: visit him in the sick: comfort him in the prisoner: and this will make
you one day hear this most joyful word, which will put Matthew. 25. 34.
you in Possession of all good: com ye blessed of my father, possess t^
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXVIII. OF THE EIGHT COMMANDMENT.
Thou shat not bear falls witness against thy neighbor.
IF the fifth commandment ougth to be much respected, because it forbids us to
assault the life of our neighbor: and the sixth, which forbids us to dishonor
his wife: and the seventh which prohibits us to steal, or to hurt him in his
goods: with more reason the eighth commandment ought to be looked upon as of
the greatest importance, since it forbids falls witness, which makes our
neighbor often lose his life, honor, temporal goods, and sometimes also his
spiritual. To handle this subject fully, and to make it more universal, we
will consider three sins or falsities which oppose this commandment: falsities
of heart, which are rash judgments: falsities of mouth, which are lies:
falsities of works or actions, which are cheats or impostures.

1. An Ancient said that there is no art nor occupation of which so many make
profession as that of Physicians; so soon as you complain of the toothake,
colic, or gravel, you will find forty, who prescribe you remedies, all as
they think very effectual, all or the most part in effect very unprofitable.
that Ancient had hitt better yet, had he sa^d, that it is the office of a judge,
that all the world will exercise; there is nither virtuous nor vicious person
that is not often tempted to judge the actions of their neighbor: and the Son
of God forbids it when he says, Will not to S. John. 7. 24.
judge according to the exterior appearance. In which words our Savior
expresses 3. circumstances which are necessary to make rash judgment a mortal
sin in a matter of importance.

2. In the first place it is necessary that a judgment be voluntary and
deliberate, for if it be but a thought, and a promptitude, which we renounce
when we perceive it, it is not a sin; JESUS said not, do not judge: but he said,
will not to judge; It is not in our power not to judge by a sudden motion: but
it is in our power, not to consent to this judgment, and to cast it out of our
mind.

3. In the second place: it is not a mortal sin when one judges not absolutely,
but doubts only of a thing: makes not a formed and fixed judgment: but suspects
only: he says not in himself, surely it is so: but it may be so: I fear lest it
be so; And JESUS did not say, suspect not. He nevertheless who should suspect
voluntarily of a Prelate, or such like persons an evil of great importance, I
know not, if one may excuse him from a mortal sin.

4. In the third place, it is not a mortal sin, nor also often venial, when you
judge of that which cannot be palliared, nor excused by any reason: if you see a
man kill his neighbor: to do ill with a married woman: to blaspheme the holy
name of God: it is not a rash judgment to think that he is a murderer, an
adulterer, a blasphemer; but to judge upon weak appearances, is contrary to the
word of the Son of God: judge not according to appeanance; It is an evil
effect, which proceeds from diverse causes, and all bad and vicious; it is
sometimes lightness and emptines of spirit; when one has not good
entertainments within himself, nor in his own house, he seeks entertainments
without himself, wanders about in companies, cannot be mute in them, tells
news, hears other, knows not enough, invents more.

5. An Ancient in Plautus, compares them to waspes: which make no honey, buzz
inceslantly, fly up and down, upon Altars, Miters, Crowns, and leave nothing
but filth upon them: so those Idlebees droanes and lazy people, who know not
how to employ themselves, pass their time in judging and detracting Prelates,
Kings, Judges, Priests, Religions: and since they are light, and shallow, they
believe easily all that comes into their mind, with never so little appearance,
be it good or evil.

6. S Paul teaches us another cause of rash judgments: the defect of charity:
It Is because you have in your heart some secret envy, bitterness, or aversion
from your neighbor: Charity thinks not ill, says the Apostle; there needs no
other proof of it than experience. If a person that you love well did the
actions which you censure in your enemy, or corrival, you would not judge them
criminal, as you do those of others: you would interpret them in a good sense.
As he that looks through a red glass, all that he sees seems to him red: so you
judge the actions of your neighbor according to the passion of love or hatred
you have for him.

We believe easily what we desire and see willingly, says S. Thomas; You have
no repugnance, but great inclination to believe the vice of your neighbor,
because you wish him ill: because you are subject to the crimes, and
imperfections which you imagine to be in him; The fool conceives that all
others are like himself, says the holy Ghost by the mouth of the wise man.
Eccl. 10. 15.
And again: the heart of a wise man is in his right side, and that of a fool in
the left; It is certain, that all men have the heart in the same place: but He
does signify, that a virtuous man judges in good part the actious of all men:
the ill man measures every one by his own ell: he makes sinister judgments of
the most part of men; the Be draws honey from the most bitter flowers: the
cantharides makes poison of the most sweet; the same rain falling upon a Vine
is changed into pleasant and wholesome wine ^t watering hemlock is changed into
mortal poison; a good stomach makes good blood of the grossest meats: a bad
stomach makes peccant humors of the best nourishment.

7. And from thence comes the bad effects which these rash judgments produce
against God, our neighbors, and our selves. It Is to usurp the office of the Son
of God and to do him injury: since the Father has given to him all judgment:
Note all; John* 5. 22. Romans 14. 4*
S. Paul looking upon it as a horrible usurpation, cryes-out: Who art thou that
juggest another man's servant? To his own Lord he stands or falls. It Is likewise
to be injurious to our neighbor: For it is detraction and injustice to ruin his
reputation, though it be in the opinion of one man only; but when you judge ill
of your neighbor upon weak conjectures, you ruin his reputation in your
self; you do to another, that which you would not have don to you; you do as
the Pharisee who disdained another only within himself, and the Son of God
reprehends him for it. In fine you do not only injure God, and your neighbor
by rash judgments, but you hurt much also your own self, for they fill you with
pride, vanity, iealousy, suspicion, unquietness, and contempt of your neighbor.

8. S. Bernard gives us for a remedy of these judgments a most salutary advice.
If you see your neighbor to do ill, think perhaps he does it with a good
intention, or out of ignorance, or through great weakness, and without malice,
or that he was surprised; but if the action be so black, that it admits none of
these excuses, think it was a very strong and violent temptation that made him
fall, and say within your self, if God had permitted the like to have assaulted
me, perhaps J had yielded to it as well as he: perhaps he has many great
virtues, which counterbalance the fault which he committed: perhaps this fall
makes him very humble, and that by his humility, he is more pleasing to God,
than you by your proud Innocence: and when nothing of all this should be: how
know you what will become of you, and what will become of him; there is
inconstancy and weakness enough in your heart to make you one day, one of the
greatest sinners in the world: and there is power and mercy enough in the heart
of God, to make this sinner become one day, a most great Saint in heaven.

9, The second sort of falsities which this commandment forbids are those of
the mouth; and men are accustomed to speak them in three manners; First in
injuring their neighbor, as when they testify that he has robbed or killed:
and this lie is called, hurtful, or pernicious. secondly, in pleasuring your
neighbor: as when you ly, to deliver him out of some peril: and this is
called a serviceable or officious ly. Thirdly, in neither hurting, nor ayding;
and this is called, a vain or idle ly. There are many* also of those that make
profession of virtue, who detest falls witness and pernicious lies: but make no
difficulty of idle, and officious; they consider not that the holy Ghost
distinguishes a ly from falswitness, and says that both displeas God. Prove. 6.
16. 2. 2. q. 110. S. Greg. lib. 18. mor: cap. 4.


S. Thomas concluds, that we ought not to ly, for to save a man. S. Gregory
said the same, speaking of officious lies. S. Augustine who wrote whole books
upon this subject, goes farther yet, and says, that one ought not to ly, for to
procure the salvation of our neighbor: ad sempiternam vitam nullus ducendus
est opitulante mendacio. And to the objection which some propose of the
Egiptian midwives who killed not the Children of the Israelites, as Pharo had
commanded, and excused themselves by lies, the scripture adding that God
rewarded them. S. Gregory answers, that they were not recompensed for their ly,
but for their Piety.

And as to the Patriarch Jacob, and other Saints who seem in the scripture to
have spoke untruths: the hoy Fathers answer, that they were mysteryes, not
lies, because they spoke not in their own person, but in the person of those,
of whom they were the figure.

10. Officious lies oblige us to the pains of Purgatory: but pernicious to the
pains of hell; The mouth that lies kills the soul, says the holy Ghost it
brings damnation most due to them who are so injurious both to God and man.

11. In fine the third sort of falsities forbidden, are frauds, circumventions,
dissimulations, and hypocrisies; These are so common in the world that if the
Prophet Hieremie were in this age, he would say of it, what he said of his,
That our houses are fall of guile. In the houses of great ones, what chringing,
suppleness, and treachery to supplant others? in the Courts of justice what
injurious judgments, what superfluous delays, what unjust appeals! In the
shops of marchands, and tradesmen, what frauds, what falls weights and measures,
what falls coin, what corrupted and sophisticated merchandise! To be short, in
the Churches themselves, what counterfeit devotions, what disguised
confessions, what hypocritical communions!

12. This Vice is so detestable, that the sacred Text joins it with homicide;
God will abominate the murderer and the the Deceiver, says the Royal Prophet;
And you will not find Psalm. 7.
that the Son of God said a word so sharp and nipping, of any absent person,
as He did of Herod, saying that he was a fox, because he was a Deceiver? Dicite
vulpi illi.

13. Let us end this discourse with three powerful passages of of Scripture,
and three reasons against these vices.

Against the first, out of S Matthew, Judge not that you may not Matthew. 7. 1.
be judged, For in what judgment you judge, you shall be judged: and in what
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. There is not^hing so
terrible as the judgment of God; the greatest Saints have reason to fear it: a
thousand times happy he, who shall not feel the severity of it; you shall be the
person, if you will: the Judge himself assures you of it; Judge not, and you
shall not be judged; if you judge your neighbor with sweetness and mercy, God
will judge you with sweetness and mercy.

Against the second Vice S. Paul says to us away with lying: let every Ephesians.
4. 25.
one speak truth with his neighbor, because we are members of one another; he
then that will be a living member of that Body, where of JESUS CHRIST Verity it
self is Head, must not by pernicious falsities hurt his neighbor, but love and
cherish him, as a member of the same Body.

Against the third Vice, the Son of God having said, that we shall not enter
into the kindom of heaven, unless we become as little children; S. Peter teaches
us in what we must be like them: be yet as children newly born without guile
with out malice, 1. Epist. 2.
without dissimulation.

Holy Job who was but in the Law of nature, practiced perfectly this
advertisement; the first praise which God gave him was his simplicity; Have you
considered, my servant Job, that there Job. 1. 8.
is not his like on earth, a man simple, and just, and fearing God, and
departing from evil? happy he that imitates him! he walks confidently Prove.
10. 9. Prove. 20. 7. Prove. 3. 32. Wisd. 1. 1.
says the Wiseman: he fears not to be taken in a ly as often impostors are; the
children which he shall leave behind him ^hal be blessed; he shall have the honor
to have communication^ with God: for his Communication is with the simple. And
for the accomplishment of his happiness, he has God* for his inheritance: For
to find God we must seek Him in simplicity of heart. It Is the most precious
treasure a man can possess, a treasure which makes him glorious, rich, content,
and happy for ever and ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE XXXIX. OF THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shat not bear falls witness against thy neighbor.
AS detraction is a very dangerous and common Vice: so it seems commonly
forbidden. Some say, that it is forbidden by the fifth commandment, Thou shall
not kill: because it takes away our civil life, by which we live in the good
opinion of men. Others say that it is forbidden by the seventh. Thou shall not
steal: because it robs men of their fame and good name. Others in fine will have
it forbidden by the eighth: because this, say they, forbids all injuries, that
we do to the goods, to the honor and reputation, or the person of our neighbor
by our unruly tongue; all which does show what a pernicious sin this is; which
kills, robs, and injures so much our neighbor; And yet, as I said, it is a most
common vice, because Detractours want not specious pretexts, nor excuses which
seem legitimate to palliate and plaster it. Wherefore in this discourse I first
lay open the nature of it, and unmaske it; In the second place, I put before
your eyes its bad effects; and in the third place, remedies.

Calumny, says S. Thomas, is to accuse our neighbor falsely of a sin which he
has not committed; And detraction is to declare a fin which he has committed,
or a notable imperfection that is in him. This is not so great a sin as
calumny, But it is a great one. When a thing is manifest: if it be known to the
most of the Town or neighborhood and cannot be concealed: if you speak of it,
it is not a mortal sin; But if the thing be secret or known to few: if you
reveal it to them that know nothing of it you do against charity and justice:
and therefore you are obliged to restitution. The light of nature, and this
maxim of JESUS teaches you this truth, Do not to another, What you would not
have don to your self. If your daughter, sister, or kinswoman has committed a
fault your neigbour seeing it, would you he should reveal it? or he to whom he
has revealed it should publish it, and say for excuse; I did not invent it:
such a person saw it: I relate it as I heard it; would you not be troubled and
grieved notwithstanding this excuse? Why then do you to another what you would
not have don to your self?

4. There are other yet more malicious: they make show that what they say, coms
from compassion, and nevertheless it coms out of passion. Our Savior said:
Take heed of them who com to you in the clothing of sheep, and are inwardly
ravinous Matt. 7. 10.
wolves; we may say again, who com to you with the voice of sheep, who praise
the absent, and afterward do as wolves; with our doubt, say they, he is one of
the finest men of his profession in the world; But he forgot himself very much:
he is much to be pitied: he would have don very well: it is a great misfortune:
I say it with a feeling; It was no fault of mine he did not avoid that: I have
often admonished him of it; they give poison sweetened with honey: they have the
voice of sheep, but the teeth of wolves.

4. And in effect they hurt and kill three persons with one bite. First
themselves; for their detraction deprives them of the life of grace, and kills
them spiritually: it being a mortal sin, in a matter of importance, according
to the scriptures. We call it detraction in a matter of importance, when you
discover any thing that diminishes notably the reputation of your neigbour,
though the thing be true, if it be secret and unknown.

That this is a mortal sin, is proved out of S. Paul: who recounting 1. Cor. 15
the sins which hinder our entrance into heaven, and the sinners that shall not
possess the kingdom of God names Detractors And in another place making a list
of sins to which Pagans were addicted, and which Christians must avoid, he adds
no Epithet to other sins, he names them all simply: but speaking of
detractors, says, detractores Deo odibiles, detractors are odious to Romans 1. 30.
God, hateful and abominable to him; it is then a mortal sin, since it makes us
odious to God, and shuts against us the gates of heaven.

The reason of it is evident; Theft in a matter of importance is it not a
mortal sin? who doubts of it? detraction is theft more notable, unjust, and
dammagable; For a good reputation is Prove. 21. 1.
more precious than great riches, says the wiseman; he then that robs a man of
his good name, does him a greater injury, than he that takes away his money:
And in effect, what man of honor would not rather choose that one should cut
his purs, or burn his house, than deprive him of his honor? Divines then
conclude by ^^ good consequence, that detraction is a greater sin than Robery,
because it takes away a thing more precious.

Some may here propose a question; There is for example a man addicted to
swearing, blasphemy, or detraction; he does so sometimes inconsiderately,
lightly, and without reflection: does he sin mortally as often as that happens
to him? Divinity answers with a distinction, either he takes pains to correct
himself or not? If he takes pains: if he does some penance when he falls into
it, then it is not a mortal sin: because it is not wholly voluntary; but if he be
careless, if he endeavors not to correct his bad custom, and to stand upon
his guard: every time heswears falsely, or detracts in a thing of importance,
though lightly, and inconsiderately, he sins mortally: for though such words
are not entirely voluntary, when he pronounces them, they are yet voluntary in
their cause.

6. If the Detractor kills himself, think not others safe: for the second wound
he makes, is in him that hears: and if there be twenty in the company, perhaps
he kills them all. Which S. Thomas proves 22. q. 75. ar. 4: Romans 1 32. Psalm.
49. 18.
by this of S. Paul: That not only they who do ill, but also they who consent
to it, are worthy of death. And that the Prophet reprehends sharply not only
them that rob with the thief, but those also that acompany him. And in that S.
Bernard doubts whether of the two merits more damnation, the dretractor, or he
that hears him; lib. 1. de consid. c. 13.
and that he concludes, that both have the Devil in them, one in his mouth and
the other in his ears.

If your neighbors house were set on fire: would you not be obliged, at least
by charity, to help him, and to quench it, if you can? He suffers a greater
loss in his reputation: your obligation is then greater to defend him from this
hurt* if then you are in company where one detracts: you are obliged to
reprehend and correct the detractor, if you have authority over him: and if he
detracts by a ly, to show that what he says is false: if what he says is true,
to excuse the absent discreetly: to change the discourse: to leave the company:
but if you cannot do these things: to show unwillingness to hear, and a
displeased countenance; for when he sees rhat you are not pleased with his
tattle, he will be ashamed, and will learn to hold his peace. The north wind
dissipates rain, and a sad look the tongue that detracts. But if you are glad
of the detraction: if you say a word that contributs to it: if you show by
Prove, 25. 23.
signs that it pleases you: if you are cause that he proceeds in the discourse:
if you make a show to know it, to the end he detract more boldly, and without
scruple, you are as criminal as he, and your soul is killed. Behold two deaths
already caused by detraction.

7 The third is of the poor absent person, whom it kills by a triple murder.
We have three sorts of lives: the natural life: the spiritual: and the civil*
The natural life is the union of the soul with the body; The spiritual is the
union of grace with the soul: And the civil is the union of a man with his
neighbors, and a good repute amongst them. Now the detractor sometimes takes
away the first life: often the second: and very frequently the third. The first
sometimes: either by creating mortal enemies against the poor absent person: or
by representing him as dishonest and unfaithful, whereby he loses those
employments, without which he cannot nourish himself, nor his. The second
often: for soon or late the detracted person hears of the Detractor, he
conceives a hatred of him, and resolves upon reveng; ah! he sometimes dies in
this disposition, and with the Devils is damned for ever. The third
frequently: for generally speaking detraction takes effect, and deprives the
detracted of the good opinion others have of him, which is the cement of the
commerce that is between them; so the detractor takes away his civil life, and
obliges himself to restitutions, and reparations both of the honor and good
name, and of all the expenses, damages, and interects caused by his
detraction, which will be very hardly made.

8 To avoid a vice so pernicious both to you and others, follow the counsel of
the holy Ghost: Weigh your words in a just Eccl. 28. 29.
balance before you utter them; Remembet, that in the judgment of God, they
shall be all exactly weighed, examined, judged, punished, or recompensed; we
must render an account in judgment of a word which hurts not: how much more of
those which blacken our neighbor, rob him of his honor, and are the cause of so
many enmities and dissentions? Remember when you are in passion and quarelling
with your neighbor, That you utter not the Prove. 25. 8.
things which your eyes have seen, lest afterward you cannot amend it, when you
have dishonored him, says the sacred text. And in effect a detractive word is
soon let forth, but not so soon recalled; words have not handells to be pulled
back again when they have eschaped: but they have wings which makes them fly
away irrevocably; if you would repair the honor of your neighbor, whither will
you go to seek all those to whom you have spoken, and all those who have spoken
of it after you? and if you find them, how will you raze out of their minds the
bad opinion of their neighbor which you have imprinted in them? And yet it is a
thing absolutely necessary: unless you go to the person whom you detracted, and
pray him to pardon you, and to free you from the obligation of restoring; But
if he does not: it is a verity avowed by all Doctors, that you stand obliged to
repair his honor: in defect whereof the Pope himself cannot absolve you.
Calumniate not, nor detract then any person, but have charity which as the
Apostle says, Covers a multitude of sins: so you will enjoy quiet in your self,
and peace with others: you will obtain the grace and favor of God in this
world, and glory in the other, Amen.

DISCOURSE XL. OF THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.
AS Creation is attributed to the Father: Redemption to the Son: So
sanctifieation of souls is attributed to the holy Ghost: because it is an effect
of particular love and goodness: The more usual way He takes for this work is
the administration of Sacraments, which are the instrumental causes of his
graces, chanells and conduits of his benedictions. Before we speak of each one
in particular, it is good to treat of them in general, and to consider what is
common to all the Sacraments of the Law of Grace. Wherefore I will put before
your eyes their causes, the nature, and effects of them.

1. The Efficient Cause who instituted the Sacraments, is JESUS lib. 4. c. 4. de
Sacrament. Trid. ss. 7. can. 1.
CHRIST. Who is the Author of the Sacraments, but JESUS our Lord? these
Sacraments came from heaven, says S. Ambrose. And the holy Ghost, by the mouth
of his Spouse, assembled in the Council of Trent. If any one shall say, that all
the Sacraments of the new Law were not instituted by CHRIST our Lord, let him
be anathema. JESUS has given his Apostles, and his Church commission to
institute Feasts Fasts and the Ceremonies of the Office: but the institution of
Sacraments He reserved to himself: it is He alone that b^queathed them to the
faithful, as the magasins of his merits, chanells of his graces, and
authentic proofs of his Divinity -- Yes of his Divinity.

2. For in the institution and administration of Sacraments JESUS shows that he
is God, since He exercises and makes appear divine perfections, His Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, and Providence.

3. His Power: They say usually in Philosophy, that no creature however noble
and eminent it may be can serve the Creator as an instrument, to draw out of
nothing another creature: that a Seraphin cannot create, no not instrumentally,
a drop of water, or one only grain of sand: Let them change now their tone, and
praise the power of JESUS CHRIST, who makes use of common creatures to produce
so excellent: of material, to to produce Spiritual: of dead and inanimate
creatures, to create a divine life: who makes use elements which are in the
lowest order of nature, to produce that which is most high and more excellent
than all that is in nature: who makes use of a little water to produce grace,
which is a participation of the life of God himself.

4. He shows in this his Wisdom, disposing of all things sweetly. leading his
creatures to their last End by means convenient, and fitted to their nature. If
you had not bodies: if you were as Angels S. Chryhom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch.
separated from all corporeal matter, God would give you his gifts purely,
spiritually, and invisibly; but because your souls are clothed with terrestrial
and material bodies, God gives you his graces in material elements. and in
sensible signs.

5. He exercises his Goodness; for by the malediction thundered against the
first man and his posterity, corporeal creatures are Wisdom. 4.
become to us temptations, stumblingblocks, and snares: But by the Benediction
of JESUS, they are the matter of Sacraments, conduits of his graces, organs of
our sanctification, and instruments of our salvation.

6. And whereas He is both merciful and just, in showing us mercy, he
exercises his justice; for man being by sin unjustly elevated against God, who
is infinitely above him; he is justly punished and humbled, seeing himself
obliged to receive his salvation by corporal creatures, which are so much below
him.

7. His Providence in sine herein does shine: He foresaw that men are naturally
inclined to an exterior worship: and He provided Sacraments and Sacrifice,
which consist in exterior actions, lest they should employ themselves in
superstitions. He sees that Unity is necessary amongst his faithful: and to
make them uniform in the exercise of Piety and divine service, to unite them
together in the same Religion, and the same Church, He institutes exterior
actions, common to all Christians, by which they may pay to God their Duties,
and receive from him his favors.

8. But JESUS is not only the Author and Institutor of Sacraments: He is
moreover the Dispencer of them, who vouchsafes to confer and administer them to
you; to confer them I say, not only as an universal and general cause: but also
as a special and particular.

9. The Nature and the Essence of a Sacrament is to be a visible and effective
sign of divine and invisible grace; And they have very great resemblance with
the Author of grace, with the subject of grace, and with the effect of grace.
The Author of grace is JESUS CHRIST Man God, and the Sacraments represent him
very naturally; For as JESUS CHRIST, if one may speak so, is but a holy and
wonderful Compositum of the divine Word and humane nature: so a Sacrament is
but a compositum of the word of the Priest, and of the material Element. The
subject of grace, is the person that receives it: he is composed of body and
soul; And the matter of the Sacrament is applied to his body: and the form
which consists in words, teaches, excites, and animates the faith and the
devotion of his soul. The effects of grace are different and very well
represented by the exterior signs or Sacraments; The effect of Baptismal
grace is to cleanse the soul from original sin, and to temper the ardours of
concupiscence; and what is more proper to represent these effects than water?
The effect of Eucharistical grace is to feed, nourish, and cherish our souls;
and what is more proper to signify this nourishment, than the species of bread?
we may say the same of the other Saments as we shall see God ayding, when we
treat of each one In particular: let us content our selves at present to see,
that the Sacraments are practical and effective signs of the grace they
signify, of which only it now remains to speak.

10. This word Grace in the Scripture, and in the language of the Faithful, is
taken in diverse senses. First, it is taken sometimes for all favors that God
does us, also in the order of nature; other times for free gifts of God, termed
graces gratis given: because they are not given for the deserts, not for the
benefit of the Receiver: but for the good of the Church, as the gifts of
prophecy, preaching, and working miracles.

11. It Is not in any of these senses that it is taken treating of the
Sacraments. It Is taken for habitual and sanctifying grace: which is a most
excellent quality, that Sanctifys us, and renders us holy and just before God:
that makes us children of the eternal Father, Brothers, and Coheires with JESUS
CHRIST, living Temples of the holy Ghost, Kings of heaven, and Partakers of the
Divine nature says S. Peter. 2. Ep. 1. ss. 7. can 6.


13. It Is an article of Faith declared by the council of Trent, that all
sacraments of the christian Church give Sanctifying grace to all that receive
them worthyly. If there were a Confessor so rich and liberal, that he would
give five or six Guinnies to all that should com and confess to him, and as
often as they should com, who would not go? would he not be oppressed with
people? We are not Christians if we believe not firmly, that as often as we
confess, or receive other sacrament as we ought, we acquire a greater treasure,
than if one should give us a thousand guinnys; yes, in the balance of Gods
judgment, and in the esteem of wisemen, one only degree of grace is more
precious, and more worth than all the riches of the Indies, because grace is of
a superior order to all the goods of nature.

14. But by the sacraments you receive not only one degree of grace, but many.
In Isaiah it is said, You shall draw waters in joy out of the Saviors
fountains: It Is not said, you shall receive they shall be given you: But you
shall draw: it is not said, out of cisterns: But out of fountains; if it were
said, you shall receive grace you might think that you should receive but as
much as one would give you: But since it is said, that you may draw, and also out
of fountains, which cannot be drained, you may take as much of it as you will.
The measure of the greater or lesser quantity of water that you draw out of a
fountain, is not in the fountain it self: but in the greatness or littleness
of the vessel wherein you draw it, so the measure of the greater or lesser
grace you receive in sacraments, is not in the sacraments themselves: but in
the greater or lesser disposition which you bring; it you com to them with much
of faith, attention, contrition, humility, devotion, fervor, and love of God,
you will receive in them much grace: if you go to them with little disposition,
you will receive but little; and consequently it is more profitable to confess
and to communicate one only time with-great devotion, than 5. or 6 times with
little disposition.

14. Moreover the sacraments give not only habitual and sanctifying grace: but
also actual and auxiliary graces, which aid us to obtain the end for which each
Sacrament was instituted. I explicate my self; when you receive holy Orders in
a good state, and with the disposition that you ought, in the sanctifying grace
which you receive, is included a promise which God makes you to give you actual
graces, to perform well the divine office, to instruct the people, to
administer the Sacraments, and to do other ecclesiastical functions to which
you are applied and consecrated by holy Orders. If you marry in a good state,
and as a christian, in the sanctifying grace which you receive, is containd a
promise that God makes you, to give you in occasions, actual and auxiliary
graces, to live peaceably with your husband, to breed up well your children, to
resist temptations against conjugal chastity, and to practice other virtues to
which marriage obliges you. By which you see the great prejudice you do your
selves, when either you neglect or receive unworthily the Sacraments: you
deprive your selves of innumerable graces, which God would oblige himself to
give you in the rest of your life, as the appurtenances and attendants of the
grace, which you should have received.

16. This will render you extremely culpable in the judgment of God, and you
will dye with great regret, seeing you had so souveraigne remedies and helps,
and that you neglected so much to profit by them. know that the Sacraments are
talents, of inestimable value: but which are given us with an obligation to
gain by them. In S. Matthew JESUS compares himself to a Lord who gave Talents
to his servants: and finding that he who had received Mat. 25.
but one had not gaind with it said, cast the unprofitable servant out into
exteriout darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. What then
would He have don to him, if he had lost his talent? what would He have don to
him, if he had received and lost many? and what will JESUS say to us? what will
he do to us, if we shall have abused, or not used and profited in virtue by the
talents of the sacraments He has given us? what weeping? what regrets? what
gnashing of teeth? and what rage against our selves for having lost so good, so
easy, and so frequent occasions to make good our salvation, to advance in
virtue, to load our selves with merits, and to enrich our selves for eternity?
But virtuous people will rejoice, will admire their own happiness, and will
acknowledge their wisdom in receiving them often, because they will see that
these Sacraments were most rich talents, and were gages, and infallible
promises of the inestimable, incomprehensible, and infinite glory which they
shall possess for ever. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLI Of the Necessity and Nature of Baptism.
WHen great S. Hierome says we are not Christians* by birth, he speaks of the
carnal birth, and not of the spiritual, for in the Sacrament of Baptism we are
made Christians we are regenerated in the life of grace; This Sacrament is a
spiritual birth, the first, and the most necessary of all the Sacraments: the
door through which we enter into the Church. To know evidently the necessity of
it, we must acknowledge three verities, founded upon the principles of Christian
Religion, received by all Doctors, and drawn from express passages of holy
scripture.

1. The first is, that all Children which are conceived by the ordinary way,
all except the Virgin, are sported with original sin, are enemies of God,
objects of his just wrath, ^laves of the Devil, Children of perdition, and
victimes of eternal death; I say, conceived by the ordinary way, to make you
understand, that the Son of God being not conceived by this way, but by the
operation of the holy Ghost, his Conception was not only exempt from all
impurity: but has been the source and origin of all purity of our souls and
bodies. I have moreover added the Virgin excepted: because according to the maxim
of S* A^stin, when we speak of sin, we speak not of the Virgin, she having been
prevented with all the graces, and advantaged with all the privileges that an
Omnipotent and loving Son could bountifully bestow on her whom He chose to be
his Mother. These two then excepted; It Is an Article of faith, that all
Children, though their Parents be faithful and in the state of grace, are
soiled with sin, and are fruits of malediction, and damnation: They are soiled
with sin, For in Adam all have sinned, says S. Paul; and nothing that is soiled
shall Romans 5. 12. Apoc. 21. 27. Ephesians. 2. 3.
enter into heaven, says S. John. They are the objects of Gods anger: we were
by nature the children of wrath, says S. Paul* and the anger of God is not a
passion, but a punishment; the wrath of God upon this stilborne infant is never
appeased: For he that has not faith, the wrath of God remains upon him, says
JESUS CHRIST in S, John: but this infant has neither actual, nor habitual
faith: not actual, for he is incapable of it: not habitual, for he could 3. 36.
not receive it but by the Sacrament, and he is dead without it: the wrath of
God remains upon him.

2. After all this, how do some flatter themselves in their sins and say, that
God made us not to cast us away: that his mercy permits him not to be so
rigorous as they say: that he will spare us though we die in the state of sin;
made He these poor infants to cast them away? and nevertheless He permits them
to be lost; the mercy of God is greater than you can possibly imagine, and
notwithstanding, this great mercy, this infinite mercy hinders him not to
exercise such a severity upon these little creatures; And if He be so severe to
them for one only sin, which they incur by the misfortune of their condition:
what will He be to you for so great a number of sins, which you commit, not by
ignorance, constraint, surprise, but so freely, and voluntarily?

3. It Is a second Verity that original sin was an evil so desperate and
incurable, that there was not any pure Creature possible, that could remedy
this evil: that nothing less was necessary than the humiliation, blood. and
death of a God, for a medecin to it is mortal malady. It Is easy to prove it by
the malice of sin, which offends an infinite Majesty: but it is not necessary:
since it is a common doctrine, that it is not but to extreme maladies that one
applies extreme remedies. sin must be a very dangerous and extreme evil, since
a remedy so powerful, strange, extraordinary, and extreme was necessary for
it. Ha! you know not o sinner! what is a mortal sin; for if you knew it, you
would rather die a thousand times than commit it: you would rather eat your
tongue, than pronounce one only blasphemy or falls testimony: you would rather
burn your hand than reach it out to a dishonest, or unjust action.

4. This precious and inestimable treasure of the merits and passion of JESUS,
is a most powerful remedy for original sin, but nevertheless unprofitable and
uneffectuall, if it be not applied to us. Suppose that you have here the best
medecin in the world: if the infirm person take in not, it serves for
nothing; so though the precious blood of JESUS, and the infinite merits of his
passion be more than most sufficient to deliver us from sin: if they be not
appropriated and applied to us by the Sacrament, they are uneffectuall and
unprofitable. So we see the Scripture attributes 1. Ep. 1. 7. Ephesians. 5. 26. 1.
Pet. 1. 19. Tit. 3. 5. John. 3. 3. 6. S. Austin. ep. 20. ad Hierom: lib. 3. ep.
9. ad Fidu: Aug. lib. 3 de Orig. Animae. 9. c.
to the water of Baptism the same effects, it attributes to the blood of JESUS
CHRIST: because water aplyes the virtue of it. The blood of JESUS CHRIST
cleanses us, says S. John. JESUS CHRIST cleanses his Church by the Baptism of
wator, says, S. Paul. S. Peter, We are saved by the blood of the immaculate
Lamb. S. Paul, God has saved us by the Baptism of regeneration.

In S. John JESUS repeats twice with great instance, that none may pretend
ignorance: Amen Amen I say to thee, if any one be not regenerated of water and
the holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Hence the
primitive Christians, if an infant was in danger, ran hastily to the Church,
and in great fear lest the infant should dye without the sacrament. Hence S.
Cyprian says, without Baptism infants are lost. Hence S. Austin gives us this
caveat, say not, teach not if you will be a Catholic, that infants departing
before Baptism can com to remission of their original sins.

Now I make your selves Judges, whom we ought to belive either a Quaker or some
other Reformer, who say that it is not necessary to baptize an infant: or the
primitive Christians, the holy Fathers, nay or JESUS CHRIST himself, who says
so clearly, and with such asseveration that it is necessary for him.

7. From these Catholic Verities, all married women ought to learn, to have
great care, that their daughters, and servants also, know well all that is
necessary for the essence of this sacrament: and that they know well what I am
about to say of it. In case of necessity, each one may baptize an infant, also
the Father or Mother in defect of another: and if you will that the child be
saved: see what you must do; You must take water, not spittle, aquavitae,
rosewater, or any other made by art, but natural water, of fountain, sea,
river, pit, pond, or well: you must wet or wash the body of the infant with it:
the head if you can possibly: and if you cannot wash the head, you must put
water upon the breast, arm, foot, or upon some other naked part. and the same
person that puts water, must in putting it say distinctly, (with intention to
purge him from original sin, and to make him a member of the Church, or at
least, to do what the Church does) these words; Infant, I Baptize thee in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. But the Infant that
should be perhaps baptized upon any other part than the head: when the head
appears, you must baptize him again under condition, saying, Infant. if thou
art not baptized, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost. Because Baptism that is given upon any other part, 3. Part
q. 66. ar. 7.
is not certain, says S. Thomas.

And when you are not certain that the child is dead, you ought to baptize him
under condition, and say, If tbou art living, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. For as S* Austin speaking of a
Catechumen that fell into an Apoplexy having not demanded Baptism says that
he ought to be baptized; because it is better to put your self in danger of
baptizing one unwilling, than to be wanting to one willing; So when you doubt
if a child be living, it is better to put your self in danger of baptizing a
dead child, than not to baptize one living; And because the life of these little
creatures is sometimes so feeble and imperceptible, that we think them wholly
dead, though a longtime after they give signs of life. I say it is good thar
every woman should know all this: for it happens sometimes that a woman falls
into labor suddenly and unexpectedly, and that the infant cannot be brought
perfectly into the world alive: or it is so weak that likely it will die
before an ordinary Minister of this Sacrament can be had; if those about her
know not how to baptize, the infant may be for want of this help deprived of
Salvation; and if this should happen but once in the whole world in a hundred
years: for to avoid it, every one should learn with great care how to apply
this Sacrament, so important is the salvation of a soul.

8. And this again is of so great importance, that very learned and pious
Bishops, and other Divines have counseled all Curates to baptize under
condition, all infants that had been baptized by women; for though some know
well the matter and the form of Baptism, they are nevertheless so surprised,
and in such a hurrie in these conjunctures, that often they know not what they
do; and this is not only the judgment of those Bishops, but Opus. 65. parag.
vlt de Officio Sacerd.
the express opinion of S. Thomas.

9. In fine married women ought to learn that they are most culpable in the
sight of God, if their infant die before Baptism because they defer it too long
expecting Gossips, or for other humane reasons or considerations: or because
they hurt themselves and lie down before their time; if this happen with out
your fault* you may comfort your selves in your innocence and adore the
Providence of God; but if you have hurt your selves by your fault leaping,
dansing, putting your selves into great passion, or by carrying too heavy
burdens; it is an evil which has no excuse, and which deserves to be deplored
all the rest of your life.

10. But if it be so great a misfortune to those poor infant^ not to receive
the grace of Baptism though without their fault: It is no small misery to lose
it after we have received it, and to lose it by our fault for a passion, or a
trifle; especially since it is so hard to return again by penance, to the same
newness in CHRIST, and to obtain so full and entire remission of all sins as in
Baptism we received. The justice of God exacts to this effect a second
Baptism, a Baptism not of elementary water, but of tears, a laborious*
painful, and sorrowful Baptism, say the holy Fathers, and the Council of
Trent. For sins committed after Baptism are far greater, more enormous, and
unworthy of pardon, ss 14. c. 2
than the sins of infidells; Christians that shall be damned, will be more
tormented in hell, than Pagans: they have the knowlegd of God, they know, or
ought to know his holy will: and his divine Commandments: how great an evil
it is to transgress them and to offend so high and so excellent a Majesty; The
Servant that knows the will of his Master and does it not shall be beaten Luke
12. 47.
with many stripes, says JESUS CHRIST.

We are not strangers, but domestics of God, his children, and beloved. We
have the honor to be received to his table, to eat of his bread, and to be
nourished with his flesh; if then we offend him after so many favors, he is
very sensible of the offense, it is a monstrous ingratitude: as when one of
your own betrays you, you are wont to say: if it were another, it would not
trouble me: but such an one, who pertains to me so nearly, whom I have so much
obliged, ha! this does pierce my heart! so JESUS says, si inimicus meus
maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique: if a Turk, a Jew, a Pagan who is my
enemy offend me, the injury is not so sensible; But you, a Christian: who have
contracted amitle with me, who have set at my table. how have you the malice to
commit sin, which disobliges me extremely? we have received the grace of God by
Baptism, the gifts of the holy Ghost, the supernatural habits, helps to
overcom temptations: if we sin notwithstanding these favors, we have much less
excuse.

Do not so if you be wise! If you have yet baptismal grace: If you are clothed
with this fine garment, which S. Austin calls the Robe of silk, with this robe
of innocence, which is given you in Baptism: keep it carefully, persever and
walk in it til death, for it is more honorable, more pleasant, more easy, and
more secure to go by the way of Innocence, than by the way penance to
everlasting life Amen.

DISCOURSE XLII of the Oblgations we contract in Baptism.
I Will pour out upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
contaminations, I will give you a new heart and a new spirit, said God by
Ezechiel; Which words the holy Fathers and the Interpreters of Scripure
understand unanimously of Baptismal water. He had reason to make this promise
with so great pomp and majesty of words; for if we consider attentively, we
shall see that after the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the Redemption of
manking, He never more obliged humane nature, than by the institution of the
Sacrament of Baptism: which purges us from all sin, makes us adoptive children
of God, members of JESUS CHRIST, coheires of Heaven, and Temples of the holy
Ghost. What honor! what dignity! and what admirable prerogatives! They that are
members of JESUS CHRIST and the children of God, ought they not to lead a life
conformable to this dignity? thy that received the Spirit of God in Baptism,
should they not act and speak according to this divine Spirit? It Is is that to
which all Christians are obliged by Baptism; It obliges them to die a moral
and virtuous death: and to lead a new life conformable to the excellency of
this birth, as shall be shown in this Discourse.

1. Before I proceed to the proofs of these important Points, I explicate my
self; By the sin of the first man, and by our own crimes we deserve to die
effectually the death of soul and body, and to be b^ried in hell eternally; But
the Son of God out of his infinite mercy, to the end we might live and merit
the crowns of heaven, changes by Baptism that horrible and eternal death,
into a moral and virtuous one; He will that we die to sin, to the world, and
to our selves. To sin, that is to all sorts of vices. To the world and its
pomps, that is you must not set your heart upon the pride, riches, and
passtimes thereof: you must reject superfluities, and content your self with
necessaries, and not according to the rules of the world, but according to
christian frugalitie, modesty, and humility. To our selves: this is that we
call dying to the old Adam: that is, you must die to ill humors, irregular
passions, vicious inclinations, to the love of your own selves, which we
contracted by our carnal birth and extraction from the first man; for by his
sin our nature has been so corrupted, that if we follow it, we have no other
object of our thoughts, words, actions, and affections, than our selves, and
our own interests. To all the aforesaid things we are obliged to die, and see
here the proofs of it.

2. For when S. Paul says in the 6th. chapter of his Epistle to the Romans,
that we are dead and buried with JESUS CHRIST Romans 6.
by Baptism: It is to prove what he would persuade us in the whole Chapter,
that we are obliged to kill in our selves sin with all its appurtenances and
for ever; so he says, since we are dead to sin, how shall we live therein? We
know that by Baptism, our old Romans 6,
man has been crucifyd with JESUS CHRIST, that the body of sin, and the mass
of evil inclinations may be destroyed. And to the Galatians, they that pertain
to Christ have crucified their flesh, with its vices and Gal. 5.
concupiscences.

Can we be good Christians and not appertain to JESUS? Nevertheless the Apostle
of JESUS says, that we appertain not to him, if we crucify not our flesh. He
says not, they that appertain to him in the quality of Religious, or Priests:
But all they that appertain to JESUS CHRIST, Crucify their flesh. And S.
Chrysostom, Baptism is to us that which the Cross and Sepulcher was to JESUS:
24. hom. 10. in ep. Romans C. 6.
it ought to have in us the same effects: it ought to crucify us, to make us
die, and to hide us from the world.

3. It imports much to note what is the Grace of each Sacrament, and what charg
it puts upon us; for each sacrament conferrs a special grace, and to this grace
some charg is annexed, to which we oblige our selves. It Is a Talent given us
with a strict obligation to employ it. The grace of Confirmation, is a spirit
of Fortitude, which obliges us to make profession of the Faith in Presence of
Tyrants, also with peril of our lives. The grace of Confession is a spirit of
Penance, which obliges us to satisfactory works, to fasts, alms, prayers, and
other actions which S. John Baptist terms, Fruits worthy of penance. the grace
of Baptime is a spirit of the Cross and death, which obliges us to die to sin,
to the world, and to our selves; if then we have any voluntary affection to the
Pomps of the world, to the delights of the flesh, to the satisfaction of unruly
passions: if we are wedded to our own conduct, to our proper judgment, and not
to that of our Superiors, we are wanting to the grace of this Sacrament; for
we are baptized to be made Christians, that is Disciples of Christ: and He says
to us expressly, He that renounces Matthew. 16. Luke 9. 23.
not himself, note himself, his unbridled passions, bad humors, his own
judgment, and self love, and carrys not his Cross daily, cannot be my disciple

4. But this death is like to that of the Phoenix, which dies not, but to
acquire a new life; It Is as that of JESUS, who was spoiled of a mortal and
fading life, to resume a glorious and immortal. We die not to sin, to the
world, and to our selves, but to live to God, and to his grace; we are not
crucifyd with JESUS CHRIST, but to rise again to a new life; we divest not our
selves of the old man, but to put on the new; For we are buried by baptism
with JESUS, to die to sin, that as the Son of God is risen by the glory of his
Father, So also we may Romans 6. Ephesians. 4. 24.
walk in newness of life, says S. Paul to the Romans. And to the Ephesians, Put
ye on the new man which according to God is created in justice and sanctity.
When the Apostle commends to us a new life, he demands of us a great change,
and an admirable metamorphosis says S. Chrysostom. Then he adds, I have great S
Chrysostom. hom. 10. in ep ad Romans 6. Gal. 5. 3.
cause to groan, and weep abundantly, considering on the one side the great
obligations we have contracted in Baptism, and seeing on the other our great
negligence.

For as S. Paul in the Epistle to the Galatians says, every man that
circumcises himself engages himself to observe, all the law of Moses:: So
whosoever receives Baptism, obliges himself to keep the law of Christ. Now
since Christian Religion is a profession of penance mortification, sanctity and
perfection: these things are not indifferent to them that are baptized, but
they stand obliged to follow them. Which made great S. Basil say, whosoever
has received the Baptism of the law of grace, is obliged to live according to
the Gospel: and has obliged himself by an irrevocable contract, to imitate
JESUS CHRIST.

5. I know well than to excuse your selves you say, if I live not according to
the world: if I cloth not my self gorgeously, if I lead a retired and
mortified life: I shall pass for an extravagant person: they will not esteem me:
they will say I am an abhorrer of society, and a man of another world.

You say true: but what is this to say? It is to say, they will esteem you a
christian: that you will pass for a Disciple of JESUS; This is that which you
have promised in Baptism: It Is in this the perfection of Christianity consists,
in declaring war against the world, and its pomps: in opposing its maxims and
customs: contradicting flesh and blood; Take courage then says S. Chrysostom,
fight valiantly, consider what Chrysostom. To 3 ser. de Martyr
you have promised, under what condition you were made a Christian, and in what
war you are enrolled. Think not to triumph without Victory, to be victorious
without fighting, to fight without enemies that are contrary to you.

6. But some do say: where are pastimes, delights, and pleasures forbidden in
the ten commandments, or in those of the Church? If those frequent, and almost
continual pastimes, delights, and pleasures are not against the first and
chief of the commandments, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy forces: they are
at least against the second, which our Savior says is like to it; For is this
to love your neighbor as your self, to employ in superfluous delights, that
which might deliver him out of great inconveniences and miseries? you know that
so many orphans, so many other poor, who are the children of God, members of
our Savior, are eaten with vermin for want of a little linen, that they are
starved with cold, and that they dye with hunger for want of assistance: and
the money wherewith you might succor them, you spend in superfluities: what
insensibility is this? where is the fraternal Charity, or the Christian
Compassion, or the bowels of mercy which the elect ought to have? The Prophet
Amos 6. 6.
Amos weighed well how much Charity was by this violated when he said; Woe to
you who seek exquisite meats, and delicious wines, and ye have not pity on the
miseries of the people.

7. S. Denis says that in his time, if one desired Baptism, the c. 2. Eccle.
Hier. parag. 2. et. 3.
first thing he did, was to entreat a Christian to be his God father; the
Christian on the one side desiring the salvation of the Petitioner: and on the
other weighing the weakness of a man with the weight of the affair, was
troubled with fear, and seized with apprehension to conduct him to the Bishop.
Nevertheless in fine he led him to the Prelate: Who said to him, that his
design ought not to be imperfect, but entire, and with all his heart, as
approaching to God who is entirely perfect; and having declared to him the
form of life he ought to lead, to live godly: received from him promises and
protestations to aspire with all his force to that perfection. And that he
might not undertake such a charg lightly and inconsiderately, he made him pass
2 or 3 years in Catechumenate, which was the Noviciate of Christianity, where
he exercised himself in fasting, prayer, and other penances to make trial, if
he could apply himself to the austere and virtuous life of Christians. By which
you see, that the answers made for you in Baptism, are not ayrie words, they
are according to this great Saint, and other holy Fathers promises, and
protestations which oblige us. By the same you see also, what life the
Christians of those times did lead, to sati^fy the obligations contractd in
their Baptism.

8. Do as they did: renounce the Devil, and all his pompes, works, and
suggestions; renounce the World, with its vanities, follies, and maxims;
renounce your selves: your flesh, sensuality, selflove, particular judgment,
and all the inclinations of the old man; separate your will from his: and turn
to JESUS your God and the Source of your salvation. Acknowledge the excellency
of your Dignity: the noble and divine Alliance to which you are elevated: to
whom you pertain by Baptism. Remember that you have the honor to be the
members of JESUS CHRIST, not improperly, nor metaphorically but really and
truly. Let us remember that he is our Head, and that we must conform our selves
to him; otherwise we shall make a great deformity in his body and dishonor him
extremely. Would not this be a monstrous and unnatural deformity, if to the
head of a handsome man were joined the body of a beast, the paws of a Lion, the
belly of a hog., the tail of a serpent? JESUS is the Head of the Church: we are
the members of it; what dishonor should we do him? what unnatural deformity
should we make in his Body, if we should be unlike to him? if He being as meek
as a lamb, as pure as the sunbeam, and as simple as a dove, we should be cruel
like lions, unclean like hogs, and deceitful as serpents; Let us assure our
selves that He will not suffer such deformity in heaven: and that to be
associated to him in the life of glory, we must be like to him in the life of
grace. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLIII Of Confirmation.
AS the eternal Father has shown effectually the ineffable love which He had
for the world in giving his only and beloved Son in the Mystery of the
Incarnation: a love so wonderful and prodigious, that though admiration be the
daughter of ignorance, and JESUS be the infinite and eternal Science, He speaks
not of it but with astonishment and admiration: Sic Deus dilexit mundum! So
JESUS has shown effectually the infinite love which He had for his Church in
giving Her his holy Spirit, who is equal, coeternal, and consubstantial with
Him* and his Father.

2. But as in the distribution of graces where of the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. 10.
speaks, the holy Ghost is communicated to diverse persons, for different
operations: to some to work miracles, to others to interpret the holy
scripture, and the like; so in Sacramental grace the holy Ghost is given for
diverse intentions, to produce diverse effects, according to the difference of
the ends, for which JESUS instituted the Sacraments. In Baptism the holy Ghost
is given us, to be the Soul of our souls, the life of our life, and the Spirit
of our spirit, to create in us the spiritual and Christian life, make us
Children of God, Members of JESUS CHRIST, and Heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
In Confirmation He is given us, to make us Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, to enrole
us in his warfare. and to arm and fortify us against his enemies.

3. That there has been always in the Church a particular Sacrament, to make
us soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, appears in the Acts Acts. 8. 17.
where S. Peter and S. John gave the holy Ghost by imposing Episcopal hands
upon the Samarians whom Philip the deacon had converted and baptized. The same,
S. Paul did to the disciples of Acts. 19. 5. and 6. Tertull de Prescrip. c. 40.
S. John at Ephesus. It apears also in Ter^ullian, who says, that Satan, Ape of
the Divinity, and ambitious of the honor we give to God in our Mysteries,
incited the Idolaters to counterfeit in their superstitious ceremonies the
Sacraments of the Church; He proves it by induction in the first S^craments.
Satan, says he. Counterfeits our Baptism: he baptizes those that belive in
him; our Confirmation: he marks in the forehead those who are his soldiers;
and our Eucharist: he makes an oblation of bread. Other Fathers say, that this
Sacrament is Pentecost for us; that is to say, the holy Ghost is given to us in
it with abundance of his grace, and for the same end for which He was sent to
the Apostles, in the day of Pentecost; JESUS ascending into heaven commanded
them not to preach the Gospel, not to appear abroad, till they had received
him: He knew their frailty: He knew that without his aid they would be
overcom. Behold S. Peter: he had been baptized: he came from communion: and
because he was not strengthened with this virtue, he trembles, and shrinks at the
voice of a poor maid; but after Pen^ecost he is so courageous, that he speaks
undauntedly in a full Consistory: he says to the Judges and high Priests, We
must rather obey God than men. You see then, that this Sacrament makes
soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, and gives us force to fight for him; wherefore it
imprints a Character: and it belongs to a Bishop only to conferr it: He
administers it with the thumb: with Unction of sacred Chrisme composed of oil
and balm: he makes the sign of the Cross upon the forehead, and gives a
little stroke upon the cheek.

4. It imprints a character in our soul; for characters are imprinted in us by
some Sacraments, to mark and distinguish us from other men, and to design us
paticularly to the service of God; by Baptism we are made his subjects: by
holy Order, Officers and Ministers of his Church: and by Confirmation, we are
made his Soldiers.

5. I know well that by Baptism we are also made spiritual soldiers: and for
this we use unction in it; But this is only to fight in our own quarrel,
against the Devil and other particular Enemies; As the Burgesses of a Town,
though they are not by profession soldiers, fail not to have arms and to fight
in need, in defense of their persons, or their country.

6. But by Confirmation we are made soldiers to fight, not in our particular
quarrels, but in those of JESUS CHRIST: soldiers by office and profession: to
the end we fight for him against Tyrants, against the World, and against the
Enemies of his Religion.

7. And hence it proceeds that every one may Baptize in necessity: and that a
Bishop only may Confirm; for to make a subject of a king we need not but to
cause a child to be born in his kingdom; But to raise and enrole soldiers,
belongs not but to Captains; so to make us Vassalls of JESUS: on needs not but
to make us to be borne in the Church his kingdom, which is don by Baptism; But
to make us his soldiers by Confirmation, one must be a Bishop or Prelate of the
Church.

8. In making us soldiers He gives us arms and force by the grace of this
Sacrament; And hence it is that the Bishop gives it with his thumb, the
strongest of all the fingers. He gives it by unction: to signify the interior
Unction and force, by which we are fitted to appear in the field; Balm is
thereto added, because we must fight publicly for JESUS: and if we do well, we
are a good odor to the son of God, and to his Church, Christi bonus odor sumus
in omni loco.

9. This unction is made in the form of a Cross: because the Cross is the
standard and the ensign of the warfare in which we enrole our selves.

10. This Cross is made in the forehead, the seat of bashfulness to teach us,
that thenceforth we must not be ashamed of the Cross of JESUS: that we ought to
embrace with a holy boldness, the reproaches, confusions, humiliations, and the
mortifications, which occur in the practice of Christian virtues; and to make
us know that we must be ready to receive and endure affronts and ignominies,
for the defense of Jesus, He gives us a little blow.

11, It was not in vain, nor without much reason, that JESUS instituted a
particular Sacrament, so great a Sacrament, a Sacrament which imprints a
character, which a Bishop only can conferr, which gives such plenitude of the
holy Ghost to arm and fortify us, not only against Tyrants, but also against
the Persecutors of christian piety and devotion. For christian Religion which
is almost freed from the persecution of pagans, is at present tyranized by the
babble, raillery, and derision of wordly souls. Wherefore S. Bernard said, the
Church may truly say, In pace amaritudo mea amarissima: my affliction is most
bitter in the time of Isay. 38. 17.
peace: It was bitter in the death that Tyrants made the Martyrs to endure:
more hitter in the infidelity of Heretics: But it is most bitter in the ill
life of Christians, who mock and laugh at the piety of devout Souls; For this
is much more hurtful than that of Tyrants. In the persecution of Tyrants
Christians dared not to pray, nor to exercise devotion in public, they sought
caves, grotes, and private houses: but they served God freely at least in these
places; the persecution of worldlings is the cause that many dare not serve God
as they ought in particular houses, for fear to be called devotes: they dare
not frequent the Sacraments, or be assiduous at divine service, because they
call them hypocrites: they dare not be conscientious and restrained from
unhandsom words and insolent actions, because they call them scrupulous: a sin
detestable and wholly unnatural, to persecute christianity in chrichristianity
it self: to have sworn fidelity to JESUS in the Sacrament of Baptism, and
laugh at those who are faithful to him: not to serve God themselves: and to
deride those that serve him: a sin, not of frailty, nor of ignorance, but of
malice and contempt: which draws from them the grace of God, indurates and
disposes them to impenitence and reprobation. The children of Hely who averted
the people from devotion, 1. Kings. 3. 14.
committed an abominable crime in the sight of God, which could not be expiated
by victimes, says the holy Scripture.

12. This temptation is so dangerous, also to devout souls, that they who stand
invincible against other assaults, permit themselves to be overcom by this:
because good natures are facile, complaisant, and condescending: they have so
much fear and confusion to do or omit any thing that may displeas another, or
which they apprehend may lessen their own honor or reputation, that one only
thought, What will they think? what will they say? will render al predications,
remonstrances, and exhortations uneffectual.

Say for example to this Gentleman or Duellist, you live upon the brink of
hell: you may say every morning when you rise, perhaps in the evening I shall
go to bed in hell; there needs no more than that a friend do pray you to serve
him as a Second, to be killed in this action and behold you are most meserable
for an eternity. Can there be any thing more foolish than to expose your self
to be killed, or to kill another man, who never disobliged you, to serve the
caprice of a giddy and unreasonable head? refuse courageously these requests,
and they will trouble you no more with them. I would willingly, he will answer
you; But what will they say?

Say to this Lady, the extravagance of your clothes does prejudice much your
salvation; it consumes the best part of your time: it fills your soul with
pride and vanity, it wedds your heart to trifles: it renders you unable to pay
debts: to give necessary assistance to the Poor: you would do well to cloth
your self more simply and modestly. I would do it willingly, she will assure
you: But what will they say?

13. But what are they you fear so much? Atheists, impious, or at best, light,
loose, and libertine Christians; good and virtuous souls, solid and
understanding persons will esteem and honor you. If a Criple should laugh at
you, because you go straight: would you do well, to be ashamed of it, and to
counterfeit your self a criple? If you study to pleas the humors and the
fancies of the world, you will never have don, you will make your selves
ridiculous; regard them not; Let them talk: it is your part do do well: and
theirs to speak ill* you can no more hinder them from talking, than you can
dogs from barking.

14. Whatsoever you do: you will be the But of evil tongues; your intentions
will be judged: your actions censured. If you be meanly clothed, they esteem
you a hypocrice; if well clothed according to your condition, proud; If
thrifty, avaricious; if liberal, prodigal; if you pardon injuries, a coward? if
you defend your right, revengfull; if you fast, a dissembler* If you nourish
your self, a glutton; if peaceable, negligent; If vigilant in your duty,
turbulent; If quick at mass, indevout; if long, scrupulous; if you preach
mildly: you lull people a sleep; if vigorously, you are passionate; if you
reprehend vices, you are too violent; if you reprehend them not, a flatterer;
S. John did neither eat nor drink, they said he was possessed; JESUS did eat
and drink, they said He was a friend of good cheer; All these overflowings of
tongues are best stopped by a generous contempt of them; when they shall have
satisfyd their folly, or their malice, they will be weary of talking, and will
honor you; for when you are virtuous, the people of the world mock you in
appearance, but in effect they honor you: they laugh at you exteriourly: but
interiourly esteem you.

15. But suppose that in effect they laugh at you, and contemn you; Why are
you confirmd? the charg that Confirmation imposes on you, is to endure
affronts, reproaches, and confusions, for the glory of JESUS CHRIST: to defend
his doctrine and his Virtues with the peril of your honor, and of your life: as
He has endured confusions, ignominies, calumnies, and a most infamou^ and
shameful death for you: He that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, I will
be ashamed of him before my Father; And Mat. 10..3
on the contrary He says, He that shall confess me: he that ^hal not be ashamed
to acknowledge my Doctrine. to practice my virtues, and to be my Disciple, I
will confess him in the presence of my Father and his Angels: I will
acknowledge him for my servant, praise his virtuous actions, and adorn his head
with a crown of Glory* Amen.

DISCOURSE XLIV of the Real Presence of the Body of JESUS CHRIST in the
Eucharist.
JESUS CHRIST being both God and man, has always two intentions in his
enterprises: He regards the glory of God, and the salvation of men; wherefore
He willed that the Eucharist should be a Sacrifice, and a Sacrament, a Victime
and a food; In the quality of a Sacrifice and a Host, it is referred to the
glory of God; in the quality of a Sacrament and food, it is referred to the
salvation of men. I shall treat of it as a Sacrifice in another place; In this,
I speak of it as a Sacrament, and demonstrat that it contains really, truly,
and substantially the precious Body of JESUS CHRIST.

1. And to convince an understanding thar teceives the holy Scripture, I need
not other proof than the clear testimony of the Son John. 6. Matt. 26. 26.
Mark. 14 22. Luke 22. 19. 1. cor. 11 Gal. 1. 12
of God, who said, The Bread which I will give you is my flesh; And giving it
to his Disciples in the last Supper, This is my Body. Which words He said not
only before his death, as the Evangelists depose: But also after his
Resurrection and Ascension, as S. Paul does testify; I have learned of our Lord
says He, and not of men that being in the last supper He said to his Disciples,
take, eat, This is my Body.

2. Notwithstanding the evidence of these words, Calvin is so bold as to say
that what our Savior held in his hand and gave to his Apostles, was not his
Body, but bread, a figure or shadow of his Body. I would know, if our Savior
de^iring to declare to us, that He gave his Body, could speak otherwise than He
did. If all the men in the world should employ a thousand years in seeking
terms to express themselves: could they speak more clearly, than saying This is
my Body; And the bread which I will give you is my flesh.

3. But suppose that these words are obscure; to whom ought we to referr our
selves for the meaning of them? Either to Calvin who came more than fifteen
hundred years after CHRIST, or to the judgment of the Faithful who lived in
the times of the four first general Counsels, during which Calvin himself
avows, that the Church was in her purity? The Gospel says, that we must credit
two or three good Witnesses: behold here six authentik ones: three of the
Greek, and three of the Latin Church; S. Cyrill of Jerusalem who had place in
the second 4. Mistagog: cat.
general Council held in the year 381. teaching his people by the Scripture,
and according to the sense of the whole Church of his age, speaks thus; Since
then our Savior himself declares and says of bread This is my Body, who shall
henceforth dare to doubt of it? And He affirming and saying This is my blood,
who is he that shall doubt of it saying it is not his blood? Heretofore in Cana
of Gallilee He changed water into wine: is He not worthy to be believed
changing wine into into blood? Under the species of bread the Body is given,
and under the species of wine the blood is given his Body and his blood is
received into our members. That which seems bread, is not bread, though the
taste preceives it such, but the Body of Christ; and that which seems wine, is
not wine, though the taste represents it such, but the Blood of Christ.

S. Cyrill of Alexandria who assisted in the third general Council held at
Ephesus in his 13. book upon Leviticus, in the middle says, Lest we should have
horour of flesh and blood put upon our Altars: God condescending to our
weakness, infuses into the things we offer, to wit into bread and wine, the
virtue of life, converting them into the verity of his own flesh.

S. Crysostome preaching to the people, brings in our Savior speaking thus to
them: Many Parents give their children to others Chrysostom. ham. 61. ad pop,
Antioch.
to be nourished: But not so I: with my own flesh J nourish you and set my self
as meat before you. J took upon my self flesh and blood for you: and the very
same flesh and blood I deliver again to you.

Let us ioyn to the Golden mouth to the Ambrosian mouth, that is to say, S.
Ambrose to S. Chrysostom; This bread before the Sacramental words, is bread:
but when the consecration is don, of bread is made the flesh of CHRIST; by what
words? of JESUS CHRIST: by the word which made althings; the Heaven was not
before the creation, the sea was not, the earth was not: but He spoke, and they
were made, He commanded and they were created: so I answer you, before the
Consecration this was not the Body of Christ: but after Consecration J say to
you that it is the Body of JESUS: JESUS has spoke the words.

In Africa they Spoke as they did in Italy, because they had there the same
faith, which made S. Cyprian or the Author of the supper of our Lord to say,
the bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples being changed, not in
appearance, but in nature, was made flesh by the omnipotency of the Word.

In fine great S. Augustine in a sermon upon the Title of the 33: Psalm
admiring these words And He was carried in his own hands said, this cannot be
understood of David nor of any other than of Jesus CHRIST: for who is he that
can carry himself in his hands? But JESUS CHRIST carried himself in his hand
when He said to his Disciples, take, eat, This is my Body.

If you will weigh with me the circumstances of the Institution of this
Sacrament, you will have no difficulty to embrace the faith of these holy
Doctors: and you will see the great injury they do our Lord who say, that He
gave to his Disciples, but only bread as the figure and the memory of his Body.

4. Let us consider first, who He is that says these words: This in my Body:
It Is the Son of God, who is all Power, ^isdom, Goodness; We may well comtemplate
in Him these Perfections since He himself considers them to accomplish this
Mystery. It Is S. John that says it: JESUS knowing that the Father gave athings
into his hands: John. 13.
that He came from God, and goes to God: whereas he had loved his that were in
the world, unto the end He loved them. JESUS in the last supper considers that
his Father gave althings into his hands, that He had an infinite power, and
nothing was impossible to Him. He considers that He came from God: that He is
the increated Wisdom produced by the Father by way of understanding and
knowledge. He considers that He had excessively loved men making himself man for
them: that it was the property of his infinite Goodness to Communicate it self
to them more and more, and to love them unto the end; Ought He to consider all
these things, to give them a morcel of bread? And is this a Donary beseeming
such a Donor?

In the second place, to whom does He speak, Saying. This is my Body? To his
beloved Disciples, to whom He had said, I will not call you servants but my
friends, because I have made known to you all that I have received from my
Father. He speaks to his Apostles, to whom He was accu^^omed to speak clearly,
without Parable or figure: or if He proposed any to them, He explicated the
same presently: He said to them, You have the privilege to know the secrets of
the kingdom of God, but to the rest I propose them in Parables, He speaks to
his Ambassadors, whom He sends to instruct the world? Is it not to Ambassadors
that a King is wont to discover his designs, to open the secrets of his heart,
to give particular Instructions, that they may negotiate the better his
affairs? And JESUS saying that. He gives his body, saying it I say, to his
Friends, Apostles, Ambassadors, shall He ^ave deceived them, and instead of his
precious Body, shall He have given them a morcel of bread?

Let us Consider in the third place, the Circumstance of Time; He eats first
the Paschal Lamb with them; and afterward to mount up to a higher Mystery, to
pass from the figure to the reality, from the image to the verity. from the
promise to the accomplishment, and from the shadow to the Body: He gives them
his precious Body: If the bread that He gave them were not his Body, but a
figure only, it would be in vain that He gave it: it would be an unprofitable
and superfluous repetition, not of word, but deed: since the Paschal Lamb was a
figure more express, more distinct, and more significant of his Body, than a
morcel of bread.

In giving it to them He said* with desire I have desired to eat this Pasche
with you before I suffer. This desire was not only to eat the Paschal Lamb
with his Disciples, since He had eaten it so often with them, and that He had
had this desire lo long; with desire I have desired, says He, that is J have
long since vehemently desired; and this desire of JESUS, this great desire of
JESUS, this desire which the amorous heart of JESUS has had so long, shall it
not have had for object but to eat with his Apostles a morcel of bread?

He said before I suffer: and S. Paul, in which night He was betrayed: 1. Cor.
11. 23.
to make us know, that being near his death, He made his Will and Testament,
and He declares it in express words: This Chalice is the new Testament in my
blood. A wise man, who loves his children, making his Will, speaks as clearly
as he can: if any one makes it in doubtful and ambiguous words: it is because he
is little intelligent in affairs: or will leave suits, not goods to his heirs;
if my Father had left me a house, and you would contest with me saying, it is a
paper or painted house he means: what Judge would hear you? what impartial
Arbiter would not condemn you: would you not injure me, and yet more my father?
if he had meant a paper house, would he not have declared his intention? JESUS
our celestial Father makes his Testament, He declares his last Will, He says
that He leaves me his precious Body: and you say it is not his true Body, it is a
figure of his Body; go you are a mocker: if it was not but his figure would He
not have said so as well as you? would He have said This is my Body, instead of
saying this is my figure?

He is upon his departure in his last supper: He goes to death and afterward to
the imperial heaven; when a loving husband is upon his deathbed, or bids
farewell to his dear spouse for a journey somewhat long: is it not then that he
opens his heart to her, and discovers to her his secrets? is it not then that
he speaks to her without ambiguitie? that he gives her testimonies of his
greatest affection, and leaves her the more precious presents? And JESUS being
in the vigill of his death: giving his farewell to the Church his Spouse, and
depriving her of his Visible presence, shall He have spoken obscurely and
equivocally to her? shall He shall He have deceived her in a matter of so great
importance, and for all nuptial presents, for the gage of his amity, for the
testimony of his tender affections, for a supplement of his absence, shall He
have left her only a morcell of bread?

The manner also in which He accomplishes this Mystery ought to be considered;
if this be but a morcel of bread; Why promises He it so long before; why speaks
He of it with so much pomp? Why praises He the effects and necessity of it so
much? Why prefers He it before the Manna? the bread which I will give you is my
flesh; he that shall eat of this bread has everlasting life; If you eat not
my flesh you shall not have life in in you; This is not as the manna your
fathers have eaten; If that which He gives is but a mite of bread: the manna
was to be preferred before it; It was the figure of the Body of JESUS CHRIST, as
well as Calvin's bread, and much more express; for it was moulded^ by hands of
Angels: the bread of Calvinists by the hands of men: that came from heaven:
and their bread from a bakers oven; that had all sorts of tastes: their bread
has but one.

After He had promised it so long time, and so solemnly, He gives it; but
washes first the feet of his Disciples: He makes them a long and sublime
sermon: He recommends to them purity and charity: He makes to his Father a
very long prayer, and if all this tended but to give them a piece of bread, I
make you judge.

5. Let us consult moreover the practice and the Piety of the primitive
Christians, and we shall see that their faith, and the religious S. Ambr. lib.
3. de Spirit. Sto. c. 12 S. Crysos. hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor. Et in orat. de
Philogonio.
Ceremonies which they practiced in respect of the Eucharist werevery contrary
to the error of the Calvinists; they adored the holy Sacrament upon the Altar,
with the worship of Latria which cannot be given but to God only; we adore the
flesh of CHRIST yet this day in the sacred Mysteries says S. Ambrose. S.
Augustine upon these words of the Psalm, Adore his footstool said, Christ has
given us his flesh to eat, but nobody eats this flesh, but after that he has
adored it. S. Chrysostom, Let us imitate at least the Mages, who seeing Christ
but in a manger, adored Him with great fear: and you see Him, not in a manger,
but upon an altar.

6. They feared extremely to let fall upon the ground the least S. Aug. lib.
50. hom. hom. 26. Origin. hom 13. in Exodus
particle of the Eucharist, or one drop of the chalice, as S. Austin. and
Origin do testify.

They required not only purity of body, and sanctity of soul to touch, or
receive this Sacrament: but they demanded sancti^ie to see it and to look upon
it, as appears in the first epistle S. Chrysostom wrote ^o Pope Innocent,
where he complains that soldiers sent by his enemies, had entered in a
tumultuous manner into the Church: and he exagerats as a bold attempt, that
many of them who were not yet baptized, had seen the holy Hosts. They exposed
not, also to the Catechumens the secret of this Sacrament: it was the secret of
the Church, which was not revealed but to her Children: and it was a crime to
speak of it in the presence of Catechumens, or of Infidells; this is seen in
the epistle which the Synod of Allexandria wrote to the Catholic Bishops,
where the Council complains, that the Arians were not ashamed to speak of the
Mysteries in the presence of Catechumens, and what is wors before infidells.

7. Now I appeal to your consciences: if the Christians of the primitive
Church; did believe that the Eucharist is but a morcel of bread which minds us
of the body of JESUS: would they have adored it with supreme worship? would
they have thought it so great an incongruitie to let fall the least crum of it?
would they have required such purity of body and soul to receive it, to touch
it, or to hear, or speak of it?

8. All the Articles of our faith are equally true; but there are none of them
so express in scripture: none taught so clearly by the holy Fathers: less
opposed in primitive times: confirmed by so many miracles: received so
unversally in Europe: in Asia: and in Africa as this; For amongst all,
Catholics, Heretics, Schismatics: amongst Grecians, Latins, Hebrews,
Abyssins or Ethiopians which have been, and which are at present, Calvin only
with his Party has obstinately denied it. I leave you to think, with whom
you should choose to rise and appear at the day of judgment, either with S.
Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and all the other holy
Doctors of the east, west, south, and north, who flourished in the time when the
Church was in her greatest purity and vigor, or with Calvin, who came fifteen
hundred years after the institution of this Sacrament.

9. Follow the counsel which the holy Ghost gives you by the Wiseman, Ne
transgrediaris terminos antiquos quos posuerunt Patres tui, Pass not the
bounds which your Ancesters have put; hold the belief of those primitive
Christians and the doctrine of these holy Fathers, who were taught by the
Apostles, or by their Successors: who read the holy Scripture day and night:
who meditated upon it seriously: who were particularly assisted by the holy
Ghost to understand it well: who were desinteressed and free from passion; for
in effect, you are not more holy, nor more learned, nor wiser than S. Austin;
And hear what he said to a Pelagian Heretic: That which the Fathers believed I
belive: what lib. 1 contra Iul. c. 2. circ^ med.
they taught I teach: what they preached, I preach.

Follow the example of this great and holy Doctor if you be wise and careful
of your salvation: follow always Antiquity and Universality in your belief*
say with the whole College of the Apostles, I believe the holy and Universal
Church; And to all the reasons of humane Philosophy that Dissenters oppose,
Answer that S. Paul has said, Our faith ought not to be in the wisdom of men,
1. Cor. 2. 5.
but in the Power of God. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLV Of the Production, Reception and Operation of the Eucharist.
S Peter having in the first chapter of his first epistle taught us, that we
are born again by the seed of the word of God, bids us in the second, to desire
as new born children reasonable milk, that we may grow unto salvation. by which
words he does not only invite us to suck yet more the milk of saving Doctrine:
but moreover to the participation of the holy Eucharist, which here he also
signifys by milk. And in effect, there are three great conformities and
resemblances between the milk which a mother gives her child, and the adorable
Sacrament of the Altar: Conformity in the manner of their production:
conformity in the manner of their reception: Confirmitie in the manner of
their operation.

2. S. Austin in his frst sermon upon the Title of 33 Psalm brings this pat
comparison: Imagine that you enter into the house of a mother of many children:
Some of fifteen or Sixteen years of age: other but four or five months old; if
you ask her what will you do with that bread? It Is, she will say, for the
nourishment of my children. And of what children? of these great and little
ones. What, for the nourishment of these little ones? they have no teeth: how
will they eat that bread? Yes, that bread is for the nourishment of all my
children both great and little, but in diverse manners; the great shall eat it
in the form you see it; and because the little ones cannot eat it so: I will
concoct it in my stomach and change it into my blood; and because they would
have horror to take my blood in its own form, I will concoct it a second time,
by the heat of my heart in the limbick of my breast: where it will become, white
as snow, sweet as sugar, and liquid as wine. The Son of God in his Divinity is
living bread, enlivening bread, the bread of Angels; The Celestial Spirits do
not live, are not nourished, saciated, and happy but by seeing, loving,
possessing, enjoying God. men also ought to be nourished with the same food:
but in this mortal life, they are incapable to enjoy God in his proper form,
they cannot see him openly, and face to face; what has the Son of God don, who
compares himself in Scripture to a loving Mother? He incarnated this bread:
this divine Word incorporated himself, and took the form of flesh and blood.
And because men would have had fear and horror to eat his flesh and drink his
blood in the form He was: He concocted this Bread a second time in the breast
of this Sacrament, by the heat of his heart, by an ardent love He again
transformed this Word, and clothed himself with the species of bread and wine,
which are common and usual with us, to be the milk and nourishment of men, who
are his little children. And as a mother giving her breast to an infant
exposes herself to many importunities, incommodities and pinches which he
gives her; So our Savior shut his Eyes to many considerations of his glory,
and of his interest which might have hindered Him from instituting this
Sacrament; He exposed himself to a thousand affronts which He receives, and
will receive to the end of the world, from Heretics, bad Catholics, and
vicious Priests, that communicate in the state of sin; and though He be the
Sovereign Purity, the essential Sanctity who abhorrs sin infinitely: yet is
content to suffer all these injuries, rather than deprive his well beloved
children of the happiness of this breast.

3. Jn the second place, this Sacrament is compared to milk in the manner it is
to be received; It must be taken as children take the breast with faith, hunger,
and familiarity.

4. An infant takes the breast with shut eyes: he examins nothing, but sucks
the breast trusting to his mother* a Dissenrer proposes questions as the
Capharnaits: how can this man gives us his flesh Psalm. 130.
to eat? How can so great a body be contained in so little a Host? If I am not
humble, and if I exalt my Soul, I shall be like to an infant that is weaned from
the breast, said the royal Prophet. This happens to a Dissenter; he exalts his
Soul, thinking that he has much of knowledge and understanding: he examins the
power of the Omnipotent, and will find that to be impossible which our Savior
said: and he is weaned from this sacred breast. Catholics as humble, simple,
docible children, trust the Church their Mother, who neither can, nor would if
she could deceive them; they silence senses, and shut the eyes of fallible
reason, to open only those of infallible Faith.

5. They that have a lively faith of that which is contained in this Sacrament,
have a great appetite to it, an earnest desire of it, and therefore they reap
incredible fruits from it. The Virgin said in her canticle, God fills the
hungry with good things, Such as approach to him with a Spiritual greediness
and avidity. see, says S. Chrysostom, with what readiness a little infant
takes the teat, with what force he joins himself to the breast: you would think
that Hom 60. ad pop.
he would thrust himself into the breast of his mother: or that he would suck
out the heart and soul of his nource; and if he be one only day without this
refection, he is wholly unquiet, troublesome, and insupportable. Do the same,
says this holy Doctor: go to the Body of JESUS amorously, ardently; and
greedily, as if you would lodge your self in the sacred side of JESUS, unite
your self to Him, heart to heart, soul to soul, essence to essence, and
transform your self wholly unto Him: and when by your fault you are deprived of
this divine refection, be sorry and troubled, as having suffered a great loss.

6. And after you have had the happiness to receive, make good use of it. This
Sacrament has a permanent Being, and remains as long as the species in the
stomach, that JESUS may have leisure to convers with us, and we with Him. We
ought then to keep him company, to court and entertain him by acts of
adoration, gratitude, love, oblation of our selves, with resolution to serve
Him well; we must believe He coms to us full of good will for us: that He
desires nothing more than to fill us with goods, to embrace us, and to unite
himself to us for ever; we must cast our selves into his arms, as an infant
into his mothers, put into his hand with great confidence our affairs,
afflictions, salvation, and our family: o God! I trust in you: you are
infinitely good, you give your self to me, you will give surely that which is
much less.

7. The third conformity of the Eucharist with milk is in the manner of their
operation.

First this is proper to milk amongst other nourishments, that it is the whole
feast and the entire refection of the infant? it Satisfys hunger and thirst,
and serves him for meat and drink; And this is also proper to the Eucharist,
that in one only Species of it is contained the whole refection of the Soul:
you are as well communicated and spiritually fed in taking the Host alone, as
in receiving both Host and Chalice.

8. Here Dissenters think that they have a great advantage of us declaming
against our communion in one kind; But I see not how they can except against
it: For whatsoever the protestant people do in receiving of this Sacrament,
Catholics do or may do too, and what more ought to be don, the Catholic
Church does it, and the Protestants do it not. must one feed upon Christ
Crucified, by Faith; Catholics do it; must the Eucharist be taken in
remembrance of Him and his Death and Passion? they do it; must the people drink
wine out of a Cup? Catholic people do the like; and over and above this, they
communicate the very Body of their Redeemer, animated with his Soul, full of
blood, and hypostatically united to his Deity; this ought to be don, to the end
we may have life in us: and Dissenters do it not. But since they desist not to
cry out and say, that we deprive our people of the necessary means, which
Christ has left them for their Salvation: I must make you see, that the holy
Scripture, the Fathers and Antiquity do authorize our practice.

9. What pretend you in communicating? Is it not to have eternal life? you
will acquire right to it in receiving but the Host; for JESUS CHRIST said in
most clear words, He that eats John 6. 51. and 58. Aug. tr. 27. in Joan:
of this bread shall live for ever. And before the murmuration of the
Capharnaits, He spoke not of drinking his Blood, but of eating his Body only.
He spoke not then of drinking his Blood, but to answer to the gross thought of
the Capharnaits, and to tell them that they were not to eat his flesh
separated from his blood dead, cut, and mangled, as S. Austin says they
thought, but to eat his living Body full of blood. Nor did He command all men
to drink of the chalice or cup when He said in S. Matthew, Drink ye all of
this: For these words were not spoken to all men: nor to all the Faithful: But
to all the Apostles, and to them all only: which is manifest out of the text it
self; for what S. Matthew says was commanded to all, S. Mark relates to have
been answerably performed by all: they drank all thereof; the second all is
restrained to all the Apostles, to whom only He spoke these words, as also the
other before and after, and who were then made Priests; what reason then is
there to extend the former words farther then the Apostles? Christ himself gave
most S. Luke 24.
probably the Eucharist under one only species to the Disciples that went to
Emaus: for He vanished, says S. Luke. as soon as they knew Him in breaking of
the bread; which S. Hierome, S. Austin, 5. Hier. in Fp. Paulae ad Eusto. S.
Aug. lib. 3. de consen. Evang. c. 25. Et Ep. 59. ad Paulinum
S. Paulinus, V. Bid and other Doctors do understand, and also prove to have
been the holy Eucharist. And it is evident in S. Ambrose, in Eusebius, in S.
Cyprian, and in Tertullian, that the primitive Church which would do nothing
against the express command of Christ, did give it often to the faithful: did
carry it in journeys: did send it to the absent, and to the sick in one only
kind or species; and therefore they also held it to be, as milk, a whole, and
entire refection.

9. Milk is given to an infant to nourish and make him grow; and the Eucharist
was instituted to make the children of the Church to increase and thrive in
Christian perfection; and therefore it is institituted under the species of
bread, which nourishes, fortifys, and causes grows. S. Ambr. orat. de fratre
suo Satyro. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 36. S. Cyprian de lapsis. Tertull. lib. 2. ad
uxor.


10. Milk has this property that it communicates often to infants the humors,
and the complexion of the Nource; when the Poets describe a cruel man, they are
not content to say, a rock has brought him forth: but they add, that Tygars
have given him suck. And the holy Canons counsel mothers to nourse their own
Children as much as may be, for fear that giving them to vicious persons, they
suck with milk* the ill humors of the nources; The Son of God is not content
to bring us forth in Baptism: He himself gives the breast: He nourishes us with
his own flesh, that He may communicate his own inclinations to us. He after
communion said to his Disciples, That the world may know I love my Father, rise
let us go, to suffer for his glory; So after communion we must examine our
selves: what service can I render to God? what can I do that may conduce to his
honor? what is that in me or mine that displeases him, and which I may correct?
if we use so this precious milk, it will make us grow in perfection: it will
make us like to Him, who nourishes us with his own substance: it will give us
his complexion and resemblance: and if we resemble Him on earth in the life of
grace, we shall resemble Him in heaven in the life of glory. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLVI. Of the Eucharist as a Sacrifice.
SAcrifice is a worship so noble, and so proper to the Almighty, as none either
in heaven or in earth may partake with him in it; So due to him, and so
necessary for men, that every Law and Religion has been still anexed with a
correspondent Sacrifice; and Christians have all the reasons to honor God by
it, the Jews, and those of the Law of nature ever had. We are an externe and
visible Congregation as they were; We have the passion of the Messiah to be
represented before our eyes now with us past, as with them it was to come; we
have the same God with the same worship to be honored: for received benefits
to be praised: for our sins to be appeased: for favors to be invocated.

2. Wherefore God promised us a Sacrifice by his Prophet Malachias: Malac. 1.
10.
where rejecting the ancient Sacrifices, and speaking of the future time as
present according to custom of the Prophets, said, From the rising of the sun,
even to the going down, great is my Name amongst the gentills, and in every
place is Sacrificed, and offered to my name a clean Oblation. He speaks not of
the improper Sacrifice of contrition, and other good works, which according to
Calvin and others are unclean; nor of the Sacrifice of the Cross, which was
of^er'd but in one place, and but once; and therefore the prophecy is not
verifyd, but in the Eucharist: which is a true and proper Sacrifice, since
there is ef^usion, or oblation of blood for remission of sins; This is the
Chalice in my blood which is shed for you. A clean Sacrifice: the Body and
Blood of JESUS; Offered in all times and places, by virtue of these words of
CHRIST: Do this in commemoration of me.

And in effect, the Apostles did so, as it appears in the Acts; whilst they
were ministering to our Lord Says S. Luke, the holy Ghost said, separate me Paul
and Barnabas; that is, whilst they were sacrificing, for so the greek does
signify, and so Erasmus does translate.

The same has been practiced by their Successors ever since as Controvertists
clearly show out of the holy Fathers. I will give you the words of three or
four, who lived during the times of the four first General Councills, that you
may see the belief and practice of those golden ages.

S. Ambrose upon the 38th. Psalm says, Though CHRIST Sc Ambr. in Psalm. 38.
is not seen to offer now, yet He himself is offered upon earth: Nay He himself
is manifested to offer in us, whose speech does sanctify the Sacrifice which is
offered.

S. Austin: Since we see this Sacrifice, foretold by Malachias, Aug lib. 18.
de civit: Dei c. 35
offered to God in every place by the Priesthood of CHRIST according to the
order of Melchisa^eck, and the Jews Sacrifice to cease, why do they yet expect
another CHRIST.

S. Chrysostom the Oracle of the greek and eastern Church said, Because this
Sacrifice is offered in many places, are there many Christ's? No: for as He who
is offered every where, is one body, and not many bodies, so the Sacrifice is
but one. Chrysostom. hom 17. in ep. ad Heb. Nice. 1. can. 18.


In fine the first most general Nicene Council complaining that in some
particular Churches Deacons gave communion to Priests, made this Convincing
determination. Neither Rule nor Custom has delivered, that they who offer
not, present the Body of CHRIST to them that offer. By which words it is evident
the Fathers of this great Council believed, the Eucharist was not only a
Sacrament, containing really the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST: But moreover a
true and proper Sacrifice offered by Priests.

3. Would it not now grieve a Christian heart to see poor Catholics of
England, so miserably harrassed, pillaged, emprisoned, hated, hanged by their
own Allies and countrymen as they have been now a hundred years, for the
profession of that great work of Christianity which Christ and his Apostles
taught them; and that they should undergo the same disgrace and ruin by such
as call themselves Christians, yea the only pure ones, for that very self same
act of Religion, for which both the Apostles themselves and all primitive
Christians were so cruelly persecuted by Jew and Pagan. But the God of mercies
look in his good time upon our Persecutors favorably: because they do it
ignorantly and in incredulity: and because they are the far greater Sufferers,
being deprived of a Sacrifice so acceptable and glorious to God, and so
profitable and necessary to men.

4. If we consider Him who offers; what He offers: and the manner in which he
offers: we shall see that it is a Sacrifice exceedingly glorious and pleasing to
God. For in this oblation the principal Offerer and Sacrificer is JESUS CHRIST,
the object of his Fathers complacence, and the subject of his most tender
loves, who is equal to him in Greatness to whom He Sacrifices; You are a a
Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedeck Psalm. 109 Heb. 5. 6. Gen
14. 18.
says the Royal Prophet, and S. Paul speaking of our Savior: because He offers
continually by Priests unbloody Sacrifice, under the species and forms of
bread and wine: which were the offerings of Melchisedeck. The Priest is but his
instrument and Minister: when he says, This is my Body: it is evident, that the
Priest Speaks not of his own body, but of that of JESUS CHRIST; and seeing he
says not, This is the body of JESUS CHRIST, But, this is my Body: it is clear by
this, that it is not properly he that speaks, but it is JESUS that speaks by his
mouth, who of the things proposed makes his Body and Blood, says S.
Chriysostom. Hom. de Tradit: Iudae,


5. That which he offers is not dead and corruptible flesh of Lambs or other
things, as the ancient Sacrifices, which were not pleasing to God in
themselves, nor in their substance, as too base to be the objects of his
delights: but only pleased Him, as they were figures, shadows, and
representations of the Victime of this Sacrifice, which is the precious flesh
of the man-God, Deifyd flesh, living, and enlivening, holy and Sanctifying
flesh: flesh united to the Divinity, subsisting with the Divine nature in the
Person of the Word.

6. The manner in which He offers it is admirable, and gives to God the
greatest Glory; It is offered as a most perfect holocaust: since in this
Sacrifice God is perfectly honored as the Sovereign Author of all Being; for
the man-God losing in honor of his Father the Sacramental Being which He has
here, shows that God produced Him: has right to destroy Him: and suffers no
loss in his destruction.

He honors the justice of his Father, in that He avows He has deserved death,
and annihilation for the sins of men, for whom He made himself a Propitiatour.

He honors his mercy, in that He transferred upon his innocent son the debts of
criminal servants; and in that He accepts the sacrifice of his precious Body,
and mystical effusion of his Blood, instead of the true and real death that we
deserve.

He honors Him as the last end: for losing the Being which He has here, to
honor Him: He shows, that he holds it for the greatest happiness and felicity,
if his Father thinks it fit, to be annihilated for his service.

7. This august Sacrifice being so glorious, and pleasing to God cannot fail to
be extremely profitable and advantageous to men. It Is a magasin of Spiritual
treasures, which furnishes us where with to satisfy the great abligations we
have to God; it is a most powerful means to obtain of him all favors
necessary for our souls and bodies: It Is a Host of praise, and an Eucharisticall
Sacrifice: It Is an impetratory Host, and propitiatory Oblation. Isaiah said, if
one should make a fire with all the wood of mount Libanus: Isay. 46. 16.
and should burn in Sacrifice all the beasts that feed on it in acknowledgment
of Gods Benefits, all that would not be enough; He said true: but he said not
all: for we may add, if we should make a fire with all the fuel in the world:
and all men and Angels should be therein consumed for the honor of God. all
that would not suffice to acknowledge worthily the favors He has don us.

But when we offer to God the precious Body of his Son: we render him that
which does counterpoise all Benefits He has don not only to poor sinners upon
Earth: but moreover to Saints in Heaven.

8. This Host of praise being presented to God in thanksgiving for favors,
obtaines other: If you shall ask, says our Savior any John 16 23.
thing of my Father in my name, He will give it you; We cannot better ask of
God any favor in the name of JESUS, then having Him with us, upon our Altars,
in our hands, and within us; The Clemency of God will have regard to the love
He has for Him: to the sacred Oblation you present to him: and harken to the
petitions you make by him.

Have you much offended God, deserved his justice and his anger? Do you fear
the effects of his vengeance? Dare you not appear in his presence by reason of
the enormity of your crimes? Take into your company the Heir of heaven, the
beloved of the eternal Father: assist at Mass devoutly: offer to the Father the
precious Body which is there Sacrificed, the blood which there is poured forth,
the Passion which there is represented: and you will appease his anger, and He
will harken to your requests; For it was for this chiefly that Christ
instituted this Sacrifice, to be the sacred Victime which appeases the wrath of
God, as he declares in Saint Luke. when you are in the state of sin, if mass be
said, S. Luke 22. 20.
for you, or if you assist at it, this obtaines of God actual graces, lights,
and good motions, to enter into your selves, to quit the sin, and to convert
your selves to God, if you resist not the Summons of his graces; when you are
in the state of grace, Part of the merits, sufferances, and satisfactions of
JESUS CHRIST, are applied to you, to acquit your debts, and to deminish the
pains due to your sins.

9 But suppose you are not indebred to the Justice of God: the poor souls in
Pu^gatory are: and you may help them much by making a mass to be said, or by
hearing one for them. For it is not in vain, says S. Chrysostom that the
Apostles ordained that in the dreadful Mysteries we make a memory of the dead;
for they knew, that by it arrived to them great benefit. And S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem, S. Chry. tom. 3 in Ep* ad Philip. S. Cyrill Catech. Mystag. 5 Paulo
ante medium. Aug. lib. 9. Confess. C 35.
we beseech God for the dead, believing the obsecration of that holy and
dreadful sacrifice which is put upon the Altar to be a great kelp to the
souls for which it is offered. Wherefore S. Augustine in his Confessions prays
God to inspite the Bishops and the Priests of his acquaintance to remember his
Father and Mother at the Altar.

10 Having then seen how acceptable and glorious this Sacrifice is to God: how
beneficial both to the living and the dead; fail not to assist at as many
masses as you may; hear them as devoutly as you can; Offer them in the first
place to God, to do homage to your Sovereign, to render him your respects and
humble submissions, to pay him the tribute of honor and service which you owe
him. Secondly; to thank him for an infinity of most great and inestimable
benefits, you have received from him: benefits in soul. benefits in body,
benefits of nature, grace, spiritual and temporal: Thirdly to appease Him, and
to ask pardon of Him for jnnumerable sins you have committed: and to gain his
favor, represent to Him the love which his Son had for Him, the zeal which He
had for his glory, the service He has don Him: offer and lay before Him, the
Mysteries of his Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision, his life, labors, and
Passion. this is that which S. Paul calls obsecrations.

Fourthy, beg light and guidance in your actions: succor and assistance in
temptations: love and grace to keep his commandments: and all that is
necessary, as well for the spiritual as the temporal; and you should do all
these duties not only for your family, but also for others. If you assist at
mass so: you will not receive only the many and great advantages of it in this
life: but moreover reap the fruits of the Mysteries which the Mass represents
to you, and which glory discovers to the Blessed in the other. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLVII. OF THE THREE PARTS OF PENANCE.
1. AMongst many expressions which the holy Ghost uses in the scripture, to
make us conceive the malign and monstrous nature of sin, one of the most
natural, is the comparison of an impostume.

An impostume is a corruption of flesh and blood in our bodies, which makes a
stinking smell; sin is a corruption of reason, and of virtue in our souls,
which cause a stink unsupportable to God and his Angels; They are corrupted,
and made abominable says the Royal Prophet. All Surgeons will tell you, and
daily experience Psalm. 13. 1.
shows it, that to cu^e an impostume, three things are necessary. First, it
must be cut with a lancet; secondly the corruption must be forced out; in the
third place, it must be bound up, oils and unguents being applied to it. Such
like are the three parts of penance so often repeated, and so ill practiced;
Contrition is the cut of the lancet; Confession is that which brings out the
corruption; Satisfaction is the application of the unguents and binders. These
are the 3. Acts necessary to cure the spiritual, but horrible impostume of sin,
of which I shall treat in this Discourse; In which omitting the Questions of
Scholasticks I propose only Verities drawn out of Scripture, and Councills of
the Church.

2. First then it is certain, that it is absolutely necessary to repent after
sin: that without repentance, there is no pardon, no grace of God, no hope of
salvation, whatsoever Confession, or Satisfaction you do make: whatever
absolution is given you: Whatsoever indulgence or Iubily is granted you. If you
want this repentance, also without your fault: though also you think you have
it, if you have it not in effect, there is no Sacrament nor absolution
profitable. And certainly Absolution is not more efficacious: and requires not
less disposition than Baptism; But to receive profitably Baptism, if we be in
mortal sin, we must have sorrow for it; for in the second and third chapter of
the Acts, S. Peter having made a powerful predication, and his Auditors being
moved, inquired of him: what ought we to do, to obtain pardon of our sins? He
answered, do Penance, and receive Baptism.

The Council of Trent assures us, that penance has been in all times
necessary, to obtain pardon of sins. And this is so certain that Divines
conclude, that a Martyr, a man that goes to suffer death for the Faith of JESUS
CHRIST, if he remember that he is in mortal sin, is obliged to make a formal
and express Act of penance: and that in defect of it his Martyrdom will avail
him nothing. With more reason this formal act of penance is absolutely
necessary to receive absolution; For the councills declare that the Acts of the
Penitent are the matter of this Sacrament, without which the Sacrament subsists
not, and is null; and amongst these acts, the first, the principal, and most
essential is repentance. And hence it coms, that it is a great Sin, and
Sacriledg to confess without sorrow, though you have but venial sins: it would
be much better, if you have no other, to say our Lords prayer, and to
communicate without confession, than to confess without repentance.

3. Now since it is not so easy to have in your heart true sorrow and regret
for daily defects, and a sincere and effective purpose to amend these venial
sins: take this counsel, worthy to be put in practice; if you have but these
lesser sins, add to the end of your confession some great sin of your past
life, for which you have more sorrow and repentance; in this case the
absolution will fall upon that sin, not upon the venial sins, of which you have
no sorrow, or true purpose of amendment.

4. Secondly the Council of Trent does teach us that this imperfect sorrow
which is called Attrition ought to be supernatural, it must be a gift of God,
and a motion of the holy Ghost And in the first Canon of the sixth session, they
pronounce Anathema against all that shall dare say, a man without the prevening
inspira ration of the holy Ghost; can believe, hope, love, and repent as be
ought, to receive the grace of justification.

5. This Doctrine condemns the practice of those, Who use great diligence in
examining their conscience: but little or none, in procuring covenient sorrow;
That is good and necessary: but This is the more important; if you fail in that
a little, a good confessor may supply by asking and examining you; but if you
have not this: none can give it you: it belongs to God only to bestow it on
you: and you ought to employ time, care, affection, and fervor to obtain it.

6. In the third place, the Council declares, that supernatural Attrition, ss.
14. c. 4.
leaves us in the state of sin, if it be not actually followed by the
absolution of a Priest. If you are surprised by the Article of death in the
state of mortal sin, having Attrition only, it avails you nothing to use all
diligence to have one, if in effect he coms not and absolves you; dying you are
lost: doubt not of it, for it is on Article of Faith. You will say: God never
obliges to a thing impossible: shall I be damned for want of absolution, since
it was not my fault, having used all possible means to have it? I answer: you
shall not be damned for any sin you commit, in that you are deprived of
absolution: but you shall be, for the precedent sin, of which you cannot have a
remedy, but by perfect Contrition, or by Attrition with absolution.

And this is not only the doctrine of the Council of Trent, and present Church:
it was the belief of the primitive Christians: as may be seen in the 180.
Epistle of S Augustine.

7. But to receive this necessary Absolution and cure from your spiritual
Physician, you must open your infirmity to him; when you have lanced your heart
with sharp Contrition or Attrition: you must make all the corruption of mortal
sins issue out of it, by an entire Confession.

8. Some say: It Is not necessary to confess all to a Sinner: it is impossible to
declare this sin: but I will have true repentance of it, give alms, and do
great penances, and God will pardon me.

Deceive not your selves: God will not be a liar, to be merciful S. John. 22.
to you; He said to Priests, whose sins you shall remit, are remitted: And whose
you shall retain are retained. The sins which you know you have committed, and
declare not to a Priest, are not remitted by him; and if he remits them not,
they are retained, and God will never pardon them. This has ever been the
sense of the Universal Church; She always understood, that in those words of
JESUS CHRIST, which contain the institution of this Sacrament, was instituted
also and commanded an entire confession of mortal sins, as the Council of
Trent declared. Wherefore S. Austin preaching to sinners said, flatter not your
selves, ss. 14. c. 5 S. Aug. hom. 49. ex. 50.
Say not I confess in my heart, I confess to God; this is not enough: for so in
vain the Son of God would have said to Priests: All that you shall unbind on
earth shall be unbound in heaven. And in effect, who would go to Priests, if by
confessing to God alone they could obtain remission? And again, Be thou
sorrowful before Confession: Confess, let all the matter and putrefaction run
out in Confession: now exult, and rejoice, that which remains, will easily be
heald.

9. By this we may understand; why so many confess, and so few are amended: why
so many receive this Sacrament, and so few profit by it? One great reason is,
that many make not a true, perfect, and entire Confession. This defect hinders
the operation of so great a Cause, and makes the Sacrament invalid or
unprofitable. It happens either through negligence, ignorance, or shame.

8. First through negligence; They examine, and Confess only the actions which
they have don, and not those which they ought to do, and have not don; they
confess the sins of their person: and not those of their condition: sins which
they committed: and not those which others committed by their occasion.

9. Secondly, through Ignorance: For they must not think to be excused saying,
I have not confessed such sins; because I thought not to do ill; if you omit any
sin through gross ignocance, or through culpable blindness, God says to you in
the scripture, If you know not, you shall not be known. Because thou have 1. Cor.
14. 38. Osee, 4. 6.
repelled knowledge, I will repel thee. If this ignorance or blindness be in
you because you pray not God enough to enlighten you, and make you know what
displeases him; or because you have thrust your self into an office, of which
you are incapable: or because you hear not sermons, nor read good books, which
may instruct you: nor desire that any one should tell you your faults, you are
not excused in the sight of God, for not confessing them.

10. Thirdly through shame; which makes us to conceal voluntarily some sin,
most perniciously, and criminally: This want of integrity is pernicious: since
the Wiseman says, He that hides Prove. 28. 13.
his sin cannot be corrected, nor directed in the way of Salvation. How can a
Physician cure an infirmity hidden and unknown? and how can the infirm be
directed in the way of health, when he has not yet begun the way? For the
beginning of a good life is a confession of the evil, says S. Austin.

It is likewise most criminal: for it is not only in its self a great crime: but
makes you to commit many other Sacriledges afterward in Confessions:
Sacriledges in communions: and sins upon sins: which will cast you into
despair, and into the mouth of hell. But if you submit to the humiliation and
shame which you have merited, and confess entirely: you rejoice the the
Angels, and your Confessors with them: you please the Son of God, who desires
nothing more, than to pardon those, who being penitent confess perfectly their
sins.

11. Let us com to Satisfaction, which is the third part of penance, and
necessary to satisfy the justice of God, and to complete the cure of our souls.
For true penance is not that which the Calvinists do say; perfect penance is
not only that, which many Catholics do think. Calvinists say, that to do
penance is to leave sinning and to amend ones life. This is necessary: but it
suffices not. many Catholics think, to do penance, is to be sorrowful for
sins, to confess them to a Priest, receive absolution, and to say a few
prayers; All this is necessary: but it is not enough. To do entire and perfect
Penance, which appeases God, averts his anger, regains his favors, and
delivers us from the dreadful effects of sin: we must satisfy the justice of
God, by humble and fervent prayers, by austerities and painful works,
according to the multitude, enormity and diversity of our offenses. For as
often as the holy scripture speaks of penance, it makes mention of works which
afflict the flesh, mortify sensuality, and which are contrary to self love. In
Joel, Convert your selves to me in fasting, and in weeping, and in Joel. 2. 12.
Matt. 11. 2. Cor. 7. 11. S. Aug. lib. 50. hom hom. ult. C. ult.
mourning. In S. Matthew: If in Tire and Sydon had been wrought the miracles
that have been wrought in you, they had don penance in hairecloth and in ashes
long ago. And S. Paul says, The sorrow which is according to God, works in us
reveng: by which we punish sin in our own selves. Wherefore S. Austin tells us,
That it is not enough to change the evil life into a better, and to depart from
past sins, if we do not satisfy God, by the regrets of penance, by humble
groans, by fasts, and by Alms.

12. The primitive Christians were so firmly persuaded of this Verity, that to
avoid the Vengeance of God, and to satisfy his Justice, they willingly
submitted to public Penance: in which they endured so many humiliations,
mortifications, and confusions that it would seem incredible, were it not
attested by so great authority, that we may not doubt of it.

13. I know well, that those rigorous observances are not now in use;
nevertheless they show what was the sentiment of those great Saints, who were
the Disciples of the Apostles, or the Disciples of their Disciples: who had the
spirit of God: who read the Scriptures day and night: who propagated the Church
and watered it with their sweat and bood. Those observances make known, that
it is not so easy to appease God, and to obtain full pardon, as we imagine: and
that we we must employ ordinarily more than one hour, one day, or week, to
regaine his ancient favors, and what we lost by sin.

14. And to know that the present Church retains the Spirit of the primitive:
read the Council of Trent, and you will see the Fathers Ss. 24, de Refor c. 8.
order public penance to be imposed for public crimes, if the Bishops
dispense not with it. And in the 14th. ss. chap. 8. they declare to Priests if
through timerousness, or too much condescendence, and humane respects, they
give little penance for great crimes, they make themselves partakers of the
sins of others. See if we are not in great danger, and if we have not great
reason to fear, that we shall fall into the dreadful hands of God? What
quarrels, what drunkennesses, what scandals are committed daily? And what
great penances are imposed for so many, so great, and enormous Crimes?

15. But behold a doctrine of great Consolation, which the Council of Trent
does teach us. It Is that we may Satisfy the divine justice, not only by the
penances which the Confessor imposes: Ss. 14. C. 9
not only by the prayers, fasts, alms, austerities, and mortifications which we
assume voluntarily of our selves: but moreover by all the humiliations and
aflictions that befall us, if we receive them as we ought. When then God
vouchsafes to send you Crosses and afflictions: receive them, not only with
patience and resignation, but with joy and thankfullness: kiss the hand that
chastises you: and adore the Justice that punishes you in this world to spare
you in the other. Say with the Prophet Micheas* Iram Domini portabo quoniam
peccavi ei. I will suffer the anger of God, Micheas C. 7. 9.
I will endure willingly this affliction: I will pardon them that afflict me,
for the love of God, and for penance for my sins, since I have been So rash as
to offend Him.

16. Let us conclude this Discour^ with the words of the beloved Disciple: Haec
Scribo vobis ut non peccetis; Be very careful that you offend not God: it is
the greatest evil that can befall you; as often as you consent to a mortal
sin, you put your self in danger of damnation; for you may die in this state
without absolution. You imagine that in this occasion you are secure of your
salvation, provided that you have time to say, my God I ask you pardon! you
deceive your self; for if you cannot have a Priest: you must necessarily have
perfect contrition: and this is most hard and rare; And if you have a Priest,
it helps you nothing without Attrition: and you cannot have Attrition of your
self: it is necessary that God do give it you by his powerful grace: and He
owes you not this grace: you have demerited it by your sin: He has not
promised it to you: and has refused it to many.

But if by humane frailty you have sinned, and averted your self from God: beg
instantly and humbly his grace through the merits of JESUS CHRIST to return to
Him by a true Conversion; Return by true sorrow for having offended a most
adorable, most amiable, and most dreadful Majesty; Return by an humble,
sincere, and entire confession; Return by a satisfaction of Prayers Fasts, and
Alms; you will be delivered from a most dangerous malady: from a most infamous
servitude: from the sentence of eternal death. You will recover sanctifying
grace: the gifts of the holy Ghost: the merits of your goods works; the Angels
will rejoice upon it in heaven: the Faithful will be edifyd upon earth:
Devils will rage for envy in hell. The eternal Father will adopt you for his
child: the Son will make you one of his members: the holy Ghost will dwell in
you as in his Temple; The B. Trinity will adorn you with a triple Crown: they
will make you happy by Beatifical Vision, by perfect Fruition, and by
possession of eternal Goods Amen.

DISCOURSE XLVIII. of Purgatory
1. Though there be but one only Church in the world; yet this may be divided
into three Parts or Orders, which according to their diverse conditions, bear
different names and Titles. That which reigns with God in Heaven, and happily
passed from the Combat to the Victory, and from Victory to Triumph, is called
the Tryumphant Church. That which fights yet upon Earth, and environed with
Devils and with Sinners, labors to vanquish the one, and to convert the
other, is called Militant; And that which Expiates its sins in the flames of
Purgatory, and satisfys the justice of God by the greatness of its pains, is
called Suffrante. Of this I shall now treat; and that the Living and the Dead
may reap profit by this Discourse: I divide it into two Parts. In the first I
will show that there is a Purgatory in which souls do suffer. In the second, we
will see, by what means we may and ought to help those poor souls.

2. Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur; Blessed are they who dye in our Lord:
who die so perfect in Faith and Charity: who depart Apoc. 14. 13.
hence so purged by true and entire Penance, that they are free from all spot
of sin: and not liable to any punishment due to it; But they that are not so
pure and clean, as so many are not, must necessarily feel the severity of Gods
justice, which leaves no sin unpunished, and must be purged, before they can be
blessed: as Scriptures, Fathers, and reason make evident to every vnbyassed
understanding.

In the second Book of the Machabees we read, that Judas Machabeus that valiant
Champion, who was high Priest or chief Bishop of the Church, and Defender of
the true Faith and Religion sent 12. thousand Drachmes to Jerusalem that
sacrifice might be offered for the Dead; And the Author of the book concludes

It is a holy and salutary cogitation to pray for the dead that they may be
delivered from their sins. And this was the general practice of the Church, as
appears by their set form of Office for the Dead in their book Mahzor,
translated and set forth by Bishop Genebrard. Munster. and Fagius in Annot.
upon. 14. of Deuteronomy Whitaker lib. 1. cont Dureum for 81. 1. Ep. c. 4.
This custom is yet observed by the Jews: which is so evident, that
Protestants themselves confess it.

S. Peter in the new Testament furnishes us with a strong proof of Purgatory in
the third chapter of his first Epistle: He teaches us, that the Son of God
descended, and Preached to them that were in prison, who had been incredulous
sometime in the days of Noah. This passage connot be applyd to the Fathers that
were detained in Limbo. nor to the damned that were locked up in hell. For the
first never were incrudulous, as were those to whom the Son of God did speak.
The second deserved not that JESUS CHRIST should preach, or Evangelize as the
text says good news to them, or should mitigate their torments by the happiness
of his presence: Since according to the Scripture, in hell there is no
redemption. It remains then that He speaks of the Souls in Purgatory, and of
those particularly, that gave not credit to the preaching of Noah: who
nevertheless being moved by the deluge, and by the present peril, called upon
God, and converted themselves to him by penance; But to Expiate the pains due
to their sins, were doomed to prison, and to punishment until the coming of
the Redeemer: who preached to them the grace of Redemption: drew them out of
prison, and led them with Him into Heaven.

S, Paul says, That he who upon the foundation of faith makes a building 1.
cor. 3. 12.
of Gold, silver, and precious stones, That is, of solid and perfect virtues,
He shall receive reward; but he that has made a building of wood, hay, stubble,
that is of imperfections or venial sins, Aug. in Psalm. 37. Psalm. 6,
shall be saved, but by fire, S. Austin explicates of Purgatory this text, and
cites moreover to the same purpose these words of David; Lord reprove me not in
your fury, and correct me not in your anger. Lord, says David, according to the
explication of Saint Austin, permit me not to be of the number of those, to
whom you will say, Go ye accursed into Eternal fire: and purify me in this life
so, that I may not need to be purged by the fire that corrects those lib. de
Monog: c. 10.
who shall be saved. Tertullian in the second age of the Church speaking of the
devotions of Widows of his time, says, that every year on the anniversary of
their husbands death, they made offerings for them, and that they prayed God to
give them refreshment; they believed then that they were in pains. We might
allege many other ancient Fathers; But there is no need to cite them, since
lib. 3. Institut c. 5. n. 10.
Calvin himself confesses, that the holy Fathers who lived a 1300 years before
his time prayed for the Dead: and that which he answers to this is, the ancient
Fathers were men, who were deceived: as if he were an Angel or rather a God
that could not Err,

But if we should have nither Scripture nor Tradition for this Verity: yet
common sense would teach it. For let us suppose that there is a man, as there
may be, who having committed blasphemies murders, adulteries, and other sins in
great number, and being upon his deathbed, repents, converts himself to God,
and dies; whither shall his soul go? Not to hell; for God never reiects a
contrite and humbled heart: and He has promised mercy to all that shall convert
themselves by true and sincere penance. Shall he go strait to heaven, and as
strait as one that has served God well, and kept his commandments all his
life? what appearance of it? and where would be the verity of this word of S.
Paul a man shall reap that which he has sown. where would be Gal. 6. Psalm. 61
Romans 2. 6. Apoc. 22 Matt. 16.
the truth of this, which the Royal Prophet, the Apostle, the Evangelist, and
our Savior himself has said, God will render to every one according to his
works? We need not but consider what is God, and what is sin, to avow a
Purgatory in which an imperfect soul is purifyd before she may, or would be
pesented to God, who is Purity it self.

3. Wherefore a soul in Purgatory murmures not: she complains not of too much
rigor: on the contrary she embraces and suffers those torments voluntarily:
she knows how disagreable she is to the Sanctity and Purity of God: that she is
a debtour to his justice: and that she deserves those torments: she desires the
justice of God should have its course: and as she loves God more than her own
self: she is glad, the injury don to his Majesty is revenged, also at her own
cost; she will remain in that prison until her debt be entirely paid, either
by her own sufferances: or by the satisfactions and suffrages of others.

4. For we may aid those poor afflicted souls; they are in communion of
spiritual goods with us: they are members of the same mystical Body, children
of the same Church, Citizens of the same City; and there is such an union, such
a simpathy, and communication betwixt members of the same Body, children of the
same family, inhabitants of the same City, that we cauterize a member that is
well, to cure that which is ill: that the labor of a child of a family profits
his brother who labors not: that one citizen ss. 25. in Decret: de purg.
can pay debts and satisfy for another. We can then help these souls,
especially in three manners. First by Prayers, as the Council of Trent
declares. For a good and devout prayer, is not only meritorious to him that
makes it, but also impetratory and satisfactory for others.

Secondly, by the Sacrifice of Mass; for this is the most See Dis. XLVI. n. 9.
Tobie. 4. 18.
profitable suffrage, that can be offered to God for the help of the dead, as
not only the aforesaid Council, but also the Fathers of the primitive Church
declare.

Thirdly by Alms. Venerable Toby said to his son, Put your bread and wine upon
the Tomb of the just; because in that time the Poor assembled in Cemeterys or
Churchyards, and alms of bread and wine were given them, for the souls
departed; He sais, upon the Tomb of the just: because alms g^ven for souls that
are in hell, avail them not: but those that departed out of this world in the
state of grace they profit much. wherefore S. Austin reproved the avaricious,
who excused themselves from such alms, by the great Aug. lib de december cordis.
c. 12.
number of their children: when we said he, reprehend you for your avarice* you
say, that if you give not so much as you desire, it is because you have many
children: It is a falls pretense wherewith you mask your avarice. For if one of
your children dye, are you more charitable than you were? if you keep your
goods for them you would send a part to him: he has now more need of it then
ever. But if you have not means to give alms for the poor souls, succor them
by other works.

5. All virtuous actions don in the state of grace, and especially the
painful, if Offered for the dead, give them great refreshment. But those
confort them most, of which they are the Cause either by their instructions, or
by their good examples. For Divinity ^eaches us, that if we are the cause of
any good as often as it is don after our death, our accidental glory in heaven
is increased: and if we are in purgatory, our torments are diminished; as on
the contrary, our pains there are augmented, if any sin be committed by our
bad example.

6. Let us give ear then to the doleful lamentations of those poor souls who
implore our help; Meseremini mei Miseremini mei, Saltem vos amici mei; Have
pity on me, have pity on me, at least you who are my friends; she says twice,
Have pity on me; Have pity on me. Lest you increas my pains! Have pity on me,
to ease me in my sufferances? Have pity: Be touched with compassion of so great
miseries; For judgment without mercy shall be don to him who shall not S. James
2. 13.
have don mercy; But on what will you exercise mercy, but on misery; and what
greater misery then that of a poor creature, who owes very much, and is pursued
and pressed by a rigorous Justice, and has not wherewith to pay? What greater
misery then that of a poor soul, upon whom the revenging hand of the Omnipotent
is laid? then of a poor soul, in torments so Excessive, that if a dog should
be so tormented, it would move you to compassion?

Of me: a soul created to the image of God, redeemed by the precious blood of
JESUS, marked with his character: embellished with his graces: designed to his
glory; He will say in judgment: I have been thirsty, and you have given me
drink: I have been Matt, 25 35.
in prison, and you have visited me: I have been naked, and you have clothed
me: I have been a stranger, and you have received me into your house; You do
all these good works of charity, if you deliver a poor Soul out of Purgatory;
you are the cause that she is satiated with a torrent of pleasute; you redeem
her out of a very obscure and painful prison: you cloth her with the stole of
glory: and you make her to be received and lodged in heaven.

At least you: who are the cause, or occasion that this soul is in pain, have
pity on her: you have made her to offend God, by your impure words, by your bad
examples, or by your solicitations; having so great part in the debt, will you
not contribute to the satifaction?

At least you friends; what is become of the affection you testifyd to your
friend? where are the offers of service? where are the protestations so often
made that you would never abandon her? forget you her because she is separated
from you: and turn you your back to her when she has the greatest need of
Succor? It appears now that you were a friend of fortune only* and the
afliction of your friend, is the touchstone which shows the falness of your
friendship.

At least you my friends; your Ancestors have made themselves debtours to the
justice God by the sins which they committed to leave you goods; will you be so
ungrateful and so cruel as to refuse them a little part of them? you swim
in delights and they are in torments: you rest in feathers, and they lie in
flames: You complain not of a large refection you give to J know not whom and
you refuse your afflicted mother a little dinner which you might send her by
the poor. In fine, if you be so mercenary as to seek your interest in all your
actions: remember that these poot Souls are in the gtace of God: must go to
heaven: and you must one day succeed in their present place: and if you shall
deliver them, they will not be ungrateful. Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy; If you give an amls for a soul in Purgatory, you do at once
two works of mercy; corporal mercy to the poor in want: and Spiritual to the
soul in pains: you make the poor man your friend, and the poor soul your
debtour; when you depart out of this world, they will remember your courtesy:
will return you the like, and receive you into the eternal Tabernacles. Amen.

DISCOURSE XLIX. of Extreme Unction.
AN Ancient being asked, what is the touchstone of perfect amity? He answered
wisely, that it is adversity; a true friend does as the heart: inclines always
to the left side: and places more affection where he sees more affliction.
JESUS then loves us with a sincere and cordial love, since He instituted a
Sacrament expressly to comfort us, and to strengthen us in our last infirmity;
when honors, dignities, offices, and riches fail us.

Though this Verity be assured us both by the greek and Latin Church, as
appears by the general Council of Florence in the Instruction of the Armenians,
which was without contradiction admitted by the Grecians; Nevertheless,
Dissenters endeavor to take from us this signal demonstration of Christ's
Providence and love, and to deprive us of this powerful help in time of our
greatest need. Wherefore in the first place I will show yet farther, that it is
a true and proper Sacrament; in the second, the effects of it; and in the
third, the dispositions we ought to have to receive it.

2. To evince the first, I need no other proof then the clear words of S.
James: If any one be sick amongst you: let him bring in the Priests of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anoiling him James. 5. 4.
with oil in the name of our Lord. And the prayer of Faith shall save the sick:
and our Lord will alleviate him, and if he be in sins, they shall be remitted
him. Here we have all that Dissenters themselves require to the essence of a
Sacrament: to wit an exterior sign or symbol: a promise of Grace: and divine
institution; The exterior sign or Symbol, is Unction with oil and the
prayer of Faith: the promise, is Alleviation of the sick, and remission of
sins: and the institution thereof is gathered from the constant and firm
promise of the Apostle: for he would not have promised so confidently and
absolutely, had not our Lord instituted and commanded it. Innoc ^p. ad
Decentium c. 8.


Hence S. Innocent says expressy and clearly, that this Unction, is a
Sacrament. declared by S. James, and therefore not given to them that are yet
in penance, since the other Sacraments are refused them. This Testimony of
antiquity shall suffice, since the Epistle is certain: He an ancient, learned,
holy man, wonderfully commended by S. Austin, S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom,
and never reprehended by any of the Ancient for teaching the Unction of sick to
be a Sacrament. Wherefore the Magdeburgenses prove by this Testimony, that
Christians of the fifth age had a custom to annoint their Magd^bur. Cent. 5. c.
6 S. Aug. in speculo. et ser. 215* Cyrysost, lib. 3. de sacerd. Origin. hom Z.
^n Levit.
sick. But they did not hold it as a pious custom only, but as a necessary
duty: for S. Austine, S. Chysostome, Origin, and other Fathers expressly tell
us, that the words of S. James appertain to us: rhat Christians ought to do
now, and in all times, what this Apostle writes concerning the infirm; And you
will avow they had grear reason, if you consider with me the admirable and
saving effects of this Sacrament, which are naturally represented by the
effects of olive oil, and expressed by the words of the Apostle,

3. First he Says, the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick; This Sacrament saves
his soul, by giving grace and force to withstand the terrors and temptations
of the ennemie in the hour of death. For it is then he plays his planks and
applies all his forces to tempr us more furiously as the holy Fathers tell us;
because he sees his time is short: and that we are least able to resist, when
through the greatness of pains we can hardly lift up our minds to God.
Sometimes he sets upon us as a Lion, with violence: Othertimes as a Dragon,
laying snares to entrap us; he tempts us to infidelity, suggesting apparent
reasons against Faith: to Presumption, and to confidence in our selves: or to
despair and diffidence in the mercy of God: exagerating the rigor of his
justice: the grievousness and great number of our sins: the little or no
penance we have don: he tempts us to impatience in the rigor or length of the
disease: to murmuration against God: to fear and diffidence in his Providence,
It Is then that Friends should aid you powerfully by servent prayers; It Is then
that Confessors should assist, and especially the Poor; for their souls are at
least as dear and precious to JESUS as those of the Rich; the rich have
generally Domestics, or friends that can exhort them, and that have leisure to
help them to dye well; the Poor have them not, nor such provision of good
thoughts, instructions, and spiritual arms as the Rich, by the advantage of
their education and their 1. Pet. 5.
reading. The infernal woolf who roves about seeking whom he may devour, sleeps
not in this occasion: the Pastor then ought to be vigilant and present in a
time of so great importance; the gift of gifts: the grace of graces, the most
precious and desirable, is final perseverance; with out this grace, all the
other benefits serve for nothing. In effect what will it profit me to have been
created* redeemed, and justified, if I die not in the state of grace? and this
Sacrament disposes me to persever in it.

4 In the second place the Apostle says, that God will alleviate the sick
person or raise him up. For this Sacrament restores health of body to those
who otherwise should dye, if it be necessary or profitable to the salvation of
the soul, as the holy Council of Trent, and before it that of Florence,
assembled from all parts of the world, declare. This makes many Catholics
subject to this reproach which the Scripture made to Asa king of Judah: Neither
in his infirmity did he seek our Lord, but rather trusted in the art of
Phisicians. There was not then in the Church a remedy instituted, for the cure
of infirmities, as there is now: nevertheless the Scripture complains that he
made recours to Phisicians rather than to God: how much more will He complain
of them who recurr not to the Sacrament which JESUS has left us: a remedy so
easy and so commodious: but in the utmost extremity, when they can do no more?

And when you expect the Agony to receive, or make this Sacrament to be
received, you put your selves in danger to be pr^vented by death, which happens
too often and the fault is irreparable, moreover when you receive it so late,
having not the use of reason, and knowing not what is don to you, you receive
it less fruitfully: since you have not actual devotion, which would dispose you
to receive it more worthily, answering to the prayers of the Priost, joining
yours with his, exercising acts of Faith, Hope, Charity, and of other virtues
which the Sacrament excites; And it would restore also health of body more
effectually; for when you are in, or near your agony, and dispaired of by
Phisicians, if the Sacrament should repair your force and strength, this would
be a miracle, which God, who disposes althings sweetly does not usually or
without necessity. But if you receive it sooner, He would dispose second causes
by the secrets of his providence to renew your health, in case He should judge
it necessary for your salvation.

6. The third effect which the Apostle atributes to this Sacrament, is the
remission of sins: And if he be in sins, they shall be remitted him; He says
expressy, If he be in sins: because he supposes, the Sick has already received
Penance, and that by absolution his sins have been remitted. But if he has not
rightly accomplished Confession and Communion, and knows it not: or if by
humane frailty he has committed a mortal sin after his Confession, and is
ignorant of it: such remainders, with all venial sins, would be remitted, and a
good part of the temporal punishment due to them relaxed by this Sacrament. If
then we are deprived of it by our fault: or if we receive the Sacrament
unfruitfully: or if by our negligence a Soul depart out of this world without
receiving the grace of it, it is a great fault, and God does make this complaint
of it, The wound is not sured, nor mollifyd with oil.

7. S. Bernard writes, that S. Malachy was entreated to visit and Vita S.
Malach.
carry the holy oils to a Gentlewoman dying near his monastery, who so
rejoiced in the presence of the holy Prelate, that she seemed to be quite
revived; she demanded the Sacrament; but the Assisstant seeing her so changed,
desired the Prelate to forbear; The Saint condescended to their request: and
returned with the holy oils. No sooner he arrived at the Monastery but he
heard the Cries of diverse, who said that she was dead; he runns, and coms to
her and finds her dead; Behold him in the greatest sorrow, in lamentations,
tears, groans, and complaints of himself, for a fault whereof he was not
guilty. It Is my fault Lord, it is my fault; since she desired it, I should not
have deferred it; he protests to all the Assistants, that he will weep in
consolably: that is Soul should never rest, til he had restored to the dead,
the grace which she had lost. he remains by the corpse, and instead of holy
Oil, waters it all night with his precious tears. This holy water frightens
and puts death to flight: for the next morning the dead opened her eyes, as if
she had been wakened out of sleep: then sits up, and making a low inclination
to the Bishop, says, The prayer of faith has saved the infirm. By which you
see how solici^ous we should be to receive the effects, and reap the fruits of
this Sacrament.

8. And to reap them with full hands, and in abundance: we must receive it with
necessary dispositions; and it is certain that Sacramental Confession must, if
possible, precede it: because this Sacrament is one of those which Divines call
Sacramenta Vivorum, that is, which ought not to be received, but by the
faithful, who are already in the life of grace. I say, if possible; for if one
should be so deprived by a sudden accident, that he cannot Confess: we must
neuertheless, administer to him this Sacrament.

But there are three other dispositions which a devout soul should have in
receiving it. One in respect of God: another in respect of himself: and the
third in respect of his neighbor.

9. First you must offer to God a sacrifice of your life, accepting death with
resignation to his holy Will, with great submission to the Orders of his
Providence: and to render honor and homage to his divine Perfections: and say:
my God, I submit with all my heart to the sentence of death you have pronounced
against me from the beginning of the world. I offer my life to you, to do
homage to your Souveraintie and Justice; I acknowledge and protest that I have
most justly deserved it, not only by teason of original sin: but as often as I
have sinned in all my life.

10. He that is in this disposition of a Victime and a Holocaust in the sight
of God: will have also the necessary spirit of humility, He will renounce all
pride, ambition, vain glory, and ostentation: he will abhor the spirit of
those vain souls; who disire passionately to be praised in gazetts, celebrated
in histories, that their hearts or bodies be em^au^med, put into ledden coffins,
carried to the grave with pomp, with famous and magnificent obsequies, and
funeral discourses; who build for themselves or make to be built high and
glorious tombs: who fix their names and arms upon the walls of Churches, and
cause Epitaphes to be composed Aug. lib. 9. confess. c. 13.
in their praises. S. Austin praises his Mother, for that she had not the least
thought of such a Vanity. And the Scripture blames the ambition wherewith they
buried the king Asa: They buried him in his sepulcher, which he dug for
himself in the City of David: and they laid him upon his bed full of Spices and
odoriferous 2. Paral. 16. 14.
ointments: and they burnt it upon him with exceeding ambition, says the sacred
Text.

12. In fine the holy oil, minds you of the Parable of the Virgins: that they
who had kept Virginity were not saved, because they wanted the oil of mercy;
with much more reason they cannot be saved, who having committed impurities,
and other sins, shall be presented to their Judge not having redeemed their
crimes by the works of Charity. You ought to do it all your life; but if you
have failed: if you have not made the lamp to be carried before you: make it at
least to follow after you, that you may not be wholly in darkness, when you go
into the other world. JESUS having given us his sweat, blood, and life,
deserves well that you give him a good part of your goods, also during your
life, when they are more necessary for you; But since you have omitted it: give
him a little part of them at least in the hour of your death, when your goods
are useless to you; it is He who gave them to you: who is the Proprietor of
them: and nevertheless desires for your good, to receive of them, in the
person of the Poor.

13. I conclude with these words of S. Salvian; You are avaricious: But you are
not enough: I exhort you to be yet more; you love Lib. 2. con Av. a ritiam in
fine.
riches: love them at your death as well as in your life: you fear the poverty
of this life: fear also that of the other; carry your riches with you into the
other world: they will be more necessary there than here: to avoid the pains
of Purgatory in the way: to redeem you in case you are cast in to that Prison:
and to make friends who may receive you into the eternal Tabernacles. Amen.

DISCOURSE L. Of Holy Orders
HItherto we have treated of Sacraments which were instituted to sanctify men
in particular: now we speak of the Sacrament of Order, instituted for the
General good, public Order, Government, and Ministry of the Church. And
because Dissenters deny it to be a Sacrament, we will show in the first place
that it is a true one; Secondly we will consider, what this sacred Sign does
signify: and in the third place the Documents we ought to draw from thence, for
the glory of God, the Salvation of our Souls, and the guidance of our lives.

1. A Sacrament is an exterior and sensible sign, by which grace of the holy
Ghost is given him that receives it worthily. Now the Apostle S. Paul, and
after him the general Council of Calcedon say expressly, that grace of the
holy Ghost is conferred in Ordination by imposition of hands. Neglect not the
grace that is in 1. Tim. 4. 14. 2. Tim. 1. 6. Council: calced an. 451. Act. 1 5.
can 2
thee: which is given thee by Prophecy, with imposition of the hands of
Priesthood. I admonish thee that thou resussitate the grace of God, which is in
thee by the imposition of my hands.

Hence the Counsels and ancient Fathers have always acknowledged Ordination
for a true and proper Sacrament; and therefore in the general Council of
Florence this is numbered with them, both Grecians and Latins approving it. I
might Fill pages with Citations of the holy Fathers: But this of great S,
Austine will suffice: He in his second book against the Epistle of Parmenean
proves against the Donatists, that the Sacrament of Order cannot be lost,
because Baptism cannot: Let them Explicate, says He, how the Sacrament of the
the Baptized cannot be lost, and the Sacrament of the Orderer may be? For if
both of them be Sacraments, of which nobody doubts, why cannot that be lost, if
this may be? Here he calls Orders a Sacrament: He shows it to be a proper and
true one by comparing it whith Baptism; He assures us that nobody doubted of
this Verity: and if S. Austin may be credited, not only all the Writers of his
time, but also all the Faithful did believe the same.

2. This external and sacred sign expresses two singular favors which
Ecclesiastics receive from God in their consecration. The first is the highest
dignity in the World. For to a Priest is given Power over the natural Body of
JESUS CHRIST: to consectate, and offer, and distribute it; and over his
myistical Body, which is the Church, to remit sins, administer Sacraments and
to do the sacred functions of the characters imprinted in him; A Power so much
more excellent, eminent, and higher than other Dignities, as the Spirit than
the Body: Heaven than Earth: Divine things than humane: and as Eternal than
temporal.

S. Paul says it is certain by the consent of all the world, Heb. 7. 4.
that he who has right to give his Benediction to another, is more noble and
high than he, sine ulla contradictione quod minus est a meliore benedicitur.
But a Priest gives his Benediction to Princes, Kings, and Emperors: his
Dignity then is more high.

S. Chrysostom exhorting Priests to refuse Absolution and Communion S. Chry.
Hom. 3. in Matt. Hom. ad 60. pop. Antioch.
to all that are unworthy, though they be Princes or Kings says to them: you
ought to do it, and you can do it; you ought to do it; otherwise, JESUS CHRIST
will exact of you an account of his Blood, and will punish you most terribly;
You can do it, for your Power is greater than that of Princes of this world.

If you suspect the Testimony of this Saint because he was a Prelate of the
Church: hear the Prince of the world. The Emperor Basil in an oration he made
to his people, in the eighth general Baron. An: 869. nn. 55.
Council: It belongs not to us Laymen to meddle with the things of the Church,
it belongs to Priests, and Prelates who have power to sanctify us, to open
heaven to us, and shut it against us, to bind us, or else to to absolve us. Our
condition is to be fed as sheep, to be sanctifyd, conducted, and unbound.

You will not think the words of these Great men strange, or that they
exagerate the Greatness of Priestly Power: if you consider that it surpasses
the spiritual Power as well as the temporal; divine as well as humane. For
popes who excel in Authority and Grandeure, if considered not as as Priests,
are less in Power than these. For the Power of Priests extends upon the natural
Body of JESUS CHRIST, and that of Popes upon his mystical Body only, which is
his Church: and therefore as much as his natural Body exceeds his mystical, so
much the Priestly Power surmounts the Papal. S. John Baptist, who surpassed all
men: who was the greatest that had risen among the sons of women for his
sanctity: Yet was less in Power than the least Priest of the Church: He showed
with his fingar JESUS CHRIST: But Priests produce Him in their hands, and give
Him for nourishment to others; He only diposed the people to penance: and
Priests absolve them from their sins. The Angels, who though they can do great
things upon creatures of the world, they cannot put Christ at their Will upon
the Altar: but are content to adore, love and admire Him there; And Priests by
virtue of their character have this Power: and can offer Him in an unbloody
Sacrifice for the salvation of the Living and the Dead.

3. This Power of Priests being so great, God out of his goodness adds in their
ordination another favor to it; He whose works are perfect, giving power,
gives likewise those things that are requisite for the legitimate and
convenient use of it. He replenishes Priests with abundant grace to make them
worthy of their Character, to exercise well the functions of it, and to rendet
them capable to sanctify the faithful. Noli negligere gratiam, quae data est
tibi per impositionem manuum Presbiterij. Idoneos nos fecit Ministros.

4. These particular favors which JESUS does to Priests, admonish us of the
Honor we are obliged to render them. Honor God with all thy soul, and honor
Priests, says Ecclesiasticus. And S. Paul, Priests that do well their duty,
deserve double honor. It Is by them says S. Hierome, that we are converted and
made Christians: by them we are received into the Church: by them we are
delivered from our sins: we reenter into the grace and favor of God: by them
we receive his blessings, enjoy the precious Body of JESUS, and offer to God
the dreadful sacrifice: by them in fine the Sacraments are administered, and
the imperial heaven is opened to us. We must not neglect them who are the
Judges of Kings in the process of eternity: them who the Prophet Malachy says,
are the Angels of our Lord. Malac, 2. 7. Exodus 22. 28.
Them, whom God himself calls Gods: because they are his Viceroys, Officers of
his Crown, His Ministers of state: Secretaries of his commandments: Judges of
his people: Ambassadors of his Majesty: Mediators between God and men: who
announce the will of God to men, and who present the desires of men to God. We
respect Ambassadors, also those of barbarous and infidel Kings, with much more
reason those which the king of Kings does send to us, said S. Chrysostom.

5. To create in our hearts a great respect to Priests: Some alleadg the
example of wise Solomon, who said to Abiather the Priest: you are guilty of
death: but I will not condemn you: because you have carried the Arc. Or the
Example of Constantine the Great: who in the Council of Nice would not sit
down, but after all the Bishops, and upon a little seat below them all. And
when one presented to him papers of complaints against some Priests: he burnt
them without reading them, and being angry with the person that gave them to
him, said, it belongs to Priests to judge Emperors, and not to Emperors, to
judge and condemn Priests: and should I see a Priest commit a sin, I would cover
him with my Royal cloak, for fear that any one should see him.

Other propose the example of S. Antony. This great Saint! this Patriarch of so
many thousands of Anchorets that lived like Angels! This great Antony, of
whose amity Emperors made so great account: This Antony whom wild beasts
obeyed; at whose Name Devils trembled: whose life converted so many Souls to
God; This great S. Antony, I say, honored so much Priests, that if he met the
least of them, he fell upon his knees, and rose not up, till he had received
his benediction.

Or of the Seraphicall Father S. Francis, who said, that if he should meet an
Angel, and a Priest: he would rather kiss the hands of the Priest, than of the
Angel.

Or of S. Catherine of Sienna, who kissed the ways and paths in which Priests
had past.

6. Is it not pity to see now that some Christians neglect them, or contemn
them, under pretense that some of them are vicious? If it be so: does it
pertain to them to speak of their vices? are they judges of their Judges? are
they wiser than Solomon: greater than Constantine: more devout than S. Antony:
more fervent than S. Francis: more innocent than S. Catherine: and more zealous
of the honor of God, than God himself? Who said by his Prophet, Touch not my
anointed. Psalm. 104. 15.


7. Let us take heed Venerable Priests and honorable Fathers that we be not
the cause, or at least the occasion of this temerity: that by our indevotions
and immodesties, by our irreverence in the Chruch, and our conversations with
the world, we be not the cause of the little respect now given to our character
and vocation. How is the gold darkened and the best color changed, says the
Prophet Hieremie? What Is become of that splendor, that luster, Thren. 4.
and glory which heretofore shined in Clergiemen? of that honor, respect,
reverence, and filial fear which they had for Ptiests in the primitive Church?
How is all this so decayed and obscured? It Is because, then they saw not Priests,
but at the Altar, in the Confessional, or in the pulpit; and now they are seen
in Taverns, in playhouses, and in worldly companies.

JESUS says to us, you are the light of the world; we must shine so then, that
men may see our good works: and may be moved to glorify our Father which is in
heaven. But if our light be darkness: if we falsify by our actions Christ's
Doctrine and maxims: this ill example of one of us will ruin more the piety of
the Faithful, than many other by their doctrine and good examples will be able
to repair.

You are the salt of the earth; salt is drawn out of water: but if it be
reunited to it: it disolves, and loses the propriety it had to prevent
corruption; a Priest is separated from the people by his consecration: if he
rejoyn himself to them by a worldly conversation: he loses the authority which
he had to preserve them from the corruption of sin.

We are judges of others: we must not be criminal; God will examine us more
axactly, judge us more severely, and punish us more rigorously.

SAVIOR JESUS high Priest and Pastor of our sols, permit not that we give you
cause to do it: permit not, that it may be truly said, as the people so the
Priest; you are our inheritance, our Lot, and our Portion: permit not that our
inheritance pertain to others more than to us. Make that our mouths be not
employed but to resound your praises: that our comportment and our manners do
express and represent your actions: that our hearts be not enflamed, but in
your love. Amen.

DISCOURSE LI. of Matrimony.
1. THe Mystery of the Incarnation is an alliance so advantageous and pleasing
to the holy Humanity of JESUS, that He would have not only in Churches, but
also in particular houses a continual image, and a lively representation of it.
This is the legitimate alliance of man and woman: of which I have three things
to show; First, that it is a true and a great Sacrament; secondly, the Dutys to
which it does oblige you; Thirdly, the honor you owe to it.

2. If we weigh holy things, not by the balance of the opinion of Dissenters:
But By the weight of the sanctuary, and by the judgment of the Church: We shall
avow that the legitimate Edhes. 5. 32. S. Ambr. c. 7. S. Aug. de bono conjug.
c. 18. c. 24.
alliance of man and woman, is one of the most holy, great, and mysterious
Sacraments of the Church. It Is a true Sacrament; For besides that the Apostle
says in the Epistle to the Ephesians: This is a great Sacrament: the Fathers of
the Church teach it. S. Ambrose speaking of an Adulterer, says, he loses the
grace of the heavenly Sacrament. S. Austin tells us, in the marriages of
Christians, the sanctity of the Sacrament is of more value than the f^cundity
of the womb. And again: amongst infidells marriage has for its end
propagation, and fidelity: but amongst Christians it has moreover the sanctity
of the Sacrament. Not only these, but other holy Fathers, the Councills, and
the Tradition of the Universal Church, ever taught the same; hence it was that
in the Instruction of the Armenians given in the Council of Florence, it is
numbered with the other Sacraments, Trid. ss. 24. can. 1.
hoth Grecians and Latins consenting to it; And that the Council of Trent
pronounces anathema against those that shall say, marriage is not a proper
Sacrament, instituted by JESUS CHRIST.

3. Let us say then, that it is a true Sacrament: nay let us say, that it is a
Great one; Great in its Cause: Great in its Matter: and Great in its Effects,

S. Austin very indiciously did say, that as in the primitive Church the holy
Ghost descended visibly upon those that were confirmed: so JESUS assisted
visibly in the marriage in Cana, to make kown that He is always invisibly in
the marriage of the Faithful; It Is He that gives your wife to you; It Is He
that gives your husband to you; It Is He that ioyns and associates you together;
This is not an airy conceit: it is a certain Verity: since the Scripture teaches
it in saying, That which God has joined let not man separate. Matt. 19. 6.


4. The Matter of this Sacrament is not a little water, oil, balm, or other
inanim^te creature; It Is your Bodies sanctifyd by Baptism: and consecrated in
Confirmation: your Bodies* the Members of JESUS CHRIST, Temples of the holy
Ghost, are employed to make this Great Sacrament.

5. In fine, it is Great in its Effects: It conferrs very great graces, and in
great number, if it be received worthily, with the dipositions and sentiment of
piety that it deserves. The ancient Israelites had the liberty to repudiate
their wives, if they did not please them: Poligamy was permitted them: they had
sacrifice, and the water of Iealosy to try the fidelity of their wives. All
these things having not been tolerated but by condescendence to that rude
people, JESUS CHRIST abrogated them; and in this rendered marriage much more
burdensome, and aggravated the yoke. Now since his Law is a Law of grace and
sweetness since. He says, his yoke is sweet, and his burden light. it concerned
Him to recompense and ease married Christians by the abundant graces which He
gives them in this Sacrament. Yes, in virtue of this Sacrament, God gives you
in the rest of your days, in diverse occasions, most great and powerful graces
(if you put no obstacle) to resist temptations: to conduct well your family, to
bring up your children in the fear of God: to endure patiently each others
imperfections: and to support the other burdens and inconveniences of marriage;
and they deprive themselves of all these graces, who marry in an ill state, in
the state of mortal sin.

6. This Sacrament being a symbol and a representation of the marriage of
Jesus with his Church, must imitate and express it. In consequence to the
alliance of JESUS with his Church, there is betwixt them mutual tradition and
communication of Bodies, of Spirit, and of Fortune. JESUS as the Espouse of the
Church, gives her his precious Body: and takes ours: He ioyns them to His, and
makes of them his Members. The Calvinists say, that JESUS CHRIST is not in the
Eucharist; they say true: He is not in their Eucharist: He gives not his body
to their pretended Church: He delivers not his precious flesh to any other but
his Spouse; It Is only the Roman Church: it is this true and legitimate Spouse:
it is this only one and well beloved that enioys this Privilege infallibly,
only, and perpetually.

7. The Lawyer said, and it is true, that a wife ought to lege adversus. Cod.
de crimine explicatae hered.
enter into society with her husband, not only in humane things, but moreover
in divine: socia rei humanae and divinae. And JESUS contents not himself to
give his humane body to the Church, but gives his divine Spirit, the holy
Ghost: and you know that the holy Ghost is love and charity by the propriety of
his Person, and by the condition of his emanation. S. Paul then has reason to
say Husbands love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church and delivered
himself for it, that He might Sanctify it. A husband then must love his wife as
JESUS loves his Church, with a sincere and cordial love, speaking to her with
an open heart: communicating to her his designs, associating her in his
enterprises, as JESUS has revealed to his Church all that Ho received from his
Father, and associated her to all his operations, also to the production of
grace. A wife must love, and also reverence or honor (as the Apostle says) her
husband, as the Church loves and honors JESUS CHRIST: she must love and Ephesians.
25
honor the parents and friends of her husband, as the Church loves and honors
the Virgin, Mother of her Espouse, S. James and other Saints his friends.
Husband and Wife must love mutually one another with a true and pure love, not
with an inordinate, sensual, or worldly love, as they do, who procure each
other what is honorable or profitable upon earth, though with eminent danger
of losing heaven: who espouse the passions, reveng the quarrels, please the
senses, and satisfy the foolish and inordinate inclinations of each other, to
the great prejudice of their souls, and their Salvation.

8. Christ loved not so, his Church: He loved not so his Mother, his Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, and other friends: but loved them in order to everlasting
life. Wherefore if you will love well, love as Christ has loved us: love in
order to everlasting life: cut off occasions of sin: seek occasions to do each
other good, to make one another virtuous, and procure by prayers; exhortations,
and good examples the salvation of each other.

9. S. Paul desires that the man be so holy, and give so good example to his
wife, that he convert her, if she be an infidel: and that the wife in like
manner by her holy conversation do sanctify her husband, though he should be a
pagan and idolater. 1. Cor. 7. 14.
This will never be don by dunning him with complaints, reproaches, invectives,
or with other outcryes; but as S. Monica converted her husband, enduring
patiently his injuries, supporting his inperfections, never answering him when
he was in anger, speaking to him of God, more by her good example than by her
words, showing him to the end, a sincere, faithful, and constant love.

10. JESUS CHRIST said to the persecutors of his Church, why do you persecute
me? so much He participates in the afflictions of his Church; The Church
partakes also in the sufferances of JESUS: she is sorrowful, afflicted,
mortifyd, when she considers Him in his Death and Passion; so all ought to be
common amongst married persons, good things and bad, joy and sorrow, pleasure
and displeasure: and this will much conduce to the honor of so great a
Sacrament, which S. Paul says is worthy of all respect.

11. Honorabile Connubium in omnibus: Marriage honorable in all. This is not
to say, among all men, as Dissenters translate: Else Heb. 13. 4.
the marriage of a Brother with his Sister would be honorable; and that of
those who have vowed continence, to whom the same Apostle says, it is damnable:
But in all things: that is, in all its Parts, Circumstances, and Appurtenances.
Honor it in the intention you have to marry; for if it be bad and vicious, all
the sequel will be corrupted. will you know why God is not in the marriage of
many? It Is because they married not for the love of him: they married for carnal
or fond love, for sensual pleasure: through ambition to have this man who is
in credit, or through avarice to have a rich Party. If two are assembled in my
name, says our Savior, I will be in the midst of them; He is not in the midst
of those: because they were not assembled in his name* This ought to be the
intention of Christians, says S. Augustine, to give children to JESUS, and to
his Church* to have a posterity that may praise, love, and serve God in your
place after your death.

12 Honor marriage, in the election and choice you make; you must pray God much
for this, that He give you a convenient Party with whom you may work you^
Salvation: it belongs to God only to know the person, and to give the same to
you, House and riches are given of the Parents: but of our Lord properly a
Proverb. 19. 14.
prudent Wife, says the holy Ghost by the mouth of the wise man; to obtain this
favor you must live holily, and do many good works before your marriage, a
good woman is a good portion: she shall be given to a man for good deeds.

13. Honor marriage in the treaty of it: let there be no circumvention, Ecclus.
26. 3.
deceit, nor fraud. you would not be well content to be deceived in a treaty of
small concern; why should you deceive another in a matter of such importance as
is marriage, where there is no relief, and which is for all the life? This is
the c^us of aversions, complaints, reproaches, and horrible divisions.

14. Honor marriage in the solemnization or celebration of it. You must
confess, communicate, hear Mass with great attention, and beg of God an
abundance of graces in this Sacrament; Invocate the Sainrs that have been
married, especially the B. Virgin: implore the intercession of those Angels
that have been employed in making marriages: as S. Gabriel that of the Son of
God: S. Raphael that of Tobias, and another that of Isaac. Banish those
impudent persons who say such words especially in the brid-chamber, which would
make impudence it self to blush. You would do better, and draw down the
benediction of God upon you, if you would follow the counsel which the Angel
Raphael gave to Tobias and his Wife: to pass the three first days in
continence, and not to employ them in delights, but prayers. And he admonished
them also, that the Devil has power over those that give themselves to lust,
as horse and mule which have not understanding.

15. Honor in fine marriage in its Effects: which is a perfect society of
heart, goods, fortune, and of all. If husband and wife are divided, and one
will hot, and the other cold: one sower, the other sweet: one will negotiate in
this manner the other in another: the burdens of marriage are most heavy and
insupportable: their house is a hell: a Place of sin and pain: of brawling,
bitterness, and despair; But if they live in union, and aid each other serve
God, and to keep his Commandments, they are agreeable to Him; For there are
three, things that please Him much: the concord of brethren, the love of
neighbors, and Ecclus. 25. 2.
a husband and wife that agree together. JESUS will be in the midst of them to
assist them: their temporal affairs will have better issue: their children
will learn virtue of them and consigne it to posterity: their people will serve
them more faithfully: Neighbors will be edifyd: Parents and Friends rejoiced:
they will bear more easily the burdens of marriage, and comfort one another:
their house will be like a terrestrial Paradise: it will be an image, a
foretaste, and prelude of the celestial, into which they will one day enter.
Amen.

DEO GRATIAS

I humbly submit these writings and my self also to the correction of the
Catholic Church, of which I desire to live and dye a member and a most
obedient Child.

TABLE OF THIS BOOK
A
Absolution. Authority to absolve from sins proved. 73. The wonderful
Circumstances of it. 74. Adore, in the Scripture signifies all sorts of honor.
170. Adultery, is a very Enormous Crime. 217. Alms, all Christians are obliged
to give them. 155. To whom 157. How to be given. 159. Exhor. to give them.
160. Anger, Its Effects and Symtoms. 204. It was not in our Savior as God.
204. It was in him, as man: but without imperfection. 205. His was virtuous,
ours is vicious. 205. Remidies for ours. 207. Exhor. to Patience. 209.
Attrition, must be supernatural. 280. It leaves us in state of sin if not
followed by absolution. 281. Avarice, is a pernicious and common vice. 221. who
is avarici ous. 222.
B
Baptism, obliges to a moral and virtuous death, 249. Jn what consists this
death. 249. It obliges to a new life. 251. Excuses of worldly Souls removed.
252. What life the primitive Christians lead to satisfy obligations of
Baptism. 253. Exhort. to imitate them 253. Beatitude: See Heaven. Blasphemy, a
detestable Vice 184.
C
Children, are obliged to honor their Parents with the honor of Reverence
192. with the honor of Obedience: which must ^e blind, cordial, and
perseverant. 193. with the honor of assistance. 195. Motives to acquit
themselves of these duties. 196. Christ, the true Messiah. Discourse 3. we must
live according to his Doctrine, 20. What is Christ. 21. Why called, JESUS,
CHRIST, only Son, our Lord. Disc. 4. he is not acknowledged Lord by many
Christians, 25. The Miracles wrought in his conception and Nativity 27. These
Mysteries declared by a natural Comparison 29 His Doctrine preached in the
Crib, contrary to that of the world 31. His Sufferances for men. Disc. 6.
Exhor. to love him, 37. He Rose up again by his own Power, and his Father also
raised him, 39. We ought to thank the Father for it, 40. How He contributed to
his Resurrection, and how we must to ours, 41. His Ascension described, 44. How
He sits at the right hand of the Father, 44. His Ascension very advantageous to
him, to the Virgin, and to us, 46, To follow him to heaven, we must imitate his
actions, 48, Church, It Is necessary to submit to all the true Church proposes
as an Article of faith, 65, We must rely on her for true scriptures, and for
the sense and meaning of them, 65, 66, The true Church is One, 67, The Roman
Church only is One, 67, The true Church is holy, 68, The Roman Church only is
holy, 69 The true Church is Universal or general. 70, The Roman Church only is
so, 70, It Is necessary to salvation to be united to the Roman Church 71,
Commandments of God, must be studied, learnt, and pondered, 162, they may be
kept 164 We must keep them with filial love, 165, They are most reasonable,
just, and amiable, 165, Why called Testimonies, Judgments, justifications,
ways and paths, 166, Catholics divide them best, 166, Confession of all
mortal Sins to a Priest is necessary, 281, Confirmation makes Soldiers of
JESUS CHRIST, 255, It Is a true Sacrament. 255, Imprints a Character, and gives
Special grace to fight against Tyrants and wordly souls, 257, These hurt more
than Tyrants, 257, they censure althings 259, Confirmation obliges us to endure
their censures and derisions, 259,
D
Detraction defined. 234. It Is a mortal sin in a matter of importance, 234. It Is
a greater sin than Robbery, 235. It kills also the hearers if they oppose it
not. 335. It kills the Detracted by a triple murder. 236. Remedies of
detraction. 237.
E
Eucharist, contains really the Body and Blood of Christ, Dise. 44. It is
compared to milk in its Production. 268. In the manner it ought to be received.
269. In the manner of its Operation. 271. Communion in one kind defended. 271.
Examples move more than words 281.
F
Faith, necessary to believe sins may be remitted. 72. The Excellency and
Necessity of it. 88. Diverse sorts of it, 88. None suffices to salvation but
living Faith 89. Many practice not according to their Faith. 91. How a good
Christian regulates his actions by Faith 91. Exhort. to true Faith 92. Fasting,
necessary. 148. The Lent was instituted by the Apostles. 149. The motives to
institute it 149. Objections against fasting solved. 150. Its lawfullness
demonstrated. 153. Virtues that must accompany it, 153. The ends and intentions
we ought to have in it 154. Frauds, are very common and pernicious. 231.
G
God, is necessarily One only. 2. He is ineffable. 2. Great in Nobility. 3. In
Power 3. In Wisdom. 4. In Goodness. 4. In justice. 5. In indepedence. 5.
Documents, from these Perfections. 6. He is Father for diverse reasons. 8. He
shows an infinite Power in Creating. 9. Incomprehensible Wisdom in Governing.
9. Ineffable Goodness in designing the Creatures to our service. 10. We are
obliged to thank him for all the good He has don to them. 11. Motives to
Gratitude. 11. Grace, divided. 113. What is actual Grace 114. In how happy a
state man was created, and how he fell from it. 114. How necessary Grace is,
and how freely given 115. We must distinguish carefully its motions, from those
of Nature. 117. How they may be distinguished 118, We must be grateful for it.
118. We must not be proud when it had produced good in us, but live in fear
118 Sanctifying or Habitual Grace, What, and how Excellent. 113* 241.
H
Heaven., How great are the Goods of it. 83. Four considerations to guess at
their Greatness- 84 motives and means to obtain them 86 Hell has diverse
significations 38 What it is to be damned 85 Hope stands with fear 95 What we
ought to hope 95 of whom we ought to hope 97 Catholics are not touched with
the malediction of those that trust in men 97 who are subject to it 97 Relyance
on our selves is cause of many inconveniences 97 We must hope with great
Confidence 98 Exhor to confidence in our Lord 99 Holy Ghost, why so called 60
Why called Gift 6 The necessity an excellency of this gift, 62, We offend the
holy Ghost in diverse manners 6^.
I
Idolatry, cannot be imputed to the Roman Church. 169. She adores not Saints,
nor Relics, nor Images. 170. 171. She prays not Saints to give things
desired. 172. Builds not Temples, Erects not Altars, nor offers Sacrifice to
them. 172. 173. Images are not absolutely forbidden to be made, but only to the
end they may be adored. 167. 168. Imitatours of the world reproved, and their
objections answered 211 212. Judgment Particular and General. 49. Reasons for a
General Judgment. 50. This is a great Consolation to the Elect 52, Description
of the general Iugdment Disc 10. What things will be therein Examined 57.
Paraphrase of the Sentence of condemnation. 58 Rash Judgment: Three
Circumstances necessary to make it a mortal Sin 228 Causes of r^sh Judgment 22^
Its bad effects 229. Remedies for it 330.
L
Love of God, the most Excellent Virtue 100. Its necessity 101. Its necessary
qualities. 102 motives to love God, 10^. Love of Neighbors, very necessary
virtue, 107. Every reasonable Creature is our Neighbor, 108. How we truly love
our Selves and neighbors, 108. 109. How ill this command is observed by many
110, The first and most necessary Effect of the love of our Ennemys is to
pardon them 111, Motives to love and pardon them 111, 112. Lies, of three
Sorts, 230, We ought not to speak an officious or Idle ly to save a man 231,
Mass: See Sacrifice,
M
Matrimony a true Sacrement, 303. A great One, 304. Duties to which it
Obliges, 305. Honor we owe to it, 307. Merit, Catholic Doctrine concerning
it, 12^. See good Works.
O
Oaths Sometimes lawful, 181. Division and Description of them 181. 182.
Conditions requisite to make them lawful, 182 183. We cannot Swear to confirm
a palliated untruth. 183, Diverse bad causes of Swearing, 185. Order a true
Sacrament, 298. It Confers to Priests two singular favors, 299 300.
P
Parents: Why God has not recommended to them in the Decalogue their duty in
respect of children 198. They owe them Nourishment 198* Instruction 200. good
Examples 201. correction. 202 Exhort to educate well children 202. Penance
Necessary. 134 279 Conversions it makes, 137 138, Two dangerous Errors
concerning Penance into which we are apt to fall 138, Fruits of true Penance,
140, means to obtain true Penance 140, Exhort, to do Penance in the present
time, 136, Prayer, Very necssary, 141, What things are to be asked in Prayer,
141 How we ought to pray, 142 143 144, Excuses of indevout removed, 146,
R
Religion Virtue may be practiced in all Occasions and Times 175 The practice
of it by the Understanding 176 By the Will 176 by exterior Actions 176 177 The
practice of it in respect of Gods Attributes 177 It obliges us to honor God,
also in his Friends and Servants, in Times and Places particularly consecrated
to his service 177 Irreligion, indevotion, and irreverence reprehended 178
Exhort to honor God etc. 178. Restitution, must be perfect. 224. It Is
absolutely necessary 224. All that concur to an injury are obliged to it. 225.
It obliges always 225. Motives to avoid injustice 225. Resurrection, proved 79.
the words of the article declared 80 We shall rise in the same Bodies but without
defect 81 The Resurrection of the Elect and that of the Rep^o^ate very
different 81. Robbery defined, and its definition explicated 222. It obliges to
perfect Restitution 224
S
Sacraments, all instituted by Christ 238 He shows therein divine Perfections
239 They represent their effects very properly 240 They conferr sanctifying
grace more or less according to the disposition of the Receiver 241 They give
also auxiliary graces 242 Exhort to frequent them 242 Sacrifice in the new Law
273 It Is very accepta^le, and glorious to God 275 greatly advantageous to men
276 Very beneficial to Souls in Purgatory 277 How to be offered 278. Salvation,
of men earnestly desired by God, and the most important work. Epist to the
Reader It Is to be procured by the securest way 43. Satisfaction, third Part of
Penance must be made according to the multitude, Enormity, and diversity of our
offenses 283 We may satisfy the divine Justice by all Crosses that befall us
28^ Motives to fly sin, and to return to God by true Penance 285 Scandal, What
properly 210 It Is sometimes a Word 211 Often Actions 211 Othertimes Omissions
213 What Actions are not to be omitted, and what are to avoid Scandal 214
Motives to avoid it 215 Sin, the greatest evil 245 248 In Christians it is far
greater than io infidells 248 By sinnlng mortally we hazard Salvation 76 Carnal
sins Contrary to man's nature, and abominable to God 216 Species or Kinds of
them 217 218 Individuums or particulars innumerable 219 Remedies of them 219.
Sunday, why instituted 189 How to be observed 189 190 Exhort to observe it well
191
T
Tradition, necessary to excuse Christians from observance of the Jews Sabbath
187 188 189
V
Unction of the Sick a true and proper Sacrament 292. Its Saving Effects. 203.
294. 295. Dispositions requisite in the Receiver 296 297. Exhort to Charity
297.
W
Works, of supererogation proved 121 good Works necessary to Salvation 122 123
Why God requires them 123 It Is necessary to be fruitful in them 124 We must
apply our Talents in them faithfully 124 Many Christian^ lofe, or abuse them
125. Exhort: to practice good works 127 We must not defer our Conversion, and
the practice of good Works Discourse 22.
FIN.

