EYE SALVE For the English ARMY, And their Assistants.

OR, A Breviate of several Particulars Seriously to be considered by all those
that either are, or have been engaged in the late war against King, Single
Person or Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that are not willing to yield their
Necks to the Rope or Block.

WITH A LETTER SENT FROM Several Regiments of Horse and Foot in The ARMY, to
the rest of their Fellow Soldiers now in Arms in the several Garrisons of
England, Scotland and Ireland, Plainly discovering the great danger that is
like to fall upon them, after the so long hazarding their Lives, if not timely
prevented.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

Of the late King.
1. THe Parliament in 1641 voted his 16 years Reign to be one Continued Act of
the breach of the Laws, in Covering the poisoning of his Father, and dissolving
the Parliament June 15. 1626. to save the Duke of Buckingham, and Committing
Sir Dudly Diggs, and Sir John Eliot close Prisoners in the Tower, for managing
the examinations against the said Duke, and also his betraying of Rochell, and
murdering the Protestants, and lending the Navy Royal and other Merchants
Ships to the Nations Enemies to introduce Popery, as is manifest by his own
Letter to Capt Penington, and his designs to Enslave England by the German
Horse, and the Spanish Fleet, with a great Army upon the Downs, 1639. together
with his enforced Loanes, privy Seals, Coat and Conduct money, and
Ship Money, enlarging of Forests, incloasing of Commons, engrossing of
Gunpowder, with innumerable Pattents and Monopilies, of Malt, Salt, Sea Coal,
Soap, Leather, Wine, Sugar, Allom, Farthens, Pins to back Raw Cloth, Tin and
Lead, besides his Cropping of Ears, sliting of Noses, Racks, Stocks, Pillories
for Conscience sake, by which the Secluded Memb. evinces the Rationality of the
former Vote, See their Declaration 1644.

2. Upon their endeavor to punish Delinquents, he endeavored to bring in the
Northern Army up against them, and tampered with the Scots to the same effect.

3. When prevented in that, he brought in several Mercinary men into the House
of Commons to have destroyed the Members.

4. When by Providence prevented, there he forsook Whitechall, and betook
himself to raise a War under a pretense of a Guard, and framed Ireland to his
purpose, by granting Commissions for the Raising the Rebellion, as the
Parliament Messages and Declarations manifest, See particularly the Parliament
Declaration, 1644.

5. He Contrary to the Fundamental Liberties of Englishmen assumed to himself
a power over all men's Persons and Estates, by taking to himself the command of
the Militia against the consent of the people in Parliament, as Witness his
Commission of Array.

6. He sets up his Standard at Nottingham, and thereupon the Parliament
Declared that that Act of his, tended to the Desolution of his Government, See
Parl. Decl. 1641.

7. He raised a War indeed, and fought there Forces at Edghill.

8. After that a Treaty was procured at Uxbridge, with a Cessation of Arms;
and at the same time be faithlesly fell upon the Parliaments Forces at
Branford, and destroyed many honest men.

9. After this he himself procured a Treaty at Oxford, and at the same time
carried on a Plot by Waller, Tompkins, and Challoner, to have destroyed all the
honest party both in city and Parliament.

10. After this he Declaraed the Parliament Dissolved, and Proclaimed them
Rebels and Traitors, and called another at Oxford, and forbad Provision and
Trade to the City, and carried on Rylies Plot against the City; and all these
times Continued Robbing, Burning, and Murdering the people by Rupert, Morris,
Hopton, Goring, Greenvill, and there accomplices, and never gave it over until
necessity forct him.

Of the Present Charles, the late Kings Son.
1. His actual appearing in his Fathers Quarrel, and with the Revolted Ships
was isntrumental in importing both Arms and Ammunition in abundance; for which
he was proclaimed a Traitor to the Common Libertyes of England.

2. His Avowed Emnity to any accommodation between his Father and the
Parliament at the Treaty in the I Will of Wight.

3. His breach of Faith with the Kirk of Scotland, notwithstanding his solemn
Engagement to the Kirks party in the Treaty at the Hague in Holland, and after
at his Coronation in Scotland he had taken the solemn League and Covenant, he
took the first opportunity to break it with the honest Zealous Presbiters, and
most Treacherously espoused the former Malignant interest, the known Enemies of
Religion and Liberty, which made Major General Straughan, Col. Car and others
disert him, and Raise a third Party, both against him and the English Army.

4. After his entering England with his Army, he Contrary to his solemn
Engagement gave Commission to the Earl of Darby, and other known Papists to
Raise Forces in Lancashire.

5. The Murders, Burglaries, Felloneys, and other Insolences Committed by
them under his Command; as in particular, the Murdering of honest William
Guise at Worcester in cool Blood by his special Command.

6. The visib^l^ty of his present design to strike at the utter exterpation of
all the Godly in the three Nations in various forms, under his and his friends
new Coined destinguishment of Phanaticks, looking upon the Presibiterians to be
the greatest, from whose Pulpits all their late miseryes flowed, as many of his
Friends in their Familiar discourses do frequently manifest; Though they say
they are constrained to make use of them at present, and to that end many of
them profanely say they are constrained to be out of measure Godly, yet in
their private Quaffings, can drink healths to the Confusion of Sion.

7. The great Obligations that lies upon him to his great Relations for
supporting of him in his several years Exilement, besides the nearness of
their afinity to the Sea of Rome.

8. The perfect enmity of his allie the King of Spain, manifested to England in
ruining many hundreds of our Merchants by his Sea Robbers, all which ought
seriously to be Considered.

Now a few words to the particular parties Confirmed in the late Quarrels
against King and Lord, Spiritual and Temporal.

First to the Private Soldiers.
You are the men that have Conquered the first and second Charles, and brought
them and their Friends into the Condition they are now in; you therefore of all
others they must hate.

Never expect an Agreemen free from the height of animosity, continually
seeking revenge against those that have been chiefly isntrumental in bringing
under either their persons or Estates that aim at Regal Authority.

You are therefore for your future safety seriously to mend those ensuing
particulars.

First to abandon King and Lords Spiritual and Temporal for these Reasons.

1. Because both they and their parties will be Continually seeking Revenge
against you for what you did against them, in bringing under their Persons and
Estates to Sequestration, Sword, Rope, or Block, and must expect the same
measure if your Enemies prevail.

2ly. Expect the wills of men to be the Regulater of your Actions, and not Law,
because our Enemies will have the Sword in there hands, to force your
submission to any Irregularity, as their unlimitted wills shall impose; and the
Reason is because the King or Single Person (if Established as formerly) will
be an absolute unlimitted Monarch by having an Army at his Heels.

3ly. Expect the same, if not greater Titany then formerly over your Persons
for Conscience sake, by Whips, Gags, Pillories, Stocks, Block, Cropping of
Ears, Slitting of Noses, besides Starveing, Imprisonment, and Restraint of
Friends Visitations.

4ly. Because by the Establishment of King, or Single-Person, Pattents and
Monopolies will be thereby upheld, and Trade thereby destroyed, the sad
Productions of Olivers Pattents the Nation now at this day Feels.

5ly. If the King be Established, then expect that money that should pay you
your Arrears, must go to pay his Debts contracted in foreign parts, and to be
dispossessed of what any of you have already in Lieu of your Arrears, either in
King, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, or Delinquents Estates,
and to be called to an account for the time you have held them.

6ly. You that have not wherewith to make satisfaction, expect to make
satisfaction in your Carasses by Slavery, and to be Branded with scorn and
Ignominy as Traitors to all Posterity.

Secondly, as you respect your own safety, you must endeavor diligently the
altering the name of the Laws in General.

1. Because by them, as they are in the Kings name you are Traitors for what
you have done in obedience to commands; And besides stand liable to innumerable
actions, and indictments that may be laid upon you for what you have done in
the late Wars.

3. By the Law in the King, or single Persons name, you are not capable of the
benefit of the Law, being by it Traitors, you are liable to be knokr on the
head as Foxes, Wolves, and beast of prey.

4. Fourthly, Because all your Titles in Parliament will be invalued, and your
money cast away that have been purchasers of Lands.

5. Your Indemnity will be to your perpetual Reproach, because otherwise
constrained to down on your knees, and ask your conquered adversary forgiveness.

3ly, You therefore must endeavor diligently to get the Moddel of your Laws,
in a Book short, plain, and few for those Reasons.

1. Because thereby ye will know your own freedom as to your late actions as
Soldiers. 2. Your liberty as Christians. 3. You Will be out of fear of the
Lawyers Cheats. 4. You will thereby be Instrumental in Freeing the Nation in
general of the Lawyers cruel extorting Fees.
Endeavor earnestly for the Establishment of a Commonwealth, not in word
only, but in truth, for these Reasons.

1. Because therein each particular man's safety, will be profound in the common
safety of the whole.

2. Begging, and stealing, would be avoided by the Establishment of public
workhouses and industry encouraged.

3. Nobleness and virtue will be encouraged, as being the Ladder to preferment,
and not great Estates or Relations.

4. All that taste of Rule, will as well taste of subjection, by which the
Supreme Magistrates dividing into Faction, will be only avoided, being only
contracted by long continuance in Power, those with innumerable inconveniences,
by the establishment of a Commonwealth, would be avoided as Murdering the
innocent, and selling the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes,
etc.

2. A word or two to those that are about to turn from their former a vowed
Friends, and engage fidelity or neutrality to former adversaries; They may do
well ^o consider that the party with whom they have to do are Politicians and
therefore may consider the story of Machiavell that he loves the Treason, but
hates the Traitor, patting no difference in return between the highest
obligation, and the greatest injury, and that a rope or a block may be their
perrions for past actions notwithstanding their present Engagements.

3. A few words to the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, and Commons, that have been
assisting against King, etc. they may in time consider what they have done
against King, Queen, Prince, Bishop, Dean, and Chapter, and against all
Delinquents, and expect if the Enemies prevail to be paid with like measure and
therefore to consider there, and the Grand Officers of the Armies Apostasy, and
the Judgments already executed, and yet impending, for which their day is
darkness, their judgments corupted by partiallity a unanimous Resolution some
time departed from them, and fear possesses them, that before was seared by
all, and the vision of truth and impartial Righteousness, is to them as a
sealed book, Judgment is turned into Wormwood, and verity is ceast to be the
girdle of their reins, coverousness, and Ambition, is manifest to be the
ultemate, end of their former hazardous undertaking, the poor perish, sigh, and
lament their wants, whils they drink wine in Bouls and bless themselves in the
enjoyment of their herds of treasure, which will ere long eat as a Canker, but
God will bring in, deliverance in Righteousness, when the Enemies thereto shall
be ashamed,

Vale.
The Letter.
BRethren and fellow Soldiers,
we having upon our hearts the sad approaching Evils, and danger that
ourselves, and all our most Real and Cordial Friends, are now most miserably
falling into, if God make us not instrumental, for our and their deliverance,
in order thereunto we have according to our wonted, Way in the like time of
eminent danger as this now is, sent too and received from the several and
respective Regiments of our fellow Soldiers, Agents, for the better carrying
on of that wherein we are mutually concerned in our lives and Liberties, which
now lie at the mercy of our Enemies; If you concur not with us, but that we may
wash our hands from the guilt of the blood, and the blood of thousands, which
you with us, have shed in that just and Righteous cause against the Late King
and his adherents, we have thought it a duty incombent upon us to make this our
Letter so public that if any shall be so unworthy as to desert that glorious
cause, that God has so eminently own You, and Us, in this shall be a testimony
against them.

We cannot but stand amazeed at that grand and wicked Apostasy of many of our
Officers that dare notwithstanding all Declarations, Protestations and
engagements: do now endeavor to betray us, and those good things we engage For
into the hands of our Adversaries therein Rendering all the Blood and Treasure
we have spilt and spent as water powered on the ground: and Rendering us Guilty
of all, as if we like base and Mercinary Slaves had no other cause but to shed
the Blood of thousands, but to set them up and pull others down, when God
knows we take up arms in Judgment and for Conscience sake, nor to serve the
Arbitrary Lusts and Will of any whatsoever; But to preserve the Common Interest
of these Nations in General, and the Cause, and the good people therein, from
the Force and Violence of their oppressors. Yet how apparently contrary are the
present Actions: did not our present pretended General most unworthily,
notwithstanding all his Declarations, and Protestations, violate that Authority
that he pretended to own and Honor which he pretended to engage in Scotland,
for that how did he suffer them to be the scorn of, and contempt of those that
durst not hold up their heads in the day of God, appearing for them, and what
honored Patriots and faithful Masters they have been to us our present
necessities in want of pay, will give us sufficient Testimony of the Care and
Love to us, which we now want.

And that we may be perfect slaves, how does our precended General, endeavor
to debauch the Army, both Officers and Soldiers, putting out of their Commands,
and private capacities, those who have most faithfully engaged with us in all
times, and upon all occasions, to the hazard of their Lives, and Estate, and
this without the least charge of any crime produced, so contrary to the law of
Arms, and Rule of War, and neiver done by any but Tyrants, and Usurpers, who
are resolved to make their lust their Law, and their will their Ruler.

And what shall we think of our pretended General, being Courted, Rewarwarded,
Feasted by the late Parliament, and other the enemies of this Army and
Commonwealth, If we may believe what some report, he has sold us to them to
be butchered and destroyed, which makes some of our confident adversaries say,
That before Midsummer day, a Red-coat shall not dare to show his Head.

Which appears they intended, who so plentifully rewarded our pretended
General, and made an Act to raise him and Col. Brown 35000 pound, when their
power would not extend either to our Indemnity, or the payment of Arrears,
though they were solemnly moved thereunto, they pretended it was too great a
Burden to charge the Nation with, they at the same time erect a Militia much
more chargeable then the Army now is; and the truth is, we are satisfied that
they intend no other payment of our dearly earned wages, then by the Militia to
knock us on the heads in our quarters; this we cannot but believe when we
consider who they are that have the command thereof, Are they not such that
either have been in actual service for the late King, and his Son, or at least
Nuters in the late Wars, nay, when our pretended General himself gives the
Command of the Army, into the hands of persons that have been in actual Arms
for the King, and some of them known Papists.

And that they tell us, they do not intend to return to their old bondage, when
our late Taskmasters are now set over us again, and none but such as they
coutenanced and encouraged, our friends and Fellow Soldiers imprisoned,
banished, and forced to abandon Wife, Family and Estate.

The same or worse they do in Ireland, to our friends there, the same spirit
that rules here, is so predominate there, that not only confiscation and
banishment is threatened, but death it self, and how soon it willo be the same
here, we know not.

And shall we stand still and see our common enemy to come in upon us, to the
ruin of our Cause and Country.

It is true we are at present in the Army, but how long do you think we shall
continue? Will it not be out turn next, with the loss of all that is due to us
as well as those already disbanded, to the ruin of our poor Wives and Families;
and what then will be the issue? Ye see the late Secluded Members have only
concluded the first War lawful, which they call defensive, made against the
King by Lords and Commons: and who (think you) shall give an account for all
the blood shed in Scotland: must not we? and are we not, if we had now Cause to
take Arms against the now King of Scots, the most notorious Rebels, and
Traitors, Thieves and Murderers in the world, and stand all condemned men in
the eye of the Law, to suffer death accordingly.

We have only this left before too late, to bear up our Spirits, and declare
our wonted courage and resolution, that we will now in despite of all
opposition make good with our blood, that Cause that we have been engaged in
against the late King, and his Son and adherents, against whom both God, the
Law of Nature, and Nations, has given their determined Judgment against, and
let us now resolved to take the field with our Swords in our hands, to avert by
Gods assistance, our Canse against all that shall oppose it, under what
pretense soever, we will not disband, or suffer our selves to be disbanded,
until we see our Liberties both Civil and Religious, asserted and secured, in a
Free State and Common wealth, and our Arrears fully paid.

Thus not doubting your cheerful concurrence, with us herein, we are yours with
our Lives and all that is dear to us.

FINIS.

