outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY On the late Duke of Monmouth.
AS Saylors Split on Rocks, so restless man,
By fond Ambition is too often undone;
Swelled with aspiring thought, he courts his Fate,
Nor sees the Danger till it is too Great;
But blinded by the Mist of Hope he strays,
Through paths of Rashness, into Ruins ways:
So the late Monmouth, giving way to Pride,
A mighty Ruin pulled upon his Head;
Debauched by Factions, Those that sought our Woe,
And Studied Britains Empires overthrow;
Then listening to the foolish noifie Croude,
Whose Clamours at the best, are but a Cloud;
(Empty of Rain) inconstant as the Wind,
Could vain contentment in that Vapor find:
It Was Fatal Flattery the Foundation laid,
(Of his Ambition too, too long displayed)
On coz'ning Quicksands that his hopes betrayed;
Who giving Ear to Factions Breath durst be,
The inglorious Pattern of Disloyalty;
And after many Favors, eager still,
To feed the Flame of an insatiate Will:
To tempt his Fate, as if her Wings were flow,
And rush regardless on his overthrow.
How has the Royal Goodness often been found,
In mildest Mercy, strongly to abound?
In hopes his hot and feverish Breast would cool,
And leave a calmer Temper in his Soul:
But all in vain, those dear indearments move,
No Loyalty, Obedience, no, nor Love.
In his Ungrateful Mind, O what can be
Worse than Ingratitude to that degree,
Ingratitude, from which, mankind should flee;
For what Returns are found, but Impious War,
And fierce Invasion, but not carried far,
Ever Fate begins the Progress, and just Heaven,
A Check to bold ambitious Reins had given;
Justice took place, just Arms obtained the Day,
And quelled by force, what favors could not sway;
Whilst Death to Gloomy Caves does tumble down,
The bold Aspirer to a Sacred Crown,
And with a lasting slumber, seals his Eyes,
Who strangely strove by lawless ways to rise:
So let him stand a Sea-Mark on our Coast,
To warn those Spirits that are Tempest tossed,
With feverish Faction, lest there be lost;
That Loyalty, may more, and more increase,
And we be blessed with plenty and with peace.
EPITAPH.
SOaring upon Icarian Wings he fell,
Who durst against the best of Kings Rebel.
Now silent is, he whose late restless Mind,
Ambition swelled, till he a Grave did find.
FINIS.
This may be Printed, R L.S.

July the 16th. 1685.
LONDON, Printed by E. Malles, in Black-Horse-Alley in Fleet Street.


