The Toutch-Stone of MONEY and COMMERCE: Or an Expedient For increase of Trade,
Money, and Shiping In England.

Showing also how the Arrears of the Army, and other Public Debts, may be
forthwith Satisfied, without laying more Impositions upon the People, or
Burden on Trade.

Together with CUSTOM and EXCISE REGVLATED.

Wherein is manifest the Destruction of Trade, by its Irregular mannagement at
present: with means to prevent the like Inconvenience for time to come.

By S. E. A Lover of his Country.

LONDON.

Printed at the Authors Charge, for his Countries good: and are to be sold at
the Turcks Head in C^rn-hill, near the Royal Exchange.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
I Know you cannot be Ignorant of the (at present) Deplorable Estate of
England, whose former Plenty, and Freedom, of Commerce, has sounded as
Echoes of Triumph to all Nations round about her: and in despite of envy or
their Emulating her happiness, made her Trade the Worlds Exchange: until of
late years (for such is her unhappiness) her Millions of plenty are grown to
complaints, and such her Commerce into a Languishing consumption: so
universally dispersed that even the greatest of her Gentry complain for want of
Money, whilst their Tenants groan under the burden of Contribution and Taxes;
The Merchant and Mariner, too late sorrowing for their loss of no less then
1300 Sail of Ships since the War with Spain, whereof many richly laden; to the
ruin of their Owners and Proprietors; when others yet Trading, and paying
Excise, with other great Duties, complain more for the Intolerable burden by
the manner of Collecting it, then the duty it self: the laws of Excise being in
truth contrived (as if purposely) to mantain a numerous rabble of Excise-men,
the most useless and unprofitable members in a Commonwealth: who making
themselves gainers by the ruin of Trade, go away with the greatest share of
the revennue, whilst the private Soldier for want of pay is brought to a kind
of beggarry; being driven to take upon trust, (where they can have it,) the
very meat they eat; and considering their penni-worths to pay dear for the
Interest. All which together with the complaints of many, Thousands poor
Families distressed throughout the Nation, for want of Trade, being considered,
I hope will so work upon your spirits, (now the Lord has again, I presume
beyond your own Expectations brought you together) that you will not rest till
you have Improved this opportunity once more put into your hands of doing good
for your Country, to which end you are called; wherein the Lord will
undoubtedly own you, and those yet unborn be Obliged to Honor your remembrance.

And apprehending that amongst other weighty affairs that of raising Moneys
for time to come, for supply of the Army, and Navy of the Commonwealth, by the
most equitable and properest ways, not burdensome to the Nation, with the
increase of Trade, Money, and Shiping, (all so much wanting in England) are not
the least of Importance: and having had the perusal of the several reports, and
proposals made this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, with all others
that have written in reference thereunto; I have upon serious consideration
subtracted the most suitable and (as I apprehend) properest collections from
the whole, and have taken liberty to publish it, with some additions of my own
observations in England, and Experience in Foreign parts: which, when receiving
the Honor of your debate, will I hope merit the favor of your good likeing,
and the Author have his expected reward, by being an Instrument of promoting
the good and welfare of his Country.

S E.

The Toutch-stone of MONEY and COMMERCE.
AMongst the diversity of Mettalls which God the Creator has shut up in the
concave Closet of the Earth; none is accounted more Excellent than Gold, and
Silver; which since it became in use amongst men may properly be termed the
Universal measure of all things, and the Staple of Commerce, which in All
Ages, and Nations, where it goes drives the Wheel of Trade and Success. I shall
therefore (since the World gives it that Esteem) begin with its Standard as in
vallew here amongst us.

The Allay, or standard of England (I mean the Intrincical The English Standard
better then Foreign.
vallew of Plate) being inferior to none, if not the best and purest of
Europe. and the large proportion in weight allowed to our pound Sterling, gives
it the greater vallue in Foreign parts, and is therefore by them the more
covetted: so that its par or vallue running higher in the North-East parts of
the World then our Native Commodities; England is by that means made but the
Carravan for its transportation from the South-West parts thither; and by
reason of the War with Spain, (a place that vended much of English
manufactures) together with the Obstruction by us given, the Spanish
West-India-Fleet which occasioned Plate to Plate decreased and the reason why.
run at a higher vallue there; England has of late years been prevented of
Importing Plate as Formerly; and her exports thereof greater by reason of the
loss of her Southern Trade, from whence her Merchants usually sent Commodities
for Holland and other Northern Countries of the production of English goods,
which now are bought from the Dutch and others their Neighbors with English
Coin: who by that means are become almost Masters, both of our Money and Trade,
which will prove of dangerous consequence to England, if not timely prevented.

Another reason of the Decrease of Plate, is by the abundance thereof melted
down, and converted to the Plate Melted down.
making of Silver and Gold Lace, Buttons, and the like, in which un-necessary
superfluity in the three Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, is wasted
no less then two hundred Thousand pounds Sterling Yearly, by a very good
estimate of knowing persons dealing therein.

Also there is a great demunition of the Coin of England, by converting it
into Tankards, Bowls, and other By Goldsmiths.
Vessels of Plate, which in a super-abounding measure we daily see in
Goldsmiths Shops, and Gentlemen and Citizens Houses: far exceeding the
Estates and Fortunes of most of them, which though convenient for private uses,
yet tends to the decrease of Monyes, and the Public Stock of the Nation, and
consequently to the decay of Trade: which is contained in a proposal late
presented the Committee of Safety by one Mr. Marshall, unto whom I give this
remembrance, Mr Marshalls Proposals.
though I know not the Author.

And having I hope sufficiently laid down the reasons of the decrease, and
exportation of English Coin, which Gold and Silver exported, how to be
prevented.
is too apparent in the scarcety of Gold, but of late Years more frequently
passing then Silver; and by the few half Crowns left in comparison of the
abundance Coined since the War in England, (they being the most profitable to
be exported, or melted down, as being least worn, and waying more
proportionably then smaler Coin, from the Mint, by so much as the labor of
Coynage is less:) I now propose the means for increase thereof, with advance to
Trade and the Public Revennue.

That from hence forward the English Shilling may The English shillings to be
made less.
contain in wait but 11d, and the Silver to be a penny courser; so that 10d in
vallue according to the present Standard may futurely be allowed taken and
reputed for 12d Sterling, and so be Stamped; and the standard fixed according
to that vallue; all other Coin running alike in proportion.

That the Mint in London, with others to be erected The Mint to be set going,
and all Money new Coined.
in the most proper places of England, Scotland, and Ireland, may be set going;
and all Monyes in the States hands above the vallue of groats (the smaler being
worn and not considerable to return a profit,) may be forthwith new Coined
according to that standard: and by degrees calling in the old Coin and paying
the owners again with new, (they allowing for all Clypt, and Broken,) all the
Money in England will (without obstruction of Trade) be new Coined into more
necessary pieces as parts into half Crowns, and the other into Shillings, and
Six pences, whereof at present there is to great a proportion, as being the
more troblesome in counting; The Spaniard being so expert in this manner of new
Coining his Money, that I have known all the Brass Money of his Kingdom (which
cannot be less in number of pieces then 6 times the Sterling Money in England,)
new Coined in two months time, which I here intimate to show the facility of
that, which some perhaps may think to be a work of great difficulty: But not
approving of that cheat in Spain, I return to prevent the Cheats that some may
also suggest will be practiced in England, by false Coining, To pr^vent cheats
in falce Coynage.
though for my own part, I apprehend need not be feared.

That it may be ordered upon some penalty that all Money within London and lines
of Communication may be brought into the Guild Hall, or some other safe place
within the City: Or otherwise into some treasury to be appointed in every
Parish; there to remain as in Banck until new Money be given in Exchange: so
that all sums considerable (contracted for by Merchants or others) may be
as well paid from one to another in Banck, as if actually told and delivered:
the experience Moni^ to be brought into Bank.
whereof we find continueally practiced in Holland, Genoway, and amongst other
Bankers, who find both ease and profit thereby; and I think would be also of
great use in England, if here erected. And for all petty sums for pocket use,
it will presently be supplied by the Monyes first to be issued out of the Mint.
The like manner of bringing their Moneys into a Treasury may be observed in
other Cities and places of Commerce; and no Moneys be suffered to pass in
payments but of the new Coin Provided that any sum of Moneys payable at a day
certain by persons either of City or Country; if delivered into the next Bank
or Treasury; may be held paid, and Credit given for so much to the person that
of right ought to have it. And since I have hinted at a Bank, I shall give the
manner of it; I suppose not known to all persons, but worth observation to some.

A Bank is a Certain number of sufficient men of Credit and Estates joined
together in a sto^k, as it (...) for keeping several men's Cash in one Treasury;
and The nature of a Bank.
letting out imaginary Money at Interest, for 2, or 3 per Cent. to Tradesmen,
or others that agree with them for the same: and making payment thereof by
assignation, passing each man's account from one to another; yet paying no
moneys: in so much, that if a Merchant or other person want Money: If he have or
can but procure credit in Bank, he may make as good payment by assignment in
Bank without it. As for Example, the said Merchant buys Cloth of a Cloathier
for 100 lb. value more or less, and goes with him to the Bank, where he is
debtor for so much moneys as he takes up; and the Clothier is made Creditor for
so much as he sold his goods for to the said Merchant: Then such Clothier
having occasion to pay Money to a Stapler or Wool-monger for Wool bought, the
said Clothier is made Debtor, and the Wool-monger Creditor upon account: the
said Wool-monger buys Wool of a Country Farmer, for so much Money, more or less;
so the Wool-monger is made Debtor, and the Farmer Creditor: the Farmer must pay
Rent to his Landlord, and is likewise made Debtor, and his Landlord Creditor:
the said Landlord for his occasions buys good of a Mercer, Grocer, Vintner, or
the like, or from all; then he is made Debtor, and such Mercer or other
Tradesman Creditor: then peradventure such Mercer or other Trads-man buys
goods from the same Merchants that took up the first Credit in Bank, and stands
yet Debtor there, but upon sale of his goods to the Mercer, or other Trads-man
both clears their accounts in Bank: and so in all Trads; as occasion presents,
which is practiced in many places as aforesaid, and is of very great use and
advantadge to Trade; the payment made therein being generally esteemed better
by per Cent. then out of Bank, as preventing troble and the receiving Clipped or
bad Money: but being already published at large in Mr Lambs description thereof:
a Book written by Mr. Lamb, who is worthy of encouragement therein: I shall not
stay longer hereon, but return to my purpose.

That to prevent the melting down of any Coin, by Goldsmiths or others, to the
prejudice of the State and To prevent the melting down of Plate.
decrease of Moneys: An Impossition of 12d upon every ounce of Silver, and the
like proportionably upon Gold, may be laid upon all Plate already wrought, and
to be wrought into any form for use, other then the Mint, as well in the hands
of Goldsmiths as other persons whatsoever: and an Office to be appointed in
London, and each respective County of England for the same to be paid, upon
penalty of forfeiture: and to receive in testimony thereof some stamp of the
Office, and accordingly to be regestred. Always provided, that such as will
bring in wrought Plate to the Mint, may be allowed to Coin it upon like terms
as at present.

That all Gold may be Coined alike in proportion, New Coynage of Gold.
regard being had to its current value, which now runs higher then Silver by
2sh in the pound: so that out of every 20sh piece of Gold will be taken the
weight of 5sh 4d. to make its parrity or quallity equal with that Standard.

That the superfluous wearing of Silver, and Gold Lace, Buttons, etc. may be
prevented by good To prevent the waring of Silver Lace.
example given of some other more comely Trimming to be worn at Court; or by
adirect prohibition against it, as is at present in France: Or otherwise by
laying an Imposition of 1sh 6d on the ounce to be paid by the maker thereof; or
by laying a yearly Fine or duty on the persons wearing it, of the quallity of
an Esquire; or upwards 10l. each: the Gentleman 5l. and all of ameaner quallity 3l.
per Annum each: which I presume will bring in a Considerable revennue, or else
cause the same to be held contemptible and not worn: either of which will prove
useful to the Public good, and prevent such superfluous extravigancies.

Which being done, I doubt not but in a short time Of the increase of Money, and
Trade.
the want and scarcety both of Gold and Silver, will be found so plentiful in
England, that our lost Trade will again revive; and no Commodity be held the
dearer for this moderate advance of Moneys; which is not here introduced to
encourage the Supreme Authority of England to Immitate our Neighbors the
Hollander, and other States and Princes, whose usual custom is to advance
their Moneys in their payments, and to decry them in their receipts; which
though some account to be good State Policy, yet I am bold to call it great
The manner of Inhancing Moneys in Holland.
oppression, when no excuse can be pleaded other then State Interest; but
otherwise, if in policy, done either to keep a Competency, or to supply a
scarcity of Moneys in a Kingdom or Commonwealth. As for instance, if the
State of England had put the 20sh. piece of Gold higher in value but 6d. when
it first began to rise it self; and be drawn away it would have stopped that
current, and perhaps also have prevented Foreign Nations of covetting our
Silver, by keeping them Ignorant of its worth and value; and I wish heartily
that such That the Export of Gold, and Silver might have been better p^evented
formerly.
timely care were taken in the preventing other Inconveniences of as great
Consequence by inspecting the proceedings of Foreign Princes, and States,
touching Trade and Commerce, (wherein we are as much concerned as any,) that we
might not suffer our selves to be outwitted, and by degrees Courted out of all
Trade, as we have from our Gold and Silver, for which the gapp being now opened
so wide, and the scarcity of Gold by degrees rising a disparrity from its
standing value, to above 2s. in every 20s. and our Silver by being here (as I
may properly say) bought at so low a rate, is found a better Commodity in
Foreign parts than our Native Manufacture, and Commodities: so that the stream
is even grown to an inundation and drowning of all Trade, for want of such
timely prevention.

And truly I apply this my design of advancing Moneys more principally, as a
means to reconcile the present This design is more to reconcile the value of
Money and Trade, then for a Revennue.
disparrity of the Coin and Trade of England, with the current Commerce, of
Foreign parts, then singly to advance the States revenue; though I confess,
finding the same will prove so advantageous both to State and Common good, I am
the more encouraged hereunto, and am glad to be serviceable to both; conceiving
the States advantage thereby cannot be less then 5 Millions, The benefit to the
State, and Commonwealth.
besides the ease to the Commonwealth, of paying the like sum in contribution,
and other Taxes; and no man have the less in esteem or vallue, but all will be
enriched again by Trade, that will revive by the return of Treasure; which the
Dutch having more plentiful in reallity then England: besides being supplied
imaginary, upon occasion by the help of their Banks, is the principal reason
they eat us out of Trade, and by no better way then this to be prevented. Then
will all English Traders have vent for their Commodities, and the Farmer have
Money to pay his Landlord; Clothing and other Manufacturies will find a market,
and be encouraged: the Soldier have his pay, and the Commonwealth in general
again have Trade, all being now at a stand for want of Money the Usurer only
excepted, whose ungodly gain is become the greater: So that if it should be
admitted, the scope of this design were upon no other account but to satisfy
the Immergencies of State. (which I hope I have given sufficient reasons of
Contradiction) it cannot be more justly and equitably imposed then upon the
greatest Mony-mongers, who Vsur^rs have born the least share of Taxes.
of all Men have born the least Share of Burden in England, during the late
Wars, and justly deserves this remembrance.

And referring the ingenious States man, that desires to enquire farther into
the mystery and practice of Foreign States concerning rising and falling their
moneys to the several and differing Authors that have written more at large
thereupon; I conclude this subject, with this my observation, That whilst we
put so high an esteem upon Foreign goods, and continue our Coin The reason why
Plate is drawn away.
at the same vallue, it will be still drawn away, and our Exports become the
less; which is wholly Inconsistant with the Common-good^ of England; whose poor
are employed, Trade increased, and wealth brought in by so much the more, as
the current of her Exports exceed her Imports: which stream has run backward
ever since the Spanish War: which War more duly deserves the daily remembrance
of the Supreme Authority of England; then Callis did to the Kings of France,
whilst ^t continued under the English Scepter.

Having done with the subject of Money: I come Of Shiping and Commerce.
now to speak of Commerce and Shipping, the other Wheel of Trade, Driven by
Merchants; but so laden with Impositions, and more by the abuses in collecting
it, as if Merchants (the most honorable profession and principal Fountain,
from whose Industrious streams flows in the riches of a Commonwealth) were
guilty of some high crimination, and not deserving the least encouragement. And
since I have subtracted the principal parts of this composure from other
Authors whom I desire not to rob of the thanks due unto them for so Public a
merit; I have and shall give each a due remembrance, and come now to Mr
Hawkins, the substance of whose Proposal made Mr Hawkins his Proposal touching
Excise.
to this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, was for the taking away of
Contribution, with Custom and Excise upon all goods Imported or Exported in
English bottoms: and that in consideration thereof, and for a Revennue to the
State, an Imposition should be laid only upon Wine, Beer, and Tobaccho,
throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland; to be Collected by Commissioners, to
be appointed in every County, in manner following.

That every Vintner, Strong-water-seller, Innkeeper, Ale house, and
Coffee-seller, in the three Nations should yearly compound for his drauft of
any such Liquors and Drinks: and to pay quarterly the sum to be agreed with the
said Commissioners.

That all private Families whatsoever should pay yearly for the Drink spent in
their Houses, according to the rates and qualifications following.

All Gentlemen of 1000lb. per Annum, or upwards, or 10000lb. personal Estate;
or a Merchant for themselves, and all in their Families per Head. 8 or 10s. All
others of 500lb. per Annum, or upwards, or 5000lb personal Estate, to pay for
all in their Families per Head. 6 or 8s All those of 100lb per Annum, or 500lb
personal Estate, to pay for themselves and all in their Families per Head. 4 or
6s All worth 100lb, and those in their Families to pay per Head. 2 or 4s All
worth 20lb Estate, and their Families, excepting all Children under, 12 years
of age to pay per Head. 0 or 1s


And all Persons of a lower Estate to go free.

That all persons that take Tobaccho by the Pipe, sneezing, or Chewing, to pay
yearly as follow.

All Lords and persons of Dignity, and their Ladies to pay yearly each. 3l
Knights and their Ladies, each. 2l Esquiers and their Wives, each. 1l Gentlemen
and their Wives, each. 10s Yoewmen and their Wives, each. 5s Handicraft men and
their Wives, each. 2s Labourours and their Wives, each. 1s All Servants and
Children above 12 years, old. 1s


The Calculation made of the Revennue that will be brought in by the Public
draft of Wine, Beer, and other Drinks in the three Nations, is a Million yearly.

By the rates set upon all private Families, for themselves, and those they
have in Family, is computed will amount yearly to two Millions.

Besides, for the Takers of Tobaccho, which is uncertain till settled, and
therefore not estimated. Which sum of three Millions is more then was ever yet
Collected by Custom, Excise, and Contribution: besides by taking off the
burden from Trade, Money, and Shiping, which are the stay and support of
Commerce, will be again increased in England.

This proposal receiving the debate of Parliament The result of the Committee
of Inspection thereupon.
was committed to the Commit of Inspection: and upon their consideration
confined only to the Public draft and sale of Wine, Beer, and Tobaccho, in
public Shops, and Houses: whereby I perceive they were not pleased to approve
of any such Imposition to be laid upon private Families: Remembering (as I
suppose) how distasteful it was in the year 1651. when Excise was paid by
private Families, much after this manner. Neither do I thing it proper at
present, considering how the State of affairs stand in England, to take off the
Duty of Custom and Excise from a few Merchants that sell it again for profit,
and place it so general upon all private Families, now not sensible of paying
any thing; though in truth I heartily wish it gone from all, except from such
goods as in policy ought to pay a greater duty then ordinary; for
encouragement and setting a balance to Trade. But for taking away the troble
occasioned to Merchants by the ill method or manner of Collecting it, which is
so great a Charge to the Public; that I think it most necessary to be
forthwith done; which will be a most acceptable service and favor to
Merchants. And for that I find it so rationally answered in a paper put in
before the said Committee by Mr. Cradock (whose report also touching this
subject, lies before them) I think it propper to commit the heads thereof, also
to public view.

Its therein confessed, that the taking away of all Custom, and Excise, lying
for the most part upon Foreign goods, will increase a Foreign Trade, and make
Mr. Cradocks answer to Mr. Hawkins his Proposals.
the Importation and Consumption of England to be the greater: But money and a
great part of the English manufactures will by that means fall and decrease;
for that by laying a duty upon such Foreign manufactures whereof the like are
made in England, and the continueing of it upon Coals, Lead, and Tynn, not to
be had elsewhere but in England, does not only bring Foreign Nations to
contribute to our Revennue, but supports our Native Industry, which otherwise
would be under sold and discouraged: and if not by that means balanced and
supported with some more proper law made to prevent the Exportation of Wools,
and Fullers-earth, whereby the Native Commodities of England exported may be
made equivolent in vallue to purchase the Commodities Imported, and Consumed;
It must necessarily follow that Plate must go to supply it, as it has done for
some years past. Moreover it were most Imprudent for this Commonwealth, not to
have regard to the Encouragement of Trade with Friends, and Alyes, and with
that Country which vends most of our superfluities, and supplies our defects:
and otherwise to discourage that Trade which hinders our manufacturies at home,
or proves otherwise prejudicial to our Plantations abroad; which will never be
well inspected without a Committee of Trade. Besides, the method in Collecting
the Custom and Excise, may be so amended that by taking away the superfluous
number of Officers, and preventing the frauds of some Merchants that by saving
their own duties are enabled to under-sell their Neighbors, to the great
prejudice of Trade, that the revenue may be brought in by a more proper way for
encouragement of Trade, and ease of so great a charge to the Nation.

Which if once taken into Consideration, M. Hawkins his method would be found
as much short in property, as his Calculation of so many Millions is too large
in quantity: for allowing the 9725. Parishes in England to have 160. Families,
in each Parish, at 6 Persons in a Family; the whole number of Persons makes
9336000. which being reasonably proportioned according to the rates set upon
private Families, will not amount to the part of Two Millions, the sum
estimated; and to expect from Scotland, and Ireland, above as much, they both
paying in Custom and Excise, not the part, nor in Contribution more then the
part, were as unequal as impossible in those parts to be Collected.

Also in the Calculation of the Public sale of Wine, and Beer, the mistake
cannot be less: for if the late Farmers by so much complained of Extortion,
could not make their Rents contracted for their respective-Farms of Beer and
Ale in England, which together with the whole receipts of Custom and Excise
upon Wines in the three Nations (which paies as much as it first Cost,) amounts
unto in all but 420000lb per Annum; How can Mr. Hawkins expect to raise a
Million upon the same, And admitting the Vintner may be compounded with at a
Rate considerable; the Merchant being freed from paying Custom and Excise may
drink Wine in his own house at half the Tavern price; As other private Families
may also, that buy it from Merchants; which will not easily be prevented: so
that the Vintner and that revennue will infallibly be ruined.

And for Tobaccho Mr. Cradock agrees with Mr. Hawkins, that the receipt will be
uncertain till settled and approves of the conceit to be good, though not for
the end Intended; for that the laying such an Imposition thereupon will
peradventure cause many Gentleman and others to leave it for Fancy, as they
took it: and the Ladies of England that now take it too public to do it more
private, not to the dishonor of their Sex and Country.

I have the rather been large upon this Proposal, finding it took up so long
Debate before this Parliament and Committee of Inspection, and was taking with
many of them. For I confess if so great a Revennue could be made out, and the
People be brought to pay it willingly, such a method may be drawn from Mr.
Hawkins Qu^ry whether it be best for Wine and Tobaccho to pay by License?
his proposals as may be good for advance of Trade. But what the Committee of
Inspection has done in designing Wines and Tobacchoes to pay by License, I may
not civilly contradict: yet am bold to Query; Whether that duty will be as
properly collected from many hands, so dispersed throughout the Nations, as
from the Few Imports thereof? And if it be by any alleged that it will much
advance the revennue (which I fear will not prove so,) Whether it may not also
be called hard measure when the Sellers thereof are compelled to pay such a
duty, or leave off Trading in those Commodities, for which they have no warrant
to rate the same in the Wines, and Tobacchoes, to be sold by any method or
prescription, other then every man's fancy: it being otherwise (at present) in
the Brewers Trade, who makes his Drink so much the smaller, according to an
exact proportion of so much the Barrel as is laid thereupon?

But for Beer, Ale etc. in Public houses, it will be Beer and Ale, will be
best collected by Lycense.
undoubtedly the properest way of Collecting it by License, as Mr Hawkins has
designed, whereby the Commonwealth will be excused of 20000lb per Annum, now
paid in Sallaries to Officers, besides brybes, and the trouble of attendance
upon Offices, to make weekly entries, etc. And the 10sh. yearly paid for every
License to the Justices of Peace, their Clarks by the persons that sell Drink
in Lycensed houses, will serve to pay half the rent of many of the poorer sort.
But for that I find it most plainly set down in the report made by Mr Cradock,
part in Print (but never published,) and part written, I have inserted it in
the latter part of my Book Touching a method presented in, by Mr Cradock, to
the Parliament
Verbatim; and also taken from thence the chiefest part of my Method, (touching
Custom, and Foreign Excise, with the increase of Shiping,) the rather for that
I find his method so well approved by many Members of Parliament, Colonel
Harvy especially, whose experience in those affairs, I render inferior to
none; I shall therefore proceed as follows.

That the Book of rates for Customs may be referred to some fit Person
experienced in Trade, to be rectified; Of Customs and Books of Rates.
and all Goods and Merchandise rated therein according to the true worth and
vallue now Current.

That where regard shall be had to Impose a greater or smaler duty to be paid
upon any Commodity either for advance to the revennue, the pe^servation of our
own Trade, or to discourage or invite others to Trade with us, in general or
particular Commodities; it may be done by imposing more or less to be paid in
the pound, according to such Book ^o Rates, and not by putting a differing price
upon Goods of the same specie and vallue; as is improperly done in the Book of
Rates now in being and cannot be properly corrected in any part, without a new
Impression of the whole.

That the duty may bepaid upon all Goods alike, by all Persons, the difference
to be only upon Commodities Foreign Ships only to pay Foreign duties.
Imported or Exported in Foreign Bottoms; (that is to say) such Ship or Vessel
not built in England, or English Teritories, or not in the possession of
English Owners, and whereof the Master and of the Mariners are not Natural
born Subjects of England: That such goodsand no other shall pay a greater duty
in the nature of Foreign Custom, which will be of greater advantage to the
State, be more agreeable with the government of a Commonwealth, and prove the
best expedient for increase of Shipping, and encouragement of Navigation.

That London, Bristol, Plymouth, Dover, Portsmouth, Hull and Yarmouth may be
made free Ports for Merchants Of making free Ports in England.
to Import, Land, and House all dry goods in the States Warehouses, without
paying any duty, more then a reasonable rate for Warehouse room: and that such
goods, with all other Foreign goods whatsoever, may be at pleasure exported in
such English Ships as aforesaid; with all Custom and Excise paid, to be
returned; and in Foreign bottoms with half subsidy returned, as at present:
whereby goods may find a Market in Foreign parts to some advadtage. The State
hereby cannot hazard more then 19000lb per Annum now received for half
subsidy, which I am confident will return with great advance, when that Clog of
Trade is Taken away, which only prevents goods here to be Imported: for
Exportation, as in Holland, and Legorn, where most goods consumed or sent by
landcarriage up into the Country pays a greater Excise then in England: besides
English Shipping will be Employed in Exportation of great quantities of Foreign
goods, yearly, that will then be laid on shore by Sweds, Danes, Hamburgars, and
other of the East-Land Frozen Countries; whose Shiping coming home but little
to late, are enforced to remain in our Harbors for safety most England as free
as Holland, etc.
part of the Winter; during which time they might make another Voyage to the
South-West parts, and return again Laden: so that excepting what is done in
favor to English Shiping, which cannot safely be taken away, England will be
as free as Holland, or any Port in Europe.

That Timber may be Prohibited to be Exporred, and care taken for its
preservation: For the Hollander For building of Shiping in England.
(though buying his Timber from us, and other Foreign parts) makes Shiping his
great manufacture; whilst the English having it more plentiful both in
England, Ireland, and New England, instead of building one, imprudently buy
four Ships from them, which will be prevented by putting this difference
between English and Foreign bottoms, and will be so great an Encouragement for
building here, that in few years Shiping may become as great a manufacture in
England, to her support against Foreign Enemies, and increase both of Trade and
the Revennue.

That to the end all Forrainers may be prevented of entering Ships for English,
whose Proprietors, and building are not really such, all Shiping now belonging
to the respective Ports and Harbors of England may be ordered forthwith to be
registered, and a duty of 40sh. per Tunn: laid upon all that shall be bought for
the Future, from Foreign Nations, to be regestred also in like manner; and oath
being made by the owners, or the major part of them, before the Commissioners
or Collectors of the Custom house appointed for the Port, of each Ship really
and truly appertaining to English proprietors, Certifficate thereof shall be
given, under their hands and seal of Office; which with the usual oath at
present made by Masters upon entry in Custom house, may be a sufficient
testimony in any Port of England; and all other Ships be deemed as Foreign, and
the duty be Collected for all goods Imported or Exported therein accordingly.

That to prevent the Exportation of Wools, and Fullers-Earth, To prevent the
Exportation of Wools and Fullers-Earth.
it may be made Felony for any person proved to be ayding, consenting to, or
assisting in the Shiping or putting the same on board any Foreign Ship, or
Vessel, or English Ship of War, (or some of them by report using to carry it
for Holland, being never visited the Custom-house Officers,) and that the
Captain, Master, and Mariners thereof (if within seven years after taken in
England,) may be also adjudged as Fellons: But if Shiped in other English
bottoms, the Goods, and Ship, only to be forfeited: for that few Masters (if
any at all) offend in that kind without approbation of their owners, who are
too often consenting to, and Imployers of Masters and their Seamen upon that
account: so that by taking away the penalty from Masters and Mariners, (at
present lying so hard that I conceive it duls the edge of the Law) their
Testimony, which is all that can be had, will not only be preserved, but
Justice be more freely Executed. And if Wools were Prohibited to be water born,
within the Dominions of England, and Scotland, upon any pretense whatsoever,
(except to be brought from an Island to the Main) and also not to be put in any
House, Barn, or other place nearer the Sea or any Navigable River then the
owners Dwelling House, upon pain of Confiscation, with a greater fine,
according to the nature of the Offense, I am confident it would prevent much
fraud practiced; which is of very great Importance to England, and most worthy
of remedy.

That upon seizing any Ship or other goods: whatsoever upon pretense of breach
of any law, or for nonpayment Commissioners of Customs to have more power.
of Duty, the Commissioners of the Customs in London may be Empowered to call
any person before them, and to take examinations upon oath touching the same;
and if they see cause to discharge such seizure; (referring only such as they
find in their judgment duly seized into the Exchequer,) and that the difficult
proof now lying upon the seizor (which I doubt introduces The proof to ly
upon the owners of goods seizen.
much perjury) may be put upon the proprietor; who if innocent of Fraud
intended, is the best able to clear his goods without further expense or delay
by suit in the Exchequer: besides much fraud in saving Customs, will by this
means be prevented: Provided it may not be construed to extend any power to
Officers of the Customs for seizing other goods but such as by very probable
or apparent demonstration are in truth seizable, whereof the Commissiones of
the Customs, may take care for preservation of Trade, and punishing offenders
according to their demerrits.

This being the substance of what I apprehend is deficient touching the
premises, and necessary to be communicated to the Parliament, to whom I have
presumed to Dedicate these my unworthy lines, Conceiving it within the power of
the Commissioners of Customs to rectify other things amiss; in the method
whereof more is spoken in Mr Cradocks report; unto which I refer my self and
others, desirous of the particulars, and proceed to the method for Excise.

That the same Book of Rates to be made for Customs, may also stand and be for
Excise; the difference Method for Excise.
of paying more or less then Custom to be rated so much more or less in the
pound, in like manner as aforesaid: which will prove a kind of check to each
Office, by the other, and be the best Informant to the general Surveyours that
shall be appointed over both.

That the Excise and Customs being dependent one Excise to be brought to the
Custom House.
upon the other, may be reduced into one Entire Office, (the receipts only to
be kept distinct,) and managed by the same Commissioners and Officers; which
will be very much to the ease and accommodation of Merchants in their
dispatches, and take off the trouble from Shopkeepers and others of fetching
tickets, (which is the cheef cause of such complaint against the duty.

That in order thereunto, instead of the first buyer Merchants to pay Excise.
the Merchant may be made liable to pay the Excise; who does the same voluntary
already, in all the out parts, and many also in London selling their goods
accordingly.

That in lieu of the Merchants standing liable to pay, Time to be given for
payment.
Excise, six months time may be given him to pay for the like quantity he
entered in-wards, and paid Customs, regard being had to such Commodities as are
not sold or exported within the said term, which may have three months time
more, but no longer. Also that a certain allowance may be computed for Leakage
of Wines, and other liquid or wasting Commodities, at so much per Cent, and no
other allowance to be made upon any pretense whatsoever.

That by making that a standing Law, which is now Merchants will have warrant to
sell the duty with his goods.
so differently practiced, and falls out often as Controversies between the
Merchant and first buyer, who although by the Law in being) is liable to pay
the duty, yet the Merchant also stands obliged to see it done, and discharged
upon his account (which trouble is in small parcels of goods sold a greater
inconvenience then the payment of the duty) many suits will be thereby
prevented, and the Merchant have more possitive warrant to demand for and sell
both the Custom and Excise with his goods.

That all Collectors and Receivers of Customs their Accounts how to be kept.
Journal or day Book, of receipts may serve to charge the Merchant for Excise,
whose Firm may also serve for Bill of Entry at Custom House, and from thence
be transferred to the Leagar, (which is all the trouble extraordinary,) and
both accounts are completed: the trouble in this and all things else, will be
to both Merchant and Officer shortened, the accounts upon occasion readier to be
compared and examined, and many mistakes and other inconveniences that now
happen between both, be prevented.

That the 5 per Cent now allowed upon all Goods entered 5 per Cent to be allowed.
in Custom House may be taken off, and in lieu thereof 5 per Cent may be
allowed the Merchant in Moneys, upon payment of his Excise: Provided it be paid
in at the day appointed, as aforesaid: otherwise the Merchant shall not claim
any benefit thereof: whereby Arrears will be prevented, by which the State has
lo^ many hundred thousand pounds.

That the Officers of Customs and Excise, are so far^ from corresponding one
with the other, or the one to The Officers of Excise and Custom, help to cheat
the state.
question that which might prevent a fraud to the other Office, (if it bring no
profit to himself, as servants (...) one Master should do,) that they are
rather helpful (...) cheat the State against each others Office, as thoug^
servants of two different Interest; which shows ho^ unnecessary and
Inconsistant one of them stands with the Public good.

That seven Commissioners may be appointed at the The number of Commissioners.
Custom House to manage both duties; whether the Excise may be removed in all
Ports: and that any three of the said Commissioners may be a Little; so that
they may divide into two Committees upon occasion: and that 8 hours in the Day
may be allowed for all men to have their business done, either in Custom or
Excise, (that is to say, from 8 in the morning till 12 a Clock, and from 2 till
6 in the afternoon.) And that all the Excise Officers may be discharged,
excepting some few Accountants, and Surveyours, which will be inconsiderable in
respect of the present number which accordto this Method will be useless.

That the prejudice to the State for want of reducing Excise makes less then
Custom.
the Excise sooner to a more certain method is evident, in that the said Duties
of Excise, set on Wines and many other Commodities is double as much (and in no
particular less then the duty of Customs; yet as to the same Commodities, it
ever came short in the receipts of what the Customs yields to the Revenue,
as may appear by the account following, taken out of Mr Cradocks report: which
I have examined by the Auditors Books, and do think it worthy to be hear
Communicated.

The total receipts of the Customs of England are Mr Cradocks account.
usually 390000l. per Annum, as it amounted unto, for the last four years,
taking them together; from which I substract 95000l. per Annum, received for
Native goods Exported, and 19000l. per Annum, for half subsidy of Foreign goods
again Exported, and the real receipt of Foreign goods consumed in England is
Yearly. 276000l. That the said Foreign goods consumed ought to pay Excise:
which upon Wines, Drugs, and many other Commodities is double as much as the
duty of Customs and upon all other Commodities 5 per Cent, more; so that the
Excise may be reasonably computed at least part more then Custom, which then
amounts to 345000l. per Annum, from which is deducted for Leakage of Wines,
and other Liquid Commodities after Housing 8000l. per Annum, which is all that
can be pretended, and the real receipt of Excise Yearly ought to be. 337000l.
For the Excise of Foreign goods, for the last four years past by a Computed
medium for one year have been received but. 175000l. So there appears to be
lost in the Collecting it (by the present method) of what it ought to make
according to the entries in Custom House, Yearly. 162000l. Moreover there may
be preserved by bringing the Excise under the Custom House management, and
taking away the superstuous number of Officers and other insident charges,
Yearly. 030000l. Also by putting the Excise of Beer, and Ale, into the method
following, to be paid by License in the several Counties of England (London
excepted) it may be Collected for 6d in the pound better then for the 2sh at
present allowed the Sub-commissioners; and thereby, will be also preserved
Yearly. 018000l. So the demunition of the Revennue by the superstuous charge of
Excise Officers and apparent loss (as I conceive by the improper method) in
collecting it is Yearly 210000 pounds (allowing the Custom receipts the same,
which by a better method might be also very much improved) I say. 210000l.


I presume some that are acquainted with the receipts Excise Improved by Major
Manron.
of the Excise may allege that a greater sum then 175000l, was received for
Foreign Goods the last Years which is confessed; but Computing the last four
Years (which is the properest way to find its real income) and it will be
found not to exceed the said sum: yet I confess a very great Improvement was
the last year made by regulating their Method, in keeping Merchants accounts,
which was done by Major Manton one of the late Commissioners, whose ingenuity
duly observes this remembrance.

I confess my own opinion could not credit this account, with other particulars
in Mr Cradocks report, (as Custom falen since 1655.
the revenue of Customs to be decreased 80000 l. per Annum, since the Year
1655. finding the total receipts as great as formerly) until I was convinced
of its reallity by a further inspection into the Book of Rates, as I have
likewise made into the method of Excise, which I find contrived as if purposely
designed to ruin Trade; by compelling every person buying or selling any Goods
in the strickness of the Law to fetch a Ticket before it be delivered (though
living at never so remote a distance from the Excise Office) or else must
submit his Goods and himself and Trade to be Trouble to Merchants by the ill
method and other inconveniences.
interupted by every (of the too many) Excise Officers, which is not all; for
he that desires to walk according to their Excise rule, is so much enslaved by
the long and tedious attendance upon Offices, that, besides his own trouble and
hinderance in his Trade, requires a Servants labor extraordinary to all of any
considerable dealings. And I am bold to affirm that the very Officers of Excise
are as chargable to the Commonwealth, as a considerable Army: Besides, the
present method refers so much to the Oaths of all Trades and their servants
that he is become the most expert Merchant that swears with the most handsome
reservations, and knows best how to equivocate: which custom of sinning has
so taken away the Conscience of it, that by such careless swearing is
introduced most wilful perjury; to the great dishonor of God the scandal of
our religion, and infamy of this Nation: so that if not speedily stopped, it
will eat out the very life of Grace, and Spirit of Fidelity from amongst us:
whereby that sacred bond of an Oath (observed by the very Turks, and Heathens,
as the most binding tie on Earth, and should be also a Christians chief
security) will expose the Lives and Estates of every honest tender Conscience
to the cruelty and treachery of such profain persons.

Truly, the hopes I have that this will be rectified have induce me to bestow
this labor, in expectation, This written in hopes to cause Excise to be taken
down, etc
that what advance shall be made to the revenue will be applied to extemate the
burden of Trade: so that Clothing and other English manufactures, with the
Oils and other materials, Imported to be Employed thereupon, will be exempted
from paying the least duty: whereby we may recall that Staple from Holland, and
prevent those ingenious Artists from under selling us.

I find also in Mr Cradocks report a second method touching Excise, which I
remember to have seen practiced The nature of Collecting Excise in Spain.
in Malaga, and as I suppose is in use in all other parts of Spain, where in
truth Excise is greater then in England, but Collected (in my apprehension) by
a much properer way then with us here: for there only two or three Officers
with a Book (wherein the Merchant stands charged, goes to their Houses once in
5. or 6. months, and taking account of all Goods remaining upon the Merchants
hands give him another distinct charge, which being compared with his old
account, they compute for all Goods found gone or sold, for which the Merchant
gives his bill to pay accordingly at a month after: so that likewise by this
method the Merchant is made pay Excise for as much as he entered in the
Custom House: and may deliver his Goods at pleasure, without ticket or trouble
of Officers; and Oaths are not at all required. But I must return to the method
of Beer, and Ale, which I conceive will be Collected most proper, and at least
charge by Lycenses, as aforesaid, and the Excise now rendered so Compulsive be
accounted a more voluntary duty.

That in referrence thereunto, the former Laws Prohibiting Method touching Be^r
and Ale.
all Persons to sell Beer and other Drinks without Lycense, may be revived, and
enjoined to be duly executed; and that Lycenses may be granted only to such as
the Justices of Peace in each County shall think fit and apoint at a yearly
rate: unto whose assistance may be added a Commissioner, without whom nothing
shall be transacted: who with a servant or two at most may be sufficient to
manage any indifferent County according to this method, at little charge in
respect of of what is now therein expended.

That the unequallity in the Trades and draughts of How all men may be justly
rated.
several persons appearing the greatest obsticle in this design, I conceive
may be rectified by the said Commissioner, who making it his whole business,
may inform himself by the former receipts, or by the People themselves, that
are apt enough to inform him also what they paid the last Farmers; which
together with the assistance of the said Justices may enable them to put an
equal estimate upon all Lycenses, according to to the quallity and trade of the
Persons desiring them; who will not be unwilling to pay down a quarters rent,
and give Bond yearly to be renewed, for the remainder.

That no Lycense granted to any Person may extend further then for Drink sold
and spent in his dwelling Drink sold in Faires to pay Excise.
House: So that the Drink sold at Public Faires, may not be exempted from
paying Excise, but may be Collected at so much the Barrel, by the said
Commissioner and his servants, which will be of some use, if only to pay them
their yearly Sallaries.

That the said Justices or any one of them, together with the said Commissioner
may have power to call Power to punish offenders.
Constables and other Officers to their assistance in their several districts;
and also to lay a Fine or other lawful punishment upon offenders (that sell
drink without Lycense, according to there demerits: to be paid one Moiety to the
State, and the other to the poor of the Parrish where the offense is committed:
by which means the People will be made to observe the plain Laws by them
understood, and be freed from that of Excise, often intrapping them, and so
mystical to vulgar apprehensions.

That all common Brewers not selling within London, Brewers out of London to be
discharge of Excise, except for small Beer.
and lines of Communication, by means thereof may be dis-obliged from paying
Excise for all strong Beer, or Ale; and a penalty be imposed on such as shall
sell to persons not Lycensed that usually are known to tapp out or retayle the
same: and that in consideration of the six pence per Barrel laid on smaller
Beer, the Brewer that will not compound may be made liable to such Imposition
quarterly to be paid as two of the said Justices and Commissioner shall
reasonably calculate. Always provided, that any Brewer finding himself Injured
by such estimation and shall together with the testimony of another make proof
thereof upon Oath before the said Justices, etc. that then due allowance may
(...)

That this way of management will not be so proper Brewers of London to pay as
at present.
in London, and lines of Communication, where the Brewer serves all that is
expended; and from whom the duty will be collected at the least charge; but as
to the Country duty the case is much different, for their Excise being paid
promiscuously by others as well as by Common Brewers, both must be kept to a
survey, which if done to any purpose, the one fourth part of the receipts will
not defray the charge: by which means both the former Commissioners and late
Farmers have been enforced to compound with all in the Country at as good rates
as they could: which in effect is the method here prescribed, dearly paid for,
and brought from Holland to England, for expedition over the Alps.

To this may be added, that the revolutions and Interruptions of Governments
since the Death of the Protector, Obstructions in Government hinders the receipt.
have been great Obstructions, to the receipts upon both Foreign and Inland
duties, which are (as I conceive) augmented by giving the Custom and Excise
but a 2 or 3 months continuance, and is no small Intemation to Officers (whose
places seem the more contingent,) and others also to make Hay whilst the Sun
shines: but apprehending the reason, I shall say no more, but that when the
Excise upon all Goods is reduced to a certain sum, and day of payment according
to the methods aforesaid, it may then be revived from one month to another,
(if thought fit) without prejudice to the receipts; when contrariwise if it
remain subject to supposed changes, under the present method, the revenue will
be exposed to ruin, and many Merchants also receive prejudice by the advantage
made by others that pay little (if any duty at all:) which is, and will be a
great hindrance to Trade.

And apprehending that the Excise laid upon Beer, Ale, Iron, Hops, with other
Inland Commodities, (not usually exported,) is the properest to be continued as
long as the necessities of State require to be so supplied, as being the least
burden to Trade, and therefore in use, with the Netherlands State, whose
revenues is chiefly supported thereby. I shall conclude with Mr Cradock, that
if less were laid upon many particulars The benefit to the State and
Commonwealth.
of Foreign Goods, more would be received into the revenue: and that by this
regulating the Custom and Excise, the foregoing Orders and Tickets, whereby
the State has been abused, and still are with other frauds practiced between
the Merchant and first buyer will be prevented: the Merchants color of being
so much in arreares as he has been; (whereby the Commonwealth lost five parts
of six, at once of all the debts in the Nation) and no good way to this day
found to make the Merchant truly accountable, will be also remedied, the
Shopkeepers and others freed from the trouble of fetching Tickets, the revenue
of Excise and Custom be improved as may appear by the aforesaid account two
hundred and odd thousand pounds per Annum; besides by such advance of Plate may
forthwith yield profit to the State at least five Millions; and by the
Imposition upon all wrought Plate half a Million at present, and 50000 lb. per
Annum for time to come: which will discharge the Arrears due to the Army, and
other Public debts with a great overplus. Navigation in England will be also
encouraged, Shiping and Money increased, and the Excise Offiers so obnoctious to
the People be taken away, the Commonwealth eased and the revenue be more
quietly managed to the content of all People, and Encouragement of Trade.

Postscript.
TO the objections which some perhaps will make that these Particulars are of
great weight, and therefore fit to be deferred till they may be more properly
discoursed on, is answered; that what is said touching Plate, may soon be
determined, and a Revenue thereby brought in sooner then by a monthly
Assesment, and with more satisfaction to the Nation; and that the method here
laid down for Excise and Custom does a breviate the Circumstances (that
occasion trouble) and superfluities (that beget charge) and brings it into a
narower compass, and the Revenue to a greater Certainty; which if referred to a
Committee Experienced in Trade, might be composed within a fortnight, and would
be a most acceptable service done in England.

FINIS.

