A VINDICATION OF THE Ministers OF CHRIST FROM That Slander cast on them, that
they Are HOUSE-CREEPERS, because they sometimes Preach in private Houses.

ALSO Proving by the Scripture who are House-Creepers, and the evil they do
where their corrupt Doctrine is Received.

Held forth in two SERMONS on 2 Timothy 3.6.

By W. E.

2 PET. 2. But there were false prophets among the people, even as there shall
be false teachers among you, which shall privily bring in damnable Heresies.

VER 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by whom the Way of Truth
shall be evil spoken of.

LONDON, Printed for John Pike of Shaftsbury in the County of Dorset
Book-binder and Bookseller. 1673.

To the Reader.
THESE are to assure Thee, that the Author of this ens^ing Discourse, never
intended it for the Press, being sensible of his own weakness. But by
Providence it is thus brought about: He being desired by some friends to open
this Scripture in 2 Timothy 3.6. This Text being made use of by some to discourage
Persons from attending the Ordinances of God in private places; Although
through the great Mercy of God, and the favor of the King, they cannot
properly be called private Places, since the Places are appointed by Authority,
and it is free for any to come unto them; They make use of this Scripture to
sear the weak from coming thither, suggesting unto them, that those who preach
in such places are the Persons that the Apostle here calls Creepers into
Houses, and the same that he calls ver. 13. wicked men and deceivers: And th^s
Scripture they make use of as the Great Engine to batter down all such
Assemblies.

This ensuing Discourse is to show, who were those tht the Apostle here calls
House-creepers; And that they have not this denomination given them on this
account, because they did preach in Houses, for it was the frequent Practices
of this and the rest of the Apostles, yea, of Christ himself.

But it was because these here spoken of did choose private Places, to the end
that they might steal the hearts of the simple from the truth, and their wiles
might not be discerned, yea, those who under the pretense of truth; with fair
words beguile the hearts of the simple, are the same with those the Apostle
here calls House-creepers, although they appear in public Places.

This being a subject seldom reated of, some having taken the Notes of the
Discourse, were very earnest to send it to the Press, which the Author was
unwilling should be done: But this Argument prevailed with him to give his
Consent; Hoping that some Person whom the Lord has endowed with spiritual
Gifts and Learning, might from hence be provoked to put forth his Abilities,
for the further clearing up this Truth, viz. The Lawfulness of Assembling
together to wait on God in his Ordinances, in such Places, which some by way of
scorn call private Places; And that those Ministers who do endeavor faithfully
to perform their duty in such Places, are not of those who are here condemned
by the Apostle, but such as did follow the Example of Christ and his Apostles;
that so those that are weak might not be affrighted by such Bug-bears: If any
shall receive benefit by these weak Endeavors, Give the glory to the Lord, to
whom alone it is due, that has enabled so weak a Creature to speak a word for
the truth, that is so much despised by many; the Lord make it a good word to
the Souls of his People. This is the earnest desire and hearty Prayer of Him
who wishes Peace and Prosperity to all the Churches of God.

Farewell.
2 TIMOTHY 3.6. For of this Sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead
Captive silly Women with diverse lusts.


THE Apostle in the Beginning of the Chapter, by the Spirit of Prophecy does
foretell, That the last days shall be perilous and full of danger; and then
what is the reason of it, as you may see 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For men shall be Lovers
of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, etc. So that there are in it these two
things Considerable.

1. That in the last days there shall be perilous times.

2. That the reason of such perilous times is, because men abound in sin and
wickedness; Whence observe by the way,

That abundance of iniquity makes Perilous Times. This is very clear in the
Scriptures. You may see, that when Holiness does increase, and Persons make it
their business to walk according to Gods Word, at such times there is happiness
and great Blessings vouchsafed unto a people. So on the other Hand, when people
Apostatize and fall from God, then usually such times are full of danger. It
was a time full of danger with Israel, when sin and wickedness abounded among
them, and they departed from God, and apostatized from the purity of his
worship Judge. 2.14.15. chapter 3. v 8.12. chapter 4. v. 1.2. chapter 6. v. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
Psalm. 16.4. When people turn aside from God and set up their own lusts, they
shall have sorrow enough. And again, when people make it their business to walk
with God, all things prosper with them.

2. Chron. 13.3.4.5.10.11.12. The like you have in the days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. but when men forsake the Commandments of the Lord, and walk contrary
to him, God has a controversy with such a land. It is the abundance of
iniquity that makes times perilous I shall give you two reasons of it.

1. Times are usually full of danger when iniquity abounds, because God usually
appears against such a people.

2. Because when iniquity abounds, people allow themselves to walk after their
own lusts, they are ready to break out into any wickedness: there is nothing
within them to restrain them, but they are ready to do whatsoever their base
hearts prompt them to, though it be never so grossly prejudicious to men's
estates, lives, or liberties. I might much enlarge here: But I shall speak no
further to this.

You have seen the dependence of the text, on the foregoing words. Now says
the text, For of this sort are they that creep into houses. Of what sort? of
the sort here mentioned, such has had a form of godliness, but denied the power
thereof.

The Apostle speaks not of such that were heathens, that had no knowledge of
God, and made profession of religion, but of such as professed God, and that
they were the friends of God. For, says the text (having a form of godliness)
they had a form of godliness, but they denied the power thereof: They pretended
much for Christ and the ways of Christ, but denied that which was the main,
viz. a full submission of themselves to Christ, to walk according to the rules
of Christ.

Now every particular of this might clearly be proved concerning the
Antichristian power, the mystery of iniquity, and those that are plunged into
it. The text says, they have a form of Godliness; and have not these? Do not
they pretend much for Christ? when none do oppose him more. Are not they lovers
of pleasures, more then lovers of God? May it not be clearly demonstrated, that
notwithstanding their pretenses for Christ, they stand in open opposition
against him in all his Offices? As first for his prophetical office, they are
so far from harkening to the voice of Christ, that they set up their own
inventions in the place thereof, preferring them before his institutions. They
obey not Christ as the great Prophet so that if those, on whom they urge their
institutions, should demand, What Word of God have you for these things? They
would return nothing but scoffs,

Again, as for Christ's Priestly Office, what a dishonor is it to Christ, that
they make their unbloody sacrifice of the Altar to be a Propitiation for the
sins of men?

And as for Christ's Kingly Office, they have no regard to the Authority of
Christ, nor to the Rule that he has appointed for the Government of the
Church, nor have they any respect to the Spirit of God, but make a mock of him,
though it be so clear in the Scripture, Romans 8.9, 14 They are so far from
walking according to the Word of God, that they walk contrary to it: so far
from subduing their sinful pollutions, that they endeavor by all means to
cherish them, maintaining their own Works of Prayer, Charity, Devotions, as
meritorious, they pretend much honor to the Cross of Christ, but on every
trivial occasion make nothing to swear by his blood and wounds: they pretend
much to Prayer, Reading with hands and eyes lifted up; yet how far are they
from that spiritual zeal and fervor of affection, that is necessarily
requisite in Prayer. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.

Now, of this sort are they that creep into Houses, leading Captive filly
Women, etc. under the pretense of being for God, they deceive people, and draw
them into pernicious errors.

Leading Captive silly Women. They usually assault such, because by reason of
the weakness of their sex and understanding, they are not able to discern their
wiles and subtilties. For observe, that it is not spoken generally of Women. But

1. Silly Women. Such as are ignorant of the Truth of God, that content
themselves with an outward profession, not endeavoring to be firmly grounded
and established in the things of God.

2. Such as were laden with fin, led away with diverse lusts, that though they
lived under a Profession of Religion, and contented themselves, because they
apprehended they had some desires, or at least some kind of affection to the
truth, yet they were under the power of their corruptions. Now such that are
wilfully captivated to their lusts, it is no wonder, if God suffer them in his
just Judgment to be ensnared by those that lie in wait to deceive them.

So that the Apostle means by silly women all such, as either by reason of the
weakness of their understanding, being not able to discern the wiles and
craftiness of deceivers, or such as being under the power and dominion of some
lust, God in his just judgment suffers to be ensnared by them. Thus you have
the sense of the words. In the words you have observable these things.

1. The persons here spoken of, called by the Apostle, creepers into houses.
viz. false teachers.

The description of them, Of this sort are they. He shows their evil
qualities in the precedent verses, They are lovers of themselves, covetous,
beasters, proud, cursed speakers, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, despisers of them that are good. Traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: Having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof. Of this sort are they, says he, as much as to say,
this is a plain and full description of them.

3. He shows what fad works these make where they creep into houses, they
lead captive.

4. The persons that they prevail on, Silly women, which is not to be
understood only of that sex, but persons that are simple, void of understanding
as to spiritual things whether men or women.

5. These persons that are thus led captive are more fully described by that
corrupt state they are in, viz. They are such as are laden with sin, such as
are under the power and dominion of some base lust or lusts: These are they who
are made a prey of by them. Now here observe.

Doct. 1. That men are not accounted these house creepers in the Scripture
account, or in the account of the Apostle, because they do preach in houses or
secret places: but when they get into such places, and there under the pretense
of holiness make it their business secretly to draw such as are weak from the
truth to error; and those who choose such places to carry on their design, may
justly be called creepers: yea, all that in their teaching carry on such a
design under the pretense of holiness, although they preach in the most public
places, and in the greatest assemblies; yet in the Apostles sense here they are
creepers.

Doct. 2. That such persons usually effect their design on such as are either
weak and ignorant, not able to discern their corrupt and unsound doctrine; or
such as are under the power of some base lust or lusts, be they men or women,
(for it may be understood of both sexes) such being by the just judgment of God
left to themselves, and so they easily prevail on them.

For the proof of the first Doctrine, I shall give you several Scriptures, by
which this shall (...) appears Consider that place John 10.1. He that climbeth
in some other way, he that enters not by the door is a thief and a robber.
Now the Door is Christ by which Men enter, when they are sent of Christ, (as
certainly Christ sends none but such as hear his voice, none are his sheep
but such as hear his voice) those then that come in, and not by Christ, may
well be termed Creepers or Climbers up another way, Gal. 2.2. We shall find
there, that the Apostle communicated the Gospel privately to them which were of
Reputation; and it was by reason of the false brethren that crept in amongst
them. So that those Persons are called Creepers, that under the pretense of
Holiness draw people from the truth, of whom also the Apostle Jude speaks,
Jude v. 4.

Now for the better understanding hereof I shall show you.

1. That in the Apostles judgment none were accounted House-creepers, because
they did preach in private places.

2. That these are to be so accounted, that under a pretense of Holiness do
seek to draw people from the truth; and those that do so, though never so
public, yet come under this Denomination.

1. That in the Apostles Judgment none were accounted House-creepers, because
they did preach in private places; I call it private, in opposition to those
places that were appointed for the public Worship and Ordinances of God, as
amongst the Jews there was the Temple and the Synagogues. Now you shall find,
that it was the practice of Christ and his Apostles, not only in the Temple and
Synagogue, but in diverse other places to preach the Word. It was justified by
Christ himself, Mat. 5. he preached on a Mountain, Mat. 13.2. in a ship; and at
another time he preached by the highway side, and by Jacobs-w^ll to the
Samaritane woman; John 4. and afterward to the Samaritans, v. 40.41, 42. And
this was not only the practice of Christ, but of the Apostles afterward, John
20.19.26. so that at both these times they were met together in a house. So
Acts 1.12.13, 14. where it appears also, that they met together about the
Ordinances of God; for it is said, they continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication. And so Acts 10. Peter preached at Cornelius's house, Acts 16.13,
Paul preached at the Rivers side, where God opened the heart of Lydia. And
again at Athens, on the midst of Mars-hill. Acts 17.17.22. So you see, that it
was the practice of Christ and his Apostles to preach in several places,
wheresoever Providence cast them. Hence we may safely conclude, That which was
the Practice of Christ, and his Apostles afterward, cannot be rationally
supposed to be condemned by this expression of the Apostle, nor was it the
Apostles intent that persons should fall under the denomination of
house-creepers, because they taught in private places, since it was use both by
Christ and his Apostles. Nay, it is very remarkable and worthy of our
observation, that the Pharisees, as captious as they were, did not (as we read)
lay this as a slander on Christ and his Apostles, for teaching in such places.

2. That those indeed are the persons, whom the Apostle means, who putting on
an outward show and form of holiness, under that deceive, and lead from the
truth. Now this will evidently appear, if you view the words that we read unto
you, in which the Apostle does discover them.

1. That they were such, that had a form of godliness, Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. For of this sort, etc.

2. They were such that under the form did deceive, by drawing from the truth.
So that when men do purposely and out of choice take such places, wherein they
may carry on their pernicious designs, and lead persons from the truth, these
in the Scripture sense, and the Apostles judgment are rightly termed
house-creepers, as the Lord Jesus Christ says, John 3.20. For every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. Such then may be said to be creepers, when they get to
secret places, on purpose to avoid the light, that their deeds of darkness may
not be discovered. It is beyond all doubt that the Apostle means not of such,
that were forced and constrained to take such places: but doubtless the Apostle
speaks of those false teachers, that had diffused their errors, and spread
themselves abroad amongst the Churches of God, thinking privately to undermine
them: there were some of them in Corinth, some in Galatia, some in Philippi,
and Coloss also, and at several other places: and Jude speaks of it to those
to whom he wrote. Such were ready to say after this manner: What, will ye not
observe the Commandments of God? Has not the Lord expressly Commanded
Circumcision, and the forbearance of such and such meats? Is not this the will
of God? and so by such fair words, many were seduced and drawn away, not being
able to discover the bottom of their designs. You may see, how notably the
Apostle speaks to the Colossians, Col. 2.16.17, 18. these men pretended much
to holiness and humility, that they yielded obedience to God, and had his law
amongst them; but see what the Apostle says, v. 20. If then ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, if ye are partakers of the death of
Christ, what have you to do with these things? You may see, how the Apostle
takes them off from these arguments, they reasoned thus. This the Law
commands, therefore we ought to do it: Admit it did so, says the Apostle,
but now by the Death of Christ ye are free from these things; you are not
commanded to forbear such and such meats, but of every creature you may
receive: the abstinence from meats was typical and figurative, but now you
are taken of from these things: So that the argument has a double force. If
they plead the Law, says the Apostle, ye are dead unto the law.

If they plead the practice of some that are wise men, says the Apostle, Yea
are dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, and then surely the
traditions of men cannot bind you. You are freed from the Doctrines of men,
(i.e.) such Doctrines that are not grounded upon the Word of God. So that there
may be fair pretenses and specious shows of holiness, when indeed there is no
such thing. Now then it appears, that since this is not spoken of those, that
do on some occasion or other preach in private places (for indeed it was the
practice of Christ and his Apostles) it must be spoken of those that do out of
voluntary choice take such places for the furtherance of their wicked designs,
to entrap such that cannot discern their wiles. As for instance, when they urge
such words as these, What will you not be ruled by the Church? will ye not be
reconciled to the Church? this avails much with such, not considering, that
the Church is ruled by Gods Word, and what is not according to this Word there
is no truth in it; that whatsoever is not grounded on the Word, and commanded
by God, is willworship; that every plant that God has not planted, shall be
plucked up; that things, though done with never so much zeal, yet is not
warranted by Gods Word, are unacceptable to God; as you may see Zach. 7. The
Jews bad observed a Fast in their 70 years captivity; and now upon their return
they sent Sharezer and Regemmelech to the house of God, to know whether they
should continue it, yea or no. But see what follows v 5.6, 7. when ye fasted
and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those 70 years, did ye at all
fast to me, even to me etc. It was such a service that God had not appointed
them, and they going to press it on people, God owned it not.

So that those that under a pretense of holiness do endeavor to draw souls
from the truth, they are those that are the house creepers: yea, though they
preach in never so public places. For what difference is there between a
Mountebanck that mounteth on a stage, and by some tricks of Legerdemain
deceives the people, and one that does it in a private place, for it is deceit
in both: nay, it is greater impudence in him that does it publicly, then in
him that does it privately. So is it here.

I shall illustrate it by another similitude. As when one comes into another
man's house with a vizard, he is judged by the man of the house to be such a
person; but when he discovers himself, he is found to be another man, then he
was thought to be; such a man may be counted a house-creeper, though he comes
in openly. So it is here, if persons under the pretense and vizard of holiness,
do endeavor to deceive the simple, they may come under this denomination of
house-creepers.

Now I shall show you by several reasons.

1. That it cannot be understood of those that take such places out of
necessity and constraint.

2. That it must be meant of such, that under a pretense of holiness do
endeavor to draw people from the truth; yea, though it be in never so great a
concourse of people.

1. That it cannot be understood of those that take such places out of
necessity and constraint.

1. Because it is not of choice by them, but necessity that causes it to be
so, therefore they ought not to be charged with evil on this account. Could any
one rationally accuse Christ, that he preached secretly and privately, when he
withdrew out of Judea, and taught Galilee, when the Jews sought his life? Was
the Apostle Paul to be charged with evil for preaching in a house Acts 18.6.?
when he had before openly reasoned in the Synagogues with the Jews, and they
raised mutinies and clamours against him, and drove him from them. Could the
Apostles justly be blamed, when they met together in private places, and in the
night time? And so the Church is former times when they were persecuted
violently by the Heathens, and durst not appear openly. Nay, this truth is so
evident, that it is granted themselves, they do even by the Papists affirm that
in times of persecution it is meet and necessary for the people of God to meet
together in private places.

OB. But some might say, Yes indeed, for Christ and his Apostles and the people
of God in such cases to meet together, this is granted, but what is this to
Schismatics and Heretics; these may not do so.

ANS. But I tell you, it is not men's accusations that prove it to be so,
persons should consider thus much, that before men can be justly charged as
Schismatical and Heretical, it ought to be made, by clear and solid arguments.
But this we know that in all Countries they that have the greatest power
condemn all others. If you go to Rome, they will tell you that their
superstition is the worship of God. So if you go to Constantinople, they will
tell you that their Turcisme and Mahometisme is the right worship of God. But
persons ought not to be charged with Heresy, till they are convinced by
strength of argument out of Gods Word. It was a Doctor of the Law that tells
us concerning Christ, does our Law judge any man, before it has heard him?
Nay, you shall see, it was acknowledged by the very heathens Acts 25.5.16. we
should not then that bear the name of Christians, be more unreasonable then the
heathens; but take heed of passing such peremptory sentences, before the matter
be proved.

2. Because what they do they do in simplicity and sincerity of heart, without
any designs of their own 2 Cor. 4.12. where the Apostle speaking of himself and
of the rest of the faith full, proves that they were not of those deceivers,
v. 2. We says he, have renounced the hidden things of darkness, we have not
walked in craftiness, we have not handled the word of God deceitfully, and what
is that? It may be this, that when men see, it is best for their interest, then
they can plead for the Word but when it is a disadvantage to them in the world,
then they can make use of the Word to decry these things that formerly they
cried up, these are those whom the Apostle means that handled the Word
deceitfully; but we were not of these, and why? because we handled the word by
manifestation of the truth, the consciences of our hearers can acquit us, that
we have endeavored to set before them the mind and will of God.

It cannot be understood that these should be the persons here mentioned,
because then the Apostle would condemn himself and the practice of all the rest
of his fellow Apostles; nay of the Lord his Master. Now it cannot be rationally
imagined, that the Apostle Paul who was infallibly guided by the blessed Spirit
of God, should thus miscarry, and give occasion to his adversaries to triumph,
they would have said; Look here, he condemns himself, he is one of those that
preach in Houses. But then

2. It must be meant of such, that under a pretense of Holiness, do endeavor to
draw persons from the truth.

1. It must be understood of these, because these are not the persons that they
seem to be, for they come under the Guise of Holiness, pretending much good to
the souls of men, but yet aim chiefly at some designs of their own; these are
the persons the Apostle speaks of, and therefore he gives them this name of
House-creepers; so that those who get into the Church of God, (be it either in
private or public places) under a pretense of Holiness, when indeed it is not
so, but there is some other design in their entrance, they are such that do
creep in, but they do not enter; for they are not such as they were supposed to
be. And therefore the Apostle Jude says, v. 4. There are certain men crept in
unawares; the Church was not aware of them, they deceive them by their wiles,
and therefore properly such are the House creepers, much like unto the Thief
that comes into a Man's House, and is disguised; when he is in he spoils and
robs: he may be said to creep in, because though he was let in, yet he was not
let in as such an one.

2. Because they purposely choose such places, and out of a design they love
s^crecy, that they might not be discovered, but carry on their designs the
more undiscernably. It is one thing for a mon to take secret places out of
necessity, and another thing to choose such places purposely. Now the Scripture
tells us, that he that is evil hates the Light. Hence it is that the Apostle
calls such creepers in another place, deceitful workers, for they are
equivalent 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. They are false Apostles, deceitful workers. But
if they are so, how are they then admitted into the Church? oh, says he,
(transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ) they make pretenses of
holiness, and shroud their wolvish nature in a Lambs-skin. And they are such
too, whose intent is the same, though it be never so openly, and though they
might come in as guides, and leaders of the Church, yet in time they discover
themselves to be such as lead out of the way.

So you see who they are that the Apostle speaks of, under the denomination
of house-creepers; I shall now make some application, USE 1. This shows us
the evil of those who are ready to make a bad use of this Scripture, and from
this do endeavor to cast reproach on all such that do assemble together out of
necessity, and wait on God in, his ordinances in private places. What ground
have they to make this as their main battery against such? Surely they bewray
their ignorance and malice herein. 1. Their ignorance, not rightly considering
the Scripture, and that it was the practice of Christ and his Apostles. Were
this rightly understood, they might be easily convinced, that there is no
ground from Scripture to charge men with evil on this account. Alas Christ,
whom they will profess to be their Master, was frequent in this manner of
preaching; he taught in a Ship on the Mount, in the House, and several other
places. And the Apostle; of Christ, who were the Ministers of Christ, and
followed him, and those, whom many of them do profess themselves to be their
successors and sollowers, were frequent in this. And therefore it must needs
be a thing which is good and just, that the Word of God does justify. Yea,
Christ has left it on record, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered
together, etc. It is sad therefore to cast slander and reproach on persons,
for doing that which was done by Christ and his Apostles, that were left by him
to be guides unto the Church. For the Apostle Paul says, Be ye followers of
me, as I am of Christ. Now where we have the example of the Apostle Paul,
concurring with the example of Christ, it ill becomes men to cast slanders on
any; especially when they have been instruments of forcing men to private
places. It is very well known, that many in this our Nation, on whom this is
injurously charged, have been in as public places as any other, and defired as
diligently to attend the work that God called them unto. But when such
impositions were put on them, that they could not yield unto without manifest
wrong done unto their consciences; it was their great grief, and the grief of
those that had benefit by their Ministry, that their mouths were stopped. And
therefore when it pleased God to put this into the heart of his Majesty to give
them this indulgence, they were ready to embrace it with all thankfulness to
God and man. So that now their assemblies ought not to be called private but
public, where all may have access, even those that charge them on this
account, to take notice what they assert and hold forth.

2. Their malice and bitterness. For you may say, why, this is strange, if the
Apostle does not here condemn all that preach privately, what is the reason
that they should be so bitter against it? Why truly friends, that lies in
their own breasts, their reasons are best known to themselves: we are not to
judge of secrets, it has been commonly affirmed, that they in private places
have asserted seditious principles. But I may certainly conclude, that those
that stick not to utter such injurious slanders, did they consult with their
own consciences, they themselves would clear them on this account. But it is
most certain, that the people of God ought not to practice any thing in Gods
worship, but what they know is warranted from the Word, and this is the duty of
Ministers, to testify and exhort here unto. And though they would suggest
disloyalty, yet they themselves when they are crossed in their designs, show
malice and bitterness enough.

The Lord will one day open the eyes of Magistrates to see, that those that are
most faithful to God are most faithful to men, and those that are most
faithful to God will give men their due, though they do not put them in the
place of God.

USE. 2. This should teach people to take heed how they take up slanderous
reports from whomsoever they hear them, but that they be careful to examine
things, and compare them with the Word of God. For you see, the same men that
the Apostle calls creepers into houses (which I showed you might be meant of
such that preach never so openly) the same men, I say, v. 13. He calls evil
men and seducers. The Scripture gives us this rule, to try all things, and
hold fast that which is good. Some people through their ignorance are offenced,
and look on it as evil for any to preach the Word, and wait on the Ordinances
of God in any places, but in those that are consecrated and set apart for that
use, because they read that it was usually at the Temple and Synagogues, they
think that it must be there and no where else; and these places are holy
places. But these are mistakes arising from ignorance; they do not understand
that the Temple was called holy, not because there was any inherent holiness in
it self. But

1. Because there were the visible signs of Gods Presence.

2. The Temple was a Figure of Christ, and in that respect was called holy, as
you may see by those words of Christ, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it
in three days.

3. The Temple was a shadow of the Church of God, to show us, that as in the
Temple were the visible signs of Gods Presence, so in the Church of God, which
is the spiritual Temple, God dwells by his Spirit. But now you may take
notice, that since these types and shadows are abolished, there is no such
difference of places; for Christ tells us, That not at this Mountain, nor yet
at Jerusalem, but wheresoever men call on the Father in spirit and in truth,
there he will be found. Besides, we may observe, that in that time, when the
Temple was the Place appointed of God for Public Worship, and such things
under the Law to be done there, which ought not to be done elsewhere (so that
if there were Holiness in any place, it was in the Temple) yet in this time
Christ himself preached in several other places, and so did the Apostles
afterward. So that it is Men's ignorance to think, that the same Duties
performed in one place were more holy, then if they were performed in another,
and it is a great fault to take up prejudices against persons on this account.
Again, there are some that are carried forth through rash and intemperate zeal
and bitterness of spirit, against persons on this account, (and it may be
instigated by the subtilty of others) but if this has been the Practice of
Christ's Apostles, and Christ himself; and if Christ has promised his Presence,
not only in this place, and that place, but wheresoever his people meet
together in his Name, then let persons take heed how they set themselves
against Christ, that they be not found Fighters against God: for let them be
sure, what Christ allows his people in, in that he will justify them; and in
what Christ has given them his example, and what he has promised his blessing
to, there he will surely make it good. So that these, though in their
intemperate zeal, they think, as the Jews did in their opposition of Christ and
his Apostles, that they did do God good service, yet indeed they are mistaken;
for believe it, those men that have the warrant of Christ for what they do,
Christ will bear them out at that great day of Account; and when men shall come
to give an Account why they have done such and such things; it will not be a
sufficient ground to say because others did so, and they did it out of their
zeal; Christ will justiste those that have his Word for their warrant, but how
dreadful will it be for those at the judgment seat of Christ, that are charged
with this, that they have opposed his servants for imitating him.

USE. 3. It shows the evil of those that cry out so much, and render persons
as evil doers, which were themselves and their own ways examined, it would be
found who they are, that are most justly to be charged with this in my text.
There are some that exclaim against others, as corner Preachers and house
Preachers, when if their own ways were well examined, they would hardly clear
themselves. Who will be found such at last, either those that are forced into
secret places, and notwithstanding are willing that their Doctrines should be
put to the trial; or such that preaching publicly will be offended, when their
Doctrines are tried and examined? Did men seek after secret places, that their
Doctrines might be concealed, there were a ground of suspicion, but such as are
willing to have their Doctrines tried, and do not shun the light, they may not
properly be called house-creepers. Should men deal with them, as the Bereans
with the Apostle Paul, they would be looked upon as censorious, and men of
factious and proud spirits, merely because they do their duty in examining men's
Doctrines by the Word of God, for which the Apostle commends the Bereans Acts
17. that they searched the Scripture to see whether these things were so or no.
Can such be justly charged with Heresy, that are willing that those things
which they hold forth should be examined by the Scripture? This is it which
they earnestly call for, To the Law and to the Testimony, who do you think
would most seek a corner, if these things were well weighed and considered,
either those that press things on humane authority; or those that press
things on Divine authority? Those that cannot endure to have their Doctrines
tried do give great ground of suspicion: Persons may pretend much to holiness
but this is no part of their holiness to held forth such things that are not
justifiable from the Word of God.

Certainly those persons that are willing to have whatsoever they deliver,
examined and tried by those that have the sharpest spirit of discerning,
(always provided that they make the Word of God the standard to try by, and
not the Laws of men) those, I say that are willing to have it so done, are not
to be accounted house-creepers. And as for such that have the warrant of Gods
Word for what they do, Christ will bear them out, notwithstanding the slanders
and false imputations of men. You know what answer Christ gave the Pharisees,
when they quarrelled with him concerning his Disciples, because they did not
observe such and such traditions This is that that will bear men out at the
great day of Account, when they can plead Gods Command and Institution for what
they do. When God puts men this Question, Who required this at your hands?
What horror will seize on their hearts, when they cannot say, Lord, we have
thy word for it.

USE 4 Since the Apostle tells us that such persons are dangerous persons,
let us take heed; for it is a matter of great weight and concernment. The
Apostle would never have taken so much care to warn us, he would not have set
forth the danger of it, had it not been a matter of great moment Let us then
take heed, that we are not deceived by such kind of persons.

Qu. But you will say how shall we know them?

ANS. There is a great ground of suspicion, when in times of peace and liberty,
that men may without any danger, or molestation hold forth the truth, when, I
say, in such times they will out of choice take private places.

2. Observe what the drift of their doctrine is, 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe
not every spirit, but try their spirits; And how? By their doctrine. Consider
what it is that their doctrine tends to, That which does derogate from Christ
and give unto the Creature; which does derogate from the grace and glory of
Christ, and advance the Creature; that is most corrupt and unsound: when men's
doctrine rendeth to this, to set up any thing of man, to exalt man's free will
and works of righteousness, as if there were something in that, which might
renders us acceptable unto God, this is very dangerous. When men derogate from
Christ, when they do not make Christ the only way to salvation, (for says the
Apostle, Acts 4.12. Neither is their salvation in any other, for there is none
other name, etc.) When they derogate from the free grace of God, they are such
indeed that are of this kind of creepers, and deceivers that are here spoken of.

Again, look to this, whether their Doctrine be such, that does hold forth the
Lord Jesus Christ to be the sole Governor, and Head of the Church: those that
will impose on men such a worship, as is not grounded on the Word, are those
that the Apostle speaks of.

So those persons that do not clearly hold forth the righteousness of Christ,
and press men to look off from all other things, and rest on Christ only for
life and salvation: that do not press men to live by faith on Christ, are
persons that do err from the truth, and so far as their Doctrine prevails
they lead from the truth.

So when men take off the affections of people, from holiness and puerity of
conversation, they are such whose Doctrine is corrupt and unsound; for we ought
to press people to manifest the power of faith in a holy and unblameable
conversation. Now these things we shhold look unto, and try them by the Word of
God, according to that Is. 8.20. and Christ tells us, that by their fruits we
shall know them. Now some fruit of a Minister is his Doctrine.

USE 5. May persons come under this denomination though never so public, then
let none think themselves safe, this is that which many poor creatures do
deceive themselves with; oh, think they, we are safe enough from any seduction
and leading aside, we never go to such places. Others run on another extreme,
they will not go to public places, they dislike all that is spoken there, but
this is evil on the other hand, we are not to judge of truth by places, but as
God approves it, and as it is grounded on the Scripture. For in a great
concourse of people we may be led aside from the truth, neither do secret
places give us any security, but there we may be led aside from the truth. Let
us then bring the Doctrines we hear to the touchstone of Gods Word, and not to
reject them, because public, neither applaud them, merely because private,
and so on the other hand. Those that are so rigorous against private places,
what would they have done, if they had lived in the days of Christ? they would
have rejected Christ and his Doctrine, because he preached on a Mountain, and
in a Ship; and if they had lived in the days of the Apostles, they would have
done the like. A faithful Minister of Christ, whether private or public, will
endeavor to approve himself to God, by holding forth such things as are
consonant and agreeable to the Word of God. Truth may be private, when error
may be public, as in the days of Ahab, when some of the Prophets were
imprisoned, and some put to death, and Jezeebel had four hundred Prophets of
Baal that fed daily at her table, these at that time had the public places,
and so in the days of Christ and his Apostles I proceed now to the second
observation.

OB. That such persons usually effect their design on such as are either weak
and ignorant, not able to discern their corrupt and unsound Doctrine; or such
as are under the power of some base lust or lusts, be they men or women; for it
may be understood of both sexes, such being by the just judgment of God left to
themselves, and so they easily prevail on them. Observe what Solomon tells,
Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every thing, but the prudent looks well to
his goings.

What does he mean in that, but this? A man that is simple and void of
understanding; you may make him believe any thing, if you put a fair gloss and
color upon it, but a man of understanding will lift and try and examine, and
see what grounds there are for the Doctrine that is delivered. Of such
deceivers the Apostle speaks, 2. Pet. 2.14. Now here.

1. I shall show you that they usually effect their designed on persons that
are ignorant.

2. That they also effect their design on those that are under the power of
some lust or lusts, that are in bondage to some base lusts.

3. That God in his just judgment is pleased sometimes to give over such to be
seduced.

1. That their design is usually effected on those that are ignorant of Gods
Word.

This you may see if you look into the Scripture. Who were they among the
Children of Israel, that the false Prophets did so easily draw aside? you may
see they were any such that did not know the Lord. Jer. 5.3.4, 5. Now how came
this to pass? They were led aside, and seduced by those false Prophets that
Jeremiah complains of, that did deceive them, and speaking smooth things to
them, did harden and confirm them in their evil ways. Again, you may see how
they were drawn in Jeroboams time to that gross and abominable Idolatry; they
willingly walked after the Commandment, Hos. 5.11. Now what people were these?
the Prophet tells us Hos. 4.1. they were such as were without the knowledge
of God, where there is no knowledge of God in a Land, people, are easily crawn
aside into the most pernicious errors. And what was the reason that the
Scribes and Pharisees had so many followers, and so few followed Christ? Why
the people were ignorant of the Law, and the Pharisees by their gross and
corrupt interpretations did deceive them. They were a people that did not know
the Law, if they had known the Word of God, Christ and the truths of Christ
would have been very precious to them. And what was the cause in this Nation in
former days, and with other Nations that remain under Ponery, they are drawn
aside to embrace the most-abominable errors, to believe things that are so
grossly corrupt? It is because they are without the Word, the Scriptures are
locked up in an unknown language, and people without the Word do believe any
thing though never so gross. Do you think, that absurd and abominable opinion
of the Popish Mass would be received, viz. That the Bread and Wine is the very
Body and Blood of Christ? Also that Crossing themselves with their Fingers is
that which will defend them from evil, (and many the like foolish opinions) if
people were not ignorant of the Word of God.

2. That which I am to show you further is this. That as ignorant persons are
apt to be drawn aside to errors, so likewise those that live under the power
of some lust or lusts, Consider that Jer. 5. The time that the Prophet Jeremiah
speaks of, was a time of looseness and profaneness. They did whatsoever was
good in their own eyes; v 5. The great men had some knowledge of God, but
notwithstanding they had burst the yoke, and broken the bonds, they would not
be under the power of Gods Word, but would walk according to their own lusts
and pleasures. Likewise that in Jer. 44.16. When the Word that Jere. had spoken
in the name of the Lord crossed their lusts, see how stubbornly they answer. As
for the Word which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hearken to thee. When persons are under the power of any lust, they are in a
ready way to be seduced to any thing, though never so corrupt. When men are in
love with any sin, and do wilfully retain any lust, they are fit persons for
seducers to work upon. And usually such persons with whom the flesh and their
own carnal interest prevails, have been drawn away from following the truth,
though they have lived some time under a profession of it, and have had some
knowledge of it, I say, such persons being overswayed by their lusts, have been
turned aside from the truths which they formerly embraced, into the most
corrupt and abominable ways. We have had experience of it in this our Nation,
when God was pleased to give us peace and plenty, and all that our hearts could
desire; how many were there that lived under a Profession of Religion, when
Religion was in credit; yet the World having the Mastery of their hearts, how
suddenly did those persons miscarry and turn aside, some to one opinion, and
some to another? And surely, those who lie in wait to deceive, observe the
frame and temper of men's spirits, and order their deceits accordingly.

3. That God in his just judgment gives such over to be deceived. When once
men will indulge themselves in any way of sin; when once they wilfully take up
their resolutions, that they will do so and so, though it be expressly
contrary to the Word of God. God is pleased to give such over to delusions, 2
These 2.10, 11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a Lie. For what cause? because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved. Observe, that he does not say, that they did
not receive the truth, but they received not the love of the truth, (i.e.)
though they had some illuminations, and some knowledge of the truth, yet they
had not the love of the truth in their hearts, they did not receive it as from
God, and so subject themselves unto it, but their hearts did rise against it,
because it crossed their lusts and wills. Now God in his just judgment does
give such over to believe a lie. This you may take notice of, that where God is
graciously pleased to afford means of knowledge to a people, and that people do
either slight it and take little notice of it, or else content themselves in a
bare external profession, and do not receive it in love and submission, God is
pleased sometime to give such over to be very corrupt indeed, and to embrace
errors contrary to those truths that formerly they have received; how many
have there been in these times lately past, that have lived under a profession,
and seemed very zealous and forward; and yet some corruption swaying their
hearts, they have not only fallen off from that fervor in the Ordinances of
God, but have looked on them as below their seize, and as needless things
to them, and look on the vain fancies and conceits that arise in their minds
to be the breathings and moveings of the Spirit of God, and at last, cast off
all show of Religion, and question whether there be any Religion or God, yea or
no? Now consider this, what a sad and dreadful thing is this, to fall into
such delusions? and yet how many were there of those whom God was pleased thus
to give over, whom one would have thought should never have received such
things as these in their hearts? But it has been evident by fad and woeful
experience; and this indeed is not to be admired at; but we may rather marvel
that it is not general amongst us, considering how we have slighted the Gods
Word, and denied the power of it in our lives: God is pleased once more to give
us this liberty, that we should openly enjoy his Ordinances; Let us remember
that God will not suffer such mercys to be abused. It is high time for us to
look to our selves, to labor to know the mind and will of God, and knowing it
to embrace it with affection and obedience. If we know not the things that
belong to our peace in the day of our visitation, we cannot expect but that the
issue will be sad, that God may judicially give men over to a spirit of
delusion, that they shall run into the most dreadful and erroneous opinions,
and all kind of gross and idolatrous superstitions and wickedness.

And thus we have cleared the point the grounds follow.

1. Because ignorant persons, through the ignorance and blindness of their
understandings are not able to judge and try things, and to put difference
between things that differ. Men that know not truth from error, may be easily
deceived, especially when there is an outward show, and fair gloss put upon
it. A man may easily be overcome in Combat that is discovered, or that has no
skill to use his arms. Many men live without Gods Word, and though they have
it, do not know how to manage this Sword of the Spirit, (as it is called by the
Apostle) they know not how to defend themselves, nor to offend those that
assault them. And Satan (is he is especially subtle) so his (...) have learned
this policy of him; when they hear men pleading Scripture, and observe their
unskil fullness in the Scriptures; they will plead Scripture too. As now for
defense of the Doctrine of merit, by good works, that by these men might be
made worthy and obtain eternal life, this Scripture will be strongly pleaded 1 Timothy 6.18.19. Look here, say they, it is clear and evident, that we ought to
lay up good works in store for our selves, as a good foundation, by virtue of
which we may obtain eternal life. But the falsehood of this is easily
discovered, if we look to the 17. v. Charge them that are rich in this world
that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches. Charge them ^y
plead th^^ they are believers, and that they be not high minded, they are apt
since they believe in God, it shall be well enough with them. But let them show
their faith by their fruitfullness in good works, let their faith be manifested
in their practice, especially in their readiness to releeve the distressed
members of Christ; for this is that which Christ will take especial notice of
before the whole world. Wherefore we must not so understand the Apostle, as if
by this expression (Laying up in store for themselves) were meant the merit of
good works, which give us right to eternal life; but that it might be evident
that they are such as have believed in Christ, by their fruitfullness in good
works: for where the Spirit of God is in the heart, that Spirit teaches a
believer to manifest the efficacy of his faith in a godly life and
conversation, and in a readiness to distribute to the necessitous members of
Christ.

Likewise that place Col. 1.^ That ye might walk worthy of the Lord etc. Now
say they, how should we walk worthy? and what is our worthiness but by way of
reward? But that which the Apostle calls worthiness, is no more then
suitableness and meetness, as v. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father which has
made us meet to be Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Now how
are we made meet and worthy? surely not by any thing in us, but by Christ only,
as the next words show, v. 13, 14. So that we are not made meet by any works of
our own, but we come to be made meet by being cleansed from our sins, and
clothed in the righteousness of Christ, by being taken out of Adam and
implanted into Christ; and so having received the Spirit of Christ, we are made
meet to be Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. There is a
suitableness in this life to that heavenly and glorious life, that we shall
live with God for ever. So that this is an abuse of Scripture. I might show you
that life cannot be obtained by works of charity, or by any thing that we can
do.

It cannot be by works of charity; for mind that which the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 13.3. Men may give all their Goods to the poor, as too many ignorant souls
have done amongst the Papists. Nay, men may give their bodies to be burned, but
yet if they have not Charity, (i. e.) if the love of God be not shed abroad in
their hearts, and the work be not done from a principle of love, it is
unacceptable. Mind also that which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By grace ye
are saved through faith, etc. That is to say, works have no hand, no share at
all in this great work.

Again, they abule that place, Jam. 2.21. Was not Abraham our father justified
by works? here to establish their Justification by works, they bring the same
Argument that the Apostle brought in another sense. The same way that Abraham
was justified, the same way are all the faithful justified. But Abraham was
justified by works, therefore by works are all the faithful justified; But
compare this with Paul's Epistle to the Romans. chap. 4. v. 2, 3. Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. What was counted?
why that which Abraham believed in and rested on, that is, the righteousness of
Christ; but it was before men only, that Abraham was justified by works; for we
must observe, that the Apostle Paul speaks of Justification before God, and
the Apostle James of Justification before men; so that in confounding these
lies the subtilty of the adversary. Now on this account they will bring
Scripture; and poor people that are ignorant and unskilful in the Word of God,
when they hear a man bring Scripture to confirm his errors. Oh say they, he
proved it out of Scripture, though it be directly contrary to Gods Word.
Likewise they bring that place, Mat. 25.34. For I was hungry, etc.

But it is as clear as the Sun, that that place is not to be so understood, as
if their works were the cause why Christ did bring them to glory; but those
works were mentioned as fruits and effects of faith, which were evident to all;
faith it self is secret and discernable to none but God himself, but works are
discernable to all, and therefore it was meet that Christ passing a sentence of
Acquittance and Absolution on them should recite it to all, even as a Judge
does recite all that by which the person is absolved; so Christ does here,
showing that their faith is not a dead faith, but a living says that did work
by love, and carried them to obedience to God, so that this is in respect of
their Justification before the whole world.

Again, they will urge Scripture as for the manner of Worship, yea, though they
have no Word of God for it; yet they will tell you, that their Ceremonies are
for the beautifying and adorning of the Church, and for decency in the Worship
of God; that things are not to be done confusedly but in order. Whereas indeed
those things are most orderly that we have Christ's Word for, and that is most
decent that Christ thinks most fit and decent; for Christ, being the Lord of
the House, that is decent which he appoints in the House, But alas! Men when
they hear a Scripture produced, though they do not consider the thing that is
there intended, yet are soon startled: and hence are people driven into the
most abominable opinions: As for instance, to receive that abhorred Doctrine of
the Popish Mass. Why, say the Papists, does not Christ expressly say, This is
my Body? And is not Christ the Author of truth? And ought we to question any
thing that Christ has said? Whenas Christ speaks figuratively, that the
Bread and Wine were figures, and did represent spiritually the Body and Blood
of Christ. Christ speaks Sacramentally, and by way of a Figure, that is usual
in the Scriptures, as sometimes Christ calls himself A Door, and A Vine. So
is Circumcision called A Covenant. And God says, that those that were
Circumcised had broke his Covenant, because Circumcision was the sign of the
Covenant. So that it cannot be the meaning of Christ, that h^ should intend
that the Bread and Wine was his natural Body and Blood, for he was then alive
and visible before his disciples.

2. Because their doctrine does suit to the corruption that is in men's hearts.
Now those that we are speaking of are not able to see the evil, and the strong
inclinations of their h^arts to that which is evil; but being that which does
suit to their corrupt hearts, therefore they receive it. For herein lies the
difference between the Ministers of Christ and false teachers: The Ministers of
Christ holding forth the truths of Christ, have nothing of Man to lay hold on,
for corrupt doctrine does suit with corrupt natures: such a doctrine as this
is, to extol Justification by Works, or at least that works have some share in
it, this does exceedingly take with corrupt hearts.

Also to worship God after the Inventions of Men, and to frame a manner of
worship of our own: this is that which men's hearts are in love withal, they
think that by this they deserve at Gods Hand: and such corrupt doctrines they
will drink in as sweet wine, though in the end they will find it a bitter
poison.

3. Because they are ignorant, and not able to understand the great danger that
is in such corrupt doctrine, how much it tends to the dishonor of God, and
how greatly it provokes the Lord-Those that are ignorant do little think, that
the setting up Man's works in the point of Justification, does exceedingly
affront the Divine Majesty, such slight the Love of God in the Gift of his Son:
for if we are able to justify our selves, what need have we of Christ? Christ
is also exceedingly provoked by setting up the rags of their own righteousness
as Copartners with his righteousness, nay, to set it above the righteousness
of Christ, this is that which does exceedingly provoke him, therefore the
Prophet Isaiah speaks to such in the Name of Christ. This ye shall have at my
hands, ye shall lie down in sorrow. They render the Spirit of God a Liar, who
when he has declared that there is no salvation in any other, but in Christ
alone; and that this is the great design of God, that he will magnify his own
grace and abase man, that no flesh shall glory in his sight. I say, they give a
lie to the Spirit of God who assert their own righteousness for Justification.
Again, they do not know the danger of the corrupt mixture of the devices of men
with the Justitutions of Christ; they know not what danger it is to oppose
Christ in his own house, whereof he is the Lord: these men knew it not.
Therefore they are advised, Ps. 2 to kiss the Son. I tell you, to go to
disenthrone Christ, and to rule in his house, is another thing then men are
aware of. Thus you see the reason, why ignorant persons are so easily seduced
and drawn into error.

The Reasons why they prevail on such that are in bondage under some lust or
lusts may be these.

1. Because they suit their doctrines to the lusts of men, that harden their
hearts, and strengthen their hands in their iniquities, that is the reason why
corrupt doctrine is embraced by such. The false prophets saw well enough, that
Ahab had a mind to go up to Ramoth Gilead, and they had a mind to please Ahab:
Oh, say they, Go up and prosper. So those prophets in Jeremiah's time saw that
the people had a good mind to live loosely and profanely, but they were
terrified by (...) Prophet Jeremiah: see how they suit their doctrine to their
lusts. Peace shall be unto you: What think ye that God will bring in the Heathe
upon you that are his people? that God will destroy his Temple? And thus it is
with the subtle J^suits, they carry on their ways so, that they foster m^n in
their wickedness, though they have a show of holiness, yet they know how to
indulge men in their sinful lusts and liberties, they have devised ways for it,
that according to their principles men may live loosely and licentiously, and
yet all may be well enough with them.

2. They usually prevail with such, because such as these have their hearts set
on their lusts. As for instance, those whose hearts are set on the world, they
are resolved to increase in the world, they will rather part with Christ then
their covetousness. You know how it was with the young man in the Gospel, he
would have Christ and his riches too, and so it is with many, they are willing
to have Heaven and the world too: but if they must part with one of them, they
will part with any thing rather then with their lust. The covetous man's Gold,
the ambitious man's vain glory command their hearts and consciences: they will
rather condescend to any thing though contrary to their own principles, then
part with their lusts. And therefore it is no wonder if such persons miscarry.

The reason why God does give such over to be deluded, is because they reject
the truth, as in 2 These. 2.10. They received not the love of the truth, they
loved not the truth, they embraced it not with their hearts; it follows, God
shall send them strong delusion. When men please themselves in any sinful way,
and there rest, its a dangerous condition, and God in his just judgment may
give such over to be deceived. You know how it was with Ahab: the Prophets told
him he should go up and prosper; but when Micajah came he set the truth before
him, but his lusts liked it not, his pride and ambition and his desire to
enlarge his territories caused him to hate Micajah. When men have had the truth
set before them, and have been convinced thereof, and their understandings
somewhat enlightened, and yet they have neglected this light, God may in his
just judgment let darkness overspread their understandings, God may say thus to
such a soul. Seeing thou will not believe the truth thou shall believe a lie.

USE 1. This gives us to see the sad condition of all those that are ignorant
of Gods Word, that are not able to discern between truth and error, between
the mind of God and the gross conceits of Satan and his instruments. It must
needs be dangerous in these last times, if you consider these Scriptures. Mat.
24.11. Many false Prophets shall arise and deceive many. What a sad and
dreadful thing is it, that when false Prophets shall arise, when they shall
come and say, here is Christ, and there is Christ, and yet he is not among
either? 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be such that shall bring in damnable Heresies.
What a sad condition then I say, must such souls be in, that live in such
times, when such pernicious seducers are abroad, and they are not able to
discern between truth and error. You would say that that man were in a sad
condition, that did set forth some precious things of great value to sell, and
a multitude did flock about him with false Coin, and he were not able to
discer^ between what was good and what was false; every one that did see him
would say, that man will be utterly undone. So it is here, what a sad condition
is this? when men shall come with corrupt and unsound Doctrine, and shall
deceive them, and they are not able to discern the precious truths of Christ
from those damnable Doctrines? Alas! in what a condition are the ignorant, when
men shall come after this manner to them, and tell them, that by their
improvement of their natural abilities, and that common light which God has
given them, they shall obtain the love and favor of God, and shall in time
come to partake of everlasting life and glory? What a dreadful thing is this?
and yet this goes down current with those that do not know the Scripture,
when it is manifest that we are dead, and that the light that is in us is
gross darkness, that unless he that is the light of light does inlighten us by
the light of his blessed spirit, we are never able to discern spiritual
things. So when men come and tell them that by their good works, by their
repentance and works of righteousness they may do away their sins and obtain
Gods favor. When men do bring these things with fair glosses and pretenses,
coloring them with the Scripture, they are easily carried away with them. Oh,
say they, these are good men, they bring the Word of God for what they say.

Again, if they come with such Doctrine as this, that men ought not to rush
presently into the presence of Christ; but they must make friends by some
Mediators; as by the Saints that are departed, and by this means they may be
interceded for, that they may be heard of him. Oh, say they, this does not
derogate from the honor of Christ, he has the honor of all we do; But it is
rudeness thus to rush immediately into his presence. This carries far with
ignorant people; for here is a fair pretense and shiew of humility, though it
is clear in the Scriptures, that they bring a great deal of dishonor to
Christ, when they take away the honor of his Mediatorship; and put it on
Saints and Angels. We cannot dishonor Christ more, then when we rob him of the
glory of his grace, encouraging us at all times to come to him; and that we
should come to the Father in and through the Son. It is not for the sake of
Saints and Angels, but for the sake of Christ alone that we are accepted of God.

Again, when they bring such abomin^^^e Doctrine as this, that we must pray
before Images. Oh, say they, we pray not to the Images, but these are
serviceable to keep our affections on God, whereas they place a holiness in
such things, and make that a help which God has not commanded but expressly
forbidden.

And what a sad thing is it, when souls are drawn aside to embrace such
impious Doctrine as this; that after the words of conscecration, the bread is
the very Body of Christ? and argue thus. This is the Word of Christ, that is
truth himself, and will you ^be^ Christ? Again, others that are not so horribly
gross have other ways to deceive, pressing men to worship God after another
way then that which God has appointed. If you ask them what ground they have
for such and such needless ceremonies: Why, say they, this is decency; and we
must do all things decently and in order. Alas! how many poor souls are
deceived herein, and become zealous contenders for Ceremonies, and more earnest
in them then in the things that God has commanded? Many are so zealous and
intemperate, that they will admit of no worship but this, and look on
Diseenters as factions and seditious that will not yield unto them.

Again, there is nothing that the nature of man is more apt to be carried aside
in, then to advance something of himself, and to set up his own righteousness,
and there is no way so subtle as this to deceive poor souls, who will say, Lo
this man is for good works, for serving God. Is not this a good man? Friends,
it is a good thing to be found in works of righteousness, but if you rest on
works of righteousness, as those that may render you acceptable to God,
thinking your selves to be justified by them in the sight of God, there is
nothing more dangerous; it is a dreadful thing for a man to establish his own
righteousness, it is more dangerous then all the Images in the world: see what
Christ says to the Pharisees, Mat. 21, 30.31. Now what is the meaning of
Christ in that Parable? Christ sets forth those Publicans and Harlots, that
walked directly against the commands of God, to be those that said they would
not. They are commanded but they obstinately answer, We will not. Then he
speaks to the Jews that professed obedience and submission to the Law of
God. Do you what I command you. We will, say they, they had a profession, and
they thought to justify themselves before God. But Christ says, the Publicans
and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. And why so? because these
were convinced as being open professed enemies against God, and therefore could
not establish their own righteousness, when as the Jews living under a
profession contented themselves therewith and sought to advance their own
righteousness, and so submitted not to the righteousness which is of God. So
Luke 18.11 12. The Pharisee says, God I thank thee etc. But the Publican stood
afar off and smote on his breast, and said, The Lord be merciful to me a
sinner etc. I cannot say, I have done this or that, but this I say, that
without thy mercy I must perish for ever. Oh it is dreadful to rest on our own
righteousness: I could show you many ways how greatly the sins of such are
increased, It utterly overthrows the great design of God. It overthrows the
whole Gospel, and all that Jesus Christ has done and suffered for. And
therefore what a dreadful thing is it, when poor souls are carried away with
vain pretenses into such an error? Surely such are in a sad condition, that
are not able to discern truth from error, but are easily carried away with
fair words, by which deceivers beguile poor souls and make a merchandise of
them.

Use. 2. Let us see then the great wickedness of the Church of Rome, that lock
up the Scripture from people, which is the key of knowledge. You see clearly,
that they are ignorant persons for whom deceivers lay their baits; and that the
ignorant are most drawn away by seducers. They fit and prepare people to be
deceived that keep Gods Word from them What an abominable thing is that, and
how contrary to the Scriptures, that ignorance is the mother of devotion? It is
directly contrary to the Scriptures. We find that this is the complaint of God,
My people perish for want of knowledge. Surely it is very gross to keep people
from the knowledge of the Scriptures, and to persuade them to rest merely on
the words of their teachers And what is this but to ensnare them, and keep them
in bondage continually? And what do they? and how nearely do they follow these
wretches that encourage people in their ignorance, and discourage them from
reading the Scripture talling them that they are to follow their own
employments, and that God expects not such at their hands, but that which is
required of them is to believe their Ministers? But surely this was not spoken
to the Ministers, but to the people, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits etc. This should be on every ones spirit to labor after such a
measure of knowledge; that they may be able to try such things as are presented
to them, and not to receive those things which are contrary to the mind and
will of God.

Use 3. What cause have we to bless God in this Nation that have had free
liberty of Gods Word? it has not been locked up to us. Oh that we had wisdom
rightly to improve this mercy; that the Scripture might not be to us as a price
put into the hands of fools. Let us be diligent to read and meditate on the
Word of God. The Scripture says, Blessed are they that read the Word of this
Prophecy^ We f^^d, that all were commanded in the book of the law continually;
none was exempted, not so much as the King himself. And as we should read the
Scripture, so we should meditate on it, that is the blessed man indeed that
does meditate on Gods Word day and night. Also we should be instant in prayer,
that God would open our eyes to see the mavelous things of his law, we should
embrace all opportunities that God gives us to wait on him in his Ordinances,
that we might receive instruction, and be built up in the faith. Its sad to be
in those places wherein we live, that there should be such gross ignorance and
darkness in men's understandings. And how just is it with God to give such over
to be deceived that are of a dull and careless frame of spirit? For the Lords
sake consider seriously of it, and put it to your own souls, what
opportunities have you omitted wherein you might have attended on Gods
Ordinances? How negligent have you been in reading Gods Word? How justly might
God give you over to the grossest delusions, that have made so light of so
precious a word, wherein the wisdom of God, the grace and love of God so
eminently appears, wherein there is such encouragement for poor ignorant souls,
and for those that find themselves in a state of misery and unbeleif to come in
and believe? And see what the Psalmist tells us, Ps. 19.7. The law of the
Lord is perfect converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure making
wise the simple. Should such fools be pitied that are fools willingly? Now all
that have Gods Word do make themselves fools in rejecting the means that God
has afforded to make them wise. See what David says Ps. 119. Thy Word is a
light to my ways, and a lanthorn to my paths. Consider that God has promised
to give to his people a heart that shall know him. Who knows, how God may in
the use of his Ordinances set home by the power of his spirit a word that may
soften a hard heart, and humble a proud heart; This is the character of Gods
people that they are a wise understanding people If then we would be be of the
number of Gods people, let us endeavor afterwisdom by the improvement of those
means that God has afforded unto us.

Use 4. Is it so that those that live under the power of lusts are the persons
that are deceived by seducers? Then consider what enemies they are to their own
souls, that do ensnare themselves under the power of any lust? they betray
themselves, and lay themselves open to adversaries. There is nothing so
dangerous to a soul as that is, that sets a soul in a ready way to be deeived
and undone by those that ly in wait to beguile him. We are apt to say of some
special sins that our hearts are much set upon, this is but a little one: when
if we did well consider and weigh all circumstances, we should find that there
is no sin little, though there are some sins greater then other some; yet no sin
can be called little. Now observe those that make it their business to deceive
men's souls do the frame of (...) spirits and they know how to fit their baits
to men's inclinations. Deceivers are like fishers that have for their several
sorts of Fishes their several baits; when they have to do with men whose hearts
are set on the world, they know how to deal with them there; and when they are
lifted up with pride and ambition, they know how to lay a bait to catch them
there; and when they see that their hearts are filled with the carnal pleasures
of the world, they know how to lay their baits accordingly. And alas! how many
are there that have lived under a profession of religion, and yet by giving
their hearts an indulgence and toleration in some lusts, they have betrayed
their souls into the hands of their adversaries that ly in wait to deceive
them? And these subtle deceivers, though they fall not on a man to beat him
suddenly from that which he owneth, yet they entangle his affections till his
heart by degrees is taken off, and he is ensnared by them, and comes at length
to embrace such abominable opinions, which if they had been presented to him at
the first, he would have fled from them as from a Serpent. The Lord grant that
every one of us may consider of it, for if we regard iniquity in our hearts,
and prostitute our consciences to the pleasures of our lusts, God may justly
suffer us to be seduced: wherefore let us make it our business to purge out
every iniquity lest it be our ruin.

USE 5. Let us not wonder then, that in such times as we live in there should
be such declensions from the Ways of God. When we see times, in which all
manner of looseness and profaneness reigns, and is not suppressed; it is no
wonder, if those that lie in wait to deceive do prosper in their designs;
though I do not mean of such that are sometimes drawn aside and overcome by
their lusts; for God may suffer his precious ones to be led aside for a season,
but he restores them again: but when I say, [such that are under the power of
lust] I mean, of such that are ordinarily overruled by their lusts, and of
that which is the usual course by which corrupt persons prevail on such. And
indeed it is not strange that they prevail on them. As I hinted to you out of
Jeremiah, concerning that gross Idolatry that was among the people, it was no
wonder that the Prophets prophesying lies should prevail on them, for there was
horrible profaneness and wickedness amongst them, when corrupt men shall frame
such a Religion as shall suit with men's lusts, it is not strange that such men
should yield unto them, whose hearts are set on their lusts. It is not strange,
that Popery should so exceedingly prevail, when they have framed such corrupt
ways, that men may go on cheerfully in the satisfaction of their lusts. When
men shall be told that some sins are no sins, and some sins are venial, and
greater sins may be done away by enduring some corporal punishments, which also
it is in he Power of the Priest to mitigate; and that if they die in their
sins, they may by enduring some punishment in Purgatory be purged from their
sins, and afterward received to glory; and that it is in the Popes Power to
deliver them from these pains. If these things be well considered, we may not
wonder that men are so easil^, drawn aside to gross Popish superstitions. Where
Christ tells us of false teachers, he tells us als^, that iniquity shall
abound, and the love of many shall wax old.

USE 6. This should^^each us to watch our hearts, and to take especial notice
of the corrupt inclinations. Did we devise a way to entangle our selves, and
ensnare our own souls, we could not find a readier way then to sollow the
lustings of our own hearts. When once the heart is set on evil, it takes
offense at the truth, esp^cially at such truths that give a wound to its
beloved sins Herod heard John Baptist gladly; but when he touches him in his
beloved sin, he hears him no more. So there are many that make a Profession
of Religion, who, when they come to be touched in their beloved sins, cannot
digest such plain dealing, and by this means their affections do abate to
Religion, and at last they fall off, and are willing to join in any way that
may indulge them in their susts. Therefore that word of Solomon is not
unsuitable, Keep thy heart with all diligence, etc. We must see that we do not
allow our selves in any evil, one sin brings in another, and frequency of
sinning causes deadness of heart, and deadness of heart takes off the S^^
from the Ordinances of God, till by degrees it com^th to have bitterness of
spirit, and deadly enmity against those that go on in the practice of those
things that are allowable by the Word of God. We have seen sad examples of this
kind in these our days, how many have been ensnared by the world, rather then
they would lose their honor and esteem with men, they leave the honor that
Christ has tendered to them. Let us not then be such enemi^s to our own souls.

USE 7 What cause have such that have been preserved from Apostasy and
Seduction, to acknowledge the in finite goodness of God unto them? there is
none of us, but if we would make a diligent search into our own hearts, our
Consciences will tell us, that since we have come to the knowledge of the
truth, we have sinned against our own light; we have done those things which
our Consciences have told us we should not have done; how might God have
suffered us to be deceived and carried aside to those ways that lead to eternal
destruction? It is sad to look abroad in the world, and to see how many in
these times have been carried aside from the Truths of God, by that corrupt and
abominable error of Popish Merit, to establish their own Righteousness; and
some have been carried aside to the same evil under the pretense of the
improvement of their natural parts and abilities, and have set up their own
work and denied Christ? How many have despised the O^^inances of God? How many
have fallen from their Profession to downright Atheism? That it is not so with
us is because God has preserved us and watched over us, how should this engage
our hearts to that God that has made his Word good to us, in keeping us to
himself by his mighty power through faith.

And again, let us not wonder that many should be drawn to this opinion, and
that opinion; but rather wonder that to this day we have not been so deceived.
If God should leave us and withdraw from any of us, if God should say to any
soul here, go in thy own way, and believe what thou will, and embrace whatever
thy heart is set upon; what opinion is there? Nay what damnable Heresy is
there? that we should not run into. It is the Lord that keeps us, or else we
should have perished. Oh what cause has every soul that has been kept in the
truth to bless God, that has given them his spirit to lead them in the truth?
It is not our parts, nor wisdom, nor any thing in us that preserves us from
error; he that beguiled Adam in his innocence might easily beguile us, that
have so much darkness in our understandings, impurity in our affections, and
perverseness in our our wills. Our souls bless the Lord, and acknowledge that
it is of his infinite grace and mercy to us that we have been preserved. We
have cause to say as the Psalmist did, Not unto us, but is to thy name be the
praise. this should be as a bond in our spirits to walk with God. The goodness
of God should have that effect on us, as it had on Jacob, when God appeared to
him in Bethel; it is said he lifted up his feet and went on his way. So it
should be with us, it should make us lift up our feet and walk on in the ways
of the Lord:

FINIS

