AN ELEGY On the Death of the Most Serene MAJESTY of HENRIETTA-MARIA, THE
Queen Mother of Great Britain, etc.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

AS on the Martial-Plain We slightly view
The Fate of common Souls; but if a few
Commanders, or the Chieftain of the Field
Be to the Fatal Stroke compelled to yield,
Then what a Grief's dispersed through all the Camp?
The Army's smitten with a general Damp.
So, What a Sable Cloud hangs over the Day
That tells Us Our Great QVEEN is snatched away?
How Subjects are concerned to have understood
Death dares attempt to touch at Royal Blood?
But what great Poet's Genius can devise
Upon Her Tomb a decent Sacrifice?
Whose Glories do exceed a Mortal Pen,
As much as Gods do momentany Men.
Let then Melpomene, nay All the Nine
Conceive so rare a Fancy, so Divine,
As may compose a sad Heroick-Verse
Worthy to wait upon Her Sacred Hearse:
While the Celestial Nymphs and Graces will
A Tear upon Her holy Dust distill;
And great Apollo with his Heavenly Quire
Her Threnodie will tune unto his Lyre.
That flattering Art which Poets use, to save
Declining Reputations in the Grave,
Is needless here, Since no Hyperbole
Can figure out how great Her Merits be;
And busy Chronicles can say no more
Than what Her Fame has told the World before.
When those poor Rebell-wretches (Sinners, who
Are right like Those that know not what they do,)
Proclaimed her Traitor, How did they proclaim
In that Her Loyal and Her matchless Name!
Who for Her Soveraign-Husband did Her Life
Expose, as loyal Subject, and as Wife;
Crossing the dangerous Seas, that She might bring
Treasure to accommodate Her Lord the KING.
And when rude Cannons by a ruder Hand
Pursued Her Majesty arrived at Land,
Then Her Spectators clearly understood
The undaunted Courage of Her Mighty Blood.
So Penthisilea the Amazonian Dame
Before the Trojans won Immortal Fame.
No Hipsecratea or the Turtle Dove
More Constant was in Hymenaean-love.
But on each Virtue to dilate is meet
For Volumns, not a Page or single Sheet:
Let it suffice, Her CONSORT now and SHE
Are Crowned together to Eternity.
LONDON, Printed by and for Thomas Ratcliffe, and Thomas Daniel, and are to be
sold at their House in New-street, betwixt Shooe-lane and Fetter-lane. 1669.


